A Compendious HISTORY OF THE TURKS: CONTAINING An Exact Account OF The
Original of that People; the Rise of the Othoman Family; and the Valiant
Undertakings of the Christians against Them: WITH Their Various Events.

BY Andrew Moore, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by John Streater, 1660.

To the Reader.
READER,
THE view of the most united and greatest Empire in the World at this Day, is
here presented unto Thee at once, in a portable and convenient Volum: wherein
Thou (...) the great Atchievments of many, whose memory is worthy to be
preserved and transmitted over to Posterity: For that they have opposed that
mighty Power of the Ottoman Family; whom God (no doubt) suffers as a Scourge
to the World; to grow to that immense Magnitude, that as a Tempest He blows
down, and overwhelmeth Kingdoms, vast Provinces, and Principalities: Some of
which are, the glorious Empire of the Greeks, the renowned Kingdoms of
Macedonia, Peloponesus, Epirus, Bulgaria, Servia, (...), Armenia, Cyprus,
Syria, Egypt, Judea, Tunis, Algiers, Media, Mesopotamia, with a great part of
Hungary, as also of the Persian Kingdom: And, in brief, so much of Christendom,
as far exceeds that which is thereof at this day left. Notwithstanding this
Overgrowth, Greatness, and unlimited Power that this Empire is attained unto;
yet, the King of Kings has at several times by his providence, showed, that he
does overruled the great Actions of the World, and he can put a book in the
Nostrils of the great Leviathan, put stops and (...) to the mighty Ones. This
History plentifully affords matter of this sort, as that of George Castriot,
or Scanderbeg's, not able defense of Epirus against the Turk's Power, by small
and Inconsiderable Forces: The defense of Malta, the Famous Battles of
Huniades, the defense of Vidda in Hungary; The continual, and not to be
compared War of the Venetians, a small City against the Turk's whole Power:
The very consideration of which should incite Noble and Valiant minds to
Heroic undertakings: The accomplishing and perfecting of great undertakings,
may next to the providence of God be attributed to Wisdom and Valor; Wisdom to
lay a good Foundation to noble Interprises, and Valor to put them in
Execution. History is a Lanskip, that presents at one view: the Counsels of
Princes, Battles, Seiges of Cities, Towns, Fortresses; Wastings, Depopulations,
erections of Edifices: Withal the various Events that time produces. The
growth of Kingdoms and their periods, the growth of this Empire; The (...) of
this (...), seems to seace and stand at an even (...); is (...) not much over
its banks, what it gains in one place at one time, it loses at another: The
Roman Empire when it arived to its (...) Power and Extent, the weight of its
own Greatness (...) itself: It Is natural for all bodies and things whatsoever,
from small beginning to grow, until they come to a full State, there to abide
a while, then (...); The greatest cause of the Turks Grows has (...) the
differences amongst (...) Christians, and nothing will ruin him but their
union: Reader, I will not detain thee any longer from the History it self, it
being carefully Collected out of the writings of (...), (...), (...), Gregoras,
Laonicus Chalcocondiles, Marinus Barletius, Leonardus Chiensis, Archbishop of
Mytelene, (...). (...), Augerius Busbequius, Nicholas Nicholai, John Crispe,
Paulus, Jovius, Pantalion, Menadoie, and Leonclavius; All writing such things
as they saw, or were (for most part) (...) their time done. And since continued
by the hands of those that have been eminent, able, and best acquainted with
those affairs; Likewise, a native Turk contributed his help to the latter part.
So that thou may be (...) thou art faithfully dealt with in this matter, by
him, who desires nothing more then (Reader) to receive thy Caracter of
Impartial,

THE HISTORY OF THE Turks before the rising of the Ottoman Family: their first
Kingdom's erection by Trangrolipix in Persia of the Salzuccian Family with
(...) success.
IT is neither agreed on by the best writers, nor well known to the Turks
themselves, from whence the Empire of this barbarous Nation, the worlds present
terror, first took its small and obscure beginning. Some deriving them from
the Trojans, from the corrupting of Teucri their common name, into Turci; but
without any probability: Others reporting that they came first out of Persia,
and some out of Arabia, and Syria. Philip of Mornay derives both Turks and
Tartars from the ten Tribes of Israel, carried away by Salmanazar King of
Assyria: some among the Tartars still retaining the names of Dan, Zebulon, and
Nepthali. Tartar also in Syriack signifying, remnants; and Turks, banished men.
Greater store of Jews being found in Russia, Sarmatia, and Lithuania than
elsewhere; and the nearer the Tartars, the more. A barbarous people likewise
in Livonia nigh the City Riga, differing in Language from the rest, daily and
dolefully repeating in the fields, Jeru, Jeru, Masco, Lon, knowing no cause,
but the teaching of their Ancestors for those words utterance; yet thought to
lament over Jerusalem, and Damasco, thereby. But both (...) Mela (who says,
the Thyrsagetes and Turks possess the vast Forests, and live by hunting, fast
by the Geloni. And Pliny, speaking in like manner, Next unto the Nations about
Maeotis Fens are the Evazae Cottae, etc. The Thussagets and Turks unto rough
deserts with woody Valleys, beyond whom are the Arympheians, (...) on the
Riphean Mountains, together with the Turks manners, attire, (...), gate,
weapons, manner of riding and fighting, and language agreeing with the
Scythians, do induce greater probabilities, that they came out of Scythia.
Ptolomies Tusci in Sarmatia Asiatica being likewise supposed to be the Turkish
Nation. The cause next to the hand of the Almighty, the Author of all earthly
Kingdoms, of departure from their natural seats, was, either a general want in
that cold Country, or their (...) driving them from the Caspian Mountains. The
time was either in 755, or 844, or both; who rather issuing out of the Caspian,
than the Caucasan streights, first seized on a part of the greater Armenia,
called by them (...); wherein, under leaders, they roamed up and down a long
time with families and cattle, in unity, having (...) little whereabout to
strive; who not only defended Armenia, but through hardiness and valor, and
the cowardice of the Asians, incroached farther and farther, though not much
skilful in war; whereby their fame and fortune increased, and the Saracen
Empire rent (within 200 victories over the Christians) into many Kingdoms,
whose Sultans (not obeying their great Caliph) as fast declined, by turning
their Arms one upon another. Mahomet the Persian Sultan, praying the Turks his
neighbors aid against Pisasiris the Caliph of Babylon, his mortal enemy, who
in hope of Persia sent him 30000 hardy men, under a valiant Captain Togra
Mucalet, called by the Greeks Tangrolipix, of the Salzuccian tribe; so that
Mahomet overcame Pisasiris. And now threatened the Turks (such necessary men,
having further service for them against the Indians) if they should talk of
departure home, over the River Araxis, which they had requested, who hereupon
withdrew secretly into the desert of Caravonitis, making incursions into the
adjoining Countries; against whom Mahomet incensed, sent an Army of 20000 men,
the third day after whose encamping by the Forest side, (in whose covert
Tangrolipix a great way off lay) the Turks at night, suddenly set upon their
affrightned enemies, who fled. Tangrolipix now furnished with all warlike
necessaries, showed himself in the field, whose Army was (through the repair of
rogues and villains unto him) grown to 50000, against whom Mahomet set forward
with a fresh Army, having put out the eyes of the Leaders of the former, and
threatened to disgrace the fleeing soldiers with women's apparel, who (by the
way) fled to Tangrolipix, to his great encouragement; and at Ispanan of Persia
they fought, with wonderful slaughter on both sides. But Mahomet breaking his
neck by unadvised riding: both Armies proclaimed Tangrolipix Sultan of Persia,
with all its Dominions in his stead, (which was in 1030, about 214 years after
their coming out of Scythia) who freed the passage for his Countrymen over
Araxis; and the Saracens being thereby kept under by the Turks (who before used
Circumcision) do now embrace Mahometan-Superstition.

Tangrolipix (who now warred against neighbor Princes) after he had slain
Pisasiris, and joined his Kingdom of Babylon to his own, sent his Cosen
Cutlumuses with an Army against the Arabians, by whom he was overthrown: whose
Turks easily overthrew, and took Stephen, the Greek Emperors Lieutenant of
Media; who sought to stop Cutlumuses his return by the confines of his
Country. Cutlumuses returning, persuaded Tangrolipix to turn his forces into
Media; who notwithstanding, went against the Arabians in person with a new
Army: by whom he was also worsted. Cutlumuses the mean while (for fear)
revolting from the Sultan, and betaking himself to the strong City Pasar, was
besieged by the Sultan; who a long time defended himself. Tangrolipix in the
mean time, sent Asan his Nephew to invade (...): who was by the Emperors
Lieutenant, slain with most of his Army. Then he sent thither his brother
Habrami Alim with 100000 men; who while the Lieutenant expected Liparites
Governor of Iberia, to come to his aid before be would encounter them, Alim
besieged Arzen, a rich but open Town; who, after six days (...), setting it on
fire in diverse places forced the inhabitants to flee for their lives, leaving
an infinite spoil to the enemy. Liparites being now come with a great power,
they overcame the Turks, and chased them in the night; yet Liparites was taken
prisoner, who was franckly set at liberty by the Sultan, with whom he sent the
Seriph in Embassage to the Emperor, to make an everlasting peace with him, by
becoming his tributary; which Embassage, being scornfully rejected, the Sultan
with all his power, invaded the Roman Provinces; And coming as far as (...),
the Country people and goods, being conveyed into strong Holds, and the
Emperor raising a great force against him at Caesarea, in (...) he returned
into Media, laying siege unto Mantzichiert, a City strongly fortified; he (...)
it 30 days with fury in vain; and was persuaded by one Alcan, to stay another
day to prove what he could do, unto whom the whole charge was committed. But
this forward Captain was (while others shot from higher ground at the
Defendants) slain in his approach to the Wall; and being drawn (by two
Sallyers) into the Town, had his head cast over the wall; whereupon, the Sultan
raised the siege, threatening a return the next Spring with greater power; But
discord arising between the Sultan and his Brother Alim, Alim joined with
Cutlumuses, denouncing war against the Sultan, by whom (...) was overcome and
taken near Pasar, and put to death: And Cutlumuses with 6000 glad to flee into
Arabia, being followed into Armenia by the Sultan, where they had sent for
protection from the Emperor Constantine Monomachus: which Monomachus
afterward sent Michael Acoluthus (a valiant Captain) against the Sultan, who
spoiled Iberia; wherefore he retired to Tauris, leaving Samuch with 3000 to
insest the Emperors frontiers; the which, (by reason of Monomachus: imposing
tribute on the frontiers of his Empire (who in lieu of defending the passages
had been free) they hereupon dissolving wonted Garrisons; and (...) (...) as
chiefly his successor, wholly given to hoard up treasure, gave little
maintenance unto men of service) the Turks now, and afterward more easily did,
to the weakening and ruin of the Constantinopolitan empire. And (...), (...) as
his wife, with three very young Sons now governing; the Turks spoiled
Mesopotamia, Cilicia, Cappodoeia, and sometimes Coelosyria: who fearing a
remove from the Empire, thought of some valiant man for her husband, to manage
so weighty affairs; the man was Diogenes Romanus of great renown, who swelling
with his Fathers ambition, had secretly aspired unto the Empire, for which by
Eudocia he was held in bonds at Constantinople; but when he was brought forth
to receive the sentence of death for his treason, the Empress moved with
compassion (as the other beholders) pardoned him; and made him General of her
forces. But a solemn oath she had made to her husband never to marry, was a
check to her purpose; wherefore in seminine policy, she sent an instructed
Eunuch unto John Xiphiline the Patriarch, to get by craft the writing of her
oath, being delivered into his hands to keep, by telling him of making his
nephew Barda a gallant her husband, if she might safely be discharged of her
rash oath. Where at the Patriarch (moved with his nephews preferment) sent for
the Senators, of whom, some by his persuasion, telling them of the
Commonwealth's dangers, and blaming her rash oath: others by gifts and promises
of the Empress, were overcome; so that the Patriarch delivered her the desired
writings, discharging her of her oath; who forthwith married Diogenes, and
proclaimed him Emperor: who being of an haughty spirit, was weary of the
pliant observations of Eudocia; and the Eastern Provinces being in part lost,
passed (although with a small and unfitted Army) into Asia: of whose coming the
invading Sultan hearing retired; and dividing his Army, spoiled the South and
North parts of Asia, surprising, and sacking the City Neo Caesaria. But the
Emperor, using expedition, with some of his best companies, came on the Turks
unawares, who fled and left the booty and prisoners of Neo Caesaria, together
with bag and baggage behind them, although but few slain. Then going into
Syria, Hierapolis was yielded unto him, where he built a strong Castle. And
hearing of the overthrow of part of his Army, before sent unto Melitena,
speedily marched for their relief; where (having a far inferior number, and
the Governor of (...) traitorously joining with the enemy) he was surrounded
with impossibility to escape; yet suddenly and silently issuing out of his
trenches; put the Turks to flight: so he returning to Constantinople, first
taking diverse Towns, and billetting his Army against Winter, about Alexandria
of Cilicia. And at Spring he repressed the Turks fury, who did much harm about
Neo Caesaria; after whose departure unto Exphrates, the Turks put Philaretus
(left by him at those frontiers) to flight, wasting Cappadocia, and sacking
(...) in Cilicia. The Emperor made toward them, sending the Governor of
Antioch, to stop the Turks passage at Mopsiphestia. But they being stripped of
their prey by the Armenians, and escaping by night at the Emperors approach,
he returned from those quieted Provinces, unto Constantinople. After which
Manuel Comnenus (whose honor was envied by the Emperor, for his prevalency
against the Turks) was, near Sebastia, taken by the Turks in his way to Syria,
and most part of his small Army (...); who (while the Emperor was preparing to
go personally against his enemies) fled from the displeased Sultan, with the
Turk that took him. The Emperor set forward, and having pacified a mutinous
Legion, at Cryapega, where he encamped; he both removed, and divided his Army
into three parts, sending one part to besiege Mantzicierts, which was soon
yielded upon composition; yet the garrison Soldiers being suddenly oppressed,
as they sought for forage, he sent (...) for the Cities relief; who when
Basilacius was sent unto him, as being too weak, put the Turks to flight in
battle. Briennius notwithstanding laden with Armor, was in the rear taken, his
horse being first slain, and brought unto the Sultan, who both entreated him
honorably, and questioned him frequently. The present Sultan in the field, was
Axan Tangrolipix his son, who was dead, of great wisdom: who sending to the
Emperor to treat of peace, had this message slighted by him, through the
perlwasion of some Captains, being willed if he desired peace, to leave the
place of his encamping to the Emperor; who sent for Ruselius in have, that he
had sent against Chliat: but (he being for safety retired into the Roman
frontiers) had not his help, some of the Scythians also in the Emperors camp
revolting to the Turks; yet he gave them battle, who having some hopes of
peace, seemed not much desirous either to fight or flee. But the Emperor
retreating for fear of his camp that was left weakly manned; others (through
Andronicus Constantine his brothers son, and that envied Diogenes, giving out
that the Emperor fled) began to flee also. At which the Turks being encouraged
hardly pursued; the Emperor now standing, and notably resisting, but in vain,
for he was both wounded and taken; which the Sultan at first believed not,
until he was assured thereof by his Ambassadors, and Basilacius, a prisoners
gesture toward Diogenes. The Sultan then cheared him with words, telling
Diogenes (who humbled himself) he would use him as an Emperor, the which he
did, concluding peace with him, on promise of marriage between their children;
and sending him away (in a Turkish habit) with his Ambassadors toward
Constantinople, being first cured of his wounds. But Michael Duc (...) (the
eldest son of Eudocia) who was thrust into a Monastery, being by John Caesar
and others, set up in Diogenes his room, letters were sent into all Provinces,
not to receive Diogenes as Emperor: who stayed at the Castle of Docia; and was
by Caesar's sons overthrown, and yielded to them in the City of Adana, upon
condition of resigning the Empire for ever, who being brought by Andronicus,
Caesar's eldest son, to Cotai in Phrygia, while he was there sick, had
(notwithstanding the Clergies faith gaged for his safety) his eyes cruelly put
out, and in the Isle Prota (worms breeding in his wounds for want of dressing)
shortly dyed, reigning 3 years 8 months.

Axan in revenge thereof, invaded not for booty alone, but for conquest, the
Imperial Provinces, and overthrew Isaac Commen's Army, taking him prisoner;
and Casar the Emperor's Uncle, with another Army, being also taken; but that
was by Russelius a revolting traitor, who hereby doing what he list in lesser
Asia, was through Alexius Commen's secret working with the Turks for money,
betrayed to the Emperor, who being imprisoned, was afterward employed against
Briennius up in rebellion.

But Cutlumuses and his cosen Melech, in the beginning of Axan's reign,
returning out of Arabia, raised a great power, and were ready to encountet the
Sultan's whole forces nigh the City Eres, as envious of his Kingdom. But the
Caliph of Babylon their chief Bishop, considering the ruin of the (...),
through civil dislention, and fearing the like in these, the chief stay of
Mahometism, thrusting himself (contrary unto Pontifical formality) betwixt the
Armies ready to join battle, who both by his reverence and persuasion, (that
Axan should enjoy his Kingdom entire, and that Cutlumuses with his Sons, should
be the sole Lords of what they subdued in the Constantinopolitan Empire) were
content to say down Arms: Most commodious to Mahometism, and most hurtful to
the Christians; for Cutlumuses etc. soon subdued all Media, a good part of
Armenia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Bythinia, and the lesser Asia; and enlarged (by
the Persian Sultans help) much the Turkish Empire, (which occasioned them to be
accounted Sultans, though indeed they were none, neither were Aspasalemus etc.
(though all great men of the Selzuccian family) any other than imaginary
successors in the Turks first Empire, Axan, or rather Ax-Han, that is, the
white King, succeeding his Father Trangrolopix; Axan giving to Ducas and Melech
his kinsmen, Damasco's and (...) government, (still to hold all of him as of
their Sovereign) that he might encroach on the Egyptian Caliph, Cutlumuses
privileges being larger: who had also assisted Botoniates, in thrusting
Michael Ducas after 6 years and 6 months reign, into a Monastery, who usurped
the Empire of Greece, though himself was in like manner served, by Alexius
Comnenus.

Cutlumuses and his sons, thus prevailing both against the Christians, and
Melech against the Egyptian Caliph, to the loss of the Saracen name and
Empire, now almost quite driven out of Asia; Peter a French Hermit, then
visiting Jerusalem in devotion, diligently observed the manners, government and
strength of these Barbarians: as also the grievious miseries of the oppressed
Christians amongst them; the which (being a little hard-favoured fellow) he had
freedom safely to do; and coming to Jerusalem, entered into deep discourse with
the Abbot of the Monastery, and Master of the Hospitalers; at length agreeing
that they should write Letters to the Pope, and other Christian Princes
touching the Christians miseries, craving aid against those cruel Infidels; the
Hermit promising that he would be a trusty carrier of their Letters, and also a
careful Solicitor of their Petitions, which were to this effect; That whereas
the Citizens and Contrymen of Christ Jesus, are daily scourged and brained,
etc. were it not impiety in diverse respects to leave the Land, they would flee
to the farthest parts of the earth. And though happily the Western Christians
are without fear, yet, the Turks forces, policies, and attempts, together with
their success, being stronger, and deeper than the Saracens; seeing Jerusalem
itself is taken and sacked, they could not presume to stand in safety; And
therefore, since our blood cries out for revenge, we lay prostrat at your feet
for help, for deliverance of your Religion from accursed slavery: and averting
the storm hanging over your own and childrens head.

The Hermit delivered these Letters at Rome to Pope Urban the second,
requesting his care for redresses of the Christians miseries seen at Jerusalem;
who calling a Council at Claremont in France of 310 Bishops out of diverse
parts, with Ambassadors of all Countries, propounded the same as a special
matter; where the Letters being read, and the Christians miseries and tears
being (by the Hermit) lively represented, the whole Assembly was moved with
compassion, crying out, Deus vult, that is, God wills it, which words were
afterward much used in their expedition as a sign of their cheerfulness; this
religious decreed war spreading in one days space, by flying fame, so far as
is hardly to be believed. And by the effectual persuasion of the Father,
returned home, were shortly seen about 300000 men with red Crosses on their
breasts, ready to spend life and goods for Religion, and recovery of the holy
Land, under the commands of Godfrey, Eustace, and Baldwin, Brothers of the
house of Bulloin; Great Hugh the French Kings brother, Raimond and Robert,
Earls of Flanders, Robert of Normandy, William the Conquerour's Son, Stephen of
Ualois, Ademar the Popes Legate, and Peter the Hermit; many Princes being
partakers of their travels, though not of such charge.

One Gualter first set forward, then the Hermit with 40000, who came at length
through Germany, Hungary, and Bulgaria, with labor and loss to Constantinople,
which weary travelers were afterward shipped over Bosphorus into Asia, by
Alexius the Emperor, (marching and encamping not far from Nice in Bythinia)
unto whom (by reason of distrusting the expedition to be against himself,
through guilt of his usurpation) they were not at first very welcome. Godfrey
with others, followed the Hermits way; Hugh the Legate and the French
Commanders, passed into Italy, taking leave of the Pope, unto whom Bohemud a
Prince of Apulia joining with 12000, they crossed the Adriatic from three
several Ports, Brundusium, Bary and Hydruntum, passing by land to
Constantinople, where they met with Godfrey, with whom jealous Alexius, better
persuaded of their good meanings, made a League, to furnish them with all
supplies, (though by him but slenderly performed) for which he should receive
all Countries, except Jerusalem, gained from the Turk, and Saracens; he
transported them unto Asia: but Bohemud from his Fathers grudg with Alexius
came nor to Constantinople; yet marched and passed Hellespont sooner than was
expected.

The Turks understanding what was growing on them out of Europe, diligently
sought to cut off Gualter, and Peter's Army, who had lain two months about Nice,
expecting the other Princes, whose Soldiers weary and somewhat pinched, chose
Raymond a Germane, in a mutiny, in Gualters room, suspecting also Peter's
prowess, and therefore by quitting Exorgum a Town, and sending out Cattle, as a
bait to train out the Christians, winking at those who brought them into
Exorgum, slew asterwards full 3000 encouraged Christians, to the discouragment
of their chief Comanders; yet the Soldiers chose one Burel a new General, and
10000 rashly going out of Exorgum in revenge, and for forage, were almost all
slain by the Turks, who afterward hardly besieging the town, with famine and
sword consumed most of them, the Hermit with much ado defending the town Cinit,
whither he had (...) til the Princes coming.

Solomon Cutlumuses his Son who was dead, who had almost nullified the Hermit's
forces, was careful to withstand the great Army; who removed from Nicomedia
besieging Nice, so called from Nicea the wife of King Lysimachus; this City was
yielded July, 1097 after 50 days siege, defended by the Turks longer then was
supposed, new supplies coming to them by the lake Ascanius on the other side;
the Turks, assayling the mean while the (...) Camp, were with great loss
repulsed, Solyman's wife and two children being taken prisoners; the City was
restored to Alexius. Then the Christian Princes encamping on the fourth days
march by a river for refreshment, news was brought to Bohemud of Solymans
approach (aided by the Persian Sultan) with 60000 men, to give the Christians
battle; who sending word to the other Princes for relief upon occasion, the two
Armies most terribly fought, the Turks lying slain on heaps, some of their
horsemen breaking in the mean time, into Bohemuds Camp, among women and weak
persons; appalled the fighters; but Bohemud withdrawing some Companies,
repulsed the enemy, whose Soldiers he found at his return ready to flee from
the Turks; but his coming restored the battle. The enemy with horsemen (...)
the Camp again, Hugh seasonably coming with 30000 to rescue it, whom a fresh
Turkish reserve notably encountered. At length (after a terririble and doubtful
fight) the Turks gave ground, retiring into the mountains, 40000 being slain;
about 2000 Christians; No enemy the next morning appearing, they buried their
dead, easily distinguished by their red crosses. Solomon fleeing, gave out he
had the victory burning, destroying, or carrying away all as he went.

Bohemud and the Princes now marching through lesser Asia, easily took
Antiochia in Pisidia, being courteously received by the Citizens of Iconium,
refreshing their Army. But at their approach to Heraclea, the Turks and
Garrison soldiers fled, the Christian Citizens gladly yielding themselves and
City to their deliverers. Here (through the Turks fear not daring any where to
abide their coming) Baldwin and (...) with part of the Army soon subdued Tarsus
Edessa, and Manussa, Cities of Cilicia, while the other part took the lesser
(...), and the Cities of (...) and Socor in Cappadocia, driving the Turks in
every place out of lesser Asia, and setting the oppressed Christians at
liberty. Of which Solomon sorely complained in Letters for aid unto Axan his
Cousin. Thus the Turks (until, by discord and ambition of the Greek Empire,
they again became dreadful this heat being over) were glad to retire farther
off, being brought low in lesser Asia.

The Conquerours mounted over high Taurus, possessing the City Maresia, (from
whence the Turks had by night fled) being first bound by oath, not to return
home till the accomplishment of that holy war. While they (...) here, the
Citizens of Artasia suddenly slaying all the Turks in Garrison, received Robert
Earl of Flanders, with 1000 men that was sent to Summon it. In revenge hereof,
the Turks sent 10000 out of Antioch unto Artasia, 15 miles off; who by
straggling Companies, drew the Flemings out of the City, purposely fleeing from
them; and had not the Citizens relieved them, they had surely perished by the
Turks ambushments. The Army, marching forward, encamped October. 21. 1097 before
Antioch, having passed the River (...), on which this famous City is situated,
( Robert Duke of Normandy by a hard conflict making the Turks forsake the
bridge, where they thought to stay their passage) the Covernour (for the
Persian Sultan) of this Metrapolis of Syria (called by the Hebrews Roblatha)
was Gassianus, who had 7000 horse and 20000 (...), as defendants, with great
store of all necessary provisions; (...) encompassed with a double Wall, 460
Towers within it, an impregnable Castle at its East End with a deep Lake on the
South side. Many a fierce sally during the siege, was made by the Turks, (...)
(...) repulsed; chiefly at the bridge made by the Christians with boats over the
River for passage to and fro. But at the beginning of February, through the
abundance of rain, and scarcity of victuals whereby they eat their slain
enemies, their horses perishing for lack of meat; Peter the Hermit, author of
this war, and Tancred Bohemud's Nephew among others, through these increasing
miseries, secretly withdrew to steal home: who being taken, and by Hugh sharply
teproved, were forced to take a new oath for their fidelity. A great part of
Arethusa's Garrison being cur off by Bohemud, the Country was more open for
distressed Soldiers relief, until a great number of Turks about Aleppo and
Damasco came to relieve the besieged, who by the Christians were put to flight,
2000 being slain, taking store of victuals, etc. and setting the Turks heads on
stakes before the City; Whereupon, Cassianus (having lost his eldest Son
herein, and expecting relief from the Sultan, requested a truce for a time,
which being (by the Turks slaying one (...) a Frenchman) broken, a fresh and
more hard siege began. The Governor had in 9 months space lost so many, that
he used one Pirrhus, amongst diverse Christian Citizens, for the guarding of a
Tower; who by secret intelligence, and easy conditions made with Bohemud, let
his Soldiers by night into the City, which was recovered June 1098, about
10000 men, women and children were put to the sword: amongst whom many
Christians by the furious Soldiers; many Turks fled into the Castle, and the
fleeing Governor, was slain by Christians in the mountains of Armenia. Amongst
other Letters, speedily certifying this joyful news, Bohemud wrote to Roger his
Brother Prince of Apulia, showing how it was yielded unto himself by Pyrrhus,
and how few days after he was in danger by a wound received at Aretum, that
was assaulted by them; assuring Roger both of the valor and esteem, he and the
Army, had of his Son Tancred. The Venetians likewise, at the time of the siege,
with 200 Galleys, having the upper hand of the Turks by Sea at the Rhodes, set
at liberty 5000 soldiers, save 30 chief Commanders, and sailing into Ionia,
took Smyrna, spoiling Lycia, Pamphilia, and Cilicia. Corbanas also, the Persian
Sultan's Lieutenant, now besteged Edessa, intending to relieve Antioch, which
was defended by Baldwin, whereof he had intelligence by the Son of Cassianus,
after he had raised that siege, keeping on his way with a mighty Army resolving
to hazard the fortune of a battle. The Turks still possessing the Castle,
Corbanas sent some supplies into it, which sallied out on the Earl of Toulouse,
who was left to keep them into the Castle, while Corbanas fought with the
Christians in the field, so that within and without the City was a dreadful
fight, and bloody slaughter; but the Turks gave ground and fled, above 10000 of
them being slain, and about 4000 Christians, leaving rich prey besides Horses
and other beasts, the Castle also surrendering the next day June 28.

Alexius the Emperor, unto whom this City should according to agreement have
been delivered, guilty of neglect, sending the Princes no relief all the siege,
refused to accept of it: so that Bohemud was chosen Prince or King of Antioch.

At Autumn there was a plague in the Army, of which 50000 are said to have
dyed, which ceasing in November, Rugia and Albaria two Cities, were by force
taken; where Raymund, envying Bohemud's preferment, dissented with him, who for
the Cause's sake, retired to Antioch. At Spring, Raymund besieging Tripolis,
from some fortunate roads made on the enemies last Winter, insolently maligned
Bohemud's proceedings, who had besieged Tortosa; Bohemud considering 'twas
enough to divide all Christians, rose with his Army, and retired to Antioch.
After which, Gabella was taken, and Tortosa, whither Godfrey (and Raymund from
Tripolis) came, after 3 (...) siege departed spoiling about (...), passing by
(...), and keeping Whitsontide at Casarea, marched to and from Rama. And upon
the first descry of Jerusalem, there were piercing and rending shouts for joy:
some lifting up eyes and hands to Heaven, calling on Christ: others kissing the
ground, and saluting those so much heard of holy places: Every one, as at the
end of long travel, expressing some joy.

This ancient and famous City; being utterly destroyed by Vespatian and his son
(...), 40 years after Christ's death, lay buried in its ruins, till about the
year 136 it was (by Aelius Adrianus Emperor) re-edified, who in part changed
its situation, enclosing the place of Christ's suffering and burial within the
City walls, and calling it Aelia after his own name, giving it first to the
Jews, who were afterward for rebellion thrust out, and then gave it to the
Christians (in time also recovering the ancient name Jerusalem) who under
several idolatrous and persecuting Emperors, endured grievous things; peace
being, about 320, given to the afflicted by Constantine the Great. Whereby for
300 years they flourished under Greek Emperors, till usurping Phocas (by
killing Maurice and his Children) occasioned Cosroes King of Persia to invade
Syria, taking Jerusalem and killing almost 100000 Christians in revenge of his
Father in Law: who about 624, was again driven out of it by Heraclius that
succeeded Phocas, cruelly slain by his Guard. Which (...), not paying a warlike
people of Arabia Deserta that had helped him against Cosroes, calling them vile
Dogs, because they had lately received Mahomet's Doctrine, caused them to
revolt and join to the Caliphs, extending (...) doctrine and Sovereignty over
all Egypt and Syria, taking Jerusalem. The Greek Emperors being overcome by
the Saracens, left Syria in their possession, for which they had diverse years
conflicted; who for 370 years oppressed the Christians, leaving a 3d part of
Jerusalem to them, with Christ's Sepulcher and mount Zion for profits sake;
until the vagrant andcruel Turks start up, and aspiring Persia's kingdom,
subdue Mesopotamia, Syria, most of the lester Asia, and all (...): The Saracens
Government being but light unto the Christians, in respect of their Thraldom
under the Turks; and had not these Princes who were now come to (...), been
stirred up for release of these miseries, none could have been expected.

The Princes lay encamped before the North and West of Jerusalem in order, (
Bohemud being at Antioch, and Baldwin at Edessa) (...) with the Germans and
Lorrainers lying next the City, whose Governor had a very strong Garrison with
all necessaries for a long siege; on the 5 day they fiercely assaulted it, but
for want of enough scaling-ladders (it was supposed) they gave over, few days
after they most terribly assaulted it on both sides afresh, until by reason of
fervent heat, and want of water (all the wells expect Siloe being poyfoned)
they retired into their Trenches.

A fleet of Genowaies now arriving at Joppa, (knowing themselves too weak for
the Egyptian Sultans fleet at Ascalon) for Jerusalem's relief, sunk their
Ships, and marched to the Camp; among whom were diverse Engineers, by whom a
great moving Tower was made, covered with raw hides to save it from fire; which
by night being brought to the wall, they the next day the wind driving the
Turks fire, who thought to burn it, into their own faces, gained the top of the
wall: which being first footed by Godfrey and his Brother, they pressed in like
a violent River killing men women and children, with a lamentable sight: The
better sort of Turks retiring into the Temple fought terribly; many on both
sides falling, but the Christians fiercely breaking in, the foremost were
miserably slain, the Turks also (...) fighting in the midst of the Temple,
there were slain heaps both of victors and vanquished, the pavement swimming
with blood. Then the Turks held the top of the Temple; And the next day (upon
Proclamation of mercy to such as laid down weapons) they yielded themselves.
Thus Jerusalem was recovered in 1099, having been in the Infidels hands above
400 years.

Eight days after (cleansing the City and giving thanks to God, and the poor
Christians welcomming with joy their victorious Brethren) the Princes
consulting of their King, chose Robert Duke of Normandy, who refusing Jerusalem
upon news of his Fathers death in England ( William Rufus being in possession
as it were) lost both Kingdoms: Godfrey of Bulloine a great Soldier being
saluted King, who said, He would not wear a Crown of Gold, where Christ wore a
Crown of thorns: but briefly certified these proceedings to Bohemud, showing
Jerusalem's strength and situation, and how he first gained part of the wall,
Baldwin opening the gates for entry; of their great conflict in Solomon's
Temple; and that, since, he was saluted King of Jerusalem, though against his
will; he would endeavor well to deserve of the universal faith. And then
joined a most dreadful battle with the greatest multitude of Turks, and
Saracens, (all as one assembled at Ascalon for revenge) killing a 100000 of
them and taking more spoil than in this whole expedition: After this Victory,
some Princes returned to their Charges, others, with honor to their own
Country. But shortly after, a great Pestilence ensuing, Godfrey among the rest
died, July 18. 1100. Scarce reigning a full year, generally lamented, and
honorably buried on mount Calvary in the Temple of Christ's Sepulcher. In
whose Room Baldwin of Edessa his brother was Crowned King in 1101. Who (aided
by Sea and Land) took the Sea-City Cesarea-Stratonis, overthrowing certain
Companies at (...), gladly and safely conducting to Jerusalem, new western
aides by Tire, and three other Cities holden by the enemies, at which time the
Christians were notably overthrown about Rama by the Turks, aided by the
Arabians and Egyptians; two Stephens, Earls of Charters and Burgundy being
slain, the King hardly escaping; who repairing his Army at Joppa, speedily so
overthrew his secure enemies, that they had little cause to rejoice in their
Victory. Tancred Prince of Galilee, in the mean time taking the City Apamea,
and with much toil Laodicea: But Baldwin (...) Governor of Edessa was, at the
siege of Carras thatwas upon yielding, overthrown by the Persian Sultan;
Benedict a Bishop, and (...) his kinsman being taken with him: who (to the
offense of the 2 Sultans) after 5 years, redeemed themselves from the Turk that
took them.

King Baldwin, who (after this) lived unmolested for a season, suddenly raised
a full strength and besieged Ptolemais or Acon in Phoenicia, and was glad to
raise his siege, being after a long time brought to his end, by a healed-up
wound received in a skirmish at his return, yet the next year Ptolemais by the
encouragement of the Genua fleet, was yielded to him on composition after 20
days. Tancred Livetenant Governor of Antioch, soon after put to flight the
invading Governor of Aleppo and others, and the Caliph of Egypt was
discomfited by the Christians at land, and by tempest at Sea, coming against
Jerusalem.

Bohemud returning out of Italy with 40000 foot and 5000 horse, (as is
reported) toward Jerusalem, spoiled (in revenge of Alexius his injuries) the
Country about Dyrrhachium, forcing the Emperor to promise by oath security and
kindness to all traveling Soldiers, and dying shortly at Antioch in 1108.
Whose Principality his child Bohemud enjoyed, under Tancreds (...)

Baldwin the King, Apr. 23. 1111. wonn the City Berytus, (...) most to the
sword, and the same year December. 19. Sidon was yielded to him, through the
assistance of a Norway fleet: Tire only (of all the famous Sea-Cities from
Laodicea to Ascalon remaining to the enemies, the which Baldwin hardly besieged
4 months in vain.

Two years after, Baldwin and Tancred who, Bohemud dying, Reigned in Antioch,
with the rest joined a cruel battle with the Persian Sultans mighty Army under
Mendus their General, (encamping on the Sea near Tyberias) after some
companies, were by some flying skirmishers entrapped in ambush, and rescued by
other Christians: who were, by the Turks far exceeding in number, put to
flight, and hardly followed with great slaughter. The Ascalon Turks (the mean
while) besieging Jerusalem, weakly manned: but news of the Kings coming, and of
Supplies out of the west made them (having burnt storehouses of Corn, and
spoiled other things) to retire home. This King (after many hard conflicts with
Turks and Saracens, won Pharamia a strong Sea City in Egypt, taking abundance
of fish, at the mouth of Nilus; wherewith he feasted in the City. And after
dinner grieved with his old wound, died near Laris in his return in 1118,
Reigning 18 years, and royally Sepulchred near his brother Godfrey.

Baldwin Brugensis of Edessa, his Cousin, was chosen and Crowned King of
Jerusalem, Apr. 2. 1118. a man of great courage, tall stature, and comely
countenance: Against whom the Caliph of Egypt with the King of Aleppo raised a
great power the same summer, Baldwin also encamping in fight of his enemies,
both armies for fear of each other, after 3 months facing, retired without any
notable action. Alexius the Emperor died this year, whose Son Calo Johannes
his successor (all his Reign) worthily defended his territories in lesser Asia.

But Roger Prince of Antioch, with more courage than discretion, going forth
against a great Army not far from Aleppo, was slain with most of his Army, the
place being called the field of blood. Baldwin Aug. 14, 1120, overthrowing the
careless Turks with a great slaughter, joining Antioch principality to his
own; which Antiochians, Baldwin their protecting Prince being far off, were
more subject to enemies inroads than before; the King of Damasco entering with
great power, and doing harm thereabouts in 1122; who understanding Baldwins
approach with a puissant Army, retired out of the Country, the King taking
Garaze, a new built strong Castle of the King of Damasco's, which he raced to
the ground; Whilst this King wisely sent Ambassadors to diverse Christian
Princes, especially to the Uenetians, for relief by Sea, Balac the Persian
Sultan with a great Army invaded about him Antioch: with whom without longer
stay for his friends aid, he joined battle, and was with certain of the best
Commanders carried captive unto Carras, most of his Army being overthrown.
Hereupon, the Caliph of Egypt the Saracen, for Egypt with Tuneis and
Moroccoes Kingdoms were yet in their possession, invading Jerusalems Kingdom,
landed an Army at Joppa, besieging it also by Sea with 700 sail. Against which,
while they lay in hope, the Duke of Venice, stirred up by the Pope for the
Christians relief, came from Cyprus thither in have with 200 sail, and either
before the Saracens could make ready, or after a doubtful battle, obtained a
glorious victory, going by land to Jerusalem, where he was honorably received
by the Patriarch etc. Eustace also the Vice-King, overthrowing them at Ascalon.

After Joppa's relief, the Saracens discomfiture, and the Christians
encouragment, they besieged Tire by Sea and Land, March 1. whose sharp assault
the Turks valiantly repulsed; yet after 4 months, June 29, 1124, it was yielded
on composition, of which a third part was given to the Venetians, according to
a former agreement; Baldwin, after 18 months imprisonment, being shortly
ransomed for 100000 Ducats.

But the Duke of Venice returning home, took Chios, (...), and three more
Islands, with the City of Modon (...) Peloponnesus, from the Emperor, who, as
Alexius his Father, envying the Christians success, had in the Dukes absence
infested his Territories. King Baldwin also invaded and spoiled the King of
Damasco's Country, overthrowing him in three battles, taking great prey, as
also the invading Saracens at Ascalon, whereby for a time he lived in peace;
who, with others, joining with Hugh Paganus the first Master of the Templars,
returning with a great number of Christians out of the West, and besieging
Damasco, through the Cities strength, the Defendants valor, and the (...)
contagion, raised their siege. King Baldwin also now sent to Fulk Count of
Turine etc. (who was 60 years old, and making preparations for the holy Land)
offering him his eldest daughter Melisinda, with the Kingdoms succession for a
dowry, whereof he accepted. And about 3 years after, feeling death draw on,
removing into the Patriarchs house, he in the presence of diverse great Ones
commended to his Son in Law and Daughter, with their Son Baldwin two years
old, the Government, presently after ( Aug. 22. 1131) dying, and solemnly
buried with Godfrey and Baldwin. Fulk was Sept. 16. Crowned by the Patriarch;
the beginning of whose reign, was by Pontius of Tripolis, and Hugh of Joppa
that joined with the Ascalonian Saracens, vexed with domestic discord, (...)
hurtful to the Christian State; which by force, and others mediation was well
appeased, and yet vengeance followed the Traitors. The Turks also invaded about
Antioch, and were overthrown; But John the Greek Emperor, with a puissant
Army, took Tarsus with Cilicia's whole Province, besieging Antioch, pretending
it belonged to his Empire; who (after Christian Princes mediation) agreed that
Raymond Count of Poictou (to whom the dukedom of Antioch was given with the
Dukes daughter) should hold it from him as his Sovereign, and so returned. Fulk
about that time, coming to relieve Monteferrant-Castle, was by Sanguin the Turk
overthrown, betaking him into the Castle: which now he hardlier befieged,
pinching them within by famine, unto whose relief the Kingdoms whole power
coming, the Turk upon deliverance of the Castle to him, set all at liberty.

John the Emperor, about 4 years after, came to Antioch (having longed also
for Jerusalems Kingdom) who not being suffered to enter, but upon an oath and
few followers, with quiet departure, in revenge, pretending the Armies want of
victuals, made havoc of the Suburbs, cutting down the fruit trees to dress
their meat. And wintring in Cilicia, at hunting of a Boar, had his hand lightly
wounded by a poisoned arrow in his quiver, wherewith his arm swelling more and
more, must be cut off, which he abhorred, saying. The Greek Empire was not to
be governed with one hand, died; Emmanuel the youngest Son (his two eldest
being dead) succeeding him.

King Fulk also now at peace, walking with his Queen out of Ptolemais,
following amongst other (...), a Hare, put up by running boys, fell in the
course with his head under the Horse, with whose weight and the (...) hardness,
the brains came out at the nose and ears of his crushed head, who died November.
13. 1142 (lying 3 days speechless) and was magnificently buried by the other
Kings with a general lamentation. The elder of whose 2 Sons, Baldwin, about 13
years (...), with his mother, were solemnly on Christmas Day crowned in 1142,
about which time Sanguin the bloody Turk took by undermining Edessa in Gount
Joscelin's absence exercising all cruelty on the Christians, (the territory of
3 Archbisho-pricks being drawn from Antioch hereby) which Turk was stabbed in
his drunkenness at the siege of Cologenbar, Noradine his Son succeeding him.
Who (after Baldwin 3 had in his first year recovered and fortified Sorbal
Castle beyond Jordan) so beset him in his return, the next year going against
the King of Damasco, that he miraculously escaped.

Edessa's loss with the Christians miseries, (through the stirring up of
Eugenius Bishop of Rome) greatly moved the Western Princes, to prepare almost
in every Province for their relief. Conrade Emperor of Germany, raising a
puissant Army, set forward, who having before certified Emanuel the Greek
Emperor of his purpose, craving passage, with victuals and all necessaries for
his money, he seemed willingly to condescend, though inwardly pining thereat;
for strong companies of the Greeks following the Army to keep the Soldiers
from straggling, now and then cut them off roaming, at advantage. And the
farther they traveled, the more the Greeks discontented countenances appeared;
yet they went on to Philippolis, from whence departing, the Greeks and Armies
rear, had not the wiser sort duly appeased them, had plainly fought. Then from
Adrianople they came to the Plain Cherobachi, where the River Melas (that
suddenly in Winter or great fall of water, overfloweth its banks like a Sea)
through abundance of rain, so by night overflowed the encamped Army, that (...)
with burdens, besides weapons etc. and also great numbers of armed men, were
with lamentable out-cties carried away, and perished like hay or chafe every
one glad to shift for himself; the beholders saying, The wrath of God was broke
into the Camp. Nevertheless, the water being fallen, the sore troubled
Emperor marched to Constantinople: Who (by armed men glistring on the Walls)
was not suffered to enter, but persuaded by the Emperor to transport his Army
over the strait, promising to supply his wants; the Greeks sparing no labor,
or vessel in that so hasty service, Who being shipped over, the Country people
(by his appointment) brought nothing, as before, to sell them; the Towns at an
extreme rate, first receiving their money by ropes from the Walls, delivered
them what they pleased, and oft-times nothing, vildely mingling Lime with their
Meal, of which many Soldiers died; but if the Emperor were not privy
thereunto, yet he coined counterfeit money to deceive them, practicing all kind
of mischief, to terrify their posterity from the like expedition, and secretly
plotting with the Turks, how they might be defeated: some part thereby, being
overthrown near Bathis, although in Phrygia themselves were greatly slaughtered
by the part marching thorough Phrygia: which Turks with a great Army, to stay
the Armies passage at the River Meander, and they having neither bridge nor boat
to pass over, declared it their patience, that the Greeks, as they passed by,
were not become their prey. Conrade retired his Soldiers out of the shot of
the Turks Archers, standing on the other banks-side for refreshment, arising
before day, and putting his whole Army in Battalion. Both Armies thus in
readiness, the winding River only betwixt them, the Emperor encouraged his men
with a Speech to this purpose. That we are exposed to dangers pining with
hunger, etc. for Christ's sake and the glory of God. But these Barbarians
(divided from us by this River) are the enemy; of Christ's Cross, in whose
blood we have vowed to wash our selves, calling to remembrance the grievous
things, and tortures inflicted on our friends and Contrymen, by these
uncircumcised; let not any terror daunt us. Let them know that we are
superior to them, as our Master excells their Prophet and seducer: Let us
fight in Christ's name, with assured hope of an easy victory. We are those
mighty men standing about the divine Sepulcher, as about Solomon's bed: let us
remove these Agarens, as stones of offense, Children of the bondwoman; I my
self will show you the way over this River, I know the water, beaten back by
our force, will, as Jordan in ancient times, be at a stand. This attempt shall
(to our immortal praise) be spoken of in all posterity. This said, after a
signal of battle, and devout prayer by every man; Conrade first put spurs to
his horse: the rest, closely following with a terrible outcry, passed all over
with less trouble than was feared; the horses even beating back the water
toward the fountain, then after small resistance, the discouraged Turks fled,
whom the Christians like Lions pursuing, the fields were covered with dead
bodies; huge heaps of bones long after declaring the fallen multitude, to the
wonder of travelers, many Italians being wounded, but few or none slain.

After this they hardly besieged Iconium in lesser Asia, but the Cities
strength, the valor of the Defendants, and the peoples numberless dying in
the Camp (of which, the Greeks mingling Lime with the Meal was the chief cause)
caused the Emperor to raise his long siege, and return into his Country; most
referring this his journey into Asia to the year 1146.

By this (...) so fortunate expedition, Baldwin the mean time, fortified
ruinous Gaza of the Philistines, serving as a Bulwark against Egypt, and to
distress Ascalon: which strong Sea City he besieging by Sea and Land, (when
Noradine was repulsed by the Citizens of (...) whom he besieged, and the Caliph
of Egypt's fleet from Ascalon's relief) was with great loss repulsed, the
Wall's breach that he had made repaired, and the dead Christians hanged in
ropes over the Walls, at which the Commanders moved, returned to the assault
and the besieged discouraged with great slaughter, yielded the City with its
spoil to the Soldiers, departing only with their lives, the enemy having now
no place in those parts.

Lewis the eighth of France, with other great Princes, at or about this
Emperors time, took on him the like expedition with a puissant Army, who
landing in Asia found nothing answerable to the feigned courtefie of Emanuel at
Constantinople; great numbers of Soldiers perishing in desolate Countries by
false guides, and many straying, cut off by the Greeks themselves; yet he
besieged Damasco, Noradin's Royal Seat, the besieged being brought to
extremity, and at the point even to yield. But some Christian Princes there,
grudging at the Kings promise of that Cities Government, (if won) to Philip
Earl of Flanders a stranger, corrupted also (as some say) with the Turks gold,
persivaded the King to remove to a stronger part of the City than where he lay,
from whence after a while for lack of victuals, he departed, returning into
France; detesting Emmanuel the Emperors name, by whose dealing such an
expedition was brought to naught.

Noradine, for some injuries done to the Turks and Arabians dwelling in the
Forest of Libanus, straightly besieged Paneda; the multitude of Turks, after
the Christians desperate fally, hardly pursuing and entering the City, put all
to the sword in their way; yet most of the Citizens stood upon their guard in
the Castle. Noradine, after spoil taken, and firing the City, departed upon
Baldwin's coming for relief, waiting in the Woods to take the Christians at
advantage, and set suddenly on the King passing over Jordan accompanied only
with his Horsemen, and doubting no such thing, most of his Nobles were slain or
taken, himself with a few hardly escaping to Saphet. Noradine after this
besieged it again, (whose Walls were again repaired) in good hope; but (though
he had made breaches in the Walls) rose with his Army upon Baldwins the Prince
of Autioch, and the Count Tripolis, approach. This (among other hard conflicts
of this young King) is worth remembrance, That he put Noradine to flight,
loosing most of his Army; who besieged the Castle Sueta, belonging to his
Kingdom; and marrying the Greek Emperors Niece, he again required one of his
kinswomen in marriage, and preferring Mary Raymund's Daughter of Antioch,
before Matilde the Count of Tripolis his Sister, the said Count grievously by
Sea infested his frontiers. While the marriage was solemnized, Baldwin abiding
at Antioch, and fortifying a Castle on Orontes, took Physic of Barac a Jew the
Count's Physician of Tripolis, whereby he was verily supposed to be poisoned;
and languishing in pain with the Bloudy-flux and Consumption, he died at
Beritum, Febr. 13. 1163. reignning 21 years, being solemnly enterred by his
Father with a general mourning. Noradine himself refusing to invade his Kingdom
at his funerals solemnity, saying, The Christians had lost such a King as the
like was hardly to be found. To return to the Turks proceedings in lesser Asia.
(...) Sultan Solyman's death, Mahumet succeeded him betwixt whom and Masut
Sultan of Iconium arose great discord, which broke out into open war, Comnen
the Emperor aiding Masut; But the 2 Infidels soon becoming friends, joined,
and overthrew the Emperor besieging Iconium, he hardly (...). Masut dying
divided the whole Turks Kingdom, gotten by him, between his 3 sons, to (...)
the eldest he gave Iconium, with the Provinces belonging; unto Jagupasan,
Amasia, and Ancyra, with fruirful Cappadocia and the places adjoining; to
Dadune, Cesarea and Sebastia with the large Countries thereabouts. These
brethren soon fell at discord; the Sultan and Jagupasan seeking openly each
others destruction: Emmanuel the Emperor rejoicing thereat aided Jagupasan,
whereby he obtained many notable victories against the Sultan, who weary of the
quarrel, personally met the Emperor coming out of Syria, and accompanied him
to Constantinople, who rejoiced to be sued unto by such a Prince, as the Sultan
was, being honorably received in triumph. For the solemnizing of which, a
great number of People were assembled at the report of an active Turk, who had
promised to fly a furlong from the top of an high Tower in the Tilt-yard: who
hovering a great while (girt with a long white garment of many pleats and
foldings, and the Beholders crying Fly Turk, fly) at length, finding the wind,
as he thought, fit, committed himself to the air, breaking his neck, arms,
etc. whereby the Sultan's attendants could not walk the streets underided, the
common people crying, Fly Turk, fly; whose insolency the smiling Emperor, in
favor of the grieved Sultan, restrained.

The Emperor, after the triumph (which was obscured by an earthquake) gave
the Sultan many rich presents with a mass of treasure, who in requital termed
himself his son, promising him Sebastia with its territories, thrusting Dadune
out of Sebastia, taking from him (...) Caesarea and Amasia, but kept all to
himself, Jagupasan's dominions likewise falling into his hands, by his death,
on whom he had also bent his forces. And now the Sultan swelling with pride
took Laodicea from the Emperor, killing and carrying the people captive as he
went, whereupon the (...) passing with a great army into Asia, maugre the
Turks, most strongly fortifyed Dorileu^, carrying the first basket of stones on
his own shoulders, as also Sybleum. Yet the Turks ceased not their inroads,
though not with such success as before: The Emperor now expostulated with the
Sultan as an unthankful man, who again upbraided him with breach of promise:
thus open war was daily expected, the Sultan managing his by expert Captains,
whereas the Emperor commonly in great expeditions adventured in (...): who in
revenge of his subjects so many wrongs, raised his whole power in Europe and
Asia; passing into Asia with his most puissant Army, well appointed of all
necessaries, orderly marching through Phrygia and other places, and by the old
ruinous Castlc of Myriocephalon, Ominous by its name. Though he were
circumspect, yet by reason of his many Carriages, and c. he made but small
speed: the Turks destroying the Country before them, and in many places
poisoning the water, whereof the Christians (especially of the flux) died. The
Sultan (though aided by the Persian) loath to adventure all on battel's
fortune, made to the Emperor once and again for peace on honorable conditions;
who pricked forward by his CourtGallants, proudly dismissed the Ambassadors,
willing them to tell their Master, he would give him an answer under the walls
of: Iconium, which caused the Sultan to take the Straits of Zibrica; enclosed
with high mountains, whose valleys opening, and growing straiter and straiter
with superimpendent rocks, on both sides, almost touching each; gave to the
Army (of necessity passing thereby, from Myriocephalon) a difficult passage.
The Emperor, though he were told that the enemy had strongly possessed the
streights and mountains, not providing for his safety, desperately entered
herein: John and Andronicus with others conducting the Vant-guard, the drudges
and carters, and c. following: then the Emperor with the maine battle; and
Andronicus Contostephanus in the rear. After no far entry, the Turks shot as
thick as hail down upon them: Yet the Vant-guard casting themselves into a three
square battle, and closely covering their heads with their Targets like a
pent-house, caused their enemies, by lusty shot, to retire into the mountains,
and passing those streights with little or no loss, encamped on the top of a
commodious hill. But the rest of the army not passing with such order and
courage, and troubled with their carriages in those rough and straight places,
were miserably overwhelmed by the Turks arrows, falling like a shoure, to their
great dismaying and disordering. The Turks now encouraged, came down from the
mountains to handy blows on plain ground, overthrowing the right wing, where
Baldwin breaking into the thickest of the enemy with a valiant troop, to stay
their fury, was slain with all his followers, and most of that wing. Then the
Turks, with all their power, stopped all the Christians ways, who (by reason
of the places straightness) could neither retire or go forward to relieve one
another, their many carriages hurting themselves, were the cause of their own
and others destruction: the valleys full of dead bodies, and the rivers running
with the blood of men and beasts, in an unexpressible manner; and if the
Christians showed any spark of valor, it was but lost, the Turks showing the
head of Andronicus Bataza the Emperor's nephew, who coming against the Turks
of Amasia was overthrown. The Emperor was now so troubled that he was at his
wits end, doubtful which way to turn, who having often attempted to open a way
for passage, but in vain, (...) the same danger in staying as in going forward
with a few of his best soldiers, resolving to die, by many blows given and
received, (himself having many wounds and could not lift up his Helmet being
beaten close to his head, about thirty arrows sticking in his Target) brake
through and escaped those streights. Infinite numbers of the other legions
seeking to follow, were slain, besides many trodden to death by their own
companions. Those that escaped one straight (this passage having 7 Valleys)
were slain in the next: the sand also, raised by men and horses and by a
violent wind carried, both armies (being as it were in darkness) killed both
friend and foe; so that those Valleys seemed to be a burying place of Turks and
Christians, the most being Christians, and those not all of the meanest sort.
The wind allaying, and the day clearing, wounded and whole living men were seen
middle and neck deep among dead carcases, not able with struggling to get out,
with rufull voices crying to passengers for help; whom every man, through fear,
without compassion, left living, as to be numbered among the dead. The Emperor
standing alone under a wild Pear Tree, to breathe himself, a common soldier
came and helped him to buckle up his armor, but a Turk came and took his horse
by the bridle, from whom the Emperor cleared himself by striking him to the
ground with the truncheon of his broken lance: other stragglers likewise came
presently ready to seiz on him, one whereof he slew with the said staff, struck
off another head with his sword, keeping them off till 10 relieved him: and
departing toward the Vant-guard, he was troubled with other Turks and heaps of
dead bodies, and (...) John (...), that married his niece, fighting alone,
encompassed and slain. The Turks seeing him, followed him as a rich prey: whom
he with his (...) company notably repulsed, coming at length, after much
labor and more danger, long looked for, and most welcome, unto the legions.
Who, in his way to them, ready to faint for thirst, and drinking some infected
water of a river, with a deep sigh said, Oh how unfortunatly have I tasted
Christian blood, whereunto an envious soldier replied, that he had often, and
long since, been drunk with Christian blood, by vexing and devouring his
Subjects with most grievous exactions: the Emperor, putting it up in silence,
answered no more to this railing companion than Good words Soldier. Then
animating his soldiers to rescue his treasures and take it for their labor,
the same soldier said, [It should before have been given to thy soldiers,
rather then now, when it is to be recovered with great danger and bloodshed;
and therefore, if thou be a man of valor, valiantly charge the Turks thy self,
and recover thine ill gotten goods.] Andronicus Contostephanus came shortly
after, having escaped the Turks fury, to the Vant-guard. The Turks cried all
the night, to increase the oppressed Christians fear, that all their
contrymen, that had abjured their Religion, or taken part with the
Imperialists, if they staid till morning, should be lost men. The Emperor
hereupon declared his resolution, to his chief Commanders, secretly to flee,
and leave every man to shift. Which base determination a soldier without the
Tent over-hearing, cried, in detestation, with a loud voice, What means the
Emperor? and turning to him said, Art not thou he that have thrust us into this
desolate and straight way, casting us headlong into destruction? What had we to
do with this vale of mourning? What can we particularly complain of these
Barbarians? Was it not Thou that broughtest us hither? And will thou thy self
betray us? etc. Which reprehension (though naught remained but death and
despair) changed his determination. And in this extremity, it pleased the
Almighty so to touch the Sultan's heart, that (by persuasion of the chief men
about him, that in peace had wont to receive great gifts from the Emperor) he
voluntarily offered him peace on the very conditions of former leagues. The
Turks ignorant of the Sultan's resolution, in the morning assaulting the Camp,
slew diverse of the Christians in their own Trenches, but by the command of one
Gabras the Turkish Ambassador, (who, with reverence to the ground, presented
the Emperor with a goodly Horse, with silver furniture, and a two edged Sword,
and by enchanting words concerning peace appeasing his heaviness) they ceased
to assault them: the Emperor giving Gebras his rich yellow Robe, upon a
pleasant conceit by him uttered, told him 'twas not fit for war, portending ill
luck, and then signed the peace, this being one condition, that Dorileum and
Sybleum should be rased. The Emperor purposed to return home another way, yet
(by his guides) was led back the same way, to behold those miserable spectacles
of the slain, all that passed by calling with grief upon their lost friends.
The Emperor placed his best soldiers in the rear to repulse the Turks, who,
in the rail of the army, slew many; the Sultan (as is said) repenting and
giving leave to pursue them. He rased Sybleu^, but not (...), answering the
complaining Sultan, he greatly forced not to perform what by necessity he was
enforced to promise. Who in revenge, straightly charged Atapack with 24000 chosen
soldiers, to waste and destroy all his provinces to the Sea side, not sparing
man, woman, or child, and to bring Seawater, an Oar, and Sea-sand as a token;
who did so to Phrygia, returning with a rich prey: But passing (...), he was,
by John Bataza and Duc as Constantine, slain with all his army, and all the
booty recovered. After many hard conflicts, Emmanuell died, having governed 38
years, being in a Monks habit a little before his death; as jealous of the
Christians in the West, as of the Turks in the East: in war altogether
laborious, and in peace given over to pleasure. The Sultan afterward took
Sozopolis, joining more and more of the Emperor's provinces to his own without
resistance: For Alexius, called (...)-genitus, (being but 12 years of age)
succeeding, followed his pleasure; his Mother, and Father's kinsemen and
friends (neglecting his education) followed their delights: Some courted the
young Empress: Others filling their coffers with the common treasures: and
others aiming at the Empire it self. Amongst whom was Andronicus, Emmanuel's
Cousin, who, for his aspiring, was by him confined to live at Oenu^: who
thought it now a fit time, in such disorder of state, to aspire unto the long
looked-for Empire. He doubted not but he was generaly beloved, yea, and of some
of the Nobility, wanting nothing more than some fair color to shadow his
purpose: He took first occasion to work on a clause in the Oath of obedience
which he took, [That if he should see, hear, or understand anything dangerous
or hurtful to the Honor, Empire, or Persons of Emmanuel or his son Alexius,
he should bewray it, and to his utmost power withstand it.] Thereupon he wrote
diverse Letters to the young Emperor, the Patriarch, and others, wherein he
seemed to complain of the immoderate power of Alexius, President of the
Council, who ruled all things at his pleasure, and that his care of the young
Emperor's safety moved him to complain, wishing so great power of Alexius to
be abridged, aggravating the report of Alexius's too much familiarity with the
Empress: the reformation of which he (as bound in conscience) most earnestly
desired. Wherefore, travailing toward Constantinople, he gave out what he
would, for his Oaths sake, do; unto whom men, desirous of a change of the
State, flockt in great numbers. Thus honorably coming to Paphlagenia, as a
deliverer of his Country; diverse Nobles also joined with him, especially Mary
the Emperors sister by the Father, with Caesar her husband, (who had raised a
great tumult in the City against Alexius, and the hated Empress her
Stepmother, not appeased without much bloodshed) pricked forward, by secret
Messengers and Letters, Andronicus to hasten his coming, and take the
government on him: who being daily encouraged, came to Heraclea, winning the
peoples hearts with words and tears, saying all that he did was for the common
good of the Emperor. Passing by (...) and Nicomedia, out of which he was shut,
he was (...) by Andronicus Angelus (sent with a great power by the President
Alexius) who spending most of the night in rioting, and the day in his bed,
left nothing undone for the assuring of his estate; working the mat er so by
the rare beauty of the Empress, by gifts and sums of money, that none of
account went to (...) Who nevertheless joining battle with Angelus overthrew
and put him to flight, whom Alexius in great displeasure calling to account for
the money of that war, his misfortune being taken as if he had betrayed the Army
of purpose; by the counsel of his 6 sons, first he (...) with them to his own
house, and presently after to Andronicus: Who being encouraged with the coming
of these noble kinsmen, encamped almost right over against Constantinople,
causing many great fires to be made in his army, to make it seem greater than
it was, some Citizens running to the Sea side, some to the tops of hills and
towers, willing to have drawn him, by their looks, into the City. Alexius, not
able to encounter Andronicus by land, (for some that could not go over on foot,
were in heart with him, others taking part with neither) commanded all the
Emperor's Galleys to be strongly put to Sea, to hinder Andronicus passage over
Propontis and Bosphorus; Contostephanus challenging the Generalship over this
Fleet as his due, unto whom he was, without dispute, glad to commit the charge
thereof. Then he sent one George Xiphiline, as from the Emperor, with Letters
and instructions to Andronicus, commanding him forthwith to return in peace,
promising him the Emperor's favor, with many honors, etc. otherwise it might
turn to his destruction: Xiphiline, as it is reported, secretly advised
Andronicus to proceed in his purpose, wherewith encouraged, he willed the
Messenger to tell them, that proud Alexius should be first displaced, and
called to an account, that the Empress should be shut up as a (...) to learn
amendment of life, and that the Emperor should take the Government on himself,
and not be overtopt by others, etc. Contostephanus, few days after, carried
all the Galleys to Andronicus; casting Alexius into the bottom of despair.
Andronicus his friends openly flocked together, and some (scossing at Alexius)
passed the Strait to him, returning home (...) and joyful, filling the City
with his praises. After that John and Manuell, sons of Andronicus, were set at
liberty, and others laid fast in their rooms; Alexius himself with all his
faction, were committed to the guard. But Alexius (by a wonderful change) was
about midnight conveigned to the Patriarch's house, and kept with a strong
guard, complaining of nothing more than his keepers not suffering him to sleep;
whose misery the Patriarch undeservedly pitying, persuaded him not to provoke
his keepers, by speeches, to use him evilly. Within few days, he was brought
(on a little jade with a ragged (...) on the top of a reed in derision) to the
Seaside, and so to Andronicus, whose eyes were, for his evil Government, by a
general consent, put out. Theodosius the Patriarch approaching, the last of
Nobles that came to Andronicus, he fell down at his horses feet, and rising
kissed his foot, calling him the Emperor's Savior, the defender of truth,
comparing him with John Chrysostom, etc. But the Pataiarch, marking his stern
countenance, subtle nature, etc. quippingly said, Hitherto I have heard, but
now I have also seen and plainly known; adjoining with a deep sigh, that
saying, As we have heard so have we seen: remembering also Emmanuel's words,
wherewith he had lively represented Andronicus (never seen before) many times
to his view.

Andronicus (all things in the City being to his mind) departing from Damalum,
crossed the strait, oftentimes singing that saying, Return my soul to thy rest,
etc. Coming to the Emperor's Countrey-house near Philopatium, he most humbly
prostrated himself before the Emperor with deceitful tears, kissing his feet:
saluting his mother Xene, as it were, but for fashion sake; staying a good
while with the Emperor, he desired to go to Constantinople to see his Cosen
Emmanuel's grave, where coming he wept bitterly, and roared as it were out,
diverse ignorant standers by saying, Oh what a wonderful thing is this, etc. He
would not be removed by his kinsman, pulling him from the Tomb; and secretly
said something, as if he had prayed: some saying, it was a charm: Others and
more truly, that he triumphed over the dead Emperor, with these or the like
words, I have thee now fast, my cruel persecutor, etc. And now I will be
revenged of thy posterity, and satisfy my self as a Lion with a fat prey, etc.

He afterward (disposing of all matters at his pleasure) allowed the Emperor
hunting and other delights, watching him by Keepers, that none should talk of
any important matter with him; He took all the Government to himself, to drive
away the contrary faction that had born sway. The state of that time (by his
rewarding bountifully the Soldiers that helped him, bestowing Offices on his
children, or other favorites, shortly driving diverse Nobles to exile,
depriving some of their sight, casting others into prison for something or
other that grieved him) began to be most miserable. Some accusing their nearest
kinsmen, for deriding Andronicus his proceedings, or that without regard of him
they more favored the Emperor; Yea, many accusing and charging others with
treason, were themselves charged by the accused, and both clapped up together.
You might have seen not only his enemies, but some of his best friends, the
same day to be crowned and beheaded, graced and disgraced: the wiser deeming
his praises, bounty and kindness; the beginning of a man's disgrace, undoing
and death. Mary, Emmanuel's daughter, who above all others wished for his
coming, was first cunningly poisoned by Pterigionites a corrupted Eunuch, her
husband supposed also to be poisoned with the same cup. He made as if he would
depart, if the fair Empress Xene were not removed from her Son: the incensed
vulgar people flocking unto, and ready to tear the Patriarch out of his
clothes, if he consented not thereunto. So in a Council of his favorites she
was after many false things accused of treason, as to solicit Bela King of
Hungary her Brother in Law, by Letters to invade Branisoba and Belligrade,
belonging to the Empire; for which she was condemned, and cast into a most
filthy prison. Four of this Counsel, being asked their opinion of her, said
They would know whether it was called by the Emperors consent? Whereupon
Andronicus, in great rage starting up, (...), Lay hands on them, his guard
shaking their weapons at them: and the people catching and pulling them, were
so fierce, that they had much ado to escape with life. The Empress now hourly
expected the deadly blow. Andronicus demanding of the assembled former Council,
What punishment there was for betrayers of any Town or Province? The answer
being in writing, that it was death; he brake out in choler, as if she had
done it. By and by a writing was subscribed by the Emperor, (labhor to write
it) unworthily condemning his Mother to dye; Manuel his eldest son, and George
Augustus his kinsman, saying plainly, They would not see her innocent body
dismembered, never consenting to her death. At which troubled Andronicus,
plucking himself by the hoary beard, etc. sighed at his own most miserable
tyrannical estate, etc. Yet few days after, he commanded her to be strangled
by Pterigionites and another: which was done accordingly; her (lately adorned)
body was secretly raked up in the sand by the Seaside.

Andronicus (all being covered under pretense of common good and safety) to
manifest his loyalty to his cosen the Emperor, persuaded the Nobility to have
him solemnly Crowned, (who for his tender age was not yet) his own shoulders,
at the time, supporting him to and from the great Church, with Crocodiles
tears, as if it had been for joy; many accounting the young Emperor thrice
happy in him. So cunningly, under pietie's vail, shaddowed he his most
execrable treachery. For (having got into his power both Emperor and Empire)
he called a Council of his favorites, declaring unto them the danger of the
Empire, through a rebellion at Nice in Bithinia, and another at Prusa, who
(before sufficiently instructed) answered, there would be no end of such
mischiefs, except he were joined in fellowship of the Empire with Alexius. At
which, the standers by with a shout cried, Long live Alexius and Andronicus the
Greek Emperors. The people swarming like Bees in every part of the City,
sounding his praises; and a world following him out of his house, crying the
same thing. The Emperor seeing the Court full of people saluting Andronicus
his fellow, welcomed the old Tyrant, sore against his will, as his companion in
Empire. Whom, dissemblingly unwilling, some flattering favorites carried up
with both hands, placing him in the Imperial Seat: others putting on him the
imperial Robes. At their proclaiming (next day) Andronicus was named before
Alexius, This reason given, That it fitted not the name of a boy, to be set
before a man so reverend, etc. Being to be Crowned in the Temple, he first,
with a cheerful countenance, began to fill the people with large promises of a
more happy Government. And the more to deceive, the Coronation past, he with
eyes cast up to Heaven, receiving the bread and taking the cup, swore and
deeply protested by those mysteries, that he took on him the fellowship of the
Empire, for no other end, but to assist Alexius in the Government. But spending
a few days in feigned devotions, he called together his own corrupt Council,
having that saying of the Poet in their mouths,

An evil thing it is to be ruled by many,
One King and one Lord if there be any.
They by general consent decreed, That Alexius (as unfit) should be deprived of
all Imperial dignities, and live a private life; another more cruel suddenly
coming out, That he should be put to death. Theodore Badibren Captain of the
tormentors, with two more: strangling him with a Bow-string in his Chamber;
Andronicus shortly after spurned the dead body, railing at his Father and
Mother; his head was left to feed the Tyrants eyes, his body carried in lead, to
Sea by two favorites, who returning with joy, vengeance followed them, all or
most of the conspirers coming to miserable ends. Alexius perished, not full 15
years old, in the third year of his reign.

Andronicus being 70 years old, as made hereby young again, married Anne the
French Kings daughter 11 years old, procuring an absolution for all people from
the Bishops (whom for a while he had in great honor) from the Oath of
obedience given to Emmanuel and Alexius; and for establishing his estate,
secretly poisoned some, deprived some of their sight, some he hanged, some he
burnt all of great honor and place that favored Emmanuel or Alexius. For
color whereof (Oh deep dissimulation) he pretended himself sorry for them,
etc. with rears running down his aged cheeks. Most being thus taken out of the
way, the rest that favored Emmanuel and his son, fled for safeguard of their
lives. Isaac and Alexius (...), Emmanuel's kinsmen, the one refuging into
Cyprus, kept it: the other fleeing into Sicily, stirred up William that King,
who took the Cities Dyrrachium, and Thessalonica, spoiling the Country as he
went, bringing great fear on Constantinople it self: which evils Andronicus
(enemies at home and abroad daily increasing) though he sent out such forces as
he could spare, was not able to remedy; but (resting wholly on tyranny) he
proscribed not only the friends of the fled, but sometimes whole families; yea,
and sometimes for light occasions his best favorites; no day passing, but he
killed, imprisoned, or tortured one great man or other; whereby the City was
filled with silent sorrow. Amongst other Nobles Hagio Christophorites came to
Isaac Angelus his house, to apprehend him, beginning to lay hands on him,
reviling his followers, for that they, touched with compassion, stood still as
beholders. Isaac thus beset, cleft with his sword Hagio Christophorites his
head to his shoulders, desperately making way through the rest; And with his
bloody sword, fled through the City into the Temple of Sophia, where the guilty
flying for refuge used to sit, confessing and craving pardon of those going in
and out. The Temple was filled with flocking people, thinking (before the
Sunset) he would be drawn thence by Andronicus, and put to some shameful
death. His Uncle John Ducas, and his Son Isaac, came thither also, who had
become sureties to the suspicious Tyrant for their kinsman. Many others also,
in doubt of their estate, instantly requested the common people to stay, and
stand by them at their need. Isaac spent that night, not thinking (...) Empire,
but expecting death; yet no friend of Andronicus appeared, every man speaking
what he list, and encouraging one another; diverse of the seditious assembly
shut up the doors, and with lights stayed all night, causing by example others
to stay. The next morning all the Citizens flocking to the Temple, cursed the
Tyrant, wishing the Empire to Isaac. (...) was out of the City at Meludinum,
being certified hereof by 9 a clock at night, stirring not that night; but by
Letters advising the people to pacify themselves. Naught in the morning
prevailed with the enraged people: neither the persuasions of Andronicus his
favorites, nor the report of his landing in the City; but flocking and
encouraging each other in the Temple, scoffed and called the lookers on Rotten
limbs. Then they set at liberty the prisoners, many of them of good houses, and
for some light fault or small offense, there laid fast; who most animated the
people, so that but soft murmurers before, did now openly join themselves,
running forth of their shops with swords, clubs, etc. Isaac was hoysed up by
this assembly, and saluted Emperor, a Sexton setting Constantin's Crown of
gold (hanging over the Altar) on his head; who fearing it to be but as a sick
man's dream, and the extreme danger, seemed at first unwilling; whereupon, Ducas
his Uncle requesting it might be set on his old bald head, the people cried
out, they would no more obey an old bald man, hating for Andronicus his sake,
every such: especially having a forked beard or bald head, as they had. Isaac
(mounted on one of the Emperor's horses richly furnished, the enforced
Patriarch waiting on him) was by the tumult invested in the Empire. Andronicus
his friends and favorites, by whose help he thought to repress the rebellious,
some shrinking from him, the rest faintly coming on, he vainly shot from the
highest Tower of the Palace among the people; then cried aloud, that if they
would be content, he would resign to his Son Manuel: the enraged people
reproaching both, and breaking into the Court, Andronicus, without (...)
fleeing, returned disguised, with his Wife and Minion, in his Galley, to
Meludinum. Isaac being again ialuted Emperor in the Palace, with the peoples
greatest applause; who forthwith sent to apprehend Andronicus, secretly fled
with his Wife and Paragon, and a few old trusty servants to Chele: thence
purposing to flee to the Tauroscythes, he was twice or thrice put back by foul
weather, the Sea still threatening to devour him. Being thus apprehended by
those that sought him, he was with two iron chains on his neck, and gyves on
his legs, cast into the Castle of Amena, and shortly after presented to Isaac,
being, as he went, most shamefully reviled, and injuriously used, especially by
women whose husbands he had murdered, or deprived of sight. His right hand was
afterward by the peoples fury cut off, and he committed to the Castle without
meat, drink, or comfort: being after few days, led bare through the
Marketplace, with his face toward the tail on a lean Cammel, in a short old
coat. But the baser sort, omitted no villainy they could devise to him they had
honored, extolled, and sworn loyalty: some thrusting nails into his head etc.
a drab casting a pot of scalding-water in his face. They hanged him up by the
heels, having thus brought him into the Theater, with indignities not to be
named; he sometimes saying patiently, Lord have mercy on me: and, Why do you
break a bruised reed? Yet they, cut off his privities, as he hung, one
thrusting a sword to the twist through his throat: two others proving to strike
with swords farthest into his buttocks. After 2 years reign, he thus miserably
perished, a man of honorable descent, and notable virtues, etc. had he not
obscured the same with ambition and cruelty. Isaac suffered him not to be
buried, but he lay a space, in a base vault, till charitable men removed him
into a low vault near a Monastery.

Isaac the Emperor, at first governed with lenity, but afterward (besides
foreign enemies) troubled with an aspiring Nobility that besieged him; for
repressing of which, he was so severe, that few days passed without condemning
or executing some great man, making no great reckoning of the meaner sort,
became odious as Andronicus. Whereupon his younger brother Alexius, whom he had
redeemed from the Turks, rose up and deprived him of the Empire and sight,
thrusting him into a Monastery, after 9 years 8 months reign, and not 40 years
old. Out of the losses and ruin of the Constantinopolitan Empire, the Turks
greatness, for the most part, grew: Chlizasthlan Sultan of Iconium, taking
after Emmanuel's death, diverse strong places in lesser Asia, and also a great
part of Phrygia, (the 3 succeeding Emperors opposing him with nothing but
entreaty and presents) which victorious Sultan dying, divided his Kingdom among
4 Sons, Masut to whom he bequeathed Amasia, etc. Coppatine, Melytene, etc.
Reucratine, Aminsum, etc. Caichosroes, to whom he left Iconium; with it,
Lycaonia, etc. Reucratine and Masut warred for Coppatin's inheritance, who
lived not long; but Masut as too weak yielded to Reucratine, glad to keep his
own. Reucratine ambitious, denounces war against Caichosroes: who fleeing to
Alexius Angelus for aid, be given to pleasure, and reputing their domestic
wars part of his safety, sent him home without comfort. Who was quickly driven
out of (...) by Reucratine; Zebune, King of Armenia, to whom he fled, denying
him aid, the poor discouraged Sultan (as forlorn) passed his days at
Constantinople.

The course of time calls us back to remember the Turk's proceedings then,
and shortly after, in Syria, Judea, Egypt, etc. where these people ceased not
til they brought those Kingdoms under obeisance. For after Baldwin's death,
Almericus, his younger Brother, was by the better liking of Clergy and People,
than of the envying Nobility, chosen King of Jerusalem, and Febr. 17. 1163.
crowned, the Egyptians first denying to pay their tribute to him. Who, in
revenge overthrew Dargan the Sultan in battle; he, to stay the Christians
further pursuit, cut Nilus banks that the King was glad to return to Jerusalem.

Almericus, the next year aided Dargan against Saracon, whom Noradine had sent
to restore Sanar, the expulsed Sultan Dargan being slain, and Saracon keeping
towns that he had won to himself; Sanar, being doubtful, joined with
Almericus, expulsing Saracon out of Egypt. Noradine, the mean time, making
inroads near Tripolis, was (by Gilbert Lacy, Master of the Templars and others)
suddenly set upon, most of his followers slain, and himself fleeing half naked.
But shortly after besieging Arethusa, (...) Prince of Antioch, with four other,
came for relief, and eagerly following the Turk, that raised his siege, they
were with great slaughter overthrown in deep fenns, all chief Commanders, (but
the Prince of Armenia, who fore-casting had retired) were taken. The Prince of
Antioch about a year, the Count of Tripolis after eight years, being hardly
delivered. Noradine in few days after won Arethusa, and besieged Paneade,
which was delivered to him, the Citizens departing in safty at pleasure. The
King returning, hanged 12 Templars for Treason, from whom Saracon had now taken
one Castle in Sidon, and another beyond Fordan.

Sanar (in dread of Saracon, coming shortly with all his power into Egypt to
subdue it) prayed aid of Almericus for 40000 Ducats, beside his yearly tribute.
(...) overthrew Saracon at Nilus; but (the Turks lighting on his carriages in
their flight) as the Christians had the victory, so the Turks the spoil.
Saracon gathered again his dispersed soldiers, being received at Alexandria,
the King attempted not the City, but encamped by the River Nilus: Saracon,
thereby foreseeing want of victuals, departed by night with his Army, leaving
Saladine his son or Nephew with 1000 horsemen. Almericus being persuaded from
following Saracon, approached the Walls with Engines. Wherewith the discouraged
Citizens began to consult of turning out their troublesome Guests. Saladine
certified Saracon thereof, requesting speedy relief: the Christians having
intelligence of all, much harder besieged it. Saracon perceiving Saladine's
request dangerous and difficult, by means of two noble Christian Prisoners,
concluded a peace: the City was yielded, the Turks in safety departing; and all
Prisoners, on both sides, freed without ransom. Saracon thus disappointed
returning to Damasco: and Almericus, Sept. 21. 1167. with glory to Ascalon.

King Almericus now enflamed with the wealth of Egypt, and (...) with the
peoples weakness, and chiefly stirred up by Gerbert Master of the Templars,
purposed to invade it, pretending the Sultan's secret seeking to join in league
with Noradine. He set forward in October, and came in ten days to Pelusium,
taking the City by force, after 3 days; he put all to the sword the rein,
giving it to the Templars according to promise, Gerbert having, on that hope,
with all his wealth and credit, furthered the War. His Fleet sacking Tapium,
and he besieging Cair; Sanar, (...) his danger, offered Almericus 2000000 Ducats
to withdraw, deferring the payment of 1900000 purposing to raise all Egypt,
and expecting aids by Saracon, whom Almericus, going to meet him, missed.
Almericus dismayed with the joining of the two Armies, retired to (...),
returning to Jerusalem, having, in that expedition, laid the foundation of his
Kingdom's ruin, by bringing the Turks into Egypt. Sarracon perceiving a fit
opportunity offered, encamped near Cair, betwixt whom and the Sultan passed all
tokens of friendship, often (...) each other: but the Sultan was at length
(...) in the Turks Camp. Sarracon entering the City was by the great Caliph (
(...) true (...)) appointed Sultan, as he desired, the first of the Turks that
enjoyed it. He dying within a full year, Saladine his Nephew stepped up, who not
regarding the Caliph (as Sarracon and the Sultan's before) with his Horse-man's
Mace struck out his brains, rooting out all his posterity; and to encourage his
Turks against the Christians, he divided the Egyptian treasures among them.
Renowned Egypt was (till about 704) part of the (...) Empire, which revolted
unto the Saracens, whose superstition they received, through the Greeks pride
and covetousness, so living about 464 years, till now (invaded by Almericus)
Sarracon, ayding, repulsed the Christians, but took the Kingdom, remaining in
Saladines posterity, till again taken by the Mamalukes, Selymus the 1 utterly
destroying them (under whose servility it was long holden) it has remained to
this day in the Turkish Emperor's Government, Selymus his posterity.

Saladine thus possessed of Egypt entered into Palestine, in 1170, with so great
an Army, as the like of the Turks was never before there, winning Daron, and
overthrowing Almericus his relievers, and returned contented into his Kingdom.
Almericus, beset on both sides by the Turks, went personally to Constantinople,
and sent Ambassadors to Christian Princes of the West to crave aid: he and his
Ambassadors were loaded with great promises, all which came to nothing.
Saladine made three light expeditions into the holy Land, the three following
years, (still raising his siege and retiring upon Almericus his coming) more to
prove his enemies strength, and train his soldiers (chiefly the womanly
Egyptians) than for hope of Victory.

Noradine, Sultan of Damasco, reigning 29 years, soon after died: Almericus
forthwith besieged Panead, but for a great sum from the Widow, and noble
Prisoners delivery he departed. So returning, not well, on horseback, (with his
ordinary retinue) to Jerusalem, where being grievonsty tormented with his old
disease, the Flux, which was before somewhat stayed, he requested a gentle
potion of his refusing Physicians, commanding it upon his own peril, wherewith
(though his loosed belly was at first eased) his Fever was vehement, and he
suddenly died, July 10. 1173. having reigned about 10 years. This wise and
right valiant Prince was buried by his Brother, with great lamentation of all.
His son Baldwin (about 13 years old) was 4 days after chosen and solemnly
crowned, 1173. Raymund Count of Tripolis, being, by the whole consent,
appointed his Tutor, for his tender age.

Noradine left his son Melechsala, a youth, to succeed him. Whose disdaining
Nobles betrayed Damasco to Saladine, secretly sent for; who, in fine,
unresistedly (...) the whole Kingdom of Damasco, Arethusa excepted. The wiser
not thinking it safe for the Kingdoms of Damasco and Egypt to be joined,
Jerusalem lying betwixt both. Wherefore the Count of Tripolis made out to
hinder his proceedings: (Then also Cotabed Prince of Parthia, Melechsala's
Uncle's Troops, sent to aid his distressed Nephew, were almost all slain by
Saladine near Aleppo) Who appeased the Christian Princes with entreaty,
rewards, and rich presents. After which he, passing 3 or 4 years in quietness,
was greatly strengthened in those new Kingdoms. Philip Earl of Flanders coming
over, the Christian Princes consulted of an expedition into Egypt, ( Saladine
drawing down into that Country). But Philip disliking it (and the rather for
Tripolis his no cheerfulness) they turned forces a contrary way, miserably
wasting about Emissa and Cesarea. (...) taking this occasion, invaded the holy
Land; where burning the Country, and raging in blood, he encamped not far from
(...); them of (...), being about to forsake the City for fear. Baldwin lay
close in Ascalon with small forces he had left. Saladine encouraged, dispersed
his Army to forage the Country. The King perceiving this, secretly issued out
and charged him, till (after a hard and doubtful battle) Saladine fled, most of
his Army being slain, or lost with hunger and cold. This was November. 25, 1177.
the Turk had 26000 horsemen, the King not past 4000. He returned triumphing to
Jerusalem, diligently repairing the Cities Walls. In revenge Saladine did great
harm, chiefly about Sidon; the King overthrowing part of his Army carried great
booty. Saladine came as a sudden tempest on the secure Christians, dividing the
spoil, slaying a great number, taking Otto and Hugh in flights confusion; the
King glad to shift. After which he took (by force) a strong Castle lately built
by Jordan, putting all to the sword, except a few prisoners; He becoming hereby
dreadful in Syria, caused the Christians to be more vigilant; yet there was
almost a 2 years breathing by the Sultan and Kings, shortly concluding a Peace.
But the Count of Tripolis, (being through enemies suspected by the King as
affected to the Kingdom, and commanded to stay) coming toward Jerusalem,
suddenly troubled this pleasing calm. The Kings turbulent Mother and her (...),
were the chief authors; but the other Nobles (wisely foreseeing discords
danger) appeased that fire for a time, by causing him, being sent for, to be
reconciled to the King.

Saladine now renounced the League with Baldwin, setting forward with great
power in Egypt, toward Damasco. Baldwin went to meet him, and encamped at
Petra; but Saladine turning away, encamped before Mount-royal Castle given to
the Templars; who there refreshing his Army, arrived unresisted at Damasco. The
Turks Captains then spoiled Galilee, besieging and soon taking (...) Castle at
Mount Tabors foot, carrying away about 500 prisoners, with great slaughter
made. Saladine joining all (...) Garrisons with Egyptian forces, entered the
holy Land; whom Baldwin (though the Count of (...) lay sick) encouraged, (...)
near (...) a Village overthrowing him, and most of his Army perishing, himself
by flight escaping to Damasco; who in revenge besieged (...) by Sea and Land:
his brother, (...) of Egypt, besieging Darum toward Egypt. Baldwin thinking
best first to relieve Berytus, set forward by Land, rigged 30 Galleys at Tire;
which Saladine, by intercepted Letters, understanding, presently departed. And
seeing the success against Baldwin not as his desire, passed more Eastward over
Euphrates into Mesopotamia, getting Edessa, Carras, etc. by force and
corruption into his hands: in which time Baldwin spoiled about Damasco,
retiring to Jerusalem laded with spoil. Saladine returning, matched in revenge,
to Aleppo, longed for above all other; which ere long, was by the Governors
treason delivered to him, the Princes fearing great matters to ensue. The
Prince of Antioch sold Tarsus ( Saladine as it were stepping betwixt him and
it) to Rupinus of Armenia.

The King sick of a Fever, and the Leprosy daily increasing, appointed (to the
great coffeehouse of the Count of Tripolis) Guy Count of Joppa and Ascalon,
to whom Sybil his Sister was espoused, Governor of the Kingdom, reserving only
the Kingly title, and Jerusalem with 10000 Ducats yearly. Saladine, after a
little breathing, took many Castles, doing infinite harm in the holy Land the
people fleeing into Cities for fear. The Christian Army, through envy to Guy,
and affection to Tripolis, lying fast by and (never so before) not moving,
suffering the enemy to spoil and depart in safety; who within a month, in hope
of a safer passage between Damasco and Egypt, sat down before Petra beyond
Jordan with a great Army. Baldwin sent the Count of Tripolis by him restored,
and Guy displaced, against him: Saladine hearing of it raised his siege.

The King, a little before, growing sicker, appointed (by the Nobles consent,
Baldwin) Sybills Son (a posthume of William Marquess of (...) her first
husband) 5 years old, to succeed him; Raymund of Tripolis, during his minority,
to govern the State. Guy hereupon, departed from Court to Ascalon,
discontented; the Patriarch and Princes, fearing great danger, requested the
King to receive (...) into favor, and to reconcile him with Raymund, by his
Parliament at Acon; but it was dissolved, and nothing in that point concluded.
Jerusalems Kingdom, through the old King's sickness, the young ones unfitness,
and the dissension between Guy and Raymund, began to decline. Raymund, fearing
Guy, was thought to have intelligence with Saladine, the King almost purposing
to proclaim him Traytot; But by the Counsel of Tyre's. Archbishop and others,
he sent Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, and two more Masters of the Knights
and Templers, to the Pope, the Emperor of Germany, the French and English
Kings, to crave aid against the Infidels. These Ambassadors, before the Pope
and Emperor, declaring the Eastern Christians hard estate, moved all the
Princes (at the Council of Verona) to compassion. Thence passing into France,
England and Germany, great preparation was made for relief, the returning
Ambassadors filling the sick King with great hopes. But quarrels shortly
arising between Pope and Emperor, sharp war between the French and English
Kings, and others, the expedition was dashed. Whereat Baldwin (oppressed with
grief) (...) without issue, May 16. 1185, 25 years old; whose body was also
buried (with a general mourning) in the Temple by Mount Calvary, not inferior
to his Predecessors. Baldwin 5th. a boy, was Crowned. Raymund contending for
the government and Kings tuition, by the late Kings (...): having it almost
confirmed by (...) But Sybill so animated Guy not to give place, that by his
favorites, and the Marquess of (...) (then in (...) with great power) he had
from the Nobles what he desired. Seven months after, the young King was buried:
poisoned by his Mother (as was said) whose death she concealed, till it was
wrought, that the King was (...), and Guy the same day Crowned: Let him have
his place as the 8th King of Jerusalem, though some reckon him not among the
Kings.

Raymund, out of all hope, did what he could to cross the King; Saladine
promising him help at need, which the Count desirously embraced. Discord
reigning, the Kingdom drew to a period; which Saladine perceiving, invited
Turks, Saracens, and Egyptians to take up Arms, assuring them of great prey,
and honor of conquest, which Mahometans flocked to Ptolemais, 50000 horse,
besides infinite foot there meeting the Count, conducting some through Tiberias,
Nazareth and Galilee. They besieging this City Ptolemais, Saladine terribly
assaulted it on May day 1187. In the heat whereof, the 2 Masters of the
Templars and Knights Hospitallers, to whom it was given to defend, sallying
out, assailed the Camp; and turning on the assaillers, made confusion and
sudden danger, turned his whole forces, fighting a most bloody battle; the
Count of Tripolis in a Turkish habit, helping the Infidels, unhorsed the Master
of the Hospitallers, who surcharged with Armor, and oppressed with enemies,
died, Saladine (new succor still coming) having lost 15000, fled with the
rest; a (...) not without Christian blood, most of the Hospitallers being
(...). Saladine now thought good to join policy to open force; working by
Raymund of Tripolis, (...) (as utterly fallen out with the Turks) he should
seek for grace of Guy, as his dread Sovereign. Saladine to color this,
besieged Tiberias a City of the (...); who, traitorously craving aid of the
King, encamped with an Army near the fountain of Sophor, joining a terrible
battle with 120000 horsemen and 160000 footmen of Turks: both Armies, as by
consent, retiring through extreme heat and nights approach. The (...) next day,
by the false Counts flight, gained the victory; Guy the King, with diverse of
great note were taken; the Christians whole strength was here broken.

Saladine, with little resistance, had Ptolemais, (...) and Berytus delivered
him; not forcing any Christian yielding their obedience and tribute, but the
Latins, to depart. And, within a month, taking, except Tire, all Seaport Towns
betwixt (...) and Ascalon; he marched from Ascalons siege of 9 days, directly
to Jerusalem, persuading the Citizens timely to yield themselves and City to
his mercy; they refusing, he for 14 days, left nothing (...) for gaining
thereof. The Citizens considering their danger, the Kingdoms strength (...), no
foreign aid to be expected, agreed to yield on condition, of staying with
goods and liberty, or departing with what they could carry on their backs;
(...) delivered October. 2, 1187, holden by the Christians 89 years. Saladine
profaning the Temple with his superstition, using the other as Stables; that
of the Sepulcher was, for a great sum redeemed by the Christians. The Latins he
thrust out, with what burdens they could bear; who traveling to Tripolis, Tire
and (...), were by false Raymund of Tripolis, and his followers, lightened
thereof. Others, as Syrians, etc. had places in the (...) appointed to dwell
in. All Monuments were defaced, except Christ's Sepulcher, with Godfreys and
his brother Baldwins. Above 20000 Christians perished, the Count of Tripolis
shortly after found dead in his bed, as some say, circumcised. Saladine
returned to the siege of Ascalon, which after 10 days, with a composition for
safe departure, was delivered for freeing Guy the King, and Gerrard (...) of
the Templars. Then he attempted (...), but gave over the siege. He most
furiously assaulted Tire, which was full of men, by Conrade of (...) arriving
with the Greek Emperor's Fleet, and distressed Christians fleeing thither; but
was repulsed with great loss. The Admiral of Sicily landing upon his back, he
(charged behind and before) left his Tents, with all therein, to the Christians
for haste: In few days invading about Antioch, he destroyed all with fire and
sword, that so strong a Cities Castle, being (by means of the Patriarch for
gold) betrayed to him; whereby he soon was Master of the City, about 90 years
before hardly gained by the Christians, 25 Cities with the Provinces belonging,
depended thereon.

The report of this loss, soon filling Christendom with pitiful complaints of
(...), and persuasions of Pope Clement 3, moved the Christian Princes with many
great Prelates; all or most making great preparations for relief against the
Turks; and afterward employing them (at diverse times) with danger of their
persons; the success shall hereafter be declared. Of which Saladine not
ignorent, set Guy at liberty; (...) a year contrary to promise, with an oath,
never by Arms to seek revenge or recovery of his Kingdom: hoping to stay the
other Princes coming thereby; which extorted oath the Pope dispensed withal.

Guy now came to Tire, but could not (for their sworn obedience to Montferrat)
be received; But departing, he besieged Ptolemais with the power he had; with
whom the Venetian Fleet, them of Pisa, and 50 sail of Flemings, joined to win
the City. Saladine came with a great (...) for relief; there was fought a great
battle, and had not Geffrey the Kings brother, come from the Camp with
supplies, the Christians, who had at first the better, had had a notable
overthrow; yet 2000 were slain. Saladine sent for his strong rigged Fleet at
Alexandria, putting men and victuals into the City. The encouraged Turks, made
often salleys, whipping in despite, the Image of Christ crucified on top of
the Wall. Saladine scoured the Seas with this Fleet, that no supplies could
come to the Camp: So that some Christians, through famine shortly arising, fled
to the Turks for bread. Saladine making show as not understanding thereof,
departed leaving his Camp full of victuals. The Christians supposing he had
gone for fear, hastened to the forsaken Camp, of whom Saladine, returning, made
a great slaughter; yet they with many a skirmish by Sea and Land, continued the
Winters siege, expecting aid the next Spring. Frederick the Emperor with other
Princes, the mean time, set forward from (...), arriving at length at
Constantinople; where Isaac Angelus Emperor, honorably, for fear and fashion,
entertaining him, hastened his passage into Asia, pretending the Christians
need of aid: who passing the strait, and marching into Lycaonia, overthrew the
Turks in a great battle, sent to stop him (...) the Iconium Sultan; which City
he took by force, giving the spoil to his Soldiers, in revenge of his Uncle
Conrade. Then he overthrew them in Cilicia, taking Philomela, racing the City
to the ground, and putting all to the sword, because they slew his summoning
Messengers. He likewise took Melitene in lesser Armenia, overthrowing a huge
Army, coming for relief, with an exceeding slaughter. Then he (...) Saphadine,
Saladin's Sons Army in Comagena. But his horse foundring in the River Saleph,
(at his too eager chase) his foot hanging in the stirrup, he was drawn through
and taken for dead; yet with much ado he uttered, Lord receive my soul, and
gave up the ghost: of whom Saladine was greatly afraid. He perished June 10,
1190. aged 70 years, reigning 38; his body was pompously buried in Tyre's
Cathedral, Frederick his Son Duke of (...), was chosen General, whose (...)
Army, the Turks fiercely charging in hopes to overthrow, returned with some
loss, and like speed as they came. But famine began to increase, the Turks
having destroyed and carried away all; yet Antioch being easily delivered him,
his Soldiers were well refreshed by the Christian Citizens. 15 days after,
the Plag ue began to rage there among his Soldiers, and he glad to take the
open field; and setting forward against Do Dequin, (...) (...), sent for out of
Egypt, they joined a great and doubtful battle; the Christians (...) in
valor, they in number. At length the Christians Vauntg uard began to retire,
their seconds hardly charged. Frederick breaking in with a valiant Troop, the
Turks gave ground: Leopold of Austria presently coming with his foot, they
speedily fled, 4000 slain, 1000 taken and 15 Ensigns, small loss of the
Christians. After which, he passed Laodicea, easily taking Berytus, with other
revolted Cities: So coming to Tire buried his Father. Thence certifying Guy, at
Ptolemais, of his coming; who sent Montferrat to transport him by Sea, because
of Saladin's great Army: and being safely conducted with his Soldiers to the
Camp at (...), he was (...) received. After whose coming, 'twas thought good to
affault the City round, every Regiment being appointed what place to assail;
which was done with such fury, as if they purposed to gage their whole forces,
the Turks still beating them from the walls top. But now Saladine (hovering
aloof) came suddenly on the Christians Camp, notably receiving the first
charge; but giving ground, some Tents with Ensigns were taken, and Pavilions
fired, having slain above 100. The Christians retired from the assault to
relief of their Camp; the Turk retired also, having almost lost himself. This
(...) (...) was October. 14.

Diverse Princes (the mean while) of the West, came thither, rather increasing
famine than furthering service. Then also Conrade of Montferrat (who had
married Isabel the Queens sister) pretending a Title to the Kingdom, much
hindered proceedings. But Duke Frederik dying shortly, at the siege, of the
plague, and buried at Tire, the Christians attempted no great matter; but lay
entrenched expecting aid from the Princes: which were Philip 2. of France; and
Richard King of England, on whom all the hope of affairs in Syria rested; who
met at Marselles in province, with combined forces for relief. The French King
first departed for Sicilia with a prosperous gale; but coming nigh the Island,
through a sudden tempest, he with much ado arived at Messena, tossed in the
deep, many ships perishing, some broken on sands and rocks, and all sore
weather-beaten. Richard arived after (...) better fortune. Both Kings resolved
there to Winter, the French being (...) so to do, for supplies from France.
King Richard and Tancred, the now aspiring King of Sieily, had like to break
out into war about the Queens ( Richard's sisters) Dowry, had it not (...)
taken up. But it fell out, whilst the Kings of England and France often met as
good friends, and c. that jealousy and distrust revived old, and raised new
quarrels, to the great hinderance of the common good they intended: a warning
to great Princes (willing to hold a unity) never to converse or stay long
together. An old quarrel was, Richard's rejecting Adela the others sister, for
suspicion of too much familiarity with his Father Henry the 2d. and espousing
Berengaria the King of Navar's Daughter: which (...) brake (...) to this
Expeditious overthrow, and disturbance of their Realms.

The French King at Spring, loosed from Messana, arriving safely at Ptolemais,
and was received by the Christians as succors from Heaven. Richard shortly
following, two ships of whose weather-beaten Fleet, were driven on Cyrus, the
Islanders spoiling them, slaying and taking the men that hardly escaped the
Sea, and forbidding the rest to land. The King, moved, landed by force, fully
conquering the Island, and taking Isaac Comnen (commonly called their King)
sent him bound in silver chains into Syria. Then there at Limozin he married
Berengaria, and set forward, after disposal of things, he took of the Sultans a
great ship laden with victuals, and warlike provisions; and was most honorably
received at (...): which had been besieged 3 years, with many a hot assault and
bloody skirmish. The eyes of all were fixed on these two Kings. The Camp chiefly
consisted of English, French, Italians and Almains: as also many others from
Zeal daily coming in. These thus besieging, had laboriously undermined that
called, the accursed Tower, with part of the Wall, appointing every Regimen to
assail the wall at the firing of the Mine; in which assault the Tower fell,
with part of the wall, opening a fair breach. The Turks forthwith in a Parley,
yielded the City, July 12, 1191, and were to restore the holy Cross, 2000
Captives, 200 horsemen of those they required, being in Saladin's power; 200000
Ducats to be given to the 2 Kings for their cost, the City Turks being to
remain hostages for performance; and to be at the Kings mercy, if all were
(...) performed in 40 days. The Austrians (as the only men) first, at entry,
advanced their Ensigns on the walls top, which Richard (especially) not
brooking, caused their Dukes Ensigns to be soyled under foot, to his after
repentance. The 2 Kings dividing the spoil, not regarding the other Christians,
they withdrew, and sent them word, except they they were partaker of the gains,
as of the pains, they would forsake them; many (the Kings delaying their
promises) departing for poverty discontented, into their Countries.

But ere long, envy and distrust, ministered new matter of greater
discontentments between the 2 Kings; King Richard requested the French King, to
bind himself with him by oath, to stay 3 years for regaining Syria and
Palestine; but he, estranged before from Richard, plotting matters nearer home,
would not be persuaded so to do; but in a color fell very sick, sending for
Richard and others: to whom in few words, he declared his purpose; That seeing
he could not endure the hot air's intemperature, and that the life of one
absent might more profit Christian Religion, etc. than the death of him
present, he must depart; but would leave 5000 horse and 10000 foot choice men,
under Odo Duke of Burgundy, giving them pay, and supply of all things. King
Richard said, his return was to invade Guien and Normandy, now disfurnished of
Garrisons; which point he so urged, that Philip bound himself to him by Oath,
no way to attempt any thing, until 50 days after Richard's return home. And
embarquing the rest of his Army, he Aug. 1. departed to Tire, thence to Rome
visiting the Pope, and so safely arrived in France, having performed nothing to
what the world expected. Leopold of Austria followed, and shortly the
Venetians, Pisans and Genoans. Whereupon Saladine refused to pay the promised
money, or restore the prisoners, threatening to chop off all Captives heads, if
extremity were used to the pledges. Richard refused Saladin's request and
presents for longer sparing his pledges; whereupon he beheaded the Christian
Captives, and Richard Aug. 20, in sight of Saladin's Army executed 2500, or as
some write, 7000 Turks prisoners.

Saladine (as it commonly happens in a great Commanders ill success) much
impaired his reputation by the loss of Prolemais; wherefore with a headlong
despair he sacked, ruined, and overthrew the walls of Porphyria, Casaria,
Joppa, Ascalon, Gaza and Elam, with diverse other places like to stand the
Christians in stead: most part whereof were fortified, and re-peopled by
Richard and the Templers, though Saladine endeavored to let them.

But nothing more hindered the Christian Princes proceedings, then discord among
themselves; for besides the strife of the Kings of France and England, no less
was between King Guy and Conrade of Montferrat, about the lost. Kingdom's
title. Richard with othesr taking Guy's part; and the French King with others
taking part with Conrade: who being shortly slain by two Assassines or (...),
suborned by the Prince of Torone, for taking from him Isabel his espoused wife.
Richard persuaded Isabel his Widow, to marry his Nephew the Earl of Campaine,
giving him Tire; Guy exclaiming as of a wrong unto himself: But shortly after,
he persuaded Guy to resign his small title in the Kingdom to him, and gave him
Cyprus in lieu thereof; Richard becoming hereby King of Jerusalem. Guy lived
not long in the Kingdom of Cyprus; yet 'twas about 283 years in the Lusignan
family: until it fell into Uenetian hands, who held it nigh 100 years, till
Selymus 2, Turkish Emperor took it from them in 1571.

King Richard was now more desirous of Jerusalem than before; And thereupon set
forward himself in the Vantguard, Otho following him, and Jaques with his
Flemings etc. in the rear; being come to Arsua, Saladine, with ambuscadoes,
charged the rear-ward, on whom Jaques turning, endured the charge till the rest
came to their succor. The French, English, and Low-countrey-men, strove
honorably in that notable battle, especially the Turks part, their only hopes
depending on Jerusalem: it continued from noon till the Suns going down;
Richard (some write) was wounded with an arrow: (...) was slain, leaving the
victory to the Christians: more Turks are said to be slain, than in any battle
in man's memory, the Christians lost no great number. They removed (the next
(...)) to Bethlehem; but the King through Winters approach, etc. returned with
most to Ascalon, which that Winter he fortified. Otho wintred at Tire, many
departed then from the Camp; however, at Spring Richard took the field, and
came to Bethlehem: taking (by the way) very many loaded Camels, sent to furnish
Jerusalem; but Otho (who knew the French Kings mind) persuaded the Frenchmen,
that the glory would redound to Richard (as present) through whose
unwillingnesse to the siege Richard (to his grief) returned to Ptolemais. News
also was then brought, that Philip of France (forgetting his promise) had
invaded Normandy, stirring up John, Richard's brother, to take on him Englands
Kingdom. Richard fearing he might lose his Kingdom at home, thought best to
make (...) good end with Saladine, and so return. But the politic Sultan, to
weaken the Christians forces, and discourage others from coming thither;
afterward, offered no other conditions than that the Christians should restore
all they had won in the 3 years, Ptolemais excepted; and that, the Turks for 5
years should not molest them: which the King was willing to accept of whereby
the labor, etc. of these two Kings, and others were frustrated: the Christians
having only Antioch, Tire and Ptolemais left in Syria.

Richard, leaving those affairs to Henry Earl of Champain, shipped most of his
men with his Wife for England, they arriving safely there: but himself from
Sicily, following, was (by extremity of weather) driven on the coast of
Histria; and traveling homeward in a Templars habit, was by Leopold of Austria
taken prisoner; who sold him to the Emperor for 40000 pounds, and after 1 year
3 months, was ransomed for 100000 li.

The great Sultan Saladine about this time dyed, who commanded no solemnity to
be used at his burial, but his shirt carried on a Lance point as an Ensign, a
plain Priest crying before his dead body, Saladine Conqueror of the East, of
all the greatness and riches he had in his life, carries nothing with him
after death, more than his shirt. He reigned about 16 years, leaving 9 Sons,
all (except Saphradine Sultan of Aleppo) murdered by Saphradine their Uncle,
from whom descended Meledin Sultan of Egypt, and Coradin of Damaseo and
Jerusalem.

Pope Celestine was now in hope, that Jerusalem might (in that discord of the
Turks) be recovered, and the Kingdom established, who persuaded Henry the
Emperor to undertake the matter; who sent the Duke of Saxony with a great Army
into Asia, to whom two (...), the Archbishop of Moguntia, and the Bishop of
Herbipolis were joined. Many other German Princes and Prelates, then taking on
them the holy war; who being relieved, and transported to Antioch by the Greek
Emperor, came by land to Tire and Ptolemais, purposing to relieve the besieged
Germans in Joppa; but they being all by treason slain, and the City raced, they
departed to (...). Then taking and fortifying Berytus, they besieged (...):
which being brought to extremity, the Turks came on so fast for relief, that
they raised their siege, which Berytus Garrison perceiving, abandoned the City,
marching with the Army to Joppa and fortifying it; The enemy coming raced
Berytus in 1197. The Turks coming to disturb Joppa's fortifying, the Christians
removed some miles off, to draw the Turks to a convenient place. The Turks
hereupon, sent a part to assail the City, the other following disorderly; on
whom the Christians turning, sharply encountered and put them to flight, some
thousands of them falling, taking the spoil and returning to the City. But the
Duke of Saxony over-heating himself, and on the (...) day, dying of a Fever,
and the Duke of Austria (the night following) of a wound, diminished this
victories joy.

Not long after, both Pope Celestine and Henry the Emperor dyed, troubles
arising in Germany, about a new Emperors choice; whereupon, the Bishop of
(...), an Electour, and the other German Princes, could not be persuaded to
stay, but home they went. The Turks afterward, (the Germans on Martin's day
making merry in their Pots at Joppa) had a port betrayed to them, putting all
to the sword, and racing the City, thinking now to drive the Christians quite
out of Syria; yet by Simon Count of Montfort, sent thither with a tall Regiment
by the French King, and their civil discords, they were repressed, and a Peace
concluded for 10 years, which was in 1199, or, as some write, in 1198, the
Count returned into France, with whom (the time and History now calling us) we
will repair into lesser Asia, to see other Turkish affairs in those Eastern
Countries.

The ruin of the Turks first Empire in Persia: with the success of their second
Kingdom in lesser Asia, under the Aladine Kings.
IT fared with the Turkish Empire (first planted by Tangrolipix in Persia and
other Eastern Countries) as with a sick body subject to many changes, which
continuing for 170 years, must now give place to a greater power. For it
fortuned about this time, that the Tartars or Tattars (inhabiting the cold and
bare Countries in the North of Asia, a barbarous, fierce, and needy Nation)
stirred by their own wants, and the persuasion of Zingis or Cangis, holden for
a great Prophet, made their leader, and honorably named (...), or the mighty
King, or great Cham flocked like the sand of the Sea, and conquering their poor
neighbors, easily entreated to seek better fortunes with them, passed the high
Mountain Caucasus, part of Taurus, dividing Asia into 2 parts; over which,
coming down as into another world full of natures delights, never seen to them
before, bear down all before them. Zingis dead, Hoccata his eldest Son, took
his Fathers place, who sending part of his Army Westward, turned himself
Eastward; where subduing the Bactrians and Zogdians, with others, he entered
India, subduing to the East Ocean, building in Cathaia the City Cambalu, 28
miles about: where the Cham of Tartary has his Imperial residence, having also
in the Province of (...), Quinsay the greatest City in the World, 100 miles
about 12000 (...) therein, some whereof are exceeding high. The Cham always
30000 in Garrison: Hoccata, through the rich pleasures of India, managed his
wars by Lievtenants, (...) them North, West, and South, who subdued the
Arachosians, Margians, etc. and also subdued Persia, with all Parthia, Assyria,
Mesopotamia, and Media. Cursumes, or Corsantes, now reigned in the City (...),
in Chorasau the farthest part of Persia, who fled with all the people leaving
all; the Tartars racing the City, and taking the Country. Cursumes (of the
Selzuccian family) dying in this flight, Ugnanchan his Son led the multitude of
Turks, and seized on Babylon, now called Bagadat; where putting all to the
sword, he there, and thereabouts seated himself; but, ere long, the Tartars
pursuing, took him, and thence expelled his people. Solomon also of the Oguzian
family, (of whom more shall be said hereafter) reigned in Persia at Nacnan; who
terrified, and waned by the Salzuccian Sultan's fall, fled with some subjects
into lesser Asia. After this, the Tartars conquered greater Armenia, with
Cholchis and Iberia. This proud Conqueror purposed to subdue all Asia; but,
overcome with India's delicacies, he so rested, embracing the manners and
superstition of the conquered. The Turks were driven out of Persia about 1202;
who retired into lesser Asia (possessed by their Countrymen) under the leading
of Aladin, descended of the Selzuccian Family, who taking opportunity by the
discord of the Latins and Greeks, and Greeks among themselves, first at
Sebastia in Cilicia, then at Iconium, erected their new Kingdom of the Aladines.

Now, and within few years, such great and strange changes were in the
Constantinopolitan Empire, that it was almost utterly subverted, the Turks
hereby establishing their Kingdoms in Syria and lesser Asia, and at present,
triumphing in the imperial City: which briefly to pass through shall not be
from our purpose.

Usurping Alexius sought also the life of Isaac his Brother's son, Heir
apparent to the Empire: who seeing the villainy committed on his Father, fled
from his Uncle's fury, with some Greek Lords, for aid to Western Princes,
coming first to Philip German Emperor, who married his sister Irene; Who most
instantly solicited her husband (from the execrable indignity done to her
Father, the banishment of her wandering Brother, and her own disgrace thereby,
as also his, declaring, that if Alexius had not lightly regarded and contemned
Philip, he durst not have committed so great villainy) not to leave the same
unrevenged. Her Husband promised to be (...) revenged, but, through wars with
Otho his Competitour in the Empire, he could not at present. But it fortuned,
that then great preparations were making in diverse places for the Holy Land:
Theobald, Count of Campaign, General of the Army, Boniface Marquels of (...),
etc. were chief, with diverse Noble men: their Army was very populous. But
(since the Greeks had formerly showed great discourtesie to the Latins) they
thought it best to journey by Italy, and chiefly to use the Venetians for their
transportation by Sea, who were the easier entreated thereto, hoping hereby to
scour the Adriatique Sea of the Dalmatians, and recover Jadera in Sclavonia,
being revolted from them to the Hungarians; which this Army did. But in their
march into (...) their General died, to the whole Armies sorrow; the Marquess
of Montferrat was chosen General. This great Army having taken Jadera, was
ready to be embarked for Syria. But prince Alexius had so wrought, especially
with Pope Innocent III. Philip the Emperor, and the French King; that they
commended both him and his cause (by Letters and Messengers) to the Army. Who
coming to Jadera, with this commendation, was received as an Emperor's son,
recommending himself, as a poor exiled Prince, to their protection, of a lively
Spirit, etc. and being instructed by the Noble Greeks in all things for his
purose, he fitted diverse Nations in the Army with motives most prevalent with
them: Promising to pay the money that the French had borrowed for this War: To
the Venetians, recompense for all injuries received from the Greek Emperors,
chiefly Emmanuell: To the Pope and Italians, he and his Nobles had promised the
Greek Church should always acknowledge the Supremacy of Rome: which made the
Pope, by all means, to further Alexius his cause: alleging that the Greeks and
Latins difference in opinion caused that the Mahometans were not, long ago, by
united forces, subdued. And promised large rewards to all that took his part.

These forces for the Christians relief in Syria, were hereby converted against
the Greek Empire, to the Turks grean advantage: who, had he been charged home
by the Christians, as by the Tartars, might easily have been suppressed. The
Commanders of the Army thought best to march directly to Constantinople: giving
out thorough all Greek Cities manned against them, that they purposed not to
war against the Grecians, but to restore their lawful Emperor. And seeing
ancient Greece had appointed rewards and honors for their deliverers from
Tyrants, they should the more favorably entreat them. So embarquing their
Army, and entering the streights of Bosphorus Thracius, they anchored even in
the face of the City with 240 tall ships, 60 Galleys, 70 of burden, 120
victuallers, the straight seeming rather a Wood than part of the Sea. They lay
thus a while, attending if, on their sight, any tumult might arise in the City.
But the Tyrant had provided, that the Citizens, favoring Alexius, durst not
stir in his quarrel. Ambassadors now came from Crete, yielding that Island to
the young Prince, which he gave to Montferrat to encourage others in hope of
recompense.

Alexius had made fast the Haven between Constantinople and Pera with a great
chain, manning it with 20 Galleys; but the General sent the Eagle, a swift and
the strongest ship in the Fleet, who sailing with a full gale, brake the chain,
thus gaining the Haven, the Greeks left their Galleys to the Venetians.
Lascaris, the Emperor's son in Law, was ready with a select company to hinder
the Latins landing, who running on Land, the Foot (for the Horses could not so
soon land) leaped out of their ships in a moment, laying about the mounted
Greeks like mad men: The Citizens expecting the event of this hot skirmish,
60000 Greeks bravely sallied out of the City, and made the battle doubtful;
yet in fine, the Greeks retired into the City, guessing the loss, by Alexius
with Lascaris and a few others, secretly (with a mass of treasure, hidden by
his daughter Irene, Abbess of a Nunnery) the next night, fleeing.

The Constantinopolitans next morning taking Isaac out of Prison, saluted him
again Emperor, and opened the Gates to the Latins, calling them the Revengers
of their liberty, and their Emperor's Life and Majesty, requesting to see
young Alexius so long desired, so saving the City, that time, from saccage. The
old Emperor and his son, in the imperial seat, gave most hearty thanks to the
Latin Princes, and though his sight could not be restored, yet he acknowledged
they restored his Life, Liberty, Empire, Country, and Son, confirming
whatsoever his son had promised them, and that he would content them better if
they were not therewith contented, not being able to render answerable Rewards
to their deserts. And consulting about means to satisfy them, (that the
Citizens might more willingly do what was to be commanded) he entreated the
Latins (as they did) to retire out of the City. But what every man was to pay
being set down, it seemed to the Greeks most intolerable. Isaac, being brought
out of a stinking Prison, through the sudden change of air and manner of
living, dyed in this very instant.

The Constantinopolitans grievously exclaimed at this exaction, all in general
saying, and the Nobles (in assemblies) grievously complaining, that it was a
villainous thing for the Empire, by a boy, to be made bare, unto a covetous and
proud Nation: that the rich Isle Creet was given to the Latins: that the Greek
Church was constrained to submit to the Sea of Rome, from which it was happily
freed since the translation of the Empire thither by Constantine the Great;
whereupon a Tumult was raised. The armed people furiously ran to the Palace,
purposing to commit some outrage on the young Emperor: to whom, without stay,
he, showing himself above, promised to do nothing without their advice and
liking, appeasing the tumult with these good words. But the Emperor burning
with desire of revenge, and thinking himself more bound to keep promise with
the Latins, (for he could not satisfy both) he sent secretly to Montferrat, to
send him certain soldiers about midnight, assuring him to receive them in by a
Gate nigh the Palace. Of this Alexius Duc as, surnamed Murzufle from his
bettle Brows, was not ignorant, whose aspiring mind took this occasion: and
the night following, raised a tumult not inferior to the former, coming
suddenly to the Emperor, as if he had no hand in it, and told him, with a sad
countenance, that the people, especially of his Guard, were in an uproar,
coming to do him violence for his love to the Latins. The terrified Emperor,
demanded of him, what was best to do in the case. He embraceing him, in his
Gown, led him by a secret door into a Tent in the Court; and departing as to
appease the tumult he was (in bonds) clapped into a close stinking prison, as the
Traitor before had ordered. The Traitor now made an Oration to the people,
showing his compassion to the Greeks and their Empire, and in that they were
governed by a Youth, mislead by the Latins pleasure. That 'twas high time for
the City and Empire to look about them, since 'twas sold by its Preservers:
that they needed one who loved his Country before the Latins had extinguished
their name. The windy people cried out with applause, That none but he was to
be Chief of the Commonweal; Others, to have him made General of all forces:
the greatest cry was to have him made Emperor; who, by general consent, was
forthwith chosen and proclaimed. Who was of nothing more careful then to break
the Latins forces, which he feared; attempting first by Galleys filled with
pitch, to burn the Venetians fleet: who, not unacquainted with such devices,
and wary, by keeping themselves from each other, avoided the same, He now, to
color the matter, sent Messengers to Dandalus the General, that it was done by
the peoples malice, without his privity, that he would be glad of their favor
and friendship, promising to aid them with all things in their wars against the
Infidels. Dandalus answered, he would believe it when young Alexius should
assure him of it, and entreat for the people: which Answer moved the Tyrant to
take him clean out of the way, (for the mutable people began to repent of what
was done against the Emperor, saying, They must find means to remedy their
fault with their troubles) and with his own hands villanously strangled him in
prison, bruiting abroad that the Prince despairing had hanged himself. And
fearing the Latins sword, resolved to meet them in the field: so arming the
Cities whole strength, with a cheerful countenance, he encouraged his soldiers
to defend their Country; to have the Walls of the City (where they were born)
before their eyes; to pity their Temples, Wives, and Children, etc. graceing
his enterprise with a color of devotion, causing the Priests in their
Ornaments to march with an Ensign, having in it the Virgin Mary's picture. He
first charged the Count of Flanders with a fierce and doubtful battle, but new
supplies every way coming in, they, with a great loss, and their superstitious
Ensign, were forced to retire into the City. The City was besieged 72 days by
Sea and Land with the Latins rare agreement, fresh men still coming to the
assault gave the besieged no rest day or night. The Venetians, on the haven
side, built a wooden Tower higher then the Walls and Rampires, on 2 fastened
Galleys, out of which, in the assault, they fired the City. The French
likewise, on the Land side, pressing on with fury and valor, over deep
ditches, high strong Walls and Bulwarks, gained the Angels Tower, and opened a
way, for themselves and the rest into the City. Alexius despairing of State and
Life, fled with Euphrosina and Eudocia her daughter whom he married, after 1
month 16 days reign. The Tyrant fled, and the Latins entering, the Priests
with their Ornaments, Crosses, and Banners, met them, beseeching them, with
floods of tears, (falling at their feet) that as men, Captains, and Soldiers,
they would pity men, Captains, and Soldiers, though not so fortunate as they:
to abstain from slaughter, burning, ransaking; that they might have much more
pleasure and profit in preserving than destroying the City, it being their own:
That the elder Alexius and Marzufle had received a reward being exiled: That
they would pity a poor people often oppressed by tyrannous Governors: That in
so doing tbe Lord of Hosts would reward them, etc. Some of the better sort were
moved with this humble submission; but the Soldiers fell all to the spoil,
without respect of injury to others, abstaining from innocent blood, every
corner of the City being filled with mourning for so great outrages: Nobles,
aged Men, and wealthy Citizens, being thrust out of all. They broke into
Palaces and Temples, where all was good prize: Some Greek Historians, eye
witnesses thereof, complaining of the Latins insolency, to their eternal
dishonor. Thus Constantinople, the famous seat of that Empire, fell to the
Latins, April. 12. 1204. or as others, 1200.

The Princes and great Commanders now considered what was best to do with the
gained City and Empire, thinking not good to raze a City so ancient and
important, it overlooking Asia and Europe, and so commodiously placed to keep
under the Christians enemies, but to place there a Latin Governor, Laws, and
Customs, uniting it with the Church of Rome. Some would have but one Emperor
in Christendom, and would choose Philip Germane Emperor, whose Wife Irene was
daughter and Heir of Isaac Angelus. But all approved of this opinion, as better
to choose one among themselves, by whose personal presence (which the Greek
affairs needed) the Latins might be always aided in their wars against the
Infidels. The chief in this election, were 9 Counts, with the Marquess of
Montferrat, and 5 Gentlemen of Venice: to whom were joined two Bishops of
Syria; with two of France and an Abbot. These, assembled in the Apostles
Temple, after they had craved God to inspire them in choosing a good and just
Prince, chose Baldwin Count of Flanders and Hainaule, about 32 years old;
crowned by (...) a Venetian, (first Latin Patriarch there) May 16. 1204 or
1205. From which time the Greek Church received Rites of the Latins,
acknowledging Romes supremacy. Not long after, the Latins dividing their
forces, took in most part of the Countries on Europe side, belonging to the
Greek Empire, dividing them among themselves. To Baldwin the Emperor was
assigned Constantinople and Thracia, with a limited Soveraignety over all
Provinces gained or to be gained by the Latins. The Venetians share was, the
rich Islands Aegeum, Ionium, and Candy, in lieu whereof Montferrat had
Thessalonica, with all Thessaly, a good part of Peloponesus, with a Kingly
Title. The Venetian State fortified some of those greater Islands, the rest
were lest to be possessed and deended by Citizens, at their private charges,
the Signiour having a care over all, by a fleet suppressing the Genua Pirates,
and taking in the strong Towns Modon and Corone, which they held a long time.
Other parts of the Empire, as the Dukedom of Athens, was given to French
Jeffery of Troy in Champaigne, being made Prince of Achaia, another to the
Count of Bloys, with diverse others to private Persons, paying yearly a 4th part
of their revenue to their Lord the Emperor. Yea, the Greeks also sought to
share out something, every man for himself, without regard of the common good,
from which they were shortly driven, by the Latins or their Countreymens
greater power.

Lascaris, who fled, at the Cities taking, to Adrianople, and so to Bithynia,
was, with the good liking of the people; (having taken in the Countries from
the windings of Meander, even to the Euxine Sea) honored as their Emperor,
making Nice his seat. The two Comnens ( Nephews of Andronicus by his son
Manuel) possessing Pontus, Galatia, and Cappadocia, erected another Empire in
Trapezond; whose posterity gloriously reigned many years, till it, with the
Constantinopolitans was by Mahomet surverted. Thus it was no longer one, but
many Empires, some in Royal dignity, many others as petty Kings in their
Toparchies: as Aldebrandine in Attalia, Michael in Epirus, and c.

(...), by the help of Dandalus the Venetian, and others, soon brought under
all the Cities of Thrace; Adrianople excepted: unto which the better sort of
discontented Greeks with Lascaris were fled; which Baldwin knowing, hardly
besieged the same. Some evil-intreated Greeks were fled into Bulgaria, by whose
persuasion, John, that Countries King (aided by the Scythians, lately come
thither, and by the Greeks themselves) took on him to relieve the City; who
sent certain Scythian Troops before, to fetch in booties of cattle near the
Camp: giving order that when they were charged, they should retire, and so draw
out the Imperials, where the King lay covertly to entrap them. The Scythians
under Cozus, by twice retiring, and then returning with a greater number, drew
the Emperor with his Army among the woods and mountains, where the King with
his Army lay in wait: where they being wearied, and beset, were overthrown
with a great slaughter: Baldwin himself taken and sent in bonds to Ternova,
where, by the barbarous King, his hands and seet were cut off; lying 3 days in
a deep valley (where he was cast, breathing) he dyed, no man burying him: He
perished in 1206, not having reigned a full year. The barbarous King with his
savage Soldiers, tasting the Latins wealth, overran all Thracia, rifling and
racing the City of Serrae, with 9 more, putting all to the sword, except a few
carried away prisoners. Of all Provinces, Thrace was most miserable, first
spoiled by the Latins, now desolated by Bulgarians and Scythians. Didimothicum
and Adrionople (valiantly defended) escaped their fury. The Latins made choice
of Henry, Baldwin's brother, to succeed him; who aided by the King of Thessaly,
recovered all places taken by the Barbarians, driving them quite out the
Country.

But to come nearer to our purpose: Alexius Angelus fled into Thessaly from the
Latins, and so to Leo Sturus (who tyrannizing at Nauplus, was grown greater by
surprizal of Argos and Corinth, by whom he entrapped Murzuffle for a secret
grudg, and put out his eyes (himself an exile a deadly foe to other exiled):
who being shortly taken by the Latins, was brought to Constantinople; where for
murdering young Alexius, he was cast headlong from a high Tower, and crushed to
pieces, miserably dying. Not long after, Alexius himself was wandering in
Thraciae by Montferrat, going against Scurus stripped of all, and sent away
naked, wandering as a beggar in Achaia and Peloponesus who hearing that Lascaris
his Son in Law reigned as an Emperor in Asia, inwardly grieved thereat, came
secretly to Jathathines the Turks Sultan lying at Attalia, declaring his heavy
state, requesting he might be restored especially in that part of his Empire,
detained from him by Lascaris; Jathathines, not forgetful of his own troubles,
or of the kindness he had received from Alexius at Constantinople, (when
fleeing from Azatines his eldest brother, he was honorably entertained by him,
received (after Azatin's death) for the Turks Sultan) and hoping to share of
what he got, threatened Lascaris with all extremities, except he gave place to
his Father in Law, to whom those Countries of right appertained; Lascaris,
fearing both the Sultan's power, and the peoples inclination, yet finding them
ready and well-affected toward him; set forward with 2000 choice horsemen,
with the Sultan's Ambassador, to Philadelphia; the Sultan with Alexius then
besieging Antioch, (on the banks of Meander) with 20000 Turks. Lascaris
understanding the gaining that strong City would hazard his whole Empire;
resolved to do what he might with those few to relieve it. And following the
Ambassador at the heels, who coming unto the Sultan, and telling him of his
approach, and at length prrswaded of the truth thereof, put his Army in the
best order he could on such a sudden, and the places straitness. The Emperor
had 800 resolute Italians, who brake thorough the Sultans Army, disordering
them, the Greeks following; but being divided from the rest, in coming back,
were by the disordered Turks all together (...), having made an (hard to be
believed) slanghter of the Turks. The Greeks were now upon the point to flee;
but the Sultan singling out the Greek Emperor, at the first encounter, gave
him such a blow on the head with his (...), that he fell down astonished, who
quickly recovering his feet, hoxed the hinder legs of the Sultans tall Mare,
with which she faltred, and the Sultan tumbled down, whose head the Emperor
cut off; the sight of which so dismayed the Turks, that they presently fled,
who for his small number pursued not, but in the City gave thanks to God. The
Turks sent shortly concluding a Peace on his own conditions; who carrying
Alexius taken in this battle to Nice, used him well notwithstanding his ill
deserts.

Whilst the Latins spent their forces against the Greeks, and Lascaris was
troubled with the Turks, the Christians affairs in Syria grew worse and worse;
whereof the Knights Hospitallers and Templers, blamed Almericus King of Cyprus;
who being so near, and marrying Isabel heir of Jerusalem's Kingdom, given to
pleasure did nothing to relieve the Christians; for though the Turks were yet
in League with them, and at some mutual discord; yet building new Castles, etc.
they cut them short upon occasion. The Knights requested Pope Inocent for
remedy, certifying him, there was one Mary daughter of Montferrat, whom they
had brought up, and were ready to bestow her on whom he should think worthy,
with her right to the Kingdom, Innocent discharging Almericus, gave it to John
Count of Brenne, a Frenchman of fame then in Arms with the Latin Princes; who
commending his Earldom to his brother, came with what forces he could to Uenice
and Constantinople; and thence with rejoicing, was received as King at
Ptolemais, arriving Sept. 5. and marrying Mary the last day, was with her
crowned at Tire in 1209, Almericus soon dying for grief. Some envying his
promotion, called him in derision, a King Sans Ville, that is, without a Town.

The 10 years peace betwixt the Turks and Christians, was almost expired: 9
years discord having continned between Noradine and Saphadin for Sovereignty,
was ended by Saphadin's death. Noradine contented with Aleppo, Coradin, and
Meladine Saphadin's Sons: one had Damasco, the other Egypt, all enemies to the
Christians. Not long after, Pope Innocent summoned a Council at Lateran, to
which, not only a multitude of Bishops, but most Christian Princes Ambassadors
repaired; the danger of the (...) in Syria, and their relief by the Western
Princes was propounded. To which all consented, and some were appointed to
publish their Decree in every Province, for relief, and to stir up the people
for undertaking the same. The German Bishops of Ments, Cullen, and Trivers,
were special furtherers of this, whose example moved many. Henry Count of
Nivers, and one Gualter, with a great and gallant number, were sent from
France, a Fleet of 200 sail meeting at the Adriatique Ports; who arrived
prosperously at Ptolemais. Andrew King of Hungary (before bound hereto)
followed with the Duke of Bavaria, and Leopold of Austria: to all which, John
of Jerusalem joined. There was great hope of some great matter to be done; they
the first day marched into Galilee, easily overthrowing some met-Companies of
the Turks. The King of Hungary bathing in Jordan, as discharged of his vow,
returned (with all his power) home, all the rest crying out the contrary. From
Jordan they came to Tabor; But Winter coming on, and the Cattle dying by cold
and want of meat, they wintred at Ptolemais and Tire. John and the Austrian
troubling the Barbarians that Winter, by taking a Castle between Caesaria and
(...). The Army met at Spring, they thought best to attempt the conquest of
Egypt, which standing upright, they should do no great matter in Syria; and,
it being subdued, Jerusalem and Palestine would of themselves yield; resolving
to begin the war at the City Damiata, the first and commodiousest Port, by
whose taking they should enter Nile, and command the Country thereabouts. This
rich and ancient City, stood about a mile from the Sea, somewhat distant from
Nile, environed with a navigable cut, like an Island, and compassed with 3
strong stone-Walls, a strong watch Tower at the Cut's mouth, a number of fair
houses about it entrenched; the Cut also was barred with a great strong iron
chain. The Christians by great strength (coming with their Fleet) brake the
chain; but they (...) a greater stay at the Watchtower, which strongly built,
and well stored, the Soldiers overwhelmed them with shot, fire, stones, etc.
The Christians had built high wooden Towers on Vessels for assault; in the
approach the Mariners and Soldiers hindered each other, by crying, they should
draw nigher the Tower, others (...) cast (...) the bridges for entry; the enemy
also with clamor encouraging one another. In this hurly-burly the higest
Tower, overcharged with men, fell with an exceeding noise, crushing some to
death, the timber oppressing others being hurt, and crying for help: others
hurt leapt for fear, some into Nile, some aboard ships, crying out of arm, leg,
head, other part, discomfiting the rest, and giving over the assault. King John
the Armies General, appeasing the tumult giving those that were hurt to
Surgions, and burying the dead bodies, cheerfully persuaded the Soldiers, not
to be discouraged, this Towers fall being through wars chance not their
cowardice, or the enemies valor.

Meledine encamped in sight of Damiata, to fill the besieged with hopes of
relief, often sending then by the River whatsoever they wanted, skirmishes
passing daily betwixt both. The Christians had still the victory, but could
neither be drawn to battle, nor kept from victnals, it being conveyed out of
upper Egypt by Nile; whereas the same River dividing into many arms, etc. gave
our men a 1000 inconveniences; therefore they resolved to besiege the Tower
again: framing a strong Tower on 2 fastened Vessels, and bringing it near their
Tower, the rest of the Fleet following for assault, others standing in battle
range at Land, to discourage the besieged; and that the Sultan should not help
them without hazzarding battle. They of the subburbs valiantly defended a
fierce and cruel assault; for, it being a public Mart-City, there (...) in the
(...), not only Egyptians, but Arabians, Indians, etc. who fought for defense
of lives and goods: our men being animated also, as in religious quarrels, so
with the spoil of those rich Nations. The Christians drew as near with their
ships as they could to Land, that they might fight hand to hand; But the
Barbarians soughr by shot, etc. to keep them from landing. The enemy boarding
by chance a ship running a ground, and making a cruel slaughter, a Soldier
made a great hole under the hatches, and drowned a great number of Egyptians
with the Christians, which most feared them; The high Tower also now mating the
Watchtower, dismayed the Defendants, as with a miracle, forsaking the Tower
and fleeing; which thus taken, the discouraged in the Suburbs fleeing, many
were wounded from the Watchtower by the Christians. Other ships then landing,
the Soldiers put all they found to the sword. There was abundance of victuals,
but far more riehes.

Now they (...) the strong Town Damiata, but gaining nothing but hard blows and
wounds, they retired; yet they lodged in the Suburbs, lying betwixt the Sultan
and the City, that no supply should be brought: the enemy being (to their great
loss) often hindered, both from entering or sallying forth. But now Nile swelling
with an Eastern wind, most of the Christians victuals were spoiled; who
(through the Pope's Legate) fasting and praying for 3 days; the wind falling
and the River decreasing on the fourth day, they prayed more earnestly,
thinking, as the Almighty had feared, so he had comforted them again.

Victual growing scant in the Sultan's Camp, he sent away half his Army about
Caire; at which time, (...) sent Ambassadors to the Princes of the Christian
Army, in his own, and the Egyptian Sultan his brothers behalf, suing for
peace, and promising to restore whatever his Father Saladine had taken from
them; most liking that well, saying, They had taken up (...) for recovery of
that had been before gotten,: that all these things being restored, there
rested no further occasion of war, etc. Yet Pelagins the Popes Legate, (for the
other (...) dead) King John, Master of the Hospitallers and Templers, Duke of
Austria, and the Germans were contrary in opinion: alleading, this sacred war
was undertaken against the Infidels and Mohammedan Superstition, and they ought
to impugn Egypt as its chief seat; whereby the Sultans large offers were
rejected. Whereupon Coradine fearing, forthwith raced the Walls of Jerusalem,
(...) down most of the stately buildings, yet sparing David's Tower and
Christ's Sepulcher, at the humble intercession, as is said, of the Christians
of diverse Countries.

The Plague arising in the Christians Camp at Damiata, the great Commanders (so
many dying) who would have (...) the Sultans large proffers, began to repent
they had so much hearkened to the Legate. The Christians weary of a now 6
months siege, and the Sultan (but only the choice of his men) having sent away
the rest, stood not so carefully on their guard as before; whereupon the Sultan
in the night hoped to send supplies to the besieged. The foremost Companies were
already entered; but the Christians perceiving them, so assailed the hindermost,
that the enemy, fearing they should enter in with them, shut the gates, where
they were all cut to pieces: The Christians hereby encouraged, next day part of
the Army presented themselves to give the Sultan battle, who would not be drawn
out of his trenches, they (especially the Frenchmen) attempted their rampires,
but not with answerable success. The Egyptians enforcing their small number
to retire, Gualter with others being lost: the King also assailing the Camp,
lost many, his face burnt, hardly escaping with life. After which, they thought
of nothing but the siege, and the City now more straightly besieged, and
brought to extreme (...), assembled themselves to consult what to do, one or
other secretly fleeing to the Camp. Had not the chief Commanders mured up the
gates, and commanded none to come on the Walls or Rampires, the City had been
by the most yielded, who searching, especially Shops and Warehouses, divided
the small store of Wheat among themselves; the people eating whatsoever came to
hand, prolonged life with what they could find. These not able to endure famins
extremities, were greatly slaughtered with the plague, which so increased, that
men were wanting, not only to succor, etc. the sick, but to bury the dead. The
dead bodies gave a horrible stink with infectious air; they choosing rather to
die, than submit themselves to their enemies, The Christians knew of the
famine, but not of the raging Plague among them. They cast up Trenches and
Baricadoes, to keep in such as the famine should enforce out, still expecting
when the besieged, through necessity, should yield. When they had lain above a
year at siege, certain Soldiers in a bravery, adventured to mount the Wall:
and finding no resistance, they stood still hearkening; but seeing that dumb
silence continued, they returned, informing the Captains of the matter; who
thinking it some policy of the enemy, afterward caused some Companies to scale
a Bulwark, in such sort, as if they had gone against a puissant enemy: who took
it without resistance, and cut in pieces (in their further entry) a small
company, very weak and feeble with famine and infection of air, after some
small resistance. The gates being set open, the Christians were let in with
displayed Ensigns; but at the entry were artainted with a most grievous stink,
they saw the streets covered with dead bodies, others drawing toward their
end. Of 70000 persons were not found above 3000 alive, and those the most part
young children, which maigred and poor ones, had their lives granted them, to
cleanse the City and bury the dead, being three months in doing it. Damiata
was taken Nov. 5. 1221. The spoil was great, with store of Gold, Silver, and
precitious Stones. The Christians (as in a Colony) forgetting their Country,
stayed there above a year after. The City, Pelagius (by virtue of his Legation)
adjudged to belong to the Sea of Rome: at which, the King and Armies General,
(to whom all places taken was agreed to be given) withdrew himself
discontented, yet dissemblingly, to Ptolemais. Pelagius, weary to see nothing
doing, the year following, commanded every man to take Arms and prosecute the
war, with besieging of Cairs; yet the Soldiers cried out with one voice, They
would be commanded by none but the King of Jerusalem. The Legate was enforced to
send and request the King, to take on (...) the mannaging of that war, who by
particular affairs, (...) his own indisposure, excusing himself, at length
(through the requests of the other Princes) at the time when the (...) Duke,
after 10 months absence, arrived (out of his Country) with a brave Company,
returned to Damiata: whom with others the Legate requested, and urged speedily
to take the field, telling them, the holy wars enterprise was grown old, and
cold by these delays, etc. That it was for the invaded or assailed, (on whose
lives their Country, Wives, etc. depended) to prolong time, and to delude and
dally off the enemy, till, having weakened his forces, he should lose his hope:
Caire, he said, was a great City; yet the greatest Cities had, by puissant and
speedy enemies, become deserts: and that great Empires ought not to be assailed
by foreign force, if they were not (at first) overthrown, or weakened as not
to recover themselves, etc. That Egypt ought not to have been attempted, or
not to be given over before conquest. The King of Jerusalem, whether grieved
that Damiata could not be given him, or having proved, that higher Egypt was
not to be attempted without great danger, said he would not go in any case, the
war being undertaken for recovery of the holy Land; and that after Memphis,
Babylon or (...) were taken, they could not be kept long by force; whereas
Syria was in right their own. And though he commended whatever forwardness,
etc. Pelagius commended; yet he ought to employ the same in Syria, and not
where no need was, or profit to be exspected. The Legate, wedded to his opinion,
commanded him and the rest, to get in the field against the Sultan, threatening
the sentence of excommunication against the backward or unwilling: So as
enforced, they set forward in August the hottest season. The Sultan (as afraid
of 70000) retired farther off, at which the unexpert Legate rejoicing said, That
fortune favored the valiant, and to cowards all fell out to the worst. The
Christians seizing on a bridge, made over Nile, cut the Keepers thereof to
pieces. Drawing nigh Caire, and encamping in its sight, they ran up and down,
provoking them of the City to come out to battle, etc. who let them alone to
brag and boast, and purposely protracted long the siege; and the Christians
having confidence in their valor, with little regard of their enemies, not
considering they were within the Trenches, etc. of a deceitful River, took no
care of duty, watch, etc. So the crafty enemies, abusing them with delays and
deceits, drew them out at length, that they might circumvent them when they
least feared it. The Christians encamped under the covert of the Banks, and
Causies of that fenny Country, thinking themselves safe; But these places were
soft and durty, the people at pleasure watring them by channels and sluices out
of Nile; which opened, the River began to overflow all. Then they (too late)
perceived themselves taken as in a gin; all the ground being covered with
water, that the victuals were corrupted, and no place for a man to lie dry in.
The Egyptians had taken the high places, that the Christians should not retire
out of the covered Boggs and Marshes: so their rash valor was exposed to the
enemies shot and fury. Then all began to cry out, and rail, etc. against
Pelagius: the King they blamed (...), who was against his liking drawn into
this war, etc. After 3 days, thus coupt up with waters, the poor Soldiers
fell down dead in the water for want of food and sleep, no help but to accept
of the proud enemies conditions; who most desiring his Countries liberty,
required Damiata to be restored and all things as before the besieging thereof,
and so the Christians to depart his Country. These hard conditions were by the
distressed Christians accepted of; but when they were propounded to them of
Damiata, a great contention arose, some said they would not surrender the Town
a stay for all Christian affairs in the East; but being restored, carried away
all their hope with it; and therefore 'twere better endure all extremities,
than receive so hurtful a Peace: Others said, they ought to have compassion of
so many thousand distressed souls, not to expose them to butchery, Towns
consisting of men, and not men of enclosures. These seeing the others
obstinate, presently, by force entered their houses, and took away their
weapons, to constrain them to yield. When they before Caire (almost drowned)
understood of this dissension, they sent word, If they would not yield Damiata
to the Sultan, they would forthwith send to Ptolemais (which would not (...))
to have it surrendered, instead, to the Egyptians. So was Damiata again yielded
to the Infidels. Meledin the Sultan, did neither by word or deed, despite or
reproach them; but relieved them with victuals, and other things wanting,
conducting them safely (by guides) out of the Country. Likewise, Coradin his
brother made a truce with them for 8 years; whereupon, the King went into
Italy, and (by the Popes persuasion) gave his daughter Yoland in marriage to
Frederick Latin Emperor, (she being Crowned Queen of Jerusalem in her dead
(...) right) to stir him up for undertaking this sacred war. He and his
successor illy prosecuting their pretended title. John arriving from Rome at
the French Court, found King Philip desperately sick, who (by will) gave to the
Hospitallers and Templers 60000 Crowns for maintenance of their wars, which was
afterward paid to John; who in the way to Spain, married Berengaria the King
of Castiles Daughter, returning into France, where he long expected Frederick
to recover his wives right to Jerusalem's Kingdom: which though he at Rome (at
the marriage) solemnly vowed; yet (otherwise let) performed it not till almost
7 years after. Let us leave the Christians in Syria, (who enjoyed the 8 years
Peace, till new troubles) returning to the troubled affairs at Constantinople,
and in lesser Asia.

Henry as aforesaid, repressing the Bulgarians and Scythians, dyed, having with
trouble reigned about 11 years. After whom succeeded his Son in Law, Peter
Count of Anserre; who to gratify the Venetians, and in revenge besieged
Theodore Angelus (Prince of Epirus his competitour) in Dyrrachium, which he had
a little before surprised from the Venetian Seigniory; where Peter laying, was
so cunningly used by the Greek, that a Peace was betwixt them concluded, and
friendship joined. So that Peter came to him as his guest, who entertained him
with all feigned formalities, but most traitorously slew him in the midst of
his banquet; (Yet others report he was by him put to death being intercepted
traveling from Rome to Constantinople) which Topulus Governor of
Constantinople understanding, made peace in the Empire's vacancy for 5 years,
with him, and the Turks for 2. Robert, Peter's Son, shortly coming thither, was
saluted Emperor; but soon after, he taking a fair Lady, daughter of a rich and
Noble (...), to Wife, before betrothed to a gallant Burgundian, the old Lady
breaking her promise: the young Burgundian (enraged with the wrong) entered the
Court in the Emperor's absence, by night, with a company of lusty Soldiers,
cutting off the young Empresses nose and ears, throwing her old Mother into the
Sea, and fled out of the City with those (...). The Emperor pierced to the
heart with the disgrace, soon went to Rome, and returning through Achaia, died
there. Baldwin, a child by his first Wife, left to succeed him, the 5th and
last of the Latin Emperors there; who being married to Martha younger Daughter
of John King of Jerusalem, but then Governor of (...), he had both the person
and Empire of Baldwin committed to his charge: which he for certain years
faithfully discharged, till Baldwin was able himself to govern. Now though
Constantinople with Thracia, and the other Greek Provinces, were all or most
under Baldwin, the Venetian and other Latin Princes; yet the oppressed (...),
were in heart devoted wholly to their natural Emperors. Lasearis reigning at
Nice, and (...), at Trapezond. Lascaris in his reign, had fought many a battle,
etc. as it were, erecting a new Empire in Asia, reigning 18 years, and leaving
John Duc as (who married (...) his Heir) to succeed him. A man of great wit,
spirit and gravity, undertaking nothing before consideration; which resolved
on, he omitted nothing for performance: The Greeks, saying, The planting this
new Empire required the celerity of Lascaris; but its stay, the gravity of
Ducas. In the beginning, setting things (...) order, he augmented his legions,
and aiming to recover Constantinople, with Thrace and Greece, built a great
number of Galleys, taking in one Summer, most of the Aegeum Islands, with
famous Rhodes, and many others; and the next Spring landing over Hellespont,
invaded Chersonesus, then forraging the Country even to the gates of
Constantinople, taking also many Cities and Towns by the Sea coast; the Greeks
almost all yielding themselves where they could help him. The ruin of the Latin
Empire in the East, was plainly to (...); for Assan the Bulgarian King, sent
his Ambassadors to John, offering his Daughter Hellena in marriage to Theodore
his Son, of which he ( Assan able to call in the Scythes) loath to have him his
enemy, gladly accepted- Wherefore Hellena, both about 12 years old, was
solemnly married to Theodore about Chersonesus. The Sultan of Iconium (not long
after) fearing, while his hands were full of the dreadful Tartars, he should be
set on by the Greek Emperor, sent unto John to prolong the League betwixt
them; which he for many causes granted, as not able to war against the Turks
and Latins at once, and to keep by this warlike Nation his own Countries safe
from the Tartars. This Peace exceedingly enriched his Countries; for now the
people began to fall to the fruitful labors of peace. The Emperor himself by
plowing got much Corn, planting many Vine-yards, and keeping Herds, and
Flocks, and Fowls of all sorts, stirred others up to the like, causing also his
Kinsmen and Nobles to have sufficient for their own spending, and not to take
any thing from the poor Countrymen; whereby in few years, every Barn was full
of Corn, etc. Then also there being a (...) famine among the Turks, they
traveling into the Emperor's Provinces for Victuals, gave their gold, silver,
and rich commodities for food; so that the Countrey-mens houses were full of
the Turks wealth, and the Emperor's Coffers stored with Treasure. The money
gathered of Eggs daily sold, making the Empress a rich Crown of gold set with
precious stones; which he called Ovata, because '(...) bought with Egg-money.
The Greek Empire thus flourishing in lesser Asia, the Turks pilled by the
Tartars and consumed with famine, as fast declining.

Frederick the Emperor, and King of Sicily, was hardly called on by Pope
Honorius, to take his long vowed expedition into the holy Land; and for delay,
excommunicated by Gregory 9, more to draw from him some of his Empire in his
absence, than for their zeal thereto, which the fearing, delayed his Vows
performance; But at length. enforced with Grrgory's thundering, he set forward
in 1227. Yoland his wife thereabout dying in childbed of a Son. There met at
Brundusium, an exceeding number of Soldiers out of all parts (especially
Germany) under the Lantgrave of Thuring, and the Bishop of Augusta; but the
Plague arising there, the Lantgrave and Bishop, with many others, dyed: The
Emperor falling very sick of a Fever at Malea, on his way, returned to
Brundusium, staying long there. Then the Pope, casting out his excomunications
against him, accusing him with perjury, etc. he would have cleared himself in
an open Assembly at Ravenna, had it not been disturbed; yet he answered all by
writings, setting forward again from Brundusium in August 1228. The Pope for
that the Emperor had neither taken his leave of him, nor reconciled himself,
in a great choler, forbad all forces in Syria to yield him obedience: writing
also to the Sultan, not to agree with him etc. And afterward ran on his
Kingdom of Naples, troubling Italy; yet he was honorably received at
Ptolemais. Sultan Meledin hearing of his arrival, offered him most honorable
conditions of Peace; who sending first for the Pope's consent, would not suffer
the Messengers to come into his presence, rending the Letters without reading
them; yet the Emperor, on condition that he should be King of Jerusalem, and
all Palestine delivered to him: That all taken from Baldwin 4th by Saladin
should be restored: that Nazareth and Joppa he might fortify at pleasure, and
that all prisoners, by both, be freed without ransom, concluded a Peace for 10
years: thereupon he was Crowned King of Jerusalem on Easter Day, 1229, who
repairing its (...) Walls, with certain Temples, etc. appointing Raynold of
Bavaria his Lieutenant, returned into Iealy. The Sicilian Kings have been ever
since called Kings of Jerusalem.

Gregory (next year) more in spite to the Emperor than zeal, did by the
lately erected Dominicans and Franciscans, stir up a wonderful number to take
on them the Cross, so termed, their cognizance, who bound themselves for
recovery, or defense of the holy Land, under Theobald King of Navarre, the
Counts of Monifort, and Campaigne, and others, to trouble the 10 years
concluded Peace; passing Bosphorus they came to the River Sanger in Bythinia,
there refreshing themselves, at length they came to the Straits of Mount
Amanus, taken by the Turks, the Sultan of Iconium not far off encamping; yet
Montfort courageously marching with his Vantguard, by force opened the
Mountains passage. Navarre in vain assaulting the Sultan's Camp, who would not
stir out; wherefore the King dividing his Army, followed Montfort, with his
best Soldiers in the rear; but the Turks (...) them upon occasion, at length
taking advantage in a Plain, slew of them an exceeding number; the battle
through the night broken off, the Christians at length arrived at Antioch,
having lost most of their Army and (...), with all their wealth and victuals;
they were (...) to Ptolemais, and thence conducted to Gaza, spoiling the
Country, they could have no help of the Emperor's forces there; for he had
expressly charged, not to do any thing tending to the breach of the 10 years
League: which the Turks perceiving, lay in every corner to cut them off: these
of Gaza, returning with spoil out of the the Country, were set upon by the
Turks, whom they put to flight. But the next morning, far more Turks appeared,
who joined with the watching Christians a cruel battle: who (though they
showed very much valor) wearied and oppressed with their multitude, were
almost all (...). The two Counts falling among the rest, the King by his
horse's swiftness hardly escaping; who after 2 days wandering, came by hap to
Joppa: some few escaped to Ptolemais: He visiting Jerusalem, returned home with
a few followers.

Raynold the Lievrenant about 4 years after dying, the Templers (who would
oftentimes have broke the (...)) now took occasion to stir up the people to
take Arms against the Turks: (...) the Egyptian Sultan, raising an Army, and
sending for the Chorasines lying near (...), besieged Gaza, which at length
taking, he put all to the sword therein: Likewise, he dealt so with Ascalon and
other places. The Templars and Hospitallers, with the weak Kingdoms strength,
came to give him battle near (...): who hastily (as if for fear) retiring, came
upon them next night, encamping by the River, at unawares and unarmed; who,
being awaked, hastily and disorderly, took such weapons as came to hand,
fighting terribly and doubtfully a long space, encouraging each other. But the
Turks keeping order, and more in number, greatly slaughtered them, yet with
loss of many thousands of their own: most of the best Templars and Hospitallers
were slain. The Sultan, being (...), forthwith took Jerusalem, putting all men,
women, and children, to the sword, rasing it, burning the buildings, etc.
defaceing Christ's sepulcher, never before violated, which he seemed chiefly to
do, for that the Christians, for its gaining, so hardly adventured, and so
troubled the (...) and Turks. Thus by breach of the league, Jerusalem fell
again into the Turks power in 1234, in whose hands it has remained to this
day, governed by a (...), the Sepulcher being again repaired, was much visited,
and not unreverenced by the Turks themselves.

Frederick was much grieved with this loss, but (being entangled with troubles
that Gregory left unto other Popes, till they had deprived him of Empire, and
life also) he could not remedy the same. Lewis the ninth, King of France,
famous for zeal, devout in life, and abounding in wealth, was careful for the
Christians in Syria. In whose devout motions, before he could resolve on the
enterprise, he fell dangerously sick, lying speechless, and but a little
faintly breathing; the first thing that he asked for (when come a little to
himself) was the Cross, that wars cognizance, which he received of the Bishop
of Paris; 3 Counts his Brethren, with the Duke of Burgundy, Earl of Flanders,
Count of Paul, and most of his Nobles, taking (the same time) the same charge
on them. Yet few years passed in preparation for so great an enterprise, many
dying before it. At length the King, taking order with his mother Blanch etc.
took his leave of the Pope at Lyous, (who, for fear of Frederick, lay there)
and embarquing at Marcelles, Aug. 25. 1248. he arrived in Cyprus, Sept. 20.
following. Who was desirous, without stay, to go for Egypt, had he not been
otherwise persuaded through want of his whole Fleet, and the years season. But
passing there the winter, the plague arising and increasing in the Camp, a
great number shortly died, with the Bishop of Bravais, and diverse others, 240
in number, not of the meaner sort; so (...) he divided his Army, attending the
stay of the Infection. The Templars, in the mean time, fearing the Turk's
overrunning all, and the French getting the Victory, would diminish their
tyrannizing power; sent secretly to the Sultan of Egypt, persuading him, by an
agreement, to avert farther harm from the French King. Who, liking it well,
sent to their Master about a peace, yet, with the French King's consent. To
whom the Templars wrote, persuading him to accept thereof, setting out the
Sultan's great praeparations. But the King of Cyprus acquainting Lewis, that
the Master had sent to the Sultan, procuring that message, he fed the Turk's
Ambassador with hope, but wrote to the Master, on his head, not to have any
intelligence with the enemy.

Winter past, diverse Noble and great ones, who had set forth late, or, for fear
of the plague, (...) by the way, repaired to Cyprus: as Robert of Burgundy,
with good Horsemen; the Prince of Achaia, with a great fleet from Peloponesus;
William Earl of Sarisbury, with a band of lusty soldiers: So Lewis departing,
tossed with winds, about 5 days after, fell upon Egypt, coming with his fleet
before Damiata. The Sultan, understanding his purpose, had strongly fortified
his stontiers, beside a great power kept with him in readiness. The Governor
of Damiata was ready to keep the Christians from landing: who, manning their
long Boats with Archers, to beat the enemy from the shore, ran a ground with
other landing Boats; coming to handy blows, a sharp battle was fought, many
falling on both sides. But the Turks, oppressed with multitudes still landing,
fled into the Town, leaving their Governor, with 500, dead on the shore. This
rich and populous City had (since the sormer taking) been strongly fortifyed by
the Turks, with deep ditches, high walls, etc. and (...) with all things for a
long siege. Yet the Soldiers and Citizens, remembering the miseries endured in
the former siege, the night following, fled over the River by a bridge made of
Boats; and brake it lest they should be followed, having first fired their
houses. The Christians entering the City, did what they could to quench the fire
and afterward found abundance of riches with store of victuals, This happened
about the beginning of October: in 1249. Meledine herewith discouraged, offered
the King for peace, and the redeeming thereof, more in (...) and Syria then
they had before a long time: which was by the French proudly rejected, and
Alexandria the Metropolis further demanded. Meledine (not much beloved) now
died, in whose stead, Melechsala, courageous and welbeloved, (even then
returning from craving aid of the Mohammedan Princes) was chosen: which Princes
(though not according among themselves, or with the Aegytian, yet in this common
danger of Superstition) joined, sending him great aid. Who being strengthened,
hotly skirmished with the Christians, not far from Damiata, wherein he retired
with some loss. But the Christians, sallying out the next day, fled to the
Camp with ten times more loss. Whereby the Sultan encouraged hoped for better
success, stopping, that without great peril no victuals could be brought to
City or Camp, so that victuals began to grow scarce; whereof he was informed by
fugitives, that fled for want. It fortuned that the Governor of Caire, not ill
affected to the Christian Religion, and highly offended with the Sultan, for
his Brothers wrongful death, secretly persuaded the King to come thither with
his Army, promising to deliver it to him, with instructions what to do.
Whereupon he assembled what forces he could make: sending also for the Earl of
Salisbury, who, with the English, was gone to Ptolemais, for indignities
offered him by Artoys the King's brother, purposing to serve no more: But with
promise of better usage, and recompense for wrongs, he returned into Egypt. And
more strengthened by new supplies from France, leaving a convenient Garrison in
Damiata; set forward toward Caire. Wherefore the Sultan offered to restore him
all (...), with a great sum of money, and all prisoners, so he would
redeliver Damiata, and join in League with him. Which offer through others
persuasion he refused: The King was to pass an Arm of Nilus, but being
conducted by a fugitive Saracen to a foord, he (...) Robert of Artoys his
brother with a 3d part, before, accompanied with the Masters of the Templars
and Earl of Sarisbury. Who assailing the Turks in their tents, (in the Sultans
absence) put them to flight. Artois above measure encouraged, would needs on
forwards, whom the ancient Templars, acquainted with that Nations deceitful
manners; and considering their own strength better then he, persuaded him not
further to prosecute the enemy, till the rest of the Armies coming. To whom he
in despite replied, he would prosecute, etc. calling them cowards, objecting
to them the common fame, that the holy Land might long since have been united
to the Christians Commonwealth; but for the false collusion of the Templars and
(...), with the Infidels. The Master moved, answered, he should when he would,
and where he durst, display his Ensigns, etc. Sarisbury also persuaded Robert
to listen to the wholesome Counsel of the Templars; being experienced men,
beginning also to pacify the Master with gentle words: Whom, whilst speaking,
Robert called Dastard, wishing the Army rid of him, and the fearful Cowards his
Country men: Who answered, well General, on, my foot shall be as far as yours;
and I believe we go where you shall not dare to come nigh my Horses tail: He
said so, because the French, had in disdain, often called him and his English,
Tails. The Earl not to be persuaded, first assaulted a little place called
Mansor, who was about to retire, having lost a number of his men. The Sultan
suddenly came on with his whole power, and with his multitude, enclosed the
long wished-for, divided Christian Army; in which great fight though they
worthily behaved themselves, yet being a small number, they were slain down
right. Then the too late repenting Earl, cried out to Sarisbury (valiantly
fighting) to fly, etc. who answered, God forbid, my Fathers son should run from
the face of a Saracen. The French Earl swiftly fleeing and taking the River
Thasues, overladed with armor, was drowned. Sarisbury with his own hand slew
many that day, till his Horse being slain, and he so wounded in the legs, that
he could not stand; yet desperately laid about him on his knees, and was there
slain; scarce more than 2 Templars, 1 Hospitaller, and 1 Common Soldier
escaped alive.

Sickness also increasing in the Camp, the King sent many sick people to
(...), down (...), purposing to march to Caire: whom the Sultan (by meeting
them with boats carried in Carts) burnt and drowned all, except one English
man, who, wound (...) 5 places, escaped reporting it to the rest. The Sultan
(...) now intelligence of the Governor, to betray Cair, and suddenly
apprehended him till better leisure: the King had all his hope of the City
hereby cut off; who now would gladly accept of the refused conditions, which
the Sultan would not hear of, but sent, in derision, to know what was become of
all his mattocks, forks etc. which he brought with him, and why (like an ill
husband) he suffered them to rot and rust by him. The King would fain have
retired to Damiata: but the Sultan got betwixt him and home, so that he must
fight it out or yield: Who being before often entreated by his Nobles, for
safety of his person, to conveigh himself by water to Damiata, would never be
persuaded, saying, He was resolved to endure with his people whatever God
should lay upon him. So passing the foord aforementioned, coming where his
Brother's battle was fought, he might see the mangled Christians (the Sultan
having proclaimed great reward to whomsoever brought him a Christians head or
hand). Long he stayed not there, but the Sultan appeared with a most huge Army:
against whom the French men, for 3 hours made great resistance. But one being
against ten, and the Army fainting for sickness and food, they were, at last,
all (except a few saved in hope of great ransom) slain: The King, with two
Brothers, was taken also: who, to the Sultan demanding, why he warred against
him, answered, 'twas for Religion, and the defense of his God's name. This was
fought Apr. 5. 1250. most of the French Nobility being slain.

The Sultan presently sent a like number of his soldiers, with French attire
and Ensigns to Damiata: where the Duke of Burgundy, French Queen, and the
Pop's Legate lay, but they were by them of the City discovered, and so kept out.

Melechsala (through compassion) yet minding to make his own of (...) Kings
life, began with cheering speeches to talk of (...) deliverance, and of a good
atonement, on condition of delivering Damiata; and paying for his ransom, and
the other charges 800 pounds of Gold, that both their Prisoners should be
frankly set at liberty, and so a peace for 10 years. The Sultan would have
sworn to renounce Mahomet, if he performed them not: requiring the King to
swear a denial of his Christ to be God, if he failed; which the King detesting,
he took his word, and published their league. But whilst they came together to
Damiata, Melechsala (not fearing the mischief hanging over his head) was
suddenly slain by 2 desperate Mamalukes; and one Tarqueminus, a Slave of the
same order, was by the Army created Sultan in his stead, and made another
league with the King much on the same conditions. Which Miscreant, after (...)
(...) paid his ransom, went from Damiata to Ptolemais, but performed not half
that he promised, scarce freeing 4000 of 12000 Captives, and killing all sick
soldiers, which he ought to have relieved, not suffering any Christian to
carry his goods out of Egypt. The King, at Ptolemais, (by the entreaty of the
Master of the Templars, etc.) stayed almost 4 years, repairing Caesarea and
Joppa, and fortifying many strong places. So sending his Brethren before,
himself arrived in France the 6th year after his departure thence: Some write
that 80000 Christians were lost in this expedition; the French Chronicles say
that 6000 of 32000 returned into France. Damiata was (shortly after delivery)
rased, by the Sultan, to the ground.

The Egyptian Sultans, having no great assurance in the effeminate Egyptians,
had bought an infinite number of Slaves, especially of the Circassians, near
Colchis and the Euxine Sea, transported out of those bare cold Countries by
Merchants: out of which the Sultans culled those of likeliest Spirit and
ability, delivering them to most skilful Teachers, who taught them to run,
shoot, ride, handle all sorts of weapons, etc. who, so instructed, were
introlled in pay as his choice Horsemen, and called Mamalukes: In whose service
finding great use, they daily erected new stored Nurseries: Whose Order now,
wonderful strong hereby, managed their greatest affairs, especially in wars,
gaining by valor many fair victories, and defending their Coun ry. But proud
of their preferment, traitorously slew Melechsala, their chief Fonnder, setting
up the Slave Tarqueminus, of great Spirit and Valor. The Turk's power in Egypt,
with Melechsala, the last of Saladine's Stock, took end. For the Mamalukes now
commanded as Lords over the rest, not suffering them to use Horse or Armor, or
sway the Commonwealth, but preferring their own swarming Slaves, the people,
kept under with heavy impositions, dared not to meddle, but with Merchandise,
Husbandry, etc. the greatest profit whereof still came to them: choosing a
Sultan still from among themselves, none of his Children to succeed, least
proud of their parentage, they should reckon them their Slaves: providing also,
that though the Mamalukes sons might enjoy their Fathers lands, etc. after
death, yet none should take on them the name of a Mamaluke, that the Government
might still rest with the Mamalukes: Neither might any Mohammedan or Jew be
admitted into that Order, but only Christians (become Slaves) instructed in
that superstition, or that had abjured Christian Religion. Many of these poor
Slaves, thus exalted, proved most renowned Princes, dreadful to the greatest
Monarchs. This servile Empire flourishing 267 years, was, by victorious Selymus
(with Syria and Palestine) united to the Turkish Empire, being overthrown by
him in 1517.

But leaving the Turks and Mamalukes, let us return into lesser Asia, and
Constantinople. The Greek Empire all this while, flourished under John Batazes:
the Latins power declining as fast, under Baldwin II. at Constantinople. The
Turks had, in the mean time, more than enough to do to withstand the Tartars.
John Ducas at length died, about 60 years old, happily reigning 33 years, by
whom, the Greek Empire, not only in Asia, but a little in Europe also, began
to gather strength. This Emperor after long lamenting Irene his first Wives
death, married Ann, the King of Sicily's Sister, among whose honorable Dames,
sent to accompany her, was one Marcesina, a rare Parragon of Nature, with
sugared words, and eyes, as Nets, to entangle the amorous; the Emperor fed his
eyes on this fair Object, till he became her Subject, seeming little to regard
the young Empress in respect of her, suffering her to be (...) and honored as
the Empress herself: She, thus triumphing, would go with most of the
Court-Gallants, and some of the Guard, to visit the Monastery and Temple, which
noble Blemmides had of his own cost lately built, where he with his Monks (as
weary of the World) lived a solitary and (...) life: (who, chosen afterward,
for his upright life and learning, Patriarch of Constantinople, refused it).
Marcesina coming thither in great Pomp, to enter the Temple, had the doors shut
against her, commanded so by Blemmides, to her great disgrace. For he deemed it
impiety for that wicked Woman, against whom he had spoke and written, to tread
upon the sacred (...). She being enraged, and pricked forward by her followers,
returning, grievously complained thereof to the Emperor, stirring him up, by
all means, and his own disgrace, to be revenged, her pick thanks not sparing
(as it were) to put Oil to the fire: who, struck with remorse, not with wrath,
deeply sighing, with tears in his eyes, said: Why provoke ye me to punish so
devout and just a man? (...) if my self had lived without Infamy, I had kept my
Imperial (...) unpolluted. But since I have caused my own and the Empire's
disgrace, I may thank my deserts if I reap the harvest of such ill seed I have
sown.

Theodorus, his son, about 33 years old, was saluted Emperor, in his stead,
who, in the beginning, renewed his Father's League with Jathathines the Sultan.
And with a puissant Army passed over into Europe to appease the troubles raised
in (...) and Thracia, by the King of Bulgaria, and Michael Angelus Despot of
Thessaly, who, in hope to join those Countries to their own, (...) to spoil
them, by whose coming they were glad to (...) (...) peace. But being advertised
from Nice that Michail Paleologus his Governor there, was secretly fled to the
Turks, he was not a little troubled. Paleologus gave out, that being brought by
his enemies into disgrace, and the Emperor, so filled with cunning complaints,
not easily in short time to be refelled, was the cause; and so willingly exiled
himself, fearing his heavy displeasure, to save his life from their malice: who
at Iconium found Jathatines making great preparation against the Tartars: who
running still on, spoiled much of the Turk's Territories in lesser Asia, lying
now at Axara. The Sultan now welcomed Baleologus, commending to his charge
some Bands of Greeks, which he had retained; as also other Latins, under the
conduct of Boniface a Venetian: so he set forward against the Tartars: who at
first sight of strange Ensigns and Soldiers, were much dismayed: Yet they had
with them a most bloody conflict, wherein that part standing against
Paleologus, being worsted, (...) about to flee, but the Sultan's Kinsman,
bearing him a grudge, revolting with his Regiment to the Tartars, the battle
was quite altered, the Tartars fighting like Lions; and the Victors were glad
to flee, a great number of them being slain. Paleologus and the General were
hardly chased, and glad to stand fighting often for their lives, with much
ado, after many days, recovered a Castle of the Generals. The Tartars
hazarding hereby the Turk's Kingdom, forraged all his Countries (...), so that
the discouraged Sultan fled to Theodorus for aid, who comforted him with such
small aid as he thought good, sending them home with him, for his safety, under
Isaac (...) Murzufle: who gave him Laodicea in recompense, yet, ere long, it
fell again into the Turks hands as not to be holden by the Christians. The
Sultan, too weak to withstand the Tartars, made a league with them for paying
them a yearly tribute. They are accounted, from this time, as their (...) and
Vassals.

Not long after, Paleologus was called home by the Emperor's Letters, with his
faith for security: who, before his return, was bound by Oath, to be loyal,
never to seek after the Empire, or cause new suspect of matters before charged,
but yield dutiful obedience to the Emperor, or his Successors. Whereupon he
was, again, Great Constable, living afterward in great honor with him. Who
reigning 3 years died, leaving John his Son, but six years old, to succeed him,
and commended him to Arsemus the Patriarch, and George Muzalo, as trusty
Tutors, together with the Empire. Muzalo, though of mean Parentage, was brought
up in the Court, as the Emperor's play-fellow, still ready to say or do what
might please him. And the elder they grew, they increased in mutual affection:
and he, as in greatest favor, was promoted to the greatest honors, and
married to the Emperor's nigh Kinswoman. An Oath of obedience unto the young
Prince, and them, as Tutors, was exacted of all sorts whatsoever, both before
and after the Emperor's death: for many Nobles murmured at Muzalo's sudden
fortune, many thinking themselves to have better right thereto, as of nearer Kin
to the Emperor; and fitter for such a charge than Muzalo, who, not honorably
born, and having been Theodore's minister of wrath against some Nobles, was to
be hated and contemned; and if be should now affect the Empire, he would spare
no villainy to effect his inordinate desire. Muzalo's wits being awakened with
these dangers, he called all the Nobility into the Court; courteously offering
to yield up both the Empires administration, and the tuition, to any one whom
they thought fittest for such a charge, which all refused, saying, He was to be
preferred, to whom the Lord of both had committed both: Muzalo (...) requested
the contrary, for fear, chiefly, of danger to ensue. But, would he or not, he
must take the charge on him. Now were all sworn with greater solemnity (the
third time) than before, wishing a shameful end to them and theirs, if they
failed to perform their obedience, etc. Yet 9 days were not fully past, but
some of the chief Nobility conspired the unworthy death of Muzalo: which was on
the Emperor's funeral day, in his Abbey at Maguesia; where, while the Hymns
were singing, etc. the Soldiers, before instructed by the Conspirator,
breaking into the Temple, with drawn swords, slew Muzalo, (at the Altar for
refuge) with Andronicus and Theodore his Brethren, and diverse others. The
mourning Matrons thronging out, fled as fast as they could: but the Priests and
Monks thinking to do the like were, by the Soulders, forced into the Temple,
and on the Pavement (slippery with blood) ended in fear those bloody Obsequies.
Arsemius, the only Tutor, was much troubled, for, though for learning and
integrity not inferior, yet, in state matters he was far to seek, and of no
great reach, yet wishing all well, he consulted with the Nobility, what were
best to be done for government of the Emperor and Empire, now Muzalo was dead.
Which, not being grounded on wise foresight, was more dangerous to the young
Emperor than the murdering swords. Michael (...), was also called to the
counsel, descended of the Comnen's house, a man very courteous and liberal,
winning all men's hearts thereby, especially the Commanders of the Army: of
whose aspiring many Rumors had formerly passed; yea, the Patriarch (on
special favor) committed to his trust the Keys of the common Treasury, when
money was to be paid out upon great occasions of State, the readiest way to
effect what he had long plotted; for he powered out the Mass of treasure
amongst the Nobility and Martial men, with others, and many of the Clergy
also. The Patriarch was, by his favorites, (who had many meetings) solicited,
though generally, to take order for the States good Government, which, as a
ship without a Master, was in danger to perish. Paleologus was then in every
man's mouth, as only fit to take the charge on him, till the Emperor came to
Age. Unto which the Patriarch gave consent; and so with a general contentment,
made him a Governor and Tutor. This was the first step whereby he mounted to
the Empire. Not many (...) after, it was alleged by his favorites in
Counsel, It was not seemly for a Tutor, and Governor of State, who was to hear
foreign Ambassadors, to want the honor next to an Emperor; whereupon he was
honored with the title of Despot. Shortly after, he was by certain great
favorites, near Magnesia, with great applause, saluted Emperor: Arsemius
being much troubled therewith, fearing what would become of the young child. He
thought it better by Oath to bind the Emperor and his makers not to seek his
life, nor to go about to deprive him, than to excommunicate them, which was
done. Within a month, the Patriarch persuaded, set the Imperial Crown on this
Usurpers head; not as still to enjoy the Empire, but according to present
necessity, till the child came of age, to whom he was then to resign. All being
confirmed by oath, good news was brought him of a victory obtained by his
brother John, against Michael Despot of Aetolia and Epirus; who hearing of the
Emperor's death, his Father in Law, with troubles in Asia, being aided by 2
others, entered Macedonia and Thracia, burning and spoiling the Country, and
thinking to take most to himself. The news he received when Crowned, the great
Commanders shortly bringing the Prince of Peloponesus and Achaia prisoners; who
gave to Paleologus for ransom, three of the best Cities of Peloponesus:
wherein he put strong Garrisons, and gained at length most of Peloponesus from
the Latins, shortly after purposing to besiege Constantinople with a great
Army; but, as too difficult, he left that, and besieged the Castle of Pera, on
the other side the haven, hoping (by winning that) to master the Town; but he was
forced to retire with loss. So fort fying diverse places thereabout, he charged
the Garrisons with incursions, to cut the Citizens so short, that they should
not dare look out. The (...) hereby were soon (...) to burn houses for fuel:
which done, he (...) to Nice.

Baldwin 2 of small courage and less power, now reigned in Constantinople; who
for maintenance; sold the public Ornaments of the City, and pawned his Son to
the Bruges Merchants, left by them at Venice to be brought up.

Mango great Cham of Tartary (now) being stirred by Aiton the Armenian King,
(through whom he received the Christian Religion) sent his brother Haalon with
an exceeding Army against the Turks in (...), and Palestine; who ((...) a
Christian) in 6 months overran all Persia; with the adjoining Countries,
except (as some say) Samarchand (afterward the seat of Tamerlaine) in the
mountains, which besieged with 10000 horsemen, was continued 27 years; and at
length, (as Aiton writes) yielded for want of clothes to cover the Defendants:
Haalon marching on (not missing the 10000) entering into Assyria besieging
Babylon, whose Caliph as Mahomet's true successor, was above all honored:
they from him receiving their Laws interpretation. (...) winning it, put all to
the sword, enriching his Soldiers with its spoil, and the Caliph's treasure;
commanding the Caliph to be set in the midest of the infinite treasure, saying
in derision, Such a (...) guest should be fed with naught but things of best
price etc. The covetous wretch thus kept certain days, dyed for hunger.
Babylon sacked and almost raced; the Tartar took Rhoais in Mesopotamia, where
Aiton came to him with 12000 horse and 40000 foot: So entering Syria took
Aleppo, which he sacked and razed in 1260. Then came Malacnesar Sultan of
Damasco, Syria, and Palestine, humbling himself before him, in hope to save
somewhat; but he was either carried far into exile, or (more probably)
afterward cut in pieces under Damasco, to his Sons terror, after a double
assault; yet he took it (together with that Kingdom) and sacked it,
overthrowing all the Mohammedan Temp es, as before he had done. But purposing to
conquer Palestine, (...) died, upon which news he returned back, after almost 6
years expedition, in hope of his brothers Empire. At which time the Christians
affairs might have been easily repaired, had the Western Princes put to their
helps, as did the Tartars; but they busied with wars and fatal discord let slip
that seldom or never so fair opportunity. Haalon left his Son Abaga with 20000
horsemen (...) the Christians if they should come; who, hearing of his Fathers
troubles at home, left Guirboca with 10000 horsemen, to like purpose; who was
with his Tartars, of a friend made a foe to the Christians: whose Soldiers
fetching booty out of the Tartars Territory, refused to restore it, and evilly
entreated those sent to demand it. (...) his Nephew being slain in farther
quarrels; who in revenge, took, sacked, and burnt down Sidon, and afterward,
doing the Christians all harm they could devise. This discord occasioned (...)
the Egyptian Sultan, with a great Army of Mamalukes, and others to enter
Syria, and spoil about Damasco; with whom Guiborcas joining battle with a
number far inferior, was slain with most of his Tartars: the rest, fleeing
into Armenia. Syria and Palestine, (...) hereby again to the Egyptian, except
few places which shortly also did. For Bandacader succeeding Melech, took
Antioch from the Christians, with most of the other places, he burnt the City,
and razed the Castle; and then did great harm in Armenia also.

The Turks Kingdom going to wrack in Syria, their affairs in lesser Asia, went
(...) then much better; for Jathatines having lost Iconium to the Tartars,
(...) fled to the Emperor (...), in hope to be relieved for the kindness he
before (...) him. fleeing from Theodore, he requested him, either with some
(...) to aid him, or (...) assign him some corner, where, with his wife
children and followers, with much wealth he might rest. The Emperor encumbred
with wars, thought not good to diminish his forces: and a place to inhabit in,
seemed as dangerous: because he a great Prince, was not like to be content with
a little; his dispersed Nobles hearing he was seared, being likely to resort to
him also: yet was loath unkindly to cast him off, Therefore with fair words, he
held him long in suspense. At length, in his absence, he was (...) (...) his
train, about 1200, to get to Aenus of Thracia by the Sea coast; where as an
honorable prisoner at large he lived, through watchful eyes, not able to
escape as he desired. Paleologus (after 2 years reign) sent Alexius
Strategopulus, against the Despot of Epirus, to repress his (...), with little
above 800 Bythinians, and to take up what he needed in Macedonia and Thracia,
commanding him to pass through the Suburbs of Constantinople, to terrify the
Latins; who passing over Propontis, encamped at Regium not far off; where
lighting upon poor laboring Greeks, dwelling in the City; he enquired of them
the state thereof, etc. who told him, their strength was small, and that most
thereof was at the siege of Daphnusia, a Town by the Euxian Sea: and, as ill
affected to the Latins government offered to show him a means of entrance into
the City, which was by an old Mine almost swarved up near the gate; this secret
way into the City, not being known to any other: promising by night to let in
(at this hole) 50 of his best Soldiers, etc. Few days after, by night, at an
hour appointed they received them, who aided by them and their (...), slew the
watch, and brake open the gate; whereby Alexius entering, and putting his men in
order, caused the (...) to be fired in 4 places, which terribly burning, was
come almost to the Emperor's Palace; who, awaked, and seeing the City all on
fire, perceiving it to no purpose to make head with his few Latins, fled with
the Patriarch and some others, into Euboca by Sea, and thence to (...):
afterward to (...) of France, hoping to be relieved by them. The chief Latins
fled after. Constantinople thus fell into the Greeks hands in 261, being
possessed by the Latins about 58 years.

This joyful news was soon carried to (...), who at first believed it (...), it
being by (...) weak a power surprised. But afterward, caused Hymns and Psalms
to be sung in every Temple, with all other signs of joy and triumph: So being
wholly busied in preparing for Constantinople, he, with his wife and Andronicus
his Son, 2 years old, entered the City on foot; and after prayers and thanks,
went to the Palace near the Tilt-yard: for the other, during the Latins reign,
had (...) ruinous and defaced. And shortly after, caused Alexius Caesar (the
Cities recoverer) in triumph, robes, and Crown of gold on his head, with great
pomp to be carried thorough the City; and that his name for one year should be
joined to the Emperors, in solemn prayers and (...): causing also his lively
Image, to be set on a Marble pillar, before the Apostles Temple, in perpetual
remembrance of him; which overthrown by an earthquake, was restored by his Son.
This great City, sometime the Worlds beauty, by the strange mutations, was
wonderfully defaced etc. for its beauty, when the Latins took it, was most
defaced by fire; who while they had it, ceased not to destroy some part or
other, as if they had known they should not long keep it: neither did this last
fire a little deform it; wherefore his chief care now was, to cleanse the City,
and first beginning to repair the Temples, then filling empty houses with
Inhabitants. Though the chief Latins were fled, yet most Tradesmen were
Venetians and Pisans; to whom to join the Genowaies and to sill the City, he
thought not altogether safe; but assigned them (...) now Pera, on the other fide,
to inhabit; with privileges and a Consul of their own over every Company;
storing (...) what he could with natural Greeks. But though all things went as
(...) could wish; yet fearing (such is the torment of usurping tyrants) lest
the smouldred anger of the Empires right heirs should break into open force,
and perhaps work his confusion: thought best to dispose so of Theodor's
children, that he might not stand in doubt. Besides Mary and Theodora, before
married to the Despot of Epirus, and the Prince of Bulgaria, other two younger
were in his custody, Theodora and Irene; whom he married to 2 Latins, one of
Peloponesus, the other to one of Genua, men of no great birth or power; John
the heir only remained but 10 years old, whom Paleologus (at first) sent into
Magnesia to be kept from Court, lest in his right, new stirrs dangerous to his
estate, should begin. The which the (...) took so ill, that he forsook all, to
spend his days in a little Monastery of the Piscasins, from whence (...) drew
him almost against his will, making him Patriarch of Constantinople; The
Usurper unmindful of his former faith given, (...) to establish him and his
posterity in the sovereignty, caused the young (...) eyes to be put out; for
which barbarous cruelty, Theodora his sister ceased not to stir up the Prince
of Bulgaria her husband in revenge. Jathatines also, weary of exile, entreated
him to war on the Emperor, promising him a great sum, if he might recover his
liberty; who with his own power, and above 20000 Tartars, sooner than could be
thought, over ran all Thracia, leaving neither man nor beast as he went: hoping
also to surprise the Emperor, returning from (...); but that he, in a Galley
of the Latins, put in by the Sea side to water, arrived safely in the imperial
City; wherefore the Bulgarian marching to Aenum, forthwith (being terrified)
they delivered the Sultan unto him. In his return, they drove before them such
numbers of men and cattle, that for a space, either (...) or beast was not to
be (...) in the open (...). Jathathines, carried over (...), and set at
liberty, soon died; whom Meleck his Son succeeded not, but two other Mescott and
Keicubades of the Selzuccian Family, as were all the Turks Sultans; betwixt
whom, Cazan the great Tartar for a yearly tribute, divided the Turks Kingdom:
unto Mescott the Cities of Amida in Galatia, Melasia in lesser Armenia, etc.
unto Keicubades, Iconium, with all Countries of lesser Asia along the Sea
coast. So that the Turks Kingdom, long flourishing in Persia, Syria, Palestine,
and Egypt, were overthrown by the Mamaluks and Tartars, and now brought under
in lesser Asia also; the 2 weak Princes reigning but at the devotion of the
Tartar. In which confusion, diverse of power, shared something of the declining
Kingdom; but many of the basest people (only with bows and arrows) with daily
incursions from the Mountains straits, much (...) the adjoining Christian
Countries, still gaining upon the Greeks what they lost to the Tartars; for the
frontier Garrisons, being for want of pay disbanded, and the Castles abandoned,
was at length a great ruin to the Greeks in lesser Asia. At length a great
power of them meeting in Paphlagonia to invade the Christians, Paleologus sent
a strong Army, to stay their further coming; which, by unskilfulness of
Captains, was by the Turks (who of purpose retiring, had drawn the Greeks into
danger of ambush) utterly (...), few or none of that multitude escaping. After
which victory, the Turks overran all the Country to the River Sanger, on
whose banks, Paleologus fortified diverse places to keep them out of Bithynia.
Yet they soon (...) all from Pontus and Galatia to the Lycian and Carian Sea,
to the River Eurimedon, dividing them (...) to Toparchies, little acknowledging
Mescot or Keicubades.

Many conflicts in the mean time, passed between the Mamalukes and Tartars, for
the Sovereignty of Syria. The poor Christians, in doubt of both, with the
Armenians, infested by the Mamalukes, sent diverse to the Pope and Western
Princes for help, whose prayers moved Lewis of France and Henry 3 of England
topromise them aid. Lewis took on him the Cross, causing Philip that succeeded
him, Peter, and John surnamed (...), (for his Mothers heaviness for her husband
in her delivery) his 3 Sons, and most Nobles to do the like; to whom the King
of Navarr and 2 others joined. He set forward from (...) March 1. 1270, staying
a while at (...), through force of weather, he arrived at Carthage (not the
ancient City, but another built after, in her ruins, or not far from them)
surprising certain ships in the Haven; but assaulting the Town, he was notably
repulsed. On a day, the Defendants making a fierce sally on the French, retired
by degrees, to draw their enemies on. The Constable coming and charging them
behind, and the retirers now standing, they were hardly beset, who made there a
great fight, not without extreme peril: which they in the City beholding,
hideously cried, astonying their friends and enemies. But the French
approaching a Bulwark on the Sea side, took it without resistance; at which
they without began to flee, and them of the Town (for their lives) yielded it
to the King. Carthage won, he besieged (...), being by the way encountered by
the Moors King, who losing 10000 men fled: resolving to keep within his (...)
walls if happily he might weaken his enemies by protacting time. Lewis resolved
not to stir thence, the City not seeming to hold out for want, considering the
peoples multitude; yet it held out 6 months straightly hemmed in every way;
after which, Ambassadors were sent to treat for Peace. But, the whiles a
furious (...) cut down the French by heaps, John Triftan his youngest Son dying
Aug. 25. 1270. The King shortly dyed of the Bloody flux; yet his brother
Charles (...) with fresh Soldiers, somewhat lightened the French, and daunred
the Moors. Edward, Henry of England's Son, came to (...) in 10 days, with a
brave Company. from (...), being joyfully received of the other Princes: who a
little before concluded a peace with the Moors King, upon his paying a yearly
tribute of 40000 Crowns to the King of Sicily, and suffering Christian Religion
to be freely preached in his Dominions, and the converts to be baptized, and c.
Edward what he might, dissuaded them from it, saying, They were enemies to the
Cross of Christ, etc. But the Peace concluded they said, they might not break:
and so hoysing sail, they returned toward Sicily, with purpose next Spring to
go into Syria. But being come nigh the Isle Drepanum, most of the great ones
went on Land in boats; for the ships being most of great burden, they could
not put in to the harbor. As they lay at Anchor, some were eaten up, some
perished by falling foul of each other, others beaten to pieces by a violent
tempest: above a 120 sail perished, with all the people, etc. only Prince
Edward's 13 ships escaped free without any loss. The Plague followed them at
Land, Theobald of Navarre and his Wife dying, Lewis his daughter, the French
Queen, with a number of others: so that Philip the French King, discouraged,
returned into France, as did the rest into their own Country. Only Edward at
Spring set forward to Ptolemais from Sicily: where, after a months rest,
marching with 6 or 7000 into the (...), (...) Nazareth, putting all to the
sword, and returned; killing afterward and putting to flight, his enemies
following and hoping for advantage. And about Mid-summer, killed above 1000
Saracens, and dispersed the rest, making head at Cackhow, about 40 miles off.
Aided by the Cyprians, he (with like success) made a 3d expedition: that for
his fame, they not a little dreaded him. But the Admiral of Joppa, one of the
Mohammedan Assassins, (...) it meritorious to kill any great enemy of their
(...), feigning a desire to become Christian, had sundry times secret
intelligence with the Prince: Who being searched, had access to him (lying,
through hear, on his bed bare-headed) and pulling out pleasing letters from his
Lord, which he read; but, the company voided, as he farther questioned with
him, he suddenly plucked out an envenomed knife secretly hidden, to strike him
into the (...); the Prince lifting up his arm was grievously wounded therein;
but as he went to double the stroke, he felled him to the ground with his foot,
and wresting the knife out of his hand, and hurt in the forehead, he presently
slew the murderer. The servants running in, one beat out the dead man's brains
with a stool, to the Princes displeasure. The wound in his arm began to
mortify after certain days dressing, that the Surgions, began to look
heavily; yet cutting out all the dead and poisoned flesh, they perfectly cured
him in 15 days after. The Sultan sent, calling his Prophet to (...), it was
not done by his consent; whose Ambassadors were not suffered to come nigh him.
So, no expected aid coming in 18 months, he returned homeward, traveling
from Apulia to Rome, and by France arrived in England; where, Henry a little
before dead, he was Crowned in 1272, Gregory 10th, knowing the Christians hard
state in Syria (being lately there with Edward) ratified the election of
Rodulph of Hapspurge, to the Empire, upon promise of giving them relief:
offering the Emperor also 200000 crowns with all tenths for 6 years, many
blessings being by the Preachers, in his name, promised to all taking on them
the holy war. Whereupon he, and shortly the Duke of Lorrain, and others took on
them the Cross; yet busied in other wars, and delaying so long and dangerous a
journey, the threatening Pope died, and nothing was done. At length the
Emperor, at some good leisure, sent Henry Prince of Meckelburg, (...) a strong
power, to perform what he had (...); who from Ptolemais, destroyed all with
fire and (...) about Damasco, carrying away rich booties, till circumvented by
the Mamalukes, he at Caire remained 26 years in prison, till a runagate German
being Sultan, demanded of him, If it would not do him good to celebrate the
Nativity of his Christ in Germany, the time being at hand? I know, said he,
thou respectest that more than liberty. Truth, said Henry, for liberty would
avail me nothing, if Christ by his Incarnation had not taken away our
Captivity: therefore I wish I could persuade thee how much all owe to the
remembrance thereof. God forbid (said the Sultan); for when I was thy Fathers
chief Engineer at Knesefenick, I was of the Christian persuasion; but leaving
that Error, I have also changed my fortune: but would thou gladly be free,
and return home to thy friends? Nature craveth it, said he, though fortune
(which yet depends of thy pleasure) gainsayeth, I must take thy denial in
good part, assuring my self, that my Wife and beloved Sons have long since
ended their mourning. Thou art (...) said the Sultan, etc. I owe much to thy
Father's remembrance, and therefore give thee thy liberty; furnishing him with
necessaries. He departed with one Martin his servant, with him all his
Captivity, and came to Ptolemais, and in the way to Cyprus was as a fugitive
taken by sea, and brought to the Sultan: who set him again at liberty, and
transporting him to Cyprus, where, as some say, furnished with all things fit,
he came to (...), traveling by Land into his Country; and at last, being
known by his own Children and friends, was joyfully received as their Father,
and as the Prince of his Subjects; shortly after dying. Thus it appears, what
notable expeditions the Princes of the West, undertook again Christ's enemies,
and for relief of the (...) Christians in Syria and Palestine. Diverse of them
had glorious success, some answered not with like event, etc. Yet even in more
zealous times, the Christian Princes (not feeling those harms so far off, and
more regarding their hereditary quarrels, could not be moved to reach their
helping hands unto their brethren crying out for aid. The Germans were jarring
about their Emperor's choice, The French agreed not with the English, nor the
Lowcountreymen: nor the English with the Scots: the Arragonians at odds with
the French; and in Italy, many deadly factions. Of which Melcohsares Egyptian
Sultan understanding, purposed to root out all the Christians in Syria and
Palestine, and join them to his own Kingdom, but sudden death hindered his great
designs. Alphix succeeding him, entering Syria, besieged Tripolis, and
undermining it, put all Christians to the sword, but those that by speedy
flight escaped, and raced it to the ground; this was April 9. 1289. Then he
took and garrisoned the Castle of Nelesine, to hinder them from building it
again. Likewise sacking and racing Sidon and Berytus; after three months siege
Tire was yielded to him, on condition of departing with bag and baggage. He
took (as without resistance) all strong holds in Syria and Palestine, except
Ptolemais the Christians Sanctuary, defended by the Knights and Templers: with
whom he voluntarily made a Peace for 5 years.

The Christians, as it were, faintly breathing by the late Peace, the 2 Grand
Masters, passed as Ambassadors to Pope Nicholas for his fatherly aid: who
solicited the Princes, especially Rodolph the Emperor for their relief; who
busied with affairs and troubles, gave good words, but no help. Some getting
money of their Subjects under that color, employed it to other uses: the Pope
entertained 1500 of his own charge, to whom many volunteers joined, who from
Brundusium with 2 Masters, arrived at Ptolemais: in which were 50000 able men,
and about 40000 weaker; among whom, diverse murders, felonies, etc. were
committed, unregarded saving by the injured, For all the chief Commanders were
then at variance, every one laying claim to the vain title of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem. Neither strove they less for the Government of the City. The Popes
Legate, the Patriarch, Templers and Hospitallers, French and English King, by
their Messengers: them of Pisa, the Venetians, the Germans, and Florentines,
pretended a right to, and endeavored for, the Government of the City. But the
greatest part, were inclined to the Armenians and Tartars, as most like to
stand them in stead: most of these deciding controversies in their own Laws and
Courts; where by the offenders removing their Suits as best served their turns,
every one might almost do what he list. Thus were murders and many outrages,
etc. done, to the hastening Cod's wrath, and grief of all good men. The
Soldiers of late sent thither, were enforced (for want of promised pay) to
take spoil in the Sultans frontiers contrary to the League: the Sultan desiring
restitution and the offenders to be delivered to him. But in a dying
Commonweal the Ambassadors were, not courteously heard; Wherewith the the
Sultan provoked, sent Araphus with 150000 men to besiege the City: who by a
Mine had soon overthrown a piece of the Wall; but was glad to retire from the
breach. Alphix now died at (...), the Mamalukes choosing (...) for their
Sultan, who was so far from raising his siege, that he more straightly beset it
than in the 3 months before. Peter, Master of the Templers, was chosen
Governor of the City, of great valor and experience: unto whom and the
Nobles, the Sultan offered great things so they would now yield the City: which
offer he rejected, telling him, He learned not of his Ancestors to sell a City
to Infidels, bought with so much Christian blood, etc. Wherewith he enraged,
next day so furiously assaulted it, as if he would have carried it; yet having
lost a number of men in assault, and a sally, he was forced to retire into his
trenches again. The Governor among other Christians lost, was wounded with a
poisoned dart, dying 3 days after, with whom the defendants courage fainted
also. Their weak and aged, were sent away to Cyprus at first of the siege; but
now (...) Captains, etc. discouraged, conveyed themselves away, a great
number of whom, were upon Cyprus coast (with the Patriarch) drowned. 12000
remained for defense of the City: who (some report) fled after, leaving it to
the enemy: others, that they valiantly defended it, till, most being slain or
wounded, the rest being driven to the Marketplace, defended themselves a
while, and fleeing to the ships were all cut off, or drowned. But however, the
Sultan giving the spoil to his Soldiers, burned it to the ground, and digging
up all foundations, left no sign of any City: but purging it of rubbidge, made
it fit to low Corn in, which he did to other Towns by the Sea coast, that they
should give the Christians no more footing there. Thus was their name utterly
rooted out of Syria and Palestine in 1291, about 192 years after the winning of
Jerusalem. Which loss as tending to a general disgrace, not a little moved the
greatest Christian Princes; yet, troubled with their affairs at home, and
neighbor Princes, none stirred for redress. Only Cassanes the great Tartar, at
the request of the Armenian Kings daughter, his Wife, a Christian, and his
Father in Law took it in hand: and with 200000 fighting men, the Armenians and
Georgians, overthrew (...) the Egyptian Lieutenant, not far from Hama in
Syria, 40000 Egyptians being reported to be flain, sending Molais to secure
him, who chased him over the desert sands into Egypt. Then he took Hama,
dividing the (...) treasures, and the spoil among his Soldiers, reserving but
a Sword and a Casket of secret Letters to himself. He took most Cities in
Syria, with Jerusalem, repairing many places, giving it to the Christian
Armenians, etc. repairing thither to inhabit; and returning, Damasco was
delivered to him. But purposing to destroy Aegypts Kingdom, he was certifyed of
troubles in Persia and other parts; wherefore he returned with most of his Army
thither, leaving Capcacus Governor of Damasco, (who had revolted to him from
the Sultan) and Molais of (...); commanding them to re-edifie Tire, and to send
to the Christian Princes, to join with them for holding those Countries. Tire
was repaired and garrisoned; but the Ambassadors coming to proud Pope Boniface
8th; could obtain naught of him. For he then by excommunication, and
discharging the Subjects loyalty to Philip of France, had given his Kingdom to
Albert Duke of Austria, declaring him Emperor, whereof great troubles arose.
And being also of the Guelphes faction, was careful to extinguish the
Guebellines, especially the Family of the Columnii, some of whom he had slain,
deprived, imprisoned, and exiled: hereby not at leisure to further the
Christians good; but being suddenly taken prisoner at his Fathers house in
Anagnia, by Sara Columnius, sent by the French King, and Longarett a French
Knight, he was brought into St. Angelo Castle in Rome, and in 35 days died,
renting himself (some report) with his teeth, and devouring his fingers for
madness. Cassanes was of a very short stature, and hard-favour; but the valor
and virtue of his mind, recompensed the want of his feature: After whose
departure, Capcaeus, considering no aid was to be expected from the Christian
Princes, revolted a new from the Tartar, drawing Damasco and most of Syria
after him: Molais was about to go against him; but Capcacus having compacted
with the Egyptian Sultan also, as too weak, he retired with his Tartars into
(...), exspecting supplies from Cassanes and the King of Armenia. The Sultan
the mean while, took Jerusalem forsaken of the Inhabitants, sparing only
Christ's Sepulcher at the suit of the religious. Then he won all less Towns,
and raced all Castles, and forts of the Hospitallers and Templers; who, of
themselves, held out almost a year, most being slain, the rest abjuring Syria
(for ever) by Oath, had leave to depart with bag and baggage; who for 300 years
had worthily defended the Christians and their Religion against the Infidels,
and now for ever (...) out about 1300. Wherefore leaving Syria and the holy
Land, though 'twere likely enough to be recovered again, had not Cassanes died,
and the Tartars domestic troubles (...), We will return to the Turks troubles
in lesser Asia, not thinking it good to break off abruptly; but to make the
reader partaker of its heaviness. Mescot and Ceicubades, kept in awe by the
Tartar, died as they lived, almost buried in obscurity. Mescot died without
issue; but Ceicubades left his Son Aladine 2d, who united the divided Kingdom,
paying also tribute to the Tartar. Aladine did not much, yet the Tartar's power
began in his time to decline: he was of a quiet spirit, and a great friend to
Othoman. But he dying without issue, Sahib his chief Couusellor, aspired to the
Kingdom: which he could neither long hold, or deliver to his posterity; for
many of the Nobility, envying at his honor, laid hold, some on one Country,
some on another, erecting greater or lesser Satrapies, and absolutely
commanding over so much as by strong hand they could hold; Wherein they shared
so well for themselves, that Sahib was shortly thrust out of all; and the Turks
Kingdom in lesser Asia, become an Anarchy. The greatest sharer herein, was
Caraman Alusirius, who took to himself Iconium the Regal Seat, with all
Cilicia, etc. and Antioch upon Meander. All which was afterward of him called
Caramania: whose successors strove long with the Othoman Sultans for
sovereignty, till by the greatness of the Othoman Empire, theirs, with all the
rest, were swallowed up. Next to him was (...) or Sarchan, of whom Joma
Maritima is yet called (...). The most part of Lydia, etc. fell to Calamus and
his Son (...), called of him, Carasia. Aidin. possessed most of ancient Misia,
etc. of him called Aidinia. Some part of Pontus, with diverse Cities near the
Euxine, and Paphlagonia, fell to the Sons of (...), or Amar; but is commonly
called Bolli of a City there so named: as was (...), so called from the City
Mendos or (...). To prosecute all Toparchies nlesser Asia were tedious. It
suffices for showing the Turks Anarchy, and their Kingdoms ruin there, to
remember these. All those that shared the Aladinian Kingdom, were of the better
sort of Turks; who under the Selzuccian and Aladinian Sultans driven out of
Persia, had here seated themselves; amongst whom, most Writers reckon Othoman
for one; but he held no more of Aladin's Kingdom than one poor Lordship, called
Suguta in Bythinia, (before given to his Father for his good service) with
other small holds, as himself gained from his weak Christian neighbors; For he
was not of the Selzuccian family, as were the rest, but of another Tribe; and
therefore they envied the sudden rising of this Oguzian Turk, being as it were
a mere stranger to them: whose fortune for all that they seemed to fear, as
dangerous (in time); wherein they were not deceived. But more being to be said
of him hereafter, we leave him with the rest unto their (...), So concluding
this part of our general History.

The LIVES of the Othoman KINGS and EMPERORS; faithfully gathered out of the
best Histories, both Ancient and Modern: and digested into one continuate
History,
The Rising of the Great and Mighty Empire of the Turks, under Othoman first
Founder thereof: With his Life and doings.
THe foundation of this so great a Kingdom, and now an Empire, was first laid
by valiant Othoman or Osman, not descended of the Selzuccian Family; but of the
(...) Tribe, in whose Line it has for 303 years wonderfully flourished; and so
yet at this day under Mahomet 3. But seeing he, and the Othoman Kings and
Emperors, took their beginning from this warlike Othoman, with whose life and
doings we purpose to begin this part of our History; it shall not be amiss a
little farther to fetch his race and descent also.

When the Turks Kingdom flourished in Persia in the Selzuccian Princes, there
was another small one at the City Marchan, over which reigned one Solomon, at
the same time that the Tartars under old Zingis bare down all before them; and
overthrowing the Turks Kingdom at Balch in Persia, drove them with their King
Cursumes out of their Country, they reigning 172 years from Tangrolipix.

Solomon was of the Oguzian Tribe, a family famous also among the Turks, who
seeing (...) beaten out, and Babylons Caliph overthrown, thought good by speedy
flight with such as would follow him, to provide for his safety: and in hope of
like fortune with Aladin (...) of the Selzuccian Family, (who by force had
honorably seated himself in Romania (...)) and accounting all well gotten from
the Christians, took his way after him; and coming to the City (...) seated
himself with many followers thereabouts, who (as the Tartar Nomades) still
removed up and down their tents and carts, feeding their cattle; as do the
(...) Nation in many parts of Asia at this day: being not only called Nomades,
that is, Heards-men (as the Janissaries will often call the greatest Turks in
contempt) but Hamaxophetie and Hamaxobii, that is, people carried or living in
Carts. Solomon staying a while there, removed to Amasia, where, by spoiling,
encountering the (...) in field, and seazing on their Towns, (...) had subdued a
large Territory: at length having lost a great number, and wearied the rest;
fearing also with the small power left, he could not keep that already gotten,
he thought best to seek better Fortune elsewhere. It was now rifely reported,
the Tartars fury was well abated in Persia: wherefore Solomon resolved to visit
his native (...). So passing through Syria he seized on Ziabercala Castle; there
staying for refreshment. Afterward setting foreward, he came to the River
Euphrates, but finding no means to get over, he stood still as dismayed.
Solomon in this perplexity; (...) taking the River to find passage, adventuring
too far was with the streams force carried away, and (with his horse) drowned.
Whose body at length found, was buried by his people (...) Ziaber Castle. Some
of whom, seated themselves thereabouts. The rest went some to the (...) of
Arabia and Syria, called the Damascene Turcomans: others returned into Romania,
of whom are the Turcomans of Iconium and Anatolia: who yet wander up and down,
in manner of their Ancestors. Solomon left 4 sons, Sentur, Token; (...),
Ertogrul, (the Father of Othoman) and Dunder. Ertogrul and Dunder, marching
along Euphrates, came to Pasin (...) where, with 400 families, they (...) with
tents and carts. Sentur and Iundogdis returned (passing the River) into Persia;
where we leave them. Ertogrul, etc. had diverse conflicts with the people
thereabouts, till he thought best to return into Romania. So he came from
Ancyra, and the black (...), to the plain Sultan Ungi, about 75 miles Eastward
from Nice, where he had many skirmishes with the Christians.

Now Aladin the Elder (of whom before) had subdued diverse great Countries in
lesser Asia, and was named by the Turk's (...) Padischach, that is, their great
King or Emperor. Ertogrul having 3 sons, Iundus, Sarugatin, and Othoman, sent
Sarugatin unto him, to grant his poor exiled Countrymen some small corner for
them, their Families, and Cattle, to rest in. The Sultan (not unmindful of his
own distress) courteously used the Messenger. And it fortuned, that this
Sultan, (troubled in lesser Asia by the Tartars) had Sharp conflicts with them;
in one whereof, he was in danger to lose the day: but Ertogrul coming unlooked
for with 400 men on the Tartars backs, so forcibly charged them, and the
Sultans men fighting now with (...) courage, they fled after, which, The Sultan
honorably welcomed Ertogrul, and gave him and his Turks a Village called
Suguta in greater Phrygia, in which they might live in Winter, and feed their
cattle on the mountains. (...) and Ormenius in Summer, he also committed to
his protection his Kingdoms Frontiers where he dwelt, by whose care and
prowess the before infested Country was well secured.

Ertogrul (become a petty Lord of a Country Village) thus living certain years;
it fortuned that the Christians of Carachisur Castle fell out with him, evilly
entreating him and his people, of which their ingratitude and wrongs, he so
complained to the Sultan that he in person with a great Army besieged the
Castle. But the Tartars entering and spoiling Caria, and taking Heraclea, he
rofe with his Army, yet leaving sufficiency for the siege under Ertogrul Beg.
The Sultan overthrew the Tartars at Baga, whilst Ertogrul took the Castle,
sending the 5th of the spoil for a present to the Sultan, with the Captain of
the Castle: who was again restored to his Castle paying a yearly tribute; but
the Sultan, after 2 years, dying, he revolted.

(...) dying at Iconium, Azatinus his eldest Son succeeded, after him
Iathatines his younger; who slain by Lascaris, Iathatines, Azatines son,
succeeded, who was expulsed and subdued by the Tartars; after which the
Selzuccian Family scarce retained the shadow of their (...) Majesty. In which
confusion Ertogrul kept close in Suguta, keeping peace on every side, sweetly
passing over the troublesome times of Mescot and (...), till the 2d Aladin the
last heir of the Iconian Kingdom, and contenting himself with a little, bare
himself kindly toward all: who with his 3 Sons, were greatly beloved of their
Neighbors, and favored by Aladin then Sultan, his sons visiting him often
with one present (...) another. In Othoman was greater courage and spirit to be
seen than in the other two brethren, and was especially of the youthful and
warlique sort most regarded, who when he hawked or hunted, etc. resorted unto
(...) and called by them Osman the Warlique.

Aladin had in this frontier Countty, diverse governors of his strong holds:
unto whom Othoman for friendshipsake resorted, especially, to the Captain of
Mungi to him very welcome. On a time, as Othoman was going to Eskichisar Castle
to make merry; at Itburne he saw a fair Maiden called Malhatun, to whom he sent
a secret friend to entreat of marriage, who answered, there was great
inequality of birth betwixt her and Othoman, etc. but one cause of this answer
was, because some had put in her head, that Othoman meant under that color to
obtain a few days pleasure with her, and afterward to cast her off: which was
far from his thoughts. And going again to Eskichisar, chanced to fall in speech
of his love, commending her beauty, etc. and not dissembling the repulse
received at her hands; which the governor hearing, said, she was by divine
providence appointed for him only. But secretly inflamed, he began to grow
amorous of her himself, whom he had not seen. Othoman by conjectures and tokens
perceiving the same, who yet dissembling the matter, secretly sent a trusty
servant to some of the Maidens friends, to send her farther off, least she were
taken from them, by a great man more amorous of her person, than respectuous of
her honor: by and by betaking himself to the Captain of Mungi; his dear
friend. But whilst he there stayed passing the time in disports, the governor
of Eskichisar, sent one to see (...), and how things went; who certifying his
master, that by Othomans advertisement she was conveyed afar off, being
exceedingly grieved and fretted: he sent to the Captain of Mungi, to command
him forthwith to deliver Othoman unto him. But he could not be persuaded so to
do: Wherefore the Governor came with the greatest power he could to the
Castle, requiring him. After much consultation, it was resolved by the Captain
and Soldiers, that he should be defended, who could not without their great
infamy be delivered: But Othoman terrified with the diversity of opinions at
the first; deeply conceired by a sudden sally, to make way through them. And
with (...) and his few followers, brake through by plain force, notably
repulsing his pursuers toward Suguta. But being come into his Fathers
Territory, such as loved him well, presently came to his rescue, slaying, and
putting to flight, the Governors Soldiers. Among those taken, was Michael
Cossi, a Christian Captain of a little Castle, called Hirmencaia: whom Othoman
pardoned. Who ever after took part with him, and did him great service: whose
posterity, even till this Age, is, next to the Othoman Family, most honorable
among the Turks.

Ertogrul shortly died, in 1289, living 93 years, and governing the Oguzian
Family 52: whole body was honorably buried at Suguta. After his death they
doubted whom to make choice of for their Governor, yet thinking it better to
chose Dunder, Othoman's Uncle, for his gravity and experience, than Othoman,
who for gifts of body and mind was to be preferred before his Brethren, for his
young Age suspected. But Dunder foreseeing what danger the Oguzian State stood
in, through the hatred of the Greeks; and not surely backed by the Iconium
Sultan's growing weaker and weaker, said, those inconveniences required the
help of a wise, vigilant, and valiant man, such as they knew Othoman was. Thus,
he in private declated his mind: and, at the general assembly, (by his example
to encourage others) saluted him their great Lord, promising him all loyalty;
whereunto ensued the great applause of the people, as to a Governor sent them
by God. Thus Othoman was great Governor of the Oguzian Turks, and named Osman
Beg, or, Lord Osman. Yet this honor was included in a small, plain, and homely
circuit: Amongst which rude Heardsmen, (...) (not far exceeding the rest in
Civility) commanded much like Romulus, of whom the Turks report many things, as
the Romans do of him.

Othoman fell first at odds with Hagio Nicholaus, Captain of Einegiol Castle,
for molesting these Oguzians in passing with their Cattle by his Castle.
Wherefore he requested the Captain of Belizuga Castle, that his people might
take refuge in his Castle with their goods and Cartell upon occasion: who, with
this proviso, That none should come in but the women only, easily granted it;
which courtesy Othoman refused not. The women usually presented the Captain
with one Country present or other, which afterward was the loss of the
Castle. Yet Othoman purposing to be revenged on the other Captain, chose 70
most able men, secretly to pass Ormenius, and (if possible) to surprise or
fire Eigeniol Castle. The wary Captain laid a strong ambush upon the mountain
to cut them off: Othoman, no less wary, with an augmented number, marched to
the place where they lay; where many were on both sides slain, Hozza, Othoman's
Nephew, being one. Yet Othoman, having the victory, his people fed their
Cattle in summer in more safety, quietly passing to and fro. Othoman shortly
after surprised (by night) the Castle Chalce, putting all the Christians to the
sword. The Christians adjoining (much grieved) complained to the Captain of
Carachizar, that these Turks, who were of pity received into that Country,
began now to lay hands on the Christians possessions, which if suffered, they
would in short time drive both them and all the rest out of their native
Countries, and c. The Captain being moved, speedily sent a strong company,
under his Brother Calanus, to join with the Christian forces at Einegiol.
Whereof Othoman understanding, marched to Opsicium in Phrygia, where was fought
a sharp battle, Sarugatin his Brother, with many Soldiers, being lost. Calanus
was also slain, whose intrails Othoman pulled out, naming his burying place,
Mesari Repec, that is, The Dog-Grave. His Brother he honorably buried at
Suguta. Aladin was very sorry for Othoman's loss, and gave him the City
Paleapolis, with the Territories belonging, with leave to besiege Carachizar,
sending him Soldiers and Munition: who straightly besieging it, won it, and
slew all the Christians, cruelly executing the Captain; giving his soldiers
the spoil, except the 5th part to the Sultan. (This was in 1290.) This, with
other Castles, was either in Phrygia the greater, or in Bythinia, and the
confines of Mysia, where the Christians lived mingled with the Turks; at
continual jars, till by them they were extinguished.

Othoman, thus inconraged, and by the Sultan supported, cousulted with his
Brother Iundus, of the best way to subject the Christians. Iundus advised him
to urge his fortune with all speed, and to invade them, discouraged with
Carachifar's loss. But Othoman said, The Castles and c. must be kept with
strong Garrisons, elle they will be again recovered: which Garrisons cannot be
maintained, if we dispeople the adjoining Countries: I think better that we
make a league with the Christians about us, which we will keep or break, as
shall serve our purpose. And he made a peace with all, chiefly with Michael
Cossi, who became also a Mohammedan. This he did the rather, for the envy of
Germean Ogli, a Salzuccian, who (as others) sought by all means to hinder his
greatness. Who to strengthen his new Commonweal, built a fair Temple in
Carachizar, for Mohammedan Religion, appointing Markets, and granting
privileges to all that resorted to his great Towns, using great Justice, so
that all sorts furnished Towns and Countries with all necessaries: but his
aspiring mind had always a greater care to enlarge his Territories, whom
Michael Cossi so politickly directed, in his inroad into Bythinia that he
returned with great spoil and more honor. The Christians thereabouts were now
loath to give him any offense, lest he should spoil them.

About his time the Captains of Belizuga and Cuprichisar falling at odds, he of
Cupriehisar first invaded him of Belizuga: who praying Othoman's aid, he
presently came with companyes of lusty Soldiers: whereby he of Belizuga set
upon his enemy, and by Othoman's help, the other fled to his own Castle, diverse
being on both sides slain: when Othoman besieging him, took his Castle, and
slow him. He of Belizuga was so proud of the victory, (though most gained by
the Turks) providing a great feast for him and his followers: that, giving
Garments of great price to Othoman, in token of his favor, rewarding also his
soldiers, but all with a presumptuous grace, he offered the Turk's common
Soldiers his hand to kiss: wherewith Othoman was so offended that he could
scarce hold his hands from him; yet he secretly imparted the disgrace to his
Cousin Dunder, inquiring of him how the Captain was to be corrected for it:
who, being the Captain's Lieutenant, told him, That, seeing Germean Ogli was
their enemy on one side, and all the Christians would be in his neck if he
offered him any wrong, nothing was then to be attempted. Othoman hereby
perceiving his Cousin's affection to him, and lest the mischief should by him
be revealed or hindered, slew him suddenly with his bow.

Michael Cossi, not long after, concluding a Marriage between a Gentleman and
his daughter, invited all the Christian Captains thereabouts thereto: and the
rather to grow in acquaintance with Othoman; hoping that at that merry meeting,
all being made friends, every one might possess his own without fear of
Othoman, whose gifts exceeded all the other Guests, giving also to the new
married folks, flocks of Sheep and Cattle; so that, the Captains saying,
Othoman's wealth portended some great matter, etc. they thought best, secretly
to compass his death: theexecution whereof they referred to him of Belizuga:
whose ill disposition though Othoman long perceived, yet he in show honored
him, and debased himself in comparison. But the Captain told Othoman that he
intended to marry the Captain of Jarchiser's daughter, requesting him to honor
it with his presence, and c. a color to bring Othoman into danger: who, near
the time, sent thither fat Oxen and Sheep, in Iundus his name, certifying him
Othoman himself would be present, with such presents as his poor ability could
afford. The Captain now surely hoped his devised treachery would take effect:
and therefore requested Michael Cossi to bring Othoman to the marriage, which
he knew Cossi might easily do, sending him by Cossi a present of gilt plate.
Cossi found him very willing to go; but being moved with compassion, he
discovered the Captain's Conspiracy against him, willing him to take heed to
himself, for which Othoman greatly thanked him, rewarded, and c. At thy return
(says he) tell him I am bound to him for many courtesies, chiefly for
protecting my goods and cattle within his Castle, which I request may be
continued for a year longer by reason of my wars with Gormean Ogli: wherefore I
will presently send to his Castle things I most reckon of: and tell him
further, my Wife and her Mother desire to be acquainted with the Lady his
Mother, whom (if he please) I will bring with me to the Marriage. When the
Captain understood his request by Cossi, he sent him back to hasten his coming,
and to bring what Guests he pleased. Because the Castle was too little for the
expected multitude, there was another place appointed, about 3 miles distant.
Othoman had accustomed to send his best things in packs to Belizuga Castle, but
now instead of household stuff, and c. he thrust in armed men, chargeing the
carriages to come thither before twilight. Then he apparelled some of his best
Soldiers in Women's apparel, as his Wife and Mother in Law with their Women: So
contriving it, that they and the packs might at one instant meet at the Castle.
The Captain thought his late coming was because the Turkish Women shun the
sight of Christian men. Othoman (being come unto the marriage place) requested
the Captain that his Gentlewomen might lodge conveniently, in his Castle,
apart, according to their homely fashion, lest the presence of such Gallants
might put them out of countenance, which the Captain granted, saluting them
afar off. The packs and the disguised Soldiers came (...) at a time: where
when they were entered, the Soldiers suddenly leapt out of the packs, and with
the help of the disguised, slew the Warders (for most were gone to the marriage
place) of the Castle, possessing the same. Othoman (the Captain taking his
chamber) took horse, with Cossi, and his followers, to Belizuga, whom the
Captain presently pursued with his train, most being drunk; whom Othoman in the
conflict slew, putting the rest to flight. Early in the morning also he
surprised Jarchiser Castle with the Captain and his daughter (which was to have
been married the next day) with all her friends; whom he shortly married to his
Son Orchanes, who had by her Amurath I. and Solomon Bassa. He presently sent
one Durgut Alps, of great valor, to besiege Einegiol Castle, who used such
speed, that he environed it (that none could pass in or out) till Othoman,
setting all in order at Belizuga, came with the rest to Einegiol, which he
presently took by force, cutting the Captain his enemy in small pieces, for
they had used the like tyranny against the Turks.

Now began Othoman to execute the Justice of good Laws to all, both Christians
and Turks, his Subjects, and to protect them from the spoil of others: whereby
those who forsook their Country, through troubles, repaired to their (...)
dwellings, and also many strangers; whereby the wasted Country soon grew
populous. Then he besieged Isnica (called Nice) in Bythinia: this City (by
placeing his men on every passage in forts, that nothing could be brought in
for relief) he greatly distressed; the Citizens, in extremity, certifyed the
Emperor of Constantinople, that they must (except present relief came) famish
or yield. The Emperor embarked certain companies for relief; of whose landing
Othoman understanding, lay in ambush with most of his forces near the place,
and slew most of them, driving the rest into the Sea, where they perished.
Othoman returning, most straightly besieged it, whose Citizens, now despairing,
yielded that great and rich City to him, with whose spoil he enriched his men.
Of whose good success Aladin hearing, sent him a fair Ensign, Drums, and c.
saying that all should be his own that he took from the Christians, and
public prayers to be said for Othoman's health, etc. the Sultan's
proprieties. This made many think, that the Sultan intended (having no
Children) to adopt him his successor: who (...) to Aladin the 5th part of (...)
spoil, but during his life, used not his princely honors; intending (...) to
visit the Sultan. But (being about to (...) forward) he was informed of
Aladin's death, and that Sahib had taken on him his dignity: which news much
discontented him, being in hope to succeed him, or share in most part of his
Kingdom. Yet he thought it now fit to take the princely honors, granted him
by the Sultan in his life: wherefore he made Dursu Fakiche Bishop of
Carachisar; who first, by his command, made public prayers for Othoman as was
went to be for the Sultan; coining also money in his own name, and taking all
the honors of a Sultan; which was about ten years after (...)'s death, in
1300, to which time the Turkish Empire under Othoman is to be referred. Then he
made his Son Orchanes princely Governor of Carachisar, and his chief followers
Governors of Castles. He chose Neapolis to be his regal seat, calling it
Despotopolis, that is, The City of the Lord: yet he (...) not to augment his
Kingdom, but (accompanied with Orchanes) surprised adjoining places, serving
best for its enlargement.

The Christian bordering Princes, fearing Othoman's greatness might shortly be
their confusion jointly invaded his Kingdom with fire and sword, who meeting
them in the confines of Phrygia and Bythinia, fought with them a great battle,
many on both sides being (...), and obtained a bloody Victory. Castaleanus one
of the greatest Christians was slain; another, called Tokensis, he chased to
Ulubad Castle not far off, who, for fear, was delivered him by the Captain, and
afterward cut in pieces in view of his chief Castle, which (with the Country
thereabouts) Othoman subdued. The other Princes fled into holds farther off.
The Prince of Bithynia fled into Prusa, (now Burusa) which Othoman hoped to
win: but finding it impossible, he, in one year, built 2 strong Castles on the
chief passages of the City, placeing two courageous Captains therein; thus
blocking up Prusa, he subdued Bythinia, and so returned home; honorably
rewarding his Soldiers, and establishing such Government, that people resorted
from far into his Dominions: which in few years became very populous, and he
most famous. So living in great quietness certain years, now being old and
troubled with the Gout, his old Soldiers came to him with one request, To take
some war in hand for enlarging his Kingdom, offering to spend their lives in
his service, etc. For which he thanked them, promising he would not be long
unmindfull of their request. But to make all safe at home first, he calls to
him Michael Cossi, (the only Christian Captain he suffered to live in quiet)
to persuade him to follow Mahomet, which if he refused, he would war on him as
his utter enemy. Cossi not thinking of what ensued, came with such Soldiers as
he thought to use in his intended service: but hearing the cause, and seeing
the danger, (...) Othoman's hand, he requested him to enter him in Mahomet's
principles, which he promised ever after to embrace: so saying certain words
after Othoman, he turned Turk, Whereupon Othoman (...) him an Ensign and rich
Robe, and assured Token of his favor: Who, after this, to content his
soldiers, took many bordering Castles, (...) all unto the Euxine Sea: and
being now aged and diseased, as aforesaid, he often sent Orchanes against his
enemies, who achieved many great enterprises, his Father yet living.

The Reader may happily marvail, why Paleologus, and afterward his Son
Andronicus, suffered the Turks, not Othoman, but the sharers of Aladin's
Kingdom, to take spoil, kill, and encroach, especially, in Bythinia, as it
were under their noses: But let him here consider the trouble of that declining
Empire, and he shall plainly fee the causes of its decay. (...) Paleologus by
treachery obtaining the Empire, and (...) Constantinople from Baldwin, ((...) is
declared) fearing the Western Princes, especially the King of Sicily, whom
Baldwin solicited for his restitution, and to marry his daughter to his Son:
to entangle Charles with troubles nearer home, he offered to Geregory X. Bishop
of Rome, to conform the Greek Church to the Latin, and that it should be (...)
to appeal to Romes Court, as to the higher: of which the Pope gladly accepted,
promising to keep Charles otherwise busied. But when this alteration in the
Greek Church should be nade, the (...) gave up his place, retiring to a
Monastery, where he spent the remainder of his life. The other Clergy (...)
their Sermons inveighed against it, persuading the people not to receive it,
etc. So that all the City and (...), was in an uproar: for many of the chief
(...) also abhorred these proceedings: Whereby Paleologus, leaving foreign
(...), was forced to turn all his (...) and study to (...) domestic troubles:
first persuading his Subjects, that this alteration was not made for any good
liking he had thereto, but for the danger of time; for (said he) if the enemies
should come, the City in many places rent or but lately repaired, etc. then
they would be Lords not of our Religion and Ceremonies only, but of Wives and
Children, and whatever we have, etc. With which persuasion, some were
contented; (...) others not, whom he imprisoned, banished, tortured, etc. using
all means to move their minds. All which, some with patience endured; but the
greater part, the Refuse, ran rogueing abroad, as men persecuted for their
conscience, out of the Emperor's Jurisdiction; some taking the names of
Arsonius his Disciples, some of Joseph's, and some of others. Wherewith the
Emperor was so encumbred, that he had no leisure to provide against the Turks:
whose deep devices in aspiring, and travels in assuring, the Empire, with
altering his Father's Religion, yielded him not so much as an honorable
burial. For, dying not far from Lysimachia, he was, by his Son Andronicus his
command, obscurely buried in a field a good way from his Camp, as unworthy of
better sepulture for revolting from the Religion of his Ancestors, though his
Obsequies were afterward, for fashion sake, with some solemnity, celebrated.

Andronicus Paleologus succeeding his Father, and thinking, by restoring the
Churches government and rites, to appease all troubles before raised, found
them no less than his Father's, for they that liked the Latinos Customs
obstinately defended them: the other faction countenanced by the Emperor,
insulted on them without measure: whereof arose exceeding stirs, chiefly in the
beginning of his reign. The Turks ceasing not to increase their Territories in
Asia, but also in the Mediterranean Islands. For Andronicus, delivered of the
greatest fear (by Charles of Sicily's death, for which he and his Father
maintained a strong Fleet of Galleys) now persuaded by some to spare that
needless charge (as they termed it), had discharged all his Seamen, and laid
all the Galleys up in one Creek or another. The Mariners went several ways
to seek a living in foreign Countries, where some gave themselves to Husbandry;
which at the first seemed very profitable to the Emperor, till many great
mischiefs were (too late) found hereof. For, besides the Turks doing great harm
at Sea, the Pirates took the spoil of Mediterranean Islands, robbing all Towns
along the Sea coast; and came with their Galleys (as in contempt) even close to
the City: yea, the Venetians (on small displeasure) rifled the Suburbs.

Then also Andronicus had a jealous suspicion of his brother Constantine's
aspiring to the Empire, seeking to win the love of all, especially the Nobility
at home and abroad: which were thought but mear slanders maliciously devised.
The grounds of this suspicion were, That from his childhood, he was (for many
causes) better beloved of his Father than Andronicus; so that he could
willingly have left him his successor: that his Father in his life, thought to
separate Thessaly and Macedonia from the Empire, and make him absolute Prince
thereof. Andronicus dissembled his secret hatred 3 years after his Fathers
death. The mean time, Constantine bountifully bestowed the profit of his great
revenues on all sorts, and with sweet behavior won their hearts. He that
blames Constantine for the two first, (they not proceeding of himself) should
do him wrong: but if (not experienced) he gave such gifts as beseemed the
Emperor himself, he ignorantly erred: but if he knew that therefore he could
not be unsuspected, he was greatly blameable; for he should have considered,
how many, such like doings had brought to untimely ends. Constantine lived in
Lydia, lately married, not past 30 years old: whom the Emperor, passing into
Asia, secretly resolved suddenly to oppress. And at his coming, Constantine,
not fearing it, was, with all his favorites and Michael Strategopulus, clapped
in prison, their Lands, etc. being first confiscate. But the Turks (those men
who defended the frontiers on the East side of Meander being laid fast) finding
none to withstand them, forraged all beyond the River, and also passing it did
great harm: so that the Emperor must make choice of some other worthy (aptair,
those his Cities and Countries being in danger by the Incursions of the Turks.
There was in Court Alexius Philanthropenus a valiant young Captain: whom the
Emperor chose to defend his frontiers in Asia, joining to him, Libadarius, an
old experienced one: the one governed the Cities of Ionis; the other, the
frontiers along Meander. Alexius, by many victorious conflicts, soon became of
great fame, being also very bountiful and courteous unto all. Thus, all things
prospering with him, the bordering Turks, more moved with his courtesy, than
fearing the Tartars, came to him with their Wives, etc. many serving in his
Camp. Libadarius envying thereat, suspected left he should proudly aspire to
the Empire, and so first begin with him. Alexius had certain companies of
Cretensians, whom he trusted above others, using them for his Guard, who, in
hope by his advancement to raise themselves, persuaded him speedily to take it
on him, the conceit of which would be no less danger than entering the action
it self, as he might see by Constantine and Strategopulus: which quick
suggestions wrought in him diverse and contrary motions. At length, the
perswaders prevailed with him; yet, at first, he forbade any to mention him in
the Army as Emperor: which caused the Cretensians almost to force the imperial
Ornaments forthwith upon him; For (said they) delay would but fill the
Soldiers heads with doubts, and disourage them with fear of an uncertain
event: all which, whether fearing the great danger, or thinking how, first, to
circumvent Libadarius, moved him not so to do. Libadarius and the Emperor (both
disquieted) had soon the report of his designs: Alexius turned from Libadarius
to follow after the Emperor's Brother Theodorus not to be feared, who (warned
by his Brother Constantine) lived in Lydia far from Court: unto whom Alexius
fearing many would (in the hurly burly) resort, thought best to make him sure,
and afterward to oppress Libadarius. But he (of great experience) by
gathering all possible coin of his own and friends, sending also for the
Emperor's treasure to Philadelphia, raised such a power out of Ionia, that in
ten days he dared give the Rebel battle in Lydia: and so wrought with the
mercenary Cretensians by sums of money given, and promises, that they promised,
in the beginning of the battle, to deliver him into his hands, which they
(...), (fast bound) unto Libadarius, who in 3 days after put out his eyes,
left the Emperor should pardon him, and kept him in prison till his further
pleasure known.

Andronicus, after this, knew not whom to trust, putting more confidence in
strangers than in his own Subjects to his great hurt. He gladly accepted of the
Messagets, Christians beyond Ister, oppressed by the Tartars, who offered to
come to him (with 10000 Families) and serve him against the Turks grievously
wasting in Asia. But when they were to be furnished with all things, especially
with Horses, Armor, and Pay; the Subjects were hardly charged, houses
searched, who murmured to have their Arms taken from them and given to
strangers: and when they were to contribute to their pay, they openly cursed
them. Yet, at length, they were shipped over into Asia under Michael the
Emperors Son, and companion in Empire: who came and encamped about Magnesia,
were the Turks at first retired into Mountains and Woods, that, protracting
time, they might learn what strength they were of, and what discipline they
kept; and perceiving them often to roave disorderly after prey (for, as
Mercenaries, they spoiled their friends as if they were enemies) they came
down, at first, adventuring but little; but afterward came further on with
greater confidence: wherewith they being discouraged, retired, the Turks
following them, who were (thinking one thing to be two) blinded with their own
fear: neither were they like to do any great good, who setting forth carried
with them the bitter curses of their friends. Michael seeing the Messagets flee
retired into the Castle of Magnesia: But the Messagets, spoiling the Country
as they went, passed over into Europe. Michael returning, not many days after,
to Constantinople, the Turks came down and subdued all unto the Coast of Lesbos.

Not long after, one Ronzerius, sometime a notable Pirate, with four tall
Galleys, manned with Catalonians, Narbonensiaus etc, in the Mediterranean Sea
and I slands, but then a famous Captain, having stood Theodore, King of Sicily,
in great stead, against Charles King of Navarre, with 2000 expert Soldiers; and
through peace concluded betwixt them, now to seek for new entertainment, he
offered his service to the Greek Emperor, whereof he gladly accepting, he came
to him with 2000 good Soldiers called by the name of Catalonians. He honored
Ronzerius with the name of Great Captain, and gave him his (...) Mary in
marriage: But one Tenza, another Catalonian, coming a while after with more
aid, he named Ronzerius, Caesar; and Tenza, Great Captain. But when they were
to be transported into Asia, they did unspeakeable harm, to the People, for
which they had many a bitter Curse. The next spring they valiantly raised the
siege of Philadelphia which was hardly bestead without and within: to these
Catalonians, great numbers of the best Grecian Soldiers, and all the Messagets
were joined; so that, had not the Emperor before commanded not to pursue the
Turks too far, 'twas thought they might have soon recovered all they had taken.
This service done, the Greeks returned home, and Messagets also. But the
Catalonians turned their forces on them that they were sent to relieve;
alleging they had not their pay, etc. Poor people were every where spoiled,
wives and daughters ravished, Priests and aged men tortured to confess their
store; yea many, that had nothing, lay by the high ways begging, having hands
or feet, etc. cut off upon their greedy imagination. The Emperor was much
grieved, but his Coffers were not able to redress any thing. Ronzerius, thus
spoiling Asia, passed over into Europe, and leaving his Army at Calipolis, he
went to Michael, then at Orestias with 200, to demand, or with threats to
extort, his pay: with whose insolency he now more offended, his Soldiers
present, compassing him in, slew him, with some others, the rest fleeing to
Calipolis. Neither was the Catalonians pride abated by Ronzerius his death, but
was cause of greater evils: for they first slew all the Citizens of Calipolis,
making it their refuge; then, manning 8 Galleys, under the leading of Tenza,
they robbed and spoiled the Merchants ships passing to and from Constantinople:
the rest (the mean time) forraging the Country. But Tenza was overthrown
shortly after by a Genoway Fleet, himself being taken; yet afterward redeemed.
Now the Catalonians, somewhat discouraged, kept themselves, certain days,
within their walls, not knowing well what to do; for they feared both the
Messagets and Thracians; for outrages upon whom, they despaired of the
Emperouur's favor. But the expectation of Michael's coming to assault them,
most terrifyed them: for fear of whom they cast a deep ditch about the City,
with a strong Counterlcarp: But the Emperor delaying his coming, they
maliciously craved aid of the Turks, dwelling in Asia, on the other side of the
Straight: who sent them 500 good Souldiets, other fugitives following; with
whom (themselves being 3000) they forraged the Country, and brought great
herds of Cattle, with their Keepers, into the City. This was the first coming
of the Turks into Europe, that I read of, and the beginning of those miseries
wherewith the Christian Commonweal has been ever since most grievously
afflicted, and in great part overwhelmed.

These now lying about Cypsella and Apri, Michael with his Soldiers, with the
Messagets and Turcopuli encamped at Apri. These Turcopuli were about a 1000
Turks which Jathathiues left behind him when he was delivered from the Emperor
by the Tartars, who had become Christians. The Emperor, advertised of the
enemies approach, put his Army in order: whose Captains divided their battle,
as their enemies, into 3 parts. The Emperor, riding from place to place,
encouraged his men. The Sun rising, the enemies (much inferior in number)
began to come on: But the Messagets (whether by a fore-agreement, or on a
sudden treason) withdrew as idle beholders, as did also the Turcopuli, the
Greeks being hereby discouraged in the very battles joining. The Emperor
entreated the Captains, by name, not to be so suddenly discouraged: but they
still shrinking, he turned himself to his few foot that were left, saying; Now,
worthy men, is death better then life, etc. Valiantly charging the enemies, his
horse was slain; but one of his followers remonted him on his own horse, with
the loss of his life. The Emperor fleeing to his Father, to Dydimoticum, was
joyfully received, but sharply reproved for adventuring so far. The enemies
pursuing, slew some, and took others: and next day divided the spoil, forraging
the Country at pleasure. The Turcopuli revolting, were enrolled in Chalel's
Regiment, who was a Turk.

Shortly after, the Catalonians mutinied; Tenza, and Pharenza disdained to be
commanded by Recafort their General. Tenza was slain, Pharenza glad to flee to
Andronicus, who honorably entertained him. The Messagets were now also (having
done the Greeks more harm then the Turks) about to return, with Wives,
Children, and wealth, beyond Ister: for whom the Turcopuli and Catalonians laid
wait, as they passed the streights of Mount Hemus; where they slew almost all
of them, recompencing themselves with their spoil, for the wrongs received by
them before, in dividing the Greeks spoil. And being proud of their Victory at
Apri, spoiled all along the Sea coast, and the inland Country also. Forraging
Thracia, they brake into Macedonia, and wintred about Cassandria, a City then
desolate. At spring they removed purposing to spoil, especially Thessalonica;
wherein they were, by the Emperor's foresight, prevented; and finding a
forsaken Country, were about to return into Thracia: But being informed, that
the Emperor had shut up the passage by a mighty wall at Christopolis, from the
Sea to the top of the Mountains; they thus beset, desperately resolved to break
into Thessaly, (being above 8000 men) to relieve their wants, or toward
Peloponesus, there to seat themselves: at leastwise, to enter a League with
some on the Sea coast, and so return into their own Country. They came in 3
days to the Thessalian Mountains, at the foot whereof, finding plenty of all
necessaries, they wintred. But Winter being past, they came down into the
Plains of Thessaly, spending that year at pleasure, havocking whatever came in
their way. That Country was but weak, the Prince being but young and like to
die, etc. And to avert these foreigners: the Nobility offered their Commanders
gifts, and guidance into Achaia and Boetia, Countries more commodious for them:
promising if they needed aid, there to seat them. Of which offers the
Catalonians accepted: So at Spring, receiving their rewards and guides, passing
over the mountains beyond Thessaly and the straits of Thermopylae, they
encamped near Locris, and the River Cephisus. But the Duke of Thebes, etc.
hearing of their coming, with great pride and contempt, denied them passage
through his Country, reckoning them but as loose wandering rogues, etc.
wherewith they enraged, resolved there to seat themselves or to die. So they
encamped not far from the River in Boetia, 3500 horse, 4000 foot. But lying
there, they caused the ground where about they lay to be plowed up, which they
watered with cuts out of the River, that it little differed from a deep Marsh.
Hither comes the Prince with about 6400 horse, and 4000 foot, casting no peril,
coming bravely on with his horsemen; but before he was come to the middle of the
Plain, his horses sinking deep, lay with their riders for most part, tumbling
in the mire, etc. other-some sticking fast stood with their riders like very
Images, not able to move. The Catalonians slew them at their pleasure, and so
speedily pursued the rest, that they surprised Thebes and Athens; so they
(having wone a goodly Country stored with all wealth) there ended their
travels and seated themselves: not ceasing (as says Nicephorius Gregorias) by
little and little to extend their bounds unto this day.

There were 3000 Turks in the Catalonians Army, of whom about 1100 were the
Turcopuli under Melech; the other came with Chalel out of Asia, being sent for
by the Catalonians: All these, when the Catalonians were about to invade
Thessaly, and seek new fortunes, partly distrusting their society, and partly
loath further to follow, began to mutiny; Whereupon Melech and Chalel, requested
of the General leave to return: which he easily granted, and so they departed,
proportionally deviding the captives and spoils taken. After which, they
divided into 2 parts; the Turcopuli following Melech, and the rest Chalel.
Melech having violated his Religion again and revolted, despairing of the
Emperor's friendship, chose rather to go to Crales Prince of Servia (by whom
he was sent for) with 1500 horse and foot; but all his Soldiers (delivering up
horses and armor) were to fall to Trades, and not to bear Arms, but when, and
so many as, the Prince saw good.

But Chalel with about 1300 horse and 800 foot, offered the Emperor quietly to
depart his Country, so he would give him passage by Christopolis, and
transport them and their substance over Hellespont. The Emperor considering
the great harm done, desirous to be discharged of them, sent Sennacherib to
conduct them out of Macedonia to the straits of Hellespont; Where the Greeks
thinking it indignity, to suffer them to carry such abundance of horses, money,
etc. taken from the Greeks, into Asia: and in hope of so rich a prey, they
neither provided for them shipping, nor cared for their safety, purposing by
night to destroy them. Os which the Turk understanding, surprised a Castle
thereby, which they notably fortified: the Greeks were glad to get further off,
and to certify the Emperor thereof, who delayed the time, to his enemies
advantage; who speedily sent over the strait for aid of the Turks in Asia,
which they presently sent them; wherewith encouraged, they often times grievously
wasted the Country round about. The Greek Captains greatly discontented,
requested Michael with all his power, to come to suppress these dangerous
enemies. For which not only Soldiers, but the Country in general flocked to
Michael with spades and mattocks, as though they would have dug down the
Castle. Most part of whose followers, not considering the danger in gaining it,
proceeded carelessly and disorderly in their (...), that their enemies, who
before feared the very fame of their coming; therewith much more encouraged,
bestowed all their wealth, etc. within their trenches: themselves with 800
chosen horsemen, sallyed out to the place of the Imperial Ensign; with which
sudden and desperate eruption, the Grecians, especially the rustical, terrified
began to flee: after whom by little and little, all fled. The Emperor did what
he could to stay them; but in so general a fear, Who regarded him? wherefore he
was glad to flee with the rest. Yet many expert Captains ashamed, making
stands, stayed the barbarous from further pursuit. In which doing, many were
taken by the Turks; Whatsoever was found in the Emperor's Tent, yea the
Imperial Crown it self became a prey also; which they say Chalel putting on his
head, scoffed at the Emperor.

After this, the Turks spoiled almost all Thracia; so that for 2 years, the
people scarce durst go out of their Towns to plow and sow; the Emperors
exceedingly grieved, all their hope was in foreign aid; wherein they found
many difficulties, their Coffers being empty, by reason of their Territories so
long wasted: yet Andronicus sent to the Prince of (...) his Son in Law. But he
making no haste, and the misery increasing, one Phites Paleologus the
Emperor's Kinsman, undertook his Countries deliverance. He had been brought up
in Court, etc. beloved of all for integrity of life, but altogether unskilful
of wars, being by nature weak and sickly: and more given to devotion, than
worldly affairs. He requested the Emperor, that with some small power, and a
few Captains of his own choice, he might go out against the Turks, hoping (he
said) to revenge the wrong, and return with victory. Whereunto he easily
yielded, saying, God delighted not in any man's legs, but in a contrite heart
etc. For I have seen (said he) the swift not to gain the prize, etc. the simple
to gain favor, and the subtle to fall into disgrace. So he furnished him with
such conveniences as he desired; which he receiving, first he by all ways of
courtesy encouraged his Soldiers, persuading them to a temperare life,
promising (the war ended) rewards according to every ones desert; and before
setting forth, understanding, Chalel with 1200 horse and foot was forraging
about Byzia, he hasted to encounter them by the way laden with spoil, encamping
the 3d day near the little River Xerogipsum, where he left nothing unsaid or
undone for the animating his Soldiers. Within 2 days, his scouts brought
tidings about midnight, that the enemy was even at hand, who by Sunrising were
come in sight; wherefore, first of all compassing themselves with their
Wagons, etc. and bestowing their bound and captives booty therein, casting
dust on their heads, and their hands toward Heaven, they came on. The
Christian Army came on also, Philes right well conducting them. He that led the
right wing at first onset, unhorsed two enemies; but his horse sore wounded,
he retiring hastily out of the battle, somewhat troubled the Christians, and
encouraged the Turks. Philes with cheerful words encouraged them, and with eyes
cast up, and tears running down, heartily besought God, etc. The footmen
encountering hand to hand, slew the Barbarians and were of them slain: But
Philes having almost encompassed their horse with a valiant company, brake in
upon the sides of the enemy; who circumvented and hardly charged, most of them
fell: a few horsemen were pursued to the entrance of Chersonesus, whither came
Philes; 5 Galleys were sent to keep Hellesponts Straits, 2000 horsemen came out
of Servia, and 8 Galleys more by the Potestate of Pera; wherefore, shutting them
up by Land and Sea, Philes encamping about the Town and Trenches, greatly
battered the Castle, making great slaughter. The Turks by night set first upon
the Grecians, by sallying out and then upon the Servians, with vain attempts:
wherefore (utterly despairing) about midnight, they full of Coin, ran to the
Sea, purposing to yield themselves to the Genowaies; But the night being dark
and misty, many unawares came to the Greek Galleys; who lightened them of their
money, and slew them. The Genowaies slew only those with the most Coin, lest it
should be sought for by the Greeks: the rest, some they sent to the Emperor,
some they kept as their own prisoners. Thus by Philes his valor, the Turks for
that time, were chased out of Europe.

Innovation and change of the Greek's Religion, covetousness, envy, ambition,
distrust, Foreign aid, and foul discord, were the chief causes of the Greek
Empire's decay and ruin. But Michael had 2 Sons, Andronicus and Manuel: of
these, old Andronicus entirely loved Andronicus his Nephew, causing him to be
brought up in his Court as not willing to spare him out of his sight. But when
he was grown a lusty youth, he began to contemn all Government, his companions
leading him forth to walk the streets, hawk, hunt, and haunt Plays, and
afterward night-walks: which requiring great expense, and his Grandfather
giving him but a spare allowance, He took up money of the rich Merchants of
Pera, etc. with secret consultations of flight. For seeing his Grandfather live
long, and his Father like to succeed, his ambitious thoughts suggested to him
such purposes: seeking after the Imperial liberty, that he might have
sufficient for himself, and to reward others; which, seeing he could not do, he
sought one while after Armenia: then after Peloponesus, sometime dreaming of
Lesbos and Lemnos, for which he was reproved by the one and the other. He used
by night to repair to a Gentlewomans house, whom another gallant no less
affected then himself; wherefore he appointed Russians to watch her house.
Manuel about midnight seeking him, passed by these watchmen; who in the dark,
supposing him the man they looked for, wounded him that he fell down for dead,
and so was carried half dead to Court: which ourrage cast the Emperor into
great heaviness; but Michael, hearing at Thessalonica of Manuel's being dead
with the wounds; shortly after dyed with grief. The unstayed youth, purposing
to flee, became more and more suspicious to his Grandfather; who appointed one
Surgiannes (who was suspected of aspiring, imprisoned, and by the Emperor
enlarged) warily to observe the young Princes doings. But he, not unmindful of
former wrong, and in hope to aspire himself, took the Prince aside, discovering
his Grandfathers device, to set them together by the ears, as follows. Thy
Grandfather most noble Prince (said he) has set me a watch, or rather a
bloodbound over thy actions, and if possible thy most secret thoughts, etc.
whilst thou followest thy shallow conceits; for what shall it avail thee to
flee away? etc. But if thou hearken to my counsel, I will show thee a ready way
to aspire the Imperial Seat, which is by leaving Constantinople, and fleeing
into the Thracian Provinces, and proclaiming immunity for ever from thy
Grandfathers long and heavy yoke; If thou likest this, I will bring the whole
matter to effect: so that thou promise me to reward my travel according to
desert, and that no great matter be done, without my consent; for thou see
how unwillingly I make my self partaker of thy Calamity, etc. And seeing delay
brings danger, let us impart the matter to such as are like to keep counsel, and
further our designs. He, moved herewith as with a charm, confirmed his desire
by an Oath in writing. John Catacuzene, Theodore, Synadenus, men of great
honor, and aged; and Alexius Apocaucus, a man of great place being present,
who showed themselves as Ringleaders therein. Syrgiannes and Catacuzene, by
corrupting diverse great ones, procured the Government of places, fittest to
begin their rebellion in. In all which they mustred Soldiers, etc.
entertaining Strangers, as for some great War; placing their Friends, and
removing those they suspected from Government: coloring all by false rumors
of the European Tartars, and Asiain Turks coming, and commended by the Emperor
himself for their care. All which Syrgiannes dissembling, often certified the
Prince what he had done, and was to do. But the Emperor seeing his Nephew
proceeded in his dissolute life, was about to reprove him before the Patriarch
and others: but being otherwise persuaded, for that it was on the point of
Shroveride, when as the people (through excess) were fittest to be drawn into a
tumult, he let him alone. But, a good part of Lent past, he sent for him to
chide him before the Patriarch and other Bishops; that (as ashamed) he might
either amend, or be thought justly punished, if he proceeded. The Prince with
his followers (...) secretly armed, agreeing, if the Emperor used gentle
admonition, to keep themselves quiet; but if in anger, or threatening to punish
him, to break in and kill him, placing young Andronicus in his stead. He was
grievously blamed of him: yet with such moderation that all seemed from a
fatherly care; so that the assembly was quietly dissmissed, and an Oath taken,
That he should not appoint any other his successor: and that the Prince should
attempt no hurt to his Grand-father's Life or Empire. At his coming out, he was
discouraged and ashamed at the speeches of the fretting and fuming
conspiratours, saying, Thou have left us in the Devils mouth to be devoured,
etc. and sent for Theodore Metochita, requesting to deal with his Grandfather
for his followers pardon: whereof he disliked, telling them, himself was to
give God thanks for escaping so great a danger, etc. Wherewith the Prince
troubled and discontented, and (after a whiles musing) commanding him to
depart; he by his Companions persuasion, entertained his former designements:
which his Grandfather suspecting would often say, In our time is lost the
Majesty of our Empire, and devotion of the Church. Yet he thought good to lay
hands betime on him; acquainting none but the Patriarch therewith, who
acquainted the Prince, (fleeing himself before) who with all his Accomplices, the
night before his apprehension to be, fled out of the City by the gate
Gyrolimnia, (still at his Command); and next day came to Syrgiannes and
Catacuzens Camp at Hadrianople; the Emperor the same day proclaimed him
traitor, proscribing him, with all his conspiratours; swearing the whole City
to be loyal to him. But he proclayming liberty in all Thracia, the people
resorted to him armed, in great numbers. First they soulely entreated the
Emperous Collectours, taking away their money: Not seven days after almost an
incredible number departed toward Constantinople, under Syrgiannes, hoping at
first coming to take the City at discord in it self. Four days after they
encamped at Selybria, whither the Emperor sent Ambassadors to his Nephew, for
appeasing so dangerous troubles, sending with them Syrgiannes his Mother, to
persuade him to retire a little, and so come to talk and demand what he
pleased. Syrgiannes, retired to the Prince about Orestius, whither the
Ambassadors came also: with whom it was agreed, that the Prince should hold
all from Christopolis to Rhegium and Constantinople's suburbs: and that the
Lands given by the Prince (to his followers) in Maccdonia, should remain
theirs: and that the Emperor should hold the imperial City, with all Macedonia
beyond Christopolis, and have the honor to hear and dispatch Ambassadors, the
Prince not delighting in those weighty affairs. Thus while the Greek Empire
was divided betwixt the Grandfather and Nephew, Asia way a prey to the greedy
Turks: Othoman founding his Empire in Phrygia and Bythinia, and Aladins
successors encroaching as fast on this side Meander; robbing also the
Christian Merchants trading to Constantinople, spoiling Macedonia, and
Thracia's Coasts, with the (...) Islands, taking Rhodes; out of which they were
shortly driven by the Hospitallers, aided by the Genowaies and Sicilian King
holding it 214 years, named Knights of the Rhodes, till it was lost to the
Turk, for want of relief: since which they have seated themselves in Malta
Island, which they have notably defended against mighty Solomon.

But Syrgiannes had thought from the beginning, to have ruled all with the
Prince at his pleasure: but seeing him to be wholly Ruled by Catacuzene, and
himself not so much as called to any Counsel, began secretly to devise revenge
on the ungrateful Prince. Wherefore he resolved again to revolt to the
Emperor, not doubting but shortly to overthrow the Princes Counsels and State.
He secretly (by a trusty friend) acquainted the Emperor of his purpose,
alleging; He could not abide the sight of him that sought to corrupt his
wife, meaning the Prince. This news was most wel-come, for it grieved the
Emperor to be so con emned and deluded by his N phew, etc. So an Oath passing
betwixt them, Syrgiannes secretly fled to Constantinople, (which rejoiced
many). But the Prince taking occasion hereat, marching toward the City, and
being within sight, lay to intercept Syrgiannes by ambushes: who the third
night after from Perinthus with 300 Soldiers, deceiving them, came to
Constantinople. The Prince hearing of his escape, and no expected tumult in the
City, presently retired into Thracia.

Constantine the Despot, was by and by sent by his brother to Thessalonica to
Govern Macedonia, and apprehend Xene the Princes Mother by the way, and then to
invade him in Thracia; that he on one side, and Syrgiannes on the other might
shut him up, and take him. The Despot taking the Empress at Thessalonica, sent
her in a Gally to Constantinople, where she was kept close. And with all his
power invaded the Prince, breaking through the wall of Christopolis. The Prince
sent Synadenus against Syrgiannes; hoping himself to encounter his Uncle the
Despot. And first he wrote and dispersed Edicts, promising great rewards, to
whomsoever brought him alive or dead. Then he proclaimed his Grandfathers
death, slain by the Constantinopolitans in a tumult: some swearing they were
present thereat, others showing white goats hairs, as if they were plucked off
his head or beard at the time: which (commonly reported) filled men's heads with
doubts; the Despot with fear retiring to Thessalonica, whither came lettters
from the Emperor to apprehend 25 chief Citizens, vehemently suspected (by
rebellion) to deliver the City to the Prince: but they (in time) secretly
stirring up the people, and by ringing bells, soon raised a wonderful tumult of
Citizens in Arms, who running to the Despots house, he fled to the Castle: they
slew, or robbed, and imprisoned all they met of his, pulling down the house.
Then they fired the Castle-gates, whereupon he (...) to a Monastery not far
off, where being taken, he took a Monks habit to save his life. Yet he was
carried prisoner to the Prince, whose waiters were ready to tear him in pieces;
had not the Prince (embracing him) saved his life. But next day he was cast
into a very loathsome deep and straight prison; his boy and others that drew up
his ordure, often pouring it on his head. Where, after a great while, and
wishing to die, he was removed into an easier prison.

Things crossing the Emperor, he was very pensive: and one day opening the
Psalter, the first verse he light on was; When the Almighty scattered Kings for
their sakes, they were white as snow in Salmon, which he applying, as if all
troubles, etc. proceeded from Gods will, sought (contrary to Syrgiannes mind)
to be reconciled to his Nephew: who being fent for, came to Rhegium visiting
his Mother, (now set at liberty) doing what was done by her Counsel. In few
days an atonement was made and he lighting from his horse, met the Emperor,
kissing his hand and foot on horseback, then taking horse, embraced him,
kissing one another. The old man, after a few words, departed into the City;
the young man to his Camp at Pega, coming for certain days in and out at
Constantinople.

Syrgiannes now spoke hardly both of the Emperor and his Nephew, wronged (as
he thought) by them both. But seeing one Asanes Andronicus walking melancholy,
he acquainted himself with him, as grieved with the like sorrow that himself
was: with whom he (as with a friend) plainly discoursed of all things as his
grief desired. Asanes spoke also hardly of Emperor and Nephew; but hating him
before for his ambition, and displeased that he was enemy to Catacuzene his son
in-law, noted whatever he said, telling all to the old Emperor; and that
unless Syrgiannes were (in time) laid hold of, he should shortly by him
(affecting the Empire) be brought to his end. Syrgiannes was forthwith
imprisoned; the common people spoiling him of his house and wealth, and
converting it, and the adjoining Vineyards to a feeding place for sheep and
goats. The Prince was shortly Crowned as fellow in the Empire, unto which the
old Emperor tiding, was, by his horses stumbling, foulely bemired in the
Streets, which many took as portending ill Fortune. During this peace, 70 Turks
were driven on shore at Chersonesus the Prince hunting there, who before they
would yield, slew diverse of his men; himself long after being tormented by a
wound (there) in the foot. Who not long so contenred, longed for the whole
Government: and weary to see his Grand father live so long, resolved to thrust
him out of Government; or to dispatch him of life and State together. And (by
his Mothers counsel) sent for Michael Prince of Bulgaria, his wife, and his
Sister to Dydimethicum, in color of a desire to see them, as before to him
unknown. But the secret conclusion was, that the Bulgarian should aid the young
Emperor against his Grandfather, and he him against the Servian, as need
should be: and if he recovered the whole Empire, then to give him a great sum
of money with confining places. So Michael loaded with rewards and promises
returned home.

The young Emperor encouraged; and knowing the Constantinopolitans and other
Thracian Cities to favor him, thought best to depose his Grandfather with as
little stir as might be. But needing money, he took all from the Collectors in
Thracia, telling them, he was an Emperor also, and that the common charge was
by the common purse to be discharged. Then he took his way with a great power
toward Constantinople, pretending he was there to take order for a ship to
transport Ambassadors to the Sultan of Egypt; having thrust the suspected out
of Office in Thracia, placing in others. But one most inward with him, secretly
fled to his Grandfather, discovering all the intended treachery, etc. advising
him to keep him out of the City, for fear of a general revolt, which the
Emperor (comparing other reports) deeming to be true, complained in the
anguish of his soul: Revenge my quarrel O God! etc. and preserve me in the
imperial power, which he comes to take, whom I begat and advanced. Then first
he sent to his Nephew, forbidding him entering the City; and that (...) was
great folly for him to think his traitorous purposes were unknown; rehearsing
unto him how many occasions he had given for breaking the league with his
Grandfather. After that he craved aid of Crales, Prince of Servia, and the
Despot his Son Governor of Thessalonica, etc. commanding him, speedily with
all his forces, and his Nephews of Macedouia to join with them of Servia,
against the young Emperor. But these Letters (written in Paper) were
intercepted on the Straits of Christopolis and other passages; yet others in
fine linen (secretly sowed) escaped, and were delivered. Nothing was done, but
the young Emperor (for all inclined unto him) was advertised thereof: but he
understood not what his Nephew did, or intended. Theodore his own son among
others (who honorably married in Italy, and by prodigality far in debt, whose
debts (very great) he paid, etc. living now at Constantinople) went about to
betray his own Father. For he (especially being become a Latin in Religion and
manners) being rejected, thought he could not do him greater despite, than by
revolting. Demetrius the Despot, calling to him his Nephews, Governors of
Macedonia, and joining with them, spoiled the young Emperor's friends there,
confiscating the estates, and exiling all with-standers. Young Andronicus was
not Idle, but secretly sent out edicts into all parts, proclaiming releasement
from all tributes and payments: promising in the Soldiers the augmenting their
pay, etc. which bruited, most were moved, inviting him secretly to hasten into
the City: who by Ambassadors srom Rhegium, requested leave of the Emperor to
come in, or to send him some of the chief, and better sort to whom he might
speak his mind. Which requests being both dangerous, he chose the easier,
sending forth two Noble Senators, two Bishops, and two other Prelates, and
four chief Burgesses of the City: to whom he openlydelivered this crafty
speech. It is not unknown, that (...) my Subjects have been more dear to me,
then I to my self. Let any tell me how I came by these wounds, but in fight
with the enemies of my Country. For I, stricken with a piercing grief, (seeing
the poor Christians some barbaronsly slain, some carried into Captivity, the
rest driven out of Houses and Cities; the old Emperor through great years
being become slothful) went out, either by some honorable death to end my
self; or to stand my Country in some stead. For he that has long reigned,
wordly things (...) in change, must at length be loathsome to his sub jects,
etc. My Grandfather having reigned so long, is become hateful: yet not
regarding to discharge himself of such a burden, (...) to relieve the
declining Empire, nor grieving to see its successors die before him (for my
Father is dead: and happily I may die, before I receive any profit thereof) I
neither flatly deny nor altogether confess my ambition in departing from my
Grand father: for, might I see the Empire increase, etc. I could willingly
content my self: But seeing the Empire decline (...) ill to worse, etc. What
deem ye me to think? For most ease their present grief, with future hope: but
to me is not left such vain hope. At length, I requested but 1000 men at arms
to preserve the Cities of Bithynia, which he denied me, taking me ever since
for his enemy. I have another request for 8000 Ducats to content my Soldiers:
which granted, I will dismiss my forces, holding my self contented.

Then discoursing with them apart, with great hopes he sent them away: who
proclayming his praises in the City, more enflamed the people than before:
Wherewith the old Emperor was exceedingly vexed, fearing to be slain in some
sudden concourse. Yet he thought best to hear the Patriarchs and Bishops
counsel: to whom he declared,

That if he were sure (after deposing himself) to see his people well Governed,
and himself live in safty, he should much prefer a quiet life before an
Empire. But how can I safely commit to my Nephew so great a charge, who giving
his power to unskilful men, and flinging away his possessions among them,
lives himself in penury, regarding nothing more than his dogs and kites. I
will never willingly cast away my subjects and my self: I have loved him more
than my self, purposing to leave him heir and successor of my wisdom and
Empire. But he contemning my good counsel, has lifted up his hand against a
Grandfather so well deserving. Wherefore (...) ought to censure him unworthy of
the Empire, and communion of the faithful; that so (as ashamed) he may lovingly
return, etc. The conclusion of his former speech is feigned, and crafty, not
agreeing with the reproaches given me in all that speech, etc.

Upon this, most of them agreed he should not be named in Church prayers, till
better conformed. But, meeting afterward in the Patriarchs house (who secretly
favored him) they conspired (diverse Nobles consenting) against the old
Emperor, binding themselves to continue constant. About 3 days after, the
Bells ringing, and the people flocking, the Patriarch pronounced
excommunication against all omitters of his name in public prayers, or
refusing to do him all honor. Which (it appears) grieved the old Emperor,
saying; If the Doctor of Peace be so mad against us, who shall repress the
Vulgars rash attempts? etc. So the contrary Bishops excommunicated him likewise
with his bribed followers: the Emperor committing him to safe-keeping in a
Monastery. About (...) days after, the young one came to the walls to know the
acceptance of his Messengers, requesting he might enter alone into the City,
to do his duty to his Grandfather; but such as stood on the walls (not abiding
to hear him speak) drove him away with stones, etc. and so for that time he
retired a little. But at night some busy heads gave him knowledge, that about
midnight they would be ready with ropes to draw him to the top of the
Bulwarks. But he, approaching, found no such matter: the watchmen carefully
watching and calling one to another. Wherefore with Catacuzene and Synadenus,
he rowed softly along the wall toward the Sea, but there the watchmen calling
and receiving no answer, began to cast stones at them: so they departed as they
came. But this ill success was shortly better recompensed; for he had secret
letters sent from Thessalonica, to come speedily thither, assuring him, with a
general good liking, to open the Gates to him: who setting forward with a part
of his Army entered the City in a Country man's habit, and casting off that
simple attire (and being known) the people with joyful acclamations received
him as their Sovereign: yet a few stood on their guard in the Castle; which
was at length taken.

The old Emperors chief Captains now fled, most of whose Soldiers went to
the young one: who came to Serre which was delivered him by composition: but
the Castle was by Bafilicus Nicephorus (whom the old Emperor had made Captain
rather for his fincerity, than wit or Capacity) strongly fortified in these
troubleous times, and kept till the old Emperous death, then reconciling
himself to the young: who, in reward of his fidelity, gave it to him to hold as
amply as before from his Grandfather: for wise men (as did King Philip in
Demosthenes) honor virtue even in their enemies. The young Emperor soon took
all strong Towns and Cities in Macedonia unresisted with the Despots wife and
Children and tteasure, his Nephews and following Senators wives also: after
whom their Husbands were most cast in prison, and some perishing in exile. The
old Emperor was about to send to his Nephew for peace, but at the same time
Michael the Bulgarian (in hope of great profit) secretly offered him aid:
whereof he gladly accepting, Ambassadors were sent to conclude it; but two or
three trusty Counselors being acquainted therewith. In the mean time he sent
out Constantinus Assan, against Sydanenus who coupt him up; by whom, he was
over thrown, and taken prisoner; the rest flying headlong to Constantinople.
Now the young Emperor returned thither to prevent the Bulgarians coming: lest
they killing the old Emperor, should seize the City themselves, or at least
keep him out. There was also great want of Victuals in the City, his Army
shutting it up by Land, and the Venetians (being at Odds with the Genowaies of
Pera) by Sea. The young Emperor at first attempted to enter, but being
repulsed, he gat farther off. About this time came also the 3000 Bulgarian
horsemen, but remembering the harms by foreign aid, he suffered but their
General and some few Commanders to come into the City. The young one, least
some harm to their utter subversion should betide them, offered to do what his
Grandfather should command. But he trusting to this Bulgarian aid, listened
little to him: (and how could he trust him that had so often deceived him?)
Who, almost despairing of success, sent great gifts to the General and chief
Commanders, promising far greater if they would return home: whereunto they
easily granted.

Two watchmen, Camaris and Castellanus fleeing secretly to the young Emperor,
offered to betray the City to him, for assurance of such money and possessions
they required, returning again (for fear of suspicion) without stay. (The
Emperor four days made shipladders of ropes). And the night being come, they
gave such store of good wine by way of courtesy to their fellow watchmen,
that they fell into a sound sleep: The traitors about midnight receiving 18
men by the ladders fastened to the top of the wall; who breaking open the Roman
gate, the Army entered. The same night, just after Sunset, a Country man in
have knocked at the gate of Gerolimna, telling the Soldiers he saw many of the
young Emperors men marching toward the City, by the way of the Roman gate:
The old Emperor (troubled) thought to send scouts to see if all were cleart
but Metochita his great Counsel our let, saying, Seeing either the rumor
was false, or the endeavor of so few, vain; it beseems not a courageous mind
to be so leightly moved. Again, diverse others came running telling the
watchmen, A great number were at the Roman gate: the Emperor (more troubled)
sharply said to Metochita: Thou seem to be strangely Metamorphosed into a
man of iron, which have no feeling of our danger, etc. for the noise of my
Nephew sounds in mine cars, etc. Nevertheless, he rose to go to bed,
accounting them but as false alarmes. But the Emperor (alone) say tumbling to
and fro on a pallat, as ttoubled with heavy thoughts. The mean time he hearing
a great noise at the Court-gate (for above 800 were entered with his Nephew, and
they of the City joyfully saluted him) rose (destitute of all but his ordinary
waiters) beseeching not God to forsake, but defend him from their fury: Who
heard him. For the young Emperor straightly charged all his Captains, etc. on
pain of death, not to violate his Grandfather, or any about him: For (said he)
this victory God has given us, and not our selves, etc. which peradventure he
will give to others, who (as we have been to them) will show themselves to us:
wherefore if nighnesse of blood or being of one Country, move us not; yet let us
use mercy that we feel not Gods hand in like case. A Courtier then opened a
wicket with this message to him,

Seeing God has (my son) given thee the imperial seat, I request thee this
good turn for many I bestowed on thee, not to spill the blood from which (next
to God) thou have taken life, etc. If brothers-blood cried out against Cain,
how much louder shall fathers-blood cry to the Lord, etc. Have pity on my
miserable old age, and a bruised reed, cast down; and do not again tread on it.
And be not proud of thy fortune, but consider the uncertainty of worldly
things; taking by me example, etc. Young Andronicus moved herewith, entered the
palace, humbly saluting, embracing, and comforting his Grandfather: Straight
way carrying away the Patriarch Esaius (kept in the Monastery) in a Chariot,
restoring him to his Dignity; who spared not fully to revenge himself of the
old Emperor's friends. One might have seen all the Nobles wealth that took his
part, carried away, and their houses overthrown, especially of Metochita, whose
wealth not only in his house, but laid up with friends (by notes in his study)
was a prey to the people, and the rest confiscate, being brought with wife and
children, to extreme beggary in one day: many (to increase his grief) saying,
All that treasure was the blood and tears of the poor subjects, brought to him
by them he made rulers of provinces, etc. that he might stop them (cruelly
dealt with by them) from complaining to the old Emperor: and that the
Revenger's eye was now awaked, etc. He was confined to Didymoticum; whence
(after a while) he was sent back to Constantinople, where, having nothing to
relieve him, he went to the Monastery of Chora, repaired by him in his
prosperity, therein shrowding himself, and not long after dying.

But Niphon (sometime Patriarch) meeting the young Emperor (the same day)
asked, How they would deal with his Grandfather? Who answering Emperour-like,
was by him inflamed; for Niphon bare a special grudge against the old man, for
that he being by the Clergy outed of his Patriarchship, for his shameful
extortion, was not defended, as he looked for: and dreaming his taking out of
the way, was a step to the same Dignity. Wherefore he said, If thou desire to
Reign without fear, etc. cast hair cloth on him, and clap him in prison, or
exile him: to which ungracious counsel, other Nobles consenting, much changed
the young Emperor's mind: that he could not endure his Grandfather a
Companion in the Empire. Whereupon it was decreed, the old man should retain
the name and ornaments; but meddle with nothing, nor come abroad; with 10000
ducats yearly for his maintenance. Of which shameful decree (...) the
Patriarch was a furtherer rejoycingly, wresting this Scripture; The just shall
rejoice when he sees the Vengeance: But the old Emperor thus shut up, humors
distilling, (through grief) first lost one eye, and shortly the other, being
often mocked not by his guarding enemies only, but by his own servants. The
young Emperor not long after falling very sick, Catacuzene and the rest yet
doubtful of the old blind man, put him to choice, either to put on him the
habit of a Monk, or to take dear exile, or perpetual imprisonment. At which
hard choice he oppressed with woes, lay on bed a great while speechless; for
being encompassed with barbarous Soldiers, none was left to direct him where
to go or stand, But would he or not, they shaving and polling him, cast a Monks
habit on him; changing (after the manner) his name to Anthony the Monk; of
which Esaeias was glad, as now no hope to recover the Empire, nor cause for
himself to fear. Yet (seeming to be very sorry, but indeed deriding him) he
sent two Bishops to know of him how he would be remembered in Church-prayers. To
which fetching a great sigh he answered: As in poor Lazarus appeared a double
miracle, that (dead) he rose, and (bound) walked; so in me, in a contrary
manner, who (alive) am dead, and (loose) bound, my tongue also wherewith I
might (at least) bewail my woes and wrongs to the Air, etc. But shame has
closed my mouth, my brethren abhor me, and the light of mine eyes is not with
me, etc. As for him that sent you, I chose and preferred him to the
Patriarchship, before many worthy men, never before preferred, or famous, etc.
But in my Calamity he joined with mine enemies, more cruel than any other:
feigning him to be (much like the Crocodile of Nile) ignorant and sorry for me.
But if I should answer to his catching question, to be remembered in the Church
as an Emperor; I shall forthwith be slain. If I say, as Anthony the Monk; it
will be taken, that of mine own free will I put on this habit, which was never
in my thought. Thus he sent them away: and sitting down said, My soul return to
thy rest, etc. neither spoke he one word more in declaring his grief, and so
against his will passing over his sorrow in silence, as astonished before the
humorus (gathered into the brain) could be difsolved into tears. But the
Patriarch decreed, he should be remembered before his Nephew in Church prayers,
as the most Religious and Zealous Monk Anthony, the better to color the
matter, as if weary of the world, he voluntary took it on him. Yet in four
days, Synadenus, understanding the people secretly to mutter at the hard
dealing with him, Ecclesiastical Laws enforcing none against will to enter
Religious orders, sent to exact an oath of him in writing, that he should never
seek after, accept of, or substitute any other in the Empire; and to fear him
of his life upon refusal, setting barbarous Soldiers over him: so yielding, he
signed the Oath with a red and black cross, another guiding his hand. Thus
living two years, on Feb. 12th, toward night, a day dedicated to St. Anthonies
Vigil, certain friends had access to him (amongst whom was the Prince of
Servia's widow, his daughter, and Nicephor as Gregoras, Author of this
History) with whom he entered discourse till past midnight, then bidding them
farewell; pleasantly saying, To morrow they would end their discourse, no sign
of sickness appearing. They gone, he eat of a shellfish, after which, (as his
manner was when he felt inward heat) he drank cold water, then feeling a great
pain in his Stomach, and afterward very sick. fell into a looseness; and
going often to a house of Office in an inner Chamber, not able to recover his
own bed, and none to help him, he dyed before day, sitting on a homely bed fast
by, having Reigned 43 years, whose death was by strange signs and accidents
foretold, a great Eclipse of the Sun, just 43 days before, and after of the
Moon, an earthquake the day before, the Sea rising above the bounds made
breaches in the Citie-Walls, etc. Many Crosses and Pinacles, with a great
Pillar before the Church of the 40 Martyrs, (he having wished to live so long
as it stood) were overthrown. He was honorably buried in the Monastery of
Libe, whose Obsequies 9 days yearly were solemnly kept.

Thus the Reader may see, the Greek Emperor's were not at leisure, to look
over into Asia. At which time Othoman on one side in Phrygia and Bithynia; and
Aladin's Successors along Meander, encroached as fast, till the Greeks were
thrust quite out. But Othoman's 2 Garrisons built before Prusa, having
continued certain years, brought the City to such (...), that many Citizens and
others died of famine; The rest out of hope to be relieved, yielded the City to
Orchanes, to depart safely with as much goods as themselves could carry. Most
write the Turks faithfully performed the conditions; yet some report, Orchanes
brake most part. Prusa was yielded 1327, and afterward by Orchanes made the
seat of the Othoman Kings. Othoman died in the year 1328, 69 years old, in the
28th year of his Reign, buried at Prusa; whose Tomb is there yet to be seen,
etc. There is another Monument of him at Suguta, by his Father's Sepulcher,
made by his Sons. Some report him to be there buried; yet the Turks generally
suppose his interring Monument is at Prusa. He was (...), politic, valiant and
fortunate, full of dissimularion and ambition, not rash in attempts, but very
resolute, bountiful especially to his men of war, and the poor. He is worthily
accounted the Turks Empire's Founder; whose Kings by lineal descent are called;
The Othoman Kings: and the Turks, Osmanide or people of Osman.

The Life of Orchanes or Vrchan, second King of Turks.
AFter Othoman's death (with great solemnity interred) Orchanes or Urchan and
Aladin his Sons, (...) a (...) for establishing a new succession, and dividing
his treasure and goods; but he having bestowed it on his men of war, there was
no Money, Plate or Jewels found, but the remembrance of his life for them to
imitate; great Dominions, store of horses and armor, with great herds of
Cattle. Aladin answered to Orchanes asking, what order was to be taken with
those things, That it was requisite, first to establish a King, which (like a
good shepherd) might govern, etc. And that to him (as his eldest brother) all
other things belonged, and so to me instead of a Father, etc. Through this
commended modesty of Aladin, the Kingdom peaceably descended to Orchanes; who
would have made him President of his Council; but he requested rather the
Lordship of Fodore: which frankly granted, Aladin lived there (mostly) a
private and quiet life, then building two Temples and an Abbey at Prusa. Some
report Orchanes obtained the Kingdom by murdering two elder brothers which he
had. But that practice (lately much used) was not before Bajazet 1. as the most
probable collections from the Turks Chronicles affirm.

The Christians presently recovered Nice, with diverse holds from the Turks.
Among whom Tzuprichiser Castle on the River Sangarius (by impeaching that
passage, into Bithynia) most grieved them. Orchanes apparrelling himself and
few others like Christian Merchants came to the Castle, craving leave to pass:
they supposing them to be Merchants, let them in: who (...) the warders,
possessed the Castle, who now so forraged the Country, that Nice wanting
victuals to relieve so many fled into it for fear, was brought to great
extremity; For whose relief young Andronicus, passed the strait into Asia,
whose greatest strength was in 2000 choice horsemen, the rest being most (...)
(who carried many small Vessels with them to receive them when they should
flee) or Rascals taken up here and there. Orchanes sent expert Captains to
forelay the strait passages, following with his Army. The Emperor in three
days march, came to the little Town Philocrene, and understanding Orchanes
laying not far off, having taken the straits, he there stayed that night. Next
morning, diverse Turks Companies coming down the Mountains, he set forward to
meet them. The Turks shot freely, keeping themselves a loof off. The Emperor
supposing that proceeded from fear, commanded some Companies disorderly to
march, and skirmish with them: his expert Captains would have had him kept his
strength together; yet such was his youthful heat, they must needs set forward;
But, the forenoon spent in this leight skirmishing, Orchanes perceiving the
Christians weary therewith, and the heat, came down with a world of men,
charging them with a hideous cry, some a far off, some hand to hand: both sides
were courageous, with great slaughter, till nights approach; then the
Christians weary and oppressed with multitudes, retired disorderly, receiving
great loss by the pursuers. The battle was at length ended, the Emperor
wounded in the foot: who going to Philocrene, fast by, to be dressed, the Army
supposing him to have fled, (as if Orchanes would have slain them all that
night) fled also: some to their boats: some, hasting to the Town-gates, were by
others trodden to death: some hanging at one another, got some up the Towns
Rampires; others drawn down by the hangers on, (...) on and perished; some
('it is reported) died for fear, none chasing them. In the morning, 200 of the
300 horsemen that Orchanes (retiring to places of advantage, doubting the
Christians farther coming on) had left as scouts, took the spoil of the
forsaken Camp at pleasure; yea, the Emperor's own furniture and (...) horses:
the other 100, slew a great number of hartless wandering Christians. The
Emperor seeing the hand of God, returned to Constantinople: After which, the
Turks seizing many Sea Towns of Bithynia, laid heavy tributes on the other
Country places, not destroying them for the benefit thereof.

Nice holding now out in hope only of 1000 horsemen, the Emperor promised to
send to lie in Garrison; Of which Orchanes understanding, furnished 800 of his
own after the Christians manner: who by a compass about, trooped toward the
City, in the highway from Constantinople. Then sending 300 other in Turks
habit, to forage the (...), within the Cities view, what they could: the 800
following them as by chance, put them toflight in their sight: who returned
again toward Nice. The Citizens, supposing them Constantinopolitan horsemen,
with joy received them as expected friends; But entering the gates, and seconded
with the other 300, bringing also others in ambush not far off, won the great
City: whose spoil the Soldiers had, the Citizens led into miserable Captivity,
and they possessing it to this day. Orchanes other Captains daily encroached on
the weak Christians. Cunger Alps subdued (...) in Phrygia, Bolli in
Paphlagonia, appointing valorous Abdura Cham, Governor. Then also old
Accecozza subjected Candara and Ermome to the Turk, (...) all Castles etc. Then
(...) the Captains Son in Scamandria, (not far from old Troys ruins) died; to
whose (...), his Father with his (...) repeiring, crafty Accecozza suddenly
setting on them, slew most and took the rest: with the Captain, his Castle, and
Country: whom he leading to Abydus renowned Castle (situate on Asia's Sea
coast, over against Sestus Castle in Europe) so near as he could, offered him
liberty on the Castles surrender, or they to see him there slain: who said,
They might cut off his head, sees him, and eat him, but the Castle he would
not deliver. The Emperor refused also to redeem him proffered unto him; yet at
last by Nicomedia's Governor ransomed. Accecozza (at Scamandria) being long
molested by Abydus Castle, and the Constantinopolitans, was glad to be most
times on horseback against the enemies attempt. The Captain of Abydus had a
fair young Daughter, who then dreamed that (fallen into a deep miry ditch) a
young gallant coming by, did both help her out, make her clean, and richly
apparel her; the Image was so fantasied, in her troubled brain, that waking
she thought she saw him, and sleeping longed for him. Accecozza, the while,
besieging her Fathers Castle, she often went into a high Turret, to see the
Martial deeds on both sides, etc. But on the first sight of Abdurachman's
approach to the siege, she thought he was the man dreamed of; wherefore waiting
another time of his approach to the Castle, she cast down a Letter fastened to
a stone, in Greek, (which he delivered to Accecozza) promising (after her
affections discovery) to deliver the Castle in the night, to Abdurachman, he
returning with a few, after the siege raised. Accecozza giving small credit
thereto for fear of treason; yet said to Abdurachman, Seeing she has on
special liking chosen thee, Will thou adventure? He said, he would undertake it
if it were his pleasure. Accecozza sharply (...) the Castle, and presently as
despairing brake up his siege. The Defendants rejoicing hereat, surcharged
themselves that night with excess; Abdurachman came to the appointed place of
the Castle, where she was attending, and by her means being conveyed in, and
so to the Porters lodge: he slew the Porter a sleep, and let his (...) in at the
gates; who took the Captain, overtaken with Wine, and fast asleep: who with his
daughter and rich spoil, being presented by Abdurachman to Orchanes, He, glad,
gave her with most of the prey to him. There was also one Cararachman, so
dreadful, that the Constantinopolitans would pacify their children, saying,
Cararachman comes. Cunger Alps and Accecozza shortly dying, Orchanes made
Solomon and Amurath his Sons Governors of those Countries. He intending to
besiege (...), took diverse small holds in his march thitherward, which being
governed by a Lady, Andronicus his kinswoman, she doubting her forces ability
to hold the siege, yielded the City on condition, with whom she would, she
might depart with lives, liberties, and goods: so shipping for Constantinople,
Solomon was made Governor of Nicomedia. The Temples were converted to Turkish
Meschitas. The greatest being turned into a School for the Students of
Mahomet's Law, yet called Orchanes his College; who placed diverse the most
experienced Soldiers, with Pensions and possessions for defense of the
Country near, and open to the Sea, in danger of the Constantinopolitan
Galleys. Then by Aladin's Counsel, all his men wore white caps (which the
Jannizaries now use) to be known from others wearing red. The Turks then and
long after, did not shave their beards: so that the King in disgrace, would
command a man's beard to be cut or shaven. They borrowed cutting or shaving of
the Italians, also many other fashions contrary to their ancient ones.
Orchanes, removing his Court to Nice, built a sumptuous Temple, appointing a
Preacher for every Friday: also two fair Abbeys, in one of which himself served
the strangers, and poor, the first dinner. He first builded Abbeys and
Monasteries, whom most his successors imitated. He gave Solomon great charge
to be vigilant over Taxara, (...) and Mudurne, nigh Nicomedia; all which Towns,
with the Couutries joining, he soon got by composition from the Christians.
Solomon so tempering justice with clemency, that many Christians became of his
Religion, and under his government, not changing the Countries politic Laws,
which greatly won their-hearts. (...) was made Lord of Prusa; Carachisar Castle
with its Seigniory, Orchanes gave his Cosen (...).

Orchanes (by persuasion of Turson Beg the King of Charasia's Son) whose
subjects (when dead) denied the elder brother wishing Turson their Sovereign)
went with an Army into that Country, surprising to his own use many Holds by
the way. Orchanes entered, Turson's elder brother fled to (...), the Turks
pursuing; where Turson approaching to speak with his brother, was slain from
the Walls. Orchanes hereupon, threatening to destroy all with fire and sword, if
they submitted not by a day to mercy; the people terrified, yielded themselves.
The Kings Son also on reasonable conditions, who (sent to Prusa) died there
after two years, of the Plague; Solomon being then made Prince of Carazina: One
of the greatest Successors of Sulten Alaain there by took end, whose Dominions
were not small. Orchanes returning, or his good success, built a Temple and
Monastery at Prusa seeking for religious men out of all his Kingdom: of which
religious men, the Turks write many Fables.

Orchanes so augmented his Kingdom, that, viewing Europe, from many parts of
Asia, and (...) with desire of (...), (...) devised how to pass narrow
Hellespont into Europe: which he imparting to his Son Solomon, he answered. He,
if he pleased, doubted not to pass the strait, and plant (...) Religion in
those Countries. His Father, much (...), gave him leave to depart, and proceed
as he thought best therein; who journeying into Carasina, made to the place (as
for pleasure) where Troy was said to have stood, by the Sea side. And standing
a great while still in a study, without speaking to any, (...) a Chieftain,
boldly said, My Lord, what strange thing is this? etc. it is some great matter
thou (...) studying on. It is, said Solomon, I was thinking how to pass this
Sea, to view Europe and return undiscovered. Said Ezesbeg, joining Fazilbeg, We
two will by God's power perform this. They showed Solomon ((...) to know) what
place they would (...) over; and shortly after, making a little boat or raffe,
arrived by night in Europe side, near Zemenick Castle, of the Greeks called
(...), or Hogs Castle, not (...) from (...); where finding a good sensible
Greek in a (...), returning back presented him to Solomon: who gave him great
gifts and rich apparel, learning at length of him how to take Zemenick Castle
at unawares; For which, boats being peedily made, Solomon with 80 chosen men
passed the Strait (not past an Italian mile over) with their guide: who brought
him to a (...) at the Castle, so high that getting in (in harvest time) they
easily won (...). Solomon sought by courtesy rather (...) (...), to win the
Inhabitants good wills; yet some of the better, he sent into Asia, returning in
one day 200 (...) more into Europe, and sent (...) in small Vessels to (...)
the Christians Vessels, (...) they should (...) his passage: so (...) few days
he had 2000 Turks in Europe; who doing no violence to the vulgar Christians,
they began to like of them, and (...) without (...). (...) some of them had
sundry times come over, yet this was the first coming of the Turks (...)
conguer and inhabit, whose posterity was never since removed; but have joined
to their Asian Kingdom, agreat part of Europe also. Solomon took (...) Castle,
2 miles from Zemenick Castle, strongly (...) both (...) After which the Turks
came in (...) number into Europe to dwell in (...): Solomon in their room,
sending Christians into Asia, Such was the negligence and security of the
Greeks, that when (...) of (...) taking was carried (...) to Constantinople,
they to extenuate (...), said, (...) was but a Hogstie lost; (...) to the
Castles (...); (...) foolish laughter (as says a grave one of their own) being
converted into most by ter (...).

Solyman's strength thus increasing, he spoiled almost to Callipolis about 22
miles off; whose Governor perceiving the Turk began to long for the City, went
out against him with what power he (...) (all the other Greeks lying still) but
he was overthrown, and fled into his City: the Turks following spoiled the
Country, and returning, took both City and Castle in 1358. The
Constantinopolitans making small account of its loss, commonly said (jesting)
The Turks had took from them but a pottle of Wine. But they got (in few years)
so far into Thracia, that Amarah placed his Seat in Hadrianople, and Bajaxet
his Son laid hard siege some years to the Imperial City, and had not
Tamerlain's expedition (to him fatal) then happened, he had carried it. But
Solomon certified his Father what he had done, and that it was expedient
speedily to send him a great supply for keeping what he had got, as for further
invasion. Orchanes welcoming this Message, commanded the Saracens likewise,
(who were come into Caracina, to possess their dwellings who were gone into
Europe) to pass over, which they did, Solomon omitted not to win small Holds,
and people them with Turks: they of Caracina also placing themselves as in a
new world; For which, and to extend the Turkish Dominions and Religion, they
refused no pains. Not far from Callipolis was the little Castle (...), whose
valiant Captain Calo Joannes molested the Turks on that side, under Ezesbeg
slaying and taking many at advantage. Solomon much argred, learning when he was
gone out for some exploit, beset the Castle placing others in by ways, lest he
should any ways escape. The Captain ignorant, thinking to return with a Turk
prisoner, was pursued by Fazilbeg, and hasting fell into the Turks ambush;
where all his men slain and he taken, his head was struck off before his own
Castle, which forthwith surrendered, and Chazi Ilibeg placed therein, who thence
troubled the Country to Didymothicum: as (...) from Callipolis; who gave diverse
places (taken thus in one year in Europe) to his Captains and Soldiers, as by
the Tombs of Ezes and Fazil-beg there appears.

Solomon hawking in Bolare fields, on Europe side, was overthrown in a ditch
and with the fall shortly died: whose Father Orchanes then laying sick, justly
sorrowing, within two months died, about 1359, 80 years old, reigning 31. Some
report otherwise of his death and time wherein he lived. But John Leunclave in
his History of the Turks Chronicles, reports as before. He was wise,
courteous and bountiful, etc. very zealous in his superstition, appointing
Pensions to the sayers of Mahomet's Law by heart in the Temple, and competent
maintenance for all Judges, that for reward they should not pervert justice,
living and dying a mortal enemy to the Christians.

The Life of Amurath I. third King of Turks, and the great augmenter of their
Kingdom.
AMurath the younger Son, succeeded (...) (...) having wondrous (...) (...)
zeal, more than any, for Mohammedan Religion. Purposing (at first) to invade
Thracia, he (...) Army from all parts to Prusa; But the Mohammedan Asian Princes
combining, he must turn his forces upon them prevailing and returning with
victory: and next year prosecuting his intended war in Europe; wherefore with a
strong Army, he passed to Callipolis, with Lala Schahin his Tutor, whose
counsel he most followed in weighty affairs. Then Benutum Castle was yielded
him on composition, and the Town Tzurulus he won, after sharp encounter with
the Christians: taking diverse small places in Romania (now called Rumilia) in
Thracia, razing some, and garrisoning others. Then also the valiant ones, Chasi
Ilbeg and Eurenoses, took some Forts on the River (...), much troubling the
Inhabitants there abouts; wherefore Didymothicum's Caprain, gathered his
Soldiers to intercept Chasi Ilbeg, losing most, and himself taken: for whose
ransom, etc. the Citizens yielded Didymothicum.

Amurath soon after sent Lala Schahin to besiege Hadrianople: the Christians
encountered him on the way, many being lost on both sides, but in the end
worsted, they retired to the City. Schahin sending news of this victory to
Amurath, with some Christians heads, Chasis and Eurenoses going before, himself
followed to the siege: which the Governor hearing, fled by night to Aenus. The
(...) seeing this, yielded to Amurath in 1362. Some Turks Histories otherwise
report, especially the taking these 2 Cities: which because `tis not
disagreeing from their subtle dealing, I thought good to set down.

Amurath at first of his reign, concluded a Peace with the (...) Christians,
during which the Governor of (...) entertained all workmen, more to fortify
his City. Amurath caused 200 Iusty men to come our of Asia, to offer him their
service, who gladly used their help: some of the wiser, wishing him to beware
of those Asians. But he, through the peace, and they no Soldiers, had the
less care, yet lodging them without the walls every night. (...) (they
entertained) requested (...) (...) (...) to go with 30 good Soldiers (...) for
(...) and to espy any opportunity to surprise (...) City. (...) coming
accordingly, they found (...), carlying stones, mortar, etc. shewlng diligence;
he vigilantly awaiting for a surprizal. Night come, and the (...) workmen going
into the Suburbs to lodge, Chasis secretly (...) showed Amurath, how one gate
of the City might suddenly be taken, if he would place a (...) ambush near, to
join with the laborers upon occasion: which resolved on, and Chasis returning,
instructed what workmen he thought meet, what was to be done. Next day at
dinner time, these (...) at fained words, and blows among themselves, suddenly
running to the gate appointed, and laying hands on the Warders weapons, (as to
defend themselves) and so (...) them; (...) opening the gate, (...) in the
Turks (laying in wait) who presently took the City, and put the chiefest to the
sword. (...) also was (in this peace) by sudden assault of Eurenoses by night
taken.

The Christians charging (...) with this breach of League, turned it to his
Captains, threatening them severely: feigning himself (...) in a color, all the
while (...) but he refused to restore these Cities, saying, 'Twas against
Mahomet's Law to deliver that wherein his Religion had been openly taught.
Whereupon fresh wars (very tedious to both) arose. Amurath therefore made peace
with them of Selybria, Constantinople and Hadrianople; yet this he desiring
heartily to take, causing Chasis Ilibeg (as discontented) to flee from his
Master to Hadrianople; from whence, issuing out with other dissembling
fugitives, he often skirmished with the Turks, and growing into the Governors
favor thereby. Many others also, under like (...), resorting to him, he wrote
secretly to Amurath, If he would send him succor against the time, he would
deliver a gate unto him. Chasis with ten followers, at day dawn (as going to
hunt) came to the gate, which opened, they furiously slew the Warders, and
aided by the other fugitives, possessed the gate, till Amurath's near ambush,
hearing the alarm, speedily came and entered, where was a cruel fight all day;
but the Turks prevailing have possessed it to this day. These Cities thus (or
as aforesaid) taken, Amurath seated his Court at Hadrianople, as the most fit
place for enlarging his Kingdom: from whence a world of woe has overflowed
great part of Christendom, drowning many Kingdoms in Europe, the Greeks of all
other most miserable. The proud Sultan now presently sent Lala Scahin, to
invade about Philopolis with the Country Zagora toward Haemus, and charging
Eurenoses to subdue Ipsala's Territory; who soon subjected them all, wherein he
shortly placed Sanzacks or Governors for better assurance thereof.

Cara Rustemes a Mohammedan Doctor suggesting it, Zinderlu Chelil their chief
Justice (afterward Catradin Bassa by Amurath's command) ordered every fifth
Captive above 15 years old, to be taken up, as due by Law, for the King: and if
under 5, to pay 25 Aspers a head, as tribute, Cara the deviser, being chief
Collector hereof, numbers of Christian youths, were by Zinderlu's Counsel
distributed among the Asian husbandmen, to learn the Turkish Religion language
and manners; where after two or three years painful labor, they (at Court) the
better sort, were chosen to attend on and serve the Prince in wars, where they
practizing all activity, are called Jannizaries, that is new Soldiers: This
was their first beginning, but increased under Amurath 2, and has ever since
been continued by that and some greater means, being (in time) so great, that
they are often dreadful to the great Turk himself, and sometimes preferring that
Son they best like, to the Empire, contrary to the will of the Deceased Sultan,
now the greatest strength of that Empire, and (being conrinual Garrisons of
martial men) not unlike to be the greatest cause of its ruin.

Amurath (after a great while) determining to return to Asia, made Scahin
Viceroy of Romania, Eurenoses Governor of the marches, Zinderlu President of
his Council, calling him Cairadin Bassa that is, the Bassa well deserving. Then
returning, he spent that Winter at Prusa. Cairadin and Cara once two Doctors
(as Turkish histories report) first corrupted that Court with coverousness and
bribery, as yet of them much blamed. Amurath thus in Asia, hearing the Servians
and Bulgarians, had gathered an Army to besiege Hadrianople, he greatly
prepared for aid in Europe, taking Boga in his way, putting all Christians that
could bear Arms to the sword, captivating the rest, his Soldiers had the
spoil, which Town ere long they recovering, gave them like measure, and razing
it; yet it was rebuilt by the Turks in 1365.

The Servian etc. Army, now near Hadrianople, mutinied among themselves: which
the Turks espying set suddenly on them by night; who (through inward hatred)
joined not against them, being ready to turn their Weapons on each other;
whereby the Turks put to flight and slew them with such a slaughter, that the
place is at this day called, Zirf Zindugi, or, the place where the Servians
were overthrown.

This notable news with the spoils fifth part, and many Christians heads, were
sent to Amurath in Asia: who then, returned to Prusa; this was in 1366. This
year he triumphantly circumcised his Sons Bajazet and Jacup, building Temples,
a Monastery, two Colleges, and a Palace at Bilezuga, Neapolis, and Prusa.

Germean Ogli, having always envied, (as did the other Selzuccian Princes) and
fearing the Othoman Kings greatness might be dangerous to his Son after his
death, now very aged, sent Isaac a Mohammedan Doctor to Amurath, with rich
presents, to offer his daughter Hatun in marriage to Bajazet, promising with
her diverse great Cities and Towns, as Cutai, and c. with their Territories:
Cutai being now the City where the Turks great Viceroy is resident, as in the
heart of lesser Asia. Amurath liking it well, contracted Bajazet unto her, and
preparing with great magnificence for the marriage, invited most Mohammedan
Princes; and commanding most of his Nobles to honor it with their presence.
The Egyptians Ambassador had the highest place of all the others before
invited; who all presented Amurath with many great gifts beseeming their
Masters. At length, Eurenoses one of his own Nobles, besides many rich gifts,
presented him with 100 goodly Christian captive boys, and as many maidens
richly attired, with a cup of gold with diverse precious stones in one hand, and
a silver cup full of gold in their other: the Embassad ours wondering at the
richness hereof: All which Amurath bestowed on them, and their presents on
Eurenoses: None also of the learned and religious came thither so poor, but he
went away rich. He sent diverse Nobles with 100 Ladies, etc. and 3000 horsemen,
to attend the brides coming: whom Germean Ogli meeting, saluted every man of
account: feasting them royally (with Princely gifts) in one of his Cities. And
delivering Hatun to two ancient Ladies, one Bajazet's nurse, sent her away with
his wife Jenses, and other Courtiers, being most royally married at Prusa. The
dowry promised, was delivered Amurath, garrisoning the Cities and Towns.

Chusen-beg Prince of Amisum, sold that Territory to Amurath, at this marriage,
with many others, doubring (as was thought) how to keep them, Amurath being
come so near him. Amurath spending great time in Asia, committing that Kingdom
to Bajazets and Temurtases his Government, returned into Europe with a strong
Army, marching from Callipolis toward Hadrianople, soon winning Magalgara by
the way: whither Lala Scahin and Eurenoses coming, he sent them to besiege
Pherae, which they took after few days. But leading his Army into Servia, and
forraging the Country 14 days, presently marched to Nissa, the Metropolis and
Key of that Kingdom, winning it shortly by Jaxis Begs advice. Lazarus the
Despot was so danted hereat, that for peace he offered 50000 li. tribute
yearly, and 1000 men's aid when he required it: Amurath granted him peace and
deparfed. Then with much a do he won great Apolonia near Mount Athos, the
Christians departing with wives, etc. and goods not spoiled by the Soldiers.
Returning to Hadrianople, Eurenoses (left) shortly took Berrhea, etc. Then also
Scahin won Zichne, and Seres in Macedonia's confines, with many other upon
Thessaly and Thrace: who made his abode in Seres; great numbers being sent for
from Asia to inhabit thereabouts forsaken by the Christians. Aladin advertised
out of Asia, that Aladin King of Caramania his son in Law invaded him with fire
and sword, was exceedingly troubled; Wherefore, telling his Nobles. etc. what
Aladin (so getting all bonds of Religion, alliance, etc.) had done, whilst he
sought with honor, the Mohammedan sincere Religions increase in Europe: from
which godly wars, said he, I am forced to turn, against men joined with us in
Religion and alliance; he appointed Chairadin Basa his (...) and his Son Alis
one of his Council: so passing into Asia and so to Prusa he there spent that
Winter. To whom Egyptian Ambassadors, then coming to renew former amity, he
thankfully sent them back with kind Letters and rewards. At Spring in 1387, he
levying a great Army, to war on the Caramanian, he prepared no less power to
meet him associating to him all the less Mohammedan Princes, who brought him
great supplies: and thinking himself strong enough for his Father in Law,
certified him, That (not being inferior in power) he did not fear him, yet he
could hearken to peace on reasonable terms; but if he had rather have war, he
should be ready to dare him battle when he came. Amurath willed the Ambassador
to tell him, That he, against faith, having cruelly invaded him, whilst busied
against the misbelieving Christians, from which, he was by him withdrawn,
against their Prophets Law, he would shortly take revenge, therefore he was to
expect naught but war, willing him so to provide as not to be wanting to
himself. Wherefore Aladin with great persuasions and promises, encouraged the
Princes to this war: who kissing the ground, promised with Oaths never to
forsake him, but to do all that Princes desirous of honor ought to do.

Chairadin died in this preparation, in whose stead Amurath appointed Alis his
Son: But he, stayed in his journey toward Europe, by urgent occasions, he sent
Post for him back again.

Aladin forecasting likely dangers, sent another with reasonable conditions for
Peace to Amurath, who answered, Perhaps he would have accepted them if one
month before sent; but seeing he had drawn him so far into the field, to his
infinite charge, no end to be but wars chance; and whereas he called me, A
heardsman, etc. in disgrace, if he be not such a one himself, let him meet me
in the field, etc. The Ambassador replied, The King offered not this for fear,
but to save innocent blood: which set apart, he should find him not inferior
in number of expert Soldiers, or other provision, etc. Amurath commanded him
to depart, (in great rage) willing his Master, (if of such courage) to end all
in the field, not doubting but shortly to chastise him, etc. Three days after
Alis came to him, whom he dearly loved, relying much upon his Counsel. The
Ambassador leaving nothing untold that Amurath had said; Aladin said to the
Princes, Amurath threatens to take from us Iconium and Larenda, but let him
take heed we take not from him Prusa. The Ambassador deeming him about 20000
strong, Aladin rejoicing said, Surely he will not dare give us battle: if he do,
it is upon great disadvantage, his men being fewer, and wearied with travel.
Amurath holding on his way, and daily encouraging his Soldiers with
persuasions gifts, and promises, came to the great Plains of Caramania; into
which Aladin coming encamped, within a days march of him, resting that night.
Amurath next morning, put his Army in order, appointing Jacup his youngest Son
(joined with expert Captains) in the right wing, Bajazet etc. in the left in
which were the 1000 Servians: himself in the main battle, Temurtazes in the
Vantguard, the Sub-bassae of (...) and Achmetes in the rear. Aladin set his men
in like order, that in all judgment he was not inferior to Amurath. These
great enemies came on courageously with displayed Ensigns, and noise of
Trumpets; Drums, etc. very great. But the sign given, Sanagazes one of the
Princes, brake Temurtazes his ranks, Teberruses also a Tartar, and Varsacides
another Prince, shot arrows like hail upon the Vantguard: which Bajazet seeing,
(and leave obtained) brake in on the enemy with such violence, that he was
surnamed Gilderun, that is, Lightning. (...) and Hozza with others; following
him with like courage, there was (a great space) a dreadful and doubtful fight;
in which many thousands were on (...) sides slain. At (...) (...) the (...)
Princes (overmatched) fled: which Aladin seeing, despairing of victory sped
hastily to Iconium. Most of the great spoil, Amurath giving to Temurtases and
his Soldiers, speedily marched to Iconium, besieging Aladin, and proclaiming
no kind of violence to be done to any on pain of death, that it might appear,
he warred against the Mohammedan rather to propulse wrong than for sovereignty
and spoil; which Lazarus his Christians among others transgressing, they were
exemplarily punished.

Aladin (without hope of escape) sent to his wife, Amurath's daughter,
bewailing his estate, and requesting her, by all love te her miserable husband,
to adventure her self to crave pardon for his offense of her angry Father; who
attired as fittest for her husband's estate, came falling down on her knees,
with wise words and distilling tears, and would not be taken up till she had
obtained grace; who ( Amurath entirely loving her) assured of her Father's
promise, sent to her husband, to come out next day, and humbly to acknowledge
his fault before her Father; who prostrating himself and acknowledging his
undutifulnesse, obtained, for his wives sake, pardon of life, and restitution
to his Kingdom with many great gifts. Latin Historys report, this was fought
against Amurath's Grandfather by the Mother, who (...) great part of his
Kingdom. But the Turkish make Amurath, Orchanes, and Lulufers Son the daughter
of the Captain of Jarchiser Castle. This victory was the true beginning of the
Othoman Kingdoms greatness in Asia; the other Selzuccian Princes submitting
themselves to Amurath, and after to Bajazet: till great Tamerlain taking
Bajazet, restored the Princes to their old possessions.

Amurath took Despotopolis in his return, in disbanding at Cutai, and in
triumph, coming to Prusa. Uaywod with his Servians returning home, reported to
Lazarus the Despot, that wars sucees, and in what cruel manner his men were
used by Amurath's command: With whom, said he, Thou have causelessly made a most
dishonorable peace, by giving faith to such a miscreant, sending thy subjects
(in recompense) to be so butchered, besides the shameful (...): whereas in
depth of wisdom, thou shall find thy self nothing inferior to the Tyrant, in
warlike force; for by our valor (but a handful) not his, he got the victory. I
know he cannot bring into the field above 50000 fighting men, admit 100000, Art
not thou able to levy far more? and tenfold better provided for all other
warlike provision? Besides, the Christian Princes will send such aid, that his
Barbarian forces will be no hing to those thou shall be able to bring into the
field, etc. Lazarus was now so moved, he determined to break the servile
League; and sent to the King of Bosna his neighbor, chiefly to crave aid
against their common enemy the Turk: who answered, It had been better that to
have been thought of, before the foul and disgraceful contract made, etc. But
seeing things done could not be undone, he promised to join with him. And
meeting at an appointed place, concluded fully all Articles.

There was a Castle in Bosna's confines called Alexandria, whose Christian
Captain, was the Turks (...): He under color of friendship went to Amurath,
secretly opening (...) Kingdoms state, and what the King intended (...) him,
showing probable means, how it might be subjected; by a convenient power, and
offering his own service. He casting a rich garment on him, (a sure token of
his favor) appointed Lala Schahin to invade Bosna; who joining himself with
this (...), with 20000 men over-runing one side, took great booties unresisted:
and to do the more harm, by his advice, divided his Army to burn and spoil in
diverse parts. The King advertized by the Captain of all, conveniently (...)
ambushes: and as Schahin with but 1000 men returned with booty, suddenly 30000
Christians appearing, he would have fled; but his other gallants, presuming,
and (...) to lose rich prey, would skirmish with them, and were almost all
slain, and the spoil recovered. Schahin saved himself by flight, most of the
rest being intercepted and slain, scarce 5000 of 20000 returned home.

Amurath, the while, married the Greek, Emperor's daughter at Neapolis, whose
2 sisters also married his two Sons: and then Circumcised Ba jazet's 3 Sons
with great solemnity. Now also Jazgi Ogli, his Ambassador to the Egyptian
Sultan, in requital of his Embassage returned. He, upon the loss in (...), and
the Despot's revolt, was much disquieted, commanding Alis Bassa to send speedy
Commissions into all parts for levying a royal Army, which was done in
post-haste. Then were the other Mohammedan Princes, homaging him, sent for to
aid him; who through fear and zeal, brought them forces. Diverse voluntier
Mahometans, came from far also. Bajazet, Cutai's Governor, etc. came to aid
his Father, with all his forces. Two Christian tributaries Custendyll and
Seratzill, came also; but Sasmenos of Bulgaria and the Prince of Varna etc.
came not. Now Lala Schahin, os great years dyed, in whose place, Temurtases
governed. Amurath highly offended and grieved at the 2 Princes revolt,
commanded Alis with 30000, to invade and spoil Sasmenos his Country: whose Army
accordingly assembled, the Bassa took many strong holds in Bulgaria, as
Piravade, Venuzina, etc. Amurath the while, gathering a great Army, in Asia,
determined to pass into Europe at Spring, committing his Countrie's
Government, to Temurtases Basia, and 4 others; being stayed a while with (...)
winds, he was transported to Callipolis by its Sanzack, the 3d time of
Amurath's Army being brought into Europe. Ba ja zet came to him thither: Alis
also retiring out of Bulgaria to Chalcide, recounted to him his expeditions
success.

Sasmenos seeing his Country spoiled, etc. by his Nobles advice, tying a
winding sheet about his neck (a token of deserved death) came to Calcide, and
falling flat at Amuraths horses feet, most humbly craved pardon, offering to
deliver his chief City Silistria, a pledge of fidelity: who pardoned him, and in
assurance cast a rich garment upon him, sending Alis to possess Silistria. But
(he repenting) delivered it not, but strongly fortified it. Amurath, now more
offended, commanded Alis, with fire and sword again to spoil him: who so
terrified the peoples hearts, that many strong places were voluntarily yielded;
then he besieged Nicopolis the strongest City, on Danubius, whither Sasmenos
was fled; who taking his Son with him craved pardon as he had done before, with
whose misery the Bassa moved, and having taken most of his Dominion, he granted
it. So returning to Amurath, who sending for Jacup Governor of Carasia,
repaired to his Father with all his power. This was the greatest Army brought
by the Turks before into Europe. Lazarus joined to him the King of Bosna, with
Uulcus Macedons Prince, his son in law. Also he procured great supplies from
Valachia, Hungaria, etc. and Italy, with numbers of voluntary Christians: all
which far exceeded the Turks great Army. He encamped by the River Morova the
greater, and sent Demetrius (a terror to the Turks) to take the strong Castle
of Serkive, taken before from Sasmenos, and thought dangerous to Servia; they
hearing he was come, yielded it without resistance. Lazarus doubting it would
be hardly kept, sent Uulcus with 20000 to bring away all therein, and in the
City, who razed both, before Jaxis Begs coming, sent by Amurath to have done
the same. The two Christian tributaries met Amurath in his march, who marched
with their forces before him as guides, and in Custendist's Country, was
refreshed with all necessaries; then (...) Morova the less River, he drew so
near Cossova's Plains, that he with Bajazet could view the Christian camp to
cover those large plains: And (daunted) he (...) with his greatest Captains
what course to take; and would that day have given (...), but Eurenoses d (...)
for the (...) and (...) (...), next morning (...) (...) Ba jazet, etc. in the
right (...), Jacup in the (...), himself in the main body. Uulcus was in
Lazarus his right wing, Bosna's King and his Son in the (...) himself in the
main battle: who (they report) had 500000 men: Amurath scarce half so many; who
drawing out 2000 of the best Archers, and placing them under Malcozzeus and
Mustapha, on both the Armies sides, Eurenose's told him, that in (...) battle,
if he retired a little; the Christians following upon hope, would loose their
close standing, and leave an entrance for his men. The archers first (...)
conragiously, the Turks gave a little ground, then the Christians (...)
assailing the left wing, aster hard fight put it to flight; Ba jazet so renewed
the battle, that the left wing began to turn (...): In which bloody fight many
thousands fell on both sides; the armor and weapons (...) was as lightning,
and whose noise, with horses neighing (...) men's out-(...), was so terrible and
great, (...) the wild (...) (...) astonished. About noon, the Christians gave
ground, and at length plainly fled, whom the Turks pursuing, slew without
(...); Lazarus the Despot being slain. (...) some report, he was (with his Son)
taken, and afterward cruelly slain, in revenge of Amurath's death: others,
that he died in (...). Amurath with a few chief Captains, viewing the
numberless heaps of dead bodies, a Christian Soldier sore wounded and bloody,
arose out of the heap, and as he came toward him, fell diverse times, (through
weakness); drawing nigh to Amurath he was commanded to come nearer, (being
slayed by the Guarders) supposing he would crave his life; who pressing as if
to kiss his feet, stabbed him in the belly with a dagger under his coat, of
which he presently died. His name was Miles Cobelitz, shortly after cut in
small pieces before Ba jazet. The Turks Annals report, That Cobelitz (coming to
him as a fugitive servant of the Despots) so stabbed and slew him, being so cut
in pieces as aforesaid. Since this, when any comes to kiss the Sultans hand or
approach to him, he is (as for honor) led between two Courtiers; but indeed so
entangling him, that he shall not violate him. Ba jazet being brought with an
Ensign, as the successuor, (...) his dead Fathers Tent, secretly conveyed
thither; Jacup Zelebi, or the Noble, was sent for by the Bassaes as from his
Father; who coming in ignorant of the chance, was (as most report) by Ba
jazet's command, by them strangled; yet their Annals charge not Ba jazet. Ever
since 'twas holden a good policy, in beginning of the Turks Reign to Massacre
their brethren and nearest kinsmen.

Amurath was more zealous in his superstition than any, of great courage,
fortunate in all; he slew more than Father and Grandfather: he greatly enlarged
his territories in Asia, by sword, marriage and purchase; and by the Greeks
discord and cowardice, he subdued the Romania in (...), with its Territories;
leaving the Constantinopolitan Emperor little or nothing there, but the City
it self. He won much of Bulgaria; entered Servia, Bosua, and Macedonia; he was
liberal and severe; beloved and feared of his Subjects, of few words, deeply
(...); slain, being 68 years old, reigning 31, in 1390. He was royally buried
at Prusa, etc. There is a Castle and Tomb in remembrance of him in Cassova's
Plains, where he was (...), and his entrails buried.

The Life of Bajazet I. the 4th, and most unfortunate King of the Turks.
BAjazet succeeding his Father, the first year of his Reign, besieged the City
Cratova in Servia, (whereto the silver Mines (not that wars least cause)
belonged) yielded to him, on condition, that the Inhabitants might with life
and liberty depart; who no sooner gone, but they were all slain by his men sent
for that purpose. Then also he wone (...), with diverse Castles near Cratova.

Young Sigismund King of Hungary, advertized by the Servians, of Bajazet's
proceedings, requested him (by Ambassadors) as he was just, and wished to live
in quiet with his own, to desist from such open wrong, etc. Whom he answered
not, till be overran a great part of the (...) Country. Then calling them
into a Town filled with his Soldiers, said, They might see his right good
enough to that Town, and the rest taken, seeing the walls acknowledged it,
willing them so to tell their Master; Which (...) answer (...) the King, as if
open war had been (...) to him: yet, not being well settled in his Kingdom, and
doubting of a contrary faction, he was glad then to put it up.

Next year he by Forises Beg taking Vidina in Servia, returned to Hadrianople.
But the Caramanian King, invading his frontiers in Asia the while, though then
not (...) leisure, yet afterward he fully revenged it. Eurenoses then took the
City Sitros in Thessaly: and Ferises passed over (...), grievously spoiling
Valachia, returning laden with prey. Now also Jegides Bassa entered (...),
carrying a number of Captives to Hadrianople, where Bajazet wintred.

Next spring Bajazet passing to Prusa, built a fair Temple, a College, and
(...) house, and, returning into Europe, a Monastery at Hadrianople. In Asia,
he besieged Philadelphia, the only City in lesser Asia holden by the
Christians. At first, he straightly commanded not to spoil or (...) any thing
belonging to the Citizens, hoping to make them more willing to yield. But
finding them resolved to the last, he commanded not to spare any thing: which
was by his Soldiers done. The Citizens after long siege, not able to endure,
and no hope of relief, yielded their City. Some write, it was not besieged
without the Emperor's consent: and the Greeks envying its holding out, helped
to win it. At the siege, Aiden Ogli Prince of Caria, came to Bajazet, yielding
himself his Vassal: to whom, he restored places taken from him a little before,
on this condition, not to coin money in his own name, or publicly to be
prayed for as before; but all to be done in Bajazet's name. (...) he led his
Army into Saruchania, subduing it on like conditions: Then passing farther, to
Mentesia in Caria, the Prince left it to his pleasure, fleeing to (...) Prince.
And in revenge of the King of Caramania's former invasion, he entered it, taking
Cesaria, and otherplaces: the King glad to be content, making peace as he
pleased. As he was making this expedition, Prince Germian's son (with a chief
Counselor) coming to him, were sent prisoners over the Strait to Ipsala
Castle, laying in durance many years. Thus he oppressing most of Aladin's
successors, returned to Prusa in triumph.

Aiden (fled) had incited the Prince of Castamona, to invade the bordering side
of Bajazets Kingdom. At which time the Vayvod of Valachia passed over (...)
into the parts of Servia and Bulgaria, possessed by the (...), spoiling the
Country, and slaying them by heaps; and carrying back many prisoners. Bajazet
deferring his purpose against the other, turned his forces against the (...):
Wherefore passing to Hadrianople, thence to Nicopolis, and so over Danubius, he
entered Valachia, spoiling and burning: whom he Vaywod giving battle, was
overthrown, and many slain; at last, he obtained peace by submission, and a
yearly tribute. News being brought (the while) that the Christian Galleys
greatly hurt along the Coasts of Asia, he entered into Thessalie, destroying all
to (...): and taking Neapolis in Greece, and Joannina in Aetolia, he wintred in
Asia. Next spring he with great power passed the (...) of Callipolis, to invade
Hungary. But (intercepting a (...) with Letters from the Greek Emperor, giving
that King warning thereof; and understanding of another Messenger before sent)
(...) persuaded him to desist, and besiege Constantinople, which was (he said)
surrounded with Turkish Provinces: bringing Philadelphia for example. Bajazet
returning, besieged it first by Land, then by Sea, which (most report)
continued 8 years, in which, Emmanuel the Emperor, left the City to crave aid
of the German Emperor, French King; and others. The Citizens at length had
happily yielded, if the Hungarian King (assisted with French and other
Volunteers, with a 130000 under John Count of Nivers) had not passed into his
Dominions, recovering Vidina etc. in Bulgaria, and besieging Nicopolis. Who
('it is reported) should proudly say in his jollity (through his Armies
greatness) What need we fear the Turks? who need not fear the Heavens fall; if
they should, we were able to hold them up with our Spears and Halberts.
Bajazet commanding the ladders, etc. for assault, to be burnt: marched from the
siege, with a puissant Army to Nicopolis, sending Eurenoses before to intercept
some Christians, to learn their Armies state. But he returned, without any
prisoner taken: which troubled Bajazet, fearing a wary enemy. Sigismund (eaving
sufficient for the siege) went to meet his proud proud enemies: who (within
sight) showed but half his Army keeping close in ambush not far off with the
other. The Christians deeming they were far (...) in number, divided also their
Army to enclose the Turks. The French disiring to give the first Charge, began
the battle (the Hungarians, etc. not yet in order) where was so many thousands
slain. Bajazet (ere long) arising with the other half, and coming on as became
his name Gilderum, so hardly charged the French, that they stood at first as
dismayed: but seeing no remedy, and hoping of relief from the rest, fought till
they were almost all slain or taken: diverse French horsemen (as their manner
was) fought on foot, which horses running on the Hungarians, made them doubt
they were quite overthrown: wherewith dismayed, they fled in great haste; the
Turks pursuing, made great slaughter, many being also drowned in Danubius. They
took so many, 'twas thought every Turk had his prisoner. (...) ((...) like) got
over Danubius in a little boat, and fearing the Hungarians violence for the
battle's loss, fled by Sea to (...); then sailing to Rhodes; and from thence,
landed in Dalmatia: so after 18 months painful (...), he returned into Hungary,
where the contrary faction had chosen the King of Naples their King, then going
with an Army to take possession; had (...) Sigismund (by some Nobles help)
prevented him: There were 20000 Christians, 6000 Turks slain. The Count of
Nivers was taken with 300 great ones, who (after great Contumely before
Bajazet) was commanded (...) choose 5 other Caprives, and with them was sent to
Prusa, (all the rest being (...) in pieces before his face) and ransomed
afterward for 200000 Ducats. This bloody battle was in 1396.

Bajazet thus relieving Nicopolis, besieged Contanstinople more hardly than
before; building Forts, etc. on one side, and a Castle upon the strait over
against it, to hinder (what possible) passage thereto by Sea. This (...) years
siege, I suppose (by the History) was part of the 8 years. Emmanuel (wearied)
sent to (...) for (...) (...) to which, (hearing that (...) intended shortly to
war upon him) he the more harkened; yet on condition, for the Turks to dwell in
a Street of the City, with freedom of Religion, Laws, their own Judge, and to
give him 10000 Ducats yearly; which he was glad to accept of. A Temple was
built, for the Turks sent out of Bythinia there to dwell: which when (...) was
overthrown by (...), was pulled down, and the Turks: driven out.

Stephen, Despot of a part of Servia, (...) his son, sent (...) an Ambassador
with loving Letters, and Royal presents: by whom, also the old Princess
offered her fair Daughter Despina in marriage, who was promised him, whilst
Amurath lived. (...) being very glad thereof, she was forthwith sent to him;
and with great solemnity shortly married. He held her dearest of all his wives,
restoring (for her sake) the (...) City and Castle, and (...) to her Brother
Stephen: She allured him to drink wine, forbidden by their Law, and to delight
in sumptuous Banquets, never used by his predecessors. Corruption increasing
in the Turkish kingdom, (...) determined to execute diverse apprehended Judges:
whose estate though Alis (...) (in such favor with him that the Vulgar
honored him as the King) and other great ones pitied; yet (He dangerous to be
spoken to when angry) none durst entreat for them. Alis requested an Ethiopian
jester (who many times (under some jest) would bolt out that, in the Kings
heat, which his Counselors durst not speak of in secret) to devise some
means for these Judges, etc. Who putting on a rich Hat wrought with gold, and
apparel beseeming an Ambassador; presented himself before the King with a
Counterfeit gravity. Bajazet asked him, why he was so (...). I have a request
said he to thee, wishing to find favor. Bajazet asked him, what it was. I
would fain go (said he) Ambassador to Constantinople. To what purpose, said
Bajazet? To crave 40 or 50 of the Emperors grave Monks and Friars to bring
thither. What should they do here, said he? To be placed instead of the doting
Judges to be put to death, said the jeaster. I can place of my own, said
Bajazet. True (said he) for gravity, etc. so would the Monks, etc. serve, but
not so learned as those in thy displeasure. If they be learned said Bajazet,
why do they contrarily pervert justice, etc? There Is good reason, said he. What
reason, (...) Bajazet? He (poynting to Alis) can tell better than I (said he):
who, commanded to give the reason, showed, those Judges (being not conveniently
provided for) were enforced (many times) to take rewards to the staying
justice. Which true, he commanded Alis to appoint them convenient stipends,
granting their pardon. The Bassa (...) down, the Judge to have 20 aspers of
every suite exceeding a 1000; and for every writing, etc. out of the Court 12
aspers: taking it at this day. Bajazet (not long after) intended to put certain
Commanders to death, grievously offended for a small occasion. Who (before him)
the Counselors sat hanging down their heads, not daring to speak a good word
for them, etc. The jeaster stepping forth earnestly requested him to execute
them presently as Traitors; railing on them, etc. Bajazet asked him why he so
exclaimed, thinking he could greatly accuse them. Because the Knaves be good
for nothing, said he, and they say, Tamerlane is coming against us: if thou
take up but an ensign, and I go before with a drum, I Will strike up such a
terrible march, that we shall need none of these, etc. to get the Victory.
Bajazet musing deeply a great while, and considering the jeasters drift,
granted them an unlooked for pardon. Bajazet sending this jeaster to his
Mother, to bring her desired news of his success against the Christians; she
began to demand how he did, and of his success. He answered; Very well, having
won a great Country, enriching (...) (...). A little after, she asked him
again, How he did, and how (...) in his Wars. He answered, as before. But
asking the 3d time how he did, Do ask me so often (said he) Oh? whore! thou
(...) brought forth a son like a Devil, who does naught, but burn and destroy
the World where he comes. She crying out, up start he, and was never more seen.

Bajazet passing over Hellespont against the Valachian, who had aided
Sigismund, leaving Temurtases his Lieutenant at (...): The Caramanian King came
and surprised Temurtases (by night) fearing nothing, and carried him in bonds
to Caramania. But Bajazet ending his Wars in Valachia, he (fearing) released
Temurtases, apparrelled him richly, craving pardon for his wrong, and sent
great presents, to Bajazet to make his excuse: Bajazet would not hear the
Ambassador, but then levied a great Army to invade him. Aladin now levied all
forces he could, entertaining all mercenary Soldiers; and at Aczae upon the
way gave him battle, but was overcome and put to flight: in which, his horse
stumbling and he falling, was taken and brought bound to Bajazet; his 2 sons
being taken also and sent to Prusa. Himself was delivered to Temurtases: who
presently caused him to be hanged, Bajazet seeming to be very sorry, for he was
his Sister's son. He won (...), etc. with all Aladins kingdom: also Amasia,
Cappadocia's Metropolis, was delivered to Bajazet, by its Prince, too weak for
Casi-Burchanidin Prince of Sebastia, and who had solicited Aegypt-Sultan to
aid him (...) Bajazet. Who led his Army toward Sebastia, whose Citizens had
deprived Casi for cruelty, (...) in his son; but soon weary (...) the son, they
sent that they would yield it to him coming that way: Casis his son now fled to
Nasradin his brother in-law; the Citizens delivering it to Bajazet accordingly,
leaving Solomon his eldest son Governor So conquering Caramania, taking Amasia
and (...), most of Cappadocia and all Rumilia, Asiatica, he wintred at Prusa:
who at spring, ( Cutrum of Castamona dead) came thither with a great Army;
wherefore his Son Isendiar fled to Synope, whence he humbly requested him, to
suffer him to have that little City to live in; and not seek the sons blood,
for the Fathers offense. Bajazet granted it; yet took from him Castamona with
most of Pontus, giving it to Solomon. Then also he oppressed Prince Germean,
and took from him all his Dominion. And the Prince of Mentesia abiding at
Castamona, and doubting now of safety after (...) Bajazet's Death, fled into a
Hermites habit to Tamerlane the Tartar. Bajazet returning, built a Magnificent
Temple at Prusa, during which, he forbear wine, reposing with grave and learned
men, and administering justice; greatly winning his subjects: and now all
bordering Princes stood in great fear of him.

Achmetes King of Bagdat and Eiracum, with Josephus of Colchis forced by
Tamerlan's incursions, fled for their lives into Syria, and (discovered) were
imprisoned by Aegypts Sultan: from whence escaping, they fled to Bajazet.
Achmetes after two months, by Bajazets aid, recovered Eiracum. Josephus
tarrying 8 months, procured Bajazet to invade the Egyptian: who slew his
general, discomfiting his forces, took Malatie in Armenia, with 3 places taken
from the Turcomans, spoiling all threabouts, Thence marching toward
Erznitzane, Tachretin its Prince meeting him, yielded all into his power, who
giving it to Josephus, after 6 days, (finding them unwilling to be governed by
a Stranger) surrendered it into his hands again. Them of (...) requesting him to
have their old Prince Tachretin, he granted: but sent his wife and children, as
a pledge, to Prusa, where they were (ere long) made away.

Bajazet having mightily prevailed in Romania, Bulgaria, etc. and other places
in Europe; and having worse oppressed the (...) Princes of Asia, some of whom
he slew: some he exiled, some imprisoned, and other living, but at his
devotion; and fearing no man, was (as he thought) the Worlds terror; diverse of
these Mahometans, met at Tamerlans Court, whither they fled for relief. Germian
Ogli after long imprisonment in Europe, brake prison with his great
Counselor, who consorting and roaming with loytering Companions, delighted
the people with toys; so passing Hellespont, came with much ado to (...): the
Prince of Mentesia (shaven) as aforesaid, Aidin Ogli passing as a Peddler, came
thither also: Tachretin as a (...)-man attending on Issendiar coming as an
Ambassador from another Prince. These with others ariving at (...), every one
particularly complaining, all earnestly requested Tamerlane to revenge the
wrong done them by the Tyrant Bajazet. In so great a matter, he coldly answered
them, that he could not tell, whether all were so as they reported; but he knew
him very zealous in the (...) Religion, therefore warring on the Christians: in
which godly cause (said he) perhaps they refused to assist, or had given him
some greater offense: For (said he) I can hardly believe, such a Prince as he
would, without cause, offer you such violence, especially to Neighbors, and of
the same Religion. Yet I will first send an Ambassador to him, to understand
more of him and his proceedings, before I resolve on any thing. But being
advertized that Achmetes and Josephus, were come to Bajazets Court for aid, he
deferred to send, suspecting Bajazet (by them incited) would first war on him.
But they being departed, he dispatched his Ambassador with many rich gifts,
etc. requesting him to deal kindly with these poor Mohammedan Princes; as also
with the Greek Emperor, whose intercessour to him he was become. Some report
he desired the Kings of Bagdat and Colchis to be delivered him; seeming to
dislike his proceedings against the Turcomans. But Bajazet (highly offended
with this Embassage) in great scorn rejected his presents, especially certain
garments; bidding his Master meddle with his own matters, etc. and not
prescribe him Laws with whom he had naught to do; and to send his rags to his
inferiors, not to Princes of greater power than himself. Adding many
despightful and disdainful words: calling him plain Tamerlan, and the Husband
of a whore, if he met him not in field, wishing himself to take his thrice
divorced wife (polluted by another) if he met him not in battle wherever he
durst. Which answer (aggravated by Axalla a Christian Genoway, and one of his
greatest Counselors, and the Greek Emperors friend) was so ill (...), that
he resolved (all things set apart) to go against the Turk. Besides, he thought
it not fit to suffer so unquiet a Neighbor to grow great, who adding conquests
to conquest, might in the end prove dangerous to his own Estate. Tamerlan
(though a Mohammedan) for the fidelity, valor, and virtue he found in Axalla a
Christian, was advised by him in his greatest affairs, disliked none for his
Religion, so he worshipped but one God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, etc. For
which cause he permitted all Religions within his Countries; were they not
Atheists, Idolaters, or worshippers of strange gods.

Bajazet (not ignorant of Tamerlan's power and purpose) prosecuted the
enlargement of his Empire, and increase of his strength: deeming Tamerlan's
messages to be forewarnings of his designs against him; which he was so far
from fearing, that (...) spared no intemperate speech to provoke him the more.

It shall not be much from our (...), to see what this mighty Tamerlane was,
who held the East in such (...), that he was commonnly called. Gods wrath, and
the Worlds terror. Most report him to have been poorly born, and (in youth) to
be a poor Shepherd, or heardsman in the Mountains; where consorting with
other sturdy Companions, he become a masterful thief among them. To whom other
such still resorting, he soon grew to that greatness as none but he ever yet
came to; contrary to the course of things, which from small beginnings grow not
to notable perfection, but by degrees; and that in long time. Wherein, late
Historiographers seem too much to follow the Turks report, who (by him brought
low) charge him with many untruths, making him first a very abject amongst men:
and for cruelty a monster in nature, etc. which reports, I list not to follow:
especially, others (of no less credit) with greater probability, reporting of
him the greatest honor. He was born at Samercand, chief City of the Zagataian
Tartars, whose Father was Zain Cham or Og their Prince, 3d in descent from
Zingis before remembered: which Og (of a peaceable Nature) long lived in happy
peace with his, subjects: contenting himself more with the increase of his
cattle, than hoording up gold or silver: which (happily) occasioned some
(ignorant of the Tartars Princes custom) to report Tamerlane as a Shepheard's
son, etc. His Father well stricken in years, delivered him his Kingdom, but 15
years old, and joining Ordinar, and Aly two faithful Counselors to assist him
in Government, retired himself to a Solitary life. He first proved his Valor
against the Moscovite, for spoiling a City under his protection, entering his
Country, and proclaiming war against him: whom he overthrew, slaying 25000 of
his foot, between 15 and 16000 horse, with the loss of scarce 8000 horse, and
4000 foot of his own. Where he beholding so many dead on the ground, to a
familiar, lamented the condition of great Armies Commanders, commending his
Fathers quiet life, etc. protesting he was heartily grieved thereat. The (...)
(discouraged) sent for peace, which was concluded on such conditions as he
pleased. The great Cham of Tartary now growing old, sent to him diverse
presents, offered him his only daughter, and with her to proclaim him heir
apparent of his Empire: as in right he was, being his Brothers son. Which
Tamerlane gladly accepting, was afterward done: being supported by his Father
in-law while he lived, and succeding him after his death. Yet (the while) he
wanted not envious Competitours: who now onwards of his way against the King of
China, Calix (of great power in the great Chams Court) with a puissant Army
seized on great Cambalu, the Citizens also disdaining to be governed by the
Zagataian Tartar. Tamerlane returning with most of his Army, met the Rebel, who
had 80000 horse, and 100000 foot, and (above 50000 being on both sides slain)
overthrew him, (himself being beaten to the ground) took him and beheaded him.
His state newly confirmed by his Victory: he proceeded in war against China,
breaking down their strong wall of 400 Leagues long, and entered their Country,
overcoming the King, leading 350000 with the slaughter of 50000 of his men,
took him, and yet (wisely moderating his Fortune) shortly freed him: yet, as
having taken half his kingdom, leaving Ormar his Lieutenant; and imposing
other conditions, with 300000 Crowns yearly tribute. So returning in triumph to
the old Emperor at (...), glad to see him and his daughter, who had still
accompanied him.

The War against Bajazet resolved on, he sent Axalla to Sachetay or Zagati to
begin assembling of forces, that at first of the spring he might set foreward,
He procured from his Father in-law a 100000 foot and 80000 horse, hoping to
have as many from Sachetay, besides 50000 from the Lords that would accompany
him, and diverse other supplies expected also; he would often say, he was
appointed by God to abate the Othoman pride. So departing toward Samarchand
his Empires seat, he left the great Emperors forces to come to Ozara; the
place of general meeting. The Moscovite (requested) sent him 15000 horse, with
a sum of money, and to pass through his necessary Territories. Axalla the
Livetenant general had (the while) assembled all the Army at Ozara, whom
Tamerlane sent for to Samarchand, to confer about setting forward; for by his
advice he did all things, without him nothing: who wanted not the envy of the
Court, but his virtues, (...), and worthy services, supported him against
malice: who having largely discoursed with him about the Armies estate and
order: they shortly departed to Ozara, where Tamerlane consulted with his most
expert Captains, whether to lead his Army toward Capha, by the Moscovites
Coasts, or on the other side the Caspian Sea by Persia's skirts. It was (in the
end) resolved to pass (though the longer way) by the Moscovite, so to the
Georgians, and Therizonda, thence into the Othoman Kings Country. From Ozara he
came to Maranis, staying 3 days for Odmars forces from China, receiving news
thereof; paying, and generally mustring his Army. He conveyed Victual's, and
most of his Furniture by the Caspian Sea, a great ease to his Army, to pass
some 20 Leagues through places without victuals and water. His Army extended 20
Leagues: At the river Edel he stayed at (...) while his Army passed over at
Mechet, and 2 bridges made for that purpose. The Circassians and Georgians now
offered him all assistance they could, he passing that way. The Georgians being
Christians, a great and warlique (...), long tributaries to the Greek
Emperors; tributaries, and sometimes confederates to the Persians, but the
Turks enemies: Axalla drew great number of them to his Princes service, whom
(being tall, beautiful, strong, courageous, and expert) he not a little
esteemed: who had (...) resisted the Othoman Power by their rough Countries
advantage. Tamerlane was by these, with all necessaries relieved: In marching
through whose Countries, he so severely ordered his Soldiers, that if any had
taken injurionsly but an Apple, or the like, he died for it. It Is reported, a
woman complaining of a little milk taken from her, he ripped up the Soldiers
stomach; where it (lately drunk) being found, he sent her away, contenting her;
who otherwise had surely died. Which severity (of many accounted extreme
cruelty) was the preservation of his Army, (...) Camp (now, as a well governed
City) was stored with all things: Artificers and Merchants from far, and
Country people, receiving present money, and safely departing. Then coming to
Bachichich, and staying 8 days to refresh, he (...) 400000 horse, and 600000
foot: or as some present affirm, 300000 horse, and 500000 foot: whom he
generally paid, orating what orders (and military discipline whereof he was
curious) he would have kept. Then also, every Common Soldier might more boldly
behold him, than on other days. Who passing the Georgians, and coming to
Buysabuich, Axalla who led the head of the Army, came to him with news that
Bajazet raising Constantinople siege, was resolved to come to battle in Asia;
(trusting more to the experience, than multitude of his Soldiers) whom,
Tamerlane could hardly be persuaded, would adventure out of Europe, but rather
there protract time to weary him: at which he not insolently rejoicing, said, a
small number well conducted, did often carry the victory from a confused
multitude, staying 3 days, his Soldiers still marching, passed over
Euphrates, the rather to maintain his Army on the enemies spoil. All Cities
yielding, he favorably received, those refusing, he used with all extremity:
(...) strong Sebastia, where some of his forerunners were cut off, and the
gates in contempt set open. Tamerlaxe offended, sent certain horsemen (upon his
displeasure) so to bear themselves, that he might find the City taken, or the
gates shut: for nothing was more dreadful to his men than his displeasure: if
any in hunting gave way to the Lion or Bear for fear, and slew him not, he was
sure to dye: and to turn his back on the enemy, was to run on his own death.
The garrison Turks, seeing these Tartarians (not many) issued out to meet them,
who were so charged by them: that (retiring) for haste, they shut out part
their own, lest the enemy following should have entered of with them: who were
slain by the Tartarians. Shortly after came Tamerlane, and sitting down before
it, lay still 7 days, the defendants thinking he intended to distress it by
long siege. But about the 8th day the walls, etc. in many places undermined,
were suddenly overthrown, leaving large breaches to enter. The Turks forthwith
yielded in hope of their lives: but he (as the Turks report) commanding deep
pits to be dug, buried quick all the people of the City, and utterly rased
it: Then he bid (...) the Governor, spared only for that purpose, to go tell
his Master, what he had there seen; which tragedy he relating, Bajazet demanded
of him, which Army he thought the bigger, he answered, Tamerlane had the greater
number. Bajazet, in great Choler, replied, surely the Tartars sight, has so
frightened this coward, that he thinks every enemy to be two. Most report,
that Tamerlane putting the men to the sword, overran the women and Children
(with his horsemen) in the fields, except a few for prisoners. Also that
Bajazet losing there his eldest son, of some called Orthobules, in his march,
hearing a Sheapheard merrily reposing himself with his pipe, (standing long
listening) with a deep sigh said. Oh happy Shepherd! which had neither
Orthobules nor Sebastia to lose. Yet the Turks give Orthobules lost 6 years
before, against Casi Buchaniden; They reported 12000 in all to be in Sebastia
(...). Other Cities yielded for fear of like danger, whose Citizens (chiefly
the Christians in respect of the Greek Emperor) he courteously used, etc. Not
gone far, he was certainly advertised, that Bajazet (coming) was within 30
Leagues of him; after which, he marched more closely with his his Army. Axalla
sent Chiansen, Prince of Ciarcan with 4000 Parthian horse, to know (if he
could) of the Turks Army, etc. and make relation to him: who (sending another
Parthian with 500 horse before) not ridden 10 leagues but heard of Bajazet's
coming, and susprizing Sennas, understood his Armies state, so marching
foreward. Tamerlane commanded him not to retire, till the enemies arrival seen,
and to give him notice every hour, himself resolving not to pass further,
being at a large plain, and Country, advantageous for battle of his Army far
greater than Bajazets. Yet, (his Army being of diverse Nations, and not to fight
against the foft Chinois, but the Turks most warlique, etc) he thought to be
well advised in proceeding. Wherefore he sent for Axalla to view the place; who
not misliking it, advised him to keep Sennas as long as possible. So sending
word unto them, to fire it upon the enemies, approach, and so withdraw, that
the enemy not desiring there to incamp, might come forward to those plains.
The Turks drawing near Sennas, they all retired, except some 100 left to fire
it, which done, they retired in great disorder. Ciarcan dividing in two parts,
commanded the first to receive the 100, purposely in disorder fleeing so soon
as the enemies pursued them, retiring altogether. Himself stood in a Valley
near a wood, unseen: where suffering 2000 horse enemies to pass by, he charged
them home in the rear the retirers turning on them also: who thus beset, fled,
most being slain, the rest taken prisoners: who were sent to Tamerlane as a
present, with the Bassa of Natolia who led them; whom Tamerlane demanding, why
Bajazet showed such contempt of his Army, etc. He answered, his Lord was Sun
upon Earth, enduring no equal: that he was rather astonished to see him
enterprise from so far, to hinder his Lords fortune; the heavens bending to
further it, etc. that he committed great folly in resisting it. Tamerlane
replied, he was sent from Heaven to punish his rashness, and to teach him, the
proud are hated of God, etc. Thy self (said he) have felt already my Parthians
Valor against thy Turkish, and I have caused him already to raise
Constantinoples siege, and look to his own in Asia. Furthermore he demanded, if
his Master resolved to bid him battle? Be assured (said he) he desires nothing
more: and I would I might acknowledge thee in giving me leave to assist my
Lord. Go, (said Tamerlane) and tell thy Lord thou have seen me, and he shall
find me on horseback, where a green ensign is displayed. The Bassa thanking
him, etc. and returning, declared he had seen him, and reported all he willed
him; and published his courtesy: who besides liberty, had given him a fair
furnished horse, though he were to serve against him. Bajazet answered, he
would shortly try him, hoping ere the march ended, to make him acknowledge his
folly. Next day the 2 Armies encamped within a League: where the Scythians
(greedy and needy) talked (all night) of the spoil, the Parthians of honor,
the Christians of their deliverance, etc. All which Tamerlane hearing, rejoiced
to see his Soldiers hope of Victory: who after the 2 watch, thought to sleep a
while in his pavilion. But his cares not suffering, he then read (as ordinary)
in a book of his Ancessours lives, not to deceive time, but to imitate and
decline what they worthily did, or by rashness, etc. fell into. After
slumbring, he sent for Axalla, who came with diverse great Captains, with whom
consulting a while, he mounting, sent every one to their Charges to make ready.
At which, he heard, the enemy came to take his ground; whose Order he desired
to see, to marshal his own by. Causing 3000 horse to advance, to begin
skirmishing; himself followed to lodge every part in places, foreseen for his
advantage. Seeing the Janissaries in a square battle in midst, on the 2 fronts 2
squadrons of horse, seeming 30000, and another covering the Janissaries
battalion, he thinking this order hard to be broken, said to Axalla, I thought
to have fought a foot, but now I see it behooves me to fight on horseback, to
encourage my Soldiers, to open the enemies great battalion. And my will is,
that my men come so soon as they may, for I will advance with a 100000
footmen, etc. Ciarcan commanded the first 40000 horse, Lord Synopes a
Genovois, the foremost foot: Axalla over 5 squadrons of horse. Bajazet's Army
came bravely on toward their enemies, who stirred not from their place; except
some light horsemen (as loose) skirmishing before the Armies. Tamerlane had
notice that Bajazet meant to fight on foot in midst of 30000 Janissaries, in
whom he most hoped. His horse were 14000 old Soldiers. The Egyptian Sultan
having also sent him 30000 Mamalukes, with 30000 foot: whose Army marching in
one front like a half moon, (but not so well knit as Tamerlanes) seemed almost
as great as his. So with horrible outcries still advancing; Tameriane standing
fast with great silence. Young Ciarcan with his 40000 horse, was in the first
encounter almost wholly overthrown, by the Turks most furious charge: yet
fighting valiantly and entering into the midst of the Janissaries, was himself
slain. About which time, Axalla with the avauntguard, cutting a wing of the
enemies all to pieces, and his foot joining faced the Janissaries, who (...)
behaved themselves for their Prince's safety. This hard fight continued one
hour, not any seen scattered, horsemen rushing together like mountains, men
dying, crying and threatening all at once. Tamerlane patient the while to see
the event; at length his men giving ground, he sent 10000 horse to join with
the 10000 for the rear ward to assist him at need, and charged himself,
causing the, foot to charge, commanded by the Prince of Thanais, who furiously
charged the Janissaries where Bajazet yet was: in whose Army were a number of
mercenary Tartars called Destenses; with many 1000s. taken up in exiled Princes
Countries, who seeing some their friends, others their Natural Princes in
Tamerlane's Army, revolted from Bajazet. Who yet with his own men, and the
Christians from Servia, and other places help, with great courage maintained
the fight: but the multitude (not true valor) prevailed. Tamerlane giving a
fresh charge, and his avauntguard knit to him again reenforcing it, he with
much ado obtained the victory. Bajazet wounded and mounted to escape, fell into
Axalla's hands (thinking him Tamerlane) who for a space took him for some other
great Commander; Musa Bajazet's son with diverse great Captains were taken
there also, with George, (...) of Servia, who (yet) gained the reputation of a
Worthy Captain, who afterward brought to Tamerlane, was by him wel-comed; but
reproved for fighting against him, come in favor of the Emperor, and other
oppressed Princes as himself was. Who answered, his own safety (against his
will) made him take Bajazet's part, to whom all the World seemed to bend:
Whereupon he gave him leave to depart at pleasure. Bajazet being afterward
brought to him, and courteously entertained, presumptnously answered him to
whatever he demanded. Tamerlane (moved) told him, 'twas in his power to make
him lose his life. He answered, Do it; that loss should be his greatest
happiness. Tamerlane demanded why he enterprized to subject so Noble a Prince
as the Greek Emperor? He answered, for glory and soveraignety, that moved thee
to invade me. But wherefore (said he) art thou so cruel toward the conquered,
without respect; said he, for the greater terror of mine enemies. What (said
Tamerlane) would thou have done with me, if I had fallen in thine hands? I
would (said he) have enclosed thee in a Cage of Iron, and in triumph have
carried thee up and down my kingdom: So (said Tamerlane) shall thou be served.
So being taken out of his presence, he said to his followers: Behold a proud
and cruel man, he deserves to be chastized accordingly, etc. I acknowledge God
has delivered to me a great enemy this day, to whom we must give thanks; which
he did. Next day (the dead being to be buried) Ciarcan's body was found amongst
the dead Janissaries: Tamerlane greatly lamenting his Kinsman's death, and
embalming it, conveyed it, with 2000 horse, (and diverse prisoners chained,
etc.) to Samarchand till his coming: The other were honorably buried at Sennas.

This bloody battle, in 1397, was fought from 7 in the morning till 4 in the
afternoon. Tamerlane's politic tiring of Bajazet's strong forces, was the
safeguard of his own. The number slain is diversely reported: the Turks say that
Bajazet lost his Son Mustapha, with 200000 men, Tamerlane, not many fewer;
others, that there were 60000 Turks slain, of Tamerlane's 20000. It was three
days (as they report) before Bajazet could be pacified, but still seeking and
calling for death: neither did Tamerlane afterward courteously use him, but,
as of a proud man, made small account of him, and shackling him in golden
fetters, made him be shut up in an iron Cage, to be seen on every side, so
carrying him up and down in Asia to be derided of his own people, used him for
a footstool when he took horse; and at other times sed him, like a dog, with
his crumbs. All which he did, not so much for hatred, as to show God's Judgment
against the arrogant folly of the proud.

This great overthrow so feared all Bajazet's Countries in Asia, that Axalla
sent to prosecute with 40000 horse and 100000 foot came unresisted to Prusa,
whither the armies remainders were retired, the Country still yielding as he
went. Yea, the great Bassa with the rest fled over Hellespont to Hadrianople,
carrying Solomon, the eldest Son, with them, setting him up in his Fathers
place. Mahomet, the younger, fled to Amasia. Prusa yielding to Axalla without
resistance, he rifled it, taking (with other Wives and Concubines) fair
Despina, which doubled Bajazet's grief.

Emmanuel the Emperor sent his Ambassadors to Prusa, whom Axalla stayed till
Tamerlane's coming; who receiving them honorably, showed them his
magnificence, and order of his Camp, to their great admiration. By these, the
Greek Emperor submitted all to Tamerlan, as his Vassal, bound so to do (he
said) being delivered from the cruellest of Tyrants, by the long journey,
discommodities, loss of his People, and danger of his person; besides his many
virtues and accomplishments. And therefore he would attend him in his chief
City, to deliver it, with all the Empire, into his hands. The Ambassadors,
looking for naught but bondage, thought Tamerlane's acceptance thereof in
friendship was the best bargain that they could make. But he, mildly beholding
them, answered, He was not come from so far to enlarge his dominions, already
large enough; but rather to win honor: And it should appear that he was come
to aid him, as his ally, being requested: that his upright meaning was the
greatest cause that God (by his power) had bruised the fiercest enemy of
mankind, under heaven: He desired no more, but that his service for the Greek
Emperor might be engraven in the memory of his posterity, that they might for
ever wish well to him and his Successors: Long might the noble Emperor live
happily, to govern: And that he (before his return) would so consider, that he
should not lightly fall into the like jeopardy. Few Princes (I suppose) would
perform such a part; but there be but few Tamerlanes in the World. One of these
joyful Ambassadors, being sent to carry this unexpected news, filled the
Emperor (with all Constantinople) with exceeding joy and gladness; who
shortly after passed to Prusa to see Tamerlane, and, in person, to give him
thanks: who, being very glad, sent Axalla to meet and conduct him to Prusa,
where these great Princes met with the greatest magnificence, spending a whole
day together. Tamerlane had a desire to see Constantinople; yet he would go
thither as a private person, which by Axalla was accomplished, where he was
with all possible familiarity received by the Emperor, who showed him all the
rare things to be seen, all the fair Gardens, a league or 2 off, along the Sea
coast, spending 5 or 6 days with all mirth possible: Tamerlane often saying in
his private conduct, he never saw a fairer City, which (for its fair and rich
situation) was worthy to command all the World. He wondering at the costly
buildings of the Temples etc. said, it repented not him of his so long
dangerous voyage, if it had been but to preserve so noble a City from fire and
sword. The Emperor gave him 30 of the best horses possible to be gotten,
richly furnished: knowing him above all things to take pleasure in them;
sending fair presents to all his great Commanders, and bountifully delivering
all necessaries for the Army. So a straight bond of friendship being made, and
by Oath confirmed between them, Tamerlane returned to Prusa, wasting and
spoiling all Bajazet's Dominion in Asia without resistance.

The year being well spent, Tamerlane dispersed his Army into diverse provinces
of lesser Asia, expecting when some of Bajazet's sons or friends should make
means to him for his deliverance, but none came. Whereupon passing by, he said
unto him: I marvail that none of thy Sons or friends come to see thee or
entreat for thee, thou must needs have ill deserved of them, as of others: Yet,
if I should set thee at liberty, would they receive thee as their Sovereign?
Bajazet answered, Were I at liberty, thou should see that I want neither
courage nor means to revenge my wrongs, and to make those disobedient and
forgetful know their duties better. Which made Tamerlan keep a straiter hand
over him. Then restoring to the Mohammedan Princes, Tachretin, Isfendiar,
Germian, and others, all their inheritance with something more; as he did
diverse Cities and Countries of Natolia to the Greek Emperor, for 400000
Ducats of Gold, and 800000 Franks of silver, yearly tribute; and enriching his
Army with Othoman spoils in Asia, he turned against the Egyptian Sultan, who
had aided Bajazet; and entering into Syria, near Aleppo (before yielded to him)
was fought a mortal battle, the Sultan having an 100000 foot and 74000 horse,
whereof 30000 were Mamalukes. Axalla with the Vant-guard, hardly distressed,
was taken, but rescued forthwith by Tamerlane; who, if he had not come on with
fresh forces, that day might have ended his good fortune: After long fight,
(80000 being slain) the Sultan fled, Tamerlane pursuing him 3 leagues, and
sending Axalla with 40000 horse and 50000 foot, to pursue along Arabia's coast:
himself, the while, with 60000 horse and 100000 foot, had all Cities by the Sea
coast as he went yielded to him, as Magata, Aman, etc. only Damasco refused,
Prince Zamadzen strongly defending the same: but Tamerlane, overthrowing part
of the Wall by battery, won it by assault, the Castle (almost impregnable) yet
remaining; but the retired multitude soon pinched with hunger, and many dead,
the rest, for their lives, offered to yield, to whom he would not show mercy:
so that most dying, the rest yielded without condition, and were almost all
slain. Which severity made them bring the keys of their Cities to him 30
leagues off, and contribution to his army. Thence he turned toward Jerusalem,
the City driving out the Sultan's Garrison. Chorazin at first stood on their
guard, but afterward dismayed, and submitting they found mercy, where leaving
certain men in garrison, for repressing the troublesome Mamalukes, he rode to
Jerusalem, to visit the Sepulcher, and make his oblations: where (joyfully
received) seeking out all antiquities, and conducted to all places thereabouts
as Pilgrims, gave to the Sepulcher and devout there many rich gifts, to the
contentment of all but the Jews, who blamed him, whom he called the accursed of
God. He heard the Sultan (gathering his forces) was in Egypt fortifying,
especially Alexandria and Caire. Tamerlane's Army the while came toward
Damiata: which he would not leav behind him, though persuaded by some (as
thought impregnable) so commanding Axalla to set on it, himself followed after.
Axalla declaring to the Inhabitants (most Christians) Tamerlane's courtesy; and
what Religion himself held, and made many Greek Captains tell them of their
misery under the Moors and Mamalukes: which so prevailed, that (by night) they
mastering a quarter of the City delivered a Gate to Axalla: who entering slew or
took all the Mamalukes, gaining the City. Tamerlane (yet on his march) hearing
of this, was in good hope of a happy end in Egypt; for he knew this haven,
might serve him with victuals out of all Greece. He left there two thousand of
the Emperor's Soldiers, taking Oath for obedience. His Vant-guard marched
toward Alexandria, and passing the River, turned even instantly to Cair, to
the Sultan's great astonishment. But using diligence, (as Tamerlane approached)
he entredthe City to defend it, with 40000 horse and 60000 foot: whereby the
City, ready to revolt, was again confirmed: Tamerlan could not stay long before
it for want of victuals, yet making a great trench to cover his horse, etc. he
drew near it giving diverse on-sets, to try the enemies confidence, and to see
the affection of the Citizens (especially of the slaves) to whom he promised
liberty. One day he showed his Army in battle array before it, to seek occasion
to fight; hoping also, if the Sultan came forth, some revolt might happen
within, he having made known to the Citizens, he came not to hurt them, but to
destroy the Mamalukes. But none came forth, neither was any stir raised in the
City: for the Sultan resolved to weary him out with lying still. Who resolved
to force him even in his greatest Cities heart, though not to be done without
great adventure. He purposing first to take one City (for it is divided into 3)
advanced by little and little, still fighting: Having brought his foot to the
place of onset (for it was fortifyed only with ditches and trenches) he
commanded the Prince of Thanais to begin with 50000, and there began a most
terrible fight. Axalla setching a compass, passed the trenches on another
quarter of the City with small resistance; leaving 30000 to fill the ditches,
and make way for the horse to enter: advancing himself against 20000 sent by
the Sultan to stop him, Thanais being almost beat back by the Mamalukes. But
the way being made plain, and 10000 horse entered (who charged on their backs
where the Sultan was) and seconded by 10000 more, Tamerlane following with all
his power: the Sultan retired into the next City. The fight was 7 hours, above
16000 of the Sultan's being slain, and betwixt 7 and 8000 of Tamerlane's: who
now sounded a retrait, hoping next day to win the rest, as he did. For Thanais
forcing their trenches in one place, and Axalla in another, the Sultan (after a
great fight) abandoned the City, encamping by Nilus, purposing to pass it, and
flee to Alexandria, whom Tamerlane followed with his horse, and a few foot,
(whose service he had promised to reward) hardly drawn from their fellows
spoiling the City, against whom the Sultan opposed (on a narrow cawsey) 12 or
15000 slaves, to favor his passage, who stood fast, but at length forced by
their enemies increasing (not without great loss) they took the River, with a
weapon in one hand and swimming with the other to the bank. The Sultan fleeing
with 18000 horse (not fled or drowned) is reported to comforchis men, saying
tha they were not men but Gods that vanquished them. Diverse Mamalukes being
taken and brought to Tamerlane, he demanded if they would serve him now their
Master was fled, which they refused, yet he freed them for their fidelity;
every man after 24 hours spoil, was commanded to his quarters. He set all the
Citizens at liberty, and leaving 10000 good soldiers with many others,
(whereof he carried great multitudes) and c. to keep the City: his Army passed
the river to follow the Sultan. Axalla before with the avauntguard, and Chanais
with the rest; himself going by water, greatly pleased to see the river's
sometimes swist course, and (in an instant) scarce moving.

The Alexandrians (hearing of his coming) besought the Sultan to withdraw into
Lybia, whither (for barrenness) he could not greatly follow; they resolving no
more to resist so great a force; promising to remain his in heart, and to make
it (on the first occasion) appear. Wherefore he (hoping time would bring some
change) determined to retire: and departing with standing tears, often said,
God was angry, etc. That he must needs suffer the overthrow of his Estate, etc.
Yet he hoped to return and deliver his pecple from bondage, etc. Tamerlane
staying long here, sent Axalla to pursue him, grieved he could not get him.
This brute passing with Axalla into Lybia, so feared all Africa, that 22
Moors Kings sent (thinking he followed) to offer obedience: the Sultan still
flying off, the nearest Tamerlane took hostages; the rest, faith given,
contented him.

After this, Tamerlane desired to see his native Country, the rather moved by
his Wive's request; his Father in-laws sickness; his Own age; and his wearied
Soldiers desires. The stay was Calibes his coming, (whom he, for his deserts,
appointed governor of all his conquests in Egypt and Syria) who was making
way along Euphrates, for the conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia; and being sent
for, came to Alexandria, whither the whole Army was assembled. Tamerlane
leaving Zamalzan (Call bes his Lieutenant general) Governor with 6000 horse,
and 10000 foot, departed to Cair, leaving Calibes 40000 horse and 50000 foot,
and instructing him how he would have those Kingdoms Governed, dismissed him,
seeming very sorry to leave him. So setting forward, he (with a few) turned
aside to Jerusalem; tarrying 11 days, visiting Christ's (...) (whom he called
the Christians god) and the ruins of Salomon's Temple wondering, etc. but
grieved not to see them in their former beauty: despising the Jews, who so
cruelly murdered Him that came to save them; he commanded Jerusalem to be free
from all subsidies and garrisons, giving great gifts to, and honoring the
Monasteries. Thence he came to Damasco, which (infected with Jezides opinion
(an arch heretic with the Mahometans) and ill affected to him) he razed,
digging up and burning Jezides his bones, and filling his before-honoured grave
with dung. So marching and blasting the world as he went, he passed Euphrates,
and conquering Mesopotamia with Babylon, and all Persia, he returned loaded
with spoil to Samarchand. Bajazet having layen 2 years in miserable thraldom,
did violently beat out his brains, against the bars of the iron cage
enclosing him in 1399. Yet of his death are diverse reports: that he (through
sorrow) died of an Ague, that he poisoned himself: the Turks affirming an
unlikely report, that first poisoned by Tamerlane, he was freed, dying 3 (...)
after. His body (at Mahomets request his son) sent to Asprapolis, was conveyed
to Prusa, and buried in a Chapel without the City Eastward, where also Despina
lies.

Tamerlane and Bajazet, both began from the Tartars: Bajazet being the 4th from
Othoman: and Tamerlane the 4th from great Zingis: both of great power, and like
spirit, etc. above measure ambitious, the ground of all troubles raised by them
to the Worlds astonishment. Yet Bajazet's virtues were much obscured by his
Choler and waywardness, etc. He used commonly to say, His treasures was his
Childrens meat, not his Soldiers pay: which was by a Soldier cast in his
teeth, when he raged to see himself forsaken by them in the great battle.
Whereas Tamerlanes virtues were graced with diverse of like nature, no man more
kind to his friends, or more dreadful to his enemies, etc. Bajazet is to be
accounted more fortunate than the Conqueror his enemy, having ever since one
lineally to succeed in his Kingdom and Empire: as at this day. Whereas
Tamerlane's Empire (divided by him among his sons) shortly after his death
decayed, rent asunder by ambition and civil discord; and not long after (with
his posterity) rooted out by Usun Cassanes the Persian King.

The Life of Mahomet I. 5th King of the Turks, and Restorer of their sore
Shaken Kingdom.
SOme write Bajazet had 2 sons, Orchanes or Calepinus, (...) in the 2d year of
his Reign; and Mahomet who possessed his Brothers Kingdom. Others that Orchanes
and Mahomet were Calepinus's sons, who died Reigning 6 years: that Orchanes
slain by his Uncle Mustapha, Mahomet in revenge slew him, possessing the
Kingdom. Others reckon 7 sons of Bajazet, with their uncertain succession. I
shall leave these diverse reports, with the History following, to the credit
they shall find with considerate Readers.

Neither the Greek Historiographers, nor John Leunclavius a great traveller
among the Turks, do mention Calepinus or Orchanes. But, in mine opinion, the
great confusion of the Turkish Kingdom wrought by Tamerlane, with the civil
discord afterward arising among Bajazet's sons for the restless Room of
Soveraignity, etc. might give just occasion of such diverse reports: some
reckoning such, as never were, to have succeeded in Government. Wherefore
leaving Calepinus and Orchanes, etc. I (following the Turkish Historie's
authority) reckon this Mahomet a younger son of Bajazet, 5th King (...) Turks:
who after his fathers Captivity, about 10 years, was (after great and dangerous
wats) solely invested in that Kingdom.

Bajazet (as the Turkish Kings) had by diverse wives and concubins, 7 sons.
Erthogrul the eldest was lost against Casi (...), Mustapha slain against
Tamerlane. Casa the youngest, a child when his father was taken, and afterward
(with Fatine his Sister) died hostage to the Emperor. Solomon (conveyed out of
the battle into Europe) was saluted Sultan. Mahomet fleeing to (...) was
Governor (in his fathers time) there. Isa, after (...) departure, seized on
Prusa. Musa was taken with his father, and afterward freed by Tamerlane.

Places about Aniasia, with a great part of Cappadocia, were so troublesome
after Tamerlan's Victory, that keeping watch and ward continually, many wearied
and despairing of better times, voluntarily exiled themselves, which much
grieved Mahomet, but 15 years old. Wherefore consulting, what course to take,
it was thought best, to get farther off into stronger places, and while their
enemies departed not, to cut them short by policy. For though Tamerlane lay at
Caria: yet his Captains (...) and spoiled at pleasure over lesser Asia.
Hereupon, he departed to Derby: encountering (by the way) with Cara (...),
Isfendiars Kinsman: whom he put to (...) with great slaughter. Thence going to
Kereden, he sent a sple into Tamerlan's Camp: afterward consulting of farther
proceedings. Some thought he were best withdraw into the mountains of (...)
Asia, till Tamerlan's departure. Others thought those mountains no places to
trust to, and therefore to return to Amasia, there to live protecting his
subjects, and not leave them a prey to straggling Tartars: which (...) he
following, and ready to set forward, the spy returned certifying of Bajazets
health, but, for the straight guard over him he could not speak with him: that
Tamerlane (...) all that part of Asia. Mahomet had not long (...) at (...), but
(...) heard, Caradulets Chach was with 20000 coming to spoil his Country,
given him by Tamerlane. Wherefore he speedily sent a spy before his forces,
who hastily returning, told him, Cara lay at Aegiolus, but with a small power,
having dispersed his Army to seek after Pillage. Mahomet marching thither with
celerity, overcame, and utterly discomfited his Army: Cara being slain with an
arrow in the head, and returning to (...), refreshed and rewarded his
Soldiers. Being shortly advertised that Cubad Ogi (hardly besieging Casaria)
was like in short time to take it to the hazarding of all Cappadocia: he
marching day and night thither, was upon him at unawares, putting him to
flight, and slaying most. Then entering Cubads Country, Pontus, he grievously
spoiled it, winning also Peltae, a strong Castle in Phrygia's confines. Inal
Ogli another of Tamerlan's Captains, immediately after entering Cappadocia with
20000 men, killed and spoiled before him; the people sleeing into woods and
mountains, for fear. Mahomet exceedingly grieved wrote to him. Whereas without
just cause, or war proclaimed, thou have invaded our Kingdom, cruelly killing
our subjects, etc. digressing from the Laws of true Mohammedan (...), etc. thou
should forthwith depart with thine Arms, etc. But seeing thou will proceed in
thy wicked purpose; falsely persuading thy self, my kingdom is (...) of a
lawful inheritour, I will shorty (by Gods power) come against thee, and in
field Chastize thee according to thy deserts. Therefore while thou may,
reclaim thy self, etc. In the year after the great Prophet (...) departure,
806. To which, Inal answered in writing; Why do thou ( Mahomet) so provoke
me? etc. being (in truth) but a very child. Thou oughtst not to have laid hands
on the Countries, with the wrongful Title of Sultan. There Is no cause to
Complain I seek after thy life, thy Kingdom, etc. I challenge it to my self,
none of thine, etc. Wherefore except thou without delay, get thee packing, etc.
I denounce against thee all the Calamities of war, wishing thee with speed to
prepare to battle, etc. This year of our great Prophet 806. Mahomet had shortly
a notable victory of this Tartar Prince, and the like against 2 other at
Charachisar Castle and Artuck Ona plain. And one Mesites a Turk, (fortified in
(...)) spoiling the Country about, he sent Bajazet Bassa who shortly brought
him bound unto him: who seeing an invincible courage in him when he was to die,
pardoned him: for which he (ever faithful) did him great service.

The brute of Mahomet's name, coming to Tamerlane, he many times highly
commended his valor in so render years; (...) Bajazet, he was very desirous to
see him: and if he found that true that was reported, he would bestow one of
his daughters on him etc. willing Bajazet to write to him, not to doubt to come
to him to his own and fathers good. Bajazet (at first) (doubting the Worst)
requested Tamerlane not to believe that of his son. Yet persuaded by his
protestations, and importuned, he wrote: Tamerlame sent Hozza, Mahomet's
Ambassador, with these and other letters and rich presents; but understanding
the cause of his coming, he consulted with the Bassaes, whether he were best go
or not. They were all of opinion, it was not good to adventure, etc. And (said
they) if Tamerlane offended will by force seek thee, we will take refuge of the
woods and mountains until he be departed etc. Yet Mahomet hoping his journey
to be for his Father's good and his own advancement, (...) to go setting
forward. But Cara Iahia getting some of the Prince (...) forces, set on him by
the way, but with as ill success as before: fo travelling-on, Alis Beg, went
about to intercept him; who (in have) was upon Alis ere he was aware, or well
provided, so that he fled. Mahomet considering, the nearer he came to
Tamerlane, the more like he was to danger, by his Counselors advice,
resolving to go no further, spoke to Tamerlan's Ambassador; Thou see the
dangers, etc. I endure, and my mind forebodeth greater to ensue, etc. Commend
me therefore to Tamerlane (...) my Father: hoping they will excuse me; for
which I will send an Ambassador of mine own, which was (...) Bajazet his
Schoolmaster, a wise and learned man, in whom Tamerlane taking pleasure, never
suffered him, to return to his Master. Mighty Prince Tamerlane returned at last
into his own Kingdom, wonderfully enlarging Samarchand, and beautifying it with
the worlds spoils; where he afterward in great peace and glory reigned:
keeping always a standing Army of 40000 horse, and 60000 foot, besides other
Garrisons, etc. commonly in every place 60000 strong upon occasion. At length,
hearing of the Turkish Kingdoms rising under Bajazet's Son: 'with whom the
oppressed Mamalukes and Greek Emperor had for fear combined; he prepared for a
second expedition to root out the Othoman family, and subdue the Greek Empire.
But (a Turkish Bassa being by Axalla overthrown, and 30000 slain) he in midst
of these great hopes, died of an Ague, Jan. 27. 1402. A little before, appeared
a great and terrible blazing-Star. He was of a middle stature, somewhat narrow
shouldred, well limmed, and of great strength. Many in talking with and
beholding him, became dumb through the majesty in his eyes: which often caused him
to abstain from looking too earnestly on them. His other visage amiable, etc.
little hair on his chin: he ware his hair long and curled, for the most part
bare-headed, contrary to the manner of the Tartars, his hair was somewhat
toward a violet color, (...) beautiful: which his Mother coming of Sampson's
(...), (as he gave out) willed him to nourish; most of his men of war believing
there was some rare virtue or fatal destiny therein. His great Empire, was by
his Sons discord, and ambition of some their disloyal Subjects, shortly brought
to confusion, and his posterity, (...) (...) out by (...) Cassanes, the
Armenian Prince. But Tamerlane departing those Countries, Mahomet determined to
go to Prusa, where his brother Isa reigned. But Isa having taken the (...) of
mount Horminius, he came about to (...), where Eine Sub-bassa remained, who
refreshed both him and his Army. Great forces (...) repairing, he marched to
Ulabad. Isa marched thither also, on the fide toward Prusa, to give him battle.
But Mahomet consulting what was (...) to be done; Eine told him, It was not for
brethren to pollute their hands in each others blood; but to assay the quarrels
composure, by some other means; wherefore Mahomet offered Isa, (...) with 4
Provinces, and other Countries belonging, so he might have Prusa, with all
about the same. Isa seeing Mahomet (...) him but such Countries as were rather
Bajazet's tributaries than part of his Kingdom, etc. in choler said, Does not
my Fathers Kingdom belong to me the Elder brother? by what right can he (but a
youth) claim it? if he can by the sword win it, let him take and hold it.
Mahomet hereupon, prepared to the field, where his brother (expecting his
coming) gave the first charge, in which most cruel fight, many were on both
sides slain. At last Isa's Army beginning to retire, he (...) into the thickest
of his enemies, with his own hand (...) ancient and valiant Eine Sub-bassa. But
Isa (...) done what he could, on every side forsaken, fled to the Seaside;
where in a ship bound for Constantinople, he passing thither yielded to the
Emperor's protection. Temurtases being taken in this (...), and brought to
(...), he in revenge of Eine, smot off his head, hanging his body on a tree. Of
this (...) certified Solomon, sending Temurtases head. This battle was much
spoken of, being betwixt two brethren, and for the death of (...) and
Temurtases, both wishing peace betwixt the ambitious brethren.

Mahomet, after this, led his Army to Prusa, and was joyfully received as their
Sultan: so likewise at Nice and Neapolis the Garrisons of Carasina, Saruchania,
and (...) with other Inhabitants resorting thither, and (...) themselves to
him, as to their King. And sending to Germean for Bajazet's body, (and his
brother Musa left by Tamerlane) he sumptuously buried it at Prusa; the Turkish
Alcaron being read 7 days on his (...): Great cheer was for all comers, and
much given to the poor for Bajazet's soul; but above all to Mahomet's
posterity, (known by their all green apparel) who were then by him greatly
enriched. He also endowed the Abbey built by his Father with great possessions;
which done, he (in progress) was every where joyfully received, spending the
Summer at Amasia, in pleasure.

(...), the eldest, at Hadrianople peaceably reigning in Europe, (...) how
Mahomet had driven Isa out of Prusa, was much offended: and declaring to his
Bassaes etc. his natural proceedings, said he, He does me also great wrong, his
eldest brother, in taking the sovereignty in Asia: In revenge whereof, I intend
to pass with a strong Army into Asia, and recover mine inheritance etc. A
(...) Counselor replied, It was not best in his opinion, to go personaliy
into those wars; for though (said he) Mahomet be but young, yet is his
experience above his years, etc. Wherefore it were best to send for angry Isa,
and make him General, in which was one brother (not unlike to be lost) thou
shall have one competitour less, etc. This counsel approved of, Isa was
presently sent for, and made General of a great Army: at whose first coming
into Asia, he possessed all Carasia and Lydia: all people where he came,
promising him obedience, if he prevailled against Mahomet: So he wintred at
Despotopolis, seeming the while, by kind Letters to Mahomet, to be glad he was
so obeyed and liked of, etc. Mahomet answering with like dissimulation, he was
even glad of his coming, etc. commending a rich garment to be cast on the
Messenger, and sending him rich presents, with provision, and necessaries for
his Soldiers.

But Winter past, Isa marched to Prusa, showing the (...) (...) loving Letters,
hoping they should (...) well agree, requesting the Castle, whose gates the
(...) sort had (...) against him; but seeing he could not gain (...) by fair
words or policy, he enraged, burnt it to the ground: (...) not ignorant (...)
Isa roamed up and down, etc. and how he had razed the royal City; between
Amasia and Prusa, overthrew all his forces in a great (...). Isa with but ten,
fled to (...), whose Prince (...) (for friendship at his hands when he was a
Suitor in Bajazet's Court) entertained: him with all (...) he could.

(...) exceedingly grieved, gave among the (...) (...) sums of money; (...) the
Citie's rebuilding, and staying to see it begun. Isa the while inciting (...)
to (...) (...), was by him, the third (...) overthrown; yet entering twice more
with small (...), and finding few or none, to (...), he fled (...) the Prince
of (...), honorably entertained by him; who in so manifest a wrong, not only
promised what help he could, but solicited the Princes of Aidinia etc. to give
(...) (...); who pitying his case and fearing Mahomet's (...) (...) so amongst
them, that Na had 20000 in (...). (...) with a strong Army entered so speedily,
the Prince of (...) Country, (...) he was upon them before looked for: after a
bloody fight, obtaining a notable victory. Isa (...) into (...) dyed none knows
how. The Prince of Smyrna humbling himself, (...) (...) favor. The others he
shortly spoiled (mostly) of their Dominions, returning to Prusa. But (...)
there, he was (...), That Solomon had raised a great Army to invade Asia;
wherefore furnishing the Castle, with all things needful for a long siege, he
(...) thence to (...), directing Commissions to take up (...) in all parts,
writing so to Doioran a Tartar, (whom he often pleasured) for aid: who came
with Troops of brave horse promising fideli y.

Not long after, Solomon now come over Hellespont, he thought without delay to
meet him in the field. But being by expert Captains advised to retire further
off, waiting all good opportunities, rather than commit all to one battell's
hazard, he being to fight against his eldest brother, and Fathers heir. Upon
which he retired toward Amasia. (...) Doioran (marching out at the other side)
fell to robbing and spoiling, burning the Villages as he went. Mahomet pursuing
and overtaking him unlooked for, flew most of his men, recovered all the spoil,
Doioran hardly escaping: and so held on his way.

Solomon (...) toward Prusa, the Citizens brought him peaceably into the City.
But Jacup Beg would by no means deliver the Castle; wherefore sharply
assaulting it, he slew many, and wounded most of the Desendants. Jacup
certifying Mahomet, the Castle could not hold out long, except speedily
relieved; he (hastening toward Prusa) sent the Messenger with Letters,
commending the Captain, and promising speedy relief, who being intercepted and
brought to Als Bassa, he, perusing them, presently wrote others in Mahomet's
name, commending the Captain, etc. but since he could not in time relieve him,
to deliver the Castle on the best conditions he (...); who yielded it to
Solomon on reasonable terms. Mahomet (now within a days march) was
exceedingly (...), and returned to Amasia: where Solomon shortly besieged him;
but (without hope to win it) he retiring to Prusa, spent his time (...), etc.
exceedingly given thereunto.

Mahomet advertized, that Solomon lay (...) at Prusa, but with small power,
marched in haste, to surprise him; but he was discovered by Solomon (...), at
the River Sangarius: who in all have gave knowledge of his brothers coming:
Solomon (dismayed) would have fled into Europe, if Alis (from the blemish and
discouragement of his friends, and encouragment of his enemies to (...)) had
not otherwise persuaded him, it were better to take Neapolis Straits, till he
might assemble the rest of his Army. Mahomet coming entered those Straits, for
he must needs pass them, being repulsed by Solomon; who, avith little loss,
frustrated his brothers brave attempts, (through the places advantage) though
much the weaker. Alis Bassa's wilie-head (the while) sent secretly Letters to
Mahomet, that most of his great Captains, etc. had bound themselves to Solomon
and one another, to betray him into his hands as the undoubted Heir, etc. which
Treason he discovered with great protestation of love and good will, etc.
Mahomet yet ceased not for 6 or 7 days to gain those passages, but in vain; one
of whose servants fleeing to the enemy, caused him to suspect the more: So
prevailing nothing, and doubting to be betrayed, he returned to Amasia: Solomon
(glad) to Prusa, ordeding his Armies assembling; but the Caramanian King and
Mahomet, agreeing in League to join against him, he forthwith drew all to
Ancyra.

Musa remaining all this while with Mahomet, though no altogether well pleased,
spoke (one day) to his brother: Thou see how Solomon coaseth not to vex us,
not unlike to prevail, etc. Now I would go to (...) his enemy and procure
passage over the Euxine into Europe, where I doubt not (in his absence) to make
some innovation, etc. which if I shall gain, by thy support, I promise to hold
it of thee as my Sovereign, Mahomet greatly pleased, (after their Turkish faith
given to stand to each other during life) furnished Musa with money, and
necessaries for so great an enterprise; who setting forward, Isfendiar
entertained him as a great Prince: and (...) him with his purpose, he visited
the King of Caramania. Mark of Valachia (having his Country spoiled by
Solyman's Garrisons) wrote to Musa, promising him his daughter and Heir, if he
would come and revenge the wrong done by Solomon. Musa gladly returning into
Europe, the Valachian received him (...) (...), and gave him his Daughter. This
fame was soon bruited through Solyman's Kingdom, and wrought such effect, that
the vulgar submitted (as it were all) to him as their Sovereign: so that coming
to Hadrianople he was received as their King.

Solomon understanding Musa's proceedings, was exceedingly troubled. Leaving a
Deputy in (...), he with his Army, obtained passage of the Emperor over
Bosphorus, promising (therefore) to restore him some places taken from him in
Asia; for Musa had brought all Turkish shipping unto Europe side. Musa made
toward him: but their Armies ready to join battle, many of Musa's Captains fled
to Solomon: he fleeing to the woods and mountains. Solomon taking again his
Kingdoms possession, gave himself (at Hadrianople) to excess without measure.

Jacup-beg, Solyman's Deputy, lately received into Mahomet's favor, delivered
to him (...), Prusa's Castle, and all the rest in Asia, who shortly reducing
again Carasia, Aidinia etc. to his obeisance, returning to Prusa, he took a
second possession of his Fathers Kingdom.

Musa still put to the worst by Solomon, gathering some good strength, drew
near where Solomon was banqueting in his Camp and full of Wine: So that news
being brought, Musa was at hand, he caused the messenger to be beaten: and when
he affirmed it more earnestly than liked him, commanded him to be slain. Ere
long Musa's Vaunt-courrours skirmishing with Solymans. Soldiers: Eurenoses
told him (...) had skirmished, etc. Solylyman (in Wine) said, Good Tutor
trouble me no more, Musa dares not come so nigh me; if I hold but up my Cap, he
is gone. He discontented, sent in Chasan, Aga of the Janissaries, who boldly
told him the danger, and sharply reproved him. Solomon moved, commanded his
beard to be (...) off; Chasan coming forth thus disgraced, said, This is the
honor wherewith Solomon in (his excess) rewards his; Wherefore I will serve
Musa a (...) of more temperance, and discretion. Who will follow me, come and
welcome. So with a number of Janissaries, he went to Musa, as did others by his
example. But then it repented Solomon of his too dissolute solly and hiding
himself till night, then accompanied only with two Noble men and a Country
Turk as their guide, thought to flee to Constantinople. This Clown led them on
purpose (all night) to and fro, bringing them in the morning not far from
whence they departed: and riding before, willed a sturdy-peasant or two to make
stop of Solomon; who with others like running out with Bats, etc. slew (...)
and Muchil that stood on their (...), taking Solomon alive; some in their fury,
cried out to kill him, etc. and end the wars: some few to save him. In this
(...) came Musa, who caused him to be strangled, reigning 6 years 10 months.
This was Solymans miserable end; much in excess, otherwise endued with many
virtues. (...) writing Alexander the Great's History in Turkish verse, (...)
publishing it in his name, he bountiously rewarded him. His body lies buried
at Prusa by his Grandfather Amurath.

Musa now reigning in Europe, in the beginning, displaced most that bare great
Offices in Solyman's time, fearing to be by them, betrayed or (...) as his
brother was, and on small causes imprisoned and put to death many well
deserving of him; Wherefore many Nobles doubting the event of such Tyranny,
kept our of the way; Eurenoses seigning himself blind, to be absent from the
Court. He also demanded of diverse Christian Princes, tribute paid or promised
to Bajazet, invading some of them, and demanding (by Ibrahim Bassa) the like of
Emmanuel the Emperor: who advertizing Mahomet of Musa's undiscreet Government
etc. he sent back, requesting the Bassa to come over to him, with rich
garments, and Princely promises: the Bassa going to Prusa was sworn one of his
Privy Council, serving him faithfully, and his Son Amurath after him.

Mahomet upon advantage of his Brothers ill government assembled 15000 choice
Soldiers to invade him, before well established; and was transported over
Bosphorus into Europe by the Emperor (after a League concluded betwixt them,
the one should never damnifie the other, etc.) Musa having stopped all other
passages. Mahomet not marched far from the Sea, Musa's Vaunt-Courriers met with
his (...) at Intzuge, Musa's were put to flight and chased to his Army; who
thinking Mahomet was: upon them, were almost ready to flee, but both Armies
rested that night. Next day, began a mortal and bloody fight: Michael Bassa of
Romania, and other Captains (on discontent) revolting to Mahomet: Many of
Musa's Soldiers (discouraged) fled. Mahomet's Soldiers so pursued, that few
were left with him; yet (in hope) he set upon his brother: who (though half
discomfited) stood himself with 7000 Jannizaries, valiantly receiving his
charge. But Mahomet was glad to flee to (...) with scarce 200 men and was
(according to the agreement) shipped into Asia by the Emperor. Musa taking his
Tents, there encamped. They who followed the chase returning to the Camp, and
finding it possessed by their enemies, stood as amazed etc. Musa suffered not
his Soldiers to put them to the sword, but dispoyling them of what they had,
suffered them to depart.

After this, the Prince of Smyrna forcibly entered Aidinia, to (...) into
Saruchania: Mahomet with a great Army so spoiled his Country, and distressed
himself, that submiting, he was glad to hold his Dominion of him, as of his
Lord, etc. Mahomet levied a choice Army again, to try his fortune against Musa,
craving aid of Dulgader Ogli his Father in Law from Amasia; who answering his
Letters, sent his Son with a Company of brave Soldiers excellently furnished,
whom he royally feasting, gave to the Prince, his own rich apparel, and horse,
and all the gold and silver plate wherein they were served: to every Noble man
a rich garment, with some other gift: and (telling them he inrended to recover
his Fathers Kingdom in Europe, or there to end his days) said, The prey shall
be theirs that win it: a Horse, Sword, and Mace, shall content my self. So
coming to Bosphorus Strait, the Emperor transported his Army into Europe, and
feasted him in a Country Palace; who, though he excused to join (through age)
with him in that war, yet assisted him with some Christian Companies, who stood
the Turks in grear stead: marching to the River Wyzen, where Eurenoses (by the
way) advising him to march very circumspectly, and not too much to hasten
joining battle, counseled him also (if by any means) to allure Jegides (...),
Barac Beg, and Siman Beg to follow him, promising (in good time) to come
himself. He shortly marching to Hadrianople, Cara Calile began to show himself,
and presently put to flight by Michael Ogli besieging Hadrianople the Citizens
sent to certify him, they could not (through Musa's Garrison) then deliver him
the City; but if by trying it in the field he should carry the victory, they
should be ready to yield themselves, City and all to his pleasure. Mahomet
content, raised the siege, marching toward Zagora. Musa is reported to come
secretly into Mahomet's Camp disguised; but perceiving himself too weak,
withdrew (...) woods and strong places; from thence to Philopopolis, (...)
along the River Meritze, where Jegides with two of Musa's Captains, setting on
(...) rear, were by Michael repulsed. Mahomet (...) to (...): as he (...), Muse
showed his Army from the Mountains, not daring to come down to battle. Mahomet
marching to (...), Jegides, Barac, and Siman, persuaded by Eurenoses, (...) to
him: We are three young men, having 3000 (...) Soldiers, of incomparable
valor, etc. Draw near (...) with what speed thou can, and thou shall find us
(...) to come to thee. He marching all next night, came to the River Morava:
where the 3 Captains joined unto him. Old Eurenoses also with a great company
of expert Soldiers. Mark of Servia sent him aid also. He began to march
farther to Cossova, his forces still increasing by the revolt of his Brothers.
Musa seeing none almost left, but the Soldiers of the Court, his best and
faithfullest men, thought best to attempt something, before left alone, seeking
with 7000 to take his brother at advantage. But Mahomet had a vigilant eye unto
him. At last, he suddenly set upon his brothers Army: but (oppressed with
multitude) after a bloody fight, was put to the worst; which he seeing, sought
death among the thickest of his enemies. But Bajazet Bassa desirous to take him
alive, he was be-set, and breaking from the midst of them, fled. But his horse
falling into a muddy ditch, or (as some) hoxed by his owu servant and himself
wounded, overthrew him, and was there taken by Bajazet, (...) and Barac, hardly
persuing him. Being brought hand-bound through the Army, which grieved many;
most were glad, hoping this long Civil war would now end. Shortly after, came
Balta Ogli sent (as they thought) from Mahomet, who after a bitter reproof for
his cruelty to Solomon, caused him to be strangled with a Bow-string. Mahomet
shed a few Crocodiles tears over his dead body. He lies buried at Prusa by.
Solomon, reigning 3 years, 7 months.

Mahomet now taking on him the sole Government in Europe and Asia; (...)
Turkish histories here begin his reign, accounting (...) (...) time to Musa's
death as a vacancy: But (...) Mahomet held all or most in Asia, during this,
(...) (in the end) the other part in Europe also, I reckon (...) Bajazet's
Successor, including all that intestine Tragedy, wherein he was chief actor.

Mahomet busied against Musa in Europe, the King of Caramania invaded his
Kingdom joining upon him in Asia, burning and spoiling all before him, Eivases
his Lieutenant, not able to withstand him, and fearing his coming to Prusa,
made the Citizens bring most of their wealth into the Castle, receiving so many
of them as he could, willing the rest to shift for themselves. The King shortly
came to Prusa, not yet fully fortified, burning it to the ground the second
time, and besieging the Castle, gave it great assaults for 30 days; but was
repulsed by Eivases, comforting his Soldiers that Mahomet (overcomming in
Europe) would come in few days for relief. Musa's dead body was then
conveighing to Prusa with much people. The Caramanian fearing it was Mahomet
with his power, speedily departed: the Turks long jested, saying, If the
Caramanian run for fear of the Othoman Kings dead body, What would h^^, had he
come against them alive? Orchanes, Solyman's Son, (a boy) departed from
Constantinople, for the League made between the Emperor and Mahomet, to go
into Valachia: by the way, great numbers of voluntary Turks offered to spend
their lives in his quarrel. Mahomet marching hastily to suppress them, they
dispersed and fled. Orchanes being betrayed by his Tu or Zaganes, Mahomet put
out his Eyes, allowing him great Revenues at Prusa, etc. This is he who some
reckon among the Turkish Kings, betrayed to his Uncle Moses; etring, I suppose,
in succession and name.

Now Mahomet assembled a great Army, to revenge himself of the Caramanian King:
Isfendiar sending his Son Casumes for aid: and commanding Germian Ogli to
provide for victualling as he passed by; he entered Caramania, taking three
Cities and besieging Iconium; but (through the rain then falling) he made peace
with the Caramanian. News was brought him into Pontus, that he renouncing his
League, was again in Arms. Wherefore, returning to Iconium, he overthrew the
King, taking him and his Son prisoners; who redeeming themselves by many Cities
and Castles, concluded a peace, receiving of him an Ensign as a token of
Vass^lship Then passing over Danubius iu Europe, he forraged Valachia Transal
pina, whose Prince sent him what tribute he demanded and his Son to serve in
his Court. Then about, happenned a great earthquake in Prusa, etc. great
troubles ensuing in Asia; Yet Mahomet going thither kept all in quiet.

Isfendiar disinheriting his Son (for that he would not return to him from
Mahomet's Court and wars) reserving Castamona with a little more, gave Mahomet
the rest; who (in lieu) gave Cassumes other great possessions in his own
Kingdom. He sent Bedredin ( Musa's Cadelcher) to Nice as exiled; yet allowing
him a great pension: Bedredin having in his house one Burgluzes, they laid
their heads how to trouble Mahomet's peaceable Government; Wherefore Burgluzes
going into Aidinia, pretending great zeal, broached diverse strange opinions: by
which he was shortly reputed a famous, learned, and devout man, and had many
followers, etc. Bedredin, fled to Isfendiars Country, from thence into
Valachia, and in a Forest as some devout man, allured to him a number of
Outlaws, and theives there living, whom (instructed) he sent in religious
habit, into Zagora, and other Mahomet's frontiers, as his Disciples: who
published his doctrine, etc. and that he was by God, appointed King of justice,
and Commander of the world, set forth by Burgluluses, and received in Asia:
therefore they should repair to Bedredin, shortly to show himself and promote
his followers according to desert. Many in hope of preferment resorted to
Bedredin: who at last, came out of the Forest, with displayed Banner, and a
great multitude resorting daily unto him: Mahomet sent his Son Amurath and
Bajazet with 2000, to apprehend Burgluzes: whom they found guarded with 3000
well appointed; there was a bloody battle and many slain: the rebels fleeing,
Burgluzes was slain and hewn to pieces. (...) Bajazet executed Torlac Kema,
who with 2000 seduced did much harm about Magnesia. Mahomet sending also
against Bedredin, whose followers, seeing in him no such matter as they hoped
for, were fallen from him, whereby he (easily apprehended) was brought to
Mahomet at Serras, and hanged in the Marketplace.

Mahomet furnished the great Temple at Hadrianople, begun by Solomon and Musa,
where he built a Princely Palace: also another Temple, a sumptuous Abbey, a
public School (...), with great Revenues, giving also great sums yearly for
Pilgrims traveling far to Mahomets Sepulcher at Medina, or his Temple at Mecha.

Shortly after falling sick at Hadrianople, he sent in post to Amasia for
Amurath his eldest Son, by his last will, to succeed him: But feeling death
approach, he straightly charged his Bassaes to conceal his death, till his
coming, lest any trouble should arise. So he departed about the year 1422,
reigning 17 years, Bajazet's rent Kingdom being (by him) wholly restored 7
years before his death.

The 3 Bassaes, Evaises, Bajazet, and Ibrahim, (fearing the Janissaries and
other Court Soldiers) called a Counsel of war as if he were alive: pretending
the Kings pleasure for the Janissaries to pass to Baga Castle in Asia, to war
on the Prince of Smyrna. Press-mony being presently given, they were sent over
with Letters, etc. The Bassaes sat daily in Counsel placing and displacing, as
if the King had so commanded. His Physicians also went with their potions, etc.
as they had wont. Yet the Pensioners and others (some of them of the Privy
Chamber) suspecting, said, They marvelled the King showed not himself so long,
as before he did. The Bassaes answered, He was yet but little recovered, and
the Physicians would not suffer him to look abroad. Then said they, (ready to
force in) We `will our selves see his Majesty. Eivases desired them not then to
trouble him, having taken Physic; but to morrow, said he, we will request (if
he please) that ye may see him. Geordiron a subtle Persian Physician devised,
that the dead body Royally apparelled, and wrapped about his head, should be
brought betwixt two, as if led into an high open Gallery, and a Boy neatly
placed under his Robes behind, to move his hand, as stroaking his face or
beard, as his manner was. Being brought accordingly, suddenly a Physician came
in fuming and raging, etc. asking the Bassaes, if they meant to kill the King
by bringing him into the open air, etc. Pardon us good Doctor, said Eivases,
for these (pointing to the Pensioners) were so importunate to see him, that he
was content to be led forth, etc. They supposing him to be alive, held
themselves contented. The Physicians, carried him in again, as an extreme sick
man. His death was thus concealed 41 days. He was wise and valiant, exceeding
bountiful, but ambitious above measure. He left to Amurath an entire Kingdom,
in the former greatness, though not much augmented. His body lies buried in a
fair Tomb in a Chapel at the East of Prusa.

The Life of Amurath II. sixth King of the Turks, and the great Establisher of
their Kingdom.
AMurath or Murat, being placed in his Fathers Seat, and Mahomet's death
published; great troubles began to arise. The Princes of Smyrna and Mentesia
rose in Arms: and at Thessalonica, an obscure fellow took on him the name and
person of Mustapha, Bajazet's Son, slain long before against Tamerlain. This
counterfeit, animated by Greek Princes, and going to Vardarium, set on so good
a courtenance, that not only the Country people, but Tzunites Beg, the prince
of Smyrna's Son, with Eurenoses (...), (...) unto him as to their natural
Prince. Going to Hadrianople, ( Amurath yet at Prusa) he was received as
Mustapha: and shortly honored as King in all the Turkish Kingdom in Europe.
Amurath sending Bajazet Bassa with a strong Army into Europe, he found all the
Country (...) to Mustapha; but being forsaken of the European Soldiers which
he brought, and afterward of the rest, he with his brother Hamze yielded for
safety to Mustapha, upon promise of loyalty, sworn one of his Privy-Councel;
who, the better to maintain his credit, (...) a great Army to make war upon
Amurath in Asia. On the way his Counselors repining at Bajazet's (...),
advised him to beware he trusted him not too far, etc. Whereupon, Bajazet
apprehended, was without trial (...), and Haze with much ado, spared. This
done, he proceeding, marching over into Asia. Amurath joined three new (...),
Temurtases his Sons, to Ibrahim and Eivases; by whose advice he sent for
Michael Ogli, (Viceroy in (...) in Musa's time) after 8 years imprisonment from
Musa's deposing) because well known to most chief men in Mustapha's Army.
Amurath setting forward to (...) him, distrusting his forces, much inferior to
Mustapha's, prostrated himself at an Emir's feet (one of Mahomet's posterity)
to receive a blessing for his better (...), etc. For all whose charms, he
marched in fear (...) to the River Ulibad, causing, through Mustapha's (...),
the bridge to be broken down, and encamped on (...) side. Mustapha finding the
bridge broken, encamped on the other side: They thus lying that both might
(...) together, Michael Ogli called aloud upon the old Soldiers in Mustapha's
Army, asking by name for (...) old friends: many there present, rejoicing to
see him, (whom they supposed dead in prison) came to the rivers (...) to hear
him. Who lowdly persuaded them that this man was not the honorable Mustapha,
but some base (...) fellow set up by the (...) Princes as a vail, etc. (...)
them Mustapha, Bajazet's Son, ended his days 22 years before, in his Countries
defense, in the great (...) against Tamerlane: wherefore they should forsake
that supposed one, and yield obedience to their undoubted Sovereign Amurath.
These words from him whom they generally reverenced and trusted, so wrought,
that some adventured over the river unto him, and many that (...), doubted.
Eivases also, sent in secret to (...), to terrify him, that ( Amurath next
night (...) to pass over above the bridge) his chief Captains (...) promised to
deliver Mustapha into his hands. (...), with some Troops (in the night) passed
the river in (...) same place, with such noise as if Amurath's whole (...) was
coming. Mustapha seeing things begin as (...) had written, and carrying a
guilty (...), fled in (...), but with 10 persons (none pursuing) till he came
to Boga river, and by a great sum to the Captain of the Castle, got passage,
landing the 3d day over Hellespont, at Callipolis. This known they all yielded
to Eivases, who repairing the bridge, Amurath joined with him. Ibrahim would
have had all the Rebels put to the sword, but by Eivases they were generally
pardoned, Amurath coming to Boga, hanged the Captain: and intending to pursue
him, hired (by chance) a Genoway ship to transport his Army into Europe; (for
Mustapha caused the shipping to be brought to the other side). He now fleeing
to Hadrianople, fearing to be betrayed, speeded thence: coming to an obscure
place in the Country, whence the pursuers brought him bound to Amurath at
Hadrianople, where he was hanged from the battlements of a high Tower. Some
Writers report him indeed to be Bajazet's Son: but the Turkish Histories
reporting as before, call him Dusme or counterfeit Mustapha, etc.

(...) of the common Soldiers apparelled and armed like Janissaries, sell into
the true Janissaries hands, Amurath's guard, who used them with all possible
indignities. A Janizary being hungry, brought 2 of these to a Cooks shop, to
sell them for a little victuals: who refusing to give him, as having no use of
such; the Janizary swore to cut off their heads, and give them him for naught
if he would not redeem them for a thing of naught. The Cook, moved with pity,
offered him a Sheeps head, which he took, swearing he had given more than they
were worth; which disgrace is yet often objected by the insolent Janissaries,
telling these Asapi (in their rage) two of them are not worth a sodden Sheeps
head.

Amurath was not a little grieved to think that this dangerous rebellion was
first plotted by the Greeks, and then (...) by the Emperor; of whom (...) to
be revenged, he sent Michael Ogli, with his Europeans to (...) about
Constantinople, following in person with the Janissaries and Asians, filling the
Land's neck before the City from Sea to Sea, and beginning furiously to batter
the walls: but they, stronger than he, supposed, and the Defendants still
repairing, he ceasing his battery, desperately assaulted it, but they were
notably repulsed, some losing their hands, some their arms, but most their
lives; no shot falling (from the walls) in vain. Which Amurath beholding
sounded a retreat, and shortly in great rage departed: To whom the Emperor,
sending about peace, he would not hear, but threatened ere long to be revenged.
Wherefore the Emperor, to keep him busied, devised with the Caramanian King,
countenancing another Mustapha Amurath's younger Brother, to his no small
trouble. Mahomet had 5 Sons and 7 Daughters, Mustapha surnamed the little was
the second, who being but 13 years old, was set up by Caramanian, and other
Mohammedan, and Christian Princes to impeach Amurath's greatness: who
strengthened with their forces, besieged Nice, at length yielded to him. But
Amurath corrupting by great gifts and promises, Ilias Beg, the Princes Tutor,
he in 9 days came to Nice, entering with small resistance, Mustapha being
presented by the Tutor to him: who because he would not spill a drop of Sacred
Othoman blood, strangled him with a bow-string, buried at Prusa.

Amurath now fearing no Competitour, removed the 3 Bassaes into honorable
places, retaining only Eivases and Ibrahim of his Council. Eivases being
shortly accused, that he sought to aspire the Kingdom, usually wearing a privy
Coat, the Tyrant (jealous) cast his arm about him (as in kindness) as he rod
with him: finding him secretly armed, would know the cause; who answered, for
fear of some enemies in Court; but he forthwith apprehended, had his eyes burnt
out with a hot steel glass. Mahumethes (the while) Caramanian King besieged
Attalia 6 months, Valiantly (...) d by Hamza, Amurath's Lieutenant: the King
being slain with a great shot, as he viewed the City. Ibrahim succeeeding brake
up the siege, to bury his Father. Then also Dracula of Valachia passing
Danubius, did much hurt about Silistra, but afterward was forced to become
Amuraths tributary.

Tzunites (then about) pretending an interest of descent in the Seignory of
Aidinia, (by all means vexed Jaxis Beg the Lieutenant) secretly favored of
the Country what they durst. Amurath Commanded Hamze Anatolia's Viceroy with
all power to war on him, who invaded the Princes Country: who meeting him well
provided, gave him battle: Hasan the Prince's son, with a part, put part of the
Turks to flight, and too furiously pursuing, left his Father hard beset by the
Viceroy, glad to flee to Hipsily Castle: Hasan returning, ignorant of the hap,
was overcome and taken: The Viceroy presently besieging the Castle, after a
while, the Prince (in extremity, yielded to him, (without Violence to him or
his son) to be sent prisoners to Amurath: the Viceroy promising it by Oath.
Iaxis whose brother the Prince (by chance) before taking, put to death,
attending Hamze to his tent, and Hasan (as the Turks manner (...)) sitting on
the ground, drawing him by the Collar to his fa hers feet struck off his head,
and in the same rage, the aged Prince's also; to the great dishonor or the
Viceroy. Their heads set on 2 Lances in the Castles sight, the defendants
yielded. After Zunites his death, all this territory was united to the Othoman
Kingdom. After all this, Amurath married Isfendiars Daughter. He now thought
high time to (...) revenge of the Greek Princes that aided the Rebels
aforesaid: wherefore ranging with a great Army through Macedonia, to
Thessalonica, he surprised diverse places (belonging to the Emperor) by the
way. This famous City, (sometime for beauty and wealth) not inferior to any in
Greece, Amurath hardly besieged with (...) battery, corrupting secretly some
Citizens, to have let him in by a secret Mine; which being by the Venetian
Governors perceived, the plotters (...) the (...), fled to the Turks. Amurath
promising his Soldiers all its spoil if they wan it, so inflamed them
(especially the Janissaries) that by a most terrible assault they entered the
City. The Venetians fleeing to their Galleys, got to Sea: but no tongue or pen
describe, the miseries the Christian Citizens endured, heartily wishing to die
and could (...). The furious enemy devoured all Sexes and Ages, but those who
for strength or comeliness, were reserved to labor and lust, afterward
dispersed into most miserable slavery. The infinite riches became a spoil: the
houses (desolate) given for a habitation to such Turks as (at pleasure)
repaired thither, and at this day possessed by them. This happened in 1432,
(...) returning to Hadrianople, sent Caratze with most of his Army into
Aetolia: whose Prince, Charles, dying a little before, divided Acharnania
amongst his 3 Base sons, (leaving the rest to his Brothers Son, Charles).
Shortly after, Amurath sending aid to one of the brethen falling at discord, in
fine, subjected all Aetolia to himself. The Princes of Athens, Phocis, Boetia,
and all Greece unto Corinths strait, terryfied hereby, became tribularies to
the Tyrant, living long under his slavery. Thus the Greeks lost their liberty,
etc. and (...) now so degenerate, that whereas they accounted all Nations (...)
in comparison, themselves are (...) no less (...). John Castriott who reigned
in Epirus, seeing how the Turk (...) against his Neighbour-Princes, (for peace)
delivered his 4 Sons, Szanstius, Reposius, Constantine, and George, Hostages to
Amurath, promising well to entreat them: But having gotten them, he circumcised
and instructed them in Turkish superstition, to their (...) great grief: and
the Father dying he poisoned the 3 Elder, seizing on Croia his chief City, and
all his Territories, as if (by right) devolved to him. But George (named
Scanderbeg, or Lord Alexander for his feature and wit) he loved (some thought)
more passionately than he should a boy: (...) him to be instructed in all
activity, etc. wherein he excelling all his equals, came (very young) to be a
great Sanzack, and being often General of his Armies, he got the love of all,
increasing in credit with Amurath. Who shortly turning into Servia, the Prince
to procure his favor (...) him a yearly tribute, and to do what he reasonably
demanded. He beside the tribute, required Mary his fair Daughter in marriage,
the Hungarians not to pass through his Country to invade him, and not to deny
his Army passage, when he would invade Bosna. All which the Prince was glad to
agree to: Now about, Josephus and Machmutes Amurath's (...), and Orchanes
Solyman's son, etc. died of the plague at Prusa.

While he thus in Europe, the Caramanian King invaded him in Asia: for 'twas
agreed between the Christians of Europe and Mahometans of Asia, to invade him
(when in Europe) in Asia, and when in Asia, in Europe. Amurath seizing on
Saruchania Mentesia, etc. before, but his tributaries, entered Caramania,
forcing the King to yield to his own conditions, and send his Son to wait at
his Court: and made Isfendiar his tributary, and to send his son also; Thus
becoming terrible to all the Mohammedan Princes. Returning to Hadrianople, he
sent Ali's Bassa to invade Hungary, in revenge of their incursions in his
absence: which he performing for a month, returned with rich booty. Ere long he
personally inroaded in to Hungary, the Prince of Servia giving his Army
passage, and Dracula of Valachia aiding him more for fear than good will. So
returning, his Soldiers enriched, he wintred at Hadrianople. Who to spoil the
secret suspected confederacy between the Hungarians and the King of Caramania,
doubting the Servian his Father in-law was chief Author, sent for him to
Hadrianople: who doubting some tragedy, pretended greatly he could not come;
and fearing, fortified all his strong places, chiefly the City Semendre,
leaving Gregory or George his son Governor, (for Stephen was at Court with his
Sister) and went into Hungary to procure some aid, and having there certain
Territories exchanged of Sigismund for the City Belgrade. Not long after,
Amurath, forgetting affinity and league, entered Servia, destroying and hardly
besieging Semendre, where after long siege, the Princes son (doubting sudden
assault) yielded himself and City: so that Sophia, Novomont, with all the rest
yielded to Amurath. After which, hearing the Servian and Hungarian were making
head, and that Gregory and Stephen, had intelligence with his Father, he cast
them into prison at Didymoticum, and burnt out their eyes (...) a red (...)
brass basin.

Albert Duke of Austria marrying Sigismund the Emperor's only Daughter, and
succeeding him, died in the 2d year of his Reign in preparation against
Amurath: who driving George of Servia out of his Dominions, had extended his
Kingdom even to Hungarian's borders. Albert leaving his wife with child, the
Hungarians (the Turks come so nigh) thought needful not to rest on the peoples
devotion toward the Queen, and expectation of her issue: but to choose some
great Prince, the better to (...) the Kingdom against their enemies. Whereupon
they sent Embassage to Uladislaus young King of Polonia, to offer him the Queen
in marriage, and with her the Kingdom also. So (...) (...) in the (...) Court
of the inequality of the (...), the King being in his prime, and the Queen well
stepped in years; naught was offered herein but wars: that the Hungarians sought
to defend themselves by Polonian force: Others said, the (...) of these 2
Kingdoms, would be great good to both, to the Kings great honor, etc. that it
were greater policy to keep the Turk out of Hungary, than leaving it a prey, to
be forced to fight with him in Polonia: and for inequality of years, it was not
so great a matter, for Princes regard more the virtues of their choice, with
their honors increase, etc. than the Summer fruit of youth, which does shortly
perish, etc. Uladislaus answered the Ambassadors he would accept of their
offers. But the Queen being delivered of a son, whom she named (...), she began
to repent of calling in the Polonian King, to her sons prejudice. And animated
by some Nobles, (hoping to grow great themselves) determined by all means to
exclude the Polonian: but most considering the most expedience, and that they
could neither with honor or safety fly from what was concluded. Hungary was
divided into 2 Factions, and grew to civil Wars. The Queen, the more to gain
the people, caused herson (but 3 Months old) to be solemnly Crowned at
Albaregalis. But the Polonian entering Hungary with an Army, and joining with
his friends, most which followed the Queen, revolted to him. So that she
(committing her sons tuition, with the Crown, to Frederick the Emperor, yet)
ceased not to stir up wars against (...) at home and abroad, till by her death
her quarrel ended.

(...) (in these civil Wars) thought a fair opportunity for Hungaria's
conquest. Wherefore with a great Army marching to the strong City Belgrade,
(which environed on the East with (...), on the South with the river Saus; and
on the other sides with strong walls and deep large ditches, was then
accounted, the gate into Hungary) First gave 2 terrible (...) (in good hope)
but was Valiantly repulsed with great slaughter. Wherefore he raising mounts,
and high wooden Towers, furiously battered the walls, causing also galleys,
etc. in great number to be brought into both rivers, to assault the City, and
keep the Citizens from succors. Yet it was still defended under Uranus a
Florentine Governor, who with Sallies and shot, slew great numbers. The Turk
knowing, that Uladislaus was at this time troubled by the Queens Faction,
continued his siege, though famine began much to increase in his Camp, hoping
the defendants (despairing of help) would shortly yield. Uladislaus assayed to
raise the siege by sending 3 Polonian Nobles Ambassadors to Amurath,
declaring, for as much as he had offered to join with him in league before he
came out of Polonia, if he would desist from invading Hungary, whereof he was
now chosen King, and raise his siege, then they should easily agree upon the
desired peace, etc. but if he had rather proceed in Arms, he would do his best
to make him know he was of power sufficient to withstand his greatest forces,
and revenge his wrongs. Amurath appointing the Ambassadors to withdraw to
Synderovia of Servia, not far off, till he might better consider their demands,
and pretending their safety: so soon as they were departed, he first assaied
the Citizens and Soldiers, with magnifical promises, etc. if they would yield
the City: shooting in also many letters full of like promises. But seeing no
hope to prevail, he spoke to his (...) (called together) as follows. Though I
know it is in my power to grant or not grant the motioned peace: yet it is my
pleasure to know your minds also. For so much as we have that (...) hand;
wherein, with worldly (...), is endangered our religion, etc. As for mine own
estate, I possess so large Countries in Asia and Europe, that perhaps it might
better stand with my estate to take more care for keeping that I have, then to
travel for more: but whether have you sufficient or not, and how long assured
of the same? And moreover, we shall be driven at length to forsake our
Religion, if we now lay down Arms. For our enemies require we should first
cease from War, and then they would talk of Peace. I omit what labor we have
taken in our siege, etc, all which they command us to forsake. Our enemies
(...), whosoever shall have this City, shall have (...) ul (...) of (...) for
his own, (...) an entrance (...) subduing of others. (...) is now divided: and
this motion is but to gain time for satisfying private quarrels, that with
double (...) they may (...) on us, etc. Their proud demands for restoring
Bulgaria and Rascia, etc. sounds already in my (...): which we refusing to
grant, the Hungarians and (...) joined, will bring those Wars to our doors,
which we (...) (...) (...) make on them (...) with (...) (...). And if we
should restore all in reason they could desire, do you think the Prince of
Servia would rest (...) with his own? whose haughty mind gapeth at all ours in
Europe, etc. If whose fortune should answer his designs, besides all the (...)
outrages to be (...), they count it a godly work to use all cruel villainies
against our Nation, except we will forsake the Faith and Religion delivered by
our Ancestors, etc. accounting all holy Saints which die in fight against us.
If ye will but, a little enforce: your selves, ye shall find all worldy and
(...) (...) assured unto us, (...) (to morrow) you shall overthrow the
foundation of the enemies wall. Hitherto we have (...) with nature in the rough
mountains of Bulgaria and (...), etc. that at length we might attain to the
wealth of fruitful Hungary, whose pleasant places do yield plenty of all food
for man and beast, not only to satisfy (...) necessity, but even glut our
wanton desires: gold which others most painfully dig up (in few places) the
Hungarians gather as it were a growing plant. It is in your power (worthy
Soldiers) whether ye will (to morrow) open your selves a way to these good
things for ever, or leave the way open for your enemies to all that you hold.
According as I shall see you fight, I shall perceive what to answer, to the
insolent demands of the Ambassadors.

Next (...) (early) (...) commanded the (...) to (...) given to a (...) (...)
(...) had made (...) the Soldiers assayling it with great courage, especially
(...) (...) who (...) the same. The Christians seeing all in (...), (...) from
all parts to the breach, (...) charged the (...) (...) they retired more
hastily then they (...). Many (...) the rest fleeing (...), were either (...)
or (...) to death in the (...), or strangled in the smoke: the Defendants wild
fire taking hold upon faggots, etc. where with the Turks made their way over.
He is reported to lose (...) 8000 of his best (...), besides 7000 over whelmed
in the Mines, by (...). They that assaulted by water had rather worse success.
Many Galleys, etc. (...), some burnt, diverse in sudden fear (...) upon the
Shelves, (...) shamefully beaten, and by famine, and (...) force losing most of
his Army, determined after 7 months siege to return. Yet (...) answered the
Ambassadors in the Camp: we will talk of peace, when (...) shall deliver us
all of (...) which he holds, and also Belgrade as a pledge. For this time I
will raise my siege: yet I would wish him, rather to accept of my friendship,
than, by denying that little, to hazard both his (...). I ask but what is mine
by law of arms, before he was called into Hungary. If he will rather strive
for other men's, than quietly possess his own, I will (in good time) repair
thither again, etc.

In his way, he (...) Isa Beg with certain troops at Scopia in Servia, who so
troubled the King of Bosna, that (for peace) he promised Amurath 25000 Ducats
yearly tribute.

Uladislans seeing Transylvania much subject to the Turks incursious, (having
gotten all Moldavia into their possession) created John Huniades his Vicegerent
there: Whatever his parents were, himself was a most polique, Valiant, and
fortunate Caprain, obtaining such Victories, as was never before (by any
Christian Prince) against the Turks, with whose (...) they used to fear their
crying Children: He began to keep them short, cutting them off when they
encred, and shutting the passages of Transylvania, and not resting till he won
Moldavia quite from them, And many times passing Danubius, made havoc of the
Turks, carrying away great booty, with many Captives.

Laying at (...), and Isa at Sinderovia, both of great Spirit: Isa to increase
his credit with the Sultan his Uncle, etc. continually forraged about Belgrade,
that wearying the Inhabitants with daily harms, he might gain the City, mostly
abandoned of the Citizens, which Amurath could not by force obtain. Sometimes
not content to spoil the open Country, he assailed the Citie's Suburbs, and
was hardly repulsed. And Huniades only hindering his further proceedings, he
brake sometimes into his Country, laying ambushes in every Corner to Circumvent
him: who grieved hereat, secretly raised a strong power, and with Valiant
Nicolas Vilarch, passing Danubius, encamped betwixt Belgrade and Sinderovia.
Isa forthwith setting forward against him with a great Army, he found (...) as
ready for battle as (...). At the first encounter, (...) his wings were forced
to retire: but the Turks coming to the men at Arms, their fury was stayed;
many fell on both sides, but of the Turks more, who not able long to endure the
Shock, were by heaps overthrown. Which Isa beholding, fled to (...); the rest
fled also: whom the (...) (especially Huniades) fiercely following, left not
the Chase till come almost to the Suburbs of Sinderovia: few escaped, the rest
being taken or slain: Huniades returning with rich prey, etc. to Belgrade,
after which Isa was more quiet. This Victory soon filled Buda with joy and
gladness: Uladislaus causing public prayers with thanksgiving to be made,
and by letters gratulatory, with rich presents, encouraged Huniades to the
prosecution of the Religious War.

Amurath, lest he would seem to yield to the Hungarians, repaired his broken
forces, to renew his wars in Valachia: sending Mesites Bassa with a puissant
Army, to invade Transylvania. He passing out of Servia over (...), suddenly
entered Huniades his Country, burning, spoiling, and killing all he lightt on
without respect. Huniades (lately come) and having no sufficient forces to
oppose the enemy, was wonderfully grieved and perplexed. At length he fled to
his old friend the Bishop of Alba Jula: but staying there about raising a (...)
Army, the enemy was come near him, glad to march softlier, as it were
surcharged with spoil. Which they beholding, thought it (...), with what power
they had to go out, and honorably to die, than longer to behold the miserable
destruction of their Countty. But whilst they marched on unadvisedly, without
scouts, they fell in ambushes laid in the woods and Vallyes to intercept them.
Huniades and the Bishop so entrapped and beset, fled back again, after whom the
Turks following, put all they could overtake to the sword: yet most (...) to
Alba Jula. The Bishop in taking a river with his horse was overthown and slain.
The Bassa encouraged, now wasted at pleasure (...) fire and sword, that part
yet unspoyled. Huniades with wonderful speed taking what Soldiers he could,
persuaded also the Sicilians to take up Arms, who (for the present necessity)
cheerfully did, he following the Bassa returning laden with spoil, to (...)
upon him on occasion: of whose coming, Mesites not (...) reckoning, said, Let
him come, and with the spoil of himself enrich our Victory. John, an Espial,
(...) discovered to Huniades, that the Bassa had appointed some of his best
Companies, above all things, (...) (...) Huniades his person in battle, (all
depending on his direction) (...) them tokens to know (...) and his horse. One
Simon (...) a Valiant man, (...) much unlike Huniades, changed horse and armor
with him, appointing him a (...) troop to attend him: Huniades, finding an
opportunity, came so suddenly on the Turks, that they were glad to (...)
without Order; many fell on both sides, but far more of the Turks. The Turkish
troops (the while) descrying Simon, with all their power made toward him,
where was fought a most bloody battle. But they bending their forces more and
more to kill him: at length slaying them about him, (not without their great
loss) slew him, supposing him the very General. But Huniades riding to and
fro, encouraged his Soldiers not to forsake the Victory, nor leave unrevenged,
so many slaughters and harms, committed by their enemies, etc. In the heat of
this battle, (...) favoring neither, great number of Transylvanian prisoners
in the Camp, with one consent brake their bonds, slaying many of their keepers,
and (...) into the battle, encouraged their Country men. Yet it was hardly
fought: But at length, the Turks, out of hope of Victory, retired by little and
little; the other fought more fiercely than before. Mesites beholding some as
if they fled, others fleeing outright, and no means to stay them, fled also:
the Hungarians pursuing with most terrible execution, in which Mesites and his
son were slain: the report of which added swiftness to the Hungarians, (...)
them for certain days to the top of the Alps, 20000 Turks were (...), about
3000 Hungarians. Huniades recovered all the prey, with their tents and baggage,
a number of Cap ives kissing his feet, gave God thanks for their deliverance:
some called him the Father, some the Defender of his Country, etc. He again
with tears standing, embracing them, rejoiced at the public good, giving
hearty thanks to God, Commanding the like to be done in all that Province. He
commended the Soldiers Valor, and the people's Loyalty, extolling the worthy
Captives by name, etc. part of the spoil; he appointed a part to devout uses,
part amongst the Soldiers. He (...) a great wagon loaded with the Turks
ensigns; and the chief of their Heads, (the Bassaes and his sons stood
foremost) to Uladislaus and the Despot of Servia, presented by an old Turk, as
follows;

Huniades, etc. sends to you part of the spoil, lest he should seem to
defraud you of the honor of the battle. These heads he sends, that you
should not want assurance of such a Victory. All these witness the greatness
of the Slaughter, and exhort you to great achievements; requesting that
general Supplications may be commanded, and a great Army provided: for all
suppose the Turk will engage his whole forces in revenge of so great a
slaughter.

The King and the Despot, commending Huniades his discreet Valor, with the
Victory, worthy (as they said) of a Roman triumph, public supplications were
made through Hungaria, Messengers sent to give Huniades great thanks, with rich
presents, commending his faithful service requesting him to prosecute the war
with like care, that he should want nothing needful thereunto. Moldavia and
Valachia the Turks Tributaries, now revolted to the Hungarians: and Huniades
fame was soon dispersed through Europe, and a general hope conceived of him etc.

This overthrow, with Mesites his death, most of all Moldavia's and Valachia's
revolt, much troubled the Turk. So that, raising a great Army of 80000 men
under Schech Abedin Bassa, an Eunuch, yet right Valiant and expert, charged him
(...) doing what harm he could in Valachia and Moldavia, to break into
Transylvania, fully to revenge the loss before received, etc. The Bassa entered
Valachia, filling the Country with fear and (...), sore repenting of their
revolt. Huniades chearing them, willed them to retire to their safest places,
and not to expose their weak forces against their fury, promising to come to
their relief, etc. The Bassa dividing his Army, forraged far and near, (...),
and spoiled all in their way, killing without (...) of Age, Sex, or Condition.
But the (...) (...) themselves (...) (...) into the (...) hands. The (...)
(...) into (...), purposing to do greater harm if possible: but (...) was
therewith 15000 chosen Soldiers, ready to (...) them. The (...) (as well (...)
with whom he had to do) (...), to see the enemies power. But informed by scouts
that he was not a quarter so many (...) the Turks, but lay strongly (...) with
his (...) and Carriages as in a (...) (...), he wondered at his courage and
skill (...) (...) of his (...) (...) doubted not to offer him (...) Being come
within (...) a mile of each other, the Turks thought not best to join battle in
one (...), but to divide and so fight by degrees; if he could not so, (...)
(...) the Christians (...) with his (...) (...) (...) his Soldiers; above all
things to keep their (...). Next day being come to (...), the Bassa spent a
good space in martialling his Army, as did also (...), encouraging his chief
Commanders that (...) (...) could have induced him to encounter such a (...)
did not necessity, their approved Valor, and the assured hope in Christ,
confirm him. Three commodities God propounded unto them, the (...) of Wives,
Children and Country, renown in this World and immortality in the World to
come. The (...) (...), (...), Bulgarians, (...) and (...) could not abide the
Turks force: The (...), (...), (...), willingly gave them (...) (...) us (...)
this praise of this Victory by God assigned, who often with a small power and
sometime against all hope, have with notable slaughter overthrown them, etc.
learning no less to (...) you though but few, than if you were many. Now they
are come with innumerable Legions: yet more than the Janissaries are no good
Soldiers among them, the rest as enforced serve them for fear, etc. We are not
to fight for other men's houses and altars, but for our own, etc. That, God is
able with his little finger (if he will) to destroy all the Turks in the World,
but he first makes proof of our courage for defense of his name, that (...)
(...) (...), he may (...) it with his own fight (...). They fight for their
Prophet, Author of all (...), for spoil and (...), destruction of (...),
other men's Kingdoms; enlarging their (...), worldly (...). But we contrary
wise, etc. A little refreshing your selves (with a repast) as you stand, on the
(...) given, thrice calling aloud upon the name of Christ, sight (as (...) you
can) with like (...) that He fought for your redemption, etc. for Christ will
be (...) present with us, who (believe me and so hope) will not only deliver
us this day out of the Turks hands, but load us with their (...) (...), and so
bring all home in safety, with much joy and (...).

The Bassa encouraged his, (...) the (...) former Victories, not to degenerate
from their Ancestors and themselves, to whom (...) the (...) interpreter had
foretold the Empire of the whole World, etc. He filled them with hope of great
spoil, promising to the Valiant, whole Villages, etc. with great (...), as
they should deserve. He assured them of Victory, their enemies being weak, and
themselves a great number, if they would fight it out like men. That (...)
overcome Huniades, whom he had found the most Valiant and skillful Christian
Captain, nothing should (...) their farther conquests; willing them above all
(...) to seek (...) him; promising to him (...) killed him, (...) (...), etc.
Both Armies being come within (...) of a (...), the signal given, the battle
began: (...) seeing the enemy cast his first battle in form of a wedge, the
(...) to divide them, they in form of a pare of Sheers were ready (...) them,
where both sides encountered with a (...) and outcry, never more terrible. They
fought a while, in the light horsemens wings, with like hope: but the Turks
better acquainted with that kind of (...), better appointed and exceeding in
number, enforced the Christians to retire to the men (...) force, where was
made a most terrible fight: most of the Turks light horsemen were slain, for
they could not abide the men at arms force, though but (...) in Comparison of
them: so that the Turks in both wings began to faint. But the battle yet
wavering, the Janissaries with men at arms, and troops of light (...),
compassed the Christian men at arms, standing in the main battle, where the
old Janissaries, with (...) cut their horses legs asunder; many of whom falling,
were made shorter by the head: likewise the Janissaries were themselves trodden
under foot. Whereupon blood ran like Rivers; most of the Janissaries being
(...), and many Christians also.

The Bassa yet in hope the Hungarians would faint with long fight, came on with
the (...) ward, and a number (...) (...) Soldiers left for guarding his
baggage. It was after four (...) (...). He commanded them to compass in the
Hnngarians, etc. vainly boasting it would be the last battle ever they would
fight. Haniadis suffering part of his men to be (...), caused the (...) to
thrust in with armed Carts, etc. behind the enemies; and afterward with fresh
supplies renewed the batele. The fight was great, and though the Turks
slaughter great, (...) not much feeling (...) (...) multitude, still (...)
(...) desperately, till the (...) wing seeing themselves compassed with
wagons, and thence (...) with shot, etc. fearing the danger (...), shrunk from
the fight. The Hungarians, now more (...) (...) their fainting enemies (...);
encouraging them in the wagons to approach them nearer, the (...) hardly
(...), and fighting disorderly, first retired, presently after fled. They that
were (...) (...) in, etc. all perished. The lest wing discouraged, (...)
likewise: the Hungarians fiercely following. The (...) stricken with despair
fled, with some Janissaries kept for his persons safeguard, whom so many (...)
(...) (...), followed: the rest flying (...) woods and (...), either perished
with hunger, or (...) by the (...) flain: (...) half the Army (...) over (...).
Huniades content with so great a Victory, (...) them not far, but with their
Camps spoil, greatly enriched himself and his Soldiers: 5000 (...) taken
prisoners, and (...) Ensigns. Huniades caused prayers with thanksgiving to be
made for 3 days in (...) those 3 (...), and hanged up at Vascape (where the
battle was fought) certain Turks Ensigns, Trophies of Victory. It was the
(...) ever any Christian (...) obtained against the Turk. Many Inhabitants
(...) their (...) for a season, for fear of infection by the Turks (...),
wherewith the (...) covered. Then (...) (...) (...) in triumph, he presented
(...), the (...) (...), etc. which he (...) receiving, and highly commending
his Valor, its (...) shortly (...) (...) (...).

Amurath a (...) before, (...) a proud Embassage to (...), offering peace, on
(...) him (...), or paying him a yearly (...) the King (upon the (...) report
of the Victory) (...), (...) to the issue of matters, he would shortly in
person come and give him further answer. And for (...) (...) power or desire of
revenge, (...) the (...) of his Kingdom, with (...) the Popes Legate, sent
(...) thither to stir up the Hungarians against the Turks, he propounded the
danger (...), and how it might be averted. (...), requested by the King to
(...) his (...), first spoke: Since the Turkish (...) began to rage in Europe,
no news was more welcome to the (...) Bishop, etc. than Uladistaus his being
chosen King of Hungary, for a fitter could not the Hungarians any where have
found, etc. The Kingdom is by your force and valor, my mediation, and the
Queen's death well pacified: but yet the Turkish Tyranny, etc. is to be
repressed, etc. If so great an Army was vanquished by one of thy Captain's
power, but small. what is to be hoped of thee (most mighty King) if thou shall
lead thine Armies in person, under the Protection of Christ Jesus? The eyes of
all Christian Princes are upon thee, etc. And albeit the Common cause of
Religion require thee to be a revenger, etc. yet Hungary and Poland's necessity
no less enforce it; of which one is miserably vexed with the Turk out of
Servia and Dalmatia, the other out of Moldavia and Valachia. You lack not
(worthy Captains) money, which shall be brought unto you from all part, not
lusty and courageous Soldiers, not policy, not for tune, etc. you want nothing
but will. It Is an Expedition necessary, religious, profitable and honorable,
wherein are all ample rewards in this life, and the life to come. Wherefore I
beseech you by the faith of Christ, by love of your Children, health of your
Kingdom, etc. with valiant courage and one consent, to take this sacred war in
hand, and so enroll your names in the eternal book of fame.

Forthwith ensued the Despot's reares, persuading them of that expedition's
necessity, declaring the Turks cruelty and strange tortures, his sons deprived
of sight, and spoiled of their Genitories, etc. that the Hungarians were
divided from the Turks but by the river Saus, often to be waded in Summer, and
hard frozen in Winter: that he was driven into exile by the Turks power,
fleeing to Ragusium, then into Hungary, of which the Barbarian now asked
tribute, to have some color for its invasion, etc. Wherefore with many tears
running down his aged face, he besought Uladislaus, not to let slip this fair
occasion, etc. offering a great sum himself toward the war's charges, assuring
them also of great supplies of men and money from other Princes. Whereupon a
decree was made, that the King should personally with all speed entertain that
war. Though Winter approached, men were taken up, and Ambassadors sent to the
Emperor, and others to pray their aid. Who (...) excusing themselves, sent no
aid at all. Yet many out of France and Germany, forsaking all, came and served
on their own charge. The spring come, and supplications made for success,
Uladislaus ( May 1.) passing Danubius from Buda, stayed 3 days at the River
Tibiscus for his Armies coming; departing thence, marching till within sight of
Bulgaria, he (...) Cobis passing Danubius with his very great Army, marched to
Sophia in about 6 days, in Bulgaria's (...). Which being badly fortified, was
easily taken; and afterward burnt, as were all other Towns and Villages
thereabouts, for terror to the rest. Thence he encamped at the River Morava,
where 500 light horse men being sent over, to view a safe and easy passage for
the Army, they took 4 Turks scouts; understanding them, that 2000 Turks were at
hand. They retiring back with all speed to the River, many leaping (for fear)
from the high banks, perished in the deep, the rest stood doubtfully expecting
what should become of themselves. The Turks descrying the King hovering on the
top of the hill beyond the River, doubting an ambush, retired. Which they on
the far side perceiving, and encouraged by the Kings coming down, followed a
while to increase their fear. Next day the King passing the River, sent to see
if all (...) clear: but being (...) that the Turks (at hand) had placed
ambushes fast by; he entering into counsel, resolved, that Huniades with 10000
horse, should next night suddenly set on the enemy. Who (...) near them, and
the Moon shining out, he led his men by the way the enemy was likeliest (...)
flee, if put to the worst; and entering the Camp with a hideous cry, the Turks
suddenly awakened, and dismayed, betook some to their weapons, some to their
heels, etc. Huniades the whiles, cheared up his men courageously to assail
their sleepy, naked, and fearful enemies. At first, the Turks made a Stir, but
hearing Huniades was there, with the greatness of the sudden fear, with an
inconsirate desire of flight, they trod down one another, thrusting on each
others weapons. Most of them driven into thickets, etc. were by the fierce
pursurers slain: the rest when 'twas day, ran the same fortune, 30000 Turks
were slain, 4000 taken, with a number of Ensigns. Most report Huniades lost but
500; for few found any enemy to resist them. They took all the spoil of a most
rich Camp: The King and Despot hearing of Huniades approach in triumph from
the slaughter of the Turks, with great applause of the other Legions went 3
miles to meet him, and would not suffer Huniades to alight, to do him honor,
but taking him by the right hand, joyed with him, thanking God who had given
him a Captain worthy to rule the Roman Empire, etc. The Common Soldiers
embracing one anothet, welcomed their victorious Friends. So the King and
Huniades, sending the spoil, and the chained Prisoners before, returned in
great triumph, causing prayers with thanksgivings to be made to God, thorowout
the Army.

The Legate General of the Voluntary Christians, persuaded the King and the
rest, to prosecure their good fortune, and take in the rest of Bulgaria.
Huniades had learned it was but. 3 days journey to Philippopolis in Thrace,
the like to Hadrianople, as much to Constantinople. The difficulty was the
great and rough mountain Hemus, which dividing Bulgaria and Servia from
Macedouia and Thrace, is not to be passed over but in 2 places, one made by
Traian the Emperor, with a mighty stone-gate to be opened or shut at pleasure,
the other near the little River Saltiza, Huniades marching foreward took all
Towns (in their way) of Bulgaria; wherein conformity of Religon, the Turks
(...), great affinity of Language, was no small help. (...) to (...) to (...)
Thrace, the weather now very cold, they learned, those passages were so
strongly shut with great stones, etc. they were very hardly to be forced.
Wherefore (...) leaving the straighter way made by man, came (...) Christmas,
even to the other, by Saltiza; where Amurath had shut up the passage, and
placed strong Garrisons to defend Macedonia and Thracia from the dreaded
Hungarians invasion. In the Army was such want of all things, that the
Soldiers were ready to forsake their (...), and, mutiny beginning, to grow
weak, by victuals failing. Besides, the Winter was so cold, and the frost so
great, they could not many times seek for forage or water. So that the Army
began to retire and had been dissolved, had not (...) daily (...) them, the
greatest difficulties werealready past etc. that in going back, they should
find greater difficulties in those wast Countries, than in going forward (...)
that, these straits opened, there remained not but the spoil of a most rich
and pleasant Country, that what they had already won, was easy to be
recovered, except those enemies remaining, were driven quite out of Europe.
Whilst Huniades spoke, every man was encouraged: but remembering their (...),
they cursed the rash attempts of ambitious Princes. The Turks coming after
them, Huniades was sent with some troops, who 8 times encountered them, and as
(...) forced them to retire. In retiring back, the King with most of the Army
went before Huniades, and the Despot followed after a good days Days march:
the Turks that kept the passage, followed them down the hill, in hope of
revenge. Carambey was their General, with express charge not to fight upon any
occasion with the enemy: (for Amurath thought it Victory enough, without loss
to keep them out of (...)). Which (...) (for all that neglecting) followed the
Christian Army, (...) to the mountain (...), hovering over (...) heads to take
them at advantage: The Christians would many times fight with them in
disadvantagious places, (...), They had rather dye like men, then (...) with
hunger and cold. (...) exceeding both in strength and number, besides the
ground's advantage, would needs give battle. (...) and the Despot (though much
troubled with the King's absence, who was gone a days march before) saw they
could not shun battle; yet Carambey coming down upon them, put themselves in
the best order they could, etc. Carambey sending his horse down, a (...) (...)
was made: in which many on both sides were slain. The (...) men at arms, with
the Hungarian light horse men fought (but as how?) (...) to dye. The Turks
stood hard to it for a (...), (...) length being hardly laid to, they began to
give ground: Carambey coming in with new supplies, (...) (...) roughly,
sometimes persuading fairly, (...) them that were fleeing. Huniades and the
Despot, when they perceived the enemy a little to faint, cried (...), Victory,
etc. And sent some companies of foot, who climbing up among the bushes,
paunched the Turks horses with half pikes, etc. as they passed by them. Here
began the battle to decline; the bolder (...) which were come into the Valleys,
compassed with the men at arms, hardly recovered the hill. Carambey (the
while) performed all the parts of a Valiant and worthy Captain, and
courageously fighting in the thickest of his enemies, stayed, for a time, the
lost battle. At last, deceived by the snow, he fell into a bogge, and was taken
prisoner by a common Soldier. Many great ones were taken besides Carambey, but
more slain, and most in the flight; few escaped but such as fled to the
mountains to them that were left to desend the passage. In the (...), (...)
seeing such a man as Carambey (though to him unknown) led prisoner, asked the
Soldier, (...) would sell him? who asked for him 10 (...), Huniades giving him
400, sent him to his tent, (...) him with cheerful words. The Despot coming
that night to the (...), began to talk with him in the (...) (...), and
guessing by his talk Who he was, asked Huniades, how he would ransom him? who
said, he cost him 400 Ducats, but he valued him at 40000, which the Despot
offered to pay: The (...) report, that Uladislaus was present and commanded as
chief in this battle: yet Hungarian writers (whose credit we follow) report as
before.

Shortly after, Huniades and the Despot confulted with the King for removing
the Turks Garrisons left to keep the passages, and to prosecute the War.
Uladislaus (considering the Difficulty, and his Soldiers necessity) thought
good (...) with to return. But they, the one for honor, the other hoping to
recover his lost Kingdom, said; The Turks were in any (...) (...) be removed,
etc. alleging the (...) (...) courage of his Soldiers. Whose valor, (lest
the King should seem to distrust) he commanded to set forward. The Kings battle
first mounted the hill, often stayed by its roughness, etc. Huniades in
searching, found a crooked way, whereby (with his men) he got to the top even
with their enemies. But being come to the desired place, they found such a deep
wide gaping rock. (...), as was not to be passed or filled up: yet being very
near, they attempted by crossbow-shot, etc. to remove the Turks, who were (at
first) so annoyed and discomfited, they were almost at the point to forsake the
pass, had not Alis Beg encouraged and taught them, (by shrowding under the
broken rooks) etc. to save themselves from the shot. Huniades had sent up other
Companies, by another more steep way, who (by too much disadvantage) were
easily rejected. At length seeing the vain attempt, and desperate danger, he
(by the Kings command sounding a retreat) retired down to the Turks, rejoicing.
Next day the cold raging, and wants increasing, the King consulted with the
(...), for hasting their return into places of greater plenty; whereunto (...)
now easily yielded, the rest spoke against it; blaming them, etc. promising he
would find money for all things needful: So said the Legate also. But the
Soldiers could nor be persuaded to slay, crying out, It was not their
Captains, etc. but them that starved for hunger: as for the Despot (in hope of
recovering his Kingdom) he persuaded things impossible, Need, they said, could
not be vanquished; but, Winter past, they would willingly return to the War.
The King sending his baggage before, retired the way he came: the Turks
following and assayling them in the rear, on both sides, did and received
harm. The Army loaded with spoil, could make no great have: and passing through
a great thick wood, full of bogs etc. they left foam strong men at arms, as a
wall against the pursuers; whom the Turks fiercely charging, there was a great
(...) and tumult raised, to which noise many (...) returning, in skirmishing,
fell into the bogs, etc. hardly (...) (...) out. Besides, there were many
crooked turnings, etc. with so sleep deseents, that their horses lay heels
overhead, overthrown with their Rides, that they were often forced to fight on
foot. About 80 men at arms were lost; besides the Turks slain, were taken a
120, all presently slain. The King, fearing his Army (in so long and
troublesome a march) should be consumed with hunger, etc. caused all things of
the carriages and (...), serving rather for burden than use, to be burnt; all
(...) of them whom he lost, as of the enemy, to be (...); and all weak beasts
of burden to be killed. So the Army marched more speedily, nor so much subject
to (...). At length Uladislaus arriving at Belgrade, stayed some days well to
refresh; thence passing the River Savus, he came to Buda, of all joyfully
received. The Legate and Huniades went on his right hand, the Despot on his
left, etc. Before the King at his coming to the City, went the notable Turks
(...); Carambey next before him, bound in chains; with them also the enemies
Ensigns and saved spoils. Huniades came behind the King, between the Legate
and Despot in a triumphant robe, as next to the King best deserving, etc.
Before all went the Prelates and Priests singing Hymns, etc. Uladislaus,
alighred at the gate, going on foot to a (...), giving there (...) thanks, and
hanging up the enemies Ensigns and part of the (...) in remembrance of so
notable a Victory, etc. Then he went to his palace in the Castle, and duly
commending ever man, (especially Huniades) gave them leave to depart. Thus the
Hungarians report: yet the Turks (dissemblers of their losses) call the Bassa
overthrown, Cassanes and the noble prisoner Mechmet Beg Sanzacit of Ancyra,
called (of some) Carambey after his Father's name.

Out of this Turkish slaughter, escaped that Valiant (...) George Castriot
(called Scanderbeg) whose mind had long desired to break out of the Turks
thraldom, and be revenged of Amurath's intolerable injuries, being often
animated thereto by secret letters and messengers from Epirus: but wisely
dissembled the same un o Amurath, till now under the leading of Carambey, in
such a confusion, he took occasion to put in practice what he had long plotted,
Scanderbeg a little before, imparting the matter to some (...) Country men,
especially to Amessa his brothers son, of great courage, had a (...) eye on the
(...) chief Secretaries flight, (...) with Amessa, and other friends he closely
followed: but getting the (...) with a (...) followers in place convenient, he
slew all the Turks, carrying away the Secretary bound, and with threats (...)
him to write letters as from the Bassa, to the Governor of Croia, (...) (in
Amurath's name) to deliver to Scanderbeg, the charge of the City and Garrison,
cunningly enterlacing other things, etc. And then (...) the Secretary, and many
Turks coming in his way, that his doings might be the longer kept from
Amurath's knowledge. Who having with him 300 Epirot Soldiers that followed him
out of the battle, came with incredible celerity, into Dibria, about 70 miles
from Croia, where staying but a day, he chose a few to wait on him to Croia,
as if his household servants; the rest; with other 300 come out of Dibria, he
appointed secretly to be led through woods and mountains, till come so nigh
Croia as possible, unperceived. When he drew near the City, he sent Amessa
before as his Secretary, to certify the Governor of his coming; who framing
his countenance and attire as a natural Turk, he delivered his Message with so
good grace and words, that all was verily believed. But Scanderbeg himself
coming, and delivered the great Commanders letters, the Governor delivering
him the Government of the City, departing next day, with his household toward
Hardrianople. Scanderbeg thus gaining the chief City of Epirus; in the dead of
the night, received in the Soldiers come from Dibria: placing most in
convenient places, he with the rest, flew the Watch, and afterward many in
their beds: the Christian Citizens also helping, in a few hours there was none
of the Turks Garrison left, except some few, who were content to forsake their
superstition, many chose rather to die, and (as is reported) to kill
themselves, than so to save their lives.

Seanderbeg now sending speedy messengers into all parts of Epirus, to disperse
the news, and (...) up the people for recovery of their liberty, flying fame
had already prevented the Messengers, and the oppressed Epirots; were in arms
in every place greatly desiring leaders; yet running by heaps they slew most
Turks (...) in the Country, abroad. No Turk could stir but he was slain, etc.
the Governor of Croia with his retinue, was by the way slain by the Country
people, and his goods a prey.

Scanderbeg commanded those he appointed Captains, speedily to repair to
Croia with all power they could possibly make, diverse Nobles also resorting to
him with their followers; in few days he had 12000 well appointed: wherein,
marching to Petrella, 25 miles from Croia, and (...) on a steep rocky mountain,
as the rest of the Cities be, he sent a wise Soldier to offer the Soldiers of
Petrella, that if they would yield it, they should choose to continue in
Scanderbeg's service, with bountiful entertainment; or depart with bag and
baggage with honorable reward. The subtle Messenger, declared to them, That
Amurath lately vanquished by the Hungarians, and looking daily to be set on by
Christian Princes, had no leisure to look to Epirus; willing them to consider
the dreadful misery that befell the Garrison at Croia, etc. The Governor
considering the matter, gave up the City, only upon departure with such things
as they had, because it should not be said, he sold the City. Scanderbeg giving
them both meat and money, sent them out of Epirus safely, with a Convoy.
Petrella thus gained, he placed therein a convenient Garrison, presently
marching toward Petra Alba in great have. It is a City in Aemathia 3 miles
from Petrella. Scanderbeg scarce well encamped, but the Governor terryfied,
offered to deliver the City, on the same conditions granted at Petrella; which
Scanderbeg faithfully performed. All things were there set in order, he came
without delay to Stellusa, a strong City 50 miles from Croia, where (...), next
morning he sent a messenger to the City, with like conditions accepted of at
Petra Alba: which most of the Soldiers would accept of, but the Governor
(...) with a few, earnestly withstood. But the greater part, when they could
not persuade him with those few, to yield, they delivered him and them bound to
Scanderbeg, and so yielded up the City. Wherefore fearing to return to Amurath,
some remained with Scanderbeg, others provided for, or rewarded, departed
whither they would. All other weaker places, in short time yielded themselves
on like condition: only Sfetigrade in Epirus frontiers, placed as it were an
Eagles nest, remained in the Turks possession. Scanderbeg coming hither, began
to assay it by composition, causing his Ambassadors to declare, all that
happened at Croia, Petrella, etc. how courteously he used the Garrison of
Stellusa which yielded to him; and having the Governor with his partakers in
bonds, whom they should see executed, if they forthwith delivered it not. This
troubled the Garrison, chiefly the Governor, seeing thereby what might happen
to himself. Wherefore first entertaining the Embassadovrs honorably, he said
to the Citizens and Soldiers: Worthy and faithful men, what is your pleasure,
we shall answer to our enemies demands? A rough and bold spirited Soldier,
drawing his sword, and shaking it on high, answered. Most Valiant Governor,
this and the like shall answer for us. Nothing was to less purpose, than to
seek to terrify Valiant minds, with the fortune of Croia, and Stellusa, etc.
we prescribe them of Petrella, or Stellusa, no laws, neither let them us: brave
minds disdain to imitate others in honest actions, much less in cowardice.
Let Scanderbeg kill the Governor, and our fellow Soldiers before our faces,
do ye therefore think we shall die in their bodies? etc. But oh happy bodies
(...) etc. which in defense of their liberty and faith have contemned Gold,
Silver, Death and (...). Wherefore carry back this answer from a common
Soldier: If thy Master seek to impose these conditions on us, let him once
more bare his Arm, which men of courage fear not so much as he thinks. Yet
Scanderbeg is not the (...) we have heard him reported to be: sor why (holding
the Governor of Stellusa in bonds) does he threaten him with death, not
deserving the same, etc? Then the Suoldiers thronging about him beating their
swords and targets, gave a shout, as approving his speech. So the Governor,
returning the common Souliders answer, appointed every man to his charge,
ordering all things for defense of the City. Scanderbeg smiling at the common
Soldiers answer, said. He is a Valiant Soldier, if his deeds be answerable to
his speeches: but if my force fail (...), I will make him happy among the happy
Ghosts of Stellusa: and commanding the Governor to be brought with the other,
some forsaking Mahometism were baptized. (...) with the rest were put to death
in sight of the Garrison Soldiers, shouting from the wall and railing on the
Christians.

Winter now grown on, he left (...) (...) with 3000 Soldiers, to keep in the
Turks at (...), and defend Epirus borders, till a more convenient (...) (...)
to Croia, when in a little above a month he had recovered his Kingdom (...)
being also ere long delivered by composicion: during this time he slept (...)
above 2 hours in a night; fighting always with his arm bare, the blood often
(...) out of his lips. (...) written, he slew 3000 Turks with his own hands in
his wars against them.

After he had wrung his inheritance from Amurath, he overran part of Macedonia,
making incursions into the heart of the (...), so (...) his Soldiers, that
they desired no (...) pay: it beginning to be a proverb, that the spoil of
Amurath's Dominions was Scanderbeg's revenews. Amurath (troubled with (...)
wars) at first seemed not greatly to account of it, though inwardly grieved at
the heart. But seeing no end to be expected of these miseries, he sent (...)'s
Bassa with 40000 (...) Soldiers, to subdue Epirus. This replenished the Turks
with such hope of Victory, that the Soldiers before setting forth, were
contending for division of the (...). Fame also filled Epirus with great fear
of Alis his coming. The Country fleeing into strong Cities fortyfied the same,
watching and warding, the aged commended them and theirs to God, and the
Soldiers courage, with (...). Scanderbeg was nothing moved, having (as was
supposed) (...) from Friends in Court of all Amurath's designs. Out of all the
(...) that repaired to him at Croia in Epirus, from (...) Princes, etc. besides
(...) Volunteers, he chose only 8000 horse, and 7000 (...), and placing some
few in frontier Garrisons, at which his friends, yea and enemies marvelled.
With which (...), marching to Dibria, after encouraging his Soldiers, he
encamped in the (...) (...) (...) (...), where the Bassa must needs pass. In
which wood, he placed Gnee and Amessa with 3000, to stand close, till he had
joined battle with the Bassa, then (...) (...) forth upon his (...) Who (...)
near (...), (...) that night, making great show of (...), with great fires:
whereas in (...) Camp all was silent, and no show of fire, which made (...)
(...) the more careless. Next morning (...) placing 3000 horse and foot in the
left (...), and the like in the right, himself led the (...) (...): The (...)
ward was (...) to (...) (...) then (...), etc. (...) (...) charged with a (...)
troop of (...) who retired that the Christians (hastily pursuing) might
disorder their battle. But Scanderbeg perceiving the Bassa's meaning, all was
kept in good order. So the wings beginning a (...), Scanderbeg (...) charged
the Bassa with his main battle. But those in the wood suddenly issuing upon the
Turks rear, made great slaughter, and forced many to flee. The Bassa's best
Soldiers placed nearest himself, renewed the (...), almost lost. Scanderbeg's
fortune was even (...) a (...): till Uranocontes receiving the wearied into the
rear, brake through the Bassa's Army with fresh troops brought thence, with
such slaughter, that he made way for all the rest. The Turks discomfited, fled,
whom the Christians fiercely pursuing, slew of them 22000, 2000 taken
prisoners, 24 Turks Ensigns; of the Christians were slain not past 120.
Scanderbeg making his 7000 foot horsemen, with the Turks horses, entered far
into Macedonia; filling his Soldiers with wealth, and sparing nothing from
fire and sword. Ali^ with the remainder returning to Hadrianople, was charged
by Amurath of cowardice and indiscretion. Whereof clearing himself by rehearsal
of his former Victories, and the testimony of the Captains present in battle,
he was again received into favor.

Amurath overthrown, first by Hunu^des, now by Scanderbeg, and elsewhere beset
that he knew not which way to turn, fell into such a Melancholy passion, that
he was about to execute himself, had not Cali Bassa (by whose persuasion, he
yielded to desire peace of Uladislaus, using the Despot a mean therein)
comforted his dying spirits. The Despot at first smally credited what the
Ambassadors told him, till better persuaded, he so wrought especially with
Huniades, that Amurath departing withal his forces out of Servia, restored it
to the Despot, delivering him his 2 sons, whom, bereft of sight, he had long
kept in prison. That thenceforth he should not claim Moldavia, nor that part of
Bulgaria lost in the last Wars. Not to molest any part of Hungaria, during the
time: and to pay 40000. Ducats for Carambey's ransom: a Peace was for 10
years concluded, and by solemn Oath on both parts confirmed. This was the
honourablest Peace ever before made with any Turk, and most profitable, had it
been sincerely kept. Amurath now converted all his forces against the
Caramanian King, injuring him whilst busied in the Hungarian Wars. The
Caramanian not daring to meet him, nor trust to any his strong holds, fortified
himself in the mountains. Amurath made great spoil, taking great booties in
his Country, at last hardly (...) Iconium. Whereupon he sent Embasladours with
his wife, Amurath's sister, to entreat for Peace, offering him the double
tribute, and his son in hostage. Amurath granting him Peace returned: In this
War Amurath's Eldest son died with a fall from his horse, (hawking) to his
great grief: Who old, and thoroughly wearied with Wars, etc. sending for his son
Mahomet but 15 years old, resigned to him his Kingdom, appointing Cali Bassa
and one, (...) his trusty Counselors. So with Hamze Beg, departing to
Magnesia, he gave himself to a Monastery life amongst certain Turkish Monks.

Many Mohammedan and Christian Princes, sorry for the peace between Uladislaus
and the Sultan, thinking that War's prosecution would have been the utter ruin
of the Turkish Kingdom, sought by all means to induce (...) to break the
solemn league, especially John the Greek Emperor, remembering him of the
confederacy made with other Christian Princes against the common enemy of
Christianity, that he (rejecting diverse offers of Amurath for Peace) was ready
with the other Princes, to join his forces with his, if he would; which he
could not do in a better time: Amurath having drawn his greatest forces into
Asia, and betaken himself to a private life: requesting (...) not to leave them
a prey to the Turk. who when he thought himself safe from the Hungarians, would
invade them. Then also letters came from the Cardinal of Florence General of
the Fleet, declaring how Amurath leaving almost none in Europe, was gone into
Asia: that he was (according to promise) come to the straits of Hellespont to
embarre his passage out of Asia: Both these letters being (...) in the Council,
the King with all the Hungarian Nobility, were never more sorry or ashamed for
any thing, than the late league with Amurath, etc. whilst they stood wavering,
Julian the Legate, an enemy to Peace, and by his place next to the King
dissuaded them, That they entered a League with the Turk an Infidel, (...)
violate their faith with the Christians, and break the holy League made with
the great Bishop, and other confederate Princes, that they might recover (...)
long before destroyed; verily a small and woeful profit, etc. Did they not in
his presence (and he the Author) willingly make a League with the Italians and
Greeks, that the one should meet them with aid out of (...): the other with a
great Fleet to come (...) Hellespont? If they made it, why made they not
another with the Turks, or by what right can they keep the same, being made?
This second League is to be broken, which except they do, be feared, as Judas
betrayed Christ, they may seem to betray his Vicar, etc. And what would they
answer to the (...) Emperor, who had (with the first) taken the field, and
expects but their coming? What would they answer the great Bishop? What the
Venetians and Genowaies whose Fleet is ready? What the Burgundians, who for
zeal passing the Ocean, by many dangers now flore in Hellespont? That they
promised the first of the Spring to be in field, and now their Soldiers both
in Spring and Summer play. That some perhaps would blame him for suffering it
with the rest: he was indeed present, but as much as in him was, he (...) it
might not be, etc. That he was overcome by the wisdom and authority of
Huniades, and compassion of the (...), etc. that having made restitution of
Servia and the Captives, what remained but to repair their Army, and keep their
first League? and to say that Uladislaus after his League with the Greek and
Latin Princes, could not without their (...) conclude any thing, especially
with enemies of Christian (...), etc. That a just and lawful (...) is to he
religiously kept, but that which ten (...) not only to a private but public
destruction, ought to be frustrate. That before their faithless dealing were
farther spread, not to violate their faith, (for the good of the Christian
Commonweal) given, to prosecute the expedition, by common consent taken in
hand: To deliver the Christian Provinces oppressed with Turkish servitude, and
not to deceive the worlds expectation conceived of them, than which nothing can
be more dishonorable: not to suffer so fit an occasion to slip away; but
requesting them above all things, to march forward with their victorious forces
into Macedonia and Thracia.

In conclusion, speaking of the great Bishop's authority, he in his name,
disanulled the League, absolving them from the Oath: which so contented the
King, and the rest, that a Decree was made to continue the League with their
confederates, and to prosecute the wars against the Turks. To which unfortunate
Decree, both the Despot and Huniades easily consented, the one in hopes of the
Wars good success, the other with desire of Bulgaria, promised and (as some
say) assured by Charter to him, by Uladislaus.

Of this breach notice was speedily given to the Greek Emperor and the
Florentine Cardinal, lest, hearing of the Peace concluded, they should alter or
desist from their purposes. The Turk being ignorant hereof, had withdrawn all
Garrisons out of Servia, and other places agreed upon, restoring them to the
Despot and others; freeing a number of Captives and the Despot's two Sons. Yet
Uladislaus (through Huniades) detained some strong holds in Servia, for which
the Despot ever grudged against Huniades.

As Uladislaus was preparing his Forces, the fame of Scanderbeg was grown
great, every man speaking of him honor and praise; Whereupon Uladislaus by
consent of his nobility, dispatching Ambassadors to him with Letters,
certifying of his purpose to root out the Turks in that Common Cause, praying
his aid to this purport; That as he seemed to him above all other Princes,
accomplished with all perfections of body and mind, so to be endowed with some
Divine and wonderful fortune, under whose good conduct, not only Epirus may
think it self secure; but the other Nations also, lately by the (...) Kings
dismembered from Macedons Realm, may recover their ancient Laws and Liberties.
For what can be more glorious than this victory obtained by the utter
discomfiture of Alis Bassa? But now there offers unto him an object of far
greater glory, with a fit occasion to revenge injuries of Amurath both new and
old: also the public calamities, and opprobrious disgraces against the
Christian Religion in general, now oppressed, if he would succor him in this
extremity of affairs: whereto all the Princes of Hungary, and Polonia etc.
Julian the Cardinal (...) him, with those courageous Christians with them,
wishing for nothing more than the presence of his victorious Ensigns: which
occasion, if he (...) not, would be a mean to drive the Turk quite out of
Europe, etc. That the flame has well near consumed them all, whilst none
thought it would come near himself. That there is no house-wife or Matron in
Hungary, not in some measure partaker of this heaviness. That the Christian
Princes hear of this, yet the misery of their Allies can nothing move them:
Only Eugenius Bishop of Rome, and Philip of Burgundy, have not refused to bear
part of the burden. That albeit (...) was not ignorant how ill at leisure he
might be to take such an expedition in hand; yet it should not withhold him
assuring him, that as it could not be but to him most honorable, so this
present desert should not be bestowed on ungrateful men.

Scanderbeg liking well this motion: by the general consent of the Albanian
Princes his Allies, promised the King by Letters (in good time) to be present
with him, with 30000 Soldiers; which Letters being dispatched, he (beginning
to levy his sorces) joined 15000 no less valiant, to the 15000 which
discomfited Alis: so setting forward with the Vows and hope of all his loving
Subjects. But at Servia's borders, he found the strait and difficult passages
shut up by George the Despot (a Christian only in name) who but lately restored
by (...) help, now in favor of the Turks quarrel, and in (...) (...) of
Huniades, did this. Scanderbeg complained to him of the wrong, etc. requesting
if but for the common Cause of Christianity to give him (as to his friend)
passage; and not perpetually to stain himself etc. But what avails requests?
Scanderbeg resolved to open his way by force, though it much grieved him, etc.
But the while, (...) pricked forward by Julian the Cardinal, or his own destiny,
assembling a great Army; yet far inferior to that he had the year before from
Segedinum (in the beginning of November) came to Nicopolis in Bulgaria, whose
Suburbs he (...) refreshing his people thereabouts, and mustering his Army;
Dracula the Vayuod of Ualachia, (of great experience) considering the King's
small number, said, He had learned to deem aright, by his own harms, of the
Sultan's power, etc. persuading him not to expose his small forces to so
manifest peril, in such an unseasonable time; but reserve to a fitter
opportunity. This Counsel was thought wholesome; but the Cardinal, extolling the
last years victory, with promises of aid from the Pope, and
Constantinopolitans, and others, etc. persuaded the King that Dracula his
speech proceeded on a superficial judgment, (...) regarding the Kings strength
from his friends, or in regard of a League, lately made betwxt him and the
Turk. The Prince seeing his Counsel not so well taken as it was meant: doubted,
whether to leave him to his fortune, (...) (casting off the Turkish League) to
join with him; but, at length resolved, he (...) to the King, That he prayed
the hope of his friends help failed him nor at his need, etc. that his
resolution, which he could not by persuasion alter he would (as times
suddenness) and his ability permited gladly further, and so presented to him
his Son with 4000 horsemen; preferring also to him two lusty young men, perfect
guides, with two horses of incredible swiftness, and with standing tears, said,
Take this small gift in good part, etc. I pray God they be given in vain; yet
if necessity shall force thee to use them; thou shall find them serviceable.

Uladislaus marching toward Thracia, took many places by the way, the Turks
yielding for fear; coming to Sumium and Pezechium, the Garrisons stood upon
their guard; but besieging and taking them by assault, he put 5000 Turks to the
sword.

The Bassaes terrified, requested Amurath to leave his obscure life, and to
levy his greatest power in Asia, for defense in Europe; blaming him for
committing the Government to so young a Prince as Mahomet, many great ones
scorning to obey him: Amurath (awaked left his Cloister) speedily gathering a
strong Army, and finding Hellespontus Straits stopped by the Venetians and
Pope's Galleys, was at his wits end. But at Bosphorus Straits, he found
conveyance: some write, he paid the Gennoways for passage, a Duckat for a
Turk, amounting to 100000 Ducats: Others affirm, by bribing the Defendants of
the passage. Being got over, he, joining his Asian and European forces, in 7
days encamped within 4 miles of Varna in Bulgaria, whither Uladislaus, hearing
of his coming had retired, having taken it but a little before, with others on
the Seacoast. And, before in hope he could not possibly find passage,
consulted now with his Commanders, what course to take; many were so
discouraged with the fame of his coming, they advised him to return, and not
oppose so small an Army, against such a world of people reported. But others,
chiefly (...), said, It was not for his honor, first to invade, and to turn
his back upon the first report of their coming, wishing him rather to remember
the good fortune of his former wars; that he learned (by experience) not to be
moved with the enemies multitude, etc. Whereupon the King resolved to try the
fortune of the field: And committing the ordering of all his forces to Huniades
he carefully disposed the (...), guarding one side with a marsh, the other with
carriages, the rear with a steep hill, that the Army could not be compassed
with the (...) of their enemies. The Turks approaching, began to skirmish,
which fight was long maintained with a (...) fortune, the ground being covered
and stained: with dead bodies and blood: At length, joining closer, Huniades
had with his Transilvanian and Ualachian horse, put to flight both the Turkish
wings, so that Amurath was about to flee, had he not by a Soldier holding the
Reins of his Bridle, been stayed. The Captains and Prelates encouraged by
Huniades his success foolishly left their appointed (...), pursuing
disorderly; nor gone far they were hardly encountered by a party of Turks in a
valley fast by. Lesco one of the most valiant Hungarians was slain; the Bishop
of Veradium that first disordered the battle, (...) through a Fenne, after
struggling with his horse, was strangled in the mud; The Bishop of Agria, was
then lost, with many Churchmen: The Cardinal with others retiring (...) their
standings, and assailed by the Turks, they were by the King and Huniades
coming, with great slaughter forced to retire. Amurath (in extreme danger)
beholding the Crucifix in the voluntary Christians Ensigns, plucked forth the
writing of the late League, and holding it up with eyes to Heaven said, Behold
thou crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians have without cause
(...). If thou be a God, etc, show thy power upon thy (...) people, who in
their deeds deny thee.

The King (in heat) hardly persuaded by Huniades, to return from the bloody
pursuit, coming to the Camp, found Julian and others overcharged with the
Turks, who there fought courageously backed by the Janissaries, Amurath's last
refuge. There began a most cruel fight, many slain on both sides. The victory
stood long doubtful: at length the Turks shrunk back, where the King and
Huniades fought; But in the left side they so prevailed, the Christians were
ready to flee, which Huniades perceiving, speedily with his presence there,
restored the battle; then returning to the King, who repulsing a number of
Turks, was come to the Janissaries. There was a 1000 deaths to be seen, etc. in
which confnsion young Uladislam brake in among them; then also Amurath (by a
French Knight) was wounded with a Pike, and asfailed with his fword, but being
speedily rescued, the Knight was slain, and performing all parts of a worthy
Soldier, his horse being slain, he was forthwith slain, and his head, struck
off by Ferizes, was presented to Amurath; who on a Lances point, proclaiming
it the head of the Christian King, the Christians discouraged therewith, fled.
Huniades after vain attempts to rescue the Kings body, gave place to necessity,
fleeing over the Mountains into woods, thence got over into Ualachia, and
imprisoned by Dracula, as some write; who after enlargement, aiding Danus
against him and his Son, they were slain; and Danus put in his room. Julian the
Cardinal was found by the way side half stripped, and mortally wounded, sharply
reproved by Gregory Sanose, as author of that perfidious war. Many fleeing
Christians were slain; but more drowned in the Fenns, perishing by cold and
hunger in woods, or fell at length into Turkish slavery. The number slain in
this battle was great as the little hills raised of bones and bodies do (...)
declare. Most agree, that scarce a third of the Christians Army escaped. The
Turks multitude was made less by (at least) 30000; For Amurath very sad,
answered those demanding why he was no merrier after such a victory, That he
wished not at so great a price to gain many such. Yet he erected a Pillar where
the King was (...), inscribing all that was done. This battle was fought near
(...), (a place fatal to many Warriers) November. 10. 1444. Some impute this
loss to Huniades's fleeing out of the battle with 10000 horse, but it seems
to be devised to excuse the Clergies foul dealing, the report not agreeing with
his noble disposition. Amurath returning to Hadrianople, and solemnly burying
the body of the Viceroy (...) Europe slain in the battle, resigned his
Kingdom, again to Mahomet, living a solitary life, at Magnesia, vowing so to do
in the fear of the late battle; but after a short time, he returned to
Hadrianople, resuming the Government to the great discontent of his ambitious
Son.

Scanderbeg yet in Servia's Borders, hearing what happened to the Hungarians
was exceedingly grieved, resolving to return into Epirus; yet breaking into the
Despots Country, he did exceeding harm. Returning home, he relieved many
Hungarians and (...) escaped from the slaughter, and repairing to him,
providing to Ragusa, thence to return into their Countries. Thus was Scanderbeg
by the Despot's treachery, stayed from being at the bloody battle of Varna, to
the unspeakable loss of the Christian (...). Of the two, Huniades was
accounted the better Commander, and the more politic, for his greater years:
which was well countrevailed by Scanderbeg's good fortune, and by experience
afterward gotten.

Amurath was exceedingly moved at Scanderbeg's proceedings, and his great harms
in Macedonia, etc. yet still dreading the Hungarians; himself (through years)
desirous of rest, and the young years of his Son Mahomet, with Scanderbeg's
fortune, and Huniades, his malice, he proved by Letters (mixed with threats and
feigned courtesies to draw him into some peace for a time, to be the better
revenged at leisure) showing that he never wanted preferments, to (...) on him
most unkind Scanderbeg; (...) now he had so highly offended him, he knew not
what (...) words to use unto him, etc. that it grieved him to rehearse his
manifold and horrible treasons, etc. if his mind would suffer them to be
covered with silence; yet he thought good to advertize him, lest his heat (when
he had lost himself) should overthrow him with his unlucky Kingdom; Did he
think his late outrages should escape his revenging hands? that he (graceless
man) should amend, and not farther expect, whether his indignation will break
out: that the allurements of his good fortune should not so puff up his foolish
desires, etc. that his misery afterward may move even his greatest enemies, or
himself, to compassion; that he should remember his courtesies, and make him no
longer sorry, that he so ill bestowed the same; That, letting pass his souls
health, which he esteemed as nothing, and (...) Laws by him despised; What had
he ever wanted at his hands of all things most delighting men's desires? etc.
For all these benefits, that, he showed himself but a very (...) brought up in
his own bosom. But the love of his Country moved him: which if he had asked,
would he have denied him? which he often proffered unto him; but he had rather
gain it by treachery, than receive it from him by (...). That he now pardoned
him all, chiefly for that the time he faithfully served him, was longer than
the time of offending him. That his Fathers Kingdom he gives unto him, on
condition of restoring him the other Towns of Epirus; by himself honorably
won. That, restoring all taken from the Prince of Servia, and recompencing him
for other harms; and never violating any his friends, or aiding his enemies, he
should eyer stand in his favor as before: That he knew his strength, and had
before his eyes the Hungarian fortune. That he might conferr with Airadin his
trusty Messenger, to understand more: to write at large what he intended to do.

Scanderbeg knowing the old Fox wrought nothing simply of good meaning, he
called (...) unto him and after many public and private discourses, to sound
his meaning, etc. he showed him the strength of his Camp, that the crafty
Messenger might not think he was afraid of his Master. Then complaining of
Amurath's dealing against his Father, Brethren, and himself, he sent him away
with such a writing, That, as Amurath had exceeded him in many courtesies, so
he would now exceed him in temperate speech: that his Letters and Messenger,
gave him more occasion of smile than choler: whilst (at first) accusing him of
ingratitude and treason, he presently seemed (...) of his souls health, himself
being a defender of a most damnable error, and as a conqueror to a vanquished
enemy, propounding many conditions, which he scorned to hear. That he imputed
his railing to his great age, way ward nature, and conceived grief, etc. Yet
wherefore did he so exclaim against him? Did he call his needful departing a
treachery, his native Countries recovering a villainy? That if Amurath's
kindness toward him were compared with his miseries, his good deserts would be
overwhelmed with his greater tyrannies: That he took away his Fathers Kingdom,
murdered his brethren, vowed him to death when he little feared it, etc. How
long did he think he would endure his insolent bondage? which yet he many years
endured, not refusing his commands etc. That simply believing his words and
deeds to be void of fraud, when his cankered malice, began apparently to show
it self, he also glosed with him, till he found occasion to recover his
liberty; yet these are but trifles to what he had laid up in hope and
resolution: therefore ceasing his threats, he should not tell him of the
Hungarian fortune, etc. Amurath herewith (and conferring with Airadin) was
filled with wrath; yet to give no token of fear, stroking often his beard, (as
when thoroughly angry) cheerfully dissembling, he said, Thou desire (wicked
man) some honorable death; We will give it thee. We will be present at the
burial of our (...) child, etc. Thou shall not complain, thou diedst an obscure
death. And because of many then great occurrents, he sent Ferises with 9000
choice horsemen to keep Scanderbeg in doing, and spoil his Country what he
could. For all whose haste, Scanderbeg hearing thereof, placed 1500 footmen in
ambush on the mountains leading into the valley of Novea, and 2000 horsemen, as
he thought most fit. Ferizes descending those woody and bushy mountains by
broken and stony ways, was set upon by the foot, suddenly arising: 760 Turks
were in this conflict taken, a number slain, and Ferises with the rest fleeing,
cried still out, Better some saved than all lost. Scanderbeg pursuing him into
Macedonia, rewarded his Soldiers with its spoil,

Amurath grieved, presently sent Mustapha with a supply of 6000 to take Ferises
charge; in no case to enter far, but to burn and spoil Epirus frontiers,
accounting it good service, if but the trees and fruits had felt his anger.
Mustapha (by continual Scouts) warily entered the Valley of Novea, entrenching
upon the rising of a hill, placing espialls on the mountains tops, to give
notice of the enemy by signs; reserving 4000 horse in his Camp, he sent about
9000 to forage and spoil: charging every one (on pain of death) to retire
thither upon sign given. The Turkish Army making havoc of all that fire and
sword could destroy; Scanderbeg drawing near the Valley was advertized (by a
wounded Epirot Soldier) of all the enemies doings; who considering Mustapha's
wary proceedings, resolved, by force, suddenly to afsault him in his trenches,
before his Soldiers could return to the Camp: and speedily entering the Valley,
was discovered by the espialls, giving a sign to the Camp, whence it was given
to the dispersed Soldiers: most of whom being strayed and busied in spoil,
heard or saw it not. Scanderbeg's Soldiers following those that heard it, (and
terrifying them with his name) many were slain in entering the Camp with their
booties, and the Turks trenches presently assaulted, and they beaten from their
top; which won, all their Camp was filled with fear and slaughter, being come
to (...) mell. Mustapha, put to the worst, fled by the part furthest from the
enemy; the rest fleeing, shifted as they could; 5000 Turks were slain, but 300
taken by the enraged Christians: Scanderbeg losing but 20 horse, and 50 foot.
The Turks in the Country (misdoubting) fled also, many being pursued and slain.

Mustapha, to excuse the misfortune to Amurath, greatly commended Scanderbeg's
courage, and wonderful skill, and said, To send such small Armies, was but to
increase his glory, and the Turks infamy, etc. Wherefore Amurath determined for
a time to suffer him to live in peace: yet commanding Mustapha to renew his
Army, for defense of his borders toward Epirus; but in no case to invade any
thereof, or to join battle with Scanderbeg.

Now also the Peloponesians (building 5 strong Castles in a wall, with deep
trenches on Corinth's strait from Sea to Sea, 6 miles long) began to deny the
yearly tribute paid to the Turk, and to invade such Princes of Achaia, content
still to be his tributaries: of whom, the Prince of Athens, and the Governor
of Thessaly continually incensed him against them: who coming (though Winter)
into Achaia, most Grecians were fled for fear, into Peloponesus. Coming to the
Isthmus where Corinth sometime stood, he there encamped; but perceiving them to
stand on their guard, he battering the wall 4 days, brake thorough with his
Army. The Grecians fleeing, some to one strong hold some to another, the Turks
spoiled that rich and pleasant Country at pleasure: selling the (...) (...) at
a vile price. Amurath sacrificing 600 captives to his Fathers Ghost: and
imposing yearly tribute on the Peloponesians and other Greek Princes, yielding
again unto him, he in his return took the Cities, Patras (...) Sicyane. This
was 1445.

Amurath now old, was content to take rest at Hadrianople: during which time,
Bajazet Mahomet's Son was born in 1446.

The Hungarians loosing Uladislaus, chose Ladislaus Albertus his posthume Son,
their King. But he being but 5 years old, it was thought necessary to choose
some worthy man (during his minority) for the Government and protection of so
turbulent a Kingdom: many were well thought of, but the glory and valor of
Huniades procured to him, that by the general consent of all the States, he was
(with great (...) of the people) chosen and proclaimed Governor, quietly
spending some years in deciding controversies in indifferent administration of
justice, ending many controversies far from the place of judgment, dispatching
many weighty matters, sitting, going, standing, riding, always affable as well
to the poorer sort as others: in peace, providing for war: above all, so
dexterously careful of the Nobilities agreement, that he was of them and others
generally beloved and feared. Being advertized (the mean time) that Amurath was
raising great forces (as the fame went) for Hungaries invasion; for
withstanding thereof in his 4th year of government in 1448, with most of the
Nobles and the Waiwod of Valachia, he set forward against him with 22000 choice
(...). Traveling through Valachia and getting over Danubius into Servia, he
requested the (...), (as before) to put (...) into that war, and not to show
himself ungrateful to the Hungarians great benefits, etc. But he, for no
Religion, and better affecting the Turk than Huniades, pretended the League he
had with (...), the times unseasonableness, Autumn being past, with many other
such: but his malice to Huniades, preferred before him in government, and
disdaining to serve under his (...), caused his backwardness. Huniades (angry)
threatened him if he returned with victory, to give his (...) to a more worthy
than he. So coming to Bulgaria, the Despot advertized Amurath of their coming
and strength; yea of every days march: if he suffered them to come on further,
and so get betwixt them and home, Huniades should hardly escape his hands.
Amurath so suffering Huniades to do, came two or three days march behind him,
that being stopped, he must needs fight. They being both come into the Plain of
Cossova in Bulgaria, about 20 miles long, 5 broad, environed with mountains,
etc. an old woman of a Village by the River fast by, where both Armies passed,
cried out aloud, Oh how much I fear the hard fortune of the Hungarians: whose
passage troubled the River but a day, the Turks 3! Not far beyond a little hill
in the Plain, was a certain Piramide Tower in memorial of Amurath I. there
slain. Amurath fearing Huniades should take the Tower before him, and so become
ominous, hasted the more to join battle before he should come thither. Huniades
encamped at the rising hill, expecting Scanderbeg every hour; wherefore Amurath
provoked him to battle, cutting off his water and forage to draw him thereto;
for he had about 80000 men. At length enforced to fight, upon Luke's day,
dividing his Army into 32 battalions, he spoke to them, That the day was come
wherein they might revenge the dishonor in the battle of Varna: that although
the enemy be more in number; yet in hope, (...), and strength, far inferior,
etc. That of their overthrow at Varna, he verily believed the angry powers from
above (to revenge their breach of faith) was the cause rather than their
cowardice; for even there every one received the just guerdon of their
treachery; whereas they against their wills drawn into that war, by Goo's
mercy, are yet preserved for defense of the Christians (...) and especially of
Hungary, etc. That God is always present with them that (in his just quarrel)
fight courageously: thereunto being joined their (...) manner of fight, etc.
their many notable (...) forcible Engines, which the enemies have not: that
they look for worthy Scanderbeg every hour: that the danger is not so great as
to fear it, nor so little as to contemn it: That if the way back, were never so
easy; yet without doing what they came for, and glory with victory they might
not retire. That they at Varna lost a devout King, by whose sacrifice, that
divine anger is appeased: unto whose Ghost in this battle, he beseeched them to
make an honorable sacrifice, not forgetting other worthy men's death. That this
fear of the Turks is even this day to be cut off, as never to grow again, etc.
Beseeching them them so to fight, as men resolutely set to overcome, or (if
otherwise) honorably to die.

The hearers were greatly enflamed herewith, and by their own desires
sufficiently encouraged. Neither did Amurath with less care, marshal and
encourage his Army, which filled the Plain from side to side, to the Christians
astonishment. Huniades sending both his wings down the hill, with certain
light-horsmen before, and men at Arms betwixt them; the Soldiers began at
first to skirmish a far off; but afterward they fought foot to foot, and hand
to hand about three hours: the Turks being (at length) put to the worst in both
wings, Amurath sending strong supplies renewed the battle; whereby the wearied
Light-horsmen retired to the men at Arms, who easily repulsed the Turks; many
were slain, but far more Turks, not so well horsed and armed as the Christians.
Huniades much hurting them with the Artillery from the hill, Amurath drew as
close thereto as he could out of the danger; whereupon Huniades coming down,
and sending supplies to both wings, encouraged them with cheerful speech, and
sometime with his valiant hand, etc. omitting nothing of a good General to be
done, whereby the battle became in every place fierce and terrible. Amurath
likewise, presuming on his multitude, hoped (by continual sending fresh
supplies, to weary his enemies, one battalian of the Hungarians being forced to
weary 3 or 4 of the Turks: who were that day put to the worst, and often forced
to retire; yet was the battle still again renewed. The night ending this fight,
both returned to their Trenches, purposing next day to renew the batrel: which
began when scarce fair day; the Hungarians not fighting with such courage as
before; for they had spent their strength the day before, whereas almost 40000
Turks not fought at all, or but lightly skirmished. Huniades exhorted his
Soldiers, that remembering how many thousands of their enemies they slew the
day before, not now to give over; for that, they were to be thought worthy of
honor, not who began, but who ended honorable actions: wishing them to set
before them the calamities like to ensue, if they should (as cowards) be
overcome, etc. Amurath also, promising and threatening his, persuaded them
rather to endure any thing, than (by that days overthrow) to be (...) out of
Europe. After some skirmishes, it was fought with no less fury, than the day
before: The slaughter being great, and the Hungarians force not to be
withstood; the Turks began with fresh horsemen to delude their fierceness, by
turning their backs (diverse being slain by the eager pursuers); And again (on a
signal given) turning back upon them, well revenged their fellows deaths:
wearying the Hungarians (thus) all day long. Many Hungarians were slain, and
the Turks had the better that day: so (at night) both returned into their
Trenches. By day dawn, the battle was again begun: Huniades his brother, with
his Light-horsmen, first setting forward; for some hours they fought with like
hope, the Hungarians being chiefly slaughtered. Zechel Huniades Sisters Son,
was in the front, the first of the leaders, (...): Marzalus and Bamffi there
died also. Amurath seeing Zechel's Ensigns taken, and his Soldiers (now di
comfited) turning their backs, commanded all the fresh Companies to issue
forth, and overwhelm the few Christians, (...) (...) 3 days fight; who
breaking out, overthrew both the Christians wings, discomfited and put to (...)
the rest, with a great slaughter. Huniades, seeing the battle quite lost, fled
also, leaving all for prey; who following the (...) with cruel execution,
returned ((...) night) to their Trenches. The rest compassing the Camp, were by
the wounded Soldiers, Waggoners, etc. kept out so long as they had shot, but
in the end were all slain, two or three Turks in many places lying dead by one
Hungarian. Amurath to cover his loss, cast most of his common Soldiers into
the River Schichniza; for which the Inhabitants long abstained from eating fish
therein taken. The plain laying covered (for many years) with men's bones, could
not be ploughed, etc. Though the Turks had the victory, yet they lost 34000 at
least, for 8000 Hungarians; yet themselves report, The Christians lost 17000,
and themselves 40000. There fell most of the Hungarian Nobility. Many taken in
chase, were by the angry Tyrant slain, of such as returned through Servia, few
escaped, being either slain or stripped of all. Huniades traveling 3 days
without maet or drink, cast off his tired horse the fourth day; and falling
into the hands of two thieves, they spoiling him of apparel, strove for his
golden Crucifix; whereby (laying hand on one of their swords) he thrust him
through, then putt the other to flight. Next day, he lighted upon a sturdy
Shepherd roaming for prey, who stricken with his Majesty, at first stood at
gaze, as did Huniades, fearing his so great weakness: after a while, the
Shepherd asked him of his fortune. He craving something to eat, the Shepherd
moved, and hoping of reward, caused bread and water to be set before him in a
cottage, not far off, with Onions; who would often say in his banquets, He
(...) fared better than with the Shepherd. Being conducted to (...), the (...)
caused him to be imprisoned; who left he should deliver him to into Amurath's
hands, yielded that all the strong Towns detained when he was restored by
(...), should be delivered him, his youngest Son (...) marry the Despots
daughter, and other like; requiring his eldest son in hostage for performance.
Huniades coming to Segedinum, was honorably received by the Hungarians.
Raising suddenly a great Army, he invaded the Despots territory in Hungary,
destroying and burning, never resting till he got it into his power, and
presently entered Rascia, where the Despots Ambassadors met him with the
hostage, craving peace: which at the Nobilities request, he granted, forgiving
all wrongs, so returning into Hungary. Amurath, exceeding wroth with the Despot
for freeing Huniades, sent, in 1449, (...) and (...), with a strong Army to
invade Rascia, who fortifying Chrysonicum on the River Morava, destroyed with
fire and sword far and near. The Despot dismayed, and wisting not what to do;
yet had rather (...) any thing than the Turks bondage again, humbly (and not
without shame) craved aid of Huniades: which the courteous Governor easily
granted. And forthwith setting forward with a convenient power, he joined with
the Despot's power in Rascia. Marching on with expedition and in a thick mist,
he was the fourth day upon the Turks before they were aware: who (the mist
breaking up) discovering Huniades's dreadful Ensigns, speedily fled; whom the
Light-horsmen followed with bloody execution all the day: Huniades with his men
at Arms, following in good order. Fritzebeg, with most of the best Commanders
were taken. Then Huniades entering Bulgaria burnt Budina its Metropolis to the
ground. So clearing the Country of the Turks, and presenting all the prisoners
to the Despot, he returned with triumph to Buda, to find no less trouble with
the Bohemians, and some Hungarian Nobles, than he had with the Turks, to the
Christian Commonweales great hurt.

Mustapha lying still all this (...) on Macedonia's borders, a great quarrel
arose betwixt the Venetians and Scanderbeg, about the inheritance of (...)
Zachary murdered, which laying in Epirus frontiers, they claimed, holding the
City Dayna against him: so that they were by him at the River Drine, (...) in
battle; wherefore Mustapha would fain have taken his opportunity to enter the
Country, but not daring to attempt it without his Master's leave, he giving
him intelligence from time to time of those troubles, earnestly requested him
to give him leave. The suspicious Sultan at length discharged of fear of the
Hungarians, sent Mustapha Letters answerable to his desire, that his own valor
should give him the glory of the wars he so desired, which he granted him; yet,
that he must deal warily with that enemy, and not rashly take up Arms, etc.

Mustapha entered into Epirus, hoping in one battle to end the war: Of which
Scanderbeg hearing (then at Dayna siege) from his frontier Garritons, commanded
them to protract the time of encounter, till his coming. Then choosing 500
horse, and 1500 foot, (old Soldiers) he marched into the upper Dibria, leaving
Amesa at the siege. Mustapha beginning to burn and spoil, when he understood of
Scanderbeg's coming, encamped at Oronoche, within two miles of him. Scanderbeg
had in his Camp 4000 horse and 2000 foot, 300 of whom he left in the fortified
Trenches. Whilst both Armies ranged in view of each other, expecting the
signal, Caragusa a Turks man at Arms, in gallant furniture, issuing out,
challenged to fight with any one of the Christian Army. At first, Scanderbeg's
Soldiers (...) still, looking one upon another: till one Paul Manessi
accounted the best man at Arms there, with great courage and cheerfulness,
requested Scanderbeg, he might accept that challenge; who commending him,
willed him to set forward, for honor to himself, and example of the rest. Paul
bravely armed, mounted to horse and riding forth, called to the Turk to make
ready to fight. Caragusa required to stay a while, speaking unto him, That
(...) he had the honor of the day, he might by Law of Arms, carry away his
rich spoils, and dispose of his dead body: But if he should fall under him he
required the same right and power, that none move out of either Army, to better
either of their fortunes.

Manessi answered, he agreed to those conditions, saying, Where the fierce soul
yielded, all the rest ought to be Conquerours; therefore he should fight
fearlesse of any enemies but himself: that if he would give his dead body to
his fellow Soldiers tears, yet Scanderbeg would not suffer a vanquished
cowards carkase to be brought into his Camp. Caragusa marvelled at his
resolution. Both Champions (after confirmation of the combate-laws by the
Generals) being left alone betwixt the Armies, with all eyes fixed on them, and
withdrawing themselves for making their course, violently running together,
Caragusa was at the first encounter struck thorough the head and slain, whose
head Manessi striking off, returned (with his armor and head) victoriously to
the Army, and was honorably commended, and rewarded by Scanderbeg. Scanderbeg
and his men hereby encouraged, and the Turks dismayed, set himself first
forward toward the enemy; and had charged them, had not Mustapha with some
disordered Troops, opposed himself, the Army faintly following, and at first
encounter driven to retire, Mustapha earnestly calling on them to follow him,
fiercely charged Scanderbeg's front, whom most of his principal Captains
following, (...) battle was for a while renewed. But Moses greatly prevailing
in one part, the Turks fled. Mustapha with 12 chief ones being taken, of the
common Soldiers few saved, 10000 Turks were slain, 15 Ensigns taken, but 300
Christians lost. All their Camp became a prey: yet Scanderbeg entering
Macedonia, burnt and spoiled all he could do. Leaving 2000 horse, and 1000
foot, to defend his frontiers, he returned to Dayna siege.

Amurath (about the time of the Venetians making peace with Scanderbeg) sent
him presents, with 25000 Ducats for Mustapha and the others ransom, which he
divided amongst his Soldiers: and leading his Army again into Macedonia, he
made his Soldiers better pay with the spoil; and for the more harm, divided it
into 3 parts, putting all the Turks coming in his way to the sword, leaving the
Christians no more than their lives: utterly consuming the buildings with fire,
in all that part bordering upon Epirus: that the Turks should find no relief to
lay in Garrison, or invade it; it was thought there was not enough left to
relieve the Turks Army for a day.

Amurath herewith exceedingly vexed, resolved to go in person with an Army, not
to conquer Epirus, but if need were to fill every corner of it. None but the
Bassa's of the Council knew whither he employed the same: which made the
bordering Christian Princes prepare for their own assurance. But Scanderbeg
easily perceived it to be made against him; and the rather for Amurath's
unaccustomed quietness, as if he had been in a (...) sleep. It was thought
also, he had intelligence from suspecting Courtiers, his friends; wherefore
setting all things apart, he first advertized his neighbor Princes of that
(...) danger, Amurath seeking the destruction of them all; and therefore to
stand fast on their guard. Then he sent Moses and others, to take the Soldiers
and all provision possible, himself not resting till he left nothing in the
Country for the enemies cruelty. Most of the people with their substance, were
received into the strong Cities: the rest into the Venetian and other Princes
Countries, till this sury was overpast; all able to bear Arms, were commanded
to Croia, out of which multitude Scanderbeg those only 1000 old Soldiers, with
whom he purposed to encounter the Turks, as he saw occasion, and placing 1300
in Croia, whose Citizens were furnished with all weapons, and provision to
defend the City: Proclamation was made, that all aged men with women and
children, should depart, etc. Croia being the chief City, Scanderbeg had the
greater care for its defense. All was full of weeping and wailing at the
departure of this weak company, no house, no street, no part of the City was
without mourning, etc. In the midst of these passions commandment came from
Scanderbeg, That they must now depart, that the Soldiers might take their
charge. Then began sorrows afresh, with pitious screeching and tears, and
departing set their feet (many times) they wist not where, for desire of
looking back upon the City; who were conveyed into Venetian Cities, and other
places, whither all, not before received into strong Cities, resorted with
their substance, and nothing left in all Epirus but the ground. After this,
Scanderbeg stored Croia with all needful things, giving to every Soldier a
small reward; and placing vatiant (...) Governor thereof. And exhorting them
(in few words) courageously to endure the siege, not listening to Amurath's
charms, departing to his Army (within view) marched toward Dibria. Not gone
far, he met Moses with a gallant Troop coming from Sfetigrade, which strong
City was Scanderbeg's second care, it standing first in the Tyrant's way.
Moses, having there set all in like order, placed politic Peter Perlat
Governor with a strong Garrison chosen out of all Dibria, accounted the best
men of war in Epirus, Scanderbeg delivering him prepared-forces, sent him with
diverse others to take order for defense of other Cities and Castles, every man
having his charge. Himself with a small Troop, went to Sfetigrade; where, all
the Soldiers assembled in the Marketplace, he spoke unto them, That a fairer
occasion could not be presented unto brave minds, than that which now caused
them to take up Arms, which they had hitherto borne for their Kingdoms honor;
(...) now they must fight for their lives, liberty, etc. That Amurath's first
pastage would be this way that the first fruits of this war is theirs: that if
they bear courageous hearts, they might beat down the haughty enemies strength,
and discourage his high conceits; who will not lay long here, except the
way-ward old man will foolishly gage all his forces; for such is the situation
and strength of this City, that it may easily set at naught an angry enemy.
Therefore to resolve with themselves, etc. That it seldom chances fortune to
fail sound advice or virtue: and they had all things which politic care could
provide sor their safety, that they might be encouraged with the very sight one
of another, and himself would not be far off, a silent beholder and encourager
of their virtue; where (though he might not try this wars fortun in plain
field) yet he would trouble the enemies designs with many a hot skirmish: that
he will first feed their hardiness with his base Soldiers blood, the easier to
entrap and oppress their rashness; but his crafty devices are by great policy
and consideration to be frustrated. For that victory should be to him
lamentable, bought with Soldiers blood, etc. That if they suffered not
themselves to be conquered of the Sultan, he would praise and honor his
subjects as conquerours. Having thus encouraged their minds, he visited other
Cities, returning to his Army near Croia. Amurath the mean time, his Army of
150000 was assembled at Hadrianople, whereof many were pioniers, etc. He
sending 40000 Light-horsmen before him, to encamp before the City, Scanderbeg
with 4000 horse and 1000 foot took his way toward Sfetigrade, strongly
encamping within 7 miles thereof; whence with Moses and Tanusius, he went by
blind ways, till from the top of a hill he might discover how the enemy lay
encamped; returning back, he the night following, drawing as near the Turks as
he could, placed his Army in the Woods and Valleys unperceived: Then he sent
Moses and Musache, with 30 of the best horsemen, as if but common Soldiers,
driving horses laden with Corn, by a by-way, and secretly, to (...) into the
City. Being discovered and set upon, they fled on purpose: but Moses seeing
themselves (...) but with a like number; returning back, he slew five, chasing
the rest to the Camp: whose Genetall sending (...) horse to pursue them, they
soon recovered sight of them, Moses of purpose slowly hastening; the Turks
drawing nigh, Moses leaving the Horses, fled; yet drawing them on, till brought
where the Army lay in (...), by whom being with great slaughter put to flight,
2000 were slain, and 1000 Horses taken, but 22 Christians being lost.

Amurath came 8 days after, the beginning of May, 1449. and encamping his
baser (...) at the foot of the Hill, himself lay with his (...), etc. farther
off; After one day, he toward evening sent a Meslenger to the City to speak
with the Governor, whom he requested the Soldiers might go further off,
having something to say to him in (...); Perlat merrily answering, said, He had
not learned to hear any message from his Enemy by night, not at any time else
out of the Garrisons hearing; tomorrow if thy Master please, I will hear thee
at large, commanding him to depart from the Walls. Amurath more hoping to gain
the City by large offers, than by great force, dissembled his wrath, sending
that Messenger with a grave (...) (...) in Epirus, who with 5 men, being
received into the City, and brought into Mary's Temple, where after insinuating
eloquence, he augmented the terror of Amurath's power; exhorting them to yield
the City: promising the Citizens to live in all respects, as under Scanderbeg
before: that Perlat should have most honorable preferments, with many rich
gifts; the Soldiers safely to depart whither they would, and 300000 (...)
among them. But the Governor replied, That, (...) (...) had not been delivered
to resolute men, it might (...) have wrought some effect, etc. But since no ill
(...) of Scanderbeg's, nor good desert of Amuraths, (...) (...) a Stranger
before their natural Prince had passed, etc. his Master should first proceed
in his action, (...) down their Walls, make havoc of their men, etc. But it
were almost to be laughed at, if they should cowardly accept of these
conditions before any assault given, etc. that Amurath had better get back to
Hadrianople to spend his old years in quiet, and not provoke them his fatal
enemies, etc: that he would never forget his faith given, to the last drop of
blood; 'twas reward enough to him, if living, to defend the City, or loosing
life to leave his guiltless soul at liberty, etc. Then (...) the Bassa, he
led him through the City on purpose to show him the store of Victuals: So
sending him away much discontented, to his Master: who exceeding wroth, (...)
the City three days together, and making a small breach, he gave a most
terrible assault by his common Soldiers the Asapi, thereby to give easier
Victory to his Janissaries and better Soldiers: whilst these are slain by
(...) at the breach, the Janissaries attempted the Wall in another place, who
first difficultly crawling up the steep Rock, then mounting their Scaling
ladders, they were with huge stones, etc. (...) down to the bottom, and
miserably slain. Many with their Scaling ladders were thrust from the Wall,
carrying others behind them, with them. Some taking hold of the Battlements,
lost fingers, hands, most their lives. Many farther off, were wounded also with
(...). The Turks discouraged, began to withdraw: but, the Captains by exhorting
and threatening some, and beating others, the assault was renewed, not with such
courage, yet no less slaughter: the defendants shouting from the Walls.
Amurath sent Feri Bassa with 3000 chosen Soldiers to renew the fight: who
without regard of danger brought them to the Walls, whom the defendants
overwhelmed with Stones, Timber, Wildfire, etc. Yet Feri Bassa slew diverse,
and had not the Governor with a fresh company, speedily come to the place, had
entered. Amurath seeing the great slaughter, and no hope, retired into his
Camp: Yet not ceasing to give the like vain attempt, The Captain of the
Janissaries perceiving a part of the City, seeming impregnable, to be commonly
but slenderly manned; told Amurath he would assay it secretly by night:
wherewith the King pleased, it was silently put in execution. The Governor
advertised hereof by the watch, repaired thither with a great Company,
beholding the Turks climbing and helping up each other by that desperate way.
But being come to the top of the Rock, they were suddenly overwhelmed, and
violently forced down, most being crushed to death, and many of the rest,
slain with shot: wherewith Amurath was exceedingly grieved.

Scanderbeg, still removing as best served his purpose, brake sometimes into
one quarter of their Camp, sometimes into another, and was straight way gone
again. Being, the latter end of June, come within 8 miles, he sent Moses, like
a common Soldier, to view how the enemy encamped. Being informed, that the
Turks kept but negligent watch; He the night following, suddenly assaulted one
of their Camps quarters, which though discoverd by Scouts; yet by his furious
assault, he slew 2000 before they could well arm, carrying away 230 horse,
losing but 42 men, whom the Turks in revenge next morning hewed in pieces.

Amurath upon these disgraces, gave three fierce assaults to the City, and was
always with loss repulsed. But turning the (...) with revenge, he encouraged
them to a fresh assault, with (...) promises than ever before in all his wars:
appointing Feri Bassa with 12000 horse, and 6000 foot to attend on Scanderbeg,
lest he should trouble the assault, by assailing his Camp: Feri Bassa glad
(...), lay as he was commanded, boasting, that he would seek Scanderbeg in the
field, and try with him hand to hand. Amurath next morning compassed the City
round, purposing to gage his whole forces on the taking thereof. The battered
Walls were not without Ladders to be assaulted through the places strength, and
the defendants still filling up with earth. They first deliver ed their Arrows
and Bullers like a Hail shower. And in this heat, clapping Ladders to the
Walls, began desperately to Scale: but the Christians with shot slew and
wounded many: yet others pressing up, the assault was terrible in many places,
especially near the Gate: where with timber, and c: raising as it were a
wodden Tower, for they fought with the Christians as upon even ground; and
prevailed so far, that they had set ensigns on the Wall. The Governor
hastening with a fresh Company, and repulsing the Turks, sent their Ensigns
into the Marketplace: Consuming the Wodden Tower with Wildfire from the
Walls; and presently placing fresh Soldiers, worthily defended the City.

Scanderbeg the while, came with 9000 Soldiers to assail their Camp: Feri
Bassa opposed against him: Scanderbeg retired a little to draw him further from
the Camp. The Bassa withdrew 4000 horse to fetch a compass and to set upon
Scanderbegs rear, and c. But the expert Captain perceiving (...), leaving
Moses with the maine battle, with 2000. so charged these 4000, before well
departed, that they had now more cause to look to their own safety: Scanderbeg
here encountering with Feri hand to hand, slew him. Moses all this while, stood
fast, receiving the assault, expecting their Success. But Scanderbeg coming
now in, he set forward with such force and courage, that the Turks fled: many
of whom were shine in chase; yet not daring to follow them too far, he
retraited, and having put his Army in order, appointed some to take the spoil
of the slain. Amurath hearing what happened to Feri, was so overcome, that he
could not for a while speak, but afterward he commanded some Ordnance to be
placed on that side of the Camp, most in danger; Sending 4000 to join to Feri
Bassaes for its defense, charging them not to issue out of their trenches.
Continuing the assault all that day, and no hope appearing, he left the
assault, in which he lost 7000, and many dying afterward: of the Garrison, but
70 were slain, and 90 hurt. Scanderbeg hoped Amurath would at length begone:
yet with 2000 he would often show himself on the Mountains sides to draw the
Turks out, and take them at advantage: But the King commanding none to go out,
or speak of battle or assault on pain of death, lay certain days more like
one besieged himself: which Scanderbeg the more distrusted, fearing he was
hatching some mischief, who thought good again to prove if twere possible to
overcome the Garrison Soldiers with gifts; wherefore he sent, offering to the
besieged conditions, with such large rewards, as had not been heard offered to
any. All which being leightly rejected by common consent, one base-minded
fellow, corrupted herewith, secretly promised the Turks espialls, that on
assurance of the proffered reward, the City should be yielded. He laid many
plots: but the first device served his purpose. The Garrison Soldiers were of
the upper Dibria: exceeding superstitious, putting nice difference between
meats, choosing rather to die, than eat or drink of that which they deemed
unclean. Sfetigrade was watered but with one Well which sunk deep into the
Rock. The Traitor in the night, cast the stinking Carcass of a dead dog
therein. In the morning, the Garrison being drawn out of the Well, the report
was, it was poisoned: all were in an uproar to find out the Traitor. The
Citizens were very sorry, but the Soldiers detested that loathsome water more
than Turkish servitude, protesting they would rather perish with thirst, than
drink thereof: Some desiring to fire the City, and break thorough the enemies,
or die. They that thought best, that it might be yielded up, as ready to sue to
Amurath for peace, though on harder terms than the former. The Governor
troubled and astonished, the better to pacify the matter, exhorted them in the
Market place to continue faithful, and make small reckoning to use the water,
which would soon be brought to its wonted purity: drinking in their sight a
great draught, whose example the Citizens followed. But the Captains and
Soldiers refused to taste thereof, as of some deadly poison, crying, to give up
the City, wherefore many thought they were corrupted by Amurath; Yet none but
the Traitor did afterward revolt, or appeared richer. The Governor seeing
they were not to be moved by persuasion, reward, or any other means, resolved
with his chief Captains, and best of the Citizens, to yield the City to
Amurath, on condition that all might safely depart with Armor, and other
things: that such Citizens as would stay, might there dwell as under
Scanderbeg, the rest to depart at pleasure with bag and baggage. Glad was
Amurath; yet (...) not that the Citizens should continue in the City, but build
their houses without the Wall. The Garrison Soldiers quietly passing, Mahomet
earnestly persuaded his Father to put them all to the sword, saying 'Twas one
of Mahomets chief commands, to use all cruelty to destroy the Christians. But
the old King would not hearken therein, saying, People abhor the government
of a faithless and cruel Prince. The Traitor had three rich suits of
apparel, 50000 aspers, and a yearly pension of 2000 Ducats. But after a few
days, he was suddenly gone, and never seen or heard of: supposed to be
secretly made away: Amurath detesting the Traitor, though the Treason served
his purpose, Sfetigrades Walls being repaired, and 1200 Janissaries put in
(...), Amurath, September 1. departed out of (...), having lost 30000 at the
Seige; much grieved that he could not (...) the enemy: Scanderbeg
understanding of his departure, speedily followed with 8000 horse, and 3000
foot, and taking advantage of Woods and Mountain-straites, skirmished often
with the Turks, charging them everyway, and slew many. Amurath left the Viceroy
of Romania with 30000 to attend on Scanderbeg, who now ceased to follow
Amurath, fearing to be enclosed between both. Which he seeing, followed to
Hadrianople, Scanderbeg returning to Croia: who leaving 2000 Soldiers upon the
borders for defense, they so kept in the (...) at Sfetigrade, that they could
not look out, but were intercepted and slain: and within sew days besieging
Sfetigrade a month, was repulsed in two great assaults, losing 500 men. Amurath
sending with speed to recall his dispersed Army, Scanderbeg returned to Croia,
Winter approaching; wherein he put 2000 of his best Soldiers under famous
Uranocontes, storing the City with a year's Victual, greatly helped therein by
the Venetians and others. The like care he had of the rest, being advertised by
secret friends in Court, of the Turks great preparation against him, at
beginning of the Spring: who by the latter end of March had ready an Army of
160000 men: of which he sent 40000, under politic (...), into Epirus in
beginning of April, 1450. who with great speed, and without let, coming to
Croia, strongly encamped near the pleasant plain Tyranna: and keeping close,
attended that no new supply should be conveyed into the City: for he was
expressly forbidden to attempt any thing against Scanderbeg himself.

After 20 days, Amurath, through age, often marching but 5 miles a day, came
thither with his Army, filling the Country round about: And after 4 days
settling his Camp, he sent two Messengers, offering the Governor, if he would
yield, to depart with his Soldiers, with bag and baggage, 200000 aspers to
himself, with an honorable place among his great Bassaes: and the Citizens to
enjoy all their former liberties, promising greater. They being commanded to
deliver their message without the Gates, he scornfully rejected their offers,
and the Soldiers shamefully (...) them. Amurath more offended at this, than
the refusal, commanded ten great Artillery pieces to be cast, for by reason of
the high Mountains, he brought none ready made, but store of metal in mass.
This work being in 15 (...) perfected, 6 he (...) against the East side toward
the plain, 4 against the Gate, in which places only, Croia was subject to
battery. In 4 days Amurath had in both places beaten down half the Wall, and
sore shaken the rest. The Turks encouraged with great cheerfullnesse made ready
for assault, striving who should show himself most foreward: And Mahomet
besides his Fathers rewards, promised a 100000 Aspers to him that first set an
Ensign upon the Walls. The Garrison nothing dismayed, comforted and encouraged
each other to endure all manner of peril, especially Uranocontes, who shaking
some Soldiers by the hand, said; These were the fortresses of their City, etc.
What honor, triumph should they hope for, if these Walls standing whole, they
should shroud under their defense, and not they defended by them? So can
Cowards defend, and Sheep not fear the Wolves rage, etc. That men of worth
shun such things, which being kept or lost, yield like praise: that things
ready to fall need shoaring, and there appears valor. Therefore their
valiant right hands should instead of dead Walls, oppose their (...) armed
bodies against the enemies force. That he in the thickest should view and judge
of every man's courage. Yet that their former hopes were little or nothing by
these breaches diminished: For that the rising of the hill, though not so high
as in other places, does serve them at great advantage to charge their enemies.
That this breach will encourage the Barbarians to climb up, etc: whereof so
many shall be easily slain, as they shall but aim at (...) that only those 2
places can be assaulted; How will so many valiant Soldiers bestow themselves
in so little room? Yet let them play the men, and in one conflict weaken the
Tyrants strength, and burst his proud heart, etc.

Uranocontes setting all thiugs in order, and repairing the breaches as well as
possible, they rested that night. In the morning the Turks cheerfully assaulted
both breaches: but it being well begun, Scanderbeg had suddenly broke in on the
Turks Camp, with 5000, slaying 600 Turks, and was spoiling their Tents; which
rumor made them with less courage to assault. Amurath for more surety sent
(...) with 4000 into the Camp, saying, Nothing could be too sure against that
wild beast. Mahomet also hasted thither against his Father's will. But Moses
knowing himself too weak; had before retired into the Mountains, having done
great harm, losing but ten men. Scanderbeg here, forgetting himself, so
engaged, that being on every side enclosed, yet valiantly breaking through, he
escaped the great danger recovering the Mountains. This was the greatest
oversight of Scanderbeg in all his Wars. When all was quieted, Amurath brought
all his forces to the Walls, with multitude of Archers and small shot,
laboring to drive away the defendants. Then likewise other common Soldiers
brought Scaling ladders, etc. The (...) and others following ready to mount
them. But the Garrison Soldiers made such slaughter, that had not the
Captains spared neither stripes nor wounds, they would presently have retired.
Hereby the Ladders were with great slaughter set up, and the Turks came to
handie blows at the breaches: who being with their Ladders tumbled down the
Mountain with horrible slaughter and discomfiture, that none would set one
foot forward again, though fierce young Mahomet caused them that returned to be
slain. These common Soldiers are most miserable Christians, now under the
Turks slavery: of whom the Turks draw great multitudes in their Wars, commonly
unarmed, because (...) daring well to trust them; they carry all the baggage,
fetch wood and water, serve for Pioneers: when (...) is in field, they with
weapons are thrust into the forefront to blunt their enemies swords: if a City
be to be besieged, serving to fill ditches with their dead bodies; and if they
shrink, more cruelly used by their commanders than enemies. Amurath stood in
doubt, whether he had better retrait: but being enraged, he gave a fresh
assault with diverse of his better companies: But Uranocontes placing (...) men
in the breaches, they repulsed the Turks with a double slaughter: till the King
not able longer to behold it, sounded a retraite, having lost 8000 men, without
any notable harm to the defendants.

Mahomet, burning with (...), drew most of the best Soldiers into that quarter
nearest Scanderbeg, intrenching on the Mountain of Tumenist; that if he should
again there assail the Camp, he might hardly do great harm, or himself
escape. Whereupon Scanderbeg left Moses with 500, where he lay, ordering him in
the night (...) assail the quarter where Mahomet lay, and speedily retire to
the Mountain. Himself with about 8000 fetching a compass by secret ways,
came to Mountecle the farther side of the Turks Army. Moses at the hour
assailed the Camp with the tumult of some great Army. Scanderbeg at the
instant breaking into the other side, there made such a slaughter, that Croia's
loss was forgot in comparison of this. Moses doing little harm, safely
retired: and Scanderbeg making great spoil, timely returned, scarce losing one
man.

Amurath (...) this, withdrew most of his small Ordinance into his trenches,
against Scanderbegs sudden attempts. Yet seeing in that hot season he could not
so closely encamp, but that some part would still be in danger, he appointed
(...) with 15000 to attend Scanderbeg: Then battering the Walls afresh, he made
greater breaches than before, appointing next day, for a new assault. But
perceiving no sign of courage in their heavy countenances, etc: he calling
them (...), said, Every weak Castle can hold out one assault; but if they will
draw these wild beasts out of their dens, they must arm themselves to endure
whatever shall happen: that great Captains have grown old under their enemies
Walls, etc: that they remember the glorious victory of Varna: that all
honorable things are brought to pass with adventure and labor: and the end
of this War depends on taking of Croia: that fortune is to be proved and often
provoked, of them that will wed her. Yet that they must work warily with this
enemy: that they should wear them out if they kill but ten at a daily assault.
That peradventure fortune may find some unlooked-for mean, as at the (...) of
Sfetigrade, etc.

Early next morning, began a valiant assault, the Turks assaying vainly and
desperately to break open the Gates. Wildfire being cast into many places of
the City, and the Artillery often discharged into the breaches, many Turks were
slain together with the Christians: who still repulfed their enemies. Yet
Amurath maintained the assault by supplies, but grieved at heart to see them so
slain: at last weary to behold it, and persuaded by his Bassaes, not wilfully
to cast away his valiant Soldiers, he ended the assault: and thought good to
prove what might be done by undermining: daily alaruming the City, to busy the
(...). Buying store of Corn of the (...) of Lisia, Scanderbeg slaying the
convoy, carried it away, dividing it among his Soldiers. Yet, he received
abundance of provision from Macedonia, and the (...) Merchants furnished him
with Corn, Oil, Honey, etc. which Scanderbeg, they being his secret friends,
would not hinder; considering he might have had all the same from the further
part of Macedonia, Thracia, Mysia, etc.

400 Soldiers sallying out the while, chased diverse Turks to the Camp:
Amurath hoping they would to their loss, give the like attempt. But the
governor would not suffer them any more to sally, Scanderbeg also increasing
his Army with 2000, (...) a part to Moses, another to Tanusie, and a third to
himself: determining by night to assail the Camp in 3 places at once. But
Scanderbeg being discovered by their Scouts, Soldiers were appointed
diligently to guard that side: Moses and Tanusie the while assailing in 2
diverse quarters, slew a number of Turks, and made great spoil. Scanderbeg
discovered, did not much harm: and retiring, sat down by fair daylight, on a
Mountaine's side, in sight of the Turks, that Moses and Tanusie might see to
meet him again. But the Turks thinking he stood to brave them: diverse craved
leave, that they might go, and, at least, beat him out of sight: which granted,
7000 horse, and 5000 foot presently set forward. Scanderbeg seeing them,
retired a little farther up, expecting Moses and Tanusies coming. When the
Turks well wearied, and laboriously marching up the (...) hills, were come a
great way, and perceived by the dust, some greater force, and ere long, saw the
foremost of them, they retired: Scanderbeg pursuing through the grounds
advantage, slew many. Moses also coming in, beside (...), took diverse; After
which victory, Scanderbeg retired into the Mountains.

The late spoil, with this overthrow, much grieved the Tyrant; but the mines
(...) to no good purpose, for the Rocks hardness, and the defendants
discovery, drove him to his wit's end. Resolving now to prove, if by great
gifts and promises, he could corrupt the Governor and (...); he sent a
dexterous Bassa, commanding him if possible, first to fasten rich presents on
him, in honor of his valiant mind: and afterward delivering his message, to
promise more than should be desired, for giving up of the City. The Bassa being
with two Servants, received into the City, presented to Uranocontes the rich
(...), with much reverence, and many magnificall words. Uranocontes willed him
first to declare his message: whereupon he would, either receive or refuse
them. The subtle Bassa nothing dismayed, thus began.

That however they agreed, yet they brought not these gifts to deceive any:
and though enemie's gifts are as he rightly said, ever to be suspected: Yet
they durst not for shame come to so worthy a Governor empty handed: neither
ought he, if he be what he seem, to refuse their courtesy, etc. That they
went not about with filed speech and rich rewards to circumvent him, whose
invincible mind they had so often, in vain proved with their forces: That is it
for which Amurath loves him: desiring to have his virtuous enemies with
himself: that he was worthy of another manner of Sovereign than Scanderbeg,
whom he condemned not; and another manner of calling, etc: that Scanderbegs
destruction might be deferred, but not avoided, against whom Amurath conceiving
implacable displeasure, would never depart out of Epirus, till he imposed a
deadly yoke on his neck: That the first of this misery begins at this City:
that his eyes would scarce behold the horrible spectacle of the men of Croia's
miserable fortune, etc. Did they think Amurath would in the midst of this
heat, raise his siege and be gone? No no, if force will not prevail, they
shall always have these (...) in their eves, till long famine tame their
courage. Can Scanderbeg victual them, (...) able to relieve his own misery? or
will the Venetians? who daily brings them plenty of all necessaries: Therefore
they should repent of their over hardiness, and gather their wits together:
That they should find liberty, rewards, perpetual rest with Amurath, etc.

The Bassa expected some great motion in the Soldiers: but perceiving his
speech rather to fill them with anger than fear, requested to talk in secret,
with the Governor: which was granted: who beginning cunningly to deliver his
(...) secret message, Vranocontes interrupting him, commanded him to depart:
and that if he or any other came from his Master to speak with him about any
such matter, he would return them dismembered of hands, noses, and ears. So
the Bassa was with his presents turned out of the City, though the Soldiers
could well have eased him of that carriage.

Amurath understanding the Governors answer, in great rage next day, caused a
furious assault to be given, rather to satisfy anger, than in hope to
prevail, and with greater loss than before, many Turks being slain at the
breach, with their own great shot. At length wearied, he gave over, returning
to his Camp, as half frantic or distract; sitting all day, full of
melancholy passions, (...) violently pulling his beard and locks, complaining,
that he lived so long to see those disgraceful days. His Bassaes, to comfort
him, recounted his many and glorious victories, and producing examples of his
like event. But nothing could content his mind, or revive his Spirits; so that
oppressed with melanchollyconceits, he became sick for grief. Whereupon by
some's Counsel, he sent to Scanderbeg, offering him peace for 10000 ducats
yearly tribute, thinking hereby well to save his honor, which being utterly
refused, greatly increased his sickness. Scanderbeg to grieve him the more,
etc: daily assailed the Camp: which he often suspected by alarums and tumults,
languishing with the grief thereof. Feeling he could not longer live, g
ievously complained, that all his former life was so blemished: who repressing
the Hungarians fury, and almost nullifying the Grecians pride and name, was
enforced to give up the Ghost under the Walls of an obscure Castle, and in
sight of his contemptible enemy. Then he gave his Son Mahomet many grave
advertisements, commending him to the faithfulness of his Bassaes; weakness,
and tears often upon sight of him, interrupting his speech; Yet forcing himself,
he warned him of what now most grieved him.

That his example be a warning to him not to contemn his never so weak enemy,
etc: whereby he had purchased this calamity, and for ever blemished the honor
of the Othoman Kings, etc. That this Trait or should then have been suppressed,
when first he recovered his wicked Kingdom, etc. Ali Bassa, nor the other
Generals, should not have been sent against him, etc: That they entered into
(...) 160000 strong, etc: but now how many tents stand empty, etc. That the
destinies had vowed his Spirits to Epirus as to him fatal. But why did he
impute these impediments and chances to himself? for this mischievous seed
first began when the Hungarians with others rose up against him. So whilst he
could not take order for all important affairs at once, this enemy grew great?
That fortune never deceived his endeavors more than in this. Therefore he
charged his Son that for so great and stately a patrimony as he should receive,
not to leave his death unrevenged of this enemy. Shortly after becoming
speechless, etc: he breathed out his Ghost, to the Christians great joy, in
Autumn 1450, 85 years old as most write: reigning 28, or as some 30, about 5
months after Croia's siege.

Thus (...) great Amurath dead almost in despair! Who had fought greater
battles? who gained greater Victories, or obtained more glorious Triumphs than
he? etc. But oh, how far was he now changed from the man he then was! how far
did his last speeches differ from his forepassed life! full of base passionate
complaints, beseeming some vile (...) overtaken with despair, and yet afraid
to die. He lies now dead a ghastly stinking Carcale, etc: and of such infinite
riches, such stately honors, etc: his frail body enjoys nothing. The Turks
say, he died, miraculously forewarned of his death at Hadrianople: others that
he died in Asia with an Apoplexy surfeiting of immoderate Wine. But Marinus
Barlesius, who lived in his time, in Scodra fast by Epirus, sets it down as
aforesaid.

Mahomet fearing some innovation at home, presently returning to Hadrianople:
buried his body with great solemnity on the West of Prusa: lying in a Chapel
without a roof, his grave not differing from the common Turks: which they say,
he so commanded, that Gods blessing might come to him by the Sun and Moons
shining, and rain, and dewes falling on his grave. He mightily enlarged the
Turkish Kingdom: for the better establishing whereof in his own house, he in
the beginning of his reign, by manifold favors began to bind to himself men
of foreign Countries, his Servants. And whereas the Othoman Kings, had
mostly, or altogether raised their Janissaries, and other Court Soldiers of
Christians Children taken in War; he seeing how serviceable they were, plotted,
how to make an Army of such, his own Creatures, etc: wherefore taking from the
Christians every 5th. Child: he placed the fairest and aptest in his own
Seraglio, the rest in other like places, where being instructed in Mahometane
Religion, then in all seats of Arms: of these he made Horsemen, etc: to guard
his person, naming he better sort Spahi-Oglani, (...) is, his Sons the Knights.
Of these he made Bassaes, Generals, and Governors, with all great Officers;
dispersing the rest and greatest part into every Country of his Dominion in
Asia to be brought up in hardness and painful labor, out of whom he
choosing the most lusty and able, they were taught to handle all manner of
weapons added to the other upon occasion, calling them his Sons, binding them,
of all sorts, so fast to him by continual pay, etc. that he might account so
many Sons as Soldiers. A great policy from a deep judgment, to weaken the
Christians by taking their Children of greatest hope, and to keep in awe his
own natural Subjects also. Amurath's successors keeping and increasing this
Custom, have not only kept the Empire in their Family: but so maintained their
State, that they are feared, obeyed, and honored as Gods, etc. Hence it comes
to pass, that the better of them called Turks (but indeed Christians children)
desire to be called Musulmans, that is, right believers, holding it a reproach
to be called Turks: For they knowing, there is not one natural Turk among all
in authority, etc. but he is borne a Christian either of father or Grandfather,
avouch those only to be Turks, living in Natolia, all Merchants, Mechanics, or
poor laborers, etc. Yea, many of the Grand-Signiors, had Christian Mothers,
accounting it in the greatest part of their Nobility.

(...) great King, was wonderfully beloved, and noless after death lamented;
more faithful of his word, than any before or after him; melancholic; rather
politic than valiant, yet both: a great dissembler, painful in travel,
exceeding wayward and testy, many imputing it to his age, He had 6 Sons,
Achmetes, Aladin, Mahomet, Hasan or Chasan, Urchan, and Achmetes the younger:
three of whom died before him.

The Life of Mahomet II. 7th King, and first Emperor of Turks, for his many
victories, surnamed, the Great.
IT was thought that Mahomet, who, being about 21 years old, succeeded his
Father in 1450, and the supposed Son of the Prince of Servia's Daughter, a
Christian, would have embraced the Christian Religion; but embracing in show
the Mohammedan, abhorring the Christian, he greatly reckoned not of either; and
worshipping no God, but Fortune, he derided such as thought God had any care of
worldly men: so that he kept no League, Promise, or Oath, longer than stood
with his profit and pleasure.

The Bassaes, and others of great Authority to whom Amurath's Government was
never grievous, inwardly lamented his death; doubting Mahomet's fierce nature,
etc. But the Court gallants in hope of preferment were glad to see him on his
Fathers Seat: and the vulgar exceedingly rejoiced in him. Then also the
Janissaries (as their (...) is) spoiling the Christians and Jews, easily
obtained pardon: whereupon he was by them and other Court Soldiers
triumphantly saluted King: which approbation is a greater assurance of their
Kingdom, than to be born the King's eldest Son.

The young Tyrant, was presently about to murder (...) his own hands his
youngest brother, but 18 months old. Moses a Bassa requested him, rather to
commit the (...) thereof to some other; which thing Mahomet commanding him to
do; he taking it from the Nurse. strangled it with water: Spondertius his
Daughter, in her rage, reviling the Tyrant to his face, etc. He requesting her
to be contented, for that it stood with policy, said, she should have
whatsoever she asked. But she desiring to have Moses (her Son's executioner)
delivered to her bound, presently struck him in the breast with a knife, crying
in vain for help, and cutting a hole in his side, cut out, and cast his Liver
by piecemeal to the dogs. He also caused another Brother in Caly Bassa's
keeping, to be murdered. Presently after, he began to abrogate and alter the
old Laws and Customs, publishing new, better fitting his own humor: imposing
also new Taxes and Subsidies on his Subsects, and was (through avarice) thought
over-sparing in apparel and diet. He calling all great Officers to straight
account, put some to death, confiscated the goods, greatly fined, or quite
removed from Office, others. He admitted also false and surmized accusations
against his Bassa's; little mercy was to be looked for; whereby he was
exceedingly feared of his Subjects, but more hated. Of 7000 Faulconers and not
many fewer Huntsmen that were maintained of the Kings charge, (saying, He would
not be such a fool, to maintain such a multitude to attend on so mere a vanity)
he ordered 500 Faulconers only, and 100 Huntsmen: the rest to serve in wars.
Then also he entered League with Constantine Emperor of Constantinople, and the
other Greek Princes: as also with the Despot his Grandfather, as some will; yet
some write, the Despots Daughter was but his Mother in Law, whom he sent again
to her Father allowing her a Princely Dowry.

Ibrahim King of Caramania, took occasion the first year of his Reign, to
invade him in Asia with fire and sword. Mahomet displacing Isa his Lieutenant
there, as unsufficient, appointed Isaac Bassa in his room; who passing into
Asia, raised a great Army. After whom Mahome^t following with a greater, he
entered with great hostility into Caramania: whose King fleeing into the great
Mountains, offered him such conditions of peace, whereof he accepted: which
being by Oath confirmed, he returned to Prusa; where the presuming Janissaries
came (in order of battle) and demanded a Donative, as a reward of their good
service, who inwardly chafing, yet (having warning by Abedin Bassa, and
Turechanbeg) he for the present dissembled his anger, scattering ten great
baggs of Aspers among them. But few days after, he (...) Doganes their chief
Captain to be shamefully whipped, discharging him of his Office: and so likewise
used he the under Captains, a punishment usually inflicted (on the King's least
displeasure) upon any man, if not a natural Turk. Presently after, (...) Isaac
against the Prince of Caria, he was driven out of his Country: which has ever
since remained subject to the Turkish Kings.

Mahomet determining to return to Hadrianople with his Army, was advertized, he
could not pass Hellespontus Straits without manifest danger; wherefore taking
his way through that part of Bythinia lying above Constantinople, passing over
at the Castle Accechisar, standing on Bosphorus Strait in Asia; being got over,
and encamping by the Sea side, he began to build a great Castle near Propontis,
directly over against the other Castle; and assembling all workmen possible,
his (...) working also, it was sooner perfected than was by any at first
expected: which for greatness is of most Writers, reputed a City named
Genichisar, Neocastron, and (...), built as for the Turks safe passage to and
fro, so to hinder the Christians passage, through those narrow Straits: and to
distress Constantinople but 5 miles distant. The rich Trade which the
Venetian, Genoan, and Constantinopolitan Merchants had to Cassa, and other
places on the Euxine, were hereby almost cut off, to the great hinderance of
those (...). Mahomet ambitious, thinking nothing more answerable to his
conceits than to attempt Constantinople, and the Greek Empires utter
subversion: and grieving at that goodly Citie's commodious Situation, and not
at his disposing; and the Emperor's small power with the other Christian
Princes discord, ministering no small hope of success; made great preparation
all the Winter both by Sea and Land, to be ready against Spring: none certainly
knowing whither he would employ the same: Constantinus then Emperor, of a mild
and soft Spirit hearing hereof, prepared according to his own small ability,
also earnestly craved aid of other Christian Princes. But they being at
variance, all his Suit was vain. Nicolas the 5th, Bishop of Rome, Alphonsus
King of Naples, and the State of Venice promised him 30 Galleys; but none came.

The Emperor made stay of certain Ships and Galleys of Venice, Genua, etc.
Then also Johannes Justinianus a Genuan adventurer came to Constantinople, with
two tall Ships and 400 Soldiers; where being entertained, he was made the
Emperor's Lieutenant General. 6000 entertained Greeks, with 3000 Venetians,
etc. made stay of, joined to the Citizens, was all the defense for his Empire.

The Turk had a great Army of 300000, ready against Spring, most out of
Bulgaria, Servia, etc. either indeed Christians, or else (...): to these were
joined diverse out of Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary. This enforcing and alluring
Christians against Christians, has not been the least means of the Turks
greatness. His effeminate Asians, natural Turks, and Janissaries, were mingled;
these last the fewest, yet commanding all.

Mahomet encamping April 9. 1453, before Constantinople, filled he Land, from
Bosphorus Sea side, unto the place where it, compassing the City on two parts,
makes a goodly haven betwixt Constantinople and Pera.

This City (anciently called Bizantium) is, in form of a Triangle, situated in
Europe, in the pleasant Country of (...), on a point of the main Land,
shooting out toward Asia, called of Pliny (...) Solinus the promontory
Chrysoceras, where the Sea Propontis joyneth unto (...) (...) which divides
Asia from Europe, called in ancient time Bosphorus Thracius, etc. and about 200
years past or more, St. George's arm. It was first built by Pausanias the (...)
King, flourishing till the Civil Wars between Severus the Emperor and Niger:
when it, enduring 3 years siege of the Romans under (...), yielded not till the
Citizens did eat one another: the walls were overthrown; the City destroyed,
and brought to the state of a poor Country Village, given by Severus to the
Pyrinthians, until Constantine the Great new built and beautified it:
translating his Imperial Seat thither, calling it New Rome; and that part of
Thracia along the Sea Coast, Romania. But the founders name so prevailed, that
it was, and is called Constantinople or [Constantine's-City.] The longest side
running from North-East to South-West, is commonly reputed 8 miles long: The
other side East and West, 5 miles, washed with the Haven more than 8 miles
long, before it meet the fresh water, and about a quarter of a mile broad, the
City Pera or Galata, standing on the further side, very deep, bearing ships
full fraught, close to the shore. The 3d side almost North and South, 5 miles
also in length; the two Sea and Haven sides, are environed with a single wall,
with high Towers flanking the same, etc. But the other side regarding the main
Land, beside the fenced ditch, is defended with 3 walls, etc.

Mahomet placed his Asians on the right, toward Bosphorus; on the left, toward
the Haven; lay himself with 15000 Janissaries, etc. betwixt both against the
heart of the City: placing also, on the further side of the Haven Zoganius,
with another part of his Army. Then also Pantologes came to the siege with 30
Galleys, and 200 small ships, and a number of others fitter for show than
service. But the Emperor chaining the Haven overthwart, (placing his small
Fleet within it, rather there by chance than provided for such service) the
City was put in good safety on that side.

When he had surrounded the City by Sea and Land; he cast up great Trenches as
near the Walls as possible, raising mounts in diverse places, as high as the
walls; thence greatly annoying the Defendants. Then, he terribly battered the
Gate called Calegaria, chiefly with one Ordnance, difficultly brought from
Hadrianople with 150 yoke of Oxen, carrying a bullet of 100 pound, made of a
hard black stone from the Euxine Sea. The Christians also discharged their
Artillery on the Turks; but sparingly, as if afraid to shake their own Walls,
or loath to spend shot and Powder; yet the Turks were grievously annoyed with
what was spent. The breach also made at the Gate, was dangerously and
laboriously repaired with (...) and earth, and made stronger than before: In
which they were directed and greatly encouraged by Justinianus.

Mahomet continuing his battery, in greater hope, employed his store of Pioners
to dig a Mine, directed by skilful (...), therefore entertained; whereby that
(...) of the wall, with one strong Tower therein was quite undermined, and
supported but with stays, till it should be blown up. This, the
Constantinopolitans neither perceived nor feared; for that, Bajazet and Amurath
had both vainly attempted the same. But Mahomet had by men of greater device,
brought this to pass, though it took not the wished effect; for John Grandis a
German, suspecting, by a Counter-mine timely discovered the Turks, and they
with fire and sword were driven out, and the Mine strongly filled again.
Mahomet removed his battery, planting it against the Bactatina Tower, near the
Roman Gate: which, at length, falling down, filled up the ditch (...) the
outer wall. But this breach was speedily and courageously made up again. The
Turks also erecting high Timber Towers covered with raw hides, slew many
Christians; But Mahomet seeing their valiantness, said, It was not the
Grecians, but the Frenchmen that defended the City; for so the Turks call all
the Christians of the West.

The Turkish King, almost despairing to win the City, (which he could but on
one side assault) a Christian in his Camp showed him how to bring a great part
of his Fleet by Land into the Haven, to assault the City by water: by which
device, and men's strength, Zoganus Bassa, brought 70 lesser Ships and Galliots,
with sails abroad, up a great hill, 8 miles, into Constantinople's Haven. The
Christian is supposed to have learnt it of the Venetians, who did the like
before, at the Lake of Bennacus. Glad was Mahomet, and the Christians (with its
sight) discouraged: who attempting to burn them in launching, the Turks with
great Ordinance, sunk the foremost Christian Galley: the rest, being dismayed,
returned. Next day the Turks slew certain Christians, of the Galley, took up in
the Haven; and in revenge, certain Turks prisoners were put to death on the top
of the walls, in sight of the Camp.

Shortly after, Mahomet made a wonderful bridge, more than half a mile long,
over the Haven, built with timber planks, etc. whereby his Army came over to
assault the City on that side also.

Three tall Genoway Ships laden with Corn, and munition from Chios, and one of
the Emperor's with Corn from Sicilia, coming for Constantinople; the Turks
Fleet set upon them, and boarded them (after an exceeding number of Turks
slain); but being much lower, they could not well look out, but they were slain
or wounded. Mahomet beholding it, cried aloud, swearing and blaspheming God,
riding in rage into the Sea, and (...) back, rent his clothes. The whole Army
was filled with indignation also. The great Fleet ashamed in sight of their
King to be overcome of so few; did what they might to enter, but in vain: glad
to fall off again. Some (...) Turks reported, almost 10000 Turks to have
perished. Three of these ships arrived at Constantinople, the other was lost.
Though Pantogles, Mahomets Admiral lost an eye in that fight, yet he thrust
him out of office, confiscating his goods, and hardly sparing his life.

A rumor being raised, of great aid coming out of Italy by Sea, and Hungary
by land, for relief of the besieged: the Turks Camp was filled with fear: So
that the Soldiers murmured, etc. Whereupon, Mahomet consulted with his three
great Bassaes, whether he were best continue the siege or not. Caly Bassa of
greatest authority, and secretly favoring the distressed Emperor, after long
declaring the difficulty of the wished success, etc: concluded, it were best
for him to depart before further loss or disgrace received. But Zoganus
envying Caly Bassaes greatness, persuaded the King to proceed in his
enterprise, assuring him of its good success, etc. Of the same opinion also
was the third Bassa, rather to cross Caly, etc: than for any great hope in the
desired success. The King resolved to continue the siege: authorizing Zoganus
to appoint a day for a great and general assault, who appointed the Tuesday
next, May 29. The mean time he sent one Ismael to offer the Emperor peace:
but on conditions, no less to be refused than death it self: the Turks being
most of opinion; God will not prosper them, except they first make their
enemies some offer of peace: and to prove what confidence the enemy yet had:
But they were by the Emperor refused. Three days before the assault, the
Turks kept their fast, eating nothing till night: then making the greatest
cheer and joy, and taking their leave one of another, Mahomet proclaimed he
Citye's spoil for three days, to his Soldiers if they won it, solemnly
swearing the Turks great Oath: By the immortal God, etc: for confirmation
thereof.

Caly Bassa, (...) that his counsel was rejected: secretly advertised the
Emperor of the appointed day for assault, persuading him (...) to (...) them,
who were no less afraid of him, etc.

The woeful Emperor did, all the siege, what he could: but the Citizens many
times were hardly drawn from their Trades, to the Walls, affirming, 'twas to
no purpose to fight at the breaches, and starve at home. Wherefore the Emperor
commanding a view to be taken of all Corn in the City, such store was found in
many's hands, that it appeared the dearth then beginning to increas, proceeded
rather of covetousness, than true want: this store the Emperor proportionably
divided at reasonable prizes: so easing the people's murmuring. The Greek
mercenaries also refused longer to go to the Walls, than sure of daily pay: the
Church-plate. etc: being converted into money, to content them. For the
Emperor requesting to borrow money of his Subjects; they would still swear
they had it not, as poor for want of Trade: which their enemies finding in
abundance, wondered at their wealth, and derided their folly. But this was their
(...) dealing with their Emperors, in that declining state, as well appeared
in Baldwins time.

But the Emperor advertised of the Enemie's purpose, first commended their
defense to the Almighty's protection by fasting and prayer: then by Justinianus
his direction, appointed every commander to his certain place. The City beset,
and the defendants but few: the Walls could be in many places but slenderly
(...). The greatest and best strength were for defense of the utter Wall.
Justinianus with 300 Genowales, and some chosen Greeks undertook that battered
(...) the Roman Gate: against which, Mahomet with his (...), lay. The Emperor
near Justinian for defense of another part: shutting fast up the Gates of the
inner Wall, that the defendants should have no hope but in their valor. Thus
they laying all night, a little before day, the Turks began the (...); who
pressing fast, and not seeing in the dark to defend themselves, were without
number wounded or slain; but these were of the common and worst Soldiers. Upon
the day's appearance, the City was at one instant on every side most furiously
assaulted: they delivering their Arrows and shot, so thick, that the light was
darkened: others mounting the Ladders, came even to handy strokes. The
Christians with no less courage, (...) them down with great stones, etc: and
soon whelmed them with shot, darts, etc: that they were ready to retire: (...)
sending in fresh supplies of (...), etc: his last (...); the terrible assault
began afresh. The King calling on, and promising the forward Captains Golden
Mountains: to others, threatening terrible death, so that, though the Turks lay
dead by heaps, yet others pressing on, over them, either slew or wereslaine.
In this conflict, Justinianus being wounded in the Arm, and losing much blood;
withdrew himself without any to supply his room; getting into the City by the
Gate Romana in the inner Wall; pretending for binding up his wound: but indeed
wholly discouraged. Upon (...) departure, the Soldiers dismayed, fled to the
same Gate: with which sight others, ran by heaps also. But striving to get in
at once, they so wedged in each other, that in the press and confusion, 800
were trodden or thrust to death. The Emperor also fleeing (...) the rest,
there ended his days. Whose body shortly found, and known by his apparel: his
head was presented to the Tyrant: by whose command it was afterward as a
trophie of Victory, carried about in the Camp and City. The Turks advancing
their Ensigns on the Walls, cried, Victory; entering by the breach, like a
flood: and entering the City by the Gate opened for Justinianus, and by a breach
they had before made, cutting in pieces all in their way, they became Lords of
that Imperial City. Some few Christians preferring death before Turkish
slavery, sold their lives dear to their Enemies. Many 1000 of men, women and
Children perished in this fury. Many fleeing into Sophia's Temple, were all
slain except a few reserved to more grievous purposes than death it self. The
Ornaments and Jewels of that sumptuous Temple, were plucked down and carried
away: it self converted at present into a stable, etc: the Image of the
Crucifix was with a Turks Cap on its head, shot at with Arrows, carried about
their Camp in derision, with Drums playing; railing and spitting at it, calling
it the Christians God. Others ransacked private houses, to whom all things were
lawful that stood with their lust, etc. What tongue were able to express the
misery of that time? etc. But the hidden Treasure and Riches there found
passes credit; that its a proverb at this day, if any grow suddenly Rich, to
say, He has been at the sacking of Constantinople. Yea the Citizens had not
care so much as to fortify the inner Wall of the City, but suffered those
having the charge thereof to turn most of the money into their own purses, as
appeared by Manuel Grageras; and by Neophytus; who soore gathered 70000
Florens: all a (...) prey to the Turks.

After three days ransacking every corner of the City, the Soldiers returned
into the Camp, driving the Christian Captives before them as droves of (...): a
spectacle no less lamentable, than the sacking of the City, etc: There might
Parents, Children, Husbands, Wives, see the woeful misery of their Children,
Parents, Wives and Husbands, and one friend another; Yet not able to mourn
together, being in the thraldom of diverse cruel Masters: The Soldiers
retired, Mahomet with great Triumph entered the City void of Christian
Inhabitants making a sumptuous feast unto his great Captains; where surcharged
with excess, he caused diverse chief Captains men and women, many of the
Emperors race, to be in his presence put to death: which cruelty he daily
used, till he destroyed all the Greek Nobility in his power, with the chief of
the Citizens, diverse Uenetian Senators, with their Governor Baiulus, and many
(...) Merchants, etc. were likewife murdered. So that of 47 Venetian
Senators, there unluckily shut up, a few found favor with exceeding ransoms.

Amongst these, was one Lucas Leontares of late, great Chancellor of
Constantinople: whom the Tyrant seemed to blame, that he persuaded not the
Emperor in time to seek peace on any condition, or to have yielded. He said,
his Master was encouraged by the Venetians and Citizins of Pera: he also drew
out Caly Bassa's letters to the Emperor, delivering them to Mahomet, hoping
for favor thereby. But his eldest Son then living was executed in his sight:
the youngest reserved for the Tyrants lust: and his own head struck off with
the rest. Justinianus escaping to Chios, within few days died of grief,
rather than his wound. Isidore the Pope's Legate, simply apparelled, redeemed
himself for a small ransom: This Cities glory continued many 100 years, till
by civil discord and private gain it was by little and little weakened, yet
holding the title of an Empire 1221 years: till by this Mahomet overthrown,
with the Christian Eastern Empire, May 29. 1453. Constantine having reigned
about 8 years: remaining since, the seat of the Turkish Emperors.

The Citizens of Pera, doubting the same misery: sent (...) to Mahomet,
offering him their keys, and to become his Subjects. Of which he accepting,
took possession thereof by Zoganus: who establishing the Turks government,
confiscated the goods of all fled, using the rest with oppression, little less
than theirs of Constantinople. And doubting the Genowaies might aid the
Citizens by Sea, upon any revolt; he cast down all the Walls and fortresses
toward the land, to the ground.

Mahomet had long boren a grudge against Caly Bassa his tutor: by whose means
Amurath his Father resumed the government before resigned to him. But he being
the chief Bassa, etc: he durst not in the beginning of his reign, take
revenge: keeping it still in mind, and warily dissembling it. Yet some time,
words fell from him, whereby the wary Courtiers, perceived the secret grudge
sticking in his stomach against him: which not unknown to the Bassa himself,
he, troubled, went on Pilgrimage to their great Prophets Temple at Mecha,
holden for a right religious work, hoping the young Kings malice might in time
be assuaged. Mahomet perceiving his distrust hereby: willed him not to misdoubt
any thing, assuring him of his undoubted favor: sending him continually rich
gifts, and heaping on him new honors. Till now Leontares discovering his
intelligence with the Emperor, he sent him in bonds to Hadrianople: where
after exquisite torments to confess his treasures, he was in extreme old age
cruelly executed. After which, his friends and servants, for he was greatly
beloved, putting on mourning apparel; Mahomet offended, proclaimed all such
next day to appear before him: at which time, for fear, there was none about
the Court, in that heavy attire.

Mahomet resolving to place his imperial seat there, repairing the spoiled
Walls and buildings, gave (...) by proclamation, to all comers thither to
dwell, with freedom of Religion and Trade: whereby it was soon well peopled,
especially with Jews, who, driven out else where, came thither in great
numbers: then taking on him the title of Emperor of Turks.

There was among the Captive Virgins, one Irene a Greek, of incomparable
beauty, and rare perfection: which Paragon being presented to Mahomet, he was
on the first view not a little moved. Yet for the present, committed her to his
Eunuch to be safely kept until his better leisure. But his new conquests well
assured, he began to think of the fair Irene: taking in her such delight, that
she soon became commander of so great a Conqueror, and he in nothing more
delighted than in doing her the greatest honor and service. All the day he
spent with her in discourse, and the night in dalliance: his wonted care of
Arms was quite neglected: Yea the Government of his Empire, seemed in
comparison of her, little or not at all regarded. But he thus spending a whole
year or two in pleasure: the Janissaries and other Court Soldiers first
secretly murmured: at length openly said: It were well done to deprive him, and
set up one of his Sons in his stead; so that it was feared by some Bassaes,
whereunto this their insolency would grow. But who should tell the Tyrant
thereof; whose frown was death? or, who durst take in hand to cure his sick
mind? There was one Mustapha Bassa, for his good service, and brought up with
him of a Child, highly favored and promoted by Mahomet, and he by him no less
honored and feared: who espying a convenient leisure, and presuming of his
former Credit with him, adventured to give him warning; that if it were not for
the loyalty owed to his greatness, dearer to him than his own life, he would
not adventure now, the hazard of his doubtful acceptance of his faithful
speech and meaning, etc. That the life he led since the taking of
Constantinople, had given occasion not only to the Vulgar, and Soldiers of
the Court, but to his greatest Commanders, to mutmur and grudge, he dared not
say, conspire against him. That he had given himself a prey to a poor simple
woman, his Slave and Vassal, etc: that, had noble (...) so given himself to
pleasure, he had not now inherited Bithynia, and Galatia, with more others
along the Euxine, etc: That Bajazet in his misfortune was more to be commended,
as vanquished in field by mighty Tamerlane, and not by a silly woman. That all
those famous conquests of his noble progenitors, should awake him out of his
heavy Lethargy, wherein he had too long slept: and let it never be said, he
could with the sword overcome his greatest enemies, and not with reason subdue
his inordinate affections. What avails it him to have won Constantinople, and
to have lost himself? That he should shake off those Golden Chains, wherein
the wily Greek had so fast bound him: which, though at first, it seem hard,
yet time shall digest it, and make him think it good and necessary for his
estate, etc. That from the want of martial discipline proceeds disloyal
speeches in his Soldiers, that if he will not lead them forth, etc: they will
set up one of his own Children which shall. That what the common Soldier
foolishly says, the great Commanders maliciously purpose, etc. That Rebellions
are far easier (...), than in their heat appeased. That what was fit for him to
do, beseemed not him to say; beseeching him to pardon him, for saying so much
already (contrary perhaps to his good liking) provoked even half against his
will to discover unto him the secret of his heart, etc.

Falling at his feet to receive the doom of his free speech, if not well
taken: the Sultan having attentively and sternly hearkened to all, knew it to
be true, and that he discharged but the part of a faithful servant. Yet he was
at war with himself, as in his often changed countenance appeared. Thus tossed
too and fro, he resolved considering the danger, at once to cut off all his
troubled passions: and to strike a error into them that had condemned him, as
unable to govern his affections: saying to the Bassa yet at his feet; that,
although he as a slave, presuming to enter into his Sovereign's greatest
secrets, deserved to die; yet, being brought up with him of a Child, and ever
faithful, he now pardoned him: and would make known to morrow, to him and
others, whether he were able to bridle his affections; that he should not fail
to assemble all the Bassaes and chief Commanders to know his farther pleasure.

The Bassa departing, he made more of the Greek than ever, dining with her:
then (sumptuously apparelling her, and with inestimable Jewels decked) he
entered the Palace Hall, where Mustapha had assembled the Nobles and
Commanders, marvelling at his meaning, who had not showed himself publicly so
long, leading the fair Greek by the hand. After reverence done them by all, he
furiously looking about him, said, He understood of their great discontent,
etc. that he overcomn, could not withdraw from this Paragons presence: But he
would know which of them, if he possessed so rare a thing, would forgo it
without thrice advising? they should freely say what they thought: They with
incredible admiration, all said, He had with greater reason passed the time
with her, than any had to find fault: whereto he answered, But I will make you
understand, there is no earthly thing can so blind me, as not to see what
beseems my high place: that nothing but death can put out of my remembrance
the honor and conquests of the Othoman Kings: with a desire to exceed the
same. Then catching the Greek by the hair, he struck off her head with his
Falchion at one blow: saying they should judge whether he could bridle his
affections or not. A while after he greatly prepared for conquest of
Peloponesus, and Belgrades siege.

When the Turks took Constantinople, Thomas and Demetrius, the Emperors
brethren, governed a great part of Peloponesus: which in form of a plane Leaf,
is almost environed with the Ionian and Aegean Seas, leaving but a strait neck
of land, called Isthmos about five miles broad. Its 175 miles lorg, and almost
as broad: wherein are contained Achaia, Messenia, Lacedemonia, Argolica, and
Arcadia. These two Princes were now about to have fled by Sea into Italy. Then
also it fortuned that the Albanians rose in arms against those their
Sovereigns, whose diversity of living, like the Scythian heardsmen, and
language, from the natural Greeks, was no small cause of their often spurning
against the Government. In this extremity the Princes offered, for peace, to be
Mahomets tributaryes: of which he willingly accepting, sent Turachan
Thessalia's Governor with an Army, to aid against the (...): whereby the
Rebels were soon discomfited, and the Country quieted.

Demetrius, and Thomas, lived a few years as the Turk's Vassalls: during
which, many displeasures arose betwixt them, desiring plausibly to win their
subjects from each other. Yet, understanding, the Western Princes were greatly
preparing against the Turk: and that Pope Calixtus had put a Fleet of Galleys
to Sea; they refused to pay the Turk any more tribute, etc: whereupon, he first
besieged (...); and, (...) Peloponesus, took diverse strong Towns, destroying
the Country, forcing the Princes to flee, one to Mantinia, the other to strong
Epidaurus, now Ragusium. They, destitute of expected aid, sued again for
peace: which he granted on condition, that all places taken should be his own,
Patras with its Country to be delivered him, and they to pay him a yearly
tribute for the rest.

Returning, he took Athens, before taken from Francus Accioval promising him
Boetia with Thebes in lieu thereof. Francus was Nereus his Nephew, Prince of
Athens, brought up in the Turks Court as one of Mahomets Minions. But he having
received that (...), was sent to Zaganus in Peloponesus as in great friendship:
but departing he was stayed, and (as Mahomet had commanded) murdered.

About 3 years after the peace with the two brethren, Mahome: understanding the
Christian Princes had combined to drive him out of Greece, thought it much for
his assurance, to root up that Empire's Relics in Thomas and Demetrius: they
being now at variance, neither paid him the promised tribute. Coming to Coriuth
with a great Army; Arsanes, whose sister Demetrius had married, came to him
from his brother in Law with many gallonts, to aid him against Thomas, they
both reckoning him as a friend. But Mahomet, being come to Tegea, he cast
Arsanes with his chief followers into bonds.

Demetrius hearing of it, fled to Sparta, now Mizithra: which in few days
Mahomet besieging, the Prince went out and submitted himself to him with all he
had; whom the Tyrant comforting, promised to give him other Lands, etc. instead
of Sparta: yet, he carried him as a prisoner till he ended those wars. Then
besieging (...), he lost diverse (...): wherefore, the City taken, he put all
the Soldiers to the sword, cutting the Captains into pieces. Then he took
Leontarium, anciently Megalopolis, with Cardicla: whither these had conveyed
their Wives and children, leaving not one alive in (...) Cities of about 6000,
and commanding the very cattle to be killed. Many Cities (terrified) forthwith
yielded, he causing all the Inhabitants 10000 of Salvarium in Arcadia, to be
cast in bonds, with which (as Captives) he peopled Conscantinople's Suburbs.
Then by Demetrius his Counsel he sent Greek Soldiers to strong Epidaurus, to
deliver it him in the Prince's name, with his Wife and Daughte: but the
Governor refusing, suffered the Princes; and Daughter, to depart to her
husband, who being presented to Mahomet, they were sent to Boetia to attend his
return; an Eunuch taking charge of the young Lady, whom Mahomet took afterward
to wife. Then also subduing most of Achaia, and Elis by Zoganus, himself (...)
long, besieged Salmenica there, which yielded for lack of water; but the Castle
was for a year defended by Prince Thomas, whom he commended, that he found many
slaves in Peloponesus, but never a man but he. Thomas getting to Sea, was at
Rome allowed, for life, a large pension by Pope Pius 2. Thus all Peloponesus
being subdued (except some Sea-holds holden by the Venetians) leaving Zoganus
his Lieutenant, he returned toward Constantinople with triumph: catrying away
with him Demetrius, his wife and daughter, etc. giving unto him the City Aenum,
with the Custom of Salt there made, to live on. This famous Country, fell into
the Turks thraldom about 1460.

The Christian Princes seeing by the Turks continual preparations, his desires
to be increased rather than satisfied with so great victories, fortifying their
frontiers provided for repulsing so mighty an enemy. George the old Despots
Dominions lying in most danger, he left nothing undone for defense; for he had
many times endured the Turks fury: then he journeyed into Hungary, to procure
aid against a time of need. But they, especially Huni ades (having sufficient
trial of his light faith, neither accounted right Turk or good Christian)
leaving him to his own fortunes, he returned full of indignation: and soon
after died of a hurt in a skirmish with Michael Governor of Belgrade, whose
brother he treacherously murdered, traveling with Michael by Wagon to
Belgrade, himself hardly escaping. This was his end, living 90 years: a man of
great courage, but mavelous unquiet, etc. a deep dissembler, and double in
all his ways, whereby he was neither beloved or trusted of neighbour-Princes,
and so detested of his Subjects, that they still term him in their Songs, The
faithless and graceless Despot. Lazarus his youngest Son succeeded him; yet his
two blind brethren fleeing to Mahomet with a mass of money, so incited him
against Lazarus, that for his friendship, he became his tributary, and dying
few months after, great troubles arose in Servia: the blind brethren craving
aid of Mahomet; and Lazarus his widow with her 3 sons, putting her self into
the Hungarians protection, with trouble held it, till the (...), weary of the
Turks harms, yielded to Mahomet's obedience; who united it to his Empire, as at
this day. Mahomet now thinking no enterprise so great, which he was not able to
bring to pass, ceased not to vex the bordering Princes; But his heart was
greatest against the Hungarians. Wherefore, because Belgrade was accounted the
Key of Hungary, he determined there to begin his wars, and levied 150000
Soldiers, in whom he repoled great confidence. He provided 200 Ships and
Galleys, that no relief should be brought to the City out of Hungary, by the
Rivers Danubius and Savius; and landing his Soldiers farther up Danubius,
spoiled along the River side. Shortly after encamping before it, he at first
terribly assaulted; but finding greater resistance then he imagined, he
entrenched his Army, and provided against sudden salleys: then laying a part of
the wall flat by the fury of his great Artillery, the Defendants with great
labor repaired it rather stronger than before.

Huniades the while, sent a Fleet (well appointed) from Buda down Danubius,
which taking 20 sail of Turks, and discomfiting the rest, they ran on ground
near their camps which were set on fire, as not to come into the Hungarians
power. Hereby the Christians (at pleasure) conveyed all necessaries by water,
to Belgrade. Huniades also with 5000, and a Minorate Friar (by whose
persuasion, 40000 Volunteers were come to that war) entered that way with their
followers.

Mahomet resolutely bent, determined next day to give a general assault; but,
as they were preparing all things for the service, Carazi Bassa, his best man
of war, was slain from the Town, Mahomet being exceedingly troubled herewith as
ominous; yet next day early, he with the sound of Trumpets, etc. brought on his
Janissaries to the breach; who without great resistance entered there, and in
diverse other places; For Huniades ordered the Defendants (upon the first
charge) to retire toward the City as discouraged, on purpose to draw the
enemies faster on to their destruction: so that great numbers being entered, the
retirers, at the sign appointed, turning again, fiercely charged them, and
Huniades issuing out, (...) oppressed the Turks, that few escaped, not being
slain or taken; the rest with exceeding slaughter beaten from the Walls.
Huniades (with the Fryar's Soldiers) presently sallying out, so charged the
Turks, defending the great Ordnance, that they with great slaughter, left them
to their enemies. The Tyrant courageously charging to recover them again, was
so repulsed, and beaten with murdering shot from the City, that he was glad
when got into his Trenches.

A great part of the Army was in this hurly, speedily transported over
Danubius, joining with Huniades, laying without the walls: who now assailed
their Trenches, as if presently to enter their Camp: which the Tyrant
disdaining, went out and valiantly beat him back to the Ordinance: from whence,
he was again driven to his Trenches: which manner of fight, was indifferently
maintained till the day almost spent. Chasanes Captain of the Janissaries, was
herein slain, and Mahomet himself sore wounded under his left pap, and carried
into his Pavilion for dead. But coming to himself, and considering his loss
in that siege, and c. departed with great silence in the night, still looking
behind when the Hungarians should have pursued and troubled him. Here were
slain 40000. his best Soldiers, besides Commanders: so that he would shake his
head, and c. wishing, he had never seen that City where he and his Father
received so great dishonor. This notable Victory was August 6th, 1456. Huniades
shortly after, died of a hurt in these Wars; or as some, of the plague, then
rife in Hungary, who would in any case be carried to the Temple to receive the
Sacrament before his departure; saying, the Lord should not come to his
Servants house, but the Servant to the House of his Lord. He was the first
Christian Captain, showing the Turks were to be overcome, obtaining more great
Victories over them than any before him. He was honorably buried at Alba
Julia, in St. Stephens Temple, greatly lamented of all good men.

Mahomet soon after the taking Constantinople, putting a great Fleet to Sea,
surprised diverse Islands in the Aegeum, and hardly besieged Rhodes. At which
time Calixtus the 3d Pope, aided by the Genowayes, for the grudge of Pera
taken, put to Sea sixteen tall Ships and Galleys, under Patriach Lodovicus, who
recovered (...) from the Turks, with other small Islands, and encountering them
near the Island Rhodes, sunk and took diverse, forcing them to forsake the
Rhodes, spoiling for three years after, at pleasure, the Turks frontiers, along
the Sea coast of lesser Asia, terrifying the effeminate people, and returning
with many prisoners and much spoil.

Mahomet after that, began diligently to prepare against spring, to subdue the
Aegeum Islands, chiefly those near Peloponesus: Ambassadors from Usuncassanes,
the Persian King arrived the while, with diverse rich presents: among which were
a pair of playing Tables, whose men and dice were of inestimable prerious
stones and workmanship, found in the Persian Kings Treasures, that Usun had
(...) and bereft, and left there by Tamerlane. Their Embassage was, that those
two mighty Princes might join and live in amity, and that David, Emperor of
Trapezond, being forced to pay Mahomet a tribute by his Asian Lieutenant, he
should not now look for it: seeing that Empire, after David's death, belonged to
him in his Wives right, David's elder Brothers Daughter, requiring him not to
molest him, so should he be his faithful confederate, otherwise his mighty
enemy. Mahomet, envying the Persian rising, and now disdaining his peremptory
requests, dismissed them with this answer, He would ere long be personally in
Asia, to teach Usun what to request of a greater than himself. This was the
ground of the mortal Wars ensuing between these two. Mahomet, now altering
his determination for the Aegeum Isles, most under the Venetians protection,
sent his Admiral with one hundred and fifty Sail into the Euxine, now the black
Sea, to anchor before Sinope Paphlagonia's chief City, to expect him with his
Army by Land, who was come thither before he was looked for. Ismael a Mohammedan
Prince; governing all thereabout, on whom Mahomet bent his forces, as being in
league with Usun, though he had 400 great Artillery Pieces, and 10000 Soldiers
for his defense: yet doubting how to endure the siege, yielded to him the City
with all his Dominions, in lieu of Philopopolis in Thrace with the adjoining
Country. This was the last of the Isfendiars long reigning in Pontus. Thence he
marched to Trapezond in Pontus, where the Constantinopolitan Emperors had
their Deputies, whilst commanding as far as Parthia: but it declining, one
Isaac fleeing from Constantinople, and taking the Government of Trapezond with
Pontus and Cappadocia, etc. was first called King; but afterward, he and his
Successors, Emperors. David Comnenus then reigned: Mahomet hardly besieged
Trapezond for 30 days by Sea and Land, burnt its Suburbs, as at Sinope. The
fearful Emperor offered to yield his whole Empire to him, on condition of
taking his Daughter to Wife: and for some other Province yielding a sufficient
yearly profit. Mahomet perceiving his enemie's weakness, attempted the City by
force, which not sorting, they again parled: at last it was agreed, the
Emperor on the Turks says for his return, should meet him without the City
for some good atonement, who as soon as he came out, Mahomet (faith not to be
kept with Christians) detained him a prisoner in bonds, wherewith the Citizens
discouraged, yielded themselves and City into his power: who entering it, and
taking his Daughter and all his Children, with all Nobles he found, sent them
forthwith by Sea with the Emperor, to Constantinople as in triumph: choosing
what Citizens he pleased for his own service: bringing up 800 Christian
Children for Janissaries, many Citizens sent captives to Constantinople,
dividing the beautiful Women to his friends and men of War, he sent some
choice ones to his Sons. The other Towns, shortly submitted to the Turkish
thraldom, wherein they have since miserably lived: he appointed Janissaries for
the Castle, and his Admiral to govern the common Soldiers in the City. So
Mahomet, having in few months, subdued Paphlagonia, Pontus, and a great part
of Cappadocia, etc. returned in great triumph. Afterward, Usuns Queen seeking
to get some of her Uncles children, possibly by her Husbands power, to advance
to her Fathers Empire; Mahomet cruelly put to death David with all his sons
and kinsmen: rooting out all the Family of the Comnens, but George the youngest
Son, who at first turned Turk, and whose Sister was afterward one of his
concubines. This Empire was by Mahomet subverted in 1461.

The year following, Ulanus Prince of Valachia resolving to join to the
Hungarians, Mahomet thought to circumvent this his tributary, before wholly
fallen from him: wherefore he sent Catabolinus his Secretary, to bring him to
Court, promising him greater promotions than ever: and commanding by him,
Chamuzes Bassa, Governor of Bidina, etc. to do his utmost for entrapping of
Uladus, promising him great rewards. Chamuzes devised, the Secretary to give
him notice of the day of his return from the Prince: when 'twas like, Uladus
would bring him on his way of himself, or at least being by the Secretary
requested; the Bassa, passing with Troops over Danubius, should lay close in
ambush on the way. The Secretary forced his wit, to persuade the Prince to go
to Court, etc. But he obtained no more from him wary, than good words, and in
courtesy to conduct him unto Danubius side. The Secretary giving Chamuzes
notice, he lay where the Secretary must needs pass: coming at the prefixed
time to the place, Chamuzes suddenly assailing the Prince, slew diverse. But
Uladus being of great courage, and better appointed than the Bassa supposed,
slew many Turks, and at length took Chamuzes with the rest: whose hands and
feet he cutting off, thrust their bodies on sharp stakes fastened in the ground,
hanging the Bassa and Secretary on a Gibbet, much higher than the other. And
gathering his forces, passed Danubius, burning along the River side, killing
man, woman, and Child, so returning into Valachia. This news set Mahomet into
such a rage, that he commanded Bassa Mahometes telling him of it, to be cruelly
whipped. But when he surely understood, rather worse than the Bassa reported, it
is not to be expressed into what a rage he fell. Wherefore assembling speedily
his Soldiers to Philopopolis, he soon raised such an Army, as had not been
against Constantinople: sending also 25. Galli s, and 150 small Vessels, to
land in Danubius, and join with the Podolian; who for a grudge against Uladus,
promised to aid the Turk: who before Mahomets coming with the Polodians help,
had burnt Prailaba, the greatest TradeTown in Valachia: then besieging Cebium
awhile with some loss, the Podolian departed into his Country, the Admiral to
his Fleet. Mahomet got over, burnt, etc. making havoc of all in his way,
taking but few Prisoners; for the Valachies had retired all unfit for Wars,
into strong Cities or Woods, or high and rough Mountains. The Prince kept the
Woods and Mountains, following the Turks as near as with safety, and cutting
off straglers many times: yet being but a handful, durst not show himself in
field. Mahomet roaming up and down, and not reckoning of so weak an enemy,
pitched in open plains, not entrenched. Uladus understanding thereof, furiously
assailed in the dead of night, the Asian quarter of the Camp, slaying many in
their Tents; the rest terrified, fled to the European Soldiers: whom the
Prince following did great harm in that quarter also: so fearing the Turks in
general, that they were on the point to flee. Yea Mahomet, fearing the
Hungarians had joined with the Prince, had fled, had not Mahomet Bassa
persuaded him; and, by Proclamation, none on pain of death to forsake his
place, enforced a head against the Prince: which Uladus perceiving, after great
slaughter and spoil of the Asians Tents, retired into the Woods. It being day,
Halybeg with select Companies, pursuing them, took one thousand, putting the
rest to flight, who were presently put to the Sword. After that, Mahomet
entrenched every night, keeping better Watches and Ward in every quarter. Who
as he marched. came where the Bassa and Secretary hanged, and the dismembered
Turks on stakes: with which he was grievously offended. Passing fu there, he
came to a plain, almost one mile broad, and two long, full of Gallows, Gibbets
and Stakes, etc. hanging full of dead men, women and children, deemed about
twenty thousand. Some their limbs broken on wheels, with many horrible kinds of
death. All which, the cruel Prince, jealous of his estate, had for desert or
suspicion put to death; his Soldiers had their goods, executing the whole
Family, sometime the whole kindred, with the offender. Mahomet, though by
nature fierce and cruel, wondered. Yet said only, Uladus knew how to have his
Subjects at command. Then sending Josephus to skirmish with the Valachies, he
was put to the worst. But Omares coming in, they were overthrown, and two
thousand heads brought on lances into the Camp; for which Omares was by
Mahomet made Governor of Thessalie.

Mahomet seeing it to no purpose, to hunt after his fleeing enemy, returned to
Constantinople, leaving Halybeg with Vladus his younger Brother, called also
Vladus, to prosecute that War with a party. This younger Dracula was, of a
little youth, brought up in Mahomets Court: who for his comely feature, sought
first by fair words and gifts, to corrupt him, at last to force him. The youth
enraged, drew his Rapier to slay him, grievously wounding his thigh and fled:
yet being drawn back, he was pardoned and reconciled, becoming his Ganymede,
and being long beloved and honored, was now set up for a Stale to (...) the
Valachies into rebellion: diverse of whom coming to Haly, to ransom their
friends taken in those Wars: young Vladus declaring the Turks great power,
and as lamenting the Countries endless miseries, imputed them to the disordered
Government of his cruel Brother: assuring speedy relief, if the Valachies
forsaking his Brother, would cleave to him as their Sovereign. By whose lively
reasons, etc. they present, persuaded, and others by them, soon all forsook the
elder, and chose him the younger, who by Mahomets consent, took on him the
Government, yet holding it as his vassal. Vladus thus forsaken, fled into
Transylvania, where he was laid fast by the Hungarian King, at Belgrade, for
cruelly and unjustly executing diverse Hungarians: yet after ten years, being
enlarged, he died in battle against the Turks.

Mahomet sent the same Fleet into the Aegeum, to take the Islands, who before
under the Constantinopolitan, had put themselves now under the Venetian,
especially Mitylene pretending its Prince harbored the Italian Pirates and
others, buying prisoners, and booty taken from the Turks at Sea, and along the
Seacoast: also, that he, slaying his eldest Brother, unjustly governed.
Himself passing into Asia, came to Possidium, over against Mitylene; Landing
his small Army over the narrow Strait, he soon overran and spoiled the Island,
captivating all its Inhabitants, who being sold at Constantinople, were thence
dispersed. Then besieging the Prince in the City Mitylene, he battered it
twenty seven days; and the defendants, by sharp assaults, greatly diminished,
the Prince offered to yield up all in the Isle, for some other Province of like
value: which Mahomet accepting, solemnly swear to perform. The Prince humbly
coming forth, excused himself for receiving the men of War, that they might
not spoil his own Country: denying he had bought or shared any of their prizes.
Mahomet seemingly contented, cheared him with good words: yet all being
delivered into his hands, he put to death many of the chief Citizens, cutting
three hundred Pirates in the middle, and placing Garrisons, he returned,
carrying the Prince with him, and all the better sort, with all the wealth,
leaving his Garrisons with a few of the poorest people.

Being arrived, he closly imprisoned the Prince, with his cousin, used in
killing his Brother; who in danger of their lives every hour, offered
renouncing Christianity to turn Turk. Mahomet in rich Apparel, triumphantly
circumcising them, set them at liberty: yet bearing the old grudge, soon clapped
them fast again, cruelly putting them to death.

Shortly after, Stephen King of Bosna, who through the Turks support, had
wrongfully obtained it against his two brethren, refused to pay Mahomet his
promised tribute: wherefore entering Bosna, he besieged Dorobiza; which taken,
one part of the people he gave slaves to his men of War, sending another to
Constantinople, a third to inhabit the City. Marching to Jaziga (now Jaica)
the chief City, it was delivered after four months on composition. Here taking
the Kings Brother and Sister with most of the Nobles, he sent them in Triumph
to Constantinople. The lesser Cities yielded also. Mahomet sent Mahometes Bassa
to pursue the King, retired into the farthest parts: who so enclosed him before
he was aware, that he could not escape, a thing thought impossible. The King
taking refuge of Clyssa, was so hardly laid to, that he yielded himself on the
Bassaes solemn oath conceived in writing, that he being honorably used,
should not be hurt by the Emperor. The Bassa carried him about with him, till
he possessed all Bosna: whose Master was offended with him for engaging his
Faith so far. The poor King departing, was suddenly sent for: who doubting,
carried the Bassas Oath in writing: yet the faithless Tyrant most cruelly put
him to death, or as some slew him quick. Bosna was subverted by Mahomet in
1464, who reducing it into a province, returned in great triumph to
Constantinople, with many a woeful Captive, and that Kingdom's wealth.

Mahomet in the beginning of his reign, sent to Scanderbeg offering him peace,
so he would pay him the yearly tribute demanded by Amurath: rather to prove his
confidence, than in hope to have it granted. Scanderbeg scornfully rejecting
this, entered into the Turks bordered dominion, wasting the Country and
returning with spoil. Mahomet in revenge, sent Amesa with 12000 Horse into
Epirus to do the like: of whose coming, he understanding, lay close with 6000
on the Mountain Modrissa. The Turks by night, being almost gotten to its rough
and sleep top, were suddenly charged, and with great slaughter driven down
amain, their horses being rather their hinderance. Being come to the foot,
they were again fiercely assailed by Scanderbeg on one side, and his Nephew
Amesa on the other: who before had placed themselves advantagiously: So that
the Turks soon overthrown were put to flight, 7000 were slain: Amesa their
General taken with diverse Captains, and sent to Croia, where was great
triumph and feasting for joy: Scanderbeg then enlarging Amesa and the rest to
be partakers thereof: and using them with all courtesy during their abode,
Amesa requested he might send to Mahomet, how the case stood with them, and to
procure their ransom, which Scanderbeg granting set down at 13000 Ducats.
The news sore grieved the Tyrant: but seeing the Armies remainder, most of
their Ensigns and Armor lost, and Amesa's messenger, he enraged, denied any
thing for ransom: imputing all to his treachery, folly, or cowardice. Yet he
was persuaded by his Bassaes and other Amesaes friends, to think better of him,
and to send his ransom, lest he should discourage other Captains, who might
happily fall into like danger: on receipt whereof they freed, were conveyed out
of Epirus: Scanderbeg dividing the money among his Soldiers.

The Tyrant determining to send another Army, and promising great rewards, etc:
to the vanquisher of Scanderbeg; among others, Debrias in great favor, by
great suit obtained that charge, promising confidently to make a better
beginning, than others before sent, requiring no more power than was sent the
year before. But Amesa setting forth Scanderbegs virtues and valor, with his
Soldiers courage, Debrias was content with a new supply, having 14000, with
whom marching to Polagus, and encamping with great security, being not yet come
into Enemies Country; Scanderbeg chose 6000 of his best Horsemen, and marching
(...) all speed, came by night, where the Turks lay, to be upon them before
aware. But by the Moonlight he was timely discried; yet the sudden approach,
and strange attempt oismaied the whole Army. But Debrias encouraging his
Soldiers, sent light Horsemen to receive the first charge, till he might set
his Army in order: betwixt whom and others of Scanderbeg's, a sharp skirmish
beginning, Scanderbeg doubting, seconded them with fresh Troops under Amesa: by
whose coming the Turks were chased even to their main battle. In which, Moses
had, following too fast, been enclosed, had not Amesa stayed his fury, blamed
by Scanderbeg: commending such forewardnesse in a private Soldier, not in so
great a Commander. Scanderbeg now fiercely affailed the Turks with his Army.
Debrias so encouraged his Soldiers, that Scanderbegs fortune was even at a
stand: till Musachius with resolute Troops out of the left wing, so charged,
that he sore disordered the side of the Turks Army: which Debrias perceiving,
came to that place, cheering them up with his presence and valor, seeming the
life of his Army. Scanderbeg the while, mainly charging the Enemies front, they
began in their Generals absence to loose order and give ground. Moses then
breaking into the thickest, threw amongst his followers a taken Ensign: who
thereby, so pressed on their Enemies, that they, discouraged and disordered,
were almost ready to (...). Debrias here-upon, hastening to encourage his
Soldiers among the foremost, was by Scanderbeg encountered hand to hand and
slain. Wherewith the Army discouraged, fled. Moses and Musachius killing more
in (...) than was in battle: 4120 Turks were slain and some taken, but few or
no Christians: so that Scanderbeg accounted it a Victory given. All spoil, and
prisoners were equally divided among the Soldiers. Moses had Debrias his horse
and Armor: Musachius a Prisoner seeming of some account given them: whose
prisoner drawing 200 Ducats out of a little bag about him for his
agreed-ransome, Musachius told him he must provide another, seeing that money
was taken with his person. The Turk alleged the agreement already made; which
controversy, Scanderbeg hearing, and smiling, said, They contended for what
was (by right) his: for, said he, I gave thee ( Musachius) the prisoner which I
knew; but not the moey, which I knew not of. And to the Turk: the concealment
makes it not thine: who by law of Arms, have lost thy self with all about
thee. Thus he brirging them both in doubt, awarded Musachius the money, and to
the Turk his liberty: who departing with his horse and Arms, spoke honorably
of so noble a Conqueror; After this, Scanderbeg triumphantly returned to Croia.

Mahomet being very melancholy with this news: seeing the many Soldiers that
returned, he could not endure the sight of them. The Captains generally envied
Debreas his hardiness, or hated his insolency. Amesa was glad his proud
successor took part of his ill fortune. The men of war offered to spend their
lives in that service, to their revengefull King: which he seeming not to
refuse, had yet plotted another manner of revenge, whereby his Father had
brought great matters to pass. He hoped to find some Chiefetain in Epirus,
whom wealth or promotion might allure against Scanderbegs life or state. Moses
of Dibria accounted the next best Captain to Scanderbeg, and most inward with
him; he most desired to alienate from him, because he commonly lay in Dibria on
the very frontiers. Wherefore he commanded the Governor of Sfetigrade to
devise by all means to withdraw and allure Moses: promising him also great
preferment if he could win him. Who at last thinking upon a shrewd-headed
Christian in Sfetigrade (whom therefore he might use unsuspected) and winning
him by great gifts and promises to undertake it, sent him away fully
instructed: who obtaining to speak with Moses in private, after some discourse
began to utter his poison: showing him, as from the Governor, that the Turks
Emperor could not but honor him, though his enemy, for his valor and
prowess: and marvelling he could be commanded by Scanderbeg, whose state was
by him chiefly upholden: whereas, if he would follow Mahomet, he should soon
find entertainment, to be preferred before Scanderbegs state: or, if Epirus its
soveraigntie better pleased him, he might easily be advanced thereto, by
joining to Mahomet's great power. Moses praises and favor with the Turk, well
pleased him: But the hope of Epirus Kingdom moved him more than all. Yet he
made no semblance of liking or disliking: which the wily messenger taking for a
secret consent, and departing, promised shortly to return to him again. After
this, many troubled thoughts arising in Moses, etc: he in short time seemed to
the wiser altogether metamorphosed. Some asking the cause of the Messenger' s
coming: he answered to receive intelligence from him concerning the good of
the State; which was holden for true. The Messenger coming again, brought
presents secretly, beseeming the Great Turk, with his message better (...).
Moses is reported to have received naught but the Treason it self: answering,
he could not but accept the Turks favors: and for the rest, he should not
thenceforth find him any great enemy: commanding the Messenger no more to
repair to him, for fear of suspicion.

Scanderbeg coming into Dibria, to see how things stood, and to consult about
besieging of Sfetigrade; Moses to avert him therefrom, told him: he lately
understood by a Messenger thence, that the City was so well stored of all
things, that it were but lost labor to attempt it: advising him rather to
besiege Belgrade (not on Danubius) but in the confines of Epirus, distant from
Sfetigrade about 140 miles. Which Scanderbeg resolving on, and his Soldiers
not so fit for besieging of Towns; he sent two Ambassadors to pray aid out
of Italy, from his old friend Alphonsus King of Naples, with presents and
letters; declaring, that his Soldiers knew not how to deal with Walls, that
the Italians had skill in that service, that there were certain Towns of
their enemies in Epirus: which eyesore he long desired to take out of his
sight, etc. Therefore Alphonsus should lend him Harquebusiers and Canoneers:
for of other Soldiers he had plenty. That he did so lovingly embrace his
former kindness, etc: that he could sometimes wish him that fortune, which (as
the common saying is) proves, but gets not friends; that he might more
certainly prove how much he was to him devoted. Scanderbeg purposing also to
use Moses his service in the siege: he found many excuses to stay at Dibria:
alleging, it was to be thought, the Turk would invade some part of Epirus, to
withdraw them from Belgrade: that no part lay nearer, and in more danger than
Dibria: that he could not do better service, than to see to that Country's
safety, in which (...) most of his living lay. These Treasonable excuses were
thought reasonable, and he commended for his care: authorized also to augment
the Garrison upon occasion.

Scanderbeg finishing his preparation, the Ambassadors returned from
Alphonsus, with much more aid than was requested; for he reckoned Epirus; but
60 miles from his dominions, the strongest Walls of Apulia, as it afterward
appeared when the Turks took Otranto. He wrote (...) loving letters to
Scanderbeg, etc: and to make bold (...) all things as his own: merrily writing,
that his Italian Soldiers could fight better with women then men and walls:
therefore the Epirots were best take heed, etc.

Scanderbeg now furnished, encamped before Belgrade with 14000 good Soldiers:
which he soon so (...), that the Turks promised to deliver it up, if not
relieved before 16 days truce. During which time, Scanderbeg encamped on a
hill near the Town with 3000 (...), and 1000 foot, appointing Musachius and
Tanusius to remove into a Plain farther off, for more fresh air in that hot
season: also he ordered 25 Scouts to watch continually on the highest Mountain,
to give warning of the Enemies coming by making a fire.

Mahomet, now ready to pass into Asia against the Emperor of Trapezond, and
grieving to lose Belgrade, holding on his intended journey (...), sent Sebalias
a Bassa with 40000 Horse to relieve it, promising him great rewards for
Scanderbeg, dead or alive. This Bassa, always accounted more politic than
forward, came on so fast by great journeys, that he prevented the same of his
coming, intercepting or corrupting the Watch on the Mountains, that no
expected sign was given. So that those in the plains had not leisure to
bridle their horses, or put on their Armor. Musachius armed, etc: as the
Enemies approach would permit, doubting whether to fight or flee: but seeing
alike danger in both, he resolutely received the Enemy's charge. At length,
seeing his men slain by heaps, he fiercely attempted to break through to
Scanderbegs Mountain: but no way being to be made, he fought till he and all
with him were slain. Tanusius also after diverse vain attempts to rescue his
Cousin Musachius, exhorted all left, to (...): in which many were slain: for
the Enemy filled all places, and eagerly pursued. Scanderbeg was about many
times to descend the hill, to help them, or have died with them, (...): his
Captains earnestly requesting him, not to thrust himself and them into peril
of assured death.

Sebalias following Tanusius with most of his Army' except few, and such as
rifled the dead, Scanderbeg coming down with his 4000, slew all Turks in his
way, and cut off a great number afterward in the rear. So that Sebalias
leaving the chase, turned upon his pursuing Enemy: and (...) a sharp skirmish
begun, sounded a (...) to call together his dispersed Soldiers, the better to
encounter his dangerous Enemy. Scanderbeg assembling his remainder, and
valiantly encountering the Turks (thinking now to end these Wars) (...) with
his own hand Achmat and Barach two valiant Turks, who had sworn to Mahomet
Scanderbegs death, if they met him. Many Turks were here slain. Night drawing
on, Sebalias retired to a Mountain nigh the City: and Scanderbeg to another
almost two miles off: and in dead of the night returned into Epirus, leaving
strong Garrisons on all strait passages, (...) the Bassa should break into
Epirus. This was the only and greatest overthrow Scanderbeg hitherto received,
losing 2000 Horse, and 3000 Foot (most of whom were the Italians) with his
Tents, and great Artillery, and about 80taken, 3000 Turks were slain also.

Next day, Sebalias buried the bodies of the slain Turks: but left the
yet-breathing-Christians, cutting off their hands and feet, among the dead.
Musachius his head, and others thought of the better sort, were cut off: and
because of the heat of the weather, being flayed and stuffed, Sebalias carried
them as Tropheys to Constantinople: Repairing Belgrades Walls, and adding 700
fresh Soldiers to the old Garrison; he returned, causing as he entered the
City, the Christian Captives to be led in Chains before him, after whom were
the taken Ensigns, with the heads on Lances, then all the spoil. Himself with
(...) Sou diers were received, with such applause as Conquering some great
Kingdom. Sebalias praises was in every man's month: he only (they said)
showing Scanderbeg was to be overcome: No preferment or reward was thought too
great, to countervaile his desert. Most of the Captives being sold, the rest
were thrust alive on sharp stakes, hanged on iron hooks, and otherwise
tortured to death.

Moses after Scanderbegs loss, thought it a most fit time now to revolt: but
he thought good, if possible, to allure some others into his Treason, both to
diminish his own infamy, and to appear with more credit before the Turks.
Wherefore at first, seeming very pensive for Scanderbeg and Epirus; with many
words, he set forth (to his utmost) Mahomets power: but to those more inward
with him, he discovered Mahomets great favor, and offered (...), etc. assuring
them of the like also, if they would conform: yet he found none, but a few of
the baser sort, which hearkened to, or followed him. Wherefore he fearing now
to be discovered, fled by night, to Sfet'grade, with those base ones; thence,
by the Governors pass, to Constantinople; where arriving a little before
Sebalias: Mahomet joyfully received him, etc: At the first report whereof,
Scanderbeg (as astonished) stood speechless: but pawsing a while, said no more,
but that he could easily excuse Moses, he being carried away with that which
might alienate a constant man: commanding diverse aggravating his (...) to hold
their peace, wishing all Treason and ill fortune were gone with Moses.
Scanderbeg went into Dibria, diligently enquiring if any of his partakers (...)
be found. But finding none, he much rejoiced, and things being set in order
(...) to Croia.

Moses solicited Mahomet to proceed in his Wars against Scanderbeg: promising
to spend his life therein. But he delaying him till next Spring, diligently
observed (the while) Moses talk and behavior: and often discoursed with him
about that Warr's management: and finding undoubted signs of a mind for his
service, he at Spring committed 15000 Horse to him, for invading Epirus, for a
greater number he required not. These Soldiers through the opinion of their
new General, and hope by his means, of friends there to join with them, were
the willinger to go. So Moses furnished (...) an Army of his own choosing,
etc. marching through Thrace and Macedonia, came and entered into Dibria. Whom
Scanderbeg stood not to encounter upon policy, he being privy to his
stratagems, but with true valor. Both Armies standing ranged in order, a
Messenger came to Scanderbeg to know if any one durst fight hand to hand with
one of the Turks, whose name was Ahemaze, (...) the general battle. Upon his
challenge, Zacharias Groppe hastily stepping forth, requested Scanderbeg, he
might be the man: who embracing, commending, and wishing him good fortune, gave
him leave: Whom as he was Arming, his companions wished only the fortune of
Manessi. He put upon his Armor many rich Jewels, etc. The Turkish Champion no
sooner was come forth in great bravery, but Zacharias bravely mounted, was as
ready to charge him: to whom Ahemaze said, It was time enough to hasten his
death, requesting to talk with him. So propounding the conditions before to
Manessi, Zacharias in no better sort accepted them. Thus agreed, and
withdrawing a good distance from each other, they ran together with such force,
they they brake their Lances, and were both horse and man overthrown: who
nimbly recovering, assailed each other on foot, with their (...). After many
sturdy strokes without hurt, being so strongly Armed, and their swords being
beaten out of their hands, they grapled with their hands: After long struggling,
Zacharias overthrowing the Turk, thrust him into the throat with his dagger and
slew him, then cutting off his head with a sword: whereat the Christians
shouting, discomfited the Turks. Zacharias returning with spoil, and presenting
to Scanderbeg the Turks head, was by him afterward honorably rewarded.

Into this place came Moses, and aloud challenged Scanderbeg hand to hand: but
seeing him ready to come forth, he with shame returned into his Army.
Presently after, both Armies joined battle, where at first onset, the Turks
vanguard gave ground, whom Moses relieved with supplies, here and there with
his presence restoring the battle. Yet the Epirots still prevailing, with
great slaughter came to the strength of their battle, Moses his best
Soldiers, and last refuge: here the Turks fought very courageously, and Moses
warily observing Scanderbeg, directed his forces if possible, to slay him: one
of whose courageous Soldiers, with his Horsemans staff, bare him quite
backward on his Horse: that the Turk thinking him to be slain, greatly shouted:
but Scanderbeg recovering, and chafed herewith, after a furious fight slew the
Turk with his sword. Diverse Soldiers thrusting the Turks heads on Spears that
were already overthrown: astonished the Turks: and with Scanderbeg, charged
their main battle fiercer than before. Moses with his own valor stayed the
Victory a while: till seeing the ground covered with dead bodies, and that he
must flee or die, fled: in which many of the hindermost were slain. Moses,
with 4000, escaped by ways well known: the rest about 11000 being slain: not
past a 100 Christians were lost, and about 80 wounded. All the Turks taken,
were tortured to death in revenge of their cruelty at Belgrade, except one
ransomed that yielded to Zacharias: Scanderbeg not knowing, or winking thereat.

Moses laying still on Epirus borders, would persuade his discomfited Army,
Scanderbeg being departed, to follow him into Epirus, to surprise the two
thousand in Garrison at Dibria, before they were aware. But the Turks now
contemning him: were about generally to return home. Wherefore Moses returned
with them: with a countenance as heavy as of a condemned man, and the Turks now
disgraced him as fast as they before admired him, speaking all evil of him; yea
the Tyrant, though he could blame but his fortune, was so offended, that he had
put him to a most cruel death, had not the Bassaes, etc. persuaded him, that
hereby he should alienate others from revolting, or attempting any great matter
for him. So he was pardoned, but had little or nothing afterward allowed him:
all which, though he outwardly seemed to bear, yet was inwardly so tormented,
that he could neither eat or drink. The Tyrant's measuring all by the event,
filled him with indignation; and to return to his Prince, having so ill
deserved, he was ashamed. Sometimes Scanderbegs clemency, etc. heartned him to
think of return; and by and by his foul treason overwhelmed him with despair:
yet, at last, he resolved to submit to Scanderbeg's mercy, etc. And getting
secretly one evening, out of Constantinople, traveling all night, and next day
not resting he came at last by long Journies to Dibria, whom the Garrison
beholding full of heaviness, etc. received him with many tears and embracings,
bringing him to Scanderbeg, then not far off; who falling at his feet with a
girdle about his neck, as deserving death, craved his gracious pardon: which
Scanderbeg granting, took him up by the hand, embraced him, and kissed him:
restoring to him all things of his (...), with all promotions as before; and
openly proclaiming, none to speak of Moses his trespass.

Mahomet was much grieved, and exceedingly fumed at Moses return; for that he
had trusted him, and let him slip out of his hands, being persuaded it was all
but a deceit of Scanderbeg. Shortly after, Mahomet allured Amesa to himself,
Scanderbeg's Nephew, promising him to be King of Epirus: hereby thinking it
easier to draw the people from Scanderbeg to him of the (...) blood, than to
any stranger. Amesa fleeing to clear the Tyrant of suspicion, carried with him
his Wife and Children, who though low of stature, and not so perfect of
feature, yet of exceeding haughty courage, subtle, etc. painful, courteous, and
bountiful: he could notably dissemble his affections, being beloved and
honored of all, next to Scanderbeg. He at his first coming, filled not
Mahomet with great promises, and vain praises of himself, as had Moses; but
spoke to him; that if he should remember the old injuries against his Majesty,
they might seem to come, rather to receive the just guerdon of their deserts,
then in hope of preferment, etc. that his Father's Army was betrayed at (...),
and Epirus by treachery wrested out of his hands: the cause of so much calamity
and bloodshed. But this fear was vain, etc. especially seeing his then green
years, etc. deceived him. He believed his Uncle, etc. but discretion growing
with years, he both perceived his sly (...) dealing, and that his revolt from
him, was more (...) to himself than any other, that Scanderbeg not recovering
and enlarging the Kingdom without him, he long expected he should give him at
least, some part of his Father's Inheritance: But marrying a Wife, he begot an
Heir: assigning unto him a base corner of Epirus, etc. that he could never
digest that injury: yet the times iniquity, and the man's insolency, compelled
him to (...) his thoughts: lest he should entrap him, as lately he did his
Sisters son, George Stresie, whom charging with fained surmises, he has
almost (...) of all. That he would willingly have fled to his Highness feet,
etc. but the remembrance of old, and since many injuries, feared him: But now
following his faith and promise, he scarcely had beckoned to him, etc. but he
came with such speed, as if he would have flowen, that he lingered not, etc. as
did Moses. Neither had he left any cause of desiring to return againinto
Epirus; having brought unto him whatsoever is dear unto him, etc. pawns as
might assure him of the faith of a most doubtful man, that if he had had time
to have trussed up his substance, he should have thought it a kind of (...), to
bring any part thereof, especially to him; only his fidelity he laid down
before him, etc. that, he dared not to promise to subdue Epirus with 15000 men,
etc. that in him he should not want diligence or faithfulness: that for other
things concerning this Warr's event, he was not to be advised by him his
unskilful vassal.

This speech seeming free from dissimulation, and his Wife and Children
confirming it: Mahomet with commendation, honorably entertained him; and upon
the Spring's approach, consulted with his Bassaes of invading Epirus: Manesaes
Counsel herein being best liked. And it was concluded, Isaac the Bassa of
Constantinople, should with 50000 men, be sent; and Amesa with him, commanding
5000 Horse, Amesa to be proclaimed King of Epirus, to persuade the Epirots he
invaded it more against Scanderbeg and for Amesa, than to take it to himself.
Fame soon filled Epirus with the report hereof, adding much more than truth.
Wherefore Scanderbeg sending without delay for his Captains, etc. to (...),
declared to them, that hope and fear were the two greatest things God had left
to vex and grieve the minds of men: the first a more comfortable thing, etc.
the other of more discretion and safety, etc. Hereupon the former chiefetaines
have gained greater honor and victories, (by fearing what was to be (...))
than other, in show more hardy. But that might be more (...) called discretion,
or wholesome policy: from whence none can deny, but the ancient Discipline of
War has risen: that this cherishes hope it self, etc. that they might
perceive, his speech tended to know their opinions, before determination of the
order of this War. That the Great Bassa, flower of Europe, etc. knocks at
their Gates: that he thinks it better to u^e policy and wariness, than their
wonted courage: that the events of War are uncertain, and it was never given
to any by inheritance, to overcome: that new occurrents require new
correspondents, etc. that Victory is like a Traveller, etc. that he was wont to
require only valor in his Soldiers, etc. but the loss received at Belgrade
has made him deem far otherwise of the uncertainty of fortune, etc. that he
spoke not this to terrify any; but to admonish and consult with them, how some
notable Victory may be achieved without the price of blood, or other loss,
etc. that Epirus must needs be soon unpeopled, if they should so desperately
only seek such glorious Victories as at Belgrade: they must fight so to day,
that they may fight to morrow also, that the loss of 50000 is not so much to
the Turks, as 100 of them to him, etc. yet he would gladly try the whole
fortune in plain field, if he might thereby for ever end all wars against the
Turks: But when this Isaac is gone, another Isaac will ere long come in his
place etc. wherefore they must so well divide their Patrimony, as always to
have somewhat to content their creditors, when they come upon them. Yet God
would no doubt, give an end to these troubles and extremities, etc. then should
it be no small pleasure to them, to remember so many labors and dangers past,
etc. That perhaps some would say, they are to be overtaken by policy, of which
opinion himself was. Then he thought it best to deceive them, when they think
they cannot be deceived; that besides their own distrust, by others harms, they
have with them his graceless Nephew, and domestical Foe Amisa, who will teach
them to shun such snares, as he with them, formerly was wont to lay for them:
wherefore they must tower up to the height of some strange policy, whereby some
great victory without their bloodshed, seldom chancing, may be obtained: with
which device, time and space, with sight of the enemy, should furnish them:
that first, all things subject to the enemies fury are to be removed: all
people brought into safe places, and their Towns to be strongly garrisoned,
with all necessary provision: Besides, who knew whether the Tyrant would follow
the Bassa at the heels or not? That, if all things be thus set in order, and
they follow his directions, they shall undoubtedly be victors; and he will make
the Epirots more terrible to the Turk, than ever it has been: that every one
the while, should take part in this charge, that he will command nothing, which
he will not do himself, nor refuse any thing tending to their common honor and
profit.

This Speech was so well liked, that many besought him to show how he would
proceed in those Wars, who cheerfully answered: it was enough, if they did
but believe him, etc. And dispatching his Lieutenants into diverse parts, he
provided, that all things were conveyed out of the Country, in places of
refuge, as before at Amuraths coming to the Siege of Croia. By which time,
Isaac with Amesa, was come into Epirus: who sent his Scouts and espialls before
him, to view every corner, for fear of entrapping. Scanderbeg had his Army in
readiness to use; but lay only with 6000 Horse, in show, as if he determined
to give battle. But the Bassa being in sight, he as discouraged, fled: and to
avoid suspicion of some policy therein, not into the Mountains and Woods, but
toward Lyssa, a Venetian Town on the Seacoast, as fleeing thither for refuge.
The Bassa glad, sent some Troops to pursue him, and mark the way he took:
himself encamping in Dibriaes plains, and resting his weary Army, expecting his
Horsmens return, who certainly reporting, he was fled out of Epirus, and no
enemy to be seen, they began to rejoice and triumph: yet grieved to find
nothing to satisfy their desires, cause enough to distrust some great matter,
but they supposed it to be done for fear of them. The (...) consulted now, with
his chief Captains, what were best be done? Amesa persuading him to stay,
expecting a further event. But the greater number said, it was better to go
farther, and take the spoil, before the people had conveyed all their
substance into (...) places, as in Dibria they had done. Hereupon the Bassa
setting forward early, proclaimed none on pain of death, to break his array, or
straggle: yet he first highly commending Amesa, and inveighing against
Scanderbeg, created him in Mahomets name, King of Epirus. Marching not far
that night for the great hear, for it was in July, he encamping kept diligent
watch that night every way, chiefly toward Lyssum. Next day, the third after
his coming into Epirus, he came and encamped that night in Aemathia.

Scanderbeg gone far out of their sight, stayed there all that day. And a
little before Sun's set, with a few chosen Horse, got up to the Mountains top,
whence a man might well discover Aemathia's plains: where he appointed (...)
Emmanuel with some Horse to mark the enemies way, and by secret signs, to give
notice to the Army, coming after midnight again to the Camp: And presently
fetching a compass, secretly came as near as possible, to those Mountains,
(...) for the enemies least motion. The Bassa early setting forward, came to
Pharsalia's plains, famous for the great battle between Casar and Pompey. Here
being some straggling Cattle, etc. the enemy fell to seek for booty, spending
that day in roaming; and at night, encamping with no great watch, but toward
Lyssum: carrying Amesa in triumph up and down the Camp, as in disgrace of
Scanderbeg: who perceiving by his espialls, which way the enemy lay; and with
great silence bent his course the same way, till come to Mount Tumenist, and
encamping at its foot: nor far from which, the Bassa next day, came and
encamped, sending Amesa with half the Army, to burn and spoil: who about noon,
returned with such prey he had, and his Soldiers wearied.

Scanderbeg like a careful Householder, to welcome so great guests, carefully
viewing the Mountains and Woods thereabouts, set Moses in one place, (...) in
another, and the rest in places convenient: so dividing his forces to make the
most terrible show; for which he placed more Drums, Trumpets, etc. than ever
before: Then with forty thousand Horsemen, and as many Foot, speedily marching
up rough Tumenist, he beheld how the (...) lay in the plains. They that lately
returned with Amesa, were scattered abroad in the fields, resting themselves,
etc. the rest were passing away time, with kinds of sport, for 'twas the
hottest of the year and day. Where the Bassa lay, they were negligent also,
little regarding Horse or Armor, for they thought Scanderbeg a great way off,
at Lyssum. They were then consulting in the Bassaes Pavilion, what to do to
content Mahomet, and commend themselves: some said, when they had wasted the
Country with fire and sword, to return: others to march to Croia; to prove if
the Citizens yielding, would receive Amesa as King, else to threaten them with
a continual siege, and their Countries utter destruction. Scanderbeg from the
Mountain, delighted with the sight of the Turks security and disorder,
encouraged and martialled his Soldiers. But first, he secretly descending with
a few, the rest soon following, suddenly slew all the Turks Scouts but one: who
running swiftly into the Camp, crying out, Scanderbeg was coming: the Turks
scarce believed he was so nigh who following as fast as he could, was in a
moment fallen in among the unarmed, greatly slaying, and filling the Camp with
sudden (...).

Amesa with some half armed, some on foot, first made head against Scanderbeg:
the Bassa doing what he might to arm and put his men in order. But the
Soldiers coming down from the Woods the while, with horrible shouts, and
noise of warlike Instruments; so dismayed the Turks, that fearing, all Epirus,
with the adjoining Countries were come, they began to flee on every side.

Amesa cried aloud telling them, Such vain terrors were not to be feared, etc.
and slaying many by his own valor. The Bassa coming to aid Amesa hardly
charged Moses with his horse, Tanusius and Emmanuel with their foot, so
encountered him that with great loss he retired to his Trenches.

(...) courageously withstanding his Uncle, and heartning them on with hope of
speedy relief, if they would a while endure their enemies fury; who would
presently be discouraged, if not prevailing in their first attempt, the Turks
were again encouraged. But Scanderbeg prevailing on them, and no help come,
(for many were (...), arming, coming, and others put to flight) they fled also.
Scanderbeg's horse made great slaughter in the chase, and took Amesa. Before
Scanderbeg came with 1000 foot and some horse to aid Moses, he had put the
Bassa with his Army to flight, whom Scanderbeg following, he looked not behind
him till out of Epirus. Amongst the many here taken, was Mesites a Zanzack, 20
the fairest Enfigns were taken, besides prisoners. Other spoils taken almost
incredible. Those who write most of the Turks slain reckon 30000 they who least
20000. But 60 Christians were lost. There was a sudden alteration of worldly
things, Scanderbeg possessing the Bassa's rich Pavilion, his Captains enjoying
Tents, etc. Amesa who the same day overran part of Aemathia, and was honored
and called a King, is now led bound to his Uncle, as a slave, speechle,
confounded, whose misery moved most to compassion, and forced reares from many.

Scanderbeg (next day) burying the slain Turks, that the Country might not be
infected, he returned in triumph to Croia; whom the Country people (from the
Woods and Mountains) meeting, as others out of Cities, they were full of his
praises. The Captives with hands bound behind, went before him, except those
carrying the Ensigns. Next, the Bassa's Pavillion, supported as in field: Then
came Scanderbeg with the Sanzack and Amesa following: for he had humbly
obtained not to be carried among the captives. Lastly, the victorious Soldiers
every one with a spare horse (...) with spoil. So being joyfully received at
Croia, he brake up his Army. Amesa being afterward condemned to perpetual
prison, was sent to A (...), to be kept at Naples: with whom was sent an
honorable present of the spoil.

Amesa, remaining a year there in prison; Scanderbeg ( Alphonsus dying)
requested Ferdinand his Son to restore him to him; who being imprisoned at
Croia, but not so straightly as before (for Scanderbeg began to forget the
injury) at last through his supplication, etc. pardoned his life, restored his
liberty, and took him into former favor. But Amesa, fearing what would become
of his wife and children if he (...) used it, with humble thanks brake his mind
to his Uncle: That whereas he had graciously regarded his life and welfare: he
ought also to to be careful of the life of others: to wit, his wife a nd
children; who (when Mahomet should perceive that he was fallen from him) shall
pay the guilt of his (...). Wherefore he was by some device to be deceived to
preserve those pledges, till some fit occasion to redeem them. That (by his
leave) he would flee as breaking (...), making the greatest show of his wonted
loyalty to (...), etc. That at length with his wife and children, he might
escape from him, wherein he might much help him, if (as grieved) he seemed
highly offended with the Keepers: that in the mean time he would stand him
instead of a faithful intelligencer.

Scanderbeg refused not his request, but said; Amesa, since we have granted
thee life, etc: we will not prohibit thee the preservation of them who may
justly call on thee as a debtor for their welfare. Go thy way, proceed, and
reform while thou have space: we now believe thee, and like of this device;
thou shall but deceive thy self, if thou longer follow the barbarous King: when
thou shall return, no greater pleasure; thou shall be with us as heretofore.

Amesa escaping that night, and the Keepers sharply rebuked, easily persuaded
Mahomet he was by chance escaped with all (...) told him; yet, for his ill
success, he was not so graced of him as before. But (whether Amesa neglected
his promise, or found no opportunity) he soon after dyed at Constantinople
thought to be poisoned, Mahomet no longer enduring the sight of him for the
notable overthrow in Aemathia: wherewith being much grieved, he justly blamed
the Bassaes security; whose credit with him better passed it over than was
supposed. Mahomet would have emplyoed all his forces upon Scanderbeg: but,
besides great wars arising between him and the Venetians, he was informed, the
Christian Princes were strongly confederating against him; wherefore he, by
those sent to redeem the prisoners, and by the Sanzack, cunningly persuaded
Scanderbeg to require peace of him: that if he did but ask it, it would be long
obtained. Scanderbeg utterly refusing to do it: Mahomet sent Sinam and Hamur
each with 14000 into Macedonia, for defense of his borders on Epirus, but by no
means to enter Epirus, or provoke Scanderbeg, whereby the Epirots enjoyed the
fruits of peace almost 2 years: so that old injuries wearing out, those
Captains mediating, 2 years peace was concluded betwixt them: in which time
Scanderbeg notably aided Ferdinand in Apulia against the French.

The time of peace expired, Mahomet (all things going well with him) sending
new supplies to Sinam, commanded him to make war on Scanderbeg: who (...)
Epirus with 20000, was utterly overthrown, but few escaping with (...).
Presently after Asam was with 30000 vanquished by Scanderbeg at Ocrida, in
which battle Asam sore wounded, yielded himself to Scanderbeg, and afterward
(...) by him, (...) following Asam with 18000, losing part, saved himself by
flight with the rest. After which, Caraza an old Captain, and Scanderbeg's
companion in Amurath's time, requested Mahomet he might prove his fortune
against him, assuring him of better success: whose long experience put Mahomet
in such hope, that he levied 10000 more then Caraza at first required; who
setting forward with almost 40000, Scanderbeg more doubted of the man than his
power, and assembled greater forces than usually, sending 2000 expert Soldiers
into the enemies Country to lie in ambush, whereby Caraza must needs pass; who
setting upon 4000 horse Caraza's forerunners, they were most part slain, those
escaping posting back to bring tidings. Caraza was now so discomfited he could
willingly have returned; yet for honors sake he came to Epirus; where long
resolving what to do, he was suddenly assailed by Scanderbeg, before he could
put his men in order. Then (through a vehement shower) both Armies retired
before any great hurt done. It rained three days together, for it was about the
latter end of Autumn, Scanderbeg not ceasing to trouble the Turks camp: so that
Caraza through the weathers extremity, and Scanderbeg's restless attempts,
rose, and returned to Constantinople; whom Mahomet derided, promising so much,
and performing so little; yet in some sort commending him, for looking on
Scanderbeg with less loss than other Generals.

Mahomet, not at leisure to employ such forces wherewith Scanderbeg was to be
subdued, proved, if by getting within him, he might bring him to confusion,
wherefore he sent rich Presents and Letters to this purport; that He thought no
acquaintance greater, or friendship firmer, than that which grew from long and
mutual converse, and living together, as he knew it had been betwixt them.
Wherefore remembering all those things, and also what he often did for
advancement of his Empire, etc. he could not but embrace him with a singular
affection, that nothing could be more welcome to him than to enjoy his company a
while. Neither needed he to fear coming to him, etc. that to let pass his
Soldiers late breaking into his Kingdom without his knowledge, who was not
offended at their overthrow, he was persuaded to join with him in a perpetual
league of amity. Of which these should be the capitulations, if they seemed to
him reasonable: first to suffer his Armies to pass through his Kingdom against
the Venetians: then to have his Son John in hostage, whom he would use as his
natural Child. A free Trade of his Merchants into all parts of his Kingdom;
Lastly, Himself to repair to him, and return without fear. In which things he
yielding, he promised him in the faith of a King, to grant him and his Kingdom
sincere peace, with perpetual tranquillity, etc. May 10th, 1461.

Scanderbeg well considering, returned answer, that He wrote of exceeding love,
etc. toward him, which should always retain its strength. But since among
other conditions of the propounded league, that his forces may have free
passage to invade the Venetians: it stands not with equity, or his honor,
they being his friends and confederates; and for his Son, since he has no
more but him, it is not good to have him taken from him, being as yet, a tender
Child, etc. As for the Merchants, he heartily wished a free intercourse
indifferently into both their Kingdoms. And for his persuasion of him, boldly
to come unto him: He could not but praise his honorable disposition, etc.
whose persuasion, if other urgent affairs, and his Kingdoms Government, a
fierce and restless Nation, would permit, he would follow. Yet he in a more
commodious time, would come unto him May 30. 1461.

Mahomet well perusing these Letters, wrote to him again, that, he understood,
he liked of none of the conditions propounded, but that of the Merchants: that,
this offer he would accept of, and his other excuses admit of; promising him to
keep a sincere peace with him for ever, except he first caused its violation.
And that he had signed these Letters with the Imperial Seal, sent unto him by
Mustapha, thereby confirming it, that he might likewise with his Seal confirm
this of his; That he openly proclaim the same through his Kingdom, as he will
cause to be in his; That of his mere bounty he freely granted and confirmed to
him and his Heirs, all the right to what he had forcibly taken from his Father
in Albania and Epirus; and will always account and call him Prince thereof,
etc. So bidding him farewell, and render love for love. June 22. 1461.

Hereupon, a peace was concluded betwixt them, and solemnly proclaimed to the
great joy of many. It was faithfully kept on both sides, till the Turks on the
frontiers, began to fetch booties out of Epirus, of which Scanderbeg
complaining, Mahomet as ignorant, seemed much offended, causing much to be
restored: whereby the peace was still continued. A little before this peace,
Wars began between the Turks and Venetians, who being in league with the
Turk, followed their Traffic, little regarding their Neighbors harms; But
Mahomet after the subverting Constantinople's Empire, and driving Thomas and
Demetrius out of Peloponesus, now Morea, began to disturb the Venetians, who
held then diverse strong Towns there: Josue Mahomet's Lieutenant having through
a Greek Priest's treachery, surprised. Argos and Omares first spoiling about
Naupactum, now (...), made all havoc about Methone and Corone. Wherefore the
Venetian Senators much troubled, deliberated ost in Counsel, what course to
take. Some thought it best to try if it might be fairly redressed by
Ambassadors to Mahomet: others deemed it to no purpose, seeing such outrages
could not be done without his knowledge and command. In this diversity of
opinions, and nothing yet concluded, at length one Victor Capella, a grave
Senator, franckly delivered a notable Speech unto them, calling upon them for
resolution: Seeing, he said, they must of necessity take up Arms, be they never
so loath, etc. and endeavoring to remove their objections, he said, when their
Ambassadors not long since came to him, he dallied off the time with deceitful
and glosing Speeches, doing such contrary things, as they least hoped, etc.
that Argos was already taken from them: that Mahomet, it was reported, going a
second time out of Peloponesus, and sounding the passage its depth, himself
rode over that Sea, strait betwixt (...) and (...), curiously viewing where he
might most conveniently pass over with his Army to besiege that City: and that
those were manifest signs of War, etc. And whereas, some fed themselves and
others with vain hopes, that he would never turn his forces upon them, etc. He
said, it plainly appeared, that he had already proclaimed open War against
them by invading, surprising and killing their people: whether they thought it
more expedient to sit still, suffering their Dominions to be taken from them,
or by open War to make the barbarous King kno w the greatness of their power?
who if suffered prosperously still to run on, people would daily more and more
fall to him, hoping to live the better as his friends: wherefore he thought it
better, to prefer an honorable War, before a doubtful Peace. That delay had
hurt many States, themselves most of all, whereby they, in a fort, had betrayed
the Greek Empire; for their traffic was much helped by the Grecians whom they
left to themselves: After that, he said, they rejected the Princes of
Peloponesus, who craved their aid with tears: also suffering the King of
Bosna's Kingdom to be lost after a humble request of aid, and promise of
requital, and himself to be cruelly murdered by the Turks: that for these
neglects (...) could not escape the (...) of all other Nations (...) rope, etc.
wherefore it was his opinion, to send into Hungary, with a mass of money, to
stir up that warlike Nation into a fellowship of that War. Also to send 2000
Italian Horsemen into Peloponesus, to animate the people to revolt from the
Turks, which they would undoubtedly do, when they should see them so proceed:
The great Bishop also was by all means, he said, to be drawn as a chief man
into the War. Hereupon most of the Senate decreeing speedy Wars, sent to
the Pope, the King of Hungary, and others, to (...) their aid. Sending also
Bertholdus Este with an Army into Peloponesus: who soon recovering Argos,
marched with 15000 men to Corinth's strait: where Alovisius the Venetian
Admiral meeting him, and joining their forces, they in 15 days, with 30000
men, fortified all that Isthmus about 5 miles from the Ionian to the Aegean
Sea, with a rampire and double ditch, being furthered therein by the old walls
ruins: then they besieged. Corinth Bertholdus being greatly wounded in the
assault by a stone, shortly died: yet Betinus, who succeeded Bertholdus,
continued the siege; But Mahomet now coming with a great Army to raise the
siege, and destroy the newly fortified Isthmus, the Venetians left the siege,
purposing (...) defend the other; but Mahomets Army being 800000. and at hand,
Betinus left the place with his small number, retiring to Neapolis to keep the
Seacoast. Soon after which, Mahomet entering Peloponesus, and roaming about
Argos with the people's great slaughter, came to Neapolis, terribly assaulting
it twice, and was notably, with many slain, repulsed: who departing, (...) and
destroyed about Modon and Corone, assaulting Juncum, but with no better
success: wherefore winter approaching, he returned to Constantinople. After
which, the Venetians spoiled (...) that of Arcadia subject to the Turks: and
not (...), Alovisius had Lemnos delivered him by (...) famous Pyrat, who taking
it from the Turks, and distrusting how to keep it, delivered it to the
Venetians. Ursatus being sent soon after, to succeed Alovisius their Admiral:
Dandalus their Land-General, while he was scouring the Aegeum, inconfiderately
encountering with the Turks Horse, was overthrown and slain with diverse of g eat
account, 1500 Venetians perishing: and then also Ursatus landing in Lesbos, and
(...) (...), lost 5000 men in two assaults, and the Turks Fleet being coming
for relief, he raised the siege; and sailing into (...), passed into
Peloponesus, where he shortly after died for grief: the Venetians sending
Jacobus (...) in his place, and laboring to draw as many Princes as they
could, into the Warre's fellowship. Pius 2d at first answered their
Ambassadors, He must take away the little Turk, before he had to do with the
Great, meaning Sigismund Prince of Ariminum, whom he hated, because he sided
with the French against the Arragonians; yet the Italian Wars being well
allayed, and Pius still solicited, he made great preparation, and giving out,
he would personally go unto those Wars, great aid out of Germany, France,
Spain, etc. were procured: Volunteers also greatly resorting from all parts of
Christendom into Italy to that end. And then also through Paulus Angelus, Arch
Bishop of Dirrhachium, the Venetians had hardly persuaded Scanderbeg to
renounce his league, and enter into Arms again, who presently spoiling the
Turks borders, Mahomet fearing (so dreadful was his name) that he should be
made General of the Christians, wrote to him by his Ambassador to reconcile him
if possible: saying, He thought it incredible, that he being a Prince of so
heroical perfection, should without any occasion break the league, not long
since contracted with him, etc. of which, he knew the Venetians were the only
cause on whom he said, he laid the blame rather than on him, etc. Therefore
remembering the old familiarity of their tender years, whilst they lived
together at Andrinople, he thought himself bound unto Scanderbeg, in all
courtesy, calling him his good Scanderbeg: he most heartily entreated him,
that by solemn Oath, they might confirm the former peace, wherewith if it had
been established, he said he would not have suffered himself to be so
circumvented, or seduced by the Venetians. So telling him if he would be
advised by him therein, his posterity should always reign in peace, etc. but if
not, it would quickly repent him: and setting forth before him the Grecians,
Emperors of Constantinople, and Trapezond, the Princes of Servia, and Rascia
the King of Bosna, and all the Kingdom of Asia, with many others vanquished and
subjected unto him, he said, he poor Princes his Neighbors, the Venetians his
seducers could not deliver him from his force and power: wherefore he advised
him to follow his counsel, etc. this was written May 7. 1463. To which
Scanderbeg replied at large, saying, his Soldiers had done that in the
confines of his Dominions, having complained to him, that Mahomets Soldiers
had before done the like in their goods and possessions: wherefore they also
upon a military bravery, as was Mahomet's phrase, had done one shrewd turn for
another: there was no cause why he should think it strange, or blame him: and
that he would have restrained his Soldiers, if Mahomet would have but taken
order for a full restitution of what they had lost, or by punishment have
chastized his Soldiers insolency etc. And as sor his inveighing against the
Venetians, in excusing him under color of old friendship, he did them wrong,
etc. and whereas he advised him to reject their friendship, it was but lost
labor; for, said he, what man is so desperate, or hated of his subjects, that
would not choose rather to err with that Senate, then to be in right with thee,
especially himself, who had long been their confederate, and was of all other,
unto them most dear: which Mahomet for all that, had no regard of, but breaking
the bonds of peace, had spoiled and wasted their Territory in Peloponesus.
Neither could he make him afraid, though but a small Prince, with his
honorable friends the Venetians. And that he made him smile, etc. in falsely
usurping to himself the stately Style of Emperor of the World, asking him, if
all were his in the lesser Asia, what he possessed in Asia the greater?
nothing, What had he in Europe, except Thrasia Mysia, part of Greece,
Peloponesus, with the Isle of Mytelene? And as for Africa, he never set foot
therein; and supposing all were his, yet he should cease to boast, and learn if
he could, the special, but true examples of humane frailty, etc. Neither, he
said, was it he alone that so much stomacked Mahomet; for the whole Chivalry
and glory of the Christian Commonweal was in Arms, and coming against him
with all their force, etc. from which, whether he could escape or not, he knew
not; yet if following his advise, he casting off Mahometane superstition, would
embrace the faith of Christ, he might make his name and Empire of great,
greater, etc. Scanderbeg about this time receiving letters from the Pope, that
he with Christian Princes, would withour delay, come into Epirus with a strong
Army, most joyfully denouncing war against the Turk, brake into his Dominion,
burning and destroying before him, and returning laden with spoil.

Mahomet likewise perusing Scanderbeg's Letters, and hearing of the late spoil,
became exceeding melancholy, which increased, as not seeing the wonted
cheerfulness in his Men of War; yet he levied a great Army fortifying his
strong holds, etc. Sending also Seremet Bassa with 14000 men to attend only on
Scanderbeg, upon Epirus borders: who accordingly came unto Ocrida, now Alchria,
in Macedonia, lodging some in the City, the rest in convenient places there
abouts.

Scanderbeg (...) ignorant hereof, marched in the night toward Ocriba with
12000 men, laying in ambush three miles off, and on break of day, sent out 500
Horse under two expert Captains, commanding them, if the Enemy came forth to
fight, they should retire as if they fled, so to train him on: which was so
well performed, that the Bassa with all his power was drawn to the place where
Scanderbeg lay: who rising suddenly up, in the battle were slain 10000 Turks:
the Treasurer with 12 of great note being taken, and being brought bound,
Scanderbeg ransomed them for 40000 Ducats. And returning with triumph, he
expected the Armies coming out of Italy; But Pope Pius being on the way with a
great Army, and come to Ancona on the Sea side, whither Christopher Duke of
Venice came to him with 10 Galleys, he sickning with a Fever, died in 1464:
whereupon the Army was dispersed, to the exceeding grief of many Princes, and
no less joy of the Turks. Lauretanus, his year being expired: Victor Capella
was sent General of the Venetians at Sea, who sailing out of Euboea, soon took
the City Aulis in Peloponesus, and Larsum, with the Isle of Himber. Then, he by
night surprised Athens, now Sethinae, carrying away all the people as
Prisoners, with its rich spoil into Euboea, where being persuaded, that if he
but showed himself before Patras, the Christians there would deliver it him, he
departing thence, landed 4000 foot under Barbaricus, and 200 horse under
Ragius; who being come within a mile of Patras: and many of them scattering
abroad, seeking for pillage: the Turks Garrisons setting on them with Horse,
easily overthrew them: Barbaricus being slain, and Ragius taken and empailed
alive upon a sharp stake: Scarce 1000 of them all escaping to the Galleys.
Victor was herewith greatly discomfited, yet, in hope, few days after he
attempted Patras again, but losing 1000 of his men, and the rest fleeing to
the Fleet, he departed with great dishonor: suddenly dying in Euboea,
oppressed with melancholy.

The Venetians being much troubled with these hard proceedings, solicited
Matthias King of Hungary to join in league with them, and to take up Arms
against the common Enemy: offering him a great sum, besides a large yearly
Pension; for which he should defend all of theirs betwixt the Rhetian Alps,
and the Adriatique, against Turkish invasion.

This Matthias was the younger Son of Huniades: whose elder Brother Uladislaus
having for injuries done to him and his Brother, slain Ulricus, Count of
Cilia, Uncle to Ladislaus King of Bohemia and Hungaria, was afterward most
cruelly executed in Bohemia by the said Ladislaus, Matthias being kept in
Prison, and, had not young Ladislaus been taken away by untimely death, had
been partaker of his Brother's fortune: But he dying, Matthias for love to
Huniades, was, while imprisoned at Prague, by a military election, chosen King
of Hungary, where he reigned 38 years: and was a far greater terror to the
Turks than his Father, notably enlarging that Kingdom, etc. And forgetting all
unkindnesse of the Venetians, who had refused often to aid the Hungarian Kings
in like case, saying, they received no harm from the Turk, etc: he undertook
the protection of their aforesaid territory: and passing over Danubius at
Belgrade, next Spring, with a puissant Army, he razed the Turks Forts
thereabouts: and wasting Servia, returned laden with spoil and 20000 Captives:
maintayning great Wars both with Mahomet, and his Son Bajazet, wherein he most
commonly returned victorious.

Mahomet now in revenge of Scanderbegs proceeding and Seremet his late
overthrow, sent Balabanus (an Epirot borne, and from a Captive Boy as he was
keeping Cattle, brought up in servitude among the Turks) with 15000 Horse, and
3000 Foot to invade Epirus: who being the first that gained the top of the Wall
at the taking of Constantinople, was afterward of Mahomet greatly esteemed,
and coming to (...), on Epirus frontiers, he sent Presents to Scanderbeg; as
if he desired peaceably to lie upon the borders: yet waiting to do him the
greatest mischief. Scanderbeg seeing into his malice, rejecting his gifts,
sent him a Spade, Mattock, and Flaile, etc: in derision, willing him to follow
his Fathers trade of life, etc: which Balabanus taking in very ill part, he
determined to set on Scanderbeg suddenly in the night, who lay not far off; but
he knowing thereof by his Scouts, set forward to meet him: which Balabanus
perceiving, stayed, encamping within two miles of him: who lay in the valley
Valchal, but with 4000 Horse, and 1500 Foot, though choice Soldiers, they thus
laying in view of each other, Scanderbeg cheerfully encouraging his Soldiers,
straightly charged them, if the Enemy should flee, or retire, they should not
pursue them beyond the hills straits, whereby the Enemy lay, guessing he would
leave an Ambush in the rough and woody hill adjoining. Then retiring unto a
Rising, a good way behind his former place, for the grounds advantage, if the
Enemy should follow to fight; Balabanus chinking verily he fled for fear, set
forward in such haste, that being come where Scanderbeg stayed, his men were
greatly disordered. Scanderbegs Soldiers receiving them with great courage,
there was a fierce battle a great while doubtful, with much slaughter on both
sides; yet the Turks being at last put to flight, they were with much slaughter
chased to those Straits where Scanderbeg had commanded his men to stay; but
some of his chief Captains unadvisedly pursuing them, they were beset with
their Enemies arising out of Ambush, and after a long desperate fighting, taken
and brought to Balabanus, who forthwith sent them to Constantinople. Mahomet
when he heard of their taking, being reported with joy to have said, Now I am
sure Scanderbeg's strength is broken. The chief taken were, Moses of Dibria,
next to Scanderbeg himself, with 7 other, every one of them able to conduct an
Army: all in Epirus so lamented this loss, that the victory was not accounted
of. Scanderbeg presently sent to Mahomet, requesting him he might redeem them
by exchange, or for what ransom he pleased; but he refusing to do either,
after all despightful usage of them, slew them quick by little and little, they
dying after 15 days miserable torment: whereof Scanderbeg hearing, entered the
Turks Dominion with fire and sword, sparing nothing he could by any means
destroy.

Mahomet highly commending Balabanus, sent him diverse rich gifts, with command
to repair his Army and proceed; which Balabanus diligently performing, lying at
Alchria, sent Scanderbeg again diverse presents, as desirous to live in peace by
him: which Scanderbeg rejecting, Balabanus corrupted Scanderbeg's Scouts with
rewards (some being Balabanus kinsmen unknown to Scanderbeg); whereby he had
oppressed him in the night at Orincheum, if Scanderbeg going about the Camp,
had not perceived his coming by the horses noise; wherefore with wonderful
speed, he putting his Army in order, after a great fight put him to flight,
slaying most of his Army in the chase, Balabanus with a few hardly escaping;
which when Mahomet understood, he doubted whether to send another General; but
considering Balabanus to be right valiant, knowing well the Country, and
Scanderbeg's mortal enemy, he committed unto him 14000 horse, and 3000 foot to
invade again Epirus, promising to make him King thereof if he subdued
Scanderbeg; who coming to Alchria, sent a third time Presents, which Scanderbeg
scornfully refused; and lying at Alehria three Months, he determined to
adventure on him by plain force; wherefore marching into the Plains nigh
Sfetigrade, Scanderbeg with 8000 horse and 1500 foot, refused not there to
fight with him; and being come to handy blows, the (...) fought like raging
Lions; Scanderbeg with skill, care and valor, performing all the parts of a
worthy Chiestain; But while he thus fought, his horse being slain and falling
under him, he sorely bruised his Arm, whereof he long complained. The Turks
also seeing him down, pressed fiercely to kill him, but he was soon rescued and
remounted: forthwith slaying Sultman a great Turkish Commander hand to hand;
whereupon the Turks retiring, after a while plainly fled, few with Balabanus
escaping through the pursuits execution; who returning to Mahomet, he was
sharply rebuked for these great overthrows; But the Kings fury being over,
Balabanus cunningly excusing himself, told Mahomet, It was in vain to send such
small Armies; but if he would send two Captains with a puissant Army, (who
dividing the same, might at once enter in several places, and one not to accept
of battle except the other were at hand) he by their thus enclosing Scanderbeg,
promised him an assured victory; which well fitting Mahomet's humor, he
commissionated Balabanus to leavy what Army he thought sufficient, and choose as
his associate, which of his Captains he pleased; who, choosing 40000 good
Soldiers, and Jacob Arnauth, (born also in Epirus) for his companion, he sent
him with 16000 by the way of Thessaly and Grecia, himself taking the nearer way
through Thrace and Macedonia into Epirus, encamping in Valchal valley with
20000 horse, and 4000 foot. Scanderbeg having intelligence from the Turks
Court, of all Balabanus his intent, had provided 8000 horse and 4000 foot in
readiness, sending out three espialls, to discover in what order Balabanus lay;
one of whom being his Kinsman, persuaded the other two, in hope of reward, to
go over to Balabanus, discovering all they knew of Scanderbeg; who (his espials
not returning) presently rode himself forth with 5 lusty Soldiers to discover
their manner of lying; who prying into every bush and thicket as they went,
descryed certain horlmen lying in secret ambush to intercept them; yet so that
they coming to handy-stroaks, Scanderbeg and his followers were glad to flee
into the next wood, the Turks closely following them. A great old tree being
fallen a cross the way, Scanderbeg with one of his men leaped over it: the
other 4 not being able, turning and fighting were slain; one of the Turks
leaping the tree, followed Scanderbeg: who seeing but one turned and slew him,
the other Turks returning, and Scanderbeg with one man to his Camp; who
speedily made ready to go against Balabanus, before Arnauth's coming, and came
with speed into the valley of Valchal, having divided his Army into 4 squadrons
between Tanusius, Zacharias, Peicus, and himself, and sending some
Harquebussers and Archers before to provoke the enemy, Balabanus would not stir
from before his Tents, expecting the coming of his fellow; which Scanderbeg
perceiving, drew nearer and nearer to his Trenches, and by continual
skirmishing with those he sent out, dared and braved him, as if he would by
force have fet him out; whereat the Turks chasing were ready to rise against
their General, because he suffered them to be so disgraced. Balabanus deferring
time what he could, and his fellow not coming, the Turks also often ready to
issue out without his direction, went out to battle, himself leading the left
wing, betwixt whom and Scanderbeg was a fierce fight, many falling on both
sides; in other places they stood almost as lookers on, expecting the force of
their Generals; whereupon Scanderbeg (the Turks having before given ground)
drawing some Troops out of the right wing, and fetching a compass charged the
side of the enemies Army; and withdrawing, speedily set on the back of the left
wing: so that the Turks there fiercely charged before and behind, fell in other
places with a great slaughter. Balabanus, withstanding as long as he could, and
now become desperate, fled out of the battle. The rest fleeing also (except a
few escaping, with Balabanus) were most either slain or taken.

Scanderbeg had scarce divided the spoil; but he heard from his Sister, then at
Petrella, that Arnauth was entered by the way of Belgrade, burning and
destroying, and encamping in the less Tiranua's Plains; wherefore he presently
letting forward with his cheerful Soldiers, soon came where the enemy lay.
Jacup having removed his Camp into a corner of the Plain, Scanderbeg encamped
in Jacup's former place: where resting one day, next morning, he cast before
the enemies Trenches diverse of the late slain Turks heads, showing them diverse
prisoners, which Jacup beholding despairingly said, I see the evil hap of
Mahomet: Scanderbeg sending forth 500 horse to skirmish, Jacup (seeing his
fellow not now to be looked for) came readily into the field, beginning a
fierce battle; but Scanderbeg singling Jacup out, slew him with his own hand;
whereupon the Turks fleeing, were most slain or taken: and those that escaped,
were by the Country people in their straggling, either slain or taken.
Scanderbeg in these two battles, loosing about 1000, but the Turks 24000 and
6000 taken, the Epiruts being so weary of slaughter, that Scanderbeg (being
told Balabanus might be surprised as fleeing but with one horse Cornet) said, O
let some of our enemies live to report their own slaughter and our victory!
Presently after he entering into the Turks frontiers, and roaming at his
pleasure, made havoc of all in his way. Then returning to Croia, he brake up
his Army.

In the mean time, Mahomet procuring two Turks with great rewards to kill
Seanderbeg, they coming to him seemed so to detest Mahomet's Tyranny and
Superstition, that they were reputed to be what they would be accounted: and
learning the Christian Principles were baptized; but these Traitors (while
watching an opportunity) falling at variance, let some words fall whereby they
were suspected by some present; whereupon being examined, they at last
confessed the design, and were presently executed.

Mahomet, understanding what was befallen to Balabanus and Jacup, became almost
frantiek; and, by his Bassa's advice, resolved to go in person with such an
Army as should for ever end his wars in Epirus, raising 200000 men; whereof
Seanderbeg being advertized, fortified all strong Holds, especially Croia:
leaving Balthazar Perduci Governor thereof, and conveighing the people into
places of refuge, he left naught for the Turks to prey upon, as he did before
at Amuraths coming. Balabanus entering Epirus with 80000 horse, after two days
ranging, sat down before Croia; on whom, Perduci made many brave salleys,
Mahomet encamping there also; who fummoning the City upon his own conditions,
the Governor returned nothing but continual shot for answer; whereupon, he
planting Ordinance for battery, cast other new ones there, rather to terrisie
the Defendants than for any great hope of taking the City by force. Scanderbeg
the while, lying abroad in the Woods and Mountains with a small Army cut off
the Turks forragers etc. and breaking into one quarter or other of their Camp
by night with great slaughter, suffered them not to rest in quiet; wherefore
Mahomet, seeing no hope, and fearing his Fathers mischance, leaving Balabanus
with 8 expert Companies under him, with a great part of his Army to continue
the fiege, departed with the rest to Constantinople, and by the way took some
small forts: also by fair promises corrupting the Governor of Chidna; and, his
faith given, that all the Soldiers lying there, corrupting the Governor of
Chidna, being 8000 and people, should safely depart, it was delivered unto him;
but having them in his power, he cut man, woman and child in pieces, to
Scanderbeg's great grief and weakening, who never received such a loss before;
and finding himself unable to relieve Croia, his Soldiers being sore wasted,
and his enemies warily encamping, he sent to the Uenetians and other
confederate Princes, praying their aid at this his need, etc. all which
promised him succors. Also, he passing disguised into Italy, came to Rome,
craving Pope Paul 2 his aid; who being honorably entertained, yet obtained
nothing of what he came for: only his Treasurer had 3000 Ducats at departure;
who returning into Epirus, found all the promised aid ready (chiefly the
Uenetians most drawn out of 4 of their Garrisons) so that he had 13400 choice
Soldiers, wherewith marching toward Croia, he suddenly came upon Jonima with
some Troops by night, who was bringing supply to his brother Balabanus, taking
Jonima with his Son Hedar; whom he showed in bonds to Balabanus. Then returning
to his Army, and so to Croia, he drove the Turks from the Mountain Cruina:
which Balabanus seeing, he riding with some Troops even to the Cities gates,
persuaded them to yield, making them promises in his Masters name; but they
sallying out, and forcing him to retire, he enraged came upon them with a fresh
charge to drive them into the City; but being shot quite through the throat he
ran as fast as he could to his Camp, where presently falling from his horse he
dyed. The Turks herewith discouraged, and with Scanderbeg's coming, rising that
night, silently retired to Tirana Plain, about 8 miles off. Scanderbeg entering
their Tents, found store of victuals, which he conveighing into Croia, followed
himself in great triumph, to the besieged's joy whom he both commended and
rewarded; and sending some Companies to take the strait passages out of Epirus:
the Turks by 2 Messengers offered to deliver up their Horses and Arms, so they
might depart with life; which Scanderbeg propounding to his Captains, himself
at last answered, That as they came into his Country without his command: so
they should not by his leave depart; Whereupon, the Turks in the dead of that
same night brake through those straits by force, yet not without their great
loss; for whose escape, the Soldiers greatly murmuring, were hardly appeased.
But Scanderbeg recovering all places taken from him, and putting Mahomet's
Soldiers therein, to the sword, he brake up his Army except 2000 Horse and
1000 Foot to defend his frontiers.

Mahomet hearing of this evil success, so fretted and grieved, that he could
neither eat, drink, nor take rest for a season. At last he resolved to go again
next Spring, with a most puissant Army; whereof Scanderbeg hearing, provided
for him as formerly, who being entered Epirus, first repaired or re-edified the
ruinous City Valmes, leaving a strong Garrison to trouble that part of the
Country, Thence he marching to Dirrachium, (now Durazzo) a City not on the
Seacoast, possessed by the Uenetians, thought to have taken it unprovided; but
(it being strongly fortified both by the Uenetians and Scanderbeg), he having
to his great loss in vain attempted it, suddenly rising came again before
Croia, (the chief cause being a persuasion that Scanderbeg was in Dirrachium,
because he had seen some of his men in his assailing thereof) offering at
first, great things to the Citizens if they would yield: otherwise, threatening
all warlike calamities, vowing not to depart till he had it; he receiving no
answer, but from the Cannon or brave Salleys: Scanderbeg also every night
molesting his Camp; wherefore rising with his Army, he marched to Kedon, not
far from Dirrachium, and in spite razed Chiurili which Scanderbeg had begun to
build. Then seeking those Epirots retired into the Mountaines' he was by them
with great loss repulsed. Scanderbeg at his heels daily cutting off part of
his Army. So at last despairing of any good to be done, he returned full of
discontent to Constantinople.

After this, Scanderbeg riding to view the state of his Kingdom, came to
Lyssa, a City of the Vinetians, to conter with the Legate and other Princes, as
in general, so how to take Valmes, which much troubled that part of Epirus;
but he there falling sick of a Fever, and sending for his confederates, and
the Venetian Ambassadors, and his Wife and Son, after discoursing of his
troublesome life, and exhorting them, in concord to stand in defense of their
Religion, Country, and Liberty, commending his Wife and Son with the Kingdom
to the Venetians tuition according to the Articles of confederation, willing
them after his death to pass into Apulia quietly, to live on possessions there
held by King Ferdinands gift, after prayer, departed January 17. 1466. about 63
years old, and reigning about 24 years. His death was generally lamented,
chiefly of the Venetians and Albanian Princes, who had lost their Watchman and
Champion: all his Subjects bewayling him as the only stay of the Commonweal,
etc. He was royally interred in Lyssa's Cathedral: which City the Turks about
9 years after, taking, in the way of the Siege of Scodra: they digging up his
bones, those who could get never so little thereof, set it in silver or gold,
hanging it about their necks, or otherwise wearing, thinking thereby, to have
such good hap as Scanderbeg had while he lived.

The Hungarians and Venetians, most time of these Wars, busied the Turks; for
Matthias entering Bosna overthrew the Turks frontier forts, and driving them out
till he came to Jaziga, or Jaitze the chief City, at length took it, wresting
all that Kingdom out of their hands: whereupon, Mahomet hardly besieging
Jaziga, it was valiantly defended, till Mathias coming to its relief, so
troubled the Turks Camp on one sice, and the besieged with salleys on the
other, that the Turk stealing away with his Army by night into Servia, left
his Tents and great Ordinance for haste (which the Turks Histories report, he
cast into the River) whom Mathias following into Servia, and taking part
thereof, united it with (...), to Hungary. After which Mahomet had no great
stomach to provoke the Hungarians: Mathias being now as dreadful to the Turks
as the name of his Father Huniades.

Then also the Venetians scouring the Seas, did great harm to the Turk by
landing in several places: amongst others Nicholas Canalis succeeding
Lauretanus, coming into Salonichi Bay, burnt diverse Towns and Villages by the
Sea side. Then returning into Pelopouesus, he in despire of all the Turks could
do, fortified (...), where leaving a strong Garrison, he returned into Euboea:
and soon after, sailing along Macedonia and Thracia, surprised Aenus upon the
River Meritza's mouth, taking its spoil, and carrying away 2000 Captives into
Euboea. Then likewise the Venetians ayding Duchaine against his Brother
Alexius, striving for Zadrima's principality, greatly overthrew the Turks near
Drine River in Epirus, who came in Alexius quarrel.

Mahomet perceiving that Euboea Island, now Nigropont, 10 miles long, abounded
with Corn, Wine, Oil, Fruit, and Wood for shipping, and, separated from (...)
with a narrow strait of the Sea, was for its commodious (...) and strength, the
chief place whence the Venetians wrought him all these wrongs, resolved to
employ all his forces both by Sea and land for the gayning thereof; wherefore
assembling a mighty A rmie, and sending Mahomet Bassa with 300 Galleys, and
other small Vessels well furnished into Euboea: himself marched through
Achaiae, till he came over against Chalcis. The Venetian Admiral, finding
himself too weak for the Turks Fleet, returned toward Seiros: But the Bassa
coming out of Hellspontus Straits, came without let to Euboea: where taking
and razing Stora and Basilicon, he went directly to Chaleis: of whose smaller
Vessels Mahomet making a bridge over the Strait, passed to the City Chaleis,
Rich, Populous, and very strong, besieging it round by Sea and land: where,
with his battery, fair breaches by the chief Cannoneers giving the Turks by
signs, knowledge where the Walls were weakest, being the sooner made, the
Traitor, it being perceived, was executed; Yet, what he beat down by day,
they repaired by night. Thus for 30 days, the City being defended, to the
Turks great loss in their sharp assaults; the Venetian Admiral, coming in
view of the City, showed as if he would give the Turks battle: Wherefore
Mahomet, (its reported) was about to go over into the maine with his Army,
lest the Venetians breaking the bridge, should have shut him in: which its
thought he might have done, if he would have adventured, as his Capraines
earnestly requested. But coming to an Anchor, he moved not: which the Turk
perceiving, brought on his men to the Wal's breaches, promising them the Cities
spoil, etc: whereof himself said, he would be aneye witness. Whereupon the
Turks furiously assaulting, the defendants made such slaughter of them, that
the ditches were filled, and the breaches made up with their dead bodies; but
Mahomet still sending in fresh supplies, this dreadful assault was maintained
a day and a night without ceasing: who twice winning the breaches, were beaten
out again. At length the defendants being most flain or wounded, and the rest
wearied, retiring into the Market place, sold their lives dear to the Turks:
among whom were found many dead women, who chose rather to die in defense, than
to fall into the Turks hands.

Mahomet, although Lord of the City, yet losing 40000 in the siege, put all men
there alive to most cruel death, especially the Italians with exquisite
torments. Ericus the Governor fleeing with a few into the Castle, on promise
of safe departure delivered up the same, but having them in his power, the
Tyrant cruelly murdered them: Erigus's Daughter being - presented to Mahomet
as the mirror of beauty: when he could not prevail on her by flattering
words, etc: to consent unto his desire, threatened her with death, torture, etc:
But the constant Virgin resolutely denying, he commanded her forthwith to be
slain. And the horrible cruelty committed by the Turks at the taking of
Chalcis passes credit: the rest of the Island without resistance yielding to
the Turkish slavety. This happened in 1470. Caualis the City being lost,
fearing to be set on by the Turks, dishonourably returning to Venice, he was by
the Senate imprisoned, and afterward with his family banished to Utinum.

Mahomet and his Fleet soon after returning, the Venetians attempted a sudden
surprise of Chalois; but the Garrison there left, was so strong, that retiring
to their Galleys, they forsook Euboea.

Petrus Mocenicus being chofen Admiral instead of Canalis: the Venetians
solicited Pope Sixtus the 4th, the King of Naples, the King of Cyprus, and the
Master of Rhodes, to join with them against the common Enemy: which they
promised. They sent also Zenus to Usun Cassanes, King of Persia, to incite him
against the Turk, who next year taking up Arms, had with him mortal Wars,
who not ignorant of these things: and knowing how he had offended Christian
Princes by his cruelty at Chalsis, lay a while still at Constantinople, as if
desirous to live in peace, whereby, as he wished, naught worth speaking was that
year attempted against him: who also requested the Persian King, if it were
only but for community of the Mohammedan Religion, to withdraw taking up Arms
in the Christians Cause, though otherwise he regarded not Religion; but Zenus
so wrought wi h Usun Cassanes, that he told the Turks Ambassadors, he neither
could nor would longer endure the Turkish Kings injury: and that having made a
league with the Christian Princes, he would to his power perform whatever he
had promised: so dismissing them discontented, as were the Persian Ambassadors
before from the Turkish Court, touching the Emperor of Trapezond.

The year following, 1472. Mocenicus arriving in Lesbos, did great harm: and
passing into the lesser Asia, sore spoiled about Pergamus. Then landing again
at Cnidus, he took a great booty: so returning, having exceedingly hurt all
along the SeaCoast, laden with spoil to Peloponesus: on whose Coast, he met
with Richiensis, with seventeen Galleys from King Ferdinand of Naples: who
joining their Fleets in one, landed at Modon in Peloponesus: where refreshing,
and new victualling, they putting to Sea, landed in Asia: whom the Country
Turks encountering, they put them to flight, pillaging for four days, store of
rich booty, especially Turkey Carpets: thence sailing to Halicarnassus, a part
of Caria, they took a wondrous spoil: there coming to them the Bishop of
Modrussa with twenty Galleys from the Pope, joyfully welcomed: also two Galleys
from the great Rhodian Master. With these 85 Galleys, they sailed to the Isle
Samos, over against Ephesus, then desolate, to consult of further proceeding.
Loosing thence, they landed at Attalia, the Metropolis of Pamphilia, of great
Traffic: in whose Suburbs, finding store of rich Commodities from Egypt and
Syria, taking what pleased them, they burnt the rest with the Suburbs; and
beginning to besiege the City, not without great loss to be taken, they
departed, and running along Pamphylia, burning and destroying, they returned to
Rhodes: where meeting an Ambassador from Usun-Cassanes, for great Ordnance,
they understood by him that his Master was preparing against the Turk: Mahomet
the while, no less requiting the Venetians; for Scanderbeg being dead, he much
prevailed on the Princes of Epirus and Albania, etc. but the Fleet from Rhodes
landed in the Myndians Country: returning to the Isle Naxos with great spoil,
whence Ferdinand's Galleys, the year far spent, returned home with much
spoil; but Mocenicus with the Legate, returning into Asia, took Smyrua with its
spoil, setting it on fire, much hurting also about Clazomene not far off. So,
laden with Asia's spoils. Mocenicus returned to Modon, and the Legate into
Italy.

Mohomet through the insatiable desire of Sovereignty, had not long before
under pretense of a friendly parley, circumvented the King of Mysia, cruelly
putting him to death, and, subduing his Kingdom, slew all of his blood. Then
invading Caramania, where Pyramet and (...) reigned, he drove them both out:
Pyramet fleeing to Usun-Cassaues: Cassanbet seeking to recover his Inheritance,
was besieging some Towns on the Seacoast, which taken, would draw in all the
rest of the Kingdom: who requesting Mocenicus, now on Cilicia's coast, he
landing some Companies and great Artillery under Victor. So battered Sichinum's
walls, that the Turks yielding it up, he delivered it to Cassambet: also
Corycus, which he took, then besieging Seleucia upon (...), about five miles
from the Sea: the Governor discouraged at the great Artillery, delivered it to
Victor: who restored it to Cassambet, who thus re-brought into his Kingdom,
much thanked the Admiral, promising, himself and Brother to be always the
Venetians friends.

Mocenicus departing, harried all along the Seacoast of Lycia: sailing also
into Cyprus, to appease an insurrection against the Queen, left to the
Venetians protection by her dead Husband: which he (...), (...) appointed
Admiral, being come into Peloponesus, he hastening thither to give up his
charge, returned to Venice.

About which time, Usun Cassanes, who of a small Prince, was accounted amongst
the greatest Monarchs theu living, began to war upon Mahomet. He was the
Son of Tachretin, who with other poor Princes, were exiled by Bajazet the
first his violence, and was again restored by Tamerlane: Usun Cassanes
obtaining a small territory in Armenia, by Tachretin's death. Wherefore not
contented, he wrung one province from this Prince, another from that, and
thrusting some quite out of all; thus soon getting a great part of Armenia
into his hands: So that Calo Joannes the Trapezond Emperor, whose style
exceeded his power, fearing Mahomets greatness, gave him Despina his only
Daughter in Marriage: agreeing that Usun Cassanes (after Calo's death, and of
David his Brother) should in his Wives right, enjoy Pontus: Despina freely to
exercise her Christian Religion: by whom he had a Daughter Martha, Mother of
Hysmael the Sophi. Usun Cassanes, now ceasing not daily to encroach, at length
began to lay hold on part of the Persian Kings Dominion, in Armenia. Zenza then
reigning in Persia, in a sort commanded Usun not to come within the bounds of
his Dominion, threatening (otherwise) to turn his forces upon him: wherewith
Usun offended, commanded the Ambassadors speedily to depart, and tell their
Master, he would shortly come and debate the matter with him face to face. The
Persian King moved, set forward an Army, thought sufficient to subdue a sar
greater Prince. Usun Cassanes (though he had scarce one man to 10) searing
nothing, set forward by great journeys to meet them: and with whom joining
(...) after a long and cruel fight, overthrew them with a great slaughter.
Zenza raising a far greater Army (the very strength of his Kingdom) set (...)
in person, and joining battle with Usun, the Persians were again put to
flight, more being slain than were in the first Army: he slaying Zenza with
his own hand, and taking Cariasuphu's Son Prisoner: whom to please the
Persians, he honored with the Title of King, calling himself the Persian
Protector. But having under color of a peaceable Governor gotten the Regal
City Tauris with the rest: he secretly dispatching the titular King (the last
of Tamerlaines posterity) took on himself the highest place. Mahomet the while,
having scornfully rejected his Ambassadors and presents, and flaine David the
Trapezond Emperor his aliance: turning Pontus into a Turkish Province which
Usun Cassanes of right claimed: after Usun was surely seated, through the
remembrance of the former injuries, suggested by (...), and the Venetian's
solicitation; he raising a great Army and passing toward Pontus, was nigh
Euphrates, encountered by Mustapha, Mahomets eldest Son, and Amurath the
Romanian Bassa, whom Mahomet had sent out of Europe to join with Mustapha, who
were by Usun Cassanes over-thrown, Amurath with 30000 Turks being shine;
Mustapha and the rest saving themselves by flight.

Mahomet being exceedingly troubled therear, leavied a mighty Army of 320000
men: Usun Cassanes Army being nothing in number inferior, which two Mahometans
meeting near Armenia's Mountains: at the first encounter a Turkish Bassa was
slain with 40000 Turks: wherewith Mahomet was so daunted that he had retired,
had not some of his most valiant Captains sharply reproved him, etc: who now
withdrew his Army into a strait between two Mountains, fortifying the front
with his Carriages, behind which were his Ordnance, on either side of his
Archers. The Persians. encouraged, coming on without fear, were all ere they
were aware, on the mouth of the Turks Artillery, which breaking their ranks,
took away a number of them. Besides, the Persian Horses through the
unacquainted report of the Ordnance, were not to be ruled: wherefore Mahomet
fiercely charged them with his Horsemen, being by themselves now out of order:
yet the Persians slew many Turks; but they were at last forced to flee: wherein
a great number were slain, and their Tents taken, whose flight, Zeinall Usun's
eldest Son laboring to stay, was slain: forty thousand Turks, not above one
thousand Persians fell.

Mahomet, contented with this dear-bought Victory, returned homewards: and Usun
(leaving another Son with his Army to defend Armenia) to Tauris. But (...)
the Christian Princes expected the event of these Wars, they suddenly
confirmed a peace, excluding the Christians. This last battle being in one
thousand four hundred seventy four, Usun Cassanes dying in Jan. 5. 1478.

In the time of these Wars, Mustapha, Mahomet's eldest Son, died at
Iconium, having spent himself among his Paragons; yet some write thus. He
coming to Court to see his Father, became (...) of Achmetes Bassa's Wife
exceeding beautiful, and Isaac Bassa's Daughter: wherefore awaiting, when she
went to bathe her self, he shamefully forced her.

Achmetes coming to Mahomet with Clothes and Hat rent, craved vengeance for
the same: who replied, Art not thou my slave? and if Mustapha have known thy
Wise, is she not my bond-slave? hold thy self therefore content. yet he in
secret sharply reproving him, commanded him out of his sight, and in few days
after, to be secretly strangled: nevertheless, the haughty Bassa putting away
his Wife, it caused implacable hatred betwixt him and Isaac Bassa, and was in
the end the cause of his destruction.

Mahomet being at leisure through the concluded peace with Usun, determined
first to subdue Epirus, and Albania standing in his way, for invading Italy,
and the Venetians Territories. And seeing the strong City Scodra, possessed by
the Venetians, seemed to give him the best entrance into Albania Epirus
Dalmatia, etc. he resolved there to begin. Wherefore preparing all things fit
for its besieging, he sent Solomon Bassa with 80000 Soldiers thither; about
which, he encamping May 25. 1475. began to shake the walls most furiously,
giving diverse sharp assaults, and omitting nothing that could be devised for
the gaining thereof: yet was still with great loss, valiantly repulsed by the
defendants, Lauretanus being their Governor. Mocenicus the while, by the
Senates command, joined himself to Grittus the Admiral, who as one man, first
put strong Garrisons into Cholchinum, Lyssa, Dyrrhachium, and others on the
Seacoast. Then going up the River Boliana, came in sight of Scodra, assuring
them of relief, by fires in the night, and c. wherewith the Turks grieved,
would have shut up those Galleys, with a Chain a cross the narrowest of the
River: in their doing whereof, the Venetians slaying 500. of them, returned to
Sea. They also attempted to put a supply into the City, but it was not to be
done.

Mathias of Hungary the while, made such spoil in the Turks bordering
Dominions, that Mahomet called the Bassa from the Siege after three months
there lying, and 14000 men lost, most dying of sickness taken in the moorish
ground nigh the River: with which the Venetians being also taken, Grittus died
thereof, and Mocenicus was dangerously sick; but returning home, he, Mareellus
being dead, was soon after chose Duke of Venice. But Mahomet was so
discontented at this dishonor, that he gave one a yearly fee, to mind him
daily of the Siege of Scodra. Solomon the same year being sent into Valachia
with a great Army, was so entangled in the Woods and Fens by the Vawod, that
loosing his Army, himself escaped but by his Mares wondrous swiftness.

Next year 1476. Mahomet sent out a great Fleet under Geduces Achmetes, hoping
to surprise the Isle of Candia; but the plot being timely discovered, the
Traitors were executed, and He disappointed: Wherefore He sent Achmetes into
the Euxine, to besiege the rich City Cassa, situate in Taurica Chersonesus, by
the Sea side, long possessed by the Genowaies, and of exceeding Trade: till
Mahomet had by building Castles on Hellespontus and Bosphorus straits, taken
away the Merchants Traffic into those Seas, and all means of succor to it,
yet its reported, a valiant Genoway carrying but 150 men almost 2000 miles from
Genoa to Cassa by Land, performed the same, Achmetes enclosing it by Sea and
Land, the Inhabitants being Genowaies, Greeks, Armenians, but most Tartars, it
was soon yielded to the Bassa, on condition, that the Genoway Merchants might
safely depart with their wealth, which the Bassa performed, sending some to
Constantinople: the rest on pain of death not to depart, or convey away any
substance, all Taurica soon yielding also to the Turk. The Precopenses, and
Destences; Tartars, becoming fot fear his tributaries: since which, they
living a servile and troublesome life, have often done great service in the
Turks Wars against the Persians, Polonians, Transilvanians and Germans, etc.

The Venetians yet holding diverse strong and commodious Havens within and
without Peloponesus, Mahomet, sore longed after them. Wherefore he sent Solomon
the European Bassa into Peloponesus, who besieged Lepauto in the Gulf of
Corinth. Lauretanus the Venetian Admiral speedily coming thither, furnished
the City with all necessaries; so that the Bassa after 4 months lying there,
in fury departed with his Army: and returning toward Constantinople, he landed
some men in (...), hoping to surprise Coccinum; but being about to enter, they
were resisted by those next the Gate. Where Marulla a Maiden taking up her
slain Fathers Weapons, and fighting desperately with those few there, they kept
out the Turks till the other Citizens coming to the Gate, forced them with
some loss to retire: the Bassa departing for Constantinople, before Lauretanus
his coming.

Mahomet having now subdued most of Epirus, and other parts of Albania, about
this time besieged Croia; for whose relief, Contarenus the Venetian
Lieutenant, coming, he gave the Turks battle in Tirana-plain: at length the
Turks fled: the Venetians contenting themselves with their Tents and Forts
against Croia; But while the Soldiers, being more set on the spoil than
pursuit, scattered themselves, and the Captains were consulting where to lodge
that night: the Turks suddenly returning on them, overthrew them, 1000 falling
in the flight. Contarenus, with other noted ones, being also flain, Mahomet
making diverse incursions into Dalmatia, Histria and Carniola, sometimes went as
far as the Province of Frinli, part of the Venetian Seigniory, carrying away
much prisoners and spoil. Wherefore the Venetians fortified 12 miles along the
River Sontium, building two Forts, wherein were kept strong Garrisons: whereby
the Country falling into security, Asabeg or Marbeck suddenly showed himself
with 1000 Horse on the farther side of the River: whereupon every man put
himself into a readiness; but night being so nigh, naught could be done, yet
they watched all night in Arms. In those Forts were 3000 Horse, and some Foot
under Nowel Count of Verona who resolved to keep the Turks from passing the
River, or to give them battle. Marbeck secretly by night, conveyed 1000. of his
best men over the River, 4 miles off, where the Venetians least feared, to lay
in ambush behind a hill in sight, and on a sign given to charge the Venetians:
sending early next morning some Troops over the River, who by offering to
skirmish, and then as in doubt whether to fight or flee to tole them to the
ambush. The Venetians being in three battalions; Nowel leading the first,
easily put those Troops to flight, earnestly pursuing them, especially his
Son, who with others, thought that day to gain great honor.

Marbeck forthwith passing over with the rest of his Army, and following the
Venetians, the fleeing Turks now turning, withstood their enemies: at which
instant, those in ambush came down the hill with such violence and clamor,
that the Venetians being on every side beset, were all slain, except a few who
yielded themselves. Many also of the other two battalions being in flight
slain: The Count himself, and Son, with half the Horsemen, were lost. The
Turks encouraged, spoiled all Friuli, betwixt Sontium and Tiliaventum. So
burning the Country, that 100 Villages were to be seen on a light fire at once.
So, laden with spoil, driving before them great numbers of Captives, they
returned to Sontium: and passing the River, that all thought them to be quite
gone, they returning, passed the River Tiliaventum, no less harming on that
side than before on the other: So returning the way they came. This overthrow
being accounted among the greatest they received from the Turks. Next year
about Harvest, 1478. they passing Sontium, came before the Forrs with a far
greater power, offering to draw Fortebrachius into the field; but he wary,
stood on his Guard, expecting to take them at advantage, wherefore the Turks
durst not disperse for spoil. So going about 4 miles, they turning up into part
of the Alps, toward Germany, grievously spoiled those people, strangely
passing those abrupt and high Mountains with their Horses, then returning home
another way about. Mahomet, determining once more to engage his whole forces,
for the winning of Scodra, gave order both in Europe and Asia, for assembling
his best Soldiers, seldom or never having a stronger Army: first he sent
Alybeg with 80000 Achanzij toward Scodra, who are Horsemen, that having Lands
for life from the King, are bound to serve on their own charge as forerunners,
when he besieges a place: who burning and spoiling, till they come to the
appointed place, may depart or stay, when all the Army is come.

Scodra's Governor fortifying night and day, provided all necessaries for a
long siege, sending forth the aged, etc. into safer places: and taking in many
able men about the Country, among whom were many Mariners, or others who got
their living on the River and lake of Scodra.

The Mountains North from the City the while, shining with fires, and the smoke
drawing nearer and nearer, soon after the Country people with what they could
carry, came running to the Cities by the Sea side, crying out, The Turks were
come. And next day May 14. Aly Beg with his Achanzij encamped in the Suburbs,
that none could go in or out. Scander-Beg, Governor of Bosna and Malcotius
(the Majesty of whose countenance and resplendent beams of his eyes were of
such piercing brightness, that none was able with fixed eye long to behold
them) with 7000 Horse joining unto him; of which Horsemen, the Christians with
often sallies and shot, slew many with little or no loss. Ten days after,
came Taut Bassa of Constantinople with 25000 men, and about 12000 Came's, most
laden with metal, to make Ordnance, etc. whose stately Purple-Tent was pitched
on a hill where Solomon had layn about 4 years before, his Army encamping
between that and the Town. Taut was born in Epirus, of mean Parentage, and for
his wit and activity, was thus promoted, and suspected he would have aspired
the Empire. Whilst the great Ordnance were casting, the Bassa made a great
Bridge over the River, to pass at pleasure. The busied Christians the while
were so vigilant, that no Turk stirred within shot, but he was slain. June 13.
Mustapha Viceroy of Asia, came with 30000 Asians to the Siege, personable men,
but not accounted so good Soldiers as the Europeans, whose rich green Pavilion
was pitched in a Vineyard about a mile from the Town. Mustapha propounding a
reward to whomsoever durst touch the Cities walls, two Soldiers well mounted,
hastening thither, were both slain from the wall, one of whose bodies being
recovered by a salley, his Head was set on a Lance upon the Wall's top. June
15. 5600 Janissaries coming to the Camp, the Bassaes wellcommed them with a
wondrous shout: 3. days after, came two other great men, with many followers,
desiring safely to speak with the Governor and Captains of the City. Which
granted, the Elder, after setting forth his Master's power, and what he had
done to others, persuaded them to yield, assuring them of all kind usage with
rich rewards, otherwise to expect naught but extreme misery and death: in whose
name, Pagnanus answered, They feared not Mahomets greatness, etc. that he
should find it hard to enforce them, impossible to persuade them, etc.
concluding, they should expect no answer to any such motion hereafter, but from
the Cannons mouth. At this time, Croia having held out a years siege, for lack
of Victuals was yielded to the Turk, on condition, that the hungerstarv'd
defendants might safely depart at pleasure, who not withstanding, put them all
to the sword: the Scodrians being much grieved, but not discouraged thereat.
The Watermen coming often down the River by night, and much hurting the Camp,
they builded some Galleys to keep them in, who yet stealing on them, much
troubled (...) who June 22, mounting 2 great Ordnance on the (...) hill, one
carrying a stone Bullet of 300 l. the other of 400, battered the Town four
days: then planting a third piece at the Hills foot, bearing a bullet of 400
l. and next day, they planted a 4th piece about the middle of the Hill,
carrying 650 weight: The while, came 8000 Asapi into the Camp, and shortly
after came Mahomet with all his Army to the River Drinon, where the two Bassaes
pompously met him. Who July 2, coming to the Camp, after viewing Scodra's
Situation, is reported to have said: O what a stately place has the Eagle
chosen to build her nest, and hatch her young ones in. Round about his diverse
rich Tents lay the Janissaries: whereinto, was but one entrance, most strongly
guarded; about the Janissaries all the rest of the Army encamped: and still more
resorting daily thither: it was deemed, Mahomet to have in all 350000 men.
Against which terror, the defendants were notably encouraged by one
Bartholmew, who being sometimes Scanderbegs Soldier, was become a Preacher.
July the 5th, the Turks mounted two other great pieces, one like the former,
but the other discharging a 1200 pound shot, being called the Prince's piece,
and wherewith, the Turks had from the beginning threatened the besieged. Next
day a 7th piece carrying 550 pound was planted on the same Bassaes Mount: they
casting in Fireballs out of Morter-pieces by night, to fire the City; but
diverse Citizens uncovering their houses, and by men, watching the fall of the
fire works, etc: the Enemie's device took no effect. Then also they casting
huge stones out of short Mortar-pieces, which falling from on high, crushed
what ever they lighted on, wondrously troubled the defendants. Few days after
they mounting three other piece's, one was bigger then the Prince's, carrying
1300 weight: So battering the City daily with 10 such pieces as has been
seldom heard of, Arrows falling like hail showers into the City. Yet they
with their shot from the Walls, exceedingly annoyed the Enemy. July 11,
mounting another like the former, they the same day battered the Walls with 178
of those shot, and having now beaten down a great part of the Wall, which the
defendants had only repaired with Timber and Earth between: Mahomet sent some
Janissaries, and others to assault the breaches; so either to enter or burn the
defendants fortifications; but the Turks approaching, many were on both sides
slain, especially of the assailants. Which Mahomet perceiving, sounded a
retreat, renewed his battery, shaking the Wall every day, with 160 or 180
terrible great shot, and one day with 194. Then he caused a fresh assault to be
given, rather with worse success than before, being forced again to retire
with shame, though two Italian Captains, and some of the better Citizens were
slain with great shot, 193 being that day discharged. Yet he continuing his
battery, the third day after gave a more furious attempt than before; So that
they coming to handy strokes, made a most deadly fight; many of the
Christians falling chiefly by the great Ordinance, but of the Turks, most; the
Enemy had so prevailed, as ready to enter. But all seeming almost forlorn, a
new supply of lusty Soldiers coming to the breach, drove him down again,
forcing him to retire with great loss: Wherewith Mahomet grieved, discharging
173 great shot into the City, sent for his Bassaes and other principal men,
and said to them, that none were ignorant that it was the third month since
Scodra was straightly besieged, etc: and the Walls and Bulworks as good as razed,
having much vexed them with assaults, etc: Wherefore the morrow at day dawning,
they should enclose the City round, and give them a terrible assault before the
worn out Enemy could recover his strength, and repair his breaches: that he
would now prove and know them that were worthy of his pay, etc: that they were
few, but the Turks almost innumerable, far passing them in Artillery wherewith
many should perish in defending the breaches, that his mind gave him, the
morrow before that time they should win the City; asking them, if the very name
of Scodra were not hateful unto them? remembering their Parents, Brethren,
Friends or Companions slain under those Walls? that it was not (...) (...)
years since, so many thousands of his people fell; that very hill, and the
stones, seeming yet sprinkled with their blood: therefore they should glut
themselves with Christian blood, as their laws did so much exhort them, doing
what they might, that not one of those of Scodra might be left alive: saying,
all things were ready: it was easy for a strong man to overcome the weak, as
they were. Hereupon, it was proclaimed, every man to be ready against the time,
on pain of death: the Commanders also viewing the City on the Bassaes hill,
consulted how (...) to assault it: the Defendants, always expecting their
hovering enemies, left nothing undone for defense. Mahomet July 22. entering the
royal Pavilion on the top of the Bassaes Mount, plainly to behold all the
assault; on a (...) given, they suddenly ran to the breaches thick, (...) to
take the Christians at some advantage; wherein they were deceived: so there was
begun a most mortal (...), especially toward the Gate, where the Cannon had
made the walls most assaultable. There fighting hand to hand, a Turks Ensign
was set upon the rampier's top. Mahomet rejoicing, thought the City as good as
taken; (...) the Christians speedily repairing thither with new supplies, beat
them from the rampires; also they casting down timber, stores, etc. on them
that were coming up: no shot likewise falling in vain, (they stood so thick)
their Ensign was plucked down, and they forced to retire: Wherefore Mahomet in a
great rage, commanded his Ordnance to be discharged into the breach with
greater (...); commanding the two Bassaes standing by him, to go and force the
Soldiers to return to the assault. Who (...) the hill, where persuasion would
not, with their drawn Swords, forced the Soldiers: who striving might and main
to win the rampires, the walls having been there shaken with 2539. shot, the
Christians with invincible courage opposed them, so that a more desperate fight
was hardly to be seen, etc. In which dreadful fight, many of the Defendants
were slain; but of the Turks 20 to one: the Christians with murdering shot
making lanes out of the loupes nigh the Gate, (...) the ditch: yet the Bassaes
and great Captains forcing them foreward, if any turned back, (...) him; so
that the Turks seeing the danger in retiring, pressing on, and others stepping
into the rooms of the slain, they again recovered the rampires advancing their
Ensigns: Mahomet beginning to lift up his head; but the Companies ready in the
Marketplace for all events, speedily coming, before the Turks had taken good
footing, slew a great number, forcing the rest from the rampires, plucking down
their Ensigns, and setting up their own. Wherewith, the Turks dismayed, without
a sign, retreated, in spite of their Commanders, hastily to the Camp. Mahomet
returning into his Pavilion, two days tormented himself, not admitting any one
to his presence. The Christians having taken their spoil, set dead Turks Heads
on poles, round the City: 12000 of them being slain in the assault, besides
wounded: 400 Christians were lost, none that came to the breach escaping
without some wound. After two days, Mahomet resolved with his two Bassaes, to
gage his whole forces on another assault; for they thought the defendants,
wasted and weakened, could not hold out another. Whereupon, every man being
straightly commanded to be ready, great rewards were promised to those who
performed any special service. Mahomet the mean time, spared not the walls,
etc. omitting his Cannon; and the Christians with restless labor, etc.
omitting naught that could be devised for defense. The new Moon beginning to
show her self: the Turks Priests gave the Soldiers knowledge thereof, by
singing a Song like a procession: the Army answering with a short, but
wonderful noise, bowed to the Moon with great superstition. Then beginning to
draw nigh the City, a mile round was thick covered with them: The Christians
were ready to repulse them, chiefly at the great Gate, where Moneta and his
Brother Moncinus undertook to receive the first assault, commonly the
terriblest of the three which they give. Mahomet going to the top of the Mount
before day, and the Signal given by 11 Cannons, and 12 lesser Pieces, the
Turks assailing the City round, with a most hideous outcry and nimbleness, had
in a trice set up an Ensign on the Gate's rampires, which was plucked down by
Moneta, and the Turks driven down, with great slaughter, the assault thus
continuing till day: Moneta received diverse wounds, being twice beaten down,
yet still recovered himself, etc. Mahomet discharging his great Ordnance on the
Christians, standing thick in the breach, many were rent in pieces, and the
rest dismayed: wherefore the Turks coming on again, forced to enter to the
uttermost; but Moneta maintained the place till new Supplies came, not
departing, nor suffering others till the assault was ended, whom nothing so
much troubled as the great Ordnance, when the Turks were driven back, almost
clearing the breach: but others stepping in their room, manfully repulsed the
Turks. Mahomet now commanded all his forces to be drawn to the Gate, there to
renew the assault. Whereupon the greatest part being brought to the place, they
so furiously assaulted the breach, that soon slaying most of the defendants,
they had advanced diverse Ensigns; but new supplies coming to the place of
danger, drove them back, clearing the breach, and overthrowing the Ensigns:
which turning Mahomet's joy into choler, he discharging all his great Artillery
at once into the breach, many of his own were slain with the defendants.

The great Captains, being in the eye of their Master, forced the Soldiers
forward with their swords, adventuring also themselves, whereby the fight was
more fierce than before. Many Turks were slain, but the Defendants being
oppressed with multitude, and overwhelmed with shot, were scarce able to
maintain the place; Wherefore a great cry running through the City, that every
man should repair to the breach, a multitude of all sorts meeting there
together, so valiantly encountered the Turks upon the Rampires, that they began
again to shrink back; which Mahomet perceiving, commanded the Ordnance to be
discharged into the breach, not regarding his own men: and threatening his
Captains with horrible death, if they returned without victory: wherefore the
assault was (...) newed; but the Ordnance slew many Turks, as well as
Christians; the shot falling thrice among the Turks themselves, rent many a
sunder to the others discouragement; yet they maintained a long and terrible
fight: at which time, with one only shot 18 Defendants were slain: Arrows
fleeing and lying so thick, that for a month after, they burnt nothing but
Turks Arrows, nothing was to be heard, but the terror of the ears, nothing but
death and its instruments to be seen: a fearful cry running through the City,
that without present help, all would be lost; whereupon not only the whole, but
the sick and wounded chearing themselves, ran with speed to the place: so that
the Turks were slain in great numbers; yet fresh ones still coming up, the
deadly fight was still maintained, many falling on both sides; the Turks one
while seeming to have the better, and streightway the worse; which doubtful
fight continued most part of the day, and most (on both sides alive) being
wounded or hurt, the assault began to assuage. Mahomet now despairing of
victory, sounded a retreat; which the Turks hearing ran as men affrighted to
their (...). The Christians joy of this victory, (...) (...) with much sorrow,
for such men as were slain; many of whose bodies they gathering up by
peace-male, buried with the rest of the slain. Then also, repairing their
breaches, they made ready for a fresh assault. Mahomet, much grieved with this
loss and dishonor, wished he had never heard of Scodra's name, saying of God,
It were enough for him to care for heavenly matters, and not cross him in his
worldly actions: and, tormenting himself again in his Tent two days, not to be
spoke withal; On the third day, calling a general Council, said, He determined
to give a fresh assault, hoping for an easy victory, over those so weakened;
but they all with one voice cried out to the contrary, his best Soldiers being
already slain, and most of those left, sore wounded, or weakened, etc. And
Achmetes Bassa, the Turks great champion standing up, with pleasing speech
calmed Mahomets fury, and with grounded reasons, persuaded him to desist, and
to take a surer course; who (having set forch the greatness of his valor,
praises, and conquests, who had gained from the Christians 20 Provinces, and
200 great Cities, saying, Caesar, Scipio, Pyrrhus, and Hannibal, etc. were all
inferior to him in victories, and Countries subdued) said, In his opinion
Scodra (which should not so much grieve him, worldly things often deceiving
their expectation) was not again to be assaulted; for he searching every Tent,
found no place without groaning, sighing, etc. he having also lot above 30000
of his best Soldiers in the last assault; they being all now afraid and
discouraged, whom, himself (he said) asking how so great a fear was come upon
them, they answered, It was the very look of the men of Scodra (whose eyes
seemed to sparkle with fire) that struck that terror into them; wherefore,
setting forth Scodra's strength, and how himself had subjected to Mahomet, the
long desired City of Croia, he concluded, that if he would win Scodra, he must
block it up, build strong Forts round about it, and make a (...) over Boliana,
with a strong Castle on each side to stop the passage; then to besiege other
weaker Cities of the Venetians, and subdue the Country round about, which would
not be hard, he being Master of the field: so Scodra, said he, must needs yield
at last, as lately did Croia by famine.

This Counsel so pleased Mahomet and the rest, that the assault being laid
aside, the Bassa of Constantinople was sent to Zabiache a City in Dalmatia's
borders, which in few days was yielded to him; who thrusting out the
Inhabitants, and leaving therein a Turkish Garrison, returned to Scodra. Then
also the Bassa of Asia, was sent against Drivasto, whither Mahomet coming,
after 16 days siege, next day he took it without much resistance, putting
those on the walls to the sword: and cruelly slaying the rest being 300, before
Scodra, to terrify the Defendants. Next day, he sending the Bassa of
Constantinople to Lyssa, 30 miles from Scodra, he finding the Citizens fled for
fear, fired the City, where also the Turks dig'd up Scanderbeg's bones as
aforesaid. Mahomet committing all touching Scodra's siege unto Achmetes,
himself departed about Sept. 7. with 40000 to Constantinople, cursing and
banning by the way, Epirus and all that was therein, especially Scodra. After
which the two Bassaes built a Bridge over Boliana, with a Castle on either side
to hinder Scodra's relief: which being furnished with all necessaries, they
returning left Achmetes with 40000 to continue the siege; who so ordering that
no relief could be brought, the Christians at length were fain to eat all
loathsome things, etc. a Mouse being sold at an (...) price, as also puddings
made of Dogs guts. The Venetians now weary of 16 years chargeable war to their
great loss, and not able to relieve distressed Scodra, sent (...) an
experienced Senator to Mahomet, who at length concluded a Peace, Mahomet to
have Scodra, Lemnos, and the Castle of Tenarus in Peloponesus delivered to him,
with 8000 Ducats yearly; And that they might freely traffic in all parts of
his Dominions, and for those of Scodra, they might live still under the Turks
Government, or depart with goods whither they pleased; whereof the Governor
being certified, declared to the Citizens how things stood. After a through
debate, they concluded all, to forsake the City, and the house of bondage, and
to live as pleased God, among other Christians: So receiving Turkish pledges of
safety, they came forth with bag and baggage, being transported into Italy,
where they lived in peace; the Turks after a whole years siege, entering the
City with joy and triumph, this happened in 1478. Mahomet in 1480 sent Achmetes
with a fleet against Leonard Prince of three Islands nigh Peloponesus, (...) he
easily taking, Leonard fled for his life into Italy, with his wife and treasure
to King Ferdinand, whose Kinswoman he had married. About which time Alis Beg
and 2 others entering Transylvania with 100000 men, so feared the Country, that
Stephen the Vaywod speedily fled to King Matthias craving his aid; who, though
sick of the Gout, by his Captains, encountered the Turks, not far from Alba
Julia, slaying 30000 of them with Isa Beg; which victory was not without the
Vaywods sore wounding, and 8000 Christians slain. Mahomet grieved that so small
an Island as Rhodes should lie so near his Dominions, troubling his Merchants,
etc. which being formerly unfortunately attempted by Mahometane Princes, he now
assembled his expert Captains, propounding the matter. Some persuaded him to
subdue it and revenge Christian injuries, not fearing a repulse; who was to
bring more assailants than was stones in the wall: Others declaring the Islands
strength with the Defendants valor, etc. said; It was like to prove more
difficult than some supposed, etc. alleging it was not worth engaging his
honor with the lives of so many valiant Soldiers, who might conquer a
Kingdom; yet Mahomet ambitious, and solicited by Meligales a fugitive Knight of
Rhodes, (who having spent his great substance, fled to the Turk with two others
of like who presented him with a plot of the City, with it and the Islands
strength, and how to win it, offering to spend their lives therein, to repair
their broken estate) he resolved to follow their Counsel who persuaded the war;
wherefore committing that great action to Mesithes Paleologus his management:
he sailed from Constantinople with 80000 men toward Rhodes, calling by the way
Demetrius one of the fugitive Knights, to know, how safely to Land. Meligalus
falling sick on the way, and growing loathsome and troublesome to the Turks,
was thrown overboard alive, crying out in vain for help. Peter Damboys a
Frenchman, was then great Master of the Rhodes; who having once in 8 days
intelligence from the Turkish Court, and of such judgment as scarce ever to be
deceived by false advertisements, had strongly fortifyed the City with all
necessaries for many years siege. Then also many valiant ones repaired thither
out of Italy, France, Germany, etc. in defense of the place and Religion.
Damboys had 16000 able men in the City, among whom were many Jews and other
(...) men, who did good service. Mesithes landing in the Island Junt 22, not
far from the City, Damboys calling the Defendants together, spoke unto them;
that the Turks their mortal enemies, were ready to destroy their Temples,
Oratories, Religion, seeking to ruin that noble City, the cruel death of them,
etc. and although the chance of war were doubtful; yet considering their
courage and cheerfulness, he conceived an assured hope of victory, That the
Turks armed not against them so much for their desert, as for rule and spite
against them, and Christianity; showing them, they wanted neither provision,
nor a most strong Garrison of diverse Nations, and which was more, Christ their
Captain, etc. That they were warlike, their enemies effeminate Asians, etc.
that he said not this to fill their ears with windy words; but he assured them,
if the siege were long, there would come such strong aid out of other
Countries, as would not only serve to raise the siege, but recover the
Constantinopolitan and Trapezond Empires. But supposing the hardest, would not
any one account his life most happily spent in defense of a good conscience,
and Christ's quarrel? etc. Therefore they showing themselves couragions, he
doubted not, but time and his discretion should provide for the rest.

They resting in the assurance of their aged Governor, departed to their
charge, full of hope etc. The Bassa sent Demetrius, (and his traitorous
companion) to view (with some Troops and foot) where best to encamp; who being
known by Anthony the Master's brother, he sallyed out, skirmishing with them;
but the Turks exceeding in number, Anthony turned on those behind him with such
force, that he slew or wounded most of them. Demetrius, having his horse slain,
himself was trodden to death by the horses, whose body Murtius unadvisedly
dispoiling, was slain and his head presented to the Bassa; who at his first
coming, taking a strong entrenched Orchard, placed some Companies therein, with
small Ordnance, (the defendants having abandoned it by night, leaving their
Ordnance behind them for haste) and by one Frapaine a fugitive Christian his
Counsel, he there began to batter Nicholas-Tower, 300 paces distant; but
Damboyse mounting two great Basilisks, he quickly forsook it; yet shortly
after, he planted a greater battery near the same, and of far greater force,
and 300 smaller pieces; but Frapaine Master of his Ordnance, bestowed the shot
to small purpose, whom the Bassa distrusting, he fleeing by night, again to the
Rhodians, discovered the Turks secrets, who continuing the battery, had beaten
down some part of that Tower,: which the Christians repaired the best they
could; yet the Turks fiercely assaulting it for 6 hours, they retired having
lost 800 men, with many drowned, and 1000 sore wounded. Mesithes having after
this made a fair breach in the wall; Damboyse cast up such Rampires with a
Countermure, that he durst not adventure to enter; the Captains helping
therein, and moving the rest by their example.

The mean time, young Caly Bassa being sent to see how the siege went forward,
it was given out (to terrify the Defendants) that Mahomet was coming with
100000 men, and 150 great Ordnance; whereat some were exceedingly feared,
especially the Spaniards and their neighbors of Navarre, that desiring leave
to be gone, they discouraged the rest; Damboyse sending for them, and sharply
reproving them promised to ship them forthwith out of the Isle, etc. commanding
them (the mean time) to cease their mutinous talk, with threats: who shortly
after, considering the dishonor to themselves and Nation, if they should be so
sent away, craving pardon they showed themselves most forward in all services
during that siege; yet Damboyse would never trust them alone. The Bassa seeing
by the Masters policy, all his devices countermanded, practiced to poison him
by one Janus a Dalmatian; who being received into the City as a Christian
fugitive acquainted himself with one Pythius an Epirot, familiar with
Philelphus, ( Damboyse his late Secretary; but then in disgrace as partaker in
the late mutiny) a fit instrument to work the Treason, as being well acquainted
with the Cooks and Butlers, etc. whom Pythius persuading to revenge the
disgrace he lived in, showed him how to do it, etc. Philelphus dissembling the
matter, desired to know what benefit might thereby arise more than revenge.
Pythius showed him the Bassa's Letters to Janus, assuring him what he promised
any one for furtherance of his poisoning, he would fully perform the same.
Philelphus, discovering the matter to Damboyse, Janus and Pythius confessing
the Treason, upon examination, Janus was beheaded, and Pythius hanged; but
Philelphus received again into favor.

The Bassa herewith much grieved, yet still battered the City, and chiefly,
Nicholas Tower, framing (besides other preparations) a great bridge stayed with
strong ropes, etc. betwixt his battery and the Tower, for assailing it. But as
it was making fast, Rogers an Englishman, found means by night, to break and
cut all the Cables, whereby it was carried away by the Sea; for which he was by
Damboyse rewarded, and publicly commended. Yet a new Bridge being framed on
boats, etc. and fassoned with Cables, and Anchors, with diverse Ordnance placed
therein, the Tower was at once battered by Sea and Land, the Defendants with
shot assailed, and the Tower desperately scaled. But Damboyse with his Ordnance
brake the Bridge sinking four foists and store of men, etc. and with shot,
timber, stones, etc. overwhelmed the scalers, with great slaughter, the assault
holding from 3 in the morning till 10, the Bassa giving over, having lost about
2500 men, in which night, two mercenaries of Creet, about to flee to the enemy,
were put to death; and Frapine, suspected of Treason, executed also.

Then the Bassa offered Damboyse (in his Masters name) great rewards and
preferments to yield the City; which the Messengers said, he could not long
hold, etc. who answered, He would not in his sure estate use his enemies
Counsel, nor in (...) refuse to yield his life to God, far rather then to yield
though on never so good conditions in show. Then (according to the Bassa's
instructions) they persuaded him to yield to Mahomes some yearly tribute or
homage. But Damboyse knowing by others example, Turkish Thraldom to lie
included under that small request, utterly refused either. The Bassa
exceedingly troubled, resolved, for his honors sake, to use (in that
extremity) an extreme remedy; wherefore mounting some pieces much higher, he
battered the City day and night, for four (...); the Christians also not
sparing their shot, but women and children in the City, shrouded themselves in
Cellars and Caves for the thickness of the shot. At length, a fair breach being
made, the Turks so desperately assaulted it, that they suddenly set some Ensigns
on the top of the walls; but they being soon repulsed into the ditches, most
never rose again. Then also in another place, they both advanced their Ensigns,
and 500 of them entered coming into Jew-street, where being all slain by
Damboyse, their Ensigns were thrown down, the rest yet scaling, being with
wondrous slaughter rejected. So the Bassa sounded a retreat, about 5000 being
lost, with small loss of the Christians: Damboyse himself receiving 5 wounds,
one whereof, under his right pap, was thought deadly, but was cured.

The Bassa, having for 3 Months spent his forces and devices to small purpose,
losing 9000 of his best Soldiers, and all the rest filled with heaviness, of
whom 15000 lay sore wounded, many being ready to give up the Ghost, also two
ships being landed at Rhodes, (in spite of the Turks) from Ferdinand of
Naples, with men and Munition, whilst he was deliberating whether to depart or
not, a rumor was spread, that Christian Princes were coming for relief;
whereupon he raised the siege. Some say, Mahomet hearing of his ill success,
(himself being ready to go against the Egyptian Sultan) sent for the Bassa;
who, having first cut down and spoiled all the Vines, and Trees in that part,
embarked his Army, and departed, August 17.

While Rhodes was besieged, Achmetes Bassa was sent with a strong Army to enter
Italy; who enbarquing at Vallona or Aulona, in Macedonia's borders, passed over
that Sea, about 60 miles broad, and landed in fertile Apulia, now Puglia, nigh
old and famous Hydruntum, now Otranto; where taking an infinite spoil, which he
conveyed to his Galleys, after 14 days ranging, and seeing none oppose him,
he besieged Otranto, (as it were the Key of that part of Italy;) where making a
breach with Ordnance, he took it being but weakly manned, and weaklier
defended, with no great loss; the Archbishop and chief of the City, being
slain in the Cathedral, whither they had fled, the rest being sold for slaves
in Greece; this brought such a fear on all Italy, that Pope Sixtus 4th was
about to forsake Rome. Achmetes, having ransacked, victualled, and strongly
fortified the Otranto leaving 8000 in Garrison, he returned to Vallona, and so
to Constantinople to know Mahomet's pleasure; but purposing next Spring to
return against Italy with greater forces: which if he had, it was to be feared
(it being then rent by the Princes discord and ambition) it had become a prey
to the barbarous Turks. But at the same time, the Caramanian King, aided by the
Persian and Sultan of Egypt, had overthrown Bajazet, Mahomet's eldest Son,
slaying most of his Army; Wherefore Mahomet with Achmetes as his chief
warrior, passed into Asia; where falling sick at Geivisen in Bythinia, after 3
days torment of his belly, supposed (by some) the Cholick; yet most thought
him to be poisoned. He dyed about 52 years old, reigning 31, in 1481. being
buried magnificently at Constantinople, in a (...) nigh a great Temple which he
built.

He was but low of stature, square set, and strong limmed, his complexion being
Tartar-like, as were most of his Ancestors: his look was stern, his eyes
piercing and hollow, his nose very crooked: he was of a sharp wit, learned,
chiefly in Astronomy; and could speak Greek, Latin, Arabic, Chalde, and
Persian, delighting much in reading of History, etc. of an exceeding courage
and (...): a severe punisher of injustice, chiefly in those to whom justice was
committed, greatly favoring and entertaining men excelling in any faculty: so
punishing theft, that a thief was scarcely to be heard of. But he was wholly
irreligious, perfidious and ambitious, delighting in blood, (being probably the
death of 800000 men); and craft, covetousness and dissimulation, were in him
accounted tolerable faults: In whose love being no assurance, and his least
displeasure death; he lived eared of all, and died lamented of none. Alphonsus
Duke of Calabriae, taking the opportunity of Zemes, Bajazet's competitor and
troubler, besieged Otranto, losing diverse great Commanders, and still by the
Turks worsted; till being aided out of Spain and Italy, chiefly out of Hungary,
from Matthias, he straightly besieged them by Sea and Land, till the besieged
(hearing of Mahomet's death and now not expecting Achmetes his return, ready to
come to their rescue, yielded it up, departing safely with bag and baggage,
having held it a year.

The Life of Bajazet II, second Emperor of the Turks.
MAhomet being dead, and some great ones seeking to place Bajazet the eldest
Son, others laboring to prefer Zemes Gemes, or Zizimus the younger to the
Empire, two great factions arose, so that there were soon tumults, hot
skirmishes and great slaughter in diverse places of Constantinople, the
Janissaries slaying Mahometes one of the 4 great Bassaes, for an old grudge, and
spoiling all Christians and Jews amongst them of their substance, the City
Merchants (natural Turks) not escaping their ravenous hands. The other 3
Bassaes Isaac, Mesithes, and Achmetes, though secretly envying each others
greatness; yet to appease trouble, and assure their own, found means by their
authority that Corcutus a younger Son of Bajazet 18 years old, was generally
saluted Emperor with great triumph: in whose name, the Bassaes disposed of all
things little regarding Bajazet or Zemes, one being at Amasia, the other at
Iconium; for the Turkish Kings, send their Sons to Govern remote Provinces,
where they are also under their Lieutenant Generals command, and may not depart
even to visit their Father without express leave.

These two hasting toward Constantinople, Bajazet as the nearer, first
arrived; but finding the Empire already possessed, he in grief, called Heaven
and Earth to witness of the great wrong done him by the Bassaes; and what by
tears, etc. what by gifts. etc. chiefly by Cherseogles, Viceroy of Greece his
solicitation, and the Captain of the Janissaries his Sons in Law, so prevailed,
that Corcutus resigned to his Father the Imperial Government, himself being
made Governor of Lycia, Caria, and Jonia, etc. with a yearly Pension, and
promise of the Empire after his decease, where he pleasantly living, and wholly
given to Philosophy, was afterward less favored of the Janissaries and others.

Zemes thus prevented by his elder Brother, raising a puissant Army in the
Countries under him, and marching through the lesser Asia, taking in strong
places by the way; also Prusa in Bythinia, purposing to exclude Bajazet out of
Asia in requital: fortune at first seeming to favor him therein, the people
yielding him obedience, etc.

Bajazet, perceiving most of his Empire in danger, and doubting Zemes would
scarce long be content therewith, passed into Asia with a puissant Army,
coming to Neapolis, nigh which Zemes encamped. Bajazet being on his way,
Achmetes, the best Turkish Warrior, presented himself on his knees before
Bajazet unarmed, his Sword hanging at his Saddle bow, to the admiration of
many: The cause was, for that in the War between Usun Cassanes and Mahomet,
Bajazet not martialling the right wing to Mahomet's liking, he commanded
Achmetes to set it in better order: which he performing, and Bajazet taking it
as in disgrace, threatened to find a time of revenge on the Bassa, who being of
great Spirit, bid him do his pleasure, and laying his hand on his Sword, vowed,
when he came to be Emperor, he would never wear Sword in field: So here being
ready to serve, if commanded, otherwise to endure his Princes pleasure. Bajazet
stretching out his Scepter, and taking him up, bid him girt on his Sword, and
not remember what he had long forgiven and forgotten: making him General, to
the Janissaries and the rest, their great content, giving great shouts as if
victory had attended him: who encamping as near as possible to Zemes, for 10
days space, many sharp skirmishes were made with diverse fortune. At length,
after a long fight and great slaughter on both sides Bajazet, by Achmetes his
policy, prevailed: Zemes fleeing to Iconium: in which flight many were taken,
whom Bajazet, Achmetes changing his mind, for terror of others suffered to be
put to the Sword.

Zemes doubting to fall into his Brothers hands, after 3 days stay, trussing
up his Treasure, etc. fled with his Mother and two young Children, and a small
retinue, from Iconium into Syria, part of Caytheius the Egyptian Sultan's
Dominion. Bajazet came thither to have surprised him, but he, fled, he took
order for the Government of that part of his Empire, returning with victory to
Constantinople.

Zemes coming in 1482. to Jerusalem, stayed there, visiting its ancient
Monuments: thence traveling into Egypt, he was honorably conducted to Caire,
by diverse of the Nobles sent from the Sultan to meet him, and being welcomed by
Caytheus, he declared the cause of his coming: which he said, was to complain
unto him of the wrongs done him by Bajazet, whom he might more justly term his
cruel enemy, than kind Brother: who had not only taken the Empire by tumult
and slaughter, but had persecuted him, etc. never resting, till he had chased
him out of the Empire's bounds, moved thereto not so much by the jealous desire
of Sovereignty, as by an unnatural cruelty toward all his kindred, and a
mortal hatred against him in particular, etc. showing, that he was not to be
blamed for the troubles arising at Constantinople, betwixt the favorites of
them both, he being then far from thence, and was sent for by many of his
good friends, etc; but lest his coming thither might have occasioned new
troubles, he returned into Bythinia to Prusa, to have rested in quiet, if his
Brother would have suffered him, etc. that Bajazet would sway all things alone;
and being of a far other mind, than either Xerxes or Alexander, had rather
have his Brother his enemy, than his friend, and drive him into exile, than to
make him partaker of his counsels: beseeching the Sultan by the sacred relics
of Mahomet, etc. to bridle domestical wrong, and lift up the afflicted by his
great Authority, or the Sword's revenge, etc. putting him in mind what deadly
enemies, Christian Princes were to the Turks: who could not but be thought
suddenly to invade their Kingdom, if shaken with civil Wars, seeking the
utter destruction of the same: and then Caytheius must stand alone for himself,
and the rest of the Mahometans against the Christians, etc. requesting him to
deal with Bajazet by Ambassadors, that if he would not receive him as a partner
of the Empire, yet admit him into some small part of his Father's Kingdom, etc.
which if he should refuse to grant, he would as at Jerusalem, so at Mecha,
complain unto the great Prophet of the injuries done him, etc. but if all those
proved in vain, he would go with fire, Sword, and slaughter, and vex his
hateful Brother, with all manner of revenge, etc.

The Sultan comforting the distressed Prince, willed him to bear patiently his
present hap, etc. commending him withal, for his courage, promising him to do
what in him lay to persuade his Brother: and soon after sent to Bajazet, Zemes
the while, traveling by the Sultans leave, to visit Mahomets Temple at Mecha,
and his Sepulcher at Medina: upon whose return to Caire, the Ambassadors
returned also, not obtaining any thing, Bajazet seeming to despise his Brother.
Wherefore Zemes determined to war upon him, reposing some hope in his secret
friends, and some discontented Captain's revolt. Then also fitly came Letters
from the (...) Caramanian King, living then in Armenia, offering to join with
Zemes all the power he could make, (hoping thereby to recover all the part of
the Kingdom, whence Mahomet drove his Father) who both together were (...)
unable by all friends they could make, to encounter with Bajazet's great power.

Zemes, with gifts from the Sultan and promised aid, met the Caramanian
(persuading the contrary), on Asia the less its borders, where they concluded
jointly to invade Bajazet; and entering Cilicia, now Caramannia, they encamped
between Iconium and Larenda. Bajazet fearing more the revolt of his Soldiers,
than his Brothers power, raised an Army of 200000 men, sending Achmetes before
with one part; in his march a rumor was in the Camp, that some Captains had
conspired to betray him into his Brothers hands, and that many upon joining
battle, would revolt to his Brother: wherefore Bajazet doubting what to do,
divided a mass of money amongst the Army, loading them with ample promises,
they showing fidelity and valor: then drawing nigh Iconium, he glozingly
showed a desire to come to some agreement with them, secretly endeavoring to
stop all passages, that they might not retire into Syria. Zemes weighing his
own weak forces, timely retired to Mount Amanus's straits, dividing Cilicia
from Syria: persuading the Caramanian to give place unto the time, etc. So
breaking up his Army, he with a few, came to Cilicia's Seacoast, hiring a tall
Ship to save himself upon sudden danger: sending the while, to Damboys, that
since he had no safety amongst his own people, he would upon his safe conduct
come into Rhodes. The great Master deeming his flight to be much profitable to
Christians, presently sent to fetch him; but before the Galleys came, Zemes was
forced by the access of his enemies, to go aboard the before prepared Ship: and
putting a little from shore, he shot an Arrow back with fastened Letters
directed to Bajazet, showing, he fled not to the Christians, for hatred of his
Religion or Nation, but as enforced thereto by his injurious dealing; but he
surely hoped, that he or his Children should receive the just guerdon of that
his tyranny: which Bajazet reading, it is reported, he altogether mourned,
shunning for a season, as half distracted, all speech and company.

Zemes being honorably entertained at Rhodes, alleged, 3 days after, in the
Knights public assembly, for color of his rebellion, that Bajazet though the
elder, was born whilst his Father lived in a private estate; but he was his
Fathers firstborn, being an Emperor, etc. yet he could have been content to
have given him place, so he would have granted him some small portion of the
Empire, etc. wherefore he hoped to find succor in that his distress:
protesting, that if ever he should by their means obtain the Empire, he would
make with them a perpetual peace, and rest their friend for ever: Damboys
chearing him, promised to keep him safe from his Brothers fury, and to commend
his cause to other Christian Princes. He was now about 28 years old, tall,
somewhat corpulent, and well limbed, gray-eyed, somewhat squinting, hook nosed,
rising in the middle, brown, spare of speech, chollerick, a great feeder,
delighting in swimming, melancholy, etc. never to be drawn from his
superstition, learned, writing the History of his Fathers life.

But Bajazet, things being well quieted, returned to Constantinople, attending
some new motion by his Brother to be made; but hearing he was at Rhodes, he
sent certain Bassaes to Damboys, to deliver up Zemes, for a wondrous sum of
money. Which, when it could not be obtained, they concluded a commodious peace
for the Rhodians; also agreeing, that Zemes should be kept in safe custody,
Bajazet to pay in consideration, and for his honorable usage, 30000 Ducats
yearly to the Master, Aug. 1.

While Achmetes was employed abroad, Bajazet discoursing with the other
Bassaes, on his late expedition against his Brother, seemed highly offended
with the untrustiness of some great Captain, seeming somewhat to distrust
Achmetes: wherefore Isaac Bassae (whose Daughter Achmetes had put away, as
aforesaid) taking hold of the opportunity, increased his suspicion: sometimes
imagining intelligence to have passed betwixt Zemes and Achmetes: and forthwith
amplifying his power with the Janissaries, so that he might thereby do more in
Zemes his quarrel, than should stand with Bajazets safety, and c. wherefore
Achmetes at his return was to be slain: who coming to Court, was by Bajazet
invited to Supper, to solace himself, as was given out with his great Bassaes;
Achmetes mistrusting nothing, came, Bajazet drunk Wine plentifully, causing
them also to do the like, although utterly forbidden by their Law. Supper now
ended, Bajazet as a token of his grace, caused Robes of pleasing colors, to be
cast on his guests, giving to every one a fair bowl full of Gold; but on
Achmetes was cast a Gown of black Velvet, a token of such indignation, that its
death for any man to entreat for such a one: Achmetes, now under the shadow of
death, said, (Oh Cachpogli) that is, Thou Son of a Whore, since thou
intendest such cruelty, why did thou not execute it, before enforcing me to
drink this impure and forbidden Wine? so looking on the ground, sat still. The
other Bassaes kissing the ground at his feet, and c. departed, with whom
Achmetes offering to go out, was commanded to sit still, and c. The
executioners stepping in to have slain him, an Eunuch in Bajazets greatest
favor, advised him not to be too hasty in executing so great a Man, etc; but
to stay to see how it would be digested, wresting the while out of him what
might be got, by torture, etc. who was hereupon stripped, and carried to be
tortured.

Achmetes his Son, missing his Father at the Bassaes coming forth, presently
mistrusted and with much ado learned of the Baslaes, of his Fathers Estate,
then also advised of the same by a secret friend: (...), lamenting and
exclaiming against Bajazets cruelty, he calling on the Janissaries for aid, and
minding them of his Fathers deserts toward them, and of his eminent danger,
had in the dead of the night, raised them all up in Arms: who running from all
parts of the City to the Court Gate, redoubling Bre, Bre, a word expressing
their greatest sury, so furiously beat at it, that Bajazet causing the outer
Gate to be opened, showed himself out at an Iron Window, demanding the cause of
that uproare: who answered, they would teach him as a Drunken Beast, and a
Rascal, to use his place with more sobriety, and discretion, calling him
amongst many opprobrious words, Bengi, that is, Batchellour or Scholar, no
small disgrace among those Martial men; then commanding him forthwith to
deliver Achmetes, or to take what should ensue. Bajazet terrified with this
insolency, commanded him to be delivered to them: who in haste was brought
forth almost naked, with marks in his body of hard usage. The Janissaries
rejoicing, supplied his want, with apparel taken from Bajazets minions,
carrying him out on their shouldiers, crying out, How he did, and c:
undoubtedly ready to have slain Bajazet if he would, and to rifle the Court;
But he labored to pacify them, excusing it as done to correct him, he happily
neglecting some part of his duty. A heart-burning long remained between Bajazet
and the Janissaries; yet for fear, he had Achmetes (in show) in greater honor
than before, but mortally hating him: and by Isaac's persuasion, all being
thought to be forgotten, Bajazet had him thrust through, sitting at supper in
the Court. This was the miserable end of the Turks great Champion: about which
time also, Caigulus Zemes his Son (a Child) was by his command strangled.

Bajazet grievously offended with the Janissaries, finding upon inquiry their
Officers to be the Authors of those stirs, he under color of preferment sent
them away into diverse parts of his Empire, appointing to them as to old
Soldiers, lands, and c: for their maintenance; but secretly sent to the
Governors of the places, whither they were sent, to execute them as Traitors,
which was done. The Janissaries hearing what was done, began to mutiny, uttering
revengfull words against the Emperor: which Bajazet understanding, purposed to
kill suddenly all the Janissaries, chiefly those about the Court and City,
wherefore he sent for great numbers of the Acanzij, reputed the best sort of
Common Soldiers; most of the Bassaes to whom he imparted his device, much
disliked it; but Alis and Ishender Bassa of Michael Ogli's Family, dissuaded
him from it, alleging their number, courage, experience, and c. And, if he
should kill all about Constantinople, yet all his strong holds being holden by
other Janissaries, they would take up Arms in their own defense and friends
revenge, which were likely to endanger himself and his whole Empire, besides
his perpetual dishonor.

The vigilant Janissaries getting an inckling thereof, more and more suspected
the matter, both by the often and secret repair of great men to Court, and
also by the unwonted multitude of those Acanzij brought into the City.

Wherefore banding themselves together, they stood on their guard, and lighting
on Alis Beg, coming from Court, opprobriously demanded of him, if he were one
who had conspired their destruction, and had he not greatly protested and sworn
to the contrary, they had presently slain him.

Bajazet seeing his purpose discovered, by others counsel; to color his
intention, proclaimed, that the Janissaries and others now assembled at
Constantinople, should be ready against a day, to go with him into Moldavia.
But when he should set forward, the Janissaries joined in order of battle by
themselves, nor would they receive the Emperor into the midst of their ranks,
as formerly, but shaking their weapons at him, told him, He had sought their
destruction, bidding him (if he would) set his Executioners to work upon them,
whom he should find ready and able to defend themselves. Bajazet giving them
good words, and using all means, by his Bassaes, and c: to pacify them,
swearing by his Fathers holy Soul, he would not harm the meanest of them, with
much ado they received Bajazet: who passing Danubius, entered Moldavia, and
besieging strong Achilleia (now Kele) a Sea-Town, it was delivered him by
composition, thence going to Acgiemen or Asprocastron, it was likewise
surrendered after a months siege: so returning to Constantinople.

Bajazet fearing Zemes breaking forth, or his setting up by Christian Princes,
offered great sums for his delivery to him: and Charles the French King
purposing to invade Greece (after Naple's its Conquest) was wondrous desirous
of him; also Matthias of Hungary, sought by all means to obtain him: then
also Pope Innocent the 8th, no less desirous of so great a pledge, with the
large pension, so wrought by his cunning Legate, that the Grand Master
delivered Zemes to him at Rome in 1488: wherefore he was honored with the
title of Cardinal. So Zemes remaining at Rome, all Innocent's and Alexander
the 6th, their time, receiving for him 20000 Ducats yearly, till Charles
passing through Italy against Alphonsus of Naples in 1495, so terrified the
Pope, furthering Alphonsu's title, that among other conditions he was glad to
give him his graceless Son Caesar Borgia in hostage, and to deliver Zemes unto
him.

John Castriot, Scanderbeg's Son, aided by the Venetians, while Bajazet was
busied against Zemes, overthrowing the Turks nigh Croia recovered much of
Epirus: then also Chernovich an Albanian Prince (by the Venetians help)
expulsed them out of that part of Albania: So that Bajazet was glad to suffer
him to enjoy all he recovered, paying him a small tribute for the rest.

Bajazet, in revenge of the King of Caramania his aiding Zemes, raising a great
Army, and marching along the Asian Countries in 1486, entered Caramania: whose
King (knowing himself too weak) fortified his strong places, and retired into
Taurus Straits, where he was in the most safety. Bajazet spoiling the Country
most of the Summer, laid siege to the City Tarsus, soon making the Walls
saultable by battery: the Citizens now offering to deliver it up reserving
their lives, libertyes, and goods, which Bajazet accepted of and performed: not
suffering any Soldiers more than needful to enter: and Winter growing on, he
dispersing his Soldiers round about, not suffering them to Till, Sow, etc:
they were forced to yield to his devotion. Wherefore the Caramanian King
obtaining aid of Caytheius the Egyptian Sultan, took the field the first of
the Spring, though much inferior to his puissant Enemy. So betwixt them was
begun a terrible fight, which was maintained the whole day, with doubtful
Victory and great slaughter, new supplies coming in. The Caramanian seeing his
overlaid Soldiers begin to give ground, so furiously brake with his guard and
other valiant ones into the midst of his Enemies, that being forthwith
environed, etc: his horse slain, and fighting on foot, fell down dead, having
slain diverse Turks with his own hand: whose Soldiers now discouraged, fled,
and were most slain or taken: after which Bajazet overrunning all, soon
subdued the large Country of Cilicia. Then was there an ancient Mohammedan
Prince commanding most of Trachea in Cilicia with the famous City Scandeloro:
who had long lived as a Neuter betwixt the Christian and Caramanian Kings;
against which poor Prince (only left in Asia the less) Bajazet turning his
forces: he weighing his small power; offered to deliver up Scandeloro with all
his territory, so Bajazet would give him other possessions for it in lesser
Asia: which he accepting, became Lord of all the SeaCoast, from Bosphorus to
Syria's confines.

After this, he descending into the lesser Armenia, subjected all thereof, as
of Cappadocia, belonging to the Caramanian Kings: so leaving Mustapha Bassa at
Iconium with his Asian Army to keep under his new Conquests, himself
triumphantly returned to Constantinople where he was joyfully received.

After which, Bajazet swelling in disdain against the Egyptian and Syrian
Sultan, who had aided Zemes, and then the Caramanian, appointed in 1487,
Caragoses Bassa with Ishender, to invade Syria with a strong Army, who being
come to the utmost parts of Cilicia, Aladenles (King of the rude and fierce
people, dwelling along mount Taurus) being in league with the Sultan, lay in
Ambush in the straites whereby the Turks must needs pass. Ishender marching in
the Avaunt with many Acanzij, before he was aware, was so fiercely charged, that
losing most of his men, the rest fleeing, he with his two Sons were taken:
Michael the eldest being bound, was slain by one whose Brother he had there
slain: whose head, Aladenles sending to Ishender to grieve him the more, he
bid the Messenger not show it him, but to bid his Master eat it if he would:
wherewith Aladenles exceedingly moved, yet pitying the old man, set the younger
soon at Liberty, sending Ishender Prisoner to Carry, where he remained 5 years;
Caragoses discouraged, retired into Cilicia, and was commanded by Bajazet to
Constantinople, as unfit for such an enterprise.

Next Spring 1488, Bajazet sent Achmetes Bassa with a far greater Army against
the Sultan: who being come to the farthest of Cilicia, was at Tzugar Ova
overthrown by the Egyptians and Arabians: himself fighting valiantly lost two
fingers, and was sent Prisoner to Caire.

Bajazet rather incensed herewith, made the greatest preparation in 1489 by Sea
and Land against the Sultan: sending Alis Bassa, or Calibeus with Cherseogles
his Son in Law, with a great Army by land, requesting of the Venetians (in
league with him) to refresh his Fleet upon occasion, in Cyprus: which the
Senate denying, yet sent their Admiral with 30 Galleys for defense of Cyprus:
who considering how secret and sudden the Turks designs were, he sent sundry
Companyes out of Creete into Cyprus for its better defense; but understanding
all their Fleet to be met, and set forward, he hois'd sail for Cyprus: the
Turkish Fleet keeping on their course, met the landArmy near Mount Taurus.
Caytheius having sent Usbeg with a strong Army of Mamalukes and others to be in
readiness. He (though far inferior to his Enemies) expected not their coming
into Syria, but met them not far from Tarsus of Cilicia: who so soon as come
together, cheerfully joined battle: which terrible fight was maintained all
day with doubtful Victory and exceeding slaughter: The Generals with fresh
supplies relieving their distressed. Night approaching, both Armies (chiefly
the Turks) wearied and weakened, retired to their Camps. But the Egyptians
finding all their Carriages, Victuals, etc: gone which, (some say) the
robberous borderers had done to please the Turks: others, that those in charge
terrified with the Turks number, and battell's doubtfullnesse, fled along the
Seaside, and were spoiled by the Turks out of the Galleys, were foretroubled,
fearing great extremities. Wherefore early in the morning they braved their
Enemies: which the Turks disdayning, set foreward with displayed Ensigns:
there beginning such a desperately resolved fight, that one might have said,
the former was but a play in comparison; none being seen to give ground, or
look back: the Janizaryes and Mamalukes Foot to Foot, spending their utmost
force upon each other; Usbeg the while freshly charged the Turks with 15000
valiant Horse as a reserve, so that they began to give ground: which being made
good again by others brought on by the Bassaes, till the Sun's going down,
the battle was fiercer than before; then retiring to their Camps, not knowing
yet who had the better.

The Bassaes finding scarce a third part of 100000 men, left, and most of them
hurt, doubting to be set upon again, fled away the same Night, leaving all
behind them. The Egyptians also losing half of 70000, and wanting provision,
were retired into Mount Taurus, not knowing of the Turks flight: Some passing
into Syria, reported, the Sultans Army was overthrown; so uncertain was the
event of that battle. But Aladeuses certifying them of their flight, and the
espialls confirming the same, Usbeg presently coming down, entered the Turks
Camp, finding plenty of all necessaryes for refreshment.

Aladeuses with his Varsacides, robbed and slew many Turks in their return, so
stopping the passages, that the Mamalukes overtaking them, few remained alive
to carry news home; Calibeus and Cherseogles being both taken and presented to
Caytheius, with 18 Sanzacks Ensigns. Bajazets Navy also riding at Orontes
mouth, was by tempest put from Anchor, and swallowed up of the Sea, or beaten
in pieces upon the maine. Wherefore, with much ado he concluded a Peace with
the Sultan, restoring all places taken from him: the Sultan delivering him
Calibeius, Cherseogles, Achmetes, and Ishander, with a number of other
Prisoners.

Shortly after Calibeius died, having worthily governed Egypt with all Africa,
unto Cirene Westward, and unto Euphrates Eastward: who through Dultibe his
Wife's importunity, had joined his Son Mahomethes in the fellowship of the
Kingdom, the better to enjoy it after his death: contrary to the Mamaluk's
custom, who grudging to be defrauded of their wonted choice, slew Mahomethes,
and soon after four more, who aspired the Kingdom, setting up a Sultan of
their own choice.

About the time of the Peace concluded, Charles the French King greatly
preparing against Alphonsus King of Naples gave out, that after its recovery,
he would invade Greece: induced hereto chiefly by Sfortia Duke of Millane his
solicitation, whereby Italy was sore shaken, and Sfartia himself at last dyed a
Prisoner in France.

Alphonsus doubting the French Kings greatness, entered a confederacy with some
States of Italy, chiefly with Pope Alexander the 6th: giving his base Daughter
in Marriage to Godfry Borgia the Bishops Son, making him Prince of Carinula,
entertayning his other Son Francis in great pay, in his Wars.

And by Camillus, his Ambassador, acquainted Bajazet what the French King
purposed against them both, requesting him to aid him with 1 2000 Horse and
Foot: Alexander also, sending George Buc ciarde to Bajazet, to declare, with
what power (after the French King had dispatched his Wars in Italy) he intended
to pass into Greece: Wherefore he had been earnest with him for Zemes; yet he
distrusting the French, and careful for the State of Italy, had entered a
league with Alphonsus, wanting nothing more than money: by which Bajazet (he
said) might provide for the safety of Greece; Rome and Naples being the surest
Walls of that side the Othoman Empire, and c. Bajazet knowing this to be true,
thanked the Bishop for his timely admonition, and c: willing Bucciarde to
return to his Master with one Dautius his Ambassador, who should carry money
and other secret resolves, writing a Greek Epistle, cunningly to persuade the
Bishop to Poison Zemes: promising him for this, 200000 Ducats, and never to
take up Arms against the Christians.

But George and Dautius being about to land at Ancona, were boarded by John
Rovereus, pretending a great sum due to him for his service done in Pope
Innocent's time, and quit of their Treasure, and whatever else aboard, which,
the Bishop much troubled, could never recover, though seeking recompense from
the Venetians, who were to save the Turks harmless in those Seas, for Rovereus
bearing upon the French, set at naught the Bishops curses and threats. Dautius
being set on shore, went to Ancona, and thence to Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, and
was by him, for auncient-friendship with Bajazet, courteously entertained, and
furnished with money and Apparel, so returning into Greece.

Bajazet forthwith sent Mustapha Bassa, to Pope Alexander with like
instructions, who coming safely to Rome, among many things in charge, the life
of Zemes, was, that he most sought for of the Bishop. Charles the French King
then in 1495, passing through Italy, against Alphonsus, and so through Rome, so
terrified Alexander the Bishop, that he yielded to all conditions he demanded
(not purposing the performance of any) giving him Casar Borgia his Son in
hostage, then a Cardinal, covering the disgrace with his Sons Title of
Legate, and was forced to deliver him Zemes: who to the Bishop's profit, had
remained seven years there in custody, who three days after, died at Caieta,
thought to be poisoned before, by a wondrous white and pleasant powder,
cunningly mingled with the Sugar which Zemes drank with water, whose dead body
sent to Bajazet, was by his appointment honorably interred at Prusa: Borgia
also deceiving his Keepers at Velitras, returned to Rome before Charles came to
Naples: which wicked imp, shortly after, envying Candianus his Brother, General
of the Bishops forces, then great, having supped together with their Mother,
caused him to be murdered going home, and his body to be cast into Tiber. Then
casting off his (...) Robes, took on him the leading of his Fathers Army. And
with exceeding prodigality, exhausting his Fathers Coffers, and the Church
Treasures, bound to him desperate Ruffians and Soldiers, chiefly Spaniards,
his Fathers Countrymen: which proceedings, his Father winked at, fearing, it
was thought, to be murdered of him, himself. He now became a terror to the
Roman Nobility and Signiories thereabouts, by his Fathers help, desiring to
make him great; drove the Family of the Columnii out of the City, then out of
Italy: and poisoning or killing the honorable of the Ursine and Caetane
Families, took their possessions: strangling at once 4 Nobles of the Camertes,
and driving Guide Feltrius out of Urbin, taking Pisaurum from John Sfortia,
hardly escaped his hands: and driving the Malatestaes out of Ariminum,
thrusting the Lady Catherine Sfortia out of Forum Liuli, and Cornelii,
shamefully leading her in triumph through Rome. And shedding blood without
measure, he took Faventia from young Astor Manfredus, whom having abused
against Nature, he caused to be strangled, and east into Tiber: But he being
with his Father at a solemn Supper in the Vaticane, prepared to destroy some
Cardinals, and other chief Citizens, they were both poisoned by a waiter's
mistaking the Flagon of poisoned Wine, prepared for the guests, the Bishop
dying few days after; but his Son, the same being more allayed with water,
died not a long time after, yet was so sick, that he was soon forsaken of his
followers; seeing two of his enemies, Pius the 3d, and Julius the 2d, sitting
in his Fathers place, Pius enjoying it but 16 days: whom Julius succeeding,
caused Casar Borgia to be shut up in a Castle, whence he freed him upon
delivery of some strong Holds held by his Garrisons, who fleeing to Ostia, and
so by Sea to Naples, he was for fear of raising new stirs in Italy, apprehended
by Ferdinand, King of Spain's Command, and imprisoned in Spain in Medina
Castle: where, after three years, he escaping by a rope, from a high Tower,
fled to the King of Navarre, in whose Wars he was in a hot skirmish, though
he got the Victory, slain with a small shot, whose body found stripped, and
brought to the King on a bad Beast, was honorably buried at Pampilona.

But the French King having lost Zemes by death, and Borgia by escape, journied
toward Naples, all places yielding to him as he went, without much resistance.
Alphonsus destitute of requested aid, and most of the Nobility hating him, for
too severely punishing the late rebellious, the Princes of Sarne and Salerne
being chief: and the people murmuring at their heavy exactions for these Wars
maintenance, with tears in sight of the Neopolitans, resigned his Kingdom to
his Son Ferdinand, scarce reigning a year after his Fathers death, passing
over to Mazerea in Sicilia: Ferdiuand was, to the wondrous content of the
Neapolitans, with joy, and c. saluted King, returning presently to his Army: by
which time the French King was with his forces entered far into Naples, and
having taken diverse Cities by assault, struck the Neopolitans with a general
terror. Ferdinand had taken the Straits of St. Germans Forest, to hinder
Charles his further passage; but suddenly hearing that Columna had broken by the
Appenines, into Campania, he doubting to be shut up betwixt two Armies, retired
to Capua, where through the River Vulturnus deepness, he purposed to stop the
French; but news being brought, that the Citizens of Naples were all up in
Arms, doubting which way to turn; he, troubled, leaving his Army and Capua in
charge to his Captains, rode back post to Naples: by whole arrival, every man
laying down his Arms, generally welcomed him: who earnestly requesting them
not to betray him their natural King unto his cruel enemies, and c. they all
answered, they would spend themselves in his quarrel, while keeping his Army
whole, and defending Capua; but if the Arragonians should be overthrown, or
abandon that City, and the French King approach Naples, he should against
reason and equity exact his Subjects fidelity. So exposing City and Country
thereabouts to be spoiled, etc. Charles the while, being come to Capua, the
Citizens, though ever affected to the Arragon Kings, yet (the French King
beating down all before him) they consulted of yielding up the City: and the
rather, through the revolt of Trivultius and his followers, which caused
Verginius and Petilianus to flee to Nola with their Companies. The French
hereupon entering the Suburbs, Gothfredus and Gaspar, two valiant Germans,
sallied forth with their Companies; and having valiantly repulsed the French,
in their return were shut out of the Gate, and in danger of the enemy: who on
their knees, entreating the cowardly Citizens on the Walls, not so to berray
their friends, etc. at length were received ten by ten, in at one Gate, and put
out at another, farthest from the enemy; who going toward Naples, met with the
King at Aversa, declaring what had happened at Capua, who notwithstanding, came
to its very Gates, calling on diverse chief ones to be let in; but none
answering him, and a French Ensign being on the Wall, he returned to Naples
where he found the Gates shut against him, and all the Citizens in Arms, not
willing to receive any but the King himself; for it was famed, that all his
chief Captains were gone to the enemy, or fled, the Army broken up, and Capua
yielded: wherefore they began to contemn Ferdinand, who fetching a compass,
came to the Castle, whereinto he was received; but foreseeing, he should there
be besieged by Sea and Land, he commending it to valiant Davalus his keeping,
departed with 20 Galleys, to the Island Aenuria, not far off; But Justus, the
Captain of the Castle, traitorously shut the Gates against him: wherewith the
Prince wondrously perplexed, with entreaty and remembrance of his Fathers, and
his own benefits bestowed on him, he prevailed with Justus so, as to come in
but himself alone: So opening a Port, Ferdinand suddenly at his entrance stabbed
him to the heart, in the midst of his Soldiers: the Warders dismayed with his
look, at his Command let in all his followers: the day after whose departure
from Naple's Castle, Charles was received with such triumph by the Neopolitans,
as if restored to perfect liberty: and soon after that Castle, with all strong
holds thereabouts, were yielded to the French: all the Princes and people
submitting unto Charles his power. All being lost, Ferdinand, from Aeuaria,
departed to Sicilie: the House of Arragon losing that Kingdom in less than 5
months; about 63 years after it was taken from the French by Alphonsus the
Elder. When the Turks saw the French Ensigns displayed on the Walls, all along
Calabria and Salern's Coast, many of them, along Epirus and Macedonia's Coast
forsook their charge for fear of the Christians in Greece beginning to lift up
their heads, chiefly the wild Acrocerauni in Epirus borders, who taking Arms,
refused Turkish Tribute.

Both Christian Princes and the Turk, doubted whither Charles his greatness
would grow: many thinking he affected the Roman Empire, and Monarchy of Italy.
Pope Alexander, and Maximilian then Emperor, being troubled: Bajazet also
fearing the turning of his forces into Epirus or Greece; and Ferdinand of Spain
no less car full for Sicilie; Sfortia also, shortly after, Duke of Millane, the
occasion of his coming and great aider, began to doubt of the King, who little
reckoned of his promise, so he might enlarge his Dominions: and the Venetians,
who had stood as Newters, doubted to lose some part of their own Territory,
before hoping to share something for themselves, by the Arragonians and French,
weakening each other.

Wherefore the said Christian Princes, concluded a strong League among
themselves, that if any one should war on any Prince, to do it on their own
charge; but if invaded by others, every one, of their own charge, to send four
thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot, to aid their Confederate: the league
being for twenty years; and if it pleased Bajazet, as other Princes,
especially, who for fear had offered aid to the Venetians by Sea and Land,
against the French: whose King the League troubled more, although pretended for
their own safety only; wherefore placing Garrisons in all strong holds of
Naples, and Mompenser his Viceroy, he returned with the rest, purposing by the
way to terrify the Bishop, if possible, from the League, and then to deal with
Sfortia as he might; but being come to Rome, Alexander was fled to Perusium.
Charles stayed 3 days violating none, but those of the Arragonian faction.
Thence marching to Pisa, and passing the Alps, he was set upon by Gonsaga Duke
of Mantua, General of the Venetians and Sfortia, to stop his passage, who being
in great danger, lost his Tents, with all his rich spoil; yet repulsing his
enemies with great slaughter, got safely home: this was at the River Taurus,
about which time, Ferdinand returning to Naples, was joyfully received by the
Citizens, and by help chiefly of Gonsalvus, sent by Ferdinand of Spain,
recovered the Kingdom within a year; and dying without issue, left it unto his
Uncle Fredericus; the chief Government of this one Kingdom, being six times
changed in less than threee years: Fredericus being as unfortunate as the
rest, and Charles the French King soon after suddenly dying, as he came from
Tennise, but twenty seven years old, leaving France with Naples its Title to
Lewis, who with great trouble, conquered it, and with greater grief lost it.

But Bajazet now delivered of fears, by Bali-beg Sanzack of Silistra, invading
Podolia and Russia, part of the Polonians Kingdom, did great harm, carrying
away many Prisoners, but coming the second time in like manner, Winters
extreme cold being come on, they were, in return, denied passage and Victuals,
by Stephen Prince of Moldavia; so that going all along the SeaCoast, many
straglers were cut off by the Moldavians, the rest perishing by cold, want, and
waye's fowlness, so that very few came home: 40000 being reported to be lost.
He sending also Cadumes into Illyria, spoiling it, with a part of Croatia, 9000
Croatians and Hungarians under Francopaine, encountering them, were worsted,
above 7000 being slain and drowned in the River Morava, the rest fleeing through
Woods and Mountains: the overthrow was imputed to the General, who would fight
in field, though entreated by Torquatus to keep the Straits for advantage.
Torquatus lost all his Horsemen, whose Horse being killed, he fought on Foot
till he was slain. The Bassa sent all the Noses of the Christians, put on
strings, as a present to Bajazet.

Lewis the 12th of France, writing himself Duke of Millan, as descended of John
Galeatius, resolving to war upon Sfortia, and seeking above all others, to
draw the Venetians into a fellowship, made a firm League with them, promising
them for their aid, the City Cremona, with all about Abdua, which was
afterward performed. Sfortia far too weak, tried to set Maximilian with the
States of Germany, upon the French King: which not sorting, he offered to hold
his Dukedom of the King for a yearly Tribute: all means being in vain proved,
he certified Bajazet of the confederation, and that their intent was, he being
oppressed, and some other Italian States, to invade his Dominions, etc. The
Duke hoping to busy the Venetians by bringing the Turk upon them: the Florence
Ambassadors also pricking the Turk forward, for malice against the Venetians,
who protected the Pisans against their oppression. Bajazet calling to mind the
former injuries of the Venetians, in aiding John Castriot and Chernovich, and
denying his Fleet to put into Cyprus, promised, as glad of an opportunity, to
do what they requested: wherefore in 1499, greatly preparing by Sea and Land,
he caused Scander-Bassa with 12000 Horse, too break into Friuli, on Italies
frontiers: who passing great Rivers, and entering, burned and destroyed as far
as Liquentia, carrying away all the people; but being come to late (for the
French and Venetians had before, unresisted, driven out Sfortia) he at
Tiliaventum, put 4000 prisoners to the Sword, and so returned laden with spoil.

Bajazet setting forth a greater Fleet than any of his Predecessors, marched
himself with a great Army, along the Seacoast of Morea; so that what they
could, they kept in sight of each other: the Venetians also setting sorth a
Fleet under Grimani their Admiral, for strength, skill, etc. superior, though
in number inferior: whom the Turks braving, yet durst not (at first) join
battle, but crept along the Coast: the Venetians troubling them, never departed
from them, accounting it good service, if they could but keep them from landing
in any place of their Territory. The longer they thus sailed, the more was the
State of Venice offended with their Admiral, delaying to fight, suffering them
to draw nearer and nearer to their Territory: while all expected some great
exployt to be done, news came, that the Turks Fleet had put into Sapientia
Haven, in Sphraga Island, to water, and were there embayed by the Venetians:
most were joyful, as of an assured Victory; but others said, the place was
such, that the enemy might depart at pleasure; yet they all thought, the
Admiral would set upon them in their coming out: which he attending to do, it
happened that Lauredanus and Armenius coming from Corcira to the battle, first
began the fight, and with two nimble Ships boarded a tall Turkish Ship, like a
Castle, whereof one Baruch, a Smyrna Pyrate was Captain, who perceiving, after
long fight, he must either yield or be taken, fired his ship, whereby the
Venetians, grapled to her, were all 3 burnt, some leaping over board were taken
up, and some perished. Some few other ships assailed the Turks, putting them in
fear; but most of the Venetian Galleys looking on a far off, the other doing
what they could, retired to them; But it plainly appeared, the Venetian Admiral
let slip a notable victory. After this, the Turks holding on their course, the
Venetians followed them, and faintly setting on them at the gulf of Patrus,
suffered them to recover it: many lying aloof, afraid to fight, so that Dauthes
the Turks Admiral purposing to run ashore, and flee to the Land Army if
overcharged, now recovered the desired gulf, though with loss of some Galleys.
Bajazet being come to Lepanto within that gulf, by the coming of his Fleet,
hardly besieged it by Sea and Land: which they of the City seeing, yielded it
to Bajazet on composition.

(...) returning to Venice, was cast into prison, and though never man in
Venice was more impugned with spite, or defended by friends; yet he was
banished into one of the Absytides Islands on Liburnia's coast; Bajazet
returning with victory to Constantinople.

Next year 1500, Bajazet putting a stronger and greater Fleet to Sea, himself
with an Army of 150000 entered into Peloponesus, encamping before Modon, then
under the Venetians, where his Foot met him; who making 3 great breaches in the
walls, he so terribly assaulted it twice, that the foremost was trodden to
death by them which followed; yet he was glad to retire from the walls, having
filled the ditches with slain Turks. Trivisamus the Venetian Admiral, lying at
Zante (far too weak for the enemy) at first sent two Galleys full of men and
munition in relief of the besieged, and doubting their farther wants, sent 3
resolute Captains with 3 great Galleys with necessaries; who with a full wind,
etc. breaking through the Turks Fleet, ran a ground under Modon's walls, the
besieged having so barred the haven, that they could not get in; who running by
heaps toward the Sea, to receive their new-come aid, diverse places of the City
were left without Defendants: which the Janissaries perceiving, entered with
little or no resistance; who making way for the rest, they slew all in their
way, with all those newly landed out of the Galleys: also the two Governors,
with Falco the Bishop in his Pontificalibus: none escaping but those reserved
for slavery, or beauty to the victor's lost, 1000 of whom, being bound together
in ropes were slain in sight of Bajazet's Pavilion; Corone, and Pylus (now
Navarrinum) terrified herewith, yielded to Bajazet on Composition; Crisseum
also, now Caput St: Galli, was taken by Cherseogles; Nauplium was besieged by
Haly Bafsa, but defended by the Venetians. Bajazet fortifying, new peopling,
and garrisoning Modon, returned to Constantinople.

Trivisanus dying in 1501 of grief (as some supposed) the Senate sent Pisaurius
in his place; who following the enemy (then departing from Nauplium even to
Hellespontus Straits) took above 20 of their ships and Galleys, that stragled
or tarried behind, taking Aegina Island in his return, and landing in diverse
places, left the Turks a woeful remembrance of his being there; then meeting
with Gonsalvus the great (sent by Ferdinand of Spain to aid him) at Zante, he
invaded Cephalania, in vain attempted the year before by Trivisanus; the Turks
in defense of the City fighting it out to the last man, and at length, was
taken by Gonsalvus his good conduct, the whole Island forth with yielding to
the Venetians.

Pisaurius repairing the City, and strongly garrisoning the Isle departed to
Corcyra, where being advertized, that the Turks were rigging a great Fleet
against Spring, some lying in Ambracia Bay, some at Eante, the rest in
Hellespontus Straits, he to avert the Turks from perceiving his secret purpose,
sent most of his Fleet to Neritos Isle, to put the Inhabitants in fear, and
himself coming to the Bay of Ambracia (whose entrance is but half a mile over)
but by and by opening with a great widnesse, the Turks thinking him to have
been at Neritos, burnt a great Turkish Galley, carrying away 11 more laded with
munition, and victual, the Turks vainly endeavoring to have sunk him from
shore in going forth; who returned to Corcyra, with his prey, and ere long he
recovered Pylos Castle in Morea; But Camalia a Turkish Pirate, putting in there
by chance, took 3 Galleys left there for defense, the fainthearted Captain,
yielding him the Castle on composition, which being twice in one year yielded
to the Turks, the Captains were both beheaded. Pisaurius attempted to burn the
Turks Galleys in the River Eante; but they by the loss at Ambracia, did now
more warily look to them: so that 200 resolute Soldiers, being sent in small
vessels up the River, they being by the way encountered by the Turks, were
forced to return, and the wind rising with such a stiff and contrary gale at
the Rivers mouth, they were driven a shore on each side, falling into the hands
of their merciless enemies.

Bajazet (then about) took also Dyrrachium (now Durazo) from the Uenetians
(before ruinous and almost quite abandoned) the Turks having got all the
Country about it, who sore pressed with these long wars, had often craved aid,
and now Lewis of France, sent the Lord Ravesten with 10 Ships and 15 Galleys,
to aid the Venetians; who coming to Melos, Pisaurius soon arrived there also:
and mutually departing to invade Lesbos, landed, and besieged Mytilene, soon
making a fair breach in the wall; Pisaurius the while, sailing with part of his
Fleet to Tenedos, the French, some write, reporting, that some Turkish Galleys
were coming thither out of Hellespont, to withdraw Pisaurius, that they (in his
absence) might carry away the honor, and spoil of the Town. Others blame
Pisaurius as departing through envy of the French their honor, which is hard
to be believed. The French furiously assaulting the breach (though the Venetian
Vice Admiral earnestly requested its deferring, and to expect Pisaurius his
return) were valiantly repulsed by the Turks, and (though many fell on both
sides) they were forced to retire; whereupon the French Admiral purposing to
depart, the Uenetian Admiral returning, persuaded him to stay: the battery
beginning with a greater fury than before; and as they were consulting of a
fresh assault, news came, that the Turks were coming for relief; who being but
few, were partly taken and cast over board, few getting to Land, saved
themselves in Woods, etc. The Venetians now courageously assailed the breach,
and having twice gained the top of the Rampires were yet beaten down: the
French looking on many valiant ones, being there slain and hurt. A Pinnace then
coming with news, that the Master of the Rhodes was coming with his Galleys to
the siege, the Admirals determined to maintain it till then. But Ravesten next
day (changing his purpose) departed to Chios, thence toward Italy, and by a
terrible tempest, the AdmiralGalley with two others and 800 Soldiers were
lost, the Admiral himself (with 40 others) being (by a chance) saved, who
recovered Tarentum with his weather-beaten Fleet. Pisaurius forsaken, and the
Master of the Rhodes not coming, departed to Chios, thence to Paros, where
finding the Master of the Rhodes, he imputed the not winning of Mytilene, to
the French-inconstancy; who also, where they came, blamed him as much or more:
who, in 1502, coming to Melos found one Richius a Turkish arch-Pirate; who,
being driven a shore, was taken by the Islanders: whom (for his exceeding
cruelty toward some Christians) Pisaurius tied to a spit, and had him roasted
to death with a small fire, so wintering at Corcyra. And next Spring, with some
Galleys sent him by Pope Alexander, sailed to Neritos, now St. Maura, parted
from the firm Land, (with a little fret of the Sea) by the Corinthians, who
suddenly surprising it, cast up two great Trenches: so that 3000 Turks horse
coming at low water over the strait, were with loss repulsed; whereupon, the
City and Island was yielded to Pisanrius.

The Venetians weary of the war, sent Manesius to Bajazet for Peace: who stood
on such rearms, that naught was concluded; yet he got Ba jazet to send with him
an Ambassador to Venice, to propound his own conditions; who having audience
twice, his unreasonable conditions were by the Senate rejected and himself
dismissed.

Next year 1503, they sent an Ambassador to Ba jazet, who (through his
subjects complaints of harms received from the Venetians, and want of trade,
fearing also troubles in Asia) hearkened more willingly to peace than before:
Phriscus returning honorably rewarded by Bajazet, and with far more reasonable
conditions, the Venetians sent Gritti, well known to Ba jazet for his former
traffic, and whose life was spared at the winning of Modon at Cherseogles
intercession, who concluded a peace: That the Venetians should deliver up
Neritos and Leucadia, reserving the Isle Cephalenia only: and that Ba jazet
should restore all Merchants goods taken in the wars, and they safely to
traffic in the Euxine Sea, having their Consul at Constantinople as formerly:
also their Territory to be separated from the Turks, by certain bounds. This
firm peace was in 1503 after 5 years wars: in which year, Ba jazet with a great
and puissant Army, (met at Sophia) purposed as was thought to invade Hungaria,
but doubting the success, he leaving Achmetes with his Asians, went with the
rest to reduce the rebellious of Albania, sending a Fleet to stop the Sea
passages; but the people fleeing into the rockie Mountains, did the Turks much
harm; who yet, mounting those difficult places, slew an exceeding number of
them, carrying away all women and children, and desolating the Country with
fire, and sword; thence returning to Manastirum, Ba jazet (on the way) met with
a Dervislar or beggarly Turkish Monk (apparrelled but with two sheeps-skins,
and a great ring in each ear) who approaching him (as for an alms) assailed him
with a short Scimiter under his habit; but Bajazet's horse starting at the
hobgoblins approach, he partly avoided the blow (yet somewhat wounded) who
being about to double his stroke, Ishender striking him down with his Mace, he
was rent in pieces by the Soldiers; wherefore, all of that order were banished
his Empire.

After these troubles, Bajazet quietly spent most of his time in Philosophies
study, and conference with the learned (to which he was naturally most
inclined, though his state and men of wars desire, drew him often involuntarily
into the field) the Civil government being referred to his three chief Bassaes.
After 5 years thus spent, of a neglected spark arose a great fire in Asia,
kindled by 2 Persians, Chasen Cheliffe, and Schach Culi his boy; who fleeing
thither under a show of holiness, raised such diversity of opinions, about
Mahomet's true successor, and afterward such rebellion, as that the one yet
remains, the other was (with great bloodshed) in a good while, not appeased.
The ground of which troubles, and the mortal wars between Hysmael, Sophie of
Persia, and Selimus 1, was from one Haidar or Harduelles, honorably descended
among the Persians, who ( Usan Cassanes there reigning) contemning honor,
riches, pleasure, etc. led such a strict life, that the vulgar wondering at that
in him, which they neither could or would imitate, began to have him in
singular admiration: Multitudes resorting to Tauris out of Persia and Armenia,
to see this accounted new Prophet; who (reviving the opinion of Giuni)
inveighed against the opinion concerning Mahomet's true successors, persuading
the people (as if inspired) that no Mohammedan should inherit Heaven after
death; but the followers of Haly, Mahomets true successors and fellow in
writing to whose mind he was privy, whose writings were authentical, therefore
only to be honored: rejecting (...), Omer and Osman with their writings, as
accursed, whom the Turks do honor as his true successors and interpreters; as
also Haly, whom the Persians only acknowledge, praying for him, and cursing the
other in their prayers: which difference, is a chief cause of their mortal
wars, and not the diverse interpretation of their Law.

Usun Cassanes, either moved with Haiders virtues, or to win the hearts of the
multitude, gave him Martha begotten of Despina, Calo-Joannes of Trapezond his
Daughter; who was freely to exetcise Christian Religion as the Emperor
covenanted with Usun, whereby Martha was a Christian also: who soon bare Haider
a Son called Hysmael, whom she so trained up in her Principles, that he
obtaining the Kingdom of Persia never found fault with the Christians Religion.

Haider, graced with this marriage, grew into greater estimation than before:
so that his doctrine and followers increasing, Jacup succeeding his dead father
Usun, distrusted left the Persians (secretly favoring their ancient Kings
posterity) should raise some dangerous rebellion before he was well settled.
Wherefore, he caused Haider his brother in Law to be secretly murdered, with
fire and sword persecuted the professors of that new doctrine. Hysmael (then a
child) escaping his Uncles fury, fled to Pyrchales his Fathers friend, ruling
in a small Territory of Hyrcania.

Amongst others that fled, Chasan Shelif, and Schach Culi, (afterward surnamed
Cuselbas) came into the lesser Armenia, dwelling at the Mountain Antitaurus: at
whose foot the broken rocks have obscure Caves, made by art and nature: which
place being called Tekeili, diverse historians have called Schach Culi,
Techellis. The place being very wholesome, and pleasant for variety of Springs
and fruits, wherewith the Plains are always watered, and the Mountains garnished.

Here they contemplatively and austerely lived for diverse years with such
things as the earth of it self afforded, whom afterward, the Shepherds on the
Mountains, and Country people wondering at their devoutness, relieved with
necessaries: Bajazet sending them 6 or 7000 Aspers as his alms. But when they
told fortunes, prognosticating things to come, the people firmly thought them
divine Prophets: and being first drawn into villages, were afterward (as if
against their wills) into Cities, filling the Country far and near with their
fame; but publishing their doctrine about Mahomet's true successor, they
wanted not followers, persuaded by them, they should be condemned for ever, if
they did not only reverence, but call on Hali, next to the great Prophet
himself: and commanded their Disciples to wear a red band or riband on their
Hats, whereby to be known from others: whence they were, and yet are (over all
the East) called Cuselba's, that is, Red. heads.

Hysmael also, embracing his Fathers superstition, being grown a man, and
eloquent, comely, wise and courageous, was (of the rude vulgar) accounted of,
more like a god than a man: Also Noblemen, etc. allured with his new doctrine,
ceased not to commend him in the highest degree; who (as yet but a youth)
seemed to make no reckoning of riches, honor, fame, or authority: some also
swearing, that Haider (calculating his Nativity) said, He should prove a great
Prophet, and the Author of true Religion; who subduing most of the East, should
be as glorious as was Mahomet himself: which report occasioned the vulgar to
talk of wonders. Hysmael, was afterward surnamed Sophos, that is, a wise man,
or the god's Interpreter. Jacup being (with his Son) poisoned by his adulterous
wife, whom he forcing to drink of the same cup, and striking off her head,
presently died with his Son; after which, troubles arose; diverse great ones
aspiring the Kingdom in order, not long enjoying it: Elvan-Beg being then
mightily impugned by his brother Moratchamus.

Hysmael taking this opportunity, arming diverse of his most able men, with some
small aid from Pyrchales, entered Armenia; and more by fame and good will, than
force, recovered his Fathers inheritance, growing stronger, and stronger by the
continual repairing of such, who having received Haiders doctrine, had long
(for fear) dissembled the same, and besieging the City Sumachia in Media's
confines; he took and sacked it, enriching and Arming his Soldiery: after
which, he thought how to compass the great City Tauris, the Persian King's
Seat, and then the Kingdom; wherefore, coming thither with his Army, before any
such thing was feared, Elvan was there, who had lately vanquished Moratchamus;
after which, he had severely executed diverse chief Citizens of Tauris, who had
taken his brother's part, whereby the Citizens were so alienated from him, that
upon Hysmael's approach, they were ready to forsake him: whereof Hysmael was
before informed. Elvan, as dismayed, fleeing out of the City, the gates were
set open to Hysmael; for the Citizens (before suffering great calamities by the
brothers contention) saw now an open way to preferment, by receiving Hysmael's
reformed Religion; who entering the City, slew some of the King's Guard, raising
Jacup's stately Tomb, and in revenge of his Father's death, had his bones
dug up and scattered abroad, razing also his memorial out of all the City.

Hysmael (knowing that while Elvan lived, his conquest was not assured)
augmented his Army to the utmost, furnishing them with Arms out of the King's
Armory: aand had news that the Persian King was coming from Scyras with a great
Army against him, and that Moratchamus (forgetting former quarrels) had raised
an Army about Babylon, to join with him; who, nothing terrified, resolved to go
against them, and letting forward, encouraged his Soldiers resolutely to
follow him (a leader given them of God) to an assured victory: So coming with
incredible celerity, to Mount Niphates (parting Armenia from Assyria, Elvan
purposing shortly to pass over it, had sent his Scouts to discover the
Straits, and Pioniers to make the ways more commodious; wherefore, Hysmael
advancing his Ensigns up the Mountains, and discomfiting those who kept the
passages, came furiously down, assailing the King in his Camp at the Mountains
foot, whereby such a hurly-burly was raised in the Camp, that the King could
scarce give order what to have done etc. so that Hysmael giving a fierce
onset, a most b oody battle began: and assailing the Kings Foot, with three
squadrons at once; put them to flight, before the Horsemen could arm and mount;
the King was glad to run too and fro, to encourage his men, and stay his
discomfited, yea, and to come to handy blows himself; But his Soldiers, not
being able to execute his sudden directions, he tesolutely thrusting himself
into the head of his battle, and valiantly fighting, was slain; whereupon, the
Horsemen first, then all the rest, fled.

Hysmael (having had little loss) possessed the enemies Tents, not much
pursuing them, but reposing there some days with his wearied Army. Then
Ambassadors from diverse places, yielding their Towns unto him, etc. he marched
to Scyras, where he was joyfully received, and his Army relieved with all
things; Hysmael there often preaching of the excellency of his Fathers
doctrine, strictly proclaimed all them to be as his enemies, who, within 30
days, did not renounce their old Superstition, and receive his new found
verity: the which, by proposing rewards, and denouncing threats, he soon drew
all the vulgar to embrace. Then paying his Soldiers with Scyra's riches, and
furnishing them with Armor there, cunningly made of Iron and Steel, and the
juice of certain herbs, better than in Europe, he departed and took the two
great Cities of Sapha, supposed to be Susa, and Sultania, deemed for its
wondrous ruins, to be Tigranocertum: then passing Tigris, into Mesopotamia, to
expulse Moratchamus out of Babylon: who terrified with his Brothers calamity,
withdrew into the remotest parts, expecting some better fortune. Hysmael, thus
become a terror to all the Princes of the East, entered into Mosopotamia, after
the flight of Moratchamus, receiving it all into subjection, every one striving
to purchase his favor thereby; so that Moratchamus trussing up his things of
greatest price, fled with his Wives and Children into Arabia. Some calling him
Mara Beg, the Turks Imirfa- Beg, who they say, marrying afterward (...)
Daughter, and recovering part of the Persian Kingdom, was murdered by some of
his Nobles, whom he purposed secretly to put to death. Hysmael returning out of
Assyria into Media, took in the late Persian King's strong Holds, yet there:
and returning into Armenia, warred on the Albanians, Iberians, and Scythians on
the Caspian borders, who through long civil Wars, had neither paid tribute
for 4 years, nor now sent any honorable message as they were wont, and as was
expected. But nothing made Hysmael more spoken of, than his innovation in
Mahometanism; for he brought a new form of Prayer into their Temples: whereby
Ebubekir, Homer, and Osman with their writings, began to be contemned, and Haly
exalted as the true Successor; commanding his Subjects to wear some red
Hatband-lace, and. on their Hats, to be known from other Mahometans, which they
still observing, are called Cuselba's, or Redheads, and was soon so beloved and
honored, that his sayings and commands were accounted Oracles and Laws; they
swearing by his head, solemnly to confirm any thing: saying, Hysmael grant thy
desire, when they wished any one well: upon whose Coin was on one side words to
this effect, There are no Gods but one, and Mahomet is his Messenger: on the
other side, Hysmacl the Vicar of God.

Chasan Chelife, and Techellis the while, in 1508, having gathered a great
Army, invaded the Turks Dominion; for now, such a desire of that new
superstition possessed the peoples minds in general, that 10000 of them met
first at the City Tascia, at the foot of Antitaurus, or else at Attalia, on a
Fair day: where they executed the chief Magistrate, setting his quarters on 4.
of the highest Towers of the City, all swearing never to forsake their
Captains, nor refuse any hazard for honor of their most holy Religion, as they
would have it. These Ringleaders considering the money brought in by the
Country people, was not sufficient to maintain such a multitude, gave their
followers proclaimed-leave to (...) the Country, and live on the spoil of
those who received not their new Doctrine: whereupon, bringing store of Cattle,
etc. into the Camp, they, their multitude increasing, entered Lycaonia, and
roaming up and down many days, the whole Country so feared them, that those in
the Villages, fled with Wives, Children, and Goods into Iconium; for
Proclamations were set up, proposing large blessings, spiritual and temporal,
to such as followed their established Doctrine in Persia; but to the obstinate,
after their Sword once drawn, utter destruction; so that the Inhabitants
thereabouts for one cause or other, resorted daily to them. While the Turks
were preparing to suppress them, some Troops of Horse came timely to these
Prophets, from Hysmael: who a little before, by Messengers, had exhorted them
courageously to proceed in so religious an enterprise, promising them skilful
leaders, and Coin from time to time; for Hysmael bearing an old grudge against
Ba jazet, for former Wars betwixt Turks and Persians, disagreeing also in
their Superstition, and heat of youth pricking him on, greatly desired in this
his prosperous success, to have occasion of warring with him: sending
Ambassadors to the State of Venice, to join with them in league, as before with
Usun Cassanes his Grandfather, chiefly requesting them to send him men skilful
in casting Ordnance, and with their Fleet to trouble Ba jazet by Sea, he
promising by filling Asia the less with his Land-Army, to give them occasion
of recovering all places they lost in the late Wars tothe Turks.

The Venetians answered, they would never forget the ancient league, etc. being
wondrous glad, that Hysmael was the Turks enemy, etc. But the Ambassadors, such
was the badness of the Venetians State and condition, obtaining no more than
the hope of a league to be in time concluded, returned to Cyprus: thence to
Syria, where having secret conference with Zenus, Governor of the Venetian
Merchants at Damasco, Ba jazet grievously complained unto Gaurus the Egyptian
Sultan, for suffering (not as a confederate) them to pass through Syria to the
Christians their common enemies, to stir them up to war; whereupon, Zeuus
with all the Merchants at Tripolis, Aleppo, Beritus, and Alexandria, were
carried in bonds to Cairo, where often answering in Chains to what was laid to
their charge, after a year's suffering manifold despite, hardly escaped with
life and liberty.

Chasan and Techellis well strengthened, and coming to Iconium, wasting the
Country, drew a multitude to receive their Doctrine. Wherefore Orchanes and
Mahomet Ba jazets Nephews governing those Countries, gathering their forces,
came into field against them; but they youthfully, and hastily joining battle
in a disadvantagious place, were put to flight: and had not these wanted
Artillery, and Engines requisite, they would have besieged Iconium. Also
Corcutus then levying an Army about Thyatira, etc. (...) not set foreward
against the Rebels, though dispersed fast by him. These Prophets, entering at
last into Bythinia, met near the River Sangarius, with Caragoses the Asian
Viceroy coming against them with a great Army, commanding Achomates or
Achmates, Ba jazets eldest Son, Governor of Cappadocia and Pontus, with his
power to follow at the back of the Rebels; but Techellis marching with all
possible speed, was upon Caragoses, near Mount Horminus, before he was well
aware, then taking up more Soldiers: who thought it not honorable to refuse
battle, though his Army consisted most of rude Country people, suddenly taken
up, most unarmed, and called Asapi, but he reposed his greatest confidence in
his ancient Horsmen's valor; and the Rebels most consisted of Foot. Techellis
exhorted his Soldiers courageously to defend their lives and Religion by
Victory, as having no new power or Cities of refuge, there to fly unto, etc.
who giving a terrible shout as cheerful, set upon their enemies. The Viceroy
placed his foot in the middle, and his Horse in the Wings, to compasse-in his
enemy; but Techellis set all his Foot in a square battle, and the Horse for a
reserve, who with their red Hats, as if bloody, terrified the Viceroy's
fresh-waterSouldiers, fleeing in half an hour. The Turkish Horse, although
they had slain many, and somewhat disordered the battle; yet Techellis his men
beginning to kill their Horses with their Pikes and lay hard at them, they fled
also: then the Persian horse, as yet lookers on, following the chase, slew
many, enclosing the Viceroy stayinghis Horsemen, who for the dust could not
well discern them, so that he had bin taken, if not rescued by his Guard; 7000
Turks Foot were slain, all their Ensigns, with store of provision taken. Chasan
and Techellis resting a day, marched to Cutaie, as it were in the midst of
lesser Asia, the Viceroy's seat, who fled thither, the Country also, having
for fear, conveyed thither most of their wealth. Techellis placing such Field
pieces, he had before taken in battle, and his Archers in fit places for
annoying the Defendants, caused scaling-ladders to be set up, proclaiming the
Citie's spoil to his Soldiers, if they could take it, with greater rewards, to
them that first recovered the wall's top. Wherefore fearing nothing, they
strove who first should get up the Ladders, etc. the Defendants, casting down
on them Stones, Timber, Fire, Scalding-water, Lime, Sand, etc. wherewith,
though many were killed and spoiled, yet others stepped up in their place, none
shrinking back; for the Viceroy on one side, and Techellis on the other, were
eyewitnesses of every man's valor; the Viceroy, all being in danger, personally
performing all parts of a courageous Soldier; but, the Defendants at last
wearied and most wounded, Techellis brake into the City in two places, over
heaps of dead bodies, bringing in his Army at one of the Gates: the Soldiers
and Citizens being miserably slaughtered: the Viceroy with his Wives and
Children, being taken, and the stately Marble Palace consumed with fire.
Techellis, thought it was now no hard matter to take Prusa so to endanger the
Turks whole Empire in Asia: wherefore, appointing when to set forward, he
prepared (if he delayed not) all necessaries for its taking, being neither
strongly walled, nor garrisoned. But a new Army being shipped over Hellespont
into Asia, he changed his purpose; for Ba jazet had now sent Alis Bassa over
with his European Army, who, though an Eunuch, yet comparable in valor with
the greatest Captains, who with the choicest Horsemen, and 7000 Janissaries,
passing into Phrygia, sent to all Governors of the Turks Provinces in Asia,
speedily to meet him with their forces in Galatia. Techellis now thought best
to depart out of Pontus, to re ire more safely, lest he should be enclosed,
etc. Wherefore calling together his Captains to consult, it was thought madness
or extreme necessity, to join battle with an enemy better knowing the Country
than he, and far exceeding him in number and expertness of Soldiers. So
trussing up his prey, he speedily returned through Galatia; but the Bassa having
almost daily intelligence thereof, and of his way; passing Sangarius, came and
encamped between Cutaie and Ancyra, supposing it the enemie's passage. Where
resting, and advertised Techellis had gone another way, he after five days
march, overtook the enemie's wearied or wounded straglers, putting them to the
Sword: Techellis causing Cartagoses, carried along with him in chains, to be
impaled on a sharp stake, fastened in the ground by the high way side; but Alis
nothing dismayed with his horrible death, held on his, and exhorted his
Soldiers patiently to endure, and strain themselves to take revenge of those
rebellious robbers, who destroying the Country, spared not the Turks very
Children nor Temples; coming next day into Ancyra's plains, to whom Achomates
came with 10000 Soldiers. Alis grieved that he could not overtake them with
his whole Army, leaving his Foot with Achomates, followed them on the spur,
with 8000 Horse, and overtaking their rears at Mount Olyga, nigh Ancyra, he
hotly skirmished with them.

Techellis, perceiving he should have to do only with Horsemen, and that in a
place of advantage, valiantly received the Turks impression, at first repulsing
them with their long Pikes and Arrows; but Alis, sending in a thousand
Carbines, who in order shot thick on the enemy, many were slain, and more
wounded, and their Ranks somewhat disordered: so that the Horse breaking in,
overthrew with great slaughter Techellis his vauntguard. Chasan himself being
slain, Techellis set in order a new battle of his readiest and best armed,
opposing them against the Horse, commanding them, by degrees to retire to the
Mountain, hoping the Turks finding the disadvantage of the place, would leave
assailing them so hardly; but the Bassa exhorting them to urge the Victory,
etc. himself, with a Troop of his best Horse to animate the rest, brake through
the enemies battle: which he attempting the second time, was enclosed and
slain. The Turks now dismayed, fought but faintly, and at last fled.

Techellis his Soldiers having now thrust forward, and with a terrible noise
crying Victory, put them to flight: who notwithstanding, having lost many of
his best Soldiers, and the rest sore wearied, refreshed them on the Mountain
Oliga: whence he marched to Tascia, his old dwelling place, thence to the City
Celenis, now Maras, then the seat of King Aladeules. Bajazet not long after,
sent Jonuses Bassa, born in Epirus, in Alis his stead, who receiving the Army
from Achomates, came in few days to the City Tascia, where burning and
destroying the Country, he encamped at Antitaurus's Foot; he had above 40000
well appointed. Techellis terrified, nor lately receiving aid from Hysmael, and
wanting great Artillery, determined to keep the rough Mountain, and thick
Woods, hoping for aid from Hysmael, and to take the Turks at some advantage:
who often fetching a compass, by the easy rising of the Hills, came to
skirmish, and Techellis his men sallying out of those places, valiantly
assailed the Turks: at length, the Turks perceiving two ways to bring up their
Army to the Mountain's top: the Bassa caused the Janissaries to march up one
way, and the rest by the other, who softly climbing up, defended themselves
what they could, with their Targets; for the enemy cast down on them great
stones, and shot, without number; But the Turks Fieldpieces drove them from
their standings: the harquebuziers shrouding under the Targetiers, thickly
delivered their shot: at whose approach, Techellis retired farther off into
higher Mountains, and rougher Woods; and next night he with great silence, fled
over the Mountains into Armania, of the Persian Kingdom; which, when the Bassa
by some wounded Soldiers taken by his Scouts, when it was daylight,
understood, he chafed, that he had not presently beset the Wood, and sending
his Horsemen in vain to pursue them, they brought back some few straglers to
the Bassa.

Jonuses, straightly inquiring through all Cities, for those who had professed the
Persian Religion, put those who had born Arms to death, with the greatest
torments, burning the rest in their foreheads with a hot Iron, whom with the
Kinsfolks and friends of the executed or fled, he transported, and dispersed in
Europe: fearing a new Rebellion, if Techellis should return with new forces,
but here ended this dangerous rebellion, wherein all or most of the Turks
Dominions in Asia, might have been surprised, if Hysmael had thoroughly
prosecuted the opportunity.

Thechellis his followers fleeing into Persia, and spoiling, by the way, a
Caravan of Merchants laden with Silks, etc. the Captains coming to Tauris,
were executed, and Techellis burnt alive.

Next year 1509. September. 14th, through a great and terrible Earthquake in
Constantinople and thereabouts, most of the Walls, with many stately, public
and private Buildings, were overthrown, and 13000 people slain, so that the
people generally lay in the Fields: yea, Bajazet, very aged and gowty, removed
to Hadrianople, but not safe there, he lay abroad in his Tent. It lasted 28
days, or a month, with very little intermission, accounted ominous (as
shortly appeared) to the Othoman Family. Then by a great plague, the City was
mostly unpeopled; but it being assuaged, Bajazet by Commissions took up 80000
Workmen, who working at once, in four months, repaired Constantinople's ruins.

Bajazet had eight Sons and six Daughters, Men and Women, the Sons all
Governors of Provinces; (yet Utrius a Genoway, who lived long in Bajazets
Court, mentions but six); Sciemscia, for his towardliness deerly beloved of
his Father, the eldest, died before him. Alemscia also died, whereof Bajazet
advertised by white Characters in black Paper (their way of writing heavy
news) he casting away all tokens of Honor, made a general mourning in the
Court, and throughout Constantinople for three days all shops being shut up,
etc: making for some space, solemn sacrifices for the health of his Soul,
giving 7000 Aspers weekly to the Poor: his body being afterward buried at
Prusa with great solemnity. Tzihan and Mahomet were (upon their Fathers
indignation) strangled. Of his other four, Machmot or Mahometes was of greatest
hope, not so voluptuous as Achomates his Elder Brother, nor so bookish as
Corcutus, nor so cruel as Selymus: but so lively, witty, bountiful, and of
Princely a carriage, that he seemed to most, worthy of a Kingdom: wherefore
Achomates, yea Bajazet himself were jealous of his affecting the Empire, soon
the cause of his death: which he hastened by means, as he least feared.
Achomates and Mahometes had one Mother, wherefore Mahometes more delighted in
him than in the others, though not answered with like love. Achomates governed
Amasia; Mahometes, Magnesia: who desirous to see his Brothers life and
government, disguised himself with two faithful friends, as if they had been
of the Religious order called (...) (who being most comely, well borne, cleanly
though homely attired, do wander up and down, making large discourses of others
manners, and commonly playing on Silver Cymballs, and singing duties, they
receive money as a devoutalms: they are the corrupters of Youth, defilers of
others beds, wholly given to ease and pleasure) traveled up and down (...)
(...) (...), and so to Amasia, where on a solemn holiday, Achomates (coming to
the Temple) passing by, listened a while to their alluring harmony, most
skilfully devised and performed. Their Music ended, Achomates (spare-handed)
commands 5 Aspers, that is, about fix pence to be given them, which Mahometes
disdaining, would not now discover himself, as he determined; but speedily
riding to Magnesia, he by taunting letters scoffed at Achomates's good
husbandry, sending him his 5 Aspers, Achomates being never afterward friends
with him: diverse also diversely deemed of his purpose therein.

Not long after, Mahometes (...) himself with some followers, like seafaring
men, came in a barque to Constantinople, diligently viewing Constantinople and
Pera, and noting how all things were governed. Bajazet the while, assembling
his chief Bassaes at the Court: Mahometes pressing in with his companions to
see them, with the fashion of the Court, the Porters (as rude (...)) kept them
out; wherefore buying a beautiful Christian Captive boy, he came next day with
two companions (as Sea-adventurers) requesting to be let in, as having a
present: So being admitted to Bajazet's (...), one of them (as a Sea Captain)
reverently proffered him the present, which he thankfully taking gave him his
hand to kiss, with a rich golden garment, with two of less value to Mahometes
and his fellow, who stood afar off. In their return, they meeting with three
Courtiers who knew Mahometes, they had done him honor, had he not by secret
signs forbidden them: so speedily returning to Magnesia. The report hereof was
at last brought to Bajazet, which raised in him troublesome thoughts, fearing
some desperate and secret conspiracy; wherefore, after long discourse with the
3 Bassaes, he resolved to take him away, causing them to write to Asmehimedi
near to Mahometes, to poison him with a poison enclosed in the Letters, with
promise of great rewards, etc. from the Emperor, charging him (if he could not
effect it without mistrust) to conceal it, etc. Bajazet also knew Asmehemedi to
bear Mahometes a grudge. Mahometes, disporting himself, in his Gardens, and
being thirsty, called for drink, into which Asmehemedi conveyed the poison:
which Mahometes drinking, and ill at ease, sent for his Physicians: who
thinking it a distemper with the cold drink in his heat, perceived not he was
poisoned, till within 6 days he died; whereof Bajazet hearing, could not but
mourn, commanding all the Court to mourn with him, and prayers to be made in
the Temples, with Alms to be given for the health of his soul: he being
honorably buried at Prusa. Asmehemedi was cast into prison, and never more to
be seen, supposed there to be secretly made away. Of Bajazet's 3 Sons left,
Achomates (politic and valiant, but given to pleasure) Bajazet and most of the
Court favored above the rest; Corcutus, for his mildness and quietness, was
of most beloved, but not thought fit for the Empire, chiefly by the Soldiers,
whom they thought was drowned in the study of Philosophy; yet Bajazet promised
to restore it him, of whom he had received it almost 30 years before. But
haughty Selimus, not brooking a subjects life under his brethren, and wholly
given to Martial affairs, sought by bounty, courtesy, policy, etc. to aspire
to the Empire. Him therefore the Janissaries etc. with some chief Bassa's,
wished for their Sovereign.

Bajazet the while (far worn with years) and not able to help himself for the
Gout, for preventing future troubles, determined while living, to establish the
succession in one of his Sons to repress the pride of the other. And although
he resolved on Achomates as the elder, and for affection; yet to try his
subjects disposition, it was said in general terms, he meant to make known his
Successor, without naming any one Son: not the least cause, that every one
with like ambition thought only on the Empire.

Selimus Governor of Trapezond in 1511, with what Ships he could, sailed
thence to the City Capha, thence coming by Land to Mahometes King of the
Praecopensian Tartars (whose daughter he had married without Bajazet's liking)
he besought him not to shrink from him his loving Son in Law, great hope of the
Empire being proposed to him by his faithful friends of the Court, etc. if he
would but come nearer to his Father, by fair means or fowl, then about to
transfer the Empire to some one Son. The Tartar commending him, speedily made
ready store of shipping, and arming 1500 horsemen, delivered them to Selimus,
promising him greater aid upon occasion, who passing Borysthenes, and also
Danubius at the City Cheliae, had commanded his Flect to meet him at Varna in
Bulgaria, and Thracia's confines: and levying more by the way, pretended, he
purposed to invade Hungary.

But Bajazet (before advertized of Selimus his coming into Europe ( Techellis
his rebellion yet scarce quietted) with foreign aid, on his own head, against
the warlique Hungarians, seizing also on the places nearest Thracia, and
keeping the Euxine Sea with a Navy) suspected the preparation to be against
himself: and thinking it better with like dissimulation, to appease his fierce
nature, than by sharp reproof further to move him, sent him Ambassadors,
declaring with what danger the Turkish Kings had formerly undertaken those
Hungarian wars, Mahomet his Grandfather being an example; wherefore, he should
expect a fitter opportunity, for better advice, greater power, and hope of
victory. Selimus answered, He was forced to leave Asia by Achomates his
injuries, and therefore came into Europe, to win (from the enemies of
Mahometanism) a larger and better Province, for that little barren and
peaceable one, which his Father had given him, that he was not to be daunted,
for danger of the Hungarians; yet thinking the ancient prowels of that Nation
to be much changed, with the change of their Kings, etc. therefore he was
resolved for his own honor, which Bajazet had some way blemished, by his
brethrens advancement, to dye in field against the enemies of Mahometanism, or
to extend the bounds of the Turkish Empire: who though one of the youngest, yet
would not be accounted inferior to any brother in prowess. The Ambassadors
(though Selimus showed no tokens of peaee) presented to him diverse gifts to
appease him adjoining Samandria, or Schenderonia, a strong City of Servia on
Hungaries borders, with other Towns, unto his Government, giving him 60000
Ducats, and 1000 cloth and silk Garments, with store of provision to relieve
and content his Soldiers; who returned them to his Father with more doubtful
answers than before, yet not changing his resolution secret Messengers and
Letters came from Court, whetting him forward, to make quick speed; Achomates
(sent for) being coming with a great power out of Capadocia.

Bajazet (now the rather moved) said he would appoint his Successout, who in
his stead, should be fit to'govern so great an Empire; but the 4 Bassaes
propounding it to the Court Soldiers, they cried aloud, No Emperor but
Bajazet, under whose fortunate conduct they had served above 30 years etc.
saying. There was in him yet strength enough, if he would retain the aged
majesty of his place, etc. and that such a one of his children, should in due
time succeed him, as of right ought, wishing the old Emperor to live in health
with a long and happy reign, he needing not to fear any controversy after his
death; for the Othoman Progeny used to attain the Empire by right and not by
faction; but if upon his own liking, he would choose such a one as the people
so well liked not of, it might perhaps bring in that confusion, which he
thought thereby to eschew; for the other brethren would never endure so notable
an injury, etc.

The Soldiers spoke these things by the instruction of Selimus, his corrupted
friends; But Bajazet thinking they chiefly affected Achomates, (...), He would
choose him if they liked it; but the chief Soldiers (corrupted) cunningly
commended Achomates, etc. yet saying, it neither agreed with the custom of the
Othoman Kings, nor was good for the Soldiery or State; for besides, that
neither Selimus nor Corcutus could endure the least suspicion of infidelity,
etc. it seemed to them unreasonable, that thereby the Soldiers should be
defrauded of their usual rewards in the vacancy of the Empire: for then all
Jews and Christians, chiefly Merchants at Constantinople, Peru, Hadrianople,
Thessalonica, and Prusa, are by the Janissaries and others, spoiled of all their
goods: neither will they swear allegiance to the new Emperor till he has
granted them that prey as a bounty, swearing by his head (the greatest
assurance) to pardon all the offenders. Bajazet hereupon, promised to give them
500000 Ducats, if they would accept Achomates for Sovereign: yet the
frowardness of these men of war, overcame his good fortune; for they conceived
far greater rewards, if, instead of a peaceable Prince, a restless Tyrant as
was Selimus, might by their help, aspire the Empire. So Bajazet concealing his
grief, put up that cishonour, till a fitter opportunity.

Selimus advertized hereof, not longer to frustrate his favorites expectation
by delay, etc. leaving Hungaries borders, and marching through Thracia, encamped
on a (...) rising, nor far from Hadrianople, whence his horses neighing and
Tents (from the City) might be discovered; and sent to his Father, then there,
that having not seen him in many years, he desired to visit him before his
return (by his appointmen) to Trapezond, never perhaps to see him again,
saying, It much concerned Asia's quietness, if the controversies betwixt him
and Achomates, might by themselves be discovered to him their Father, as a
decider, humbly beseeching for a time and place of audience, and to kiss his
hands, which his Ancestors never refused, to their poor friends, much less
children. Bajazet had called to him certain Zanzacks, with their Companies, out
of the nearest parts of Greece, setting also strong watch through the City, left
his Soldiers about his person (upon the point of revolt) should in show of
Parley, quite be drawn away, and now blamed Selimus, that he had, on his own
head, brought his Army into another Province, requiring audience in Arms, and
insolently abusing his Fathers lenity; that he should not presume to approach
nearer to him, etc. but speedily to repair to his own charge in Pontus, so he
should find greater kindness with him than before; but if he proceeded in his
course (not taking him for a Son, but an enemy) he would shortly chastise him
for his malepert insolency, etc. Bajazet, being advertized, that Selimus, the
night following, was marched toward Constantinople, hoping for some tumult
upon his approach, departed by break of day from Hadrianople thither-ward; upon
which, Selimus peaceably entered Hadrianople, the Citizens fearing destruction
upon resistance; and refreshing his Army, set forward, by speedy marches to
prevent his Fathers coming to Constantinople; who scarce come to Tzurulum
almost the midway, warning was given, that Selimus's forerunners were cutting
off Bajazets straglers troubling his rear; who commanded his Standard to be set
up, that Selimus might find him in readiness. The great Captains and Nobles,
cunningly favoring Selimus, seemed not to like of his resolution of battle,
the victory bringing naught but sorrow; but the overthrow threatening
destruction, which seemed the more dangerous, he being then inferior to his
Son in provision and number; therefore not so hastily by a miserable death, to
stain the glory of his former life; but speedily to march to Constantinople,
out of which, Selimus being excluded, might (for fear) think of return, and so
perish with his (...) followers, by their hands, whom he had spoiled, rather
than by his Father's sword. Mustapha the most ancient Bassa gave this Counsel,
who maliciously hated Bajazet, emulating the younger Bassaes, by him promoted,
and secretly affected Selimus, esembling Mahomet his Grandfather, both for in
favor and condition. Mustapha was a Greek Priest's Son, born in Sores, of a
sly and crafty wit, subject to corruption, his froward and sainting look,
discovering it. Selimus had allured also Bostanges Bassa (infamous for
covetousness, ambition, and treachery) betroathing by promise, one of his
daughters unto him, and by the same slight Ajax, Aga of the Janissaries; yea,
the Captains either for reward or fear, almost generally leaned that way. Only
Cherseogles a faithful and upright man, thought that Selimus was there by force
of Arms to be oppressed, before his nearer approach to the Imperial City, etc.
not to be thought, said he, that the naked Tartarian horsemen (though more in
number) would abide the charge of Bajazet's well-armed Pens oners: not doubting
but the Janissaries would defend their aged and victorious Emperor against
disobedient Selimus etc. Wherefore he persuaded him, cheerfully to mind his
Soldiers of his former bounty, as of their duty; who reposing his trust in
their fidelity and valor, in that place resolved to chastise his unnatural
Son's insolence, with his followers.

Cherseogles (a Christian born) turned Turk being a man grown, always loving
Christians and their Religion, not common with such renegates. His Father was
Chersechius, a small Prince of Illyria: who lustfully beholding a Lady of rare
beauty and feature, to whom Cherseogles was going to be married, whom he
entirely loved, took her in marriage himself, all his friends crying shame on
so fowl a fact. Wherefore, he driven headlong with despair, fled to
Constantinople: on whom Bajazet (liking the honorable man, and his cause of
revolt) smiling on him said, Be cheerful, noble youth, for thy courage is
worthy of greater fortune than thy Father's house can afford: instead of thy
love taken from thee, the (...) of an (...) Prince (for she was descended of
the Despot's house) thou shall have the daughter of a great Emperor, of
singular perfection: So, abjuring his Religion, and named (of Stephen)
Cherseogles, he married Bajazet's daughter, deserving to be one of the greatest
Bassaes; yet with a desire to return to his former profession, he secretly kept
the Image of the Crucifix. This man by entreaty, saved the Venetian Senators at
the taking of Modon, afterward delivering Gritti a prisoner condemned to dye,
chosen afterward Duke of Venice; By him, the Venetians obtained a peace to
their good, redeeming a multitude of Christians, by his authority and charge,
from slavery: Neither is his furtherance of learning to be forgotten, as in
Pope Leo 10th his time. But Bajazet encouraged by Cherseogles, and hearing
(among other things) that Selimus had almost enclosed his rereward, got out of
his Pavilion, (grinding his teeth with trickling tears) in his Horse-litter
(not able for the Gout to sit on hors-back) saying to the Pensioners and
Janissaries, Whether they his foster-children, etc. would suffer him, innocent,
to be butchered by his graceless Son? And being old and diseased, to be
murdered by wild Tartars, little better then Rogues and thieves, etc. that
many persuaded him to commit himself to flight, etc. But he, contrarily, would
give the fierce enemy battle, and in this his last danger prove all their
fidelity, and valor, etc. and so either break that graceless man, or (having
reigned above 30 years) end his days with those that should continue loyal,
and though fame would make him believe he should be betrayed by some of his
Guard, yet he would not fear it, till he saw proof thereof.

The common Janissaries, to whom the Commanders had not communicated their
purpose of Selimus, cried out, He should not doubt to join battle, shouting,
clapping hands, and clattering their armor: Others for fashion sake doing the
like, the great Commanders especially, (whether for shame or fear) changing
their affection, and Mustapha with Bostanges, out of a feigned loyalty,
encouraged and martialled the battle: and by Cherseogles advice, the Sanzacks,
with their horsemen (about 6000) being set in the front, etc. Bajazet commanded
the Trumpets to sound, and a red Ensign to be displayed: Selimus placing his
Tartarians in both wings, and Turks in the midst, etc. The Tartars running
round in great rings, to shoot backwards and forward, annoyed the Turks greatly
with showers of Arrows; the others farther off, shooting more upwards, so
galled the Turks horses with their Arrows direct fall; but the old Soldiers
^erring close, received their Arrows with their Targets over their heads,
hastening to come to handy blows: the Pensioners then also bravely charging the
middle of Selimus his battle; and Ajax drawing out 700 Harquebusiers from the
Janissaries, assailed the hindmost of the Tartarian wing; the 4000 servants left
in the rear, repulsing the other wing (with great slaughter) coming to spoil
the Turks Carriages.

This fierce and doubtful battle, lasted from noon till Sunsetting. Selimus
fighting and stirring as for an Empire; but the Tartars not able to abide the
Harquebuziers shot, their Horses chiefly terrified with that unwonted noise,
fled: the rest, who could not be enforced to stay, fled also: the Foot attired
and armed like Janissaries, being sorsaken, were almost all slain by Bajazets
Horse. Selimus hardly beset, was yet delivered by some Turkish Troops, staying
with him, and being wounded and freshly mounted, (...) sollowed the Tartars;
but doubting to be overtaken, he took another cole-black Horse of wonderful
swiftness, (...) fleeing with a few to Varna, (...) by Sea, to Capha. The Horse
called Carabulo, that is, a (...) Cloud, Selimus so esteemed, that covered with
Cloth of Gold, he was in all his expeditions led after him as a spare-Horse,
and dying at Caire, as Alexander for Bucephalus, be erected a Monument for him.
Of 40000 men brought into the field, not above 8000 escaped from being slain or
taken. Bajazet losing about 700, and 3000 hurt with Tartarian Arrows, in
revenge, put all taken to the Sword, whose Heads and Bodies were laid apart by
heaps: old ruinous Chiurlus or Zurulum, became famous by this battle, in 1511;
but more famous afterward by Selimus, there (...) his days by a most (...)
Disease.

Bajazet's Soldiers being after 3 days returned from the Chase, he went to
Constantinople, rewarding them there. Achomates hearing of what had happened,
came with 20000 men from Amasia, to the City Scutari, situated directly
against Constantinople, expecting what course his Father would now take: for
his mind was filled with hope of the Empire for sundry reasons ceasing not to
send over Bosphorus Strait to Constantinople, soliciting Bajazet to (...) the
Empires resignation, importuning also his friends to commend him, and (...) to
extol Bajazet's purpose herein, that Selymus being overthrown, through them
(...) might the sooner (...) the Empire, his Inheritance. Bajazet was easily
entreated to hasten what he before determined, preparing Galleys for
transporting Achomates to Constantinople. But the CourtBassaes and Soldiers,
again resisted it, alleging the former reasons, and saying, they would not
suffer him so to disable himself, as to resign, who had lately so courageously
fought for the honor of his Crown, etc. yet not to cut off Achomates, nor he
to distrust their good will, but to enjoy his right in due time as the eldest
Son, and a man of approved valor: saying, they had sufficiently declared in
the battle against Selimus, what minds they were of, etc. Oh fowl
dissimulation, etc.

Bajazet again disappointed of his purpose, or as some thought, delighted with
Sovereignty; for that after the Victory, he seemed as young again, etc. sent to
Achomates how it stood, and to depart to his charge at Amasia, whence he would
call him when he had won the Soldiers with new bounty, and procured other
Courtiers liking, whereby so great and unusual a matter might the more securely
be effected.

Achomates thus deceived, and complaining he was so mocked and contemned, began
to inveigh against his Father, for making him a by word, etc. after by his
appointment he had come so far; but if he still so doated, reckoning so of
the Court Soldiers, as not to regard his promise, or what was right, he would
by Arms defend his honor and right, and revenge the disgrace: Bajazet answered
him by the Cadalescher, the Interpreter of their Law, and so of greatest
authority, that he did neither well nor wisely, to fall into such choler,
thinking to get that by force, which was only by love and loyalty to be
gained, whereas all should be surely kept for him, if he marred not that by
haste which by patience he ought to cherish: the Cadalescher telling him, he
might learn by Selymus his Example, what might be for his good, etc.

Achomates enflamed with anger and grief, while he was speaking, sharply
taunting him, could scarce stay from violence, threatening, that his Father
should dearly buy the change of his purpose, and the Soldiers their treachery;
(...) rising with his Army, he cruelly spoiled in Bythinia in his return,
determining to invade the lesser Asia, to use its wealth, if he must try his
right against either Brother; and being at leastwise possessed of half the
Empire, he should thereby, be readier for all events: wherefore greatly
complaining of Bajazets unkindness, etc. to his Sons Amurathes and Aladin, he
declared, there was no hope left, except they with him, would arm to defend his
and their own right, easy to be done by a courageous surprising of the lesser
Asia; seeing Pisidia, Lycaonia, Pamphylia and Ionia's Seacoast, had no Army or
Navy; and for Corcutus, there was no great doubt but he would either sit still,
or in a just quarrel take his part; however he might easily be thrust out,
doubting not but that the other Governors would yield to his Command or
Fortune: wherefore he willed them to pluck up their hearts, etc. These Gallants
encouraged, had soon raised a notable Army of Volunteers, most being servile
men; But Achomates, besides his old Army, led against the Persian Rebels,
levied new forces, with all the able men in Cities, so running and proclaiming
himself King of Asia, prosecuting, with his two Sons, all who yielded not to
him, whereby many Cities, for fear, or constraint, were delivered to him. Then
entering Lycaonia and Cilicia's borders, he frequently requested Mahometes his
Brothers Son, governing there, to aid him in his just quarrel, for the
recovering of the Empire, etc: And if Mahometes would aid him with men and
Victual, he promised, he should find a better Uncle then he had a Father, in
time to be most bountifully (...): who answered, he could not do it, without
Bajazet, his only Sovereign, his Command; (...) not for him to judge whether
he did right or not, that in his lifetime, he would resign to his Son. But
this he knew, he was to obey no other, so long as he lived in possession of the
Empire: to whom both his Father, Tzihan and himself had sworn loyalty.
Wherefore, it were good to pacify himself, lest he wronged his Father, and
overthrew his hope and honor, which of right, should be great, if he could
have patience. Achomates unexpectedly finding his requests more considerately
denied, than were reasonably by him demanded, entering his Province, destroyed
with fire and sword: which, Mahometes seeking by power to remedy, was
overthrown by Achomates: who fleeing to Larenda, not far off, was there
besieged; and at last, with his Brother a Child, delivered into his hands, the
City being yielded on Composition, who put to death Mahometes his Counselors,
with his foster Brother, supposing they had persuaded him so to answer, etc.

Bajazet, wroth and grieved, in old age, to be set upon by two Sons, sent to
him, reproving his disloyalty, commanding him to free his two Nephews, and
without more stir, to get him to Amasia; and, if not, to denounce to him open
War; but he receiving this Message, caused the chief Ambassador, frankly
speaking, to be put to death in his presence, threatening the rest with the
like, if they voided not his Camp before Sunset.

This unreverent outrage, and against the Law of Nations, highly offending
Bajazet, and estranging many from Achomates: the Soldiers exclaimed in
Bajazet's hearing, that his insolence was forthwith to be repressed, etc.
Mustapha also, with Bostanges, and others, who had cunningly dispersed these
things, began as it were to wonder at the fact, as condemning the deed, but not
the doer; but when they saw Bajazet from sundry motives, ready to seek revenge,
they bitterly inveighed against Achomates as a Traitor, commending the
Soldiers fidelity and courage, who for their aged Emperor, were most ready to
expose all unto new dangers. So Achomates being proclaimed Traitor, it was
ordered, the Court-Souldiers, with the European Horse, to be with all speed
sent against him; but choice being to be made of some worthy General, they all
began to strain courtesy, etc. saying, It were a great indignity, for the
Emperors Army to be led against his Son by a Servant; and the Soldiers
having their Lesson, said, they neither durst, nor would draw Sword against his
son and Heir, except conducted by one of the Othoman blood in person; for so
had his Brother long before, and lately Selimus, been both vanquished by
Bajazet's own Conduct. All this was, that Selimus, whom yet they durst not
name, but in way of disgrace, might indirectly be reconciled to Bajazet,
whereby coming to Constantinople, he might seize on the Empire; for besides
Bajazet and Corcutus, who, it was not probable, would for age and study,
undertake those (...), Selimus was only left, all the young Nephews being as
yet unfit. Bajazet in a chase, flung into his Palace, excusing himself; but
complaining that Corcutus following learning, had neglected other studies,
better beseeming a Prince. Mustapha the while, having drawn him into a
Discourse concerning that Wars proceeding, craftily and destructively said;
himself, though never so able, must not pass into Asia personally, lest
Selimus should in his absence seize on Thrace, Greece and the Imperial City:
nor, if he should send his old Soldiers into Asia, calling Corcutus with his
Asians into Europe, would (said he) Selimus, fear these fresh water Soldiers,
or their Philosophical General, etc. but if Bajazet should for defense of
Thrace retain his most approved Soldiers, he should see all Asia on a fire,
etc. wherefore seeing it was his fate, that two begotten of him, should be
adjudged Traitors: why did he not set upon them as occasion should serve, when
they were by the ears betwixt themselves? At present, says he dissemble thy
grief, and taking one, in show, into favor employ him against the other, etc.
at pleasure to oppress him, to whom he should commit his Army, his trusty
Soldiers being ever ready, etc.

He scarce having don speaking, the other Baslaes, as before agreed, persuaded
Bajazet to call home Selimus, and make him General, saying, It was like, he,
now corrected, would contain himself within compass: whereas Acho mates was
not like to be brought to conformity, till by force plucked down, as was
Selimus. Bajazet seeing Cherseogles sit silent, hanging the head, as not of
that opinion, stood a while in doubt what to resolve on; but the unfaithful
Bassaes, Cherseogles most instantly persuading the contrary, so persuaded him,
as to write himself to Selimus, that, on hope of his loyalty, he would receive
him into his former favor, making him General against his rebellious Brother
Achomates, if he would speedily repair to Constantinople.

Corcutus the while, advertised of these things, sailed to Constantinople in
his Galleys, where entering the PrivyChamber with many friends, humbling
himself, and kissing his Father's hand after much talk betwixt them, is
reported to have said, that he above 30 years past, being by a general consent
chosen and proclaimed Emperor, had cheerfully and willingly delivered that
glorious Empire unto him, etc. Neither did it ever repent him of that his
singular kindness and duty done, when as being contented, with what he assigned
him, as with a Kingdom, he thought, that his Father's great Estate, etc. not
comparable to the quiet of his pleasing studies, those worldly things working
no full contentment to the insariable desire of man, and that surmounting
virtue, and most sweet meditation of heavenly things promised to his
contemplative and ravished mind, of far more worth and Majesty, than all the
Monarchies of the World; but whilst he was for devotion and desire of
knowledge, traveling to Mahomet's Altar, and so to the Indians, as more
knowing and sincere men, he drew him out of Egypt by that Sultan, into
Phrygia, etc. as if he thought, the time would come, when for the ill
disposition of some, an innocent man, devoted to study, might be a stay to him
and the Othoman Family. Since which, he had with all possible integrity
discharged his charge: and in the late Persian War, defended his Frontiers
from invasion. But they being vanquished, his unnatural Brethren having one
assailed Bajazets person and Empire, the other, setting all that part in Asia
on a broil, he thought himself in duty bound to repair to his Majesty, etc. who
having had too great proof of his Brethrens infidelity etc. he humbly besought
him before the coming of Selimus, he hearing, that his Father's Guard and chief
Commanders, did but expect a time when they might salute him Emperor, whom he
sore against their wills overthrew infidels, to restore him the Empire due to
him, whilst it was yet in his power, in that so momentary occasion then
presented.

Bajazet moved with a Fatherly affection toward Corcutus, whose tears stood
in his eyes, bad him be of good cheer, discovering his ground of calling home
Selimus, and that he could be content to resign to him the Empire; but it was
not at present in his power, for fear of the Court-Souldiers, etc. But by the
plot now laid, Selimus should, under the Title of Honor, with the Soldiers,
be drawn into Asia, whither as soon as they were passed, he promised to resign
unto him: which done, although they wholly liked not, yet he feared not, that,
they who had lately defended him against Selimus, should for his sake dislike
Corcutus, etc. hoping rather, that if Achomates and Selimus should join battle,
either one or both should justly perish.

Corcutus, not much misliking his Fathers purpose etc. returned to his Lodging
not without hope, and remaining many days at Constantinople, he as a plain
upright man, neither by gifts nor promises, strove to procure any ones good
will.

Selimus his friends the while advertising him of Corcutus his coming to
Court, advised him with all speed, to come to Constantinople, etc. whereupon,
he with certain Troops commanding the rest to follow, came thither with
wondrous speed: Corcutus, the Bassaes Courtiers, and most of the Soldiers
receiving him, as their manner is, (at the Gates entrance) with a kiss,
bringing him through the City, the people running to see him, who was welcomed
with much thundering shot, and joyful acclamation of all Ages and Sexes: and
next day coming to Court, humbly in show, kissed Bajazet's feet, craving
pardon: who smiling on this Crocodile, courteously took him up, saying, His
faults were so much less, as finding speedy repentance; therefore he the
willinglier pardoned him, henceforth to endeavor, that God may be thought to
have endued him with a good mind, as with a notable courage: which, with his
forwardness, he might manifest by a martial matter, worthy his hardiness.

A Council of War being called, Selimus dissembled the Generalship; not to be
preferred before Corcutus, for his years and discretion; that he having his
Fathers favor, could be now content with never so little corner of the Empire.

Corcutus and his friends, whose hope was in Selymus his departure with the
Soldiers, instantly requested him, not to refuse that Honor, without disgrace
to Corcutus, he being more experienced in War. So he was no sooner chosen
General against Achomates, but the Janissaries and Court-Souldiers especially
before instructed, saluted him their Emperor also, arming to defend their act:
Selimus at first, showed a half unwillingness, as to reverence of his
alive-Father; but afterward promised, besides particular favors owing to the
Men of War, to bestow a great and general largess amongst them, which he did.
Then he requested the Bassaes and chief Commanders, to go and take Orders since
it was their mind, that the Empire might be transferred on him by his Fathers
good will, without farther trouble.

Mustapha, whether on a new fineness of his own, or that Selimus threatened to
kill him, if he did not; coming as dismayed to Bajazet, who hearing the
Soldiers clamor was come into the open rooms, most unwelcomly said, Emperor,
the Men of War have saluted Selimus, etc. requiring thy ratification, ready
to break in and kill us both, if thou refuse to resign: they request that of
thee, which they have already put into his hand. Wherefore its far more
dangerous to seek to recover, etc. than willingly to yield, etc. they in Arms
and fury, thinking on greater mischief.

Bajazet troubled, and perceiving the treachery, after pausing, furiously brake
out: False and forsworn, do you thus betray me? etc. why not also take away my
life, who could not a while expect my dissolution? but must in post-hast set up
a most wicked man. But much good may do you with him, etc. to whom ere long,
you shall dearly pay for this treachery. And he, beginning his Empire with
unnatural treason and bloodshed, shall not, I hope, escape Gods heavy hand.

Mustapha with false Bostanges and Ajax returning, told them; he, as well
content, had appointed Selimus to succeed him: then those corrupted, began to
look big, and others, standing before doubtful, joined themselves to that
faction. Selimus being mounted, was in pomp conducted up and down the streets,
and generally by the people, yet most otherwise affected, saluted Emperor, the
Bassaes and Soldiers being that day sworn unto him.

Corcutus, whether for grief or fear, (though Selimus promised him Mytilene
with Lesbos) secretly returned to (...).

Bajazet overcome with sorrow; before he were enforced, trussing up store of
Treasure, etc. with 500 Servants, departed toward Hadrianople, to have gone to
Dimotica, not far thence, and wholsomly situated. Selimus bringing him about
two miles on his way, returned, possessing the Palace.

Whilst Bajazet was traveling not above five or six miles a day, then about
76 or 80 years old, and for pain, etc. sometime staying two or three days in a
place, Selimus doubted, if he should pass over into Asia, Bajazet might the
while possess Constantinople and the Empire: wherefore before his going, he
secretly compacted with Hamon a Jew, Bajazet's chief Physician, to poison him,
promising him a reward of 10 Ducats a day for life, and threatening him with
most cruel death, if he did not secretly and speedily work it, when he had done
to return to him: the Jew coming to Bajazet very weak, told him, he would
prepare a potion to restore and strengthen him, if he would early next morning
take it. Bajazet, not mistrusting his old Physician, said, He would gladly take
it. Hamon coming, stood waiting till he should awake; but he still sleeping,
the Jew awaking him, said, the time was almost past, etc. Bajazet willing him
to bring it, Hamon took the assay, having before taken a preservative, drank it
up, he bidding the waiters to keep him well covered, not to give him drink,
till he had well sweat, and so fled to Constantinople. Bajazet feeling most
grievous gripings in his stomach, gave up the Ghost in 1512. (...) 30 years,
the Turks say he died naturally; but Genoway serving then in his Chamber,
reports, plain tokens of poison, were to be seen on his dead body: Selinus
having all his Treasures, buried Bajazet's body with the greatest solemnity, in
a Chapel he built nigh the great Mohammedan Temple at Constantinople: all his
Servants but five, who attired themselves in mourning, were restored to their
former places: they being imprisonned, two of them being put to death, the
other saved, by Solomon Selimus his Son, and two Bassaes suit; who being
stripped of all, were enrolled for common Soldiers. Utrius a Genoway being one,
who after ten years captivity, escaping difficultly, and returning into Italy,
wrote a History of what he had seen there.

Hamon, expecting his reward, was beheaded by Selimus his Command, saying, He
would not stick for reward, to do the like against himself, when opportunity
offered.

The Life of Selimus the I, the third and most Warlike Emperor of the Turks.
SElimus fully possessed of the Empire, first viewed the Turkish King's
abundant heaped up Treasures, and gave to the Court-Souldiers 3 millions of
Ducats, augmenting the Horsmens pay 4 aspers a day, and the Footmens two:
whereby he greatly assured their minds unto him, then passing with a great Army
into Asia, Sloyman his only Son to govern Constantinople, he came to Ancyra
in Galatia, hoping to oppress Achomates; but he considering his unableness,
fled into the Mountains of Cappadocia, taking up men by the way, praying aid of
all sorts, though strangers to him, to make head against Selimus, and recover
Asia. Selimus doing very little that Summer, because of the winter cold and
snows near Taurus. Achomates also fleeing from place to place, sending his
European Horse toward the Seacoast, and the Janissaries to Constantinople,
wintered with the rest at Prusa, who then continued the league concluded by
Bajazet, with the Hungarian, Polonian, and Venetian: and calling to him five of
his Brothers Sons, between 16 and 20 years old, except Musa, not past 7;
Mahometes, whom Achomates had upon Bajazet's death, freed, being about 20, who
for his feature and courage, was accounted the Paragon of the Othoman Family,
etc. He demanded of diverse Doctors and Lawyers, whether (...) not better, 5, 8,
or 10. to be taken away, than the whole Empire with great bloodshed, to be
rent asunder, etc. who, fearing displeasure, answered, It were better, etc; for
in a general calamity, those few must needs perish with the rest: upon which
color, he leading those five Nephews into Prusa Castle, by 5 of his Captains,
they were in the night strangled. Mahometes is said, to have slain one sent to
kill him with his penknife, wounding the other for dead Selimus being in a
Chamber fast by, sent in others, who first binding him, then strangled him:
their bodies were buried at Prusa; which cruelty so offended most, that many
martial men, for some days absented from his sight, as from some raging Lion.

Amurat and Aladin ( Achomates Sons) only remained of all the Nephews (whom he
purposed suddenly to surprise) besides his two brethren of the Othoman Family.
These young Princes had recovered Amasia, whence they were expulsed by Selimus,
when Achomates fled: wherefore Selimus sent Usegi Bassa with 5000 horse, who
(by great travel) might suddenly take them, the City being neigther well
walled, nor furnished for defense, Achomates also being absent in taking up
Soldiers. But Mustapha the old Bassa, now detesting his execrable tyranny, by
secret and speedy Messengers, warned them of Usegi his coming, etc. who,
advertizing Achomates thereof, lay in ambush for them; So that the Bassa fell
at unawares into the midst of his enemies, and Achomates also following him,
most of his men being slain, he, with other Captains were taken prisoners, and
committed to safe custody.

But some of Achomates Soldiers, scoffing the prisoners, told them how the
matter had been carried, boasting they wanted not friends, most inward with
Selimus, who favoring the Better Cause, would not long suffer the Beast to
rage: all which, when ransomed, they reported. But Usegi still in prison,
secretly informed Selimus, that Mustapha was the only cause of that loss; who
of late, envying at Mustapha's authority, caused him to be in his sight,
without trial, strangled and his body cast out into the street, a rare
spectacle of the worlds uncertainty, and example of disloyalty. Achomates (in
revenge) executed Usegi, setting all the rest at liberty.

Selimus at Spring, resolving on the destruction of Corcutus spending his time
in quiet contemplation at Magnesia, giving out, he would make a sudden inroad
into Cappadocia, set forward from Prusa with 1000 horsemen, (whereof Antonius
Maenavinus a Genoway, Author of this History, was one) and keeping on the right
hand, the Soldiers perceived they were to go for Lydia, and Ionia. A valiant
Soldier (sometimes of Corcutus his Court) secretly and speedily coming to
Magnesia, gave him warning of his Brothers coming; Corcutns richly rewarding
him, fled with two servants to the Seaside, hoping for passage into Crete or
Rhodes.

Next day early, Selinms came to Magnesia's Castle, hoping to find Corcutus in
his bed; but being deceived, he in a rage examined his servants, etc. with
cruel torments, getting it out of them, that he, warned by a Soldier, was fled
they knew not whither. Wherefore Selimus caused a diligent search for 15 days
all over the Country, and along the Seacoast; but not hearing of him, he sent
all Corcutus his treasure, etc. to Constantinople; and leaving there a Captain
with 1000 horse, he returned to Prusa, supposing he was fled by Sea into Italy.
But Bostanges with a Fleet on Ionia's coast, hindered Corcutus escape; so that
he hid himself in a Cave nigh the Seaside, hoping to find some opportunity in
few days: he living thus with Countrey-Crabs, etc. a good while, and forced to
send his man to a Shepherd's Cortage for relief was discovered to Cassumes, (by
a Peasant) seeking after his life: and being apprehended was carried toward
Prusa; and being within a days journey thereof, Selimus sent Kirengen Ogli
called (of his squint look) Chior Zeinall to strangle him, and bring his body
to Prusa, who awakening him in the dead of the night, told him, He was sent to
see him executed, which must presently be done. Corcutus deeply sighing,
desired to be so long spared, as to write a few lines to Selimus, which
guiltless, he readily in Turkish verse reproved him of his most horrible
cruelty, upbraiding him with his Father's, Nephews, and thirsting after his and
Achomates guiltless blood; and concluding with bitter curses, besought God
justly to revenge so much innocent blood; requesting the Captain, the letter
with his dead body might be delivered to Selimus; which being next day done,
(for he was presently strangled) Selimus uncovering the face to be sure it was
he, took and read the paper from his hand; which done, he bursting into tears,
protested he was never so troubled at any man's death, and commanding a general
mourning in the Court, he Princely buried his body, and 3 days after, struck
off 15 of the Searchers heads, flinging the bodies into the Sea, saying, If he
were driven to flee and hide himself, they would not stick so to serve him.

Achomates at Spring, set forward with his Army from Amasia, being frequently
excited by friends letters, assuring him, Selimus might be easily oppressed, if
with expedition he would come to Prusa, the Janissaries and Europaean horse
being then absent, and himself as hated of God and man, could not in so
unexpected danger, tell what best to do, etc. wherefore they willed him to
hasten, etc. lest Selimus should call together his dispersed forces, etc. for
Summer being come, he must either conquer by plain battle, which was hard, or
get him out of Cappadocia, and the lesser Asia. He hoping for better success,
as well for his own strength, supply of horse from Hysmael, and chiefly hoping,
Selimus now hated, would be forsaken in time of battle, yielded to his friends
persuasion, and being come into Galatia with above 15000 horse, left his foot
for haste, to come after: wherefore, Selimus sent speedily for his horse, and
while he levied common Soldiers Achomates friends with Selimus, did by Letters
earnestly persuade him, to make haste from Paphlagonia, before Selimus his
Janissaries, and horsemen were come, he also making all speedy and possible
preparation, etc. which letters being intercepted, Selimus executing the
writers caused others to be written in their names to Achomates (and signed
with their Seals) with all speed to come on, and not stay for his foot, since
Selimus might be easily oppressed with a few Troops, if he would but show
himself to his friends: who on the signal of battle would tumult and kill
Solimus going to and fro; and having them cunningly delivered, Achomates giving
credit, and much presuming on his strength, left his footmen under Amurath,
encamping with his horse nigh Mount Horminius, upon Parthenius bank. Selimus
going from Prusa, 10000 Janissaries lately being come to him sent Sinan Bassa
his Asian horse-General, to prove his enemies strength; who not knowing where
Achomates lay, through the mornings darkness, was set upon in a
disadvantagious place, and losing 7000, fled back with other 8000. Selimus not
discomfited, marched to the River Elata, which running out of Horminius into
Pontus, waters most large fields on the right hand, called, the Plains of the
new Land: So did Achomates, who though Selimus was too strong for him; yet
being now encouraged, and hoping upon his friends with Selimus, neither
retired, nor expected his others coming: the River was betwixt them, and their
number discovered, yet Achomates, to whom the open fields offered a safe
retreat, could not be persuaded to provide in time for his, and his Armies
safety.

Selimus, passing the River, commanded every man to be ready for battle next
day, and placing 1000 horse under Canoglis his wives brother, sent a little
before from Taurica, with some choice, Tartarians, in ambush in a wood, charged
him to charge the enemy, (battle being joined) on their backs; and when it was
day, he put his Army into battalia, Achomates (having no Foot) dividing his
Horse into two wings. Whilst they thus stood, Achomates offered Selimus to try
their quarrels equity hand to hand: which if refused, he took God and the world
to witness, Selimus was the only cause of the blood to be shed; who answered,
He was not to do that at Achomates appointment, and though he could be content
so to do, his Soldiers would not suffer him, etc. returning the Messenger with
1000 Aspers reward.

Achomates charging his brother's right wing, they valiantly received them; but
when it came to handy-blows, they by the force of the Persians (well armed)
were disordered, and forced with great loss to retire. Wherefore, Selimus to
encourage them, brought on his left wing, and his Janissaries also, who with
their shot enforced the other to retire. Achomates (careful) courageously
coming on with fresh Troops, the battle was renewed, and whilst he was in great
hope of victory, Canoglis rising out of ambush, with great outcries, caused
their enemies to turn upon them; the Footmen, standing close, charged them a
Front, and the Horse who had fled, were for shame also returned; so that
Achomates, being beset, his Ensigns were taken, many slain, the rest fled: and
himself fleeing, fell with his horse into a rainy and miry ditch, and being
taken, could not obtain to be presently slain, but was reserved to Selimus his
pleasure; who sent Kirengen, with a Bow-string to strangle him: whose dead
body, being brought to Selimus was royally buried at Prusa.

Amurath, hearing on the way by the Persians (who made their way thorough the
Turks) of what happened, returned to Amasia, resolving with his brother; he
with the Persians to flee to Hysmael; Aladin, to flee into Syria, and so to
Campsoa Gaurus Sultan of Egypt.

Selimus, after this, soon with little trouble, bringing all lesser Asia under,
and disposing of all things, would return to Constantinople; but the Plague
being there hot, he came to Hadrianople, where he spent that Summer, and the
next Winter, So to Constantinople, the mortality being ceased, 160000 having
there dyed.

Hysmael sending for Amurath, demanded why he came? who by his heavy
countenance and abundance of tears, expressed the cause; yet briefly declared,
That his Father, Uncle, and Consens, had lately been murdered by the Tyrant
Selimus; who sought also his and his Brothers life, wherefore they were glad to
flee.

Hysmael taking him into his protection, willed him to be cheerful, promising
him aid, shortly giving him his Daughter in marriage; for it was thought, if
Selimus should any way miscarry, none was to be preferred before Amurat: and if
he should invade him out of Persia, all lesser Asia, for the death of
Achomates, would revolt from him. Wherefore Hysmael, at Spring, willed Amurat,
to pass Euphrates at Arsenga, into Cappadocia, with 10000 Horsemen, to prove
the Countries affection, and enemie's strength: sending Usta Ogli with 20000
Horse to follow Amurat within a days journey, himself staying in Armenia with
a far greater power, doubting to want Victual in those vast and barren places,
whereby he must pass.

Amurat entering Cappadocia, had some Towns yielded him by friends; others he
took by force, sacking or razing them, and so fearing the Inhabitants, that
they submitting all the way, 'twas thought that he had gone to Amasia, had not
old Chendemus, Selimus his Asian Lieutenant, at Sebastia, now Sivas, met him
with a great Army: who also having advertised Selimus of the Persian's coming,
he came into Asia, meeting all his forces at Prusa, speedily levying thereabout
40000 Soldiers: which Amurat understanding, though desirous to fight
Chendemus, yet doubting to be entangled in Antitaurus's straits by Selimus his
speed, he retired to Usta Ogli. Selimus to the great joy of Christendom,
converted into the East, in 30 days came and joined with Chendemus at Arsenga,
and in revenge of his enemies harrying the Country, resolved to follow them,
and enter the greater Armenia, the chief Persian Province. The difficulties of
this expedition were propounded in Council, to be great and many; for the
Soldiers, who had soon marched thither, out of Europe already, were to endure
the pinching cold of Mount Taurus; by and by, scorching heat in plains, with
thirst, hunger and want; and the more, since the (...) retreating, destroyed
all, serving for the use of man, on purpose, if they should pursue them;
besides, they stood in no small doubt of the petty Princes of Armenia the
less, and Aladeules the Mountain-King, whom they should leave behind them,
with no great assurance of their friendship, etc. Aladeules his forces being
not to be contemned, and his command by Castles and Garrisons stretching from
the Mountains Scodrisci, near Pontus, to Amanus, dividing Cilicia from Syria.

Chendemus also, of great experience, and in greatest authority with Selimus,
persuaded him with a notable and grave speech, to stay a while in Cappadocia,
to refresh his wearied Europeans, and to expect the coming of his enemies,
dissuading him from the dangerous expedition into Persia. But he doing all
things according to his own direction, though not a little moved with that
speech, and seeing many Captains troubled at the imagination of the danger; yet
in a fume, refuting a little of Chendemus his speech, dismissed the Council,
protesting he would proceed, hap what would hap: though that old fellow he
said, feared to die honorably. Whereupon, others accustomed to serve his
humor, and envying Chendemus, beginning with the greatness of his forces,
valor of his Soldiers, etc. labored to lessen, what the Bassa had said,
touching te enemies prowess and power: Then discrediting him, saying, he being
of known resolution, had not so said, as wanting courage, but as foreloaded
with Amurat's promises, and Persian Gold. Wherefore they wished him to beware
of the Fox, and proceed so much the boldlier, etc. And moreover, these
flatterers suborned false accusers, affirming he received great sums from
Amurat, and therefore timely went not against the Persian robbers; for which
pretenses, Selimus commanded Chendemus, without further hearing, to be slain,
indeed to terrify others from like liberty of speech, and to teach them to
accept of their Sovernighs devices and counsels, without contradiction. The
sudden death of this faithful Counselor, struck exceeding fear into the minds
of all.

Selimus marching on, came to the lesser Armenian King's Confines, and of
Aladeules, requesting them then in Arms, to join and go with him against the
Persian: promising, the Wars happily ended, to give them all taken from the
enemy, as a reward; But they hating them both for daily injuries received, and
expecting the event, answered, they took not up Arms, but for their own
defense, etc. yet, if he would peaceably pass through their Dominions, they
promised a free passage, and to relieve him in Armenia the greater, with what
Victual their bare Country afforded. Selimus thinking those poor Kings would
for love or fear have done him what service they could, then dissembled his
grief. Wherefore passing the Mountains Scodrisci, in 8 days, to the great
Mountains Moschii, which famous Euphrates separates from Antitaurus; and
running into Iberia and Colchis, discovers Armenia the greater, on the right
hand here; Selimus, least he should lack water, departed not from Euphrates his
banks. So holding on Eastward, till he came to the Mountain Periardo, for its
fertility, there called Leprus, that is, fruitful; for Euphrates and Araxis
there running forth of contrary marshes, water that Champian dry Country.

Selimus, not yet hearing where Hysmael with his great Army was, as half
afraid, encamped at the head of Euphrates, sending his Scouts every way, to
intercept some that might inform him therein. But the Armenians, whether for
fear of Hysmael's command, were fled out of that part, whereby Selimus was to
pass, carrying away, or burning whatever was for man's use.

The Scouts after two days, returned to Selimus, not taking one man, showing
him how it was, and thinking either the Armenian Guides mistaking, or on
purpose, had brought them into such desert places, where Horses and men must
perish together: the weak Kings increasing their fear, chiefly Aladeules, who
for a few days, helped them with Victuals; but being gone far thereinto,
Armenia performed not his promise, thinking Hysmael would vanquish the Turks,
as he had most of the East. Selimus, perplexed, and c. with grief remembered
what Chendemus had before told him, yet seeming cheerful to his Soldiers, and
c. and calling his Guides, he understood, that on the right hand beyond
Periardo, lay the fruitful Country of Armenia; so, compassing the Hill
Northward, he turned down toward Araxis, passing it over about the City Coy;
for it is foordable, till it receive Rivers out of Periardo.

He had scarcely got over, but Usta-Ogli with Amurat encamping not far off,
quickly set forward to meet the Turks, lest Coy where the Persian Kings for
fresh Fountains, etc. wholesome air, and plenty of all fruit, used to spend most
of the Summer, should be suddenly surprised. ( Cussimus an Armenian, probably
showed Jovius; Coy to have been famous Artaxata, which Domitius Corbulo
destroyed,) Nor did Hysmael, though he lately sent most of his forces against
the Coraxeni in rebellion, not much reckoning the Turks, durst come so far,
delay; but forthwith came personally to his Army.

Usa-Ogli, incamping near the City, when as the Turks Scouts, upon Hysmael's
coming, the dust rising, and the Horses neighing; perceived a great power was
at hand.

The Turks were glad, that now they should by Victory, turn their toil and
famine, etc. into ease and plenty, or honorably end their miseries at once;
for the Horsemen, especially the Europeans, whose Horses were starved, and the
Foot spent with travel, and a great flux, living mostly on Crabs, etc. with a
supping of meal and Vinegar, began to die in every corner. Hysmael, to terrific
them the more, sent a Herald to Selimus, with some skilful Soldiers, to view
what they could; his number, Artillery, and how encamped; telling him, seeing
the Turks had no Title to Armenia, etc. he marvelled why he entered his
Dominion; but if, as Alexander the great, he should think so much his own as by
the Sword he could win, he should next day prove his fortune, and others forces
not inferior to his. Selimus answered, the manifold injuries done to the Turks
by the Persians formerly, and also in his Wars against Achomates, might give
him just cause, yet he esteemed them not sufficient causes of War, only
seeking after Amurat, lately spoiling Cappadocia, whom if he would friendly
deliver to him, as mutual Laws of amity required, he would peaceably return:
else he threatened to destroy with fire and Sword, even the heart of Persia.

Next day, Selimus set forward in order of battle against the enemies laying
about two miles off, thinking, so great a Prince would fight without delay, yet
what strength, etc. the Persian was of, he certainly knew not; for the
ingenious Persians, generally so loved Hysmael, that not one went to the Turks:
whereas many revolted from Selimus to him.

Selimus having 80000 Horse, placed Casan Bassa with his Europeans in the right
Wing, Sinan Bassa with his Asians in the left; before them both, the Acanzii;
in the middle, the Asapi; behind them, the Artillery guarded with 4000 Horse:
lastly following himself with his Pensioners and Janissaries, compassed with his
small Fieldpieces and Carriages, commanding his Vant-guard Foot, upon the
enemies approach, speedily to divide, that the great Ordnance might play
betwixt them.

Hysmael understanding by fugitives, his enemies devices, said to his chief
Commanders, there was no doubt of Victory, if they could shun the Artillery:
wherefore, when the Turks Foot divided, they should likewise withdraw into two
parts, causing two great Ensigns to be displayed, whither then to retire, one
for himself, the other for Usta Ogli, and the rest. He had about 30000 Horse,
no Foot; among whom were 10000 men at Arms, resolute, experienced, mounted on
courageous barbed Horses, and bravely armed; no Guns; in which, and number,
they were inferior to the Turks: yet contemning about 300000 Turks, and little
reckoning of their Artillery, they doubted not to give them battle: being also
exhorted by Hysmael, to remember their former Honor, etc. telling them, they
had to do with such whose Weapons were but weak Staves, and light Targets:
their Horses little poor jades, almost dead with hunger.

Selimus gave notice, that the long-wished for battle, was come, wherein if
they would worthily acquit themselves, they should to their immortal fame,
extend the Turkish Empire from the Persian Sea, to Mount Caucasus; but if
otherwise, they must not think to escape by flight, through those desolate
Countries, where they either should perish, or being taken, be forced always
to serve the Persian Women: also, Euphrates, Taurus, and Aladeules, who had
shut up the passages, did cut off all such hope.

The Asapi making place for the Artillery to play, Hysmael also dividing,
charged the Turk's right wing so forcibly, that Casan Bassa, after a terrible
fight with the foremost being slain, and many after them, that wing was forced
to retire unto Selimus; but Usta Ogli, who had no small harm by the Ordnance,
as not clearing his men so speedily as Hysmael, charged their left wing, making
great slaughter, and in his courageous assail was slain with a small shot.
Wherewith the Turks encouraged, who before gave ground, renewed the battle, and
with their terrifying Harque-busiers, drove the Persians upon the Turk's common
foot: who serring together, brake through them, bearing them down with a mighty
slaughter, and slaying the Cannoniers, who discharging at all adventure, slew
many of their own, as of enemies, so making way till they came to the right
wing, where Hysmael still hardly charging the European Horses, they were forced
to retire; but now charged afresh, scarce able to endure it, cried to Selimus
for help: who opening his carriages, sent out part of his Horsemen, and said to
his Janissaries, that days Victory was reserved to their valor: therefore as
fresh men, they should assail their wearied enemies, whose Horses were all on a
water, and the men faint under their Armor: yet Selimus could say, they were
not very forward, and whilst they leisurely set forward, the Persians slew the
European Horsemen down right, and were ready to assail Selimus himself on every
side; but Sinan Bassa, though his wing was sore rent, came in in good time, and
with some fresh Troops, restored the battle almost lost; but chiefly by the
courage of Alisbeg, and his Brother Mahomet resembling their warlike Father
Malcozzius. Selimus still in hope, commanded all the Ordnance about him to be
discharged: whereby such slaughter was made of his own, as well as of his
enemies, that for dust, smoke, and noise of the Artillery, both sides almost
losing sight, and hearing their Horses terrified with the Ordnance, not now to
be ruled, the battle brake off, the Victory yet doubtful. The Turkish Histories
term this, the only day of doom.

Hysmael being wounded under his left shoulder with a small shot, and
withdrawing through persuasion to have it searched, was the safeguard of
Selimus and his Army: for they following their King, left the Victory, thought
by all to be almost gotten; but Hysmael perceiving the wound was not deep, he
was about to charge a fresh; but hearing of Usta Oglie's death, in whom was his
greatest confidence, his Captains also persuading him not to set light by his
wound, whose grief he yet felt not, being warm, he softly marched away, as not
resembling flight: and passing by Tauris, willed the Citizens to open the Gates
to Selimus, if he came, rather than to fall into destruction, himself marching
in Media's confines.

The Turks having no hearts nor strength to pursue them, yet took their Tents,
where besides much rich furniture, were many Ladies and Gentlewomen, who,
Persian-like, had followed their Husbands in those Wars, whom Selimus safely
freed, except a Wife of Hysmael, whom he gave in marriage to a Bassa. Some
there present, reported that diverse Persian women were found among the dead,
armed, whom Selimus honestly buried. This notable battle in the Galderan fields
nigh Coy, was fought August 7th, 1514. Selimus losing above 30000 men, Cusun,
Lieutenant of Europe, being one, Seven Sanzacks, two being the Malcozzian
Brethren, who were slain rescuing each other: most of his European Horse; the
flower of his Army, being almost all slain, or grievously wounded: yet he
having the Victory, by his enemies confession, and having Ambassadors from Coy
and other Cities also from Tauris, promising to relieve him, and do what he
commanded, he marched thither to see and possess himself of that chief City,
two days journey from Coy. The Citizens being ready, brought them store of
Victuals into the Suburbs, Selimus not holding it safe to lodge within that
populous City, only kept the Gates with a strong Guard: Some say Selimus went
not into Tauris, but in a common Soldiers habit: others that he banqueted in
the Kings Palace, discoursing with the Taurisians, about his Victory. And
purposing to winter in Armenia, he asked his great Captains, how they liked of
it, who for fear, referred themselves to him.

Only Musthapha, chief Bassa said, twere good to know the minds of the
Janissaries, and Court-Souldiers: wherefore Selimus, commanded him out of his
sight, and degraded him, sending a Jester after him in disgrace, who cut off
part of his Tulipant that hung down; but the Janissaries much offended with the
indignity, rose in arms, telling Selimus, they would not winter so far from
home, in the enemie's Country: therefore he were best betime consider of it,
they being resolved to forsake him, if he did not speedily return. Selimus much
troubled, and hearing Hysmael was coming upon him with a greater power, and
considering with what difficulty and danger he escaped in the last battle, etc.
and suspecting the fidelity of the Taurisians, he resolved to return into
Cappadocia: wherefore exacting from them a great Mass of money against his
promise, he speedily retired toward Euphrates, a longer way than he came,
carrying away 3000 Families, the best artificers, chiefly those skilled in
making Armor and Weapons: fearing to return by the head of Araxis, etc. for
meeting the Albanian and Iberian Horsemen.

Hysmael followed him with such speed, that he left his Carriages, and such as
could not endure such a march, behind him; yet he overtook no part of his Army,
till come to Euphrates, where he was transporting his Foot in diverse small
Boats made, many swimming over for haste upon bladders; some on broken pieces
of their Carriages burst in sunder to that end. Selimus got over in a little
Boat, causing the Horsemen at once, to take the River, to break the streams
force, whereby his Foot and burdened Cammels got over, less dangerously, and
some Fieldpieces also with less difficulty: yet the Georgian Horsemen coming
in sight before all got over, raised such a fear, that 2000 Turks were in their
haste drowned, diverse Ordnance sticking in the mud, and much baggage carried
away with the River. The Georgians drew out the Turkish trash, pursuing them no
farther. Hysmael rejoicing, that chasing away his enemies, he recovered much of
the Ordnance, that did him such hurt.

Selimus his passage was much more dangerous at Antitaurus, than he thought of;
for Aladeules waiting for his prey, had taken all strait passages of that
MountainCountrey, whose savage people assailing them every night, robbed their
Carriages: so fleeing into the thick Woods, rocky and Mountainous: Aladeules
fraudulently excusing him self, as if done by the people used to such robberies
against his will, yet saying he would chastise the Authors, so soon as found.
And sending a little provision for some days, he spoiled the Turks by night,
by his Soldiers upon advantage, which Selimus could not prevent: wherefore
purposing to be in time revenged, he with much ado, came to Trapezond, thence
to Amosia, repairing his sore weakened Army that winter.

Thus Jovius reports the said Wars, whom others since have mostly followed;
yet Manavinus a Genoway, who served therein, does much otherwise report the
same. Selimus, says he, with about 300000 coming to Euphrates, the Bridge was
broken down by Amurat; and his enemies encamped on the farther side, having new
supplies from Hysmael: so that the Persians were about 90000 Horse and Foot,
most having two serviceable Horses apiece: neither could Selimus, any way learn
whether Hysmael were there, of, which he most feared, raising greater forces.
Wherefore, repairing the Bridge, he sent over Casan and Sinan, Bassa's, who
encamped as they thought convenient: next morning, Amurat, two hours before
Sunrising, suddenly assailed Casan in his Trenches, discomfiting them, and
taking their Tents: whereupon such a terror came on Sinan, that his men swam
over with great danger to the rest.

Selimus troubled hereat, placed his Artillery along the hither most bank of
Euphrates, and to hide them, ranged some Soldiers before them, as if presently
to pass over; but upon a signal, should withdraw from the Ordnance, bent upon
the enemy; many of whom being overcharged, burst in sunder, slaying diverse
Turks, also many Horses and Mules, terrified with the noise, leapt into the
River, and were drowned with their Riders.

The Porsians also having great loss, retired farther off for fear: So Selimus
passing over, marched toward the enemy, whom the Persians notably encountered:
The Fight was long doubtful, and much blood shed on both fides; and had not the
nights approach broke it off, the Persians through multitude, rather then
valor, had been greatly overthrown; but now they escaped the Turk's pursuit.
Selimus leaving his Carriages, etc. with his Foot, marched with his Horse,
suddenly to surprise Tauris, before the fame of the battle: the Persians being
as careful of their affairs. The day before, 10000 fresh Horsemen were coming
to Hysmael, who placing them in the Turks way, commanded them, upon their
approach, to flee.

Selimus in the morning, descrying them, supposing they were such as could not
follow the rest, exhorted them courageously to pursue them; of which, being
about mid day; weary, they stayed at a little River to refresh: then again
pursuing, leaving those who could not follow, hoping before night to ransack
rich Tauris. The Persian Horsemen in ambush, set the while on the Turks Foot,
thought to be secure, greatly slaughtering them, taking all Selimus his
Treasure and Artillery. Which being by Posts made known to him about two at
night, and that the enemy was following him, he, wonderfully abashed, began to
retire. The 10000 Persians now turning on the Turks, charged them hardly: who
being enclosed before and behind, received a great overthrow; and losing their
Ensigns, brake out sidewayes and fled.

Selimus also fleeing, and passing Euphrates, brake down the Bridge, fearing
further pursuit, and coming to Amasia with trouble and danger, assembled the
relics of his discomfited Army: such as could not follow in flight, being all
slain by the Persians.

The Genoway concludes, that Hysmael did not more rejoice hereat than himself,
hoping now to free himself of thraldom, as he did. For, fleeing into Trapezond,
he thence had passage to Hadrianople, thence by Land to Salonica; thence
transported into Chios, whence he returned to Genua, after ten years captivity,
part as a page in Ba jazet's privy Chamber, the rest a Court-Souldier under
Selimus

Jonius compares these two great Princes together, Hysmael and Selimus, who for
royal descent, strength of body, courage of mind, riches and power, were
equal, thereby obtaining like fame and renown; but in conditions and qualities
of mind, and Martial Discipline, much differing: for Hysmael was Majestical,
Selimus tyrannical; Hysmael courteous, Selimus churlish in devotion and
gravity: neither suffered he his Wives to come to Court, nor using their
Company, but for procreation sake, and that, as was thought, without any great
countenance; for he being more delighted with unnatural pleasure, thought a
man's mind and body to be not a little weakened with the allurements of Women:
scoffing also many times at his Father Ba jazet, who, he said, was so drowned
in the study of Averroes, determining nothing certainly of the souls nature,
and the Heavens motions, that he desired rather the name of a sharp disputer,
amongst the idle professors of Philosophy, than of a renowned Chiefetain,
amongst his valiant Soldiers.

A Persian Ambassador finding him pleasant, asked him, Why he wore not his
beard long as Ba jazet and others, to seem of greater Majesty; who answered, He
liked not to carry such an unnecessary handful, whereby his Bassaes might at
pleasure, lead him up and down the Court, as they did his Father; for Selimus
followed no advice but his own, in what ever he undertook.

The cause why Hysmael, out of so many large Provinces; for he had under his
Dominion, Armenia the greater, Sulthania, Persia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Media,
and Parthia: Armenia being the chiefest which yields the Persian his best foot,
Persia his choice Horsemen, chiefly from Scyras; next to them, from Assyria,
whose chief City is Bagdat, or Babylon: the Medes and Parthians being the best
Archers next to the Scythians, brought now so small an Army against Selimus,
was, because to win his peoples hearts, he had remitted a great part of his
Customs and Tributes; so that he wanting money, could not raise such an Army,
as otherwise he might, out of those populous Countries, yielding plentifully
all necessaries for man's use.

But in 1515, Selimus wintring at Amasia, raised such a power in Europe and
Asia, that at first of the Spring, he entered again into the Persian Confines
with a greater Army, and that sooner than either that part of Armenia's cold
would suffer; or the enemy thought he could have done: who thought in any case
to be Master of strong Ciamassum, standing on the first entrance into Armenia;
thereby, as of some holds thereabouts, to open a fair way into his enemies
Country. Hysmael being then gone against the rebellious Hyrcanians, Bactrians,
etc. Selimus making a Bridge over Euphrates, laid hard siege to Ciamassum,
before they were well aware, driving the Defendants from the Walls, with their
Harquebusiers and Archers, and still bringing on fresh men; others then also
breaking open the Gates, and scaling the walls in diverse places, the Defendants
retired into the Marketplace; where though spent and wounded, they resolutely
fought it out to the last man. Having taken and ransacked the Town, with two
small Castles, for fear abandoned, he thought good to enter no farther, till he
had chased out Aladeules: who, fearing his own estate, hearing Selimus was
come, soon raised a great Army for his defense, purposing to do as formerly.
Wherefore Selimus leaving a Garrison at Ciamassum, retired to Antitaurus, where
his enemies were reported to lay. Aladeule's people were fierce and warlike,
who could profit little by Husbandry, yet bred Horses and Cammels in
Pasture-bearing places; but most of their living stood in hunting and stealing.
His chief City was Maras, which may be thought so called from the fair River
Marsias, running through it out of the Mountain (...); who seeing Selimus enter
his frontiers, brought down about 15000 Horsemen into a large Valley, ordering
his great store of Foot to keep the Mountains on the right and left, there
advantagiously expecting his coming. Selimus considered the places
disadvantage, yet presuming on his strength and multitude, commanded Sinan
Bassa the Eunuch, General of his European Horse, in stead of Casan, to charge
the enemy afront, with a square battle, because of the places straightness,
himself with the Janissaries and Asian Horse, following after. Aladeule's
Soldiers also, fought valiantly in the head of the battle; and having spent
their Arrows, stood close, keeping the grounds advantage, so repulsing the
Turks old Soldiers, that they seemed little or naught to prevail; for they
could not enclose them on either side, and the Foot grievously wounding the
Turks from the sides of the Hills, with darts and Arrows. Selimus seeing such
strong resistance, contrary to expectation, sent some Harquebusiers to relieve
their Fellows, and the Janissaries at that instant, to mount the Hill. The
Aladeulians terrified with the shot, fled into the Mountains and Woods fast by;
yet the most slaughter was of the Foot, who, the Horse being fled, and the
Janissaries coming up the Hills, did with much difficulty by steep and broken
ways, clamber up the Mountains, as surprised with sudden fear: the Turks
killed them to the going down of the Sun: the swift Horsemen retiring into
further and stronger places, with little loss.

Aladeules, thinking it now best to protract the War, as the Turks pursued
him, burning the Cottages, he fled from Mountain to Mountain, not offering
battle, but in advantageous places; wherefore Selimus fearing want of Victual,
or intrapping, on the 7th day left off the pursuit: and himself conveniently
encamping, sent Sinan, carrying Victuals with him, with all speed and policy to
hunt after the King himself. And the while inquiring of the Captives, of
Aladeules strength, etc. found, he had taken with him his best Horse and Foot,
commanding the people to forsake the Villages to leave all desolate; and
intrenching himself on a strong Rock, with store of Provision, resolved not to
give battle, till he had drawn them where their multitude should little avail,
but to increase their Iosse: also they said, he feared to be betrayed by
Alisbeg, General of his Horse, who first fled; for Aladeules had treacherously
murdered his Father, upon a suspicion of his aspiring the Kingdom. Selimus
striking off their Irons, laded them with gifts and promises, and sent them to
Alis, to persuade him in so fit a time, to revenge his Fathers death, which if
he should perform by some notable exploit, he should have both credit with him
and the Kingdom: these imparting the matter to Sinan, he soon wrought with
Alis, pricked on with desire of a Kingdom and Selimus his rewards, that he went
over to Sinan, with a great part of the best Horsemen; whereby the rest, for
rewards, came all by degrees, over to the Bassa. Aladeules, thus unexpectedly
circumvented, reposed his hope in secret flight; but they pursuing him as he
fled, hiding himself, at last drew him out of a Cave, betrayed by the Peasants:
and being brought to Selimus, was in few days put to death, and his head in
derision carried about afterward through lesser Asia, then sent to the
Venetians as a witness of his Victory. Selimus reduced all his Kingdom into a
Province of 3 parts, to every part a Sanzack. Alisbeg to be chief over the
rest, wanting nothing of a King, but the name only. And leaving Sinan there,
commanded him, after he had set all things in good order, to winter in Iconium,
himself, with a few, returning to Constantinople; for he heard, the Hungarians
had made incursions into Servia, and spoiled it. Wherefore least he should lose
Samandria, reputed the Bulwark of Servia and Thrace, he sent Jonuses, Bassa of
Bosnia, with 8000 Horse into Croatia, as far as Catinum, transporting another
Army over Dannbius, into Hungary, that the Hungarians at once; doubly beset,
might fear their estate: and to show the World of what power the Othomur
Emperors were, etc. Having thus pressed the Hungarians, he at Hadrianople, and
Constantinople, the following winter, more prepared for War than ever, as
being advertized, that Maximilian the Emperor, with the Germ: Princes,
Uladislaus of Hungary, and Sigismund of Poland, had combined to war on him; but
learning by his intelligencers sent into all parts of Europe, that their
meetings proved but great words and Banquets, he turned himself with all his
preparations again toward the East, to the great quiet of Christendom. Yet he
strengthened his frontiers, with most strong Garrisons, leaving his Son to
Solomon at Hadrianople, and Pyrrhus Bassa his Tutor, which was strange, a
native Turk, at Constantinople, then he sent Cherseogles, whom he was most
trusted, with his Army into Bythinia, making Zafferus an Eunuch, Admiral of his
Navy lately built, and with wondrous charge rigged forth, and staying a little
at Constantinople, to see the young Soldiers then choosing Janissaries, he
departed to his Army at Iconium, intending again to invade the Persian, Being
come thither, he heard that Campson Gaurus, Sultan of Egypt, was come into
Syria with a great Army, giving out, he would aid the Persian King his
Confederate, entering into Cilicia with all Hostility, if Selimus proceeded to
invade him: he, perplexed, and fearing if he should pass Euphrates, Campson
should break in by Mount Amanus, and endanger that part of his Dominion, stayed
at Iconium, sending the Cadalescher, who wrote the Commentaries of this War,
and Jachis a great Captain, with great presents to pacify him, if possible,
not to hinder or disturb Selimus, from warring upon Hysmael, who had so invaded
his Dominions in Asia; and by a new form of superstition, had corrupted and
altered the most sure grounds of Mahometanism: and if Campson would by no
conditions be removed, then diligently to learn his strength and designs, and
speedily to return.

Campson, though spent with age and living in worldly bliss; yet for sundry
causes thought this expedition good and needful; for he hated Selimus for his
cruelty, and would never renew the League with him made with Bajazet; desiring
also to repress and abate his insolency, grown by success, beyond reasons
bounds, etc. especially, fearing the loss of Syria, and so of all his Kingdom:
for Egypt, Judea, and Syria intollerably oppressed with the Mamalukes, were in
danger to revolt, if the Persians should chance to be vanquished, with whom he
h dmade a firm League: also moved with Aladin's misery, he was persuaded,
Selimus might by his and Hysmael's forces be thrust out of all; for Aladin
living three years in his Court, had by all means possible incited the
Mamalukes to revenge. Likewise Aladules eldest Son fleeing into Egypt, had
filled so the minds of all with detestation of Selimus his cruelty, that the
chief of the Mamalukes humbly besought Campson, to take on him so just a war:
and if through years he thought himself unable; yet to give them leave of
themselves to take it in hand.

These Mamalukes far excelled the Turks both in strength, skilful riding,
goodly armor and also in courage and wealth. Many Christians of loose life, or
condemned for notorious offenses, fleeing to Egypt, and abjuring their
Religion, being circumcised, and meet for the wars grew by degrees to great
honor, as did Tangarihardinus the Son of a Spanish Mariner, by whose advice
(in Campson's time) almost all things were done, and was by him sent
Ambassador to Bajazet, and to the State of Venice, about matters of great
importance; yet at length by envy he was brought into disgrace, thrust out of
his place, cast into prison, and miserably died, loaded with cold irons. For
appeasing the mischief arising in that servile Monarchy (for 4 years) by civil
wars, about the succession of a Sultan, after Caytheius his death, to the sore
weakening of the Mamalukes estate, the great Courtiers, and chief men amongst
them offered the Kingdom to Campson Gaurus, or (as the Turks) Casaves Gauris a
man of great integrity and courage, and free from ambition: who earnestly, at
first, refused it, excusing himself as unfit for so high a place, and with
tears standing in his eyes, besought other great Lords to forbear to thrust him,
(content with his private life) into that place subject to so many dangers,
etc. (for he was terrified with the example of so many Kings slain in a short
time by other proud competitors). They persuaded him not upon a foolish
obstinacy or vain modesty, to refuse his good fortune; but courageously to take
on him the government of the State, sore shaken with civil discord, together
with the regal dignity, promising by solemn Oath, with all their power, policy,
and wealth, to maintain and defend the Majesty of his State, and that the men
of war, should not demand their wonted largess, till it might be raised out of
his Customs, and other Crown-Revenues; whereby he suffered himself to be
salured Sultan, and having given 10 millions of Ducars to the men of War, as a
largess, and by his moderate Government, had caused men generally to admire his
prowess and wisdom, he so reformed the shaken State of that Kingdom, taking
away by poison and other secret devices, the chief Authors of that Sedition,
that for 16 years, neither tumult or noise of war, was heard in all Syria and
Egypt: Undoubtedly worthy the name of a most excellent and fortunate Prince,
if in the winding up of his life he had not rashly thrust himself into the
dangerous quarrels of other Princes.

Campson, encamping at the River Orontes, (now Farfar) entertained Selimus, his
Ambassadors with more bounty than courtesy; who most temperately and calmly
delivering their Embassage in his Pavilion, he answered, The Egyptian Sultans
(holding the chief place in their Religion) used to keep with all care other
Mahometans in concord, whereof he was ever desirous, and was come into Syria,
only to persuade (...) to peace; who, if he would proceed against Hysmael his
confederate, he would not long suffer all to go to rack for the pleasure and
fury of one insolent and ambitious man, saying, He had long seen into Selimus
his insatiable, fierce, and troublesome disposition; who, procuring the death
of his Father, slaying his Brethren, Nephews, with many other his best friends
and faithful Counselors, could make no end of his ambitious tyranny:
therefore, to tell him the only condion of peace should be, If he desisted from
invading Hysmael, and restored to Aladeules's Son his Father's Kingdom, long
under the Egyptian Sultan's protection, as he ought to be; whereby, besides
his friendship, he should reap more glory by a sure and honorable peace, than
by a dangerous war.

Though the Ambassadors knew, Selimus would not, for any threats, give over
his enterprise; yet that being the sooner dispatched, they might truly
advertize Selimus of the Sultans sudden coming, he seemed wondrously to like of
his motion, and to give good hope by their persuasions to induce Selimus his
liking, etc. So being by Campson rewarded, they departed, traveling day and
night till they came to Selimus, who was come to Caesaria. Campson also came
into Comagena unto Aleppo, at this day a famous City, for its commodious
situation, much frequented by Merchants from the farthest part of the world;
but the City Birtha at Euphrates, of late time bounded the Egyptian Sultan's
Kingdom from the Persian.

Selimus understanding by his Ambassadors, both of the coming and number of
his enemies, also the Sultan's proud answer, thought good to convert his forces
another way than (...); Wherefore, making show as if he would have gone against
the Persian, he sent before, part of his Army with his Carriages to Suassia,
formerly Sebastae, standing in the Persians frontiers; but, turning on the
right hand, purposed to pass Taurus, and suddenly into Comagena, to come upon
Campson before he were well aware; wherefore he cheerfully declared to his
Janissaries, and other Court Soldiers, what he resolved to do, with the
Reasons, persuading them, the victory would be easily achieved; if they
courageously and with speed, would get up to the top of the Mountains, and
recover those difficult passages, not fearing the vain names of (...); for why,
said he, the strength of those horsemen is long since decayed and gone; the old
Mamalukes, who in Caytheius his time were of some fame, are all dead, etc. To
overcome (said he), indeed wholly consists in their courage and valor, who
deem nothing more honorable or better than to spend their (...) for the honor
of their Prince and Country. Here the Janissaries (...) their weapons, cried
our, He should conduct them whither he would, they being ready to overcome all
difficulties, and endure all labors and dangers.

Selimus, by the people, finding the easiest passages, resolved to pass the
Mountain in three places, and by opening straight passages, by the people and
Soldiers, and making rough ways smooth, encouraging by reward those Soldiers
who took extraordinary pains therein, in 5 days, all his Army, baggage, and
Carriages, got over the mountain into Comagena's Plains: for where Taurus takes
the name of Amanus, it is not exceeding high, nor yet impassible.

Alis Beg the betrayer of Aladeules, being sent for, with a strong power of
Horse, speedily overran all at the foot of Amanus and Taurus; thereby to
understand, of the people and those they could take, where Campson lay: also by
keeping the passages to do what possible, that Selimus his coming might not be
(...).

Campson who had vainly and proudly flattered himself, could not be persuaded,
Selimus was come over Mount Amanus, till he had certain news, that he was
encamped with a most puissant Army, within 2 days march of him. Then as sore
troubled, he sometimes hoped well, and by and by was as half dismayed. And
being exceeding careful of his honor and himself, doubted whether to retire
into more safe places, or to hazard a battle, though on great disadvantage;
for besides the Mamalukes Military glory above 300 years, himself being 77
years old, was not willing to reserve his last days to shame and obloquie.

One Jamburd Gazelles above others (valiant, experienced, and Governor of
Apamia) thought, to fight with the Turks most expert Soldiers, with so small a
power, was desperately dangerous: also that 'twas good speedily to retire,
choosing (...) as the fittest place for war, whither they might easily retire,
(the Turks not able hastily to follow them for their Foot and Carriages) and
calling thither all the Mamalukes in (...) and Egypt, and entertaining the
Arabians to protract the war till Winter, when the enemy would want victual:
neither was it to be feared, Aleppo (though but reasonably furnished) could be
presently taken, the enemy having but small fieldpieces. Besides, aid would
soon come from the Persians out of Mesopotamia, and Hysmael was like enough to
break into Asia the less: they might also, upon request, have great Artillery
from Rhodes and Cyprus against the common enemy; afterward, he said, Campson,
if he saw meet might (on eeven hand) give battle; but seeing the most (...)
motions of the greatest wars, did commonly by politic delay grow calm, he
should not make too much haste, since the errors of war often chancing through
Chieftain's rashness, might be lamen ed and detested, but hardly or never
recovered or amended. This grave speech much moved the Sultan and others; but
the foolhardy Mamalukes began to leap, dance, and rejoice, that now they might
prove their (...), and win themselves honor, a time long wished for, by
notable (...) of their enemies, to advance Campsons Majesty far above the fame
of (...): Some chief ones also, upon flattery and boasting, alleged how they
overthrew the Turks great Army at Taurus, persuading him the victory would be
easily gotten. Chiefly Cayerbeius Governor of the Province and (...)
(afterward preferred by Selimus to the greatest honors of Egypt) extolling
the Mamalukes, and extenuating the enemy, strove to the utmost to overthrow
Gazelles wholesome Counsel; for he grudged in heart against Campson, who had
poisoned his brother next to himself in power, and of an aspiring mind.
Cayerbeius, doubting the same on himself, when summoned to a Parliament at
Caire, feigned himself sick: Campson offended hereat, thought best to wait for
a fitter opportunity, to take away that proud man, etc. either coming to Aleppo
upon occasion of that war, or of going in person to Euphrates; for the Sultans
accounted themselves unworthy of that name before they had encamped their Army
at Byrtha, and with solemn pomp forced their horses into the River to drink,
thereby to show, they were ready by Arms to prove, all to be theirs along
Euphrates, from Taurus to Arabia's deserts. (...) this wars consideration,
caused him to deferr his wrath against Cayerbeius, till the end thereof, lest
the Mamalukes should revolt, or some mutiny be raised in Aleppo, he keeping
there a strong Citidal, built on a hills rising in the middle of the City, with
a sure Garrison.

Many of Campson's secret friends (the while) advised Cayerbeius to beware of
the Sultan, etc. who without delay, sent secretly to Selimus, declaring the
cause of his grief, promising to come to him upon occasion and to deliver to
him the Castle, with the heart of the Citizens, and all his own Horsemen: and
for performance of promise on both sides, required Hostages; also advertising
him of the Sultan's strength, in any case to give him battle, before he had a
greater power. Selimus condiscended to all, promising him far greater things
than he required.

Campson, through the General consent of his Soldiers, resolved to dare him
battle. He lay encamped on the River Singa, almost 10 miles from the City, that
his Soldiers using the benefit of the River, and removed from the Cities
pleasures, might yet be relieved with the plenty thereof.

The Mamalukes were scarce 12000, yet every one according to his place, had
more servants well furnished. Besides, their cunning and furniture in their
fighting, their Horses were strong, courageous and swift, and so docible, that
at signs and speeches of the Rider, they would reach him with their teeth from
the ground a Lance, Arrow. etc. and run upon the enemy with open mouth,
lashing at him with their heels, and had learned not to be afraid of anything.
Campson made 4 battles: Cayerbeius led the first, it being in his Province.
Sybeius, Governor of Damasco, (called for his activity Balvano, that is, a
Tumbler) the second. After them (who were to charge both the Turkish wings at
once) followed Gazelles with the third. Campson, all glistering, himself led
the fourth, almost a mile and half behind. The last was to defend the Camp.

Selimus ordered his Asian horse in the right wing, his European in the left,
his Janissaries and Artillery in the main battle; before whom, between the
wings, he placed his valiant Pensioners, serving that day amongst them, not
used so to do.

Cayerbeius gave a hot charge upon the Europeans; and by and by, as if to
compass in that wing, wheeled a great way about behind them, where lighting on
a great company of drugdes, etc. with Cammels and Carriages, he made there a
great stir, with little slaughter. Sybeius, turning his Troops on the left
hand, entered overthwart the ranks of the other wing; where, having made great
slaughter of the Asian Horse, they furiously bare down all before them, till
they came to their Ensigns in the midst: neither could Mustapha the Beglerbeg,
nor the Imbrahar Bassa, (or Master of the horse) by any means stay the rest
from flight. So Sybeius now thrusting in betwixt the foot and the Pensioners
backs, brought great fear on the whole main battle; the matter being extremely
dangerous; for Selimus was hereby almost cut off from his Foot; the Janissaries
being also hardly charged by Gazelles, setting on the head of their battle. But
by the seasonable coming in of Sinan Bassa with many fresh troops, (being but
lightly charged by Cayerbeius the traitor) the Mamalukes fury was repressed,
the Turks encouraged, and the victory soon wrung out of their hands: Selimus
then discharging his Artillery amongst them, their Horses somewhat troubled,
could not be so well ruled as before, themselves, though wondrous courageous,
being oppressed with the multitude of their enemies; yet serring close, they
brake thorough the midst of them, with great slaughter of the Europeans, and
hurt of the Pensioners, speedily fleeing toward the Camp and City, Sinan
following with the readiest Troops; for Selimus who that day seemd greater than
himself; riding up and down, called earnestly upon them to urge the victory.

Campson on the way, coming for relief, or to partake of victory, heard by
those that fled, That Cayerbeius was revolted, his Army overthrown, and his
Soldiers flight not to be stayed: 'twas also reported, that the enemies
multitude and their Artilleries force were not to be encountered; Whereat the
proud old man, who never rasted of ill hap, was ready for grief to sink down,
and forthwith his own men and the pursuing enemy, coming upon him, who without
regard overthrew whomsoever they met, he being corpulent, of great years, and,
besides his weighty Armor, troubled with a rupture, through hear and grief,
fainted in that press, and falling down was trodden to death. The (...) of
Damasco and Tripolis fighting behind, to repress the pursuers force, were
slain. Selymus erecting a few Tents in the field; keeping most of his men in
Arms, slept not that night, as not yet assured of his victory, lest the
Mamalukes should set upon his Camp, knowing they were put to flight rather by
Cayerbeius his treachery, and fury of his Ordnance, than by valor. Gazelles
and others hearing of Campson's death, baiting their Horses hasted from Aleppo,
to Damasco. Next day, Selimus giving his enemies rich Tents, to his Soldiers
for a prey, had Aleppo delivered to him by Cayerbeius, and, to win the Citizens
hearts the more, granted them greater privileges than formerly.

This noted battle (wherein not above 1000 Mamalukes were slain, but of their
servants, etc. many more, whose foggy fat Horses, brought up in cold Stables,
fainted, with the scorching heat, so that many betook themselves to their feet
and were easily slain) was fought Aug. 17. 1516, on which day two years, he
obtained the victory against Hysmael, in the Calderan fields. He lost 3000
Horsemen, although Sinan by Cayerbeius his Treason, escaped with small loss.
Campson's body being found two days after, was laid in open place, that such
as believed him alive, might be out of hope of his return from Caire; and
others, revolted, might be the more confirmed; and afrer three days, thus
laying and beginning to grow noisome, it was simply buried in the most ancient
Temple of Aleppo.

Selimus sent Jonuses Bassa to pursue his enemies to Damasco, who himself came
thither few days after, his enemies being fled to Cair. They of Damasco not
thinking it good to hazard their lives with that Cities great Wealth, opened to
him the Gates; other Sea-Cities, as Tripolis, Berytus, Sidon, Ptolemais, etc.
yielding themselves in like manner.

Not long after, he held a great Counsel in his Camp, under its walls; for he
brought not his Soldiers in, for troubling the Cities State, and the great
Trade then very securely there kept by Merchants of diverse Countries. And so
severe was his Discipline, that (...) Orchards and (...), it being (...),
rested without a (...), untouched: whereby his Camp had (...) of all
necessaries, at reasonable prices. And taking men skilled in the Laws and
Customs of the Country, with Ambassadors of all Cities, he decided the Syrians
greatest controversies, appointing Governors, viewing the Tributes and
Customs, abrogating many old ones due, seeming unreasonable or grievous.

Having refreshed his Army, especially his Horses grown lean, he most desirous
of conquering Egypt, sent Sinan into Judea with 15000 Horse, and a selected
Regiment of Harquebusiers to try the passage, and open a way to Gaza, thought
to be troublesome, for the wild roaming Arabians: Gaza (...) nigh the Sea,
toward Egypt, not far from the Sandy Deserts.

The Mamalukes the while, assembled generally at Caire, without contention
(...) Tomombeius or Tumanbai a Curcassian, their King, being Diadare, or next
in office before. He thinking his own Majesty, and the Mamalukes remaining
hopes, to be wholly reposed in Arms; with great industry provided Armor,
Weapons and Horses, casting store of Ordnance, and mustering great Companies of
his slaves: entertain ng many Moors and Arabians: Hiring also men skilful to go
through the Palmyren Deserts, into Mesopotamia, and so to Hysmael, requesting
him by Letters to invade Asia the less, or speedily to break into Comagena,
then destitute of sufficient Garrisons: and that Selimus, then in Judea's
(...), might easily be enclosed by them both, and vanquished or distressed for
want: and the rather, for that there was no Turkish Fleet on that Coast, etc.
Sinan the while Selimus his forerunner (having (...) diverse Companies of
theevish Arabians) was come to Gaza: the (...), (though in heart the Mamalukes)
yielded him their City on composition, and relieved him, giving him great
dissembled thanks, that by his means they were (...) from the Mamalukes
bondage, and ever promised to remain faithful for so great a benefit. Sinan
commending their good will, lodged his Army nigh the Walls, within defense of
the Gardens, there to expect Selimus his coming. And the while, (...) sought to
get knowledge of that (...), (...) Country, chiefly of the nature of the great
sanos: winning by rewards the Inhabitants thereabout, to procure the chief
Arabians favor, by large offers, and to spy what the Mamalukes did at Caire,
etc. and give him knowledge.

The Gazians on the other side, advertized Tomombeius of Sinan's coming, and that
he might be oppressed before Selimus came, if a strong power were sent thither,
and if the Mamalukes would at an appointed time, set by night upon them, they
then sallying out, would do them what harm they could with fire and sword.
Tomombeius presently sent Gazelles with 6000 choice Horsemen and many Arabians;
who having shown himself a politic and valiant Chiefetain, all held a great
opinion of his valor and direction.

But Sinan was instantly advertised by his Intelligencers, that they were
coming suddenly to oppress him, and would be with him within two days, being
on the (...). But Sinan, though he knew nothing, yet providently suspecting the
Gazians treachery, silently betwixt 10 and 12 at night, (...) his Army, marched
about 15 miles toward Egypt, nigh which was a small Village, wherein
Travelers lodged, for a plentious Spring (...) rise h; Sinan and Gazelles
both, purposed to stay there: both whose fore runners brought news that the
enemy was at hand.

Gazelles not a little troubled, and unable to fight in plain battle;
especially his Horses (...) sore wearied, was enforced on a new resolution; yet
not (...), he cheerfully exhorted his Soldiers to make ready, and perform that
by force which they could not by policy. Sinan having somewhat sooner set his
men in order, as taking order before, with long hopeful persuasions encouraged
his, to play the men; not to think of flight, for the ways would be shut up;
chiefly to be persuaded, no one could perish, but whom the immortal God had
appointed to die: that valiant men found life in the midst of their enemies, as
cowards death in their safest flight.

Sinan placed his Harquebusiers in the wings, in thin Ranks, the easier to use
their pieces, and enclose the enemy. Gazelles sent, before, the Arabian light
Troops, to trouble the enemies wings: charging their middle battle with a
square battle. The battle was long terrible, and doubtful; for the Turks being
glad to give ground, and disordered by the Mamalukes breaking in, began to look
which way to flee; but the Harquebusiers having repulsed the Arabians, wheeling
about, enclosed the enemies battle, whereby men and Horse were a far off slain,
true valor helping them not; for the Mamalukes pressing forward, the Turks
retired, laboring only to gaul them with shot.

Gazelles, his Horses being spent, the Arabians beginning to fall off, and many
of his valiantest men slain or wounded, (himself also wounded in the neck)
making his way through, losing diverse Ensigns, fled back to Caire: having lost
the Governors of Alexandria and Caire, with 1000 more, and a great number of
Arabians. Sinan lost above 2000 of his best Horsemen, some being noted
Commanders. The Turks (not able to pursue) there encamped near the Fountain:
and next day gathering the spoil, fastened their enemies heads, known by their
long beards, upon date Trees; in witness of their labor, and to feed the eyes
of fierce Selimus, shortly to pass that way.

They of Gaza, supposing Sinan on some knowledge of the Mamalukes coming, had
retired, early setting upon many left in the Camp, most being sick and weak,
slew them, and presently spoiled 2000 Horsemen of their Carriages, putting them
to flight, who were sent from Selimus to Sinan: who fearing he had been lost
with his Army, in fear retiring, were slain by the Arabians: neither had one
escaped, if Juleb sent from Selimus to Sinan with Grecian Horsemen at Rama,
had not repressed their fury: yet they calling for more and more, dwelling in
the Mountains, were a great Army overtaking the Turks, at the Village
Carasbara, forcing them to fight in a place of great disadvantage; for having
taken straits, closing in the passage of a large Valley, they were before,
behind, and on both sides at once. They skilfully used Bows and Arrows, with
long Spears armed at both ends, upon their swift Horses; so that the Turks
keeping close, hardly defended themselves, in number few: Juleb opening the way
by 4 pieces of Artillery, speedily brought his men through those straits; then
marching more safely, he skirmished a far off with them, discharging his
Fieldpieces, where he saw the thickest of those wild people: yet they were
still hovering in their rear; slaying such as could not follow, and not
suffering them to refresh or take rest: so that many through thirst, wounds and
labor, died; but a great number of other Turks met them unlooked for, being
even at last cast; for Selimus having left Imbrahor Bassa upon Persia's
borders, and sent for supplies from Constantinople, by Sea to be transported,
had removed from Damasco, and the better to provide for Victuals and forage,
every day, sent before, great Companies of his Army.

Juleb, next day meeting with Selimus, told him all that had happened, and what
they conjectured of Sinan Bassa: He now exceeding melancholy, thought good to
go no further, before he knew how it stood with Sinan, in whose fortune he had
put the hope of his good success; But suddenly came the Syrian Spies, declaring
what Sinan had done, turning that melancholy into joy, seeing by that Victory
Egypt laid open to him, etc.

Next day removing to Rama, he burnt, by the way, the dwellings, Wives, and
Children of those Arabians, who had done so much harm to his men; and sending
his Foot to Sinan at Gaza, himself turned on the left hand to Jerusalem, to
visit that ancient and famous City, then unpeopled, desolate and defaced, not
inhabited by Jews, but mostly by a few poor Christians, who paid a wondrous
yearly tribute to the Sultan of Egypt, for the possession of the holy Grave;
and reverently worshipping the Monuments of the Prophets, and having done
special sacrifice to Mahomet, he gave to the Christian Priests keepers thereof,
as to devout men, money to maintain them for six months; and afrer one nights
stay, marched in four days to Gaza, having skirmishes day and night with the
Arabians: who, where the Turks were forced for the ways straightness, to
extenuate their ranks, they would be ready to skirmish, and suddenly come to
handiblows: tumbling down upon them great stones from the Mountains: their
Harquebusiers through the weathers rayniness, and tempestuousness, serving to
little purpose; yet the Janissaries climbing up the hills with Pikes, and
driving them from their standings, near the Emperors Person, no (...) hurt was
done.

Sinan, who returning, had put to death the Authors of the treachery at Gaza,
confiscating their Goods, and exacted a great sum of the People in general,
went to meet Selimus with his victorious Soldiers: who gave to the Captains
generally, and particularly, the (...) common Soldiers, silk Garments, with a
great sum of money as a reward.

He stayed but four days at Gaza; and although his expedition required great
haste, yet his Army was to be refreshed, and great provision to be made for
carriage of water on Cammels backs, through the dry, solitary and light (...)
Deserts, by the wind much troubling the weary passengers; but such a sudden
calm ensued, the great rain falling few days before, that Selimus wanted
nothing, no not plenty of water, for the happy conduct of his Army; yet the
wild Arabians all along, hovered about them for prey, snatching up, and slaying
any that stragled, or stayed behind; but he provided an easy re-medy by
placing his Fieldpieces in diverse parts to be, upon danger, discharged upon
them: also strong Harquebusiers in the rear-ward, for defense of the weak who
could but softly follow.

By this means, with small loss he in 8 days drew nigh to Caire; Sinan with
his Europeans, keeping a days journey before. Into a Village called Matharea,
famous for plenty of excellent balm, about six miles from Caire, nigh the
Village Rhodania, Tomombeius conveighing all his new and old Artillery, had
drawn deep ditches a cross the field and high way, closly covering them with
weak hurdles and earth: and he with about 12000 Mamalukes, and a multitude of
Arabian Horsemen, lay in convenient places, that the Turks approaching might
feel the force of his Ordnance, before come within Arrows shot, and forthwith
to set upon them, disordered and entrapped, so that none doubted of the
success; a great mischief to the Turks, if the treachery of a few, had not
frustrated their great endeavors. For 4 Epirot Mamalukes (grieving at the
preferment of Tomombeius: whether upon malice, or hope of reward, etc. or in
that declining of their Kingdom to seek new friends, fled secretly to Sinan:
who being born in a Village of Epirus, a Sow kept in the House, is reported to
have bit off his Genitories, being a Child sleeping in a shady place; and being
brought to Constantinople, by the takers up of minions for (...) Turk, was
presented to Mahomet the great: where (...) advanced him to his appointed
honors whom she had before dismembered) instructing Selimus and him
especially, what stratagems Tomombeius had devised, whereinto they must needs
fall, if they forlook not the high way. Wherefore by their guidance, they by a
great compass and unusual way, came before day, showing themselves at their
enemies backs in order of (...), with their Artillery ready bent. Tomombeius,
though above measure (...) at the frustrating of all that he with such industry
and labor had brought to pass, yet being of an invincible courage, entered
into his wonted devices, telling quickly his chief Commanders what to do: the
Signal for making ready was to be given, the battle to be ordered, the (...)
encouraged: and his Ordnance to be quite contrary turned, hardly at once, to be
directed by one, and hastily to be done by many; but especially the great
concourse for removing of the huge iron (...) like Ship Ordnance, most troubled
the well ordering of the rest with their tumultuous stir; but (...) and
constancy much helped their difficulties: who although twice overcome, and in
so sudden an accident, were still of greater spirit and confidence. Wherefore
Tomombeius, the signal being given, commanded his Arabians to enclose the
enemie's wings behind, skirmishing with them, that, if possible, the Turks
Horsemen, might be (...), before he came to charge them, (...) his Ordnance
presently to be discharged. So did the Turks likewise, bringing them within an
arrow-shot. So that for a good space they beat one upon another with their
Ordnance only: the Egyptians Cannoneers being almost all (...), and many of
their Field-peeces broken, by the others shot. For Selimus had allured many
excellent Canoniers, out of Italy and Germany, chiefly of those Jews who were
banished Spain by Ferdinand, dispersing, (...) (...) those devices thorough the
East. Jacobus Regio Lepidi was the chief, a cunning Engineer, who lately
through the Turks rewards, revolted to (...).

But after the matter brought to battle, the (...) with a most hideous cry,
furiously assailed the Turks in three (...): for Selimus keeping his wont,
approached his enemies in form of a half Moon: Mustapha (...) the Asians in the
right wing, Jonuses the Europeians in the left, himself the main battle: Sinan
the General of the field led a (...) number of selected Horsemen, (...) five
hundred (...), Harquebusiers, ready against all uncertain events. So almost at
once, four sharp battles were made in diverse places. Some present, report,
that, what for clamor, (...) of Instruments of War, and rising of the (...),
all were so confounded, that mistaking one another, they sle v many friends
instead of (...): never battles meeting with greater (...), nor two Kings with
less care of their persons and safety, (...) desperately showed their strength
and courage. Gazellus to requite the Eurepeians for the (...) not far from Gaza
very suriously (...) Jonuses, and at first (...) brake his first Ranks (...)
(...) of his Guidons; and the Arabians then pressing in behind forced (...)
victorious, the flower of Thrace, Thessalia, Epirus, (...) and Grecia to (...),
which never enemy before saw: but Sinan coming speedily in with his fresh
Troops, (...) the declining battle; and while he was fighting courageously in
the head of his battle, he was by (...) Bidon coming in, slain: to rescue whose
dead body, while his followers labored, they were by Gazellus unfolding his
Troops, most slain, the rest put to flight: and the five hundred choice
Janissaries, now destitute of Horse, when they had done what was possible were
compassed, cut in pieces, and trodden under foot in a trice. Mustapha in the
other wing, sore pressed the Egyptians left wing, which valliant Helymis the
Diadare, and Giapal led, who had lately received great harm by Selimus his
overthwart Ordnance. Mustapha hereupon with his whole Troops, overthrew their
broken Ranks, and glistering, with a land voice encouraged his Asians by valor
or honorable death, to recover their honor lost in the fields of Aleppo.

Then also Tomombeius breaking through the middle battle of the Turks-Horse,
entered among the Foot, giving many a deadly wound with his Scimitar, he being
big and strong. The Arabians also had enclosed the uttermost of the Turks,
forcing them in many places to turn upon them, being doubtfully charged before
and behind. Selimus setting forward with his foot, and Janissaries, neither the
courageous barbed Horses, nor their Riders could abide their force; for with
their harquebusiers and pikes, they so strongly be set their front, that
nothing could stand where that linked body swayed; yet this cruel battle
continued doubtful fromthe fourth hour, till Sun setting, every part of both
Armies with diverse successes enduring the fury of that fight, both victors and
(...), fighting as prodigal of their lives, etc. So that their bodies wearied
and weakened with wounds, supported with anger seemed sufficient to mantain
that Battle till next day; if the darkness coming on, had not ended that days
slaughter.

Tomombeius fearing to be utterly (...), first sounded a retreat, that his
Mamalukes might not seem to be put to (...); for the fortune which deceived his
first hopes, seemed to promise better success, if, as not discouraged, he
should renew the War. The Turks enjoying their enemies tents and Ordnance,
pursued them till midnight. It was fought Jan. 24. 1517. The Diadare was taken
in flight, mortally wounded, and valiant Bidon, having his knee broken with a
(...) his Horse being therewith slain: both whom, Selimus next day, commanded
to be slain either for their wounds thought uncurable, or to revenge Sinan's
death, which he wondrously lamented.

The Turks Armies was greatly impaired even in their fortunate Battles: the
fourth part was consumed by sickness and Sword, that day tyring many Horses,
besides their former long journey. Wherefore not yet experiencing the (...)
disposicion, nor certainly understanding where Tomombeius stayed, or what he
resolved, staying four days at Matharea and Rhodania, he provided for his
wounded, and burying his dead but not his enemies. Then for more commodious
watering, he came into the plains between old Caire and Bulace.

Tomombeius, encamping between new Caire and Nilus, with his collected (...),
Ethiopian slaves, (...) so is and (...): also Jews and Arabians having opened
the old Armory, (...) for a (...) War than before; but, having lost his (...),
with many of his (...) Horsemen, and desiring to protract the War till heat of
Summer, he thought not good to adventure another (...): but resolved by night
to (...) the Turks Camp, and if possible to (...) on fire: that he might
attempt some notable exploit before the enemies should perceive his weak (...),
and before grown into contempt with the (...) Egyptians, expecting but some
fit occasion to (...): also by benefit of the night, to avoid the danger of
their great (...). But Selimus by some (...) who daily (...) him, understanding
hereof, making great fires in his Camp, kept most careful watch: whereby next
night Tomombeius (...) (...) with no small loss of his first Troops,
unadvisedly going on too far, and misdoubting the unwonted fires, called back
his hasting Troops, marching into the very mouth of the (...) (...) on (...).

Tomombeius his chief Captains now (...) him with his whole strength to man
Caire and keep the Turks from entering: wherefore the Mamalukes coming thither,
furnished all their (...), and flat roofs of their Houses with all (...) of
Weapons: requesting the Egyptians to take arms against their ancient and (...)
enemies, not to suffer themselves to be slain, their goods spoiled, and their
wives and children to be miserably captivated, since the merciless enemy (if
they overcame) would not spare them, though they stood as newters, etc. Many of
the wealthiest, as they thought the charge would be hurtful to their trades and
wealth; so were they ready to help their old Lords. But many of the middle
sort, and far more of the basest vulgar, having little or naught to lose, hoped
to gain by others losses, and remembering their about three hundred years
slavery under the proud Mamalukes, kept close, expecting the last event,
secretly rejoicing, that their cruel Masters should now be justly punished; and
the more, that the revenge should be by the hazard of others lives, with which,
they hoped shortly to fill their eyes.

Tomombeius with much labor and care fortified all the gates and entrances of
that great and ancient City (for it was not compassed with any walls)
appointing to every street a Captain, in every public (...) encouraging the
people, and omitting nothing that could be done or devised: making cheerful
show of greatest hope in so great a danger. The Mamalukes also, strivingly,
according to every ones devise, caused great ditches, or Timber-logs to be cast
along the streets, some setting up sharp Stakes in covert Trenches, that the
enemy falling on them unawares, might be engaged; others furnished the windows
and fronts of their Houses in the greatest streets, with Harquebusiers, and all
(with many more) with such speed, that none refused to put his hand to any
labor. The broadest street came strait from the East gate to the Castle and
middle of the City (the rest, were so narrow and crooked, that no great
Artillery could be brought by them, or Soldiers enter without great danger):
into this, especially, Tomombeius conveyed his chiefest strength, for the
enemy must needs come in that way; but the innermost part, where the Castle
stood, was kept with very great, strong and valiant Garrison: thence, on all
occasions to come for relief; for why, that greatest City, could not with his
then so small power, be in every place sufficiently defended. Selimus certainly
understanding hereof, drew nearer to the City with his Army, exhorting them,
now a little to force themselves for gaining of the Rewards due to their former
labors and Victories, which he said, would be more and greater than they had
imagined: telling them, there was but few good Soldiers left with the desolate
Sultan, etc. making them believe, he was sent for by the Egyptians, promising
to assail the Mamalukes whose name they hated, upon occasion, out of their
houses; yet saying, they were not to be accounted quite overcome, which lived
in hope, with Weapons in their hands, possessed of the chief City; therefore to
think, that in that day's fortune rested the good or bad estate of their lives,
honor and fortunes: assuring them it would be but small labor to bring it to
an end, if in that new kind of fight as in other Battles, they would but
resolve to overcome.

This speech enflamed the Soldiers, but hope of such prey, much more; So that
Selimus entering by the gate, Bassuela thrust in his Horse at diverse places at
once, but brought in his Janissaries by the largest street. At first, Horsemen
with Horsemen bloodily fought in the narrow streets, but the Foot discharging
their Culverings and Falcons before them among the thickest enemies, cleared
the street; but coming to the Baracadoes and (...), and to remove Timber-logs,
etc. by force, they fought with force and obstinacy on both parts, never in
man's memory more cruel: for they were not ignorant, that 'twas as well as for
their lives and Empire, as for honor. Here the Turks received great loss, for
running on, the hindermost on the foremost, they tumbled by heaps into the
covert Trenches, and were impailed upon the sharp stakes. The women and
children also throwing down stones, tyles, etc. from house-tops and windows,
upon them: they, as they could spy them, fetching them off with their
Harquebusies, or breaking into their Houses and fighting with diverse success;
but most of the Egyptians according to either fortune, assailed sometimes the
Turks, sometimes the Mamalukes, Many cruel encounters were at once, in diverse
places; for, crossing from street to street, they both happened on new enemies,
and the Victors pursuing a-front, were by others following them slain
downright. The lanes and streets so flowed with blood of the slain heaps; that
the dust at first, very thick, was laid as with a plentiful shower, the air was
darkened with smoke and arrows, and through clamor, noise of Armor, and
Artillary, the earth seemed to tremble, and the houses to fall down.

It thus continued two whole days and nights without ceasing, yet the
Mamalukes few, and through such labor and watching, giving ground by degrees,
retired further into the City. The third day beset with the greatest danger
they so resolutely fought that the Turks retiring a great way, left some
Fieldpieces behind them: whereat, Selimus despairing commanded to fire the
Houses, especially for that Jonuses Bassa, was in his sight dangerously wounded
by a stone out of a window. The Houses burning, the Egyptians cried for mercy:
the Turks fighting, but faintly expecting a retreat: but they had sudden news,
that Mustapha on their side had forced the enemies to retire and flee; for he
being by some directed to a broad street, where the Mamalukes had left their
Horses ready that on the worst chance, they might retire, and so haste to their
appointed Refuges, took them all away, having put to flight the weak Garrison
of most part Horsboies and Muletors.

This accident, daunted the Mamalukes: who now, hardly beset, and in their own
judgment overcome, fled, most with Tomombeius to Nile, where being transported
in boats, they fled into the Country Sigesta: others hiding in Egyptians Houses
and loathsome corners of the City: 1500. of the better sort fled into Mahomet's
Temple, long defending themselves, to yield on honorable conditions; at last,
through thirst, weariness, and wounds, with the fury of the Ordnance, they
yielded to their pleasure; part being slain in the porch, the rest, sent down
the River to Alexandria to be afterward there murdered.

Selimus now, sent part of his Army, to quench the raging fire, proclaiming
through the City, that all Mamalukes yielding themselves within twelve hours,
should have mercy, otherwise, no hope of life; proposing Rewards to the
Egyptians revealing them, but concealing them, to impail them, selling their
wives and children, and to burn their Houses; whereupon, many Mamalukes came
forth, and being cast into Irons, were soon after perfidiously murdered, it
being given out, they sought to escape: and many Egyptians not breaking their
faith with the Mamalukes, their neighbors appeaching them, most constantly
died for their friends.

The insolent Turks ransacked all the City, drawing out, and (...) the hidden
Mamalukes, riffling the Houses of friends and foes: and some, in the same
Houses, raged at once with covetousness, cruelty and lust, as every one was
inclined. That day that Selimus took Caire, Gazelles, lately gone to Thebais to
assemble the Arabians and new supplies, came thither; but finding all lost, and
c. he came to Selimus upon faith given for (...) of him and his followers
(three Arabian Captains and a number of good (...)) in the midst of his chief
Captains boldly speaking to him; If fortune had not envied our safety, thou.
should not now have had matter (most noble Selimus) to excel others in
worthiness of mind. Whilst we were in Arms, our State standing whole we, as
proudly presuming, little (...) of thee or the Turks name, yea we hated thee as
enemies; but having to the utmost proved thy force, admiring thy prowess and
victories, not given without the providence of the immortal God, we (...) come
to thee, to better our (...) fortune, that thou by sparing thy vanquished and
yielding enemies, may extend thy Fame beyond the (...) of thy immortal
glory. We faithfully served Tomombeius, while he held even but the name of a
King, and c. But he being driven out, wandering the Deserts, uncertain whether
to live or not; we come to thee, rather as forsaken than forsaking their
Prince, to show thee our loyalty and valor: if by thy goodness, we may serve
under thy worthy conduct.

Selimus knowing Gazelles his virtue and valor, and desiring a league with the
Arabians (or rather Alarbes) most to be feared; courteously received them with
honorable pensions, and to sorget their old (...) looking for greater things
of him. Not long after, the Moors and Arabians with some (...) fled to Achasia,
making incursions about Caire, often cutting off (...) (...) (...) sorrage) he
sending (...) to repress them, he quickly winning and lacking Achasia slaying
most of those Adventurers, returned in less time then was expected.

Tomombeius the while, began to make head again, in Sigesta; for he sent for a
strong company of Mamalukes from Alexandria, many great Arabians and Moors of
that Country promising him their help: Besides, many Egyptians of Caire, who
became a prey, promised, if he would come thither by night, they would raise a
tumult, that should easily work the Turks confusion, since they could no longer
endure their indignities: sending him word, that the Turks were now but a
contemptible number, most being slain in the Battle, and most of the rest very
weak with wounds and sickness: wherefore hope began to revive Tomombeius his
invincible heart, above his miserable state. One (...) an Egyptian, the
greatest man in all Sigesta, whether to avert the War out of his Country, or to
gain Selimus his good liking, came and certified him of Tomombeius his
strength, and of the Citizens practices. Who keeping strong watch and ward in
all places, secured the suspended Citizens in the Castle, then also in his
possession: placing along Nilus armed boats to impeach Tomombeius his passage
at the further banks; yet (considering Tomombeius was still preparing greater
forces in those vast and unknown Countries, and fearing the doubtful faith of
the numerous Citizens his power being so small: the Mamalukes also levying
supplies in diverse Countries whither they fled, and the fleet in the Arabian
gulf against the Portugals (wherein were 3000. Mamalukes with store of brass
Ordnance) being daily expected at Suezzia; chiefly fearing, if the Bassa, left
at Taurus, should not be able to withstand the Persian King, he should be
excluded both out of lesser Asia and Syria before supplies could arrive from
Constantinople to Alexandria) He sent some the reverendest of his Religion,
with some honorable Egyptians, Ambassadors to Tomombeius, bountifully
promising him on the faith of a Prince, if he would come in and submit, he
should on reasonable conditions, repossesse his Kingdom, never by force to
regain; but otherwise, when the matter was again tried by Battle, he should
never find any regard of his Princely State, from his angry enemy: These
passing into Sigesta, were barbarously slain by some Mamalukes chancing on
them, to gratify Tomombeius now not knowing of it, and show, they desired no
peace.

Selimus provoked by so great injury, provided all things necessary for his
expedition into Sigesta against Tomombeius; and, for his honor and
convenience, mad a strong Bridge to pass over Nilus, with all small Vessels
and Lighters he could gather.

Tomombeius understanding hereof, and fearing the Country-people's revolt, by
means of Albucho^ar, determined once again to prove the fortune of a battle:
wherefore by advice of his best Captains, he timely departed out of Sigesta
with 4000 Mamalukes, and 8000 Moors and Arabians, traveling day and (...) to
come to Nilus, the Turks suspecting no such thing from their weak enemies,
hoping by his sudden approach to overthrow part of the Turks Army first
passing the River, before relieved from the other side: and fitly came to the
place, even as the Asian Horsemen were come over the Bridge. Selimus his
harbingers and Pages being gone somewhat farther then the rest, to choose a fit
place for his Pavilion, perceived their coming by the dust. Mustapha suddenly
raising an alarm, brought great fear, both on them passed over, and on them on
the further side.

Tomombeius assailing them, while but putting themselves in order, and c. slew
those that resisted, discomfiting the rest: neither could Mustapha by his
invincible courage or persuasion, repair his disordered Battle, or stay their
flight, all being full of tumult, slaughter and fear: and all along the Rivers
Bank Turks ruthfully looking on the River, cried to those on the other side for
help: many forced to take the River, perished: Others striving to return by the
Bridge,. through fear or being overborn by their fellows, sell in and were
drowned. Four men abreast might pass at once; but the Ordnance passing over,
fewer Horse were sent than the sudden danger required: nor could their Ordnance
be discharged without hurt to the further Banks, their own men standing between.

Selimus the while, filling a number of Boats, and c. with his Harquebusse
Janissaries, hasted his Horsemen over the Bridge for relief; in which Boats the
Watermen were so nimble, that they soon transported diverse bands of them: which
wondrously comforted the Asians,, ready to give over. Canoglis also with loss
of a few Horsemen swam over the River, to the Beholder's admiration; but the
Tartars had often by Troops swam over Taurus and Valga, Rivers as dangerous as
Nile. For speedy Victories sake, Tomombeius strained with might and main to
gain the Bridge's-head, by plucking away some few Boats, to shut in his
enemies: and, by cutting the Cables fastening them to the Bank, the Bridge with
Turks thereon might be carried away by the River's force: whereupon a most
bloody sight arose, Mustapha having drawn his Ensigns and best Soldiers
thither. And being relieved by Janissaries and European Horse, comne over in
great number, they by little and little enforced them to retire. This Mustapha
the Hungarian, Baiazet's son in Law, built, for his Fame, that notable stately
Stone Bridge (of the spoils of this Victory) over the River Stremon, by which
men pass over into (...), wondering thereat.

Tomombeius to give a breathing rhyme to his Mamalukes with their fainting
Horses, exhorted the Moors and the Arabians awhile to charge the enemy, which
after their manner, they valiantly performed. Then the Mamalukes so suriously
renewed the Battle, that Selimus doubting the Victory (though persuaded to the
contrary) adventured over the Bridge in person, by whose coming, his Soldiers
encouraged, repressed the enemie's fury. Who, soon after, by fresh Janissaries
coming on, were notably repulsed, and at length put to flight, fresh Horsemen
pursuing them all the fields over: The Tartars also (who through the streams
force recovered not the further Bank so soon) were now come in, augmenting the
slaughter with their swift Horses.

Selymus not assured of any thing gotten while Tomombeius lived, commanded
Mustapha, Gazelles and Cayerbeius, with fresh Troops of light Horse to pursue
him, not to (...) if possible: who making speed, overtook him next day at a
(...) of a (...) deep Fenn; where having a (...) (...), hewas about to cut off
a wooden Bridge, to binder the pursuit; some of (...) followers being flain and
taken, he again fled. The third day all his men being almost lost, and he come
in (...) Sucussane (...) (...) (these (...) Captains denouncing to the people
thereabouts, all extremities and tortures, if they diligently kept not those
Marish passages, that he should not escape) he was so (...) that he hid himself
in a foul deep marsh alone: and was soon, by the Peasants search, found, up to
the shoulders in water among the flags, who delivering him bound, he was with
certain (...) taken in flight (...) to Caire. Selimus (resolving his death, and
the rather for the injury to his Ambassadors) not admitting him to his
presence, commanded him to be (...), to reveal Campsons great Treasures, which
he was thought to have (...): wherein, he is reported, with great constancy and
stern look to (...) nothing, but deep sighs and groans: after which he was set
on a lean Camel in ragged apparel, with his hand's bound behind him, and so
carried in derision through all the notable places of the City. Then bringing
him to the chief gate Basuela, they there openly (...) him with a rope, hanging
him up by the neck upon an Iron hook in an arch of that gate, so leaving him to
the worlds wonder. This misery befell him April, 13. 1517. Many shed tears to
behold so lamentable a Spectacle, seeming thereby to detest that unworthy death
of their late Sultan; yet the Janissaries reproved them threatening them with
death, who like giddy brained fools (they said) enured to the slavery of the
Mamalukes, thankfully accepted not their deliverance; for the Egyptians
doubted, lest the Turks (no more courteous then the Mamalukes) should no less
tyrannize over them under their cruel Emperor: they remembered also, that
Tomombeius with a general favor rose by all degrees of honor to the regal
Dignity: with which also, and his Martial (...); his tall and strong body,
grave countenance, and long and hoary beard, well agreed. Diverse of the
Mamaluke Princes, with some of the common sort, ran he same fortune. No power
being now heard of in all Egypt to renew the War. Selimus dividing his Forces,
sent them to take in the Egyptian Provinces farther off. Alexandria after the
Battle of Caire, expelling the (...), and easily surprising the (...) of
Pharus, (...) many days before to the Turks: Damiata (...) submitting (...) to
them, and every City betwixt Nilus and Judaea and Arabia's borders yielding to
Selimus his obedience. Also the African Kings boroering on Cyrenaica, the
Sultan's Tributaries, or Confederates, sent him Ambassadors with (...).

The wild Arabians, chiefly they of Africa, only remained, who losing many
friends in ayding Tomombeius, (...) thought would never submit to the Turk.
These wanderers living mostly by theft, had filled all from Euphrates running
by the Palmyrens, with the meaner part of Egypt and Africa to the Atlantic
Sea, with multitudes: living under diverse Leaders a hard kind of life in Tents
and Wagons, like the Tartars, whose greatest wealth is a serviceable Horse,
with a Lance or bundle of Darts, by whose perpetual discord the Egyptian
Sultans seemed to hold their Empire, rather than by their own strength.
Wherefore Selimus (...) alluring many of their (...) (by faith before given) to
Caire, honorably entertained and rewarded them, whereby others came in daily,
and receiving Rewards, (...) Allegiance to Selimus. Others who would not be
won, being cunningly intercepted by (...) Captains, suffered for their
obstinacy.

The other remote Nations toward Aethiopia being formerly in friendship, (...)
than under command, through the (...) of the Victory, easily joined in like
amity with the (...).

Selimus, about this time, sent Horsemen to Suazzia (of old Arsinoc) a part of
the red Sea, where Gampson had built a strong (...) against the Portugals, who
by their Indian (...), (...) taken away all the Indian Trade into the Arabian
Gulf, greatly hindering his customs: over (...) (a (...) before the Wars)
Amyrasses and Ray (...) we e made Generals: who laying at Gidda, the port of
the City Mecha (having yet done nothing) and hearing what had happened, fell at
variance: one willing to obey Tomombeius, the other to follow the Victor's
fortune: whereupon a (...) arising, Amyrases was forced to flee to Mecha: where
Solomon requiring him with all hostile threats, they fearing the spoil of
Gidda, apprehended him, sending him to the Fleet. Solomon (to be sole Admiral,
and to (...) into Selimus favor) (...) Amyrases overboard by night, and
giving the Soldiers two months pay, swear them to Selimus his obedience, and
sailing bick to Suazzia, and leaving the Fleet, he came to Selimus to Caire,
being graciously received; after which, all former Tributary or confederate
Princes, even to Presbyter John's confines, quickly (...) to and confederated
with the Turks,

All being thus subjected, Selimus (about the (...) of July, sailed down (...)
to Alexandria, to view his Fleet come from Constantinople, with supplies of men
and victuals: and viewing also the Citie's Walls and (...) Castle, he returned
to Caire, having slain all the Mamalukes in durance at Alexandria, in the
prison's entrance. Then also 500. the (...), etc. Egyptian Families were
commanded from Caire to Constantinople, a great number of the (...), Women and
children, were were also (...) thither, with the Kings Treasure and Riches, and
all the public and private Ornaments of that City: yea, the very Marble stones
excellently wrought or beautiful, were rent out of the Walls to his great
infamy: Laying a Caire, he pleasantly beheld the rising of Nilus, then having
overflowed the adjoining Country, most curiously enquiring of the old
Countrymen, the measure and nature of the River; for by the diversity of its
rising, known by certain marks and measures, they fore-tel abundant plenty,
extreme dearch, or reasonable store.

Selimus now resolving to return into Syria (and the rather, it being reported,
Hysmael was coming into Mesopotamia, and so likely to break into Comagena)
disposed of all things, leaving a strong (...) of his best Soldiers in Caire
under Cayerbeius, whom he made his Deputy (...) all that great Kingdom, now
turned into a Province, as at this day. Which preferment so unworthily
bestowed, exceedingly troubled Jonuses Bassa, enflamed with (...) and just
desire thereof; for, Sinan being dead, he, puffed up with his own worth and
valor, thought himself the only man, to whom that charge should be committed,
neither wanted he the general liking of the Soldiery; for after recovery of
his wound, he in the Diadaries house (usurped rather than by gift obtained)
keeping daily Princely cheer for all comers, giving to all, some Horses, some
beautiful slaves, some Money Plate, Jewels, rich Garments, fair Armor. etc.
won such favor, that when he went to the Castle to the Governor, he was
brought with a great and goodly Train, in all is judgment (...) to that
Government. All which highly offended Selimus.

Jonuses coloring his coffeehouse by faigning himself sick came not abroad
for certain days, yet in his choler, some words fell from him, whereby it was
perceived. Cayerbeius coming to visit him, and in heat of the day, calling for
water and Sugar (the Egyptian drink) felt (...) ly, such grievous and unwonted
torments in his stomach and belly, that many supposed the Bassa poisoned him,
yet by a sovereign Remedy he was pre erved: which uncertain report sunk farther
into Selimus, than any one would have thought,. He had heard also, that many of
those Families commanded to Constantinople, Jonuses being to order that matter,
had for great sums obtained quietly to remain still in Egypt: which was
probably alleged by the repiners at his honor, secretly accusing him, that
those Prince-like expenses, not to be maintained by his pension, were supported
with the imbezelled spoil and revenues of that new got Kingdom: which tending
to lighten his credit, another crime coming on the neck, so wrought his
confusion; for Selimus (expecting but some new occasion) waited vigilantly on
his words and deeds, with a full purpose to destroy him.

The Soldiers, left in Garrison at Caire, alleging the distance of the
place, expected-dangers, and alteady endured-labours, requested of Selimus an
augmentarion of their wages: who, never spare-handed to his Soldiers,
commanded Jonuses, that the required sum might be added, and entered into his
accounts; but he acquainted neither the Treasurers nor Pay-masters herewith
that they, deceived of what was promised, might begin to hate Cayerbeius, as
author of such an injury; whereby Caire and the Kingdom being disquieted by a
mutiny, Selimus should in stead of him (hated by the Egyptians for his treason
and not beloved of the Soldiers, as being to them a stranger) of necessity
send a Turkish Bassa to govern; but Selimus now on his way (almost as far as
Jerusalem) the pay day being come, and the Soldiers receiving but their old
wages, began insolently to insult and threaten the Treasurer and Pay-masters,
openly railing upon Cayerbeius: wherewith he astonished, (as not yet acquainted
with their fashions) with the Pay-masters, requested them not to think so
hardly of them, who were innocent, and patiently to understand the truth,
craving no favor, if they were found fraudulent: at last it was (with much
ado) agreed, trusty Messengers to be forthwith sent to Selimus (not yet gone
out of (...)) to know the truth of the matter. They making great speed,
overtook him a little from Larissa, declaring the Soldiers complaints, and the
others care to excuse the matter, with their danger, and all that had happened
since his departure. Selimus incensed, forthwith commanded Jonuses before him
to answer, who though struck with guilt, and surprised with fear, being pale as
ashes, seeing in Selimus his (...) most certain tokens of veavy displeasure;
yet being of great spirit, boldly answered, He had not forbidden the wages
(against his Command) to invert the money to his own use, or to draw any man
into disgrace, as was maliciously by some suggested; but to provice for his
Majesty's Coffers wondrously emptied by those late Wars: the constant Report
of new troubles like to arise out of Persia giving also occasion, etc. Whereas
the Garrison Soldiers (he said) were enriched with Egypt's spoils, possessing
the Mamalukes sumptuous Houses and Lands: feeding on the Egyptians goods, and
had received greater pay and Rewards from him than any, from any of his
Predecessors: wherefore (if not past all modesty) they might take it well
enough, if somewhat restrained in their unreasonable requests: saying, that
Princes (...) their Soldiers in reasonable pay, in peace and war, ought
sometime for Warlike Discipline, to moderate their desires, lest striving for
private gain, money be afterward wanting for a greater and more needful
Charge, Wars rising upon Wars, since none, if never so valiant, or fortunate,
did ever any great matter, if he wanted Coin, the very sinews of War: Selimus
full of wrath interrupted him, lest by longer discourse, he (recounting his
Deserts and worthy service, in (...) and his own time) should have had
Intercessours, causing him in his presence to be there executed: saying, Others
who would presume to prescribe what their Sovereigns had to do, should ever (by
that insolent servant's example) be admonished of their condition and duty.
It Is reported, the Soldiers in (...) of Selimus, wondrously lamented his
unworthy death: who by his rare valor, (...) wit, comely Personage, Military
Eloquence, and gallantry of living, so won the love of all, that few or none in
the Army but acknowledged themselves some way beholden to him, condemning
Selimus his cruelty, beginning to tell of Mustapha and old Chendemus, not
forgetting Bostanges his son in Law, nor Cherseogles, both which, about two
years before, had their heads struck off, none well knowing wherefore; and
their dead bodies cast out at the Court-gate to the terror of the beholders.
Yea (...), Achomates, and (...), with the other Princes of the Blood, were
presented afresh to all men's eyes. So that men generally both feared and hated
him, who had set down in his ambitious and tyrannical mind; it was better (for
assuring his Estate) to be feared of all, than be loved of many; therefore not
sparing any man's life, whom he in the least suspected. Yet his severity against
this Jonuses, may be excused (in some sort) as being justly moved thereto, by
his presumption and malice underhand (contrary to his charge) to the peril of
Selimus his late Conquests.

This great Bassa, by his cruelty on the fair Manto his best beloved Wife,
offended (most) the people's minds. She (her lovely conditions being
answerable, and a Greek born) was by Sebalia her first Husband, carried with
him into the Wars as his chief delight; but, he slain, and she falling into the
Turks hands, was a prisoner, till Jonuses, (seeing her far to exceed the other
Captives) became amorous of her beauty, which he finding graced with no less
inward Virtues, took her to Wife, honoring her above all his Wives and
Concubines, she also loyally seeking to please him, lived a while in all
worldly felicity; but the Bassa fearing lest that which so pleased him, gave no
less content to others, began to distrust her, though he saw no cause, but his
own conceit; which jealous humor more and more increasing, he became so
froward and imperious, that nothing she could say or do could please him,
tormenting still both himself and her, whom he so loved, with his passionate
distrust: till, the fair Lady, grieved and wearied herewith, determined
secretly to depart from him into her own Country: which she discovering to one
of her Eunuchs to whom she gave Letters to be conveyed to friends, whose help
she was to use therein, he openly delivered them to his Master; who enraged,
calling for Manto, stabbed her with a dagger to the heart: So curing his
tormenting jeal ousie with the death of his Love.

But Selimus now come into Syria, was advertised from the Hembracor Bassa, whom
he left on his Frontiers to attend the Persians motion, that the hot rumor of
their preparations at beginning of Winter, was grown cold in heat of Summer, he
having seen in all that time, none but straggling companies, showing as if
greater power were coming, making (often) sudden inroads, whom he diverse times
had prosperously encountered, and that it was both by prisoners taken and his
own espials reported, that Hysmael troubled with the Hyrcanians and Tartars,
had turned most of his forces against them; so that Winter drawing on, and deep
snows already fallen on Taurus, he could not that year look after Asia the less
and Syria. Some said, the Tartars dwelling between Tanais and Volga, by Selymus
his procurement (...) money, busied Hysmael by invading the Albanians, and
Iberians, who were under his protection, and that by means of his father in
law, who being of the same Nation, easily induced them (needy) by Rewards to
take up Arms against them.

Many marvelled, why Hysmael neglected such an opportunity, who ('it was thought)
might have thrust (...) out of Asia and Syria (while thus busied) yea, and have
destroyed him, shut up, especially while Campson and Tomombeius made such
resistance. But others saw, that Hysmael was not so strong abroad (as at home)
most of his Army consisting of Gentlemen, or those used voluntarily to serve in
defensive Wars without pay. These valiantest Horsemen of the East did worthily
defend the Persian Kingdom, upon occasion Warring with near Neighbors also;
but could by no means away with a longer expedition, being so addicted to their
Wives, and accustomed to draw after them Carriages and Horses even for wanton
uses, not to be done without wages: with which difficulty Usuncassanes was much
troubled in his Wars against (...) the great; but it was harder for Hysmael to
do, who obtaining his Grandfather's Kingdom, by mere good will of the people,
eased them of their heavy Impositions always thinking the love of his Subjects
(gotten by Bounty and Justice) the surest Riches of his Kingdom, etc. Whereas
Selimus, stepping into his Fathers (...) by force, mischief, etc. had (like the
Othoman Kings) put his most assured strength in a mercenary kind of men, whom
(for pay) he might at pleasure, draw far from home, from place to place, for
enlarging of his Empire; thoreby deeming true and ready Power to stand only in
money, and the severity of his own Command.

Who the Winter following, 1518. stayed in Syria, visiting its parts and
Cities, and setting things in order; but Spring approaching, when he
understood, that Pope Leo 10th. had procured the Christian Princes, to consult
of Warring upon him, etc. he (leaving Gazelles his Lieutenant in Syria)
returned to Constantinople, there, as at hand, to behold the Christian Princes
motions and devices, fearing no alteration in Syria and Egypt, to arise, since
he well saw, Cayerbeius and Gazelles were at deadly hatred betwixt themselves;
as for old grudges, so for Cayerbeius's Treason, the great cause of the (...)
ruin.

Selimus being at Constantinople, purposed thenceforth to turn all his Force
upon the Christians, making wondrous preparations, chiefly at Sea; so that
'twas thought he would either attempt Rhodes, or some parts of Italy. But while
he delighted himself with Gracian Cities, solacing in the pleasant Country
about Hadrianople, he was struck with a Canker in his Reins, which contemning
cure, did so by degrees eat up and corrupt his body, as that he (so honored
before) was now loathsome to himself and others. As he lay thus languishing,
leaning his head in the lap of his most loved Bassa Pyrrhus: said, O Pyrrhus, I
see I must shortly die without remedy. Pyrrhus thereupon discoursing with him
of many matters,, persuaded him to (...) the great wealth taken taken from the
Persian Merchants in diverse places of his Empire, upon (...) (...) (...): who
rep yed, (...) thou I should bestow others goods wrongfully taken away, on
works of Charity, for my own vain praises? I will never do it. (...), see
rather they be restored to the right owners: which was forthwith done. To the
shame of many Christians, who make, of Robbery, a sacrifice, not minding
restitution.

He (...) above ground in his Tent, on his way to Hadrianople, sent (...) and
Achmetes, (...), before to provide for solemnizing their great Feast Bairam, as
it were their Easter, keeping with him only Ferhates Bassa, to come after as
his weak body would permit; but such was his Disease, fury and intolerable
pains, that he soon after died in September in 1520. (...) Chiurli in the very
place, where he had assailed his aged Father Bajazet, aged 46 years, reigning
8: To the great joy of all Christendom. His dead body being solemnly buried by
his Son Solomon, in a Temple he built at Constantinople for that purpose. He
used to say, Nothing was sweeter than to reign without fear or suspicion of his
(...); and commending Solomon to Pyrrhus, charged him, to leave the Persians,
and turn wholly against the Christians: and, to incense him, left his lively
Counterfeit by his beds-side, with sundry bloody Precepts.

The Life of Solomon the Magnificent, fourth Emperor of Turks.
FErhates Bassa carefully concealing Selimus's death, lest the Janissaries and
Court Soldiers, should in the vacancy spoil the Merchants and strangers, and
afterward, as wont, insolently prescribe to the chief Bassaes at pleasure,
sent letters in Post to Solomon, then at Magnesia, of his Father's death, and
to hasten to Constantinople, while things were in good order, timely to repress
the feared disorders of his Men of War. He perusing the Letters to his great
content, yet considering his Fathers cruelty, who on a jealousy of his
aspiring mind, and for some words in dislike of his Fathers extremity, had
sent him a poisoned shirt, whose misdoubting Mother (...) one of his Chamber
first to wear it, whereof he soon died; and that the news was not seconded
from any other Bassa, fearing some plot, durst not adventure from his charge,
giving little or no credit to the Messenger. Ferhates, hearing of his wariness,
ten days being past, sent to Pyrrhus and Mustapha at Hadrianople, speedily to
repair to Court; to whom, when come, he declared Selimus's death; who all,
speedily and secretly sent to Solomon Letters thereof, with their Hands and
Seals: who now assured, by long journies came to Scrutarium, of old
Chrysopolic: where the Aga of the Janissaries meeting him, he was (...) over the
passage to Constantinople: where the Janissaries knowing yet nothing, till
Solomon were ready to receive him in the midst, the Captains said aloud, Behold
your Emperor! who cried with great acclamation, Long live the great Emperor
Solomon: which concent, is the greatest assurance of their Estate. So being
tryumphantly brought into the Palace, he was placed in his Father's Seat in
1520. Charles 5th, being chose Em perour of Germany that year. The Janissaries,
in lieu of the spoil, received a great largess of Solomon, he somewhat also
increasing their wages, to their wondrous (...).

Solomon, beginning to reign about 28 years old, the Princes to whom Selimus's
name was dreadful, hoped, a quiet Lamb was come in place of a raging Lion; but
they were soon deceived therein, chiefly the bordering Christian Princes, upon
whom he converted his forces, most of his long reign, which Selimus almost
wholly employed against the Persian and Egyptian Kings.

Gazelles, as if now discharged of his Oath to Selimus, and earnestly desiring
to restore the Mamaluke's Kingdom, gathered speedily to him the dispersed
remnant of the Mamalukes, and by rewards, the wild Arabian leaders, with great
numbers of the discontented Syrians, driving the Turk's Garrisons out of
Birtha, Tripolis, and other Syrian Cities, and possessing them. He sent also
Ambassadors to Cayerbeius, persuading him to revenge the wrong done to the
Mamalukes, and by killing the Turk's Garrisons, to make himself Sultan of
Egypt, offering therein, his utmost service. But he, whether not trusting
Gazelles, or ashamed of new (...), or (...) his own strength, presently in his
sight, caused them to be executed as traitors: speedily certifying Soliman
hereof, who sent Ferhates with a strong Army into Syria.

Gazelles retired with all his Army, into strong Damasce; whither Ferhates
coming, Gazelles, rather than to be shut up valiantly issued forth with all his
power, and gave him battle, for six hours most cruel, and many (...) on both
sides: At last, being oppressed with his enemies, eight to one in number, he
was forced to fight in a ring valiantly dying with his Mamalukes, in midst of
his enemies, who had a bloody Victory.

Gazelles thus slain, all Syria presently yielded to the Turks: Ferhates,
taking it in good part, suffered not his men to enter Damasco, then richly
stored with all sorts of Commodities from diverse parts. Ferhates going to
Cairo, commending Cayerbeius, confirmed him in his Government; and inveighing
against Selimus his cruelty, to please the Egyptians, bid them hope for
happiness under peaceable Solomon, to whom he returned, all things being set in
order.

Next year, by Pyrrhus's counsel, (the Christians mortal enemy,) and the
Janissaries (...), Solomon resolved to besiege strong Belgrade on Hungaries
borders, vainly attempted by Mahomet the great, and Amurath, to their great
loss and dishonor: where the Turk's Ensigns were taken, with other of
Huniades, and Mathias's Trophies of Victory, were reserved, to their grief. His
Army sent before, was come to Sophia in Servia, the European Lievetenant's
residence, before the Hungarians were aware; for, they living at ease, all
Uladislaus's time, and now secure under young Lodovicus his Son, of no
experience who being poled by his Nobles and great Clergy, could not raise
sufficient power against such an enemy, especially his Nobility, promising
much, but performing nothing; so that Solomon coming without let before the
City, by battery and undermining, soon became Lord thereof, and with little
loss. It was won Aug. 29. 1521. The miseries ensuing upon the opening of that
gap, did and do declare, how much that loss concerned the Christian
Commonwealth.

Solomon returning to Constantinople, breaking up his Army, lay still almost a
year, greatly preparing at Calipolis, and other Ports, for rigging up a great
Fleet: which caused the Italians, Venetians, and them of Rhodes to look about
them. About which time, Philip Villers, wise and conragious, was, in his
absence at the French Court, chosen Great Master by the Knights of the Rhodes,
who safely arrived there from Marselles, after a dangerous Voyage, hardly laid
for by Cortug-ogli, a famous Turksish Pirate. Solomon knowing it, whole two
Brethren the Knights had surprised at Sea, and slain, keeping the third in
prison.

Pyrrhus, by whose advice Solomon was directed, consulting with the other
Bassaes, what great exploit was first to be attempted, differed in opinion
about Rhodes. Pyrrhus, dissuading, as too full of difficulty and danger,
producing Mahomet the Great for an example: But Mustapha next to Pyrrhus,
extolling Solomon, said, Their (...) was not to be included within his
Predecessor's attempts; as appeared by Belgrade, who should likewise prevail
against the Rhodes, being able to: (...) more men before it, than there were
stones in the walls, presumptuously (...), that upon the first landing of
Solymans great Army, they would presently yield themselves and City into his
hands.

Solomon desirous of Cortug-oglies Opinion, before the undertaking of so great
a matter, Mustapha and Ferhates ushering him in, after reverence, and command
to speak, said: Thy great deserts, most mighty Emperor, makes me now frankly
speak, what I think may be for thy Majesty's and Empires glory: I daily hear
the pitiful lamentation of those of Mitylene, (...), Peloponesus, Achaia,
Caria, Lycia, etc. for the spoil of their Countries, (...) their Cities,
carrying away Cattle and people, etc. which they suffer by the Rhodian Pirates,
none withstanding them. Often have they instantly requested me, to be a mean to
thy Majesty, whereby they might be protected from these cruel rovers: wherefore
I beseech thee by the most reverent (...) Mahomet, (...) by thy (...)
heroicalness, to deliver thy afflicted subjects from their most cruel enemies,
etc. It rending not so much to their hurt in private, as to the (...) of thy
imperial Dignity which if any other (...) Prince should offer, I know thou
would not suffer, unrevenged. Who (...) pass to Tripolis, Damasco, etc.
without manifest danger? What have we heard every Spring, this many years, but
that they have taken one Port or other, and (...) and that, under thy nose in
the heart of thy Empire? We thy loyal Subjects, ought not for the increase of
our Religion, and enlarging thy Empire, (...) to adventure the hazard of all.
If thou likewise be carried with love of Glory and Renown etc. in what can
thou easier gain the same, or better employ us, than in subduing this reputed
Bulwark of Christendom, which only keeps us from their Countries? Thy happy
fortune has subjected Belgrade, far more strong than in times past, and do
thou then despair of Rhodes? If thy captivated subjects, built it for the
Christians, cannot they now at liberty, etc. destroy the same? If thou please,
thou shall see a divine occasion procured by Mahomet, presented unto (...), The
Western Christians being at discord, and mortal Wars among themselves. Thy
Majesty is not ignorant that in managing of Wars, the opportunity is
especially to be followed etc.

Solomon ambitious, and pricked forward by Cortug and others, hereby seeking
(...), chiefly by Mustapha, resolved to go in person against the Rhodes. And
first to prove what spirit and courage Villers was of, he sent him a cold
friendly Letter, thus directed.

Solomon by God's Grace, King of Kings, etc. To the Reverend Father Viller us
Lilladamus, Great Master of the Rhodes and Legate of Asia, Greeting.
I Am glad of thy coming an new promotion, which I wish thou may long and
happily enjoy, since I hope thou will exceed all before thee: from whom as my
Ancestors have withdrawn, so I join with thee in friendship: joy thou
therefore my friend, rejoicing also in my Victory, etc. For last Summer passing
Danubius, I expected the Hungarian to give battle, taking his strongest City
Belgrade with othea Holds, and destroying much people with fire and sword,
captivating many more, and, in triumph breaking up my Army, am returning to
Constantinople; whence farewell.


Villerius considering these Letters, perceived, Peace was offered in show, but
War in meaning: wherefore rewarding the Messenger, he sent with him another
of his own, a private person, for they seldom sent any honorable Ambassadors
to each other.

Vi^lerius Lilladamus, Great Master of the Rhodes, to the Turk.
I Well understand thy Letters. Thy friendship is as pleasing to me, as
displeasing to Cortug-Ogli, who would suddenly have intercepted me; but that
failing, he tried to rob some Merchants Ships in the Rhodian Sea, bound from
Joppa to Venice; but sending my Fleet, I forced the Pirate to leave behind him
the Prizes taken from the Merchants of Creet: Farewell; from the Rhodes.


Hereby Solomon perceived he should not so easily carry the Rhodes as he had
Belgrade; yet resolving to try, he thus opened his determination to certain
chief Commanders. Though I doubt not, ye are of the same mind as ever, in the
invading other Nations; yet I thought good in matters tending to all our good
to use your general advice. Since my Father left this World, we have made War
with diverse Nations, having our forces shut up within the compass of the mighty
Sophi of Persia his Dominions; yet, my mind, greater in conceit than my
Empire, and the blood of O^homan, finds no content in these Victories; all ye
have done, though great, seeming but little, to your worth. This I have above
all desired, to root out the very name of the Rhodian Soldiers: and how often
have I heard you crying out, The Rhodes, the Rhodes? Never a greater
opportunity: much of the Cities Walls lying level, Coin wanting, the Castle
Garrison but small, their French aid far off, which will come too late, or I
believe, never: that King being at Wars with the Germane Emperor, and Lord
of Italy, etc. Nor do ye believe the Spaniard's distressed at home, will easily
come out of Sicily and Campania with supplies: and I have prevented the danger
to be feared from the Venetian Fleet. Wherefore, courageous Soldiers,
cheerfully follow your Sovereign, against those most cruel enemies. Admit,
their Valor did gain Victory in one unluckie assault, my Great Grandfather
unfortunately calling home Mesithes Paleologus: will you therefore always
suffer these piratical excursions, etc? So help me Mahomet, it shall not be so:
I vow in despite of Christ and John, shortly to set up my Ensigns with the
Moon, in the midst of their Marketplace; not seeking my self, more than the
honor thereof: the profit reported to be great, I give you my
Fellow Soldiers: wherefore let us now set forward with all our force and
courage.

This his purpose being with one accord liked, Pyrrhus at first dissuading the
War, now said, I cannot but admire the great Wisdom and Virtues of our young
Emperor: who has declared all deep Counsels of a worthy Chiefetain, in taking
War in hand. Blessed be Mahomet, thrice and four times blessed is this
Empire, etc. with such a Prince: which manner of proceeding, if we would
always follow, we should soon subdue, as the Rhodes, so all Kingdoms in
Christendom. Yet besides this, mine age and experience, exhorts you, by gifts,
and all other means, to corrupt if possible, the very chief Citizens, thereby
to enter into their most secret Councels: and that it may be wrought, I. as one
desiring peace, will induce the Great Master to send some honorable Embassage;
which if once brought unto, let me alone with the rest.

Solomon pleased above others, with the old Fox his Counsel, charged him
speedily to prove what he could do: the other to prepare the greatest Land and
Sea-forces: therefore it could not be kept so secret, but Febr. the 4th, the
Rhodians had news of it: which daily increasing, Villerius lent a Christian
spy, who could speak the Turkish Language, to Constantinople, who secretly
informed him, The Turks were preparing a great Fleet, and mighty Army, with a
great deal of battering Artillery; but whether for Italy, Rhodes, Cyprus, or
Corcyra, was not known; whilst every one thought, 'twas against any one,
rather than himself, certain notice was given the Rhodians, that the Turks
diligently kept strict Watch and Ward along all their Seaports thereabouts
otherwise than before, which seemed to foreshew somewhat else, than defense of
their frontiers: wherefore Villerius with all diligence, provided great store
of Victual, Armor, Weapons, and all necessaries for defense. The new Walls,
and Avergne fortress begun in Caractus's time, was laboriously set about by
Basilius, an Engineer to Charles the 5th, every one putting to his helping hand:
a Messenger the while, coming from Pyrrhus Bassa, the cunning fellow delivering
his Field-Message by the way, painted (...) Solyman's courreous nature, greatly
also, commending Pyrrhus, and delivering Letters from both, to this purport.

Solomon by God's Grace, King of Kings, etc. to Villerius Lillidamus, Great
Master, etc.
I Am certainly informed, my Letters are delivered thee, which thou rightly
understanding, pleases me beyond expression: Trust to it, I am not content
with the (...) at Belgrade, hoping for another: nay assuring my self, which I
will not hide from thee, whom I am always mindful of.


Pyrrhus great Councellor, etc. To Villerius Lilladamus, Great Master, etc.
THy Letters, more in meaning than Character, I have delivered to our mighty
Emperor; but I would not suffer the bearer (...) come into his presence, lest
too much offended with so base a Messenger: henceforth, send him men of worth,
years and discretion, with whom, if he please, he may confer and conclude of
public matters, which to do, it shall not repent thee, nor me of my counsel.
The Messengers brings Letters also from our Emperor; how to answer, ye are
admonished.


These Letters being openly read, such as wished for peace, commended Pirrhus's
Counsel, as being old, and greatly experienced, more desiring his Countries
quiet than theirs: wishing to order that by wisdom, which the young Prince
sought for by War, fearing the common chance of War, etc. Whereupon,
Raymund March a Knight, a Spaniard, Muster-(...), eloquent, courageous and
skilful in the Turks Language, was appointed to go Ambassador. Many contrarily
suspecting deceit, said, (...) good to beware, asking, To what end? for, Should
we proclaim War, say they, against the mighty Tyrant, writing all peace? or,
Should we entreat for peace, no War as yet proclaimed? etc. Besides, with
what security or face, can he go, unrequested by the Emperor, who having him
in his power shall with cruel torture force him to discover our secrets, etc.
The Messenger's diligent enquiry of the state of things, confirmed this
opinion: who was sent back with one private Soldier, to carry Villerins's
Letters to the Turk.

Villerius etc. to the Turk.
THat thou art mindful of me, grieveth me not, I also mind thee. Thou, as not
content, hopest for another Victory, nay assurest thy self thereof, before the
attempt. Beware, etc. men's expectations never deceive them more than in War.


Villerius to Pyrrhus the Bassa.
I Have considered thy Letters with thy Messengers behavior: As I contemn not
thy counsel, so will I not follow it, whilst my men do spoil thy Masters
Countries and Ports: which I bear withal, for injuries they sustained by
Turkish Pirates; but I will call them home, and send Ambassadors, thou first
sending me safe conduct under thy Masters great Seal.


But these were not delivered; for the Turk being come into the main, posted on
Horseback to Constantinople, leaving the other behind him: who returning, and
telling what he heard and saw, they despaired of peace, and Villerius sent to
hire Cretensians: he was also advertised from Naxos Isle, the Turks were ready
to pu t to Sea, at first of the New Mood; which they observe in the beginning
of all great actions: Merchants also coming to the Rhodes with Corn from
Euboea, brought the same news of (...): who being the Turks Tributaries, by
his command under that color, noted what was done in the City.

Villerius likewise sent diverse Galleys to learn of the enemies doings.

Lupus a Knight and a Captain, took a great Turkish Ship laden with Corn,
bringing her home; but (...) another Captain, suffering his men to straggle
into an Island, his Ship in harbor, was by a Turkish Pirate taken. About which
time, the Turks making great fires by night, signifying, they desired some
parley, a Knight was sent with a Galley to the Main, to see the matter.

Xaycus a play master, skilful at Sea, and civil affairs, beloved of Turkish
Merchants, whose Language he had learned, being joined with him, drawing nigh,
the Merchants, were making merry on the Main, with such Merchandise as they
used to exchange with the Rhodians for Woollen-Cloth: they gaged their faith
for each others safety; but being requested to come ashore, till a familiar of
his was sent for, not far off, he said; not so, except a pledge were delivered
on Shipboard.

These perfidious, laughing, sent their pledge and Merchandise abroad. Xaycus
going ashore, and embracing the Merchants, was upon a sign given, beset and
taken, and conveyed post to Constantinople, where he was, with most exquisite
torments, forced to confess what they desired. Then was their wisdom commended,
who occasioned the Decree for sending the Ambassador to be revoked; The Turks
Hostage, was found to be a Country fellow, well apparelled to deceive the
Rhodians, who answered to all things demanded, according to his knowledge, as
that the Turks were greatly preparing on Caria and Lycia's Coasts by Sea,
taking up there many Soldiers, for defense of Syria's frontiers against the
Persians: Solomon doing this to put the Rhodians out of suspicion of invasion;
but Villerius perceiving by many circumstances, chiefly by that of Xaycus, that
the Rhodes was that longed after, proclaimed a Cessation from all businesses,
till all things for defense of the City were accomplished. A general Muster
being taken, and 5000 able free men being found, amongst whom were 600 Knights,
500 of Creete; the rest, most Mariners, who did great service: the (...)
serving chiefly to dig and carry Earth: and the Citizens, except a few of the
better sort, were most weak, and of small courage, great speakers, but small
doers, yet hardly to be governed. Villerius rearing naught more than the faint
hearts of the Citizens (...) them together, encouraged them by a speech, the
(...) whereof (...), to (...) the Turks, who came out of the dark Dens of (...)
Caucasus, their injury and tyranny, and (...) desire of Sovereignty; especially
to exceed herein against Christ, and Christians: whose Islands and Countries he
strove to the utmost to take from them, and utterly to root out the Christian
name: hoping, he said, other Christian Princes would in good time, join with
him and his Knights of the Order, who were most ready to defend them, their
Wives, Children, Goods, and Temples; declaring the Cities strength, and great
store of furniture of Arms and Provision, (...) as they should not feel hunger
and thirst, which calamities for all that, he said some people in faithfulness
and valor, not comparable to them, had most constantly endured, as they of
Petilinum, when besieged by the Carthaginians and they of Cassilinum, by
Hannibal, holding out till a (...) was sold for much money; who thrusting their
Children and Parents (...), lived with Leather, or Hides sodden, leaves of
Trees etc. till wanting strength, to hold their Weapons, or stand on the walls:
that, if their Houses chanced to be beaten down, they must have patience; for
they should be repaired: neither was (...) of such importance, as therefore to
yield to enemies, in whose (...) and fidelity, there was no assurance; for,
said he, besides Solymans being cruel and unfaithful by nature, he can by no
means be gentle and faithful toward us who have done him so much harm: that
God had hitherto protected them, so often assailed by open force, whom he
wished them above all things to serve and call upon; for, says he, except the
Lord keep and defend the City, the Watchmen watch but in vain.

The vulgar especially, were much encouraged herewith; but whilst they dreamed
of nothing but victory, the wiser (...), careful, did what they could to effect
the forewished good.

Clement the Greek Bishop, greatly repured by them, laboring to persuade the
Greeks, in that great and common danger to join with the Latins, whose
Governme nt they many times repined at, fordefence of the City: and it was so
ordered at that time, that they all agreed as one man, to spend their lives,
etc. many of the vulgar, wishing his coming rather then not: And few nights
after, the Turks by night fires in the Main, gave sig (...) parley: whereupon,
a Galley and long Boat, setting forth, being nigh the shore, was hailed by a
Turk with a Troop of Horse, desiring to send one ashore, for more convenient
parley: which the Captain refusing, Art thou, said the Turk, afraid of Xaycus's
fortune? who (...) answered, Xaycus troubled him not, nor they feared him; but
if he had nothing else to say, to get further off, or he would speak to them by
the Cannon.

A Turk coming, laid down Letters on a stone, and said, In them was their
charge: who, being departed with the rest, the long Boat was sent for them,
thus directed.

Solomon by Gods Grace, King of Kings, etc. To the Reverend Villerius
Lilladamus, Great Master, etc.
THe Purport was, that, pitying his Subjects, and for his great injury, he was
wroth. Therefore he should yield him the Island and City without delay: making
diverse protestations, that if they chose rather his friendship than his force,
they should depart with all their Riches or live under him without infringement
of Liberty and Religion, by any Tribute: but to those that were subdued, were
all extremities from the angry Conqueror threatened, from which, neither their
force, foreign aid, nor huge Walls, which he would utterly overthrow, should
defend them.


This being openly read, some thought, 'twere good to answer him roundly:
Others, not further to provoke so great an enemy; at last they agreed to send
him no answer at all.

The day these Letters came, June 14. a Turkish Commander, arrived at
Coos-Island (part of the Rhodes Dominion) with 30. Galley forerunners. Who
beginning to burn the Corn almost ripe, and Villages; Prejanes the Governor
(of great valor) with some Horse and Foot suddenly set upon the dispersed
Turks, with such a cry of the people and Instruments of War; that running away
amazed, many were slain, not resisting; and had not the Galleys received them,
not one had escaped, who then put to Sea again. The Rhodians now (most of them)
assured of the Turks coming, by Pomerolus Vice-master his persuasion, burnt
down the Suburbs, utterly destroying their pleasant Gardens nigh the City, and
all the rest within a mile (except things needful for the Siege, which they
took in) that the enemy should find nothing there to use: A woeful sight the
while, more mournful than the enemie's (...), presenting it self; for the
miserable Countrypeople (as Villerius commanded) bringing in wood, corn,
cattle, fowls, etc. numbers of Women and Children followed them weeping, with
dischivelled hair, scratching their faces, tearing themselves, wringing hands,
and casting up eyes, beseeching God to defend the City and themselves: which
multitude being packt into narrow Rooms, and their cattle starved, afterward
corrupted the air, rotten agues and (...) ensuing: but the City being yielded,
there followed such a plague, as destroyed great numbers of Turks, and
Christians not knowing whither to go.

The Turkish General which landed in Coos, was sent before to provoke the
Rhodians to Battle, who with 20 Galleys came daily betwixt Lycia and Rhodes
(leaving the rest at Gnidum (...), not far from Rhodes, to aid him upon
necessity; braving them many days; knowing a Victory then, was little less
than taking the City; or if he could by fight but weaken their number, he
should further his Masters Victory: and sometimes laying at the very Havens
mouth: the Rhodians moved, as not wont to be so braved, by importunity had a
Council called, to consider whether to fight or not? Whereupon the Chancellor,
of great authority and spirit, etc. said, Such disgrace was presently to be
revenged: for, said he, the huge Fleet of the Turks is as a head to be joined
to these Pyratical Galleys as members, to which head they should give such a
blow, by cutting off those limbs, that it should ever after stagger: or if no
Fleet were prepared to follow that, then it being discomfited, they should be
at quiet: which in his judgment, was most like to be true, the fit time of the
year for a Siege being so far spent, etc. Wherefore to set upon their proud
enemies: not fearing a few threatening words, and sitting still like cowards not
daring to show their heads: which forsooth, they called Fabius his policy:
wishing they were as Fabius; but fearing they should prove more like Antiochus,
the Aetolians and Vitellians, all whose courage consisted in words, etc. but
Victory was gained by exposing themselves to danger.

Though the multitude, with these and the like (...) moved desired to fight, as
not wanting Weapons, courage or hands to slaughter their enemies: yet the
graver sort thought not good to adventure any great part of forces, afterward
to be wanted for defense of the City. The Turkish General deceived of his
expectation, withdrew 12 miles off to Villanova where landing his men he burnt
all the corn thereabouts: the people being all retired either into the Rhodes,
or Castles in other places of the Islands.

Villerius careful to reserve his Soldiers for more expected dangers commanded
troops (sent to skirmish with them) to return: and during the Siege, he would
often eat his meat with his Soldiers: watching himself, and walking up and
down, he would rest on some homely seat as it chanced, being more adventurous
in time of assault than was wished; yet more allowing Counsel grounded on
Reason, than prosperous actions commended but by events, he carried always
among so many cares, such a grace in his cheerful countenance, as made him to
be reverenced and loved: bestowing all the time he could spare in praying, etc.
and that (oftentimes) most of the night in the Temple alone, his Armor laying
by him; so that it was commonly said, His Devotion and Care would make the City
invincible.

July 26. Early, news came from Stevens Watchtower about a mile off: (...) a
huge Fleet (reported, above 200 sail) was making thitherwards along the West of
Lycia: whereupon all places were full of tumult, and a pitiful cry as is usual
in such cases: public prayers were made throughout the City; (...) ended, the
gates were shut up: people of all ages and sexes going forth to gaze upon that
dreadful Fleet; the foremost being the Admiral of Callipolis, who was to assail
the City by Sea: Cara Mahometes was Rear-Admiral, with a great squadron of
Galleys, and a fair wind, striking before the mouth of the Haven began to row
toward the City; but many hasting unto that Bulwark defending the left side of
the Haven more subject to danger than the other; the Turk fearing to be sunk,
got him to the rest of the Fleet: the Rhodians deriding him with outcries for
his folly: The Fleet passing on came to the Promontorie of Bo, about 3 miles
Eastward: which Harbor being too small, many Galleys, riding it out at Sea,
were by shot, often forced to get further off. Whilst the enemy was landing,
and transporting all things and men; also viewing the City, and choosing a fit
place for his Camp: the Rhodians sunk many soundding the Walls to discover the
enemies Mines, and fortified their Bulwarks with bigger Rampires. The Master
sent also, one Knight into Spain to Charles the Emperor, and another to Rome:
thence into France, craving aid by Letters for relief by Sea and Land; but they
grudging against each other, or respecting only themselves, returned them with
good words without relief.

Then also Preianes, forementioned, (comparable with any Captain of that age,
etc.) having hid himself 2 or 3 days in the Rocks at Sea for fear of the
Turks, came by night in a Pinnace to the Rhodes, whereat they wondrously
rejoiced: whom Villerius in any great exploit, trusted above any, and who in
the Siege, cheerfully endured such labors as others accounted extreme
miseries. Also Mariningus a most skilful Engineer coming out of Creet,
defeated, by Counter-mines, 55 Mines which the Turks made with exceeding charge
and labor.

The City is (...) on a Plain every way to be besieged (except Northward) for
its goodly Haven, thence laying all Westward: (...) it and the Hill's about it,
is a stony Plain longer than broader, the Hills being full of planted Orchards;
but it was compassed with a most strong double Wall, deep Trenches, having 13
sure and stately Towers, with 5 mighty Bulwarks diverse fair gates: with most
exact Warlike Discipline from the French. Tower (seeming to mate the sky)
stood the French with the Lillies in their Ensigns, under Abimus a Knight of
the Order: thence to George's gate lay the Germans with the Eagle: then the
French Avergnois with the Spaniards, the Ditches being there not so deep or
broad as elsewhere. Fifthly, the English, whom the Master himself commanded: then
they of Narbona: lastly, the Italians under Balimus and Morgutus. In every
Station were diverse valiant Knights of the Order.

A Turkish woman-slave, conspired with some others: when the Turks gave the
first assault, to fire the Houses (wherein they dwelt) in diverse places, that
the defendants drawn to quench it, the Turks might more easily enter; but the
Treason was revealed, and they executed.

The Turks had not placed their Battery, when as they took a Hill, whereon
stood Cosmus and Domianus Temple, right against the English Station, with
little hurt (so far off) shooting thence into the City. Then (having with them
5000 pioneers, whom they forced to labor day and night) with incredible speed,
ways were cut through the stony Rocks, Plains raised to Mountains, with earth
brought two miles off, and Mountains levelled; yet were they sadly rent in
sunder with the Town-Ordnance: the Rhodians also sallying out, fiercely pursued
and slew great numbers of them, and of others defending them: and when many
others, thought to relieve their fellows, the Ordnance from the Walls so
thundered among them, that the ground was covered with Weapons and Carcasses.
After three such salleys, the Turks wrought most by night, keeping most strong
watch, and doubling it by day, bending their Ordnance against the Rhodians
sallying places, which kept them not so much in, as the fear of weakening
themselves. Amongst others, certain Mariners having the Turks (...), by leave
(disguising themselves as Turks) came forth by night, in a small Boat laden
with Apples, Pears, Plums, etc. to the place where the passage is out of the
maine. There (as if come from the main) the Turks bought their fruit greedily:
which they having sold and now ready to depart; certain Turks, disliking the
hard beginning of the Siege, earnestly requested to be taken with them into the
maine; who with much ado (in show) were entreated to take in 7 or 8, (whom they
could master) bringing them prisoners to the Rhodes: Where being brought up by
Preianes to the top a Tower, where they might descry all the Turks Camp,
discovered unto him all he demanded: and confessing, that the Soldiers
discontented with the Siege, were ready to mutiny, hardly to be commanded
forth, saying, all was but lost labor, etc. Wherefore, if they were wise, they
should in time depart: which appeared afterward true, for Pyrrhus Bassa
gladder, to please the Soldiers than to punish, wrote to Solomon: if he would
have the Siege go forward, he should speedily come in person to the Camp, they
refusing to be commanded.

The Turkish Captains heard the while, by some fugitives, that the high steeple
of St. John's served as a watchTower: Wherefore, and in despite of the Cross
upon it, they labored with continual shot to beat it down. Solomon coming to
the Camp; Aug. 28. more grieved to see the signs of cowardice, and the great
disorder, than he did take pleasure and hope of 200000 men in his Army; yet
moderating his indignation, he called them together, causing them to be
disarmed, and compassing them in with 15000 Harquebufiers brought with him, he
stepped up into a high Royal Seat; and pausing a good while, he thought it enough
to correct the multitude with sharp words, uttering after silence made, a
choleric speech, calling them Slaves, for he could not afford to call them
Soldiers, asking them, what kind of men they were become? etc. If any one (he
said) at home should have but named the Rhodes among their Feasts and pots,
etc. they could then brag to pull it down; but when he here proved their
courage, it was nothing but perhaps they thought, the Rhodians so soon as they
saw their Ensigns before their gates, would yield; but that infamous denn was
full of most cruel beasts, whose madness, they should never tame without much
labor and bloodshed; yet, said he, I shall tame them, or else here spend my
days, wishing himself, his Empire, and strength for ever cursed, and if he did
or said otherwise. So pardoning all their former offenses, he swear them all
again to his obedience: all things being afterward done with better success
and more care. First planting diverse great guns, they shot up huge stones into
the air; which might (falling down) break whatever they lighted on; Villerius
was like to be slain hereby; yet with 200 such shot, there was but ten men
slain, which Apella a traitorous fugitive declared to the enemy, as he
confessed upon examination, for which he was executed.

The Turks planted also 40 great battering Pieces, 12 being Basilisks: (the
Basilisk killing man and beast with his sight) with these they battered
continually; but being somewhat far off, did little harm. They then likewise
laying battery against Nicholas Tower (defending the Haven on the right hand,
where stood the great Colossus) it was valiantly defended by Guido a Frenchman,
with 200 Soldiers, 30 being Knights. The Turks Artillery being soon dismounted
with their shot, and many Gunners slain; so that, laying still all day, they
began to batter it by night; but the Defendants warily observing, so aptly
placed their Ordnance, that the Turks (...), their doings were by some means
discovered; so after 500 shot bestowed, and a small breach made which they
durst not attempt, they abandoned the place.

Pyrrhus was busy in working Mines, 35 whereof were frustrated by
counter-mines, many being lost on both sides therein; yet the English Bulwark
was Sept. 4. in part blown up, the violence whereof seemed at first, an
Earthquake: and diverse English, were overwhelmed; the Turks attempting to
enter, were with great slaughter repulsed: but Mustapha, crying out of their
cowardice, renewed the assault with supplies: where for a while was a most
cruel fight. The Townsmen and Women casting down upon the Turks, fire, stones,
timber, etc. So that, not able longer to endure it they ran away, not looking
for a sign of retreat: the Ordnance wondrously slaughtering them as they fled:
some write almost 2000 Turks were slain at this assault, amongst them, the
Master of their Ordnance; the Christians also losing (besides a few others) 50
Knights of the Order.

September. 9. Solomon by Mustapha's persuasion commanded a fresh assault; which
was with greater resolution than the first: 7 Ensigns being broken into the
Bulwark, the Defendants giving ground: but the Master coming in with his
Ensign and Knights, drove them out again, Mustapha courageously restored the
Battle, with new supplies, other Captains forcing the retired Soldiers to
fight. Then began a more cruel fight than ever before, and more dangerous to
the Christians, for the Turks much shot; but in that extremity none regarded,
either danger or life; it continued three hours: at length Mustapha, losing two
thousand with three Noble men, whom Solomon specially favored (the Spaniards
beating them out of their Flankers) retired. Few Christians were slain (in
comparison); but, Cluis the Ensign bearer being shot blind, had not Ruiavix a
Knight most courageously rescued it, the Ensign of the Order had been lost.

After this, Mustapha began to grow in contempt with Solomon: and Pyrrhus, to
keep his credit, continually battered the Mount nigh the Italian Bulwark with
17 great Pieces. Then also Cassius Governor of Bythinia labored by
undermining to overthrow the French Bulwark: but was frustrated by Chierus his
countenance: and Pyrrhus in a hot assault, gaining the Mount, and greatly
affrightning the City, was with great loss repulsed, and caused by Solomon to
retire: the Governor of Euboea, Solyman's Lieutenant General being slain: for
which he was exceeding pensive.

Mustapha determined (if possible) by a third assault of the English Bulwark to
recover his credit: agreeing with Achimetes at the same time to assault the
Spanish; who suddenly blowing up part of those Walls, and entering presently in
the thick of the dust and smoke; recovered the Rampiers-top. Mustapha, also
hardly charging the English, a doubtful fight was made in both places. The
Rhodians manfully repulsed the enemy, forcing him with shame to retire, many
English were slain, and Preianes sore hurt: having slain many Turks; 2 of
Mustapha's Ensigns were taken by (...), commendatour of the Germane Knights.
Achimetes having set up his Ensigns; by valonr, and some Ordnance placed by
Martiningus in the Houses before the breach, and by shot out of the Flankers on
both sides, he was forced also to retire.

Sept. 23. They hoping through a Mine, made against the Avergne Bulwark, to win
the City, were, upon their approach at the blowing of it up, met with by a
countermine; so that being in a place of great disadvantage, they returned with
some hurt; yet their expert Captains, conjecturing, the wall might be inwardly
shaken by the mine, though not outwardly perceived; violently battered there
all that day and night after, making a large breach: that night was heard, an
unwonted noise in the Camp; which the Rhodians rightly conjectured a sign of
some great assault to be shortly given; for Solomon resolving next day with all
his Force to assault the new breach, after a melancholy walking in his Tent,
sent for the chief Commanders, declaring unto them: that though they needed not
any exhortation, yet the enemie's desperate madness made him speak to them a
few words: by effectual persuasion and large promises to hearten on his men to
the winning of the City, rent, shaken, beaten down: and they wearied and worn
out, etc. worthily seeming unto his Soldiers of invincible force and courage,
for in taking that one City, they should make entrance upon the matter, into
all Dominions of the Christians; and enjoy store of Warlike provision with a
rich City, and a Haven of all others most commodious, etc. And as for them he
said, considering he had by their valor and wisdom, lately subdued Belgrade,
he rested in great hope, those fierce and obstinate Christians, should not be
able long to defend themselves in their Dens and lurking places.

The Captains making known the Emperors pleasure, proclaimed the spoil of that
rich City, to the (...) s a prey. Solomon laid him down on his Pallet to take
rest; but Villerius all night in Arms, viewed all the City, encouraging his
Soldiers to remember they watched for Country, life, and liberty. A Christian
serving a Turk, secretly warning the Watchmen of a general assault next day:
Villerius calling his Knights to prevent rashness and fearfulness, said, He was
glad the time was come, when in one battle, they might be justly accounted the
defenders of the Christian Commonwealth: the Turks presumed upon their
multitude; but if they measured valor, not by number, but courage, a few,
resolute, would overcome a multitude of cowards; that they knew their manner of
fight, etc. Wherefore remembering their birth, and what opinion the Christian
Commonwealth has had of them, they should furiously fight, as if their slaves
bore Arms against them: necessity as well as wrong, enforcing them; for they
were in an Island, whence was no escape, and in a City, whose rent walls
defended them not so much as their Weapons: therefore to morrow should give
them a joyful Victory, or a most honorable death.

The enemies approach made him cease, every one hastening to his charge; they
with a horrible cry, fiercely assailed 5 stations, 10000 Turks being appointed
to a Place: Mustapha calling on Mahomet, and promising his men the spoil,
assailed the English, whence he had been thrice repulsed.

Pyrrhus (...) ed the Italian; a cruel and deadly fight was in both places:
also Women, Children, and aged men, bringing stones, burning-Pitch-Barrels,
hoops with wildfire, scalding Oil, and boiling Pitch: on whomsoever it fell,
so scalded them, that (...) down their weapons to tear off their Clothes, many
rent off the skin and flesh; besides the deadly shot which fell, never in vain.

Villerius having well relieved the Italians station, at first hardly
distressed, left Monterollus a Knight, with company convenient, and went to the
English hardly laid to by Mustapha; but having well relieved that place, a cry
ran, that the Spanish Bulwark was possessed by the enemy: at which heavy news,
he leaving Gombaulus with a choice Company, hasted thither with his Guard:
which he found taken; for some Turks at the first, hiding for fear at the
Bulwarks foot among the stones, beaten down by battery: Achimetes hotly
charging the Spaniards on the right hand not meddling with the Bulwark it self,
those in the Bulwark, seeing their fellows distressed fast by, left the
Bulwark, and went to that place. The hidden Turks, (...) (...) silent over
them, secretly crawling up the battered walls, got in (...), before discovered;
suddenly slaying a few (...) Soldier, in removing a great piece, and
overthrowing the Christia Ensigns: which the Turks (...), seeing, made great
have through the Town-Ditch, to get into the Bulwark; but were so cut off by
shot from the flankers that few got up.

Villerius, nothing fearing, resolutely scaled the same, and Caponus a
Spaniard, with Menotius a Frenchman, breaking in by a Gate, not yet bolted;
whom they (...) not, they forced to mischief themselves for (...) over the
walls. It was two (...) in the enemies possession.

Villerius leaving there a sufficient number, went with the rest, where the
Spaeniards, sore charged by Achimetes, had much ado to hold out: who
encouraged with his sight, valiantly repulsed their enemies. It were long to
tell the hard fight and adventures at the Avergnoys and Narbonenses stations;
but the Turks laying slain by heaps: Solomon beholding it from his standing
made of high Masts, and no hope of Victory, caused a retreat welcome to both
sides to be sounded: diverse Knights, with 150 common Soldiers, were slain in
this six hours assault, and 2000 Turks.

Solomon was so much offended hereat, that falling into a rage, especially
against Mustapha, as an unfaithful Counselor, and chief perswader of that
unlucky War, commanded him to be put forthwith to death in his presence:
which sudden dreadful doom on so light occasion, upon such a man, struck such
terror in all present, that none durst so much as sigh in pitying his case.

The Executioner ready, Pyrrhus presuming of his great favor, (...) forth,
earnestly requested him to spare his life: wherewith Solomon was so wrathful,
and for sending for him to Constantinople, that he commanded him to be executed
also: All the rest seeing the danger, fell down at the Tyrants feet, craving
pardon, saying, The enemies ground, had already drunk too much Turkish blood,
etc. Solomon at this general intercession, pausing a little, granted them their
lives: Pyrrhus for his age and wisdom, and Mustapha for his Wife's, Solymans
Sisters sake, once Bostanges his Wife.

The Turks great Fleet all the while, lay before the Haven, not doing any
thing; for the Admiral no man of War, seeing all fortified, durst not try to
enter, or besiege the Castles: suffering also Victual and Ammunition to be
conveyed into the City: (...) though by Achimetes mediation, Solomon spared
him from a most cruel death; yet on the poupe of the Admiral Galley, he
receiving an 100 stripes with a cudgel, was thrust out of office.

The remembrance of so many unfortunate assaults, etc. so grieved Solomon, that
being ready to raise the siege, he also lay (...) speechless, with fainting:
and a great while alter, would not be spoken withal, till Abraham his minion,
recomforted him, and persuaded him to continue the siege, time working that,
which the Sword could not suddenly subdue.

Solomon building a Castle upon Mount Philermus, in sight of the City: Letters
were shot in the while, revealing many of Solymans secretest Counsels, and
promising a great man's revolt: which the Rhodians gathered to be Mustapha, not
forgetting the late injury; but tyding: coming, that Cayerbeius was dead,
Solomon sent Mustapha to be Governor of Egypt, thereby pleasing him, no
letters coming into the City after that.

It now seemed, that the Turks purposed by long siege, rather than assault to
take the Town; yet the watchers in their Trenches, would sometimes offer the
Soldiers on the walls, great rewards to yield, sometimes threats, and would
politickly say, Solomon, desiring only revenge upon the Latins, meant no harm
to the Greeks. October was now begun, Rain, Thunder, etc. and mighty Tempests,
fell so abundantly, that the wearied Turks were now discouraged: the Admiral
being forced for the Seas roughness, to slip his Anchors, and run his Galleys
on ground. In these troubles, Achimetes, one of his valiantest Captains,
comforted Solomon, promising, if he would continue, shortly to make open way
into the City: who, thereupon assembling his fainting-Souldiers (...) his
Pavilion, thus (...), that he knew what great things they had endured for his
honor, etc. that the threatenings of the Heavens did persuade him to give them
leave to lay down Arms; but they were first to consider, whether it were not a
dishonor to men of courage, etc. And if they should thence depart, who doubted
but the enemy, out of revenge, and having lost what he had, would prey upon
theirs, more miserably captivating their Wives and Children, than himself was
now in bondage: wherefore he advised them to continue, till they attained the
end of their desires. And if there were no necessity; yet the eyes of all
Nations, chiefly the Christians being on them, when they should hear, they
could not endure the field one Winter, would call (...) Summer Birds, etc:

If the Graecians for a strumpet, besieged Troy ten years' should not the
Turks, vexed and oppressed 214 years, endure one winters siege? that (...) and
thirst has vanquished impregnable Cities, as it shall do Rhodes, telling them,
there was a secret mischief (...) against it, which might not in that open
audience be published. Though many thought this was spoken out of policy, and
the cold courages of the Soldiers were little moved; yet in regard of duty,
with an expectation of the secret, they departed at least in show, content to
endure all difficulties.

Achimetes daily assailing the Vanmures of the Avergne station, not very high,
at length obtained them, desperately keeping the place till more help ran in,
who speedily clapped up a strong covering, like a Pent-house betwixt the wall and
the Vanmure: easy to do, the ditches there being filled so high, that the
slankers could not scour them, nor the Defendants without danger, come to cast
any thing down from the walls: so that the Rhodians overtaken with a sudden
mischief, were first heavily silenced, then breaking out into pitiful
outcries. The Turks under their Pent-house labored to dig up the walls
foundation: and Prejanes, what might be, threw down fire, scalding Oil, etc.
upon them: who shrinking away for fear, and being beaten forward by their
Commanders, and fresh men still thrust on, the fatal work begun October. 7th,
went forward apace: The Asapi were employed in this work, who often serve to fill
Townditches, for the Janissaries to pass over upon, shoring it up as they
wrought with Timber, then firing it, hoping to overthrow the wall: which not
sorting, as not being enough undermined, they tried to pull it down with hooks
and ropes; but the Ordnance soon put them off with great (...).

Achimetes disappointed, doubted whether to give over, or there to expect some
better hap, knowing the Tyrant measured all things by the event; who
understanding the wall to be sore shaken, however, planted his battery against
the undermined part, which falling down more and more, the Rhodians labored
day and night to raise a new wall.

Solomon persuaded generally, the City was that day to be taken or never,
determined another general assault, proclaiming the Cities spoll to his men,
and briefly speaking to them, that fortune having proved their courage and
patience, now offered them the reward of their pains, etc. that it was the time
to end those mungrel-people, of whom more were slain than left alive: who, he
knew, would resist, not as daring but for (...); wherefore they should revenge
themselves, and make them a woeful example to posterity, saying, There was a
fair breach wherein 30 Horsemen might enter, nothing wanting but their courage.
The Soldiers encouraged cheerfully promised to do their utmost, threatening the
Christians with horrible death and captivity: the great shot the while, flying
through the breach, beat down many Houses; but the Countermure, standing on a
lower ground, it seldom touched. The Citizens were wondrously terrified with
the rattling, noise, and thundering: Women and Children lamenting, and seeming
forlorn: the night following was more troublesome; but the day dawning, the
Turks with glistering Ensigns, and cheerful with hope, hasted to the breach
with great outcries and songs: setting down many Ensigns before Ambrose Gate,
decked with Garlands, in token of Victory: their Fleet also, made show before
the Haven, as if it would assail the City on that side; yet for all these
extremities, the Rhodians regarding no danger, running by heaps to the walls,
opposed their bodies, instead of battered walls, propounding to each other, the
cruel death, servitude, and taunts, if they fell into their enemies hands, to
be endured.

Achimetes fiercely assailed the breach: the deadly fight being on both sides
with great courage maintained; (the dismayed Matrons and Maidens, some in their
Houses, some in Temples with floods of tears, craved the Almighties help in
that distress.) The Turks hoped to win the City, if they did but a little
strain themselves, therefore for terrors sake, gave terrible outcries: the
Rhodians accounting them as good as vanquished, they having not yet prevailed;
and by whose invincible courage the Turks were forced to retire: whom the
Rhodians shouted at in derision: who disdaining, that they in number many,
should be so derided by a handful of men, as good as (...), returned with a
more furious assault than at first: and then had the City been taken, had not
the Turks been overwhelmed with shot out of their Barricadoes, and flankers of
the new walls, more slaughter for the time, was ever hardly seen: wherefore
Achimetes again retired, leaving in the breach and Town-ditch, 500 dead Turks,
many more dying afterward of hurt received. This was on November. the last: the
Turkish Captains, though not despairing of Victory, resolved for no more
notable assaults, but by great Trenches, to be made thorough the ruins, to get
into the City, and with mattocks, etc. to overthrow the new wall, and another
(...) without the same; and the while, to busy the Rhodians with skirmishes
and Alarms.

This device served to more purpose than all done before, for the multitude
destroying the new Fortifications, and creeping on further by degrees, the
Defendants were glad to pull down their Houses to make new ones, lessening
their City by new Trenches; so that in short time, they knew not which place to
fortify first, for the enemy had gained almost 200 paces in breadth, and 150
in length.

Soly man, though cruel, and assured of Victory, yet Achimetes and Cassius
perswa ding him, nothing was better for enlarging his Empire than the fame of
Clemency: commanded Pyrrhus to try, if they would by parley, yield on
reasonable conditions: who sent one Monilia a Genoway to the Walls, who craving
safe conduct, said, He had somewhat to say, tending to the good of the
distessed City: who being commanded to speak, said, He would in secret, either
by (...) or Letters, deliver his Message to one Matthias his Countryman a
Citizen: Fornovius a French choleric Knight (reported to have (...), himself,
500 Turks from Georges Tower) moved to hear a motion of private conference,
bending his piece, made him depart without doing his Message. Many
understanding the enemy had offered parley, conceiving some hope of life,
requested Villerias to provide for the safety of his loving people, and c. most
of whom left, being wounded or sick: saying, they had proved their force and
fortune, wherefore he should beware left by too long consulting, the enemy
conceived further indignation: with these and such speeches he was forced to
send Ambassadors to Solomon: Groleus the Ensign-bearer, and Barasius skilled
in the Greek-tongue, for whom Achimetes kinsman, and an Epirot who had fled to
the Turks because a Greek Captain struck him with his open hand, of a sharp
wit, and speaking Greek, Turkish, Italian Languages; were pledges. Solyman's
Interpreter came also after; for Solomon counted it a disgrace to speak any
Language but his own; the Ambassadors told Solomon, they were sent to know why
he sent for parley: Who in a flaming heat, as if not knowing thereof, said,
There was no such matter, and commanding them to void the Camp, sent them away
with Letters, that they should yield speedily as he commanded: their Lives,
Wealth, and choice to tarry there still, or to depart, he granted them: that
they should not refuse grace frankly offered, and c. saying, it should not be
always lawful for them to make choice of both. Upon their return, the multitude
flocked to Villerius his House, who being dismissed, and the chief Burgers sent
for, the Letter was read before the Knights and better sort of Citizens. To
which the Master answered: they had heard those imperious letters, and were
sorrowful, that they must resolve to yield or die except Foreign aid come:
Wherefore with Weapons in hand, letus, said he, to the last gasp valiantly
defend our Faiths and Nobility received from our Ancestors, and c. never to
besaid, Honors died, but with our selves.

This speech seemed to many heavier than Solymans Command: who stood silent,
heavily looking one upon another, and c. At length, a Greek Priest with great
compassion of mind, and tears trickling down, brake forth into a (...) speech,
persuading the Great Master to yield. Most there present was of his mind; yet
the speech was not liked of all; Some considering the harms they had done the
Turks, doubted with what safety, they might yield unto those faithless people,
rather to fight it out to the last man, and so leave them a bloody Victory:
Amongst these one bold-spoken fellow stepped forth, a common Soldier, and, by a
most resolute speech, dissuaded the yielding up of the Rhodes: concluding they
should enjoy eternal fame, and glory in Heaven and earth, prepared for such as
honorably dic in defense of their Prince and Country: which honor, said he,
it becomes not them to envy, who for many years enjoying the profit of peace,
and being greatly enriched by the bounty of this sacred Military Order, refuse
now to bear this last burden of War. At these words, an ancient Greek, for
wisdom and discretion greatly reputed by Greeks and Latins, perceiving his
Countrymen wrongfully touched, and the desperate holding out of the City
vainly persuaded, interrupting him, notably answered to his speech, and urged
earnestly and affectionately the yielding of the City. Notwithstanding,
Villerius, making show of greater courage than his present State required,
after thus discoursing most of the night, commanded every man to his charge,
answering only, He would be careful of all their well-doing. Next morning he
sent for Preianes, Martiningus, and a few other, who resolved him, the City
could not be long defended. Wherefore calling a Common Counsel; it was by a
general consent concluded, the City should be yielded; and a Decree by the
Great Master pronounced. During a 4 days truce with the enemy, full of danger;
diverse presuming Turks, came to behold the, Walls and Rampires; Fornovius sore
moved, without command, discharged a Tire of Ordnance among the thickest of
them. Then also they received by night into the City, a ship-load of Wines from
Creet, with Alphonsus chief Pilot of the Rhodian Galleys, and 100 voluntary
Latins thence, without the knowledge of the Venetian Senate then in league
with Solomon. The Turks hereby justly offended, supposing the supplies far
greater than they were, without command or Ensign displayed, thrust in, in
great numbers, to the new Rampires and Barracadoes, with a furious assault,
many being slain and wounded on both sides; but the Turks retired. The truce
thus broken, the bloody Captain of the Turks Senoeres, having taken 3
Christians, cut off their hands ears and noses, sending them thus with Letters
to Villerius, charging him with Truce-breach; threatening, within 3 or 4 days
to make him the like example to Posterity. None was more troubled with this
breach than the 3 Knights, then Ambassadors in the Turks Camp: who had been
slain or tortured, had they not feared the like to their Hostages: but two
Burgesses being come into the Camp with Articles of surrender, their rage was
soon appeased. Solomon gave them audience, beset with his great Army and
glistering Janissaries, who with great humility presented the conditions: The
chief were, that the Temples should remain to the Christians (...): No children
to be taken from their Parents, nor no Christians forced to turn Turks: That
such as would tarry in the City, might, at liberty, paying no Tribute for 5
years: All others to depart with bag and baggage, furnished with convenient
Shipping and Provision as far as Creet; carrying so much Ordnance as they
pleased; and a reasonable day to appoint for their departure: Solomon solemnly
swearing to perform them all: but it seems, they were not altogether kept nor
broken: many great outrages being committed against the mind of Solomon.
Fontanus a Civilian, then a Judge of the City, reports; the Turks brake in one
Christmas Day by the (...) Cosqueinium, polluting the Temples, abusing the
Christians, and making havoc of all things: Himself redeeming himself with
what money he had, not having enough to content all their desires, was hardly
entreated, and grievously beaten: Villerius by Achimetes counsel, putting on
simple attire, went out into the Camp, with a few Knights, where waiting most
of the day in the rain, at Solyman's Tent, at last having a rich Gown cast upon
him, was brought into his presence: where a while piercingly beholding each
other, the great Master humbling himself, was admitted to kiss his hand; and
welcomed by Solomon, thus, Though I might justly infringe the Articles, with
thee especially such a Capital (...), and c. Yet I have determined to be not
only gracious, but bountiful, promising, if thou (...) amend; the highest
places in my Empire in time of War and Peace, thy present state persuades thee
not to refuse, and the Christians deserve no better at thy hands. For what
should let thee as it were betrayed and vanquished, to cast thy self into the
protection of a most merciful and mighty Conqueror, Villerius answered, Most
mighty, and c. Thy Favors before thy other Worthies I deserve not, nor dare I,
or ought now, to refel the same; yet I will speak freely in the presence of the
Conqueror (whose mercy I never despaired of, or of his faith doubted) I had
rather, having lost my Sovereignty, lose my life, or for ever live in
obscurity, than to be accounted a fugitive; for to be a vanquished man, is but
War's chance; and of so great a Conqueror, no shame: but afterward to forsake
his people and turn to the enemy, I account it shameful cowardice and
treachery. Solomon marvelled at the courage of the old Prince, in such
extremity; Sent him into the City with his own guard, till come into his
Palace; every Knight, atttending him, having a rich Garment in token of his
favor; and few days after coming into the City, he went to visit Villerius,
busy in packing up his things: who falling on his knees to worship Solomon, he
would not suffer him; but putting aside his Vail of Majesty (a reverence given
only to God and Mahomet) took him up, saluting him by the name of Father, to
whom the great Master spoke: Since the fatal Destinies would needs overthrow
the Rhodian State; he was glad, he was the man before all other, and c. the
least of whose praises, that should not be, that he vanquished the Rhodes, and
showed mercy. Wherefore he doubted not, but he would keep the Conventions of
peace inviolate, which his Clemency persuaded him to grant, and their necessity
forced them to take: saying, He should be an Example of the Turkish Emperor's
Clemency and Virtue, more than if he had at first yielded. Solomon answered by
his Interpreter. It was a great pleasure to him, that God had at any time put
it into his mind, to choose Peace before War: which if he had liked from the
beginning, he had now received more good from him, than hurt; which that he did
not for hatred, but desire of Sovereignty he might gather, because he suffered
them to depart at liberty with all their substance; for he warred not to heap
up wealth, but for Honor, Fame, and an enlagement of his Empire, and c. But it
was commonly bruited: he had ordered a Ship and Galleys to transport the Master
and Knights to Constantinople: but if he had so purposed, who should have let
him? Joulus reports, he heard Lilladamus say, that when Solomon entered Rhodes
with 30000 men: there was not any man heard to speak a word: and when he came
to ask Solomon leave to depart, he turning to Abraham Bassa, said, Truly, I
cannot but grieve to see this unfortunate old man driven out of his dwelling,
to depart so heavily.

Lilladamus embarquing himself with his Knights, and such as were willing to
depart, departed on New-yearsday at night, landing after long and dangerous
travels at Messana in Sicily: thence he went to Rome, where he was honorably
received by Pope Adrian 6, a Hollander, who if he had been so forward to
relieve the Rhodes, as to maintain Charles his quarrel against the French King,
its like it had been relieved. Thus Solomon, while Christian Princes were at
discord, entered the Rhodes, December. 25. 1522. after 214 years valiant defense
against the Turks, from whom the Knights took it in 1308. It was 6 months
besieged by Solomon, who lost a great part of his Army, 30000 dying of the
flux, besides those slain.

Alis Beg, who betrayed his Uncle Aladeules, being made chief Governor by
Selimus, as aforesaid; Solomon jealous of his honor (all Aladeules children
being dead) especially if they should join in friendship with the Persian sent
Ferhates Bassa, with a great Army to take him out of the way, who marching
along the confines of his Country, as if but to look to those marches of the
Empire, whereof he was Governor, faigning himself very sick, sent to Alis,
requesting him to come to him, at the point of death: to whom he had things of
importance from Solomon to impart, and would leave with him his charge, if he
died, till Solomon should dispose thereof. Alis always faithful and
mistrusting no harm, came to him with his four sons, whom with their Father, he
presently put to death, and reducing that Country into a Province, under
Solomon, came to him with 20000 men about the time of the yielding of Rhodes:
where all things being disposed of, Solomon returning to Constantinople, brake
up his Army, and for 3 years after, followed his pleasure: in which time and
many years after, Italy was miserably afflicted and rent by Charles the 5th.
Emperor, and Francis the French King: This, envying of his glory: and Charles,
seeking to make himself Lord of all Italy: most of other Christian Princes and
States being drawn into fellowship of the War: Whereupon Solomon thought it now
a fit time to set foot into Hungaria; Belgrade being already taken: for he knew
Lewis that King was but young, unacquainted with War, rather overruled by his
Subjects, than commanding them, hoping also that other Christian Princes near
him, either regarding their own estate would not, or being by League bound to
him, could not greatly aid him. So setting forward from Constantinople, he was
come so far as Sophia with 200000 men, before the Hungarians (so blind and
secure was that State) knew of his coming. The young King was wondrously
dismayed at this fame: yet he sent to his neighbor Princes with all speed,
requesting their aid, but in vain. He the while summoned the Assembly of his
Council for the Wars: Thither his stipendary Prelares (bound to appear) came
with ill-appointed Horsemen, the Troops not half full, delivering in far lass
(...) of money than they ought. And the Nobility as fresh water Soldiers,
never seeing the Turk in his strength vaunted: That though they were but few,
they would easily overthrow their great numbers, if they came to handystroaks;
but above all, Tomoreus Arch Bishop of Colossa, who had been in some light
skir-mishes with the Turks, so did confidently brag of the Victory, that in his
Sermons to the Soldiers, and talk with the Nobility, he seemed himself
sufficient to vanquish the Turks Army; but a general muster being taken, there
was scarce 25000 Horse and Foot. So the fool hardiness of Tomoreus and others,
was of most wise men disliked: the old Soldiers, saying, 'Twas mere madness to
give Battle with such a handful of men. Wherefore amongst others; Verbetius a
noble Captain, counseled that King (...) should be kept out of danger in the
strong Castle of Buda; but the unruly Soldiers said, unless the King led them,
they would not fight: Of which opinion was Tomoreus, persuading them speedily
to give the enemy Battle, * c. The King ruled by this unlucky Counsel set
forward with his Army, and came to Mohatchor Mugace, a Village not far from
Danubius, the mid way between Buda and Belgrade. Balybeus, with 20000 Turks,
forerunners was at hand, and then the Hungarians consulted, whither (...) to
encamp along Danubius within their wagons, to expect Sepussius Uayuod of
Transilvanias's coming with his Horsemen, or to march forward and give Battle?
But Tomoreus, knowing upon Sepusius his coming, he was to give place, would not
hear of delay, and by his frantic persuasions drew the young King into most
apparent danger: for Balybeus making 4 Battles, skirmished with the Kings Army
without ceasing day or night, keeping them in so straight, that none could
water his Horse at Danubius without danger, or once stir forth; but must dig
Water pits where they lay; so that Tomoreus must of necessi y fight. His Battle
was ranged all in length, and his Horse placed here and there by Troops among
his Foot, lest the Turks should with their multitude compass them, for Solomon
was come with all his Army. Tomoreus placed a choice Troop (nigh the chained
wagons enclosing the Tents) to defend the Kings person against all events: but
at the first encounter, the Hungarians, though not hurt by the Turks Artillery
(being mounted too high, most of the Guuners being Christians) were easily
overthrown, as oppressed by multitude: Tomoreus with the rest of the Prelates
and Nobles, being almost all slain together, and the Horsemen slain or put to
flight: the Turks assailed the Camp, hardly defended by the weak Garrison: whom
the Kings Guard-Troop would needs go to help: the King, seeing himself
forsaken, fled; but passing over a Fenny-ditch, his Horse plunging out, fell
backwards upon him, where being loaded with Armor, he was miserably drowned in
the filthy ditch; some few Horsemen escaped, the rest were slain or taken: This
woeful Battle, the ground of that Kingdoms miseries, was fought, October. 29. 1526.

Solomon after this, marching to Buda the regal City, it was delivered him with
the Castle; on condition to violate no man or goods, and to leave it again to
the Hungarians, all which he performed; he much commended the Castle, but
lodged not therein, but in his Camp, the Turkish Emperor being forbidden by
their Law to lodge in any walled place not his own.

He laying at Buda, 7 heads of the Slain Bishops and Nobles were presented to
him, set on a wooden step, his Courtiers bending with their right hands on
their breasts, and deridingly saluting them by name, as valiant Popes, whereat
he smiled, and enquiring particularly what they were; he most detested
Sal-canius Bishop of Strigonium, who although abounding in wealth, refused part
thereof unto his Sovereign at his great need: blaming Tomoreus of rashness, who
busied himself fo far in matters not belonging to his vocation: commending
Perenus Bishop of Veradium, who sharply said in the Council when Tomoreus would
needs fight with the Turks: that he foresaw, their friendlike General would
thereby but effect one Holy Day more in the Christians Kalenders for 30000
Hungarian Martyrs slain by the Turks in unequal Battle. He called George
Sepusius and others rash fools, for adventuring with so small strength to
encounter so strong an enemy. King Lewis and his Wives counterfeit being showed
him: he said, he was sorry it was his ill hap to have so unadvised Counselors
in so important a matter: and that he came not to take away his Kingdom; but to
revenge the wrongs done him by the Hungarians: and, had he escaped, he would
have restoredto him the Kingdom, as content with a small Tribute, etc. All which
he commanded to be told to Mary the Queen, who was fled to Possonium: and he
did (shortly after) give the said Kingdom to John Sepusius, not royally
descended (and he then retaining the mind of a very enemy) After that he took
away three goodly Brass-Images: placed by Matthias in the entrance of the Kings
Palace, Representing Hercules with his Club, Apollo with his Harp, and Diana
with her Bow and Quiver, placing them in the Tilt-yard of Constantinople as a
Trophy of Victory; yet they were since taken away by the Mufties persuasion (as
against their superstition) and Ordnance made of them. Also he carried away 3
most curious Artillery Pieces, and certain Brazen Pillars. In his 20 daye's
stay at Buda, to satisfy his cruel and greedy Soldiers, he sent diverse
Troops, by whom all the Country betwixt Rab and the River Tybiscus, was so
destroyed, that above 15000 people were said to be slain or led Captive: all
(...) being done, he returned to Constantinople.

John Sepusius Vayvod of Transylvania, coming too late to aid the King,
forasmuch as the King being dead without issue; He was of greatest account
among the Nobility of Hungary: he cunningly and instantly requested diverse
Noble men one by one, at the next Parliament not to betray the honor of their
Country, in suffering the Royal Dignity to be transferred to a stranger, etc.
for they ought to remember what calamities they had formerly received in
choosing foreign Kings to rule over them, and in following their unfortunate
Ensigns against the Turks: saying, there remained of the Nobility of Hungary,
men honorably descended of most ancient Houses, worthy of the Kingdom, etc.
Among whom, said he, I would not be accounted so base or heavy-headed (though
many for honor of house, and wealth, may seem to go before me) that I will
therefore confess any to be better then my self, for conducting an Army, or
Government of a Kingdom. He had hereby won many of their good wills and the
easier, for that Steven Bator was gone into Bohemia to King Ferdinand, then
greatly busied in procuring the Nobilitie's favor, and Commons of that Realm
against the time of the Parliament, wherein he was shortly after chosen King.

Lewis his dead body, after Solyman's departure being found by the
demonstration of Cotriscus quire of his Body, present when he was drowned, was
buried with great solemnity at Alba Regalis amongst the Sepulchers of the
Hungarian Kings; which ended, the general Military Parliament (by whose Voice
the Kings were anciently chosen) was called: where John the Vayvod was by the
great Applause and Consent of all there present, chosen King: to whom Perenus
(...) the ancient Crown of the Kingdom, which was in his keeping, and he being
orderly Crowned, was consecrated by the hands of Paul lately chosen Bishop of
Strigonium, and Steven Bishop of Vacia, whom he chose his Secretary: giving
unto Gybachus Bishop of Veradium the Vayvod-Ship of Transylvania; But whilst he
was thus rewarding his friends, and strengthening himself in his Kingdom; he
heard that Ferdinand his Competitour was chosen King of Bohemia, who ont of the
old controversy betwixt Matthias and Frederick the Emperors great Grandfather
alleged great claim to that Kingdom, derived from the time of Ladislaus,
reported to be poisoned at the solemnization of his marriage, through the
ambition and malice of Pogibracius, who shortly after obtained the Bohemian
Kingdom. And now it seemed, that Ferdinand made greater herewith, and
strengthened by his Brother Charles the Emperor might on good ground claim the
Hungarian Kingdom, belonging to him (as he pretended) ever since Albertus the
Emperor's time: neither wanted he the furtherance of diverse Nobles of
Hungary, besides Bater who were in his Court, and (...) at the Vayvoa's
preferment. By whose persuasion, he (trusting to his strength in Austria,
Bohemia, Rhetia, Stiria, and Corinthia) marched toward Buda. Whereat John
being exceedingly troubled, as not having sufficient strength, nor greatly
assured of his Subjects fidelity; departed from Buda, exhorting his Captains to
follow him: And by long marches passed over Tybiscus, encamping at the strong
Castle of Tocai. Ferdinand obtaining Buda without resistance; and staying a
while, consulted whether to pursue John or not: It was soon resolved, he was
speedily to be pursued, before he should gather greater strength, etc.
Ferdinand committing his Army to the Hungarian Nobles his Friends: they with
all speed passed Tybiscus on a bridge made of Boats brought with them, coming
to the Castle of Tocai: John terrified, and debating with his (...) of the
danger, they persuaded him to withdraw a (...) out of the Battle, and if things
fell out contrary, to reserve himself to better fortunes: but they would
resolutely fight against those traitorous Fugitives, etc. Bodo was chief of the
Kings Army, to whom he delivered his Ensign with his own hand: who stood
himself in the main Battle with the Hungarians, placing the Transilvanians in
the wings. Turacous led Ferdinands main Battle, strengthened on one (...) with
the Stirian, on the other with the Austrian Horse; but Bachitius (well acquainted
with the Turkish Wars: lay a good distance off in ambush with light-horsmen to
take his advantage upon occasion. The Ordnance discharged, they joined Battle;
the wings fighting with diverse fortune. The Stirians were worsted by the
Transilvanians, and Bodoes left wing being mostly (...) Soldiers, were
likewise overthrown by the Austrians. The main Battles almost all Hungarians,
fought most eagerly with equal courage; but Bodoes right wing being now put to
(...) by a fresh charge, all his Army was put to flight. Bodo laboring to
restore the Battle, and save the Kings Ensign, was by Bachitius s coming in,
taken: All the Kings Artillery and Ensigns being taken also: himself fleeing
into Polonia. Ferdinands Captains entering Transylvania: all the Province
submitting to Ferdinand: to whom all the Noble prisoners with the Ensigns,
being sent, when Bodo could not be persuaded to renounce his Oath to King John,
and bear Arms against him; He was cast into a dark Dungeon, where soon after he
miserably died. Ferdinand, was by common consent of the Hungarians saluted
King, and crowned with the same Crown that John was Crowned, brought to him by
the same Perenus. Anne his Wife, Lewis his only sister, being Crowned with him:
and all at Alba Regalis. Ferdiuand leaving Bator, and the revolted Bishop of
Strigonium his Deputies for Government, making Berethsaxius Secretary; and
Tursonus a Moravian Treasurer, returned into Bohemia,

John thus thrust out of his Kingdom; fled to Lascius of great fame amongst the
Polonians: who frankly promised him his own wealth, for recovery of his Estate;
and more than that, the utmost of his Device; which was accounted wonderful in
great matters. Lascus's entertainment of John was not unpleasant to Sigismund
King of Poland, though, not to offend Ferdinand his Alliant; he seemed to
forget himself in showing so small kindness to John, whose Sister he had
married. After almost a months debating, Lascus rested on this one point, that
ready help in so hard a case, was only to be hoped for of the Turkish Emperor
Solomon, thinking that he would not reject his humble prayers; especially if
being by him restored, he could be content to hold his Kingdom as of the
Othoman Kings bounty. And ere long, upon this resolution with the King; Lascus
went as Ambassador from John to Solomon: It was reported that Sigismund gave
him his safe conduct with Letters of Credence: who being come to
Constantinople, he soon won the favor of the Bassaes, and other Courtiers,
presenting them with gifts for Rareness rather than value, as might be most
pleasing to theit Wives. Abraham was then Vizier or chief Bassa, and keeper of
the Emperors Seal, doing whatever pleased himself; and commonly said to be the
Commander of Solymans thoughts: Lascus, for that he could speak the Slavonian
tongue, the Turkish Courtiers familiar speech, earnestly solicited the Kings
cause, wondrously commending him: for (having saluted Solomon) he was turned
over (after the manner of the Turkish Court) to the Bassaes: which his request
with the particular motives and Arguments thereof, being sharply delivered, and
by the Bassaes reported to Solomon: who at a secret Window had before heard
them heclared by Lascus: It was no great labor to persuade him, again to
undertake the Hungarian War, and grant John his request according to the
success of the Victory; so he would faithfully perform what he had promised,
not show himself unthankful. Ferdinand the while, fearing no force but the
Turks, sent John Oberdanscus a Hungarian, Ambassador to Solomon (with gifts
for the (...) (...)) by showing to him his ancient Title and claim to the
Kingdom of Hungary, (...) desire his Friendship, and join with him in League
upon Ladislaus, his Son Lewis, and Sigismund of Polonia, their very conditions:
but though he was courteously received by Solomon, and patiently heard, yet in
conclusion Solomon said, it was far from the manner of his Ancestors, to
receive them into favor, who had injured the Othoman name: Ferdinand having
done impudently to invade (...) Kingdom, and to think to hold it, seeing his
old Claim, was lost by the Law of Arms, by his late Victory against King Lewis:
wherefore instead of Friendship and League, he denounced unto him all the
calamities of War: commanding Oberdanscus speedily to depart from
Constantinople: who coming to Vienna and telling the Kings Lievtenants, that
Solomon would shortly come thither with his Army, he was not believed, but
reputed a vain man: wherefore he hastened to Ferdinand then at Spires (hoping
to be chosen King of the Romans at the Assembly of the States of the Empire at
hand) for crowning his Brother Charles. This news not a little troubled
Ferdinand, even foreseeing what would happen, knowing he should come in an ill
time to crave help of the Germans, especially his Brother Charles being busied
in his Wars in Italy, and himself wanting money. The Spring come, Solomon set
forward from Hadrianople with 150000 men. Abraham and Achomates conducting the
Europeian Horse: Michael Ogli General of the Acanzij: Becrambeius following him
with his Asians: himself in the middle with his Janissaries and Court-Souldiers,
(...) in 15 days to Belgrade: where John with Lascus, and other Hungarian
Nobles, came to him, and doing him all honor, requested him to proceed to
revenge his quarrel.

Solomon (...), and yet friendly, gave him his right hand, protesting, nothing
was better to him, or he more desired of God, than to relieve distressed
Princes, chiefly those wrongfully (...) by his enemies, willing him to be of
good comfort, promising to bestow on him what in that war he won by the
Sword. John obtained this by Abraham Bassa's mediation, whom Lascus had so won
by gifts and requests: Grittus, the Duke of Venice his Son, born and brought up
in Constantinople, then following the Turk's Camp, and in great reputation
among the Turks, and so favored by Abraham, that he could persuade him to any
thing, especially helping him herein.

The fame of Solyman's coming, so terrified the Citizens of Buda, that they
almost all fled to places further off; so entering Buda unresisted, he besieged
the Castle, whose Captain was Nadastus, of great account among the Hungarians:
who perceiving his Soldiers, as dismayed willing to surrender, forbad them to
talk with the enemy, bending his Artillery upon the Turks, and seeing his men
timorous, he reproved them of cowardice and treason, threatening them with
shameful death, if they held not out to the utmost, etc. But they misdoubting
by the Turks running to and fro, that the Castle was undermined, and at least
imagining to smell the sent of Gunpowder, were struck with such fear, that
naught could s^ay them, but they would needs deliver up the Castle: which when
they could not persuade the resolute Captain to consent unto, but sternly
exclaiming against them, they bound him hand and foot, presently concluding
with the enemy to yield, so they might depart with bag and baggage: and they
about 700, about to depart toward Possonium: and the Janissaries loosing the
Captain, were about to let him go also.

Solomon advertized of their treachery, and the Captains fidelity, in
detestation, gave them all to the Janissaries to be slain; but offered
Nadastus's honorable entertainment, which he refusing, he courteously sent him
away, helped by King John's commendation, though his Sister was married to
Stephen Malat, his deadly enemy. This bloody execution, the Turks said, was not
only lawful, but also to Solyman's immortal glory, in the execution of
justice. Buda thus taken, Solomon resolved forthwith to besiege Vienna, the
chief City of Austria: sending Achomates, before him, with the Achanzii, who
running through Hungary, and entering Austria, passed by Vienna, miserably
burning and destroying, as far as Lyntz. The poor people fleeing as men and
women dismayed, carried with them their Children, and what else they could; for
whatever fell into their hands, was lost, the old men slain, the young led
captive, women ravished before their Husbands faces, and then slain with their
Children; Infants ripped out of their Mothers wombs: others taken from their
breasts, were cut in pieces, or thrust on sharp stake, etc.

Solomon shortly after, following them with all his Army, took Altenburg Castle
by the way, commanding 300 of the Bohemians there in Garrison, to follow his
Camp. He also assaulted the little City Neapolis, 7 times in one day, still
repulsed: but he forsook that, and came to Vienna September. 26. incamping in 5
places about it, with such a multitude; that from the highest Tower thereof,
the ground seemed to be covered 8 miles space with (...) (...) people.
Ferdinand, besides his own forces (not (...) to oppose so mighty an enemy) had
craved aid of Christian Princes his Neighbors, chiefly those of the Empire, who
appointed Frederick Palatine of Rhexe, and (...) of Bavaria their General; but
the Germans (after their manner, slowly serting forward, Solomon the while,
had so belayed the City, that Frederick could not get into (...) but stayed
with his Army at Chremse, about (...) (...) off; yet a few days before, 20000
Horse and (...) (...) come to Vienna, their chief Commanders being Philip the
Palsgrave Fredericks Nephew, sent thither a little before by his Uncle, with a
few Companies of Horse and (...); Nicholaus Count of Salma; the Lord (...) John
Cazzianzer, a Croatian Noble, with four others (...) (...) and valor, of great
account.

Vienna was somewhat strong toward the North, by reason of Danubius; but in
other places, the Ditches were dry, easy to be passed; the walls of Brick,
round, without Flankers, neither high nor thick: neither had they, as men
secure, cast up any rampire or Bulwark, unless at the Gate of Carinthia; so
that of 100 great pieces, and 300 others, less, a great part were of no use;
yet, as the sudden coming of the enemy gave leave, they cast up Bulwarks, and
planted their Ordnance thereon. Abraham Bassa encamped on a Hill, where stood a
ruinous Castle, whence he might overlook all the City; yet laying out of danger
of Gunshot: Becrambeius lay at the Gate Purgatoria: toward the Hill's rising,
lay Michael Ogli. At the Scottish gate toward Danubius, lay the Asapi, with
diverse Companies of Janissaries, who powered such showers of shot and Arrows
into the City, that none could appear on the walls without danger, or (...) in
the City unarmed, but he was wounded.

Solomon lay nigh St. Marks Temple, compassed with his Janissaries and
Court-Souldiers, defended also with the brick walls of the Gardens: the
Defendants sallying often out, slew many, while thus encamping: in one of which
sallies, Hagen with certain old Spanish Soldiers, was slain, fighting
valiantly at the Castle Gates; and in another, Zetlitz sallying out with 500
Horse, even to their Trenches, was taken with six others, whom the Turks
compelled to carry so many Heads of their slain fellows, on poles, and so
presented to Solomon: of whom he enquired many things concerning Ferdinand, and
where he was, and whether the Princes within hoped to defend the City against
his power. Zetlitz answered (though not so truly) that Ferdinand lay not far of
at Lintz, expecting a great Army; and that diverse Princes were coming to him
with great aid, etc; And as for the Princes in the City, he knew, they and all
the Soldiers were solemnly sworn, not to give it over to the last man, etc;
But as for him and the others taken with him, they were in his power to kill or
save: yet he granted them their lives and liberties, charging them to wish the
Defendants in his name, to yield the City: which it was impossible for them
long to defend against his mighty power, etc. and to accept before too late, of
safe departure with bag and baggage; for he was resolved not to depart before
he had taken it. So he sent them away with three Hungarian Ducats a man. They
being received into the City, related the threatenings and proud speeches of the
Turk, which they so disdamed, as to send him no answer: whereat he displeased,
deridingly sent them word, if they wanted help, he would send them the 300
Bohemians taken in Altenburge Castle: who answered, they needed none from him,
therefore, he might dispose of his prisoners, as he saw good: wherefore he
began to batter the walls with such Ordnance as he brought with him: which
being not great, did not much harm, more than to beat down the battlements of
Timber, hanging over the walls for small shot to play out of.

His great Artillery was coming up Danubius; but Wolfgangus Hoder going out of
Possonium, with certain small Vessels, set upon the Turks with such resolution,
that slaying many of them, he sunk amongst other Vessels, those
battering-pieces with the Boats that brought them; so losing a few men, he
returned with Victory: the City hereby, being delivered of a great danger; yet
another part of the Turks Fleet, at the first coming up to Vienna, brake down
all the Bridges, which joined diverse Islands together, made by Danubius; over
which is the way from Austria, unto Vienna: and so kept the passage, that none
by land or water could go in or out without danger.

Solomon now fell to undermining the City: which was with exceeding labor and
diligence, attempted in 15 places; but was perceived by Drums on the ground,
basins filled with water, and sounds made in the Earth, and so, met withal by
countermines, that most were frustrated, and 8000 Turks slain or buried quick
therein. Solomon, that they might not so perfectly discover his Mines,
appointed his Army, divided into four parts, in order to give the Defendants a
continual Alarm: whereby his works went forward with all possible speed: and
one Mine was suddenly blown up, shaking and overthrowing much of the wall nigh
the Gate, leading toward Carinthia: whereat, the Turks greatly shouting,
pressed in on all sides by the ruins of the wall, charging the Defendants with
shot and Arrows very thick: who resolutely standing in the face of the breach,
so received them with shot and push of Pike, that they began to retire:
whereupon, Solomon sent in new supplies; but these also receiving a great
overthrow, retired without any sign of retreat.

The ground nigh the Town lay covered, and the ditches filled with dead Turks.
Ere long, the wall was blown up in two other places, by which breach not very
great, they sought so desperately to enter, that they thrust one another upon
the point of their enemies Weapons: who slew them without number, being mostly,
without Armor, enforcing them again disorderly to retire, filling the breaches
with their dead Carcasses.

Three days after, another piece of the Wall, not far from the first breach,
was so suddenly overthrown, that for eagerness on both sides, throwing away
Guns and Bows, they came to handy-blowes in midst of the breach, the Turks
with Scimitars, the Germans with long Swords: as their Captains encouraged
(them) with cheerful persuasions; so the Turks Captains forced (them) forward
with words and wounds: it was thought, a more fierce and deadly fight was never
seen; for many Turks Horsemen, thrust in on foot amongst the rest, and fought
most desperately. At the last, after three hours furious fight, the Turks
seeing no hope, retired to their Camp, many of their best Captains and
Soldiers lying dead by heaps.

It were tedious to recount every assault in particular; yet Lord Rogendorff is
not to be forgotten, who one day sallyed out (with some Troops) upon many
straggling Turks, with such violence, that overthrowing them at first onset,
and chasing them, scarce 140, of 5300 escaped: after which his name was
terrible to the Turks. Solomon exceedingly grieved with his vain assaults,
purposed to prove the utmost of his forces, and calling his chief Commanders,
at first, sharply reproved them as of no courage, who had turned their backs in
the breaches half won: wherefore (he counting it a great dishonor to forsake
the siege) they should resolve next day as Conquerors, to take the City, or as
cowards, to end their days. Next day, October. 15. they with all their sorces
assailed the City, thrusting their men by heaps into the breaches, as if they
would with very multitude, have overborn the Christians; being at handy blows,
the fight was most terrible, the Christians still repulsing them: whose
Ordnance also fitly mounted, made such slaughter among the thickest of them,
that they shrunk back, and chose rather to be slain of their own Captains, as
some were, then to be rent in sunder by the murdering shot; so that the
Captains, seeing no remedy, retired, leaving many thousands dead in the
Town-ditches.

Next day Solomon despairing, and fearing Ferdinand and the Count Palatine
their coming, winter also coming fast on, determined to raise the siege: to
color which dishonor, he sent certain chief prisoners, richly appareld, and
full of money, to tell them of the City, he came not intending to besiege or
take Vienna; but to revenge wrongs done him by Ferdinand; and to fight with him
for the Hungarian Kingdom: whom, since he could not draw to Vienna, he would
remove to seek for him: wherefore they should yield, promising not to enter
their City, but to receive them all into his protection, reserving them their
lives, goods and freedom: which they scornfully refused, as proceeding of
desperation. Next night, he slew all the prisoners in his Army: which pitiful
outcries, they heard into the City, not knowing what it should be, till, after
his departure, they found men women and Children wallowed in their own blood.
Solomon causing Abraham, to show himself in order, as if to give a fresh
assault, rose himself the while, with the rest, returningin such (...), that he
neither garrisoned or demanded tribute of any places taken. Abraham following
him a days journey behind, he arrived at Buda in five days, 32 Germane miles
from Vienna. He is reported to have lost 80000 men, his Lieutenant of Asia
being one, and many forward Captains. Few or none of name, of the defendants
were lost; but of the country, above 60000 were thought to be slain and carried
captive: all about Vienna being miserably spoiled. Solomon restored Buda to
King John, who by writing, acknowledged himself his Vassal, to whom he joined
Grittus as his legate, to help him in providing for that Kingdoms defense.

While Solomon lay at Buda, he was one day earnest with King John, to receive
the Bishop of Strigonium and Perenus, who had taken part with Ferdinand, into
his former favor, who showing himself unwilling to be entreated, said, their
mutable minds would never contain themselves within the bounds of loyalty, but
find occasion to commit some fowler treason: whereto, Solomon straining his
voice a little as somewhat moved, replied, Can any thing happen better to thee
in this life, than for thy enemies by thy kindness to be accounted by all
ungrateful, etc. when as in thee the commendation of a courteous Prince shall
for ever remain? So fearing the cold of approaching Winter, he set forward to
Belgrade, thence to Constantinople.

All this while, Charles the Emperor, lately reconciled to Pope Clement 7th,
besieged Florence, by Davalus, laboring to bring them again under the
subjection of the Medici's, whereof Clement was chief: which with much ado he
bringing to pass, invested Alexander the Popes Nephew in (...) Dukedom. And
giving him his (...) Daughter in marriage; forgetting his Brother Ferdinand the
(...) and Austria (...), with Vienna endangered. Next year, 1520, Solomon, with
great solemnity, circumcised his Sons Mustapha, Mahomet, and Selimus at
Constantinople. And hardly digesting the dishonor at Vienna, and solicited by
John against Ferdinand, who with greater stomach still (...) him; but mostly,
from an exceeding unsatiable desire of enlarging his Empire, he raised an Army,
purposing chiefly, to conquer all Ferdinands Dominions, and so, all Germany;
prefining to himself but three years for accomplishment. It was reported, that
he would often say, what belonged to the Roman Empire, was of right his, he being
possessed of the Seat and Scepter of Constantine the great: wherefore, when he
mentioned Charles, he would as in disdain, term him, King of Spain, but never,
Emperor.

Christian Princes discord, and great troubles then in Germany, about Religion,
not a little encouraged him to his expedition.

Ferdinand sent him three Ambassadors, whereof Noble Negarola, skilled in
diverse Languages, was chief, with rich presents, and reasonable offers for
peace, who meeting him on Servia's borders, were courteously received and
heard; yet had no answer, but to follow his Camp, and atrend his pleasure: the
report whereof, brought fear on all Germany, chiefly the Austrians, in whose
remembrance were the bleeding wounds of their Country etc. Charles the Emperor,
had a little before, for a while well appeased the dissension about Religion,
put the Germans in hope of a general Council, for deciding all such matters;
and in a great Assembly of the states of the Empire at Ratisbone, showed them
the greatness of the eminent danger, etc.

If they should then fall at variance among themselves: offering to go in
person with all his old Soldiers in defense of the Christian cause; so that,
highly commending him, all other matters then set apart: they agreed with one
consent to send at a prefixed day, such Forces to Vienna, as they had (in any
time before) sent. Whereupon he wrote to Vastius his Lieutenant General in
Italy, speedily to call together the old Captains, and to leavy what
Harquebusiers they could, with whom, and the Spanish, to repair sorthwith into
Austria: enjoining Auria his Admiral to rig up a strong Fleet; and to go
against the Turks Navy into Greece: He sent also for his choice Horsemen out of
Burgundy, and the Low Countries: and many Noble and expert out of Spain:
entertaining 12000 Germans for his guard, commanded by famous Herbersthene and
Tamisius. Pope Clement also, having exacted from the Clergy a great mass of
Money (for his Coffers were much emptied by the Florentine Wars: whereto his
rich Cardinals contributed nothing) sent the young Cardinal Hippolytus, Medices
his Nephew, (about 20 years old, as his Legate to Charles) accompanied with good
Captains and store of Treasure, whose coming was very welcome: for besides his
great bounty, he entertained 8000 Hungarian Horsemen, best acquainted with the
Turkish Wars. King John thought it now a fit time to wring from Ferdinand what
Towns he yet held in Hungary: wherefore he sent Aloysius Grittus, to besiege
Strigonium, situated on Danubius side, about 30 miles from Buda: the Castle
was holden with a strong garrison; yet Grittus so besieged it by water and
land, that the Defendants doubting to hold out, (chiefly, if Solomon took that
in his way, sent for relief to Gazzianer Governor of Vienna, who sent certain
small Frigots down Danubius (well manned) from Possonium, by their unexpected
coming to open a way to the Castle hindered by the Turks Fleet: but Grittus
informed hereof by the Hungarians serving Ferdinand, and yet sometime fleeing
to either party, sent his Fleet up the River, to oppress his enemies, as they
thought to have done him (promising great rewards to such as performed any
extraordinary service) who at first were exceedingly dismayed: yet thinking it
a great shame to flee, courageously encountered their enemies many being wounded
on both sides in that sharp fight: at last, they of Possonium (not able to
endure the shot, especially of the Turkish Archers) fled: and but 13 of 60
Frigots escaping with Corporamus their General, the rest being sunk, or run a
shore, and forsaken by the Possonians, of whom almost 500 were slain. After
this Grirtus hoping, they of the Castle would not long hold out, left off
battering and under-mining it, by keeping them from relief to force them to
yield. Thus, whilst the divided Hungarians sought each others ruin, Solomon
was ready to devour them and their Country, as in fewyears he did.

The Spanish Soldiers drawn together by Vastius were, much about this time,
come to the Alps: being of all sorts about 20000, yet almost the third part not
serviceable. For the old Soldiers enriched with the long Wars in Italy,
brought with them all their gotten spoils, and their very Women, which drew a
multitude of Carriages and unnecessary people: Wherefore Vastius straightly
commanded, they should leave behind all such unnecessary Baggage, whereat they
murmuring, presently (...) in mutiny: for many Captains being rich, and
disliking that long and dangerous expedition, covertly put into the Soldiers
heads, that they all said, they would go no further before they had their pay.
Vastius though he perceived the tumult was raised by some of his enemies, yet
diss mbling the matter contented them with a month's pay, promising the full
when they came to the Emperor; so having with much ado appeased them, he set
forward,

Immediately after followed the Italians, so cheerfully offering their service
that every. Captain brought twice so many as was expected; So that Vastius (who
before doubted their forwardness, especially to aid the Germans of whom they
had received great harms) was now glad to dismiss many Common Soldiers, and,
against his will, to displace most of the forward Gentlemen, who had gallantly
furnished themselves: for the Emperor had appointed the number of Italians to
be led by old Captains, whose valor and discretion he had well experienced.
They were 14000 select Footmen, besides many brave men voluntarily resorting to
Vienna. Gonsaga followed these with 2000 Horse, and some Greek and Spanish
troops, with whom came many noble Gentlemen, who served now as private men
without pay, counting it shame not to be present in that religious War The
Emperor also viewing his Low Country Horse, and shipping his store of bought
Ordnance, departed down Danubius from Ratisbone to Lintz: which never carried
so many Vessels and Soldiers since the time of the great Roman Emperors: and
yet the Banks on both sides were filled with Horse and Foot, passing along
under Colors with Drums and Trumpets sounding: a most glorious earthly show.

Solomon the while, in 1532, coming to Belgrade in 56 days, sent a multitude
of Horsemen into Hungary over the River Savus by Bridges made, and leaving
Danubius on the right hand, marched toward rich Stiria, now Stiermarke; coming
by the way, to the little Town Gunza, which courageous Jureschitz kept with a
small Garrison of his own, not very strongly walled, an obscure thing, standing
in a Plain. Abraham very desirous to save the said Captain, knowing him to be
of great courage, and his familiar acquaintance at Constantinople; first by
persuasions and offers, then by terrible threats, tried to induce him to yield.
But finding him resolute: he enclosing it round overthrew the Walls (by Mines)
in 3 places: which while the Garrison valiantly defended against the Janizarics
assaults on the South side; the Bassa with his Fieldpieces on the Hills from
the North, grievously annoyed the Defendants. Wherewith the Governor troubled,
though not much discouraged, raised a Curtain of Timber and Boards 12 foot-high
at his Soldiers backs; so that they now shooting at all adventures at the
Curtain, did nothing such harm as before; with desperate and restless labor,
repairing the Breaches strong as at first: 200 Turks Horsemen the while,
straggling for booty as far as Neostat, were by Hungarian Horse all slain and
taken; whose Heads they bringing to Vienna, to encourage the Soldiers, set
them on stakes upon the Walls: Then they knew by the prisoners that Solomon had
500000 men and 300 Field pieces; but smal'. For why, Solomon by destroying the
Country, purposed to draw the Emperor to Bartel: which report was confirmed by
Ferdinands Embassidours, whom Solomon granted to depart at Gunza with each of
them a Velvet Gown and piece of Plate, and Letters to Charles and Ferdinand;
proudly usurping the Titles of many Kingdoms: saying, he was come into Hungary
to revenge the wrongs they had done to King John his Friend and Vassal, and
would enter their Country, with fire and sword: and by God's and Mahomet's
power, would give them Battle, if they durst meet him in one Battle to end that
quarrel, either by winning or losing the Empire of the World. Solomon having a
great while sharply assaulted Gunza and still with great loss repulsed: He in 4
days cast up nigh the Town-ditch two great Mounts of Faggots and earth, so
high, that they over-topped the highest Towers of the Town: one was against the
face of the Town, the other at a corner to flanker the Wall: whence he with his
shot, beat both them on the walls, and those who went to and fro in the
streets. The Town-ditch being filled up, and many Defendants (...) or wounded,
the Turks most furiously assaulted the place before shaken, the valiant Captain
opposing all his strength left; but the Turks with their multitude, got up the
walls with 8 Ensigns, whence they had repulsed the Defendants, who being all
wounded or wearied, shrouded themselves under their Pent-houses, so that the
Walls were now abandoned. But such a sudden clamor was make by the Women and
Children, and other fearful people; that the Turks on the Walls, thinking the
Town full of Soldiers, stood as men dismayed: whereupon the Defendants began
again to show themselves, at whose sight they forsook the Wall, and could by no
means be brought on again. The Town was then defended in all judgment, by Gods
power, not man's strength: Solomon exceedingly grieved to see so base a Town
hold out so long, often (in his rage) threatened to leave no sign thereof
remaining: but Abraham Bassa waited a fit time when his choler was past; told
him, it was not worth his name and greatness, to spend his time and Forces upon
so small a Town of no importance, by razing whereof he should get neither honor
nor profit, etc. Wherefore 'twere more honorable to raise his Siege, and,
calling the Governor, to give him the Town as of bounty, than to spend so many
good men in winning it by force. The Bassa so prevailed, that the Governor was
by a Herald, sent for to Abraham, who though grievously wounded, yet refused
to come to any parley, except first assured by sale conduct and good Hostages
for his safety, and nothing to be exacted unbeseeming his Religion and Honor:
which stout answer made them think, he was still able to hold out the Siege:
whereupon what he required, was forthwith granted; So he going forth, was by
Abraham honorably received, and bid sit down by him in his Tent, who
courteously demanding, whether he had recovered his old infirmity which he had
when sent Ambassador to Solomon, and whether his wounds were dangerous? But
last of all, on what hope he alone had so long and obstinately withstood the
mighty Solomon? saying, he marvelled, why he reposed confidence in the bringing
King Ferdinand? Who modestly answered, he was (thanks be to God) well delivered
of his old Disease: his wounds being without danger; As for his holding out, he
knew (he said) it was the duty of a good Soldier, valiantly to withstand his
enemies, nor to be discouraged with any chance of War, etc. That Ferdinand
would ere long be there present with a great Army: he not much marvelling, he
was not relieved before then, since many lets might hinder the King's purpose,
considering Fortune's inconstancy in Martial assairs. The Bassa wondering at his
courage, said, Although Solomon might utterly destroy the Town with all
therein; yet being by nature most honorable and mild, and a great lover of
valiant men, He had commanded him in his Name to give him that Town, and all
the lives in it as a Reward of his Valor: yet so, as to swear to him
obedience, and receive some few Turks into it in token of yielding. The
Governor knowing (...) a third part of 800 Soldiers were left, and them sore
weakened, thought it needful to make his peace in best sort he could: and so
cunningly used the matter, that Abraham was content, he should only receive a
Captain with 10 Janissaries in, at one of the gates for a while courteously
entertained, and then dismissed; though he had neither Germane nor Spaniard
then in the Garrison; yet he told the Bassa, he was much afraid the Turks
would be ill entreated by them, who deadly hated them. So Solomon having layen
at that Siege 28 days: and to his great loss assaulted Gunza 13 times: He rose
with his Army, glad of a little seigned submission for safety of his honor.
And leaving Vienna on the right hand, where was most of the Christian Army, he
came into Carinthia, and so to the River Mura, thence to the City Gratia. This
put all fear out of the Christians minds: for that Solomon (a little before
feared) being repulsed at Gunza, shunned his enemies at Vienna, etc. Which
disgrace, the Turks sought to cover, as that Neostat lay betwixt him and
Vienua, not to be taken without great difficulty, nor without danger left
behind him: Winter also beginning to approach. But some were of opinion,
Solomon understanding that the Germane Princes had joined Forces with the
Emperor's brought from Spain, Italy and the Low Countries, which at first he
least feared; and that the Christian Army great, were (mostly) not inferior to
his best men of War, chose rather to take the spoil of the Country with safety,
than to adventure person and state in a most doubtful Battle. While this was
doing, Cason was sent with 15000 Acanzij, to spoil all the Country between
Danubius and the Alps: Wherefore dividing his Horsemen into 3 Companies not far
asunder, he slew or carried away prisoners a multitude of all sorts of people
as he went, forcing thousands of men and women to run (tied together) as fast
as their Horses, burning down the Villages, and in them the children of the
Parents: so that, almost 150 miles every way was covered with smoke and fire
within 3 mile of Lintz, whence Ferdinand was glad to get to Strabinga to Charles
the Emperor. This cruel Turk, loaded with spoil and prisoners, began to return
the way he came, to Solomon: either (as he thought) at Gunza, or Neostat,
coming toward Vienna; but the Christian Captains went out of the Camp, to meet
with them: using such diligence in taking the passages, it was impossible they
should escape unfought withal: 4 troops of Spanish and Italians under Valiant
Coue, first lighting on them nigh Neostat, and charging them, were (most)
slain; but Cason perceiving how he was on every side laid for: the night
following slew 4000 Christian prisoners, lest he should be hindered in flight;
and, dividing into two parts, set forward about midnight to escape out of the
enclosed Valleys: One part of his Army led by Ferises, going Southward, with
incredible labor, cut a way thorough the thick Woods, coming with little loss
to Solomon into Stiria, Cason with 8000 Turks breaking out of Storamberg
Valley, chanced on the Palatine, who with 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and some
Fieldpieces, brake them, slaying a great number. Casons Ensign being taken,
and himself fighting in the rear for others to escape, was slain. Whose gallant
Head piece presented to the Emperor, confirmed the report. Those who there
escaped (falling into the hands of Lewis, and Marquess of Brandenburg, and of
Hungarian Horsemen, led by Turacus, who killing them 7 miles, insulting over
them in their own Language; and of the Country people, about Vesprinium, and
the lake of Balaton) it was thought, not one escaped to Solomon.

The Emperor hearing Solomon was gone as far as Gratia, called a Council in
Lintz Castle, to know wherher 'twere best to follow the enemy. From Lintz to
Gratia is 3 good dayes-journey of bad rough way. Some said, 'twas best to fight
the Turks in that uneven Mountain-countrey: whose chief strength (being Horse)
should stand them in small stead; their Foot being in eriour to the Christians.
The Emperor presently sent Apontius a Spaniard to view that passage, who soon
brought word, that all the Country was desolate; and (sor fear) forsaken; but
where the enemy lay, he could not certainly learn: whereupon they concluded to
go all to Vienna, to view the Army and fight the enemy, if he returned. Some
disliked that; saying, Charles should in that distress of Stiria and Carinthie,
rather pursue his enemy; but others said, it was one thing to invade, and another
to defend, etc.

Charles being come to Vienna, and viewing the Army, found therein 260000 men,
120000 being counted old Soldiers; It was thought, that so many worthy
Captains and valiant Soldiers, were never (before) in man's memory, together
in one Camp: all the Flower and strength of Germany from Vistula to Rhene, from
the Ocean to the Alps, were sent or voluntarily came thither. A thing never
before heard of, etc. Besides, the great number of Spaniards and Burgundians:
the Bohemians lay not far off, with the Silesians and Moravians: There were
also some Troops of Polonians; as voluntary men. King Sigismund winking thereat
(as if without his knowledge) being careful, not rashly to break his League
with Solomon.

This Army lay in a great field near Vienna, in an excellent order; ready to
receive the enemy: which many Gentlemen beholding, wept for joy, conceiving
assured hope of Victory, if the Turk with all his Forces durst join in Battle.
But Solomon advertised of the Emperors strength and manner of laying, got over
the River (...), and at Marpurg, by Bridges suddenly made, passed over Dravus,
and so to Belgrade, thence to Constantinople, leaving here and there some
remembrance of his cruelty, and still looking behind him, if the Emperor were
not at his heels, when as a few Dalmatian and Croatian Horse pursued his Rear.
Its reported he carried 30000 into captivity, besides many thousand slain.
Charles now determined speedily to return into Italy, though Ferdinand earnestly
entreated him, first to employ those great Forces against King John, who might
then have been easily thrust out of all; but Winter approoching, and the plague
in the Camp, yea in his Court, he continued in his purpose; yet leaving behind
him all the Italians, who with Ferdinands own Forces were thought sufficient
for the Hungarian War.

One Maramaldus was appointed General over those Italians; but no order taken
for their pay. Other Captains thought themselves disgraced by Maramaldus's
preferment: whereby the under-Captains and Officers, said plainly, they would
not go into Hungary except Ferdinand himself went, or Vastius, or Leva were
their General: and the Soldiers said, They would ask leave to depart, if they
had not 3 months pay, knowing they should never get it of poor King Ferdinand;
Vastius greatly persuaded them to remember the faith of Soldiers, etc. saying,
Valiant Soldiers never wanted pay, furnishing themselves by Victories, with
all necessaries: and that they had no just cause to mislike Maramaldus, being
an old Captain of great experience, and placed by the Emperor as most
sufficient: having well appeased them, and being gone to Vienna, to take order
for remedying of all difficulties: night the nurse of sedition, gave farther
scope to the mutinous Soldiers. There was then brought to the Camp, very
coorse hoary, molded bread, which some, on their Spears point, showed to
their fellows in great choler, railing against King Ferdinand, etc.

And a little before, a Spanish common Soldier casting the like bread at
Vastius's feet in the Generals Tent, bitterly cursing the Emperor and
Ferdinand, had raised a wondrous tumult: wherefore, the Italians flocking
together, gave many hard speeches about their pay, Victuals, and the War's
difficulty; and setting up one Marconius upon a heap of Saddles, he was by
diverse Captains, requested frankly to speak, what he thought concerned all
their safety and welfare: where, he is reported, to have uttered a seditious
Oration unto them: at which very time, a great Blazing-Starre was seen at
Vienna, which the said Marconius called a terrible and bloody Comet, shooting
he said, his Beams toward Italy. But his Speech ended, the Soldiers highly
commending it; a confused noise was heard throughout them; but the Drums
presently striking up a march, they go forward toward Neostat. Six Captains
drew after them 8000 Soldiers, the rest for shame, and fear staying with
Maramaldus.

Vastius, and diverse great Companies hearing thereof, posted after them 6
miles, requesting them to stay, and not dishonor themselves with so foul a
fact, saying, their pay was ready, and mingling prayers with grievous threats;
but they, as enraged, sternly discharged some small shot upon them.

Vastius was often in danger to be slain, so that in the end, he was glad to
forsake them.

Ferdinand hereby, for that time disappointed of hope to recover the Hungarian
Kingdom, wrote to his Stirian and Carinthian Subjects, to show them no
courtesy in their passagee whereupon ensued great hurt on both sides: yet the
Italians at length, recovered Tiliaventum in Italies borders, where disbanding,
they returned to their dwellings. Charles also breaking up his Army at Vienna,
appointed Gonzaga to go foremost with the light Horse, with whom himself went:
Vastius following with the Spaniards; two days after came the Cardinal with
the biggest Train. Lastly, the mercenary Germans; so returning safe into Italy.
This was the end of Solomon and Charles the 5th, their wondrous preparations in
1532, some mavelous alteration being expected, and the more for that, then, a
great Blazing-Starre appeared for 15 days. In the mean time, Andreas Auria
with 35 tall Ships, and 48 Galleys, and 25000 good Soldiers, greatly annoyed
the Turks in Peloponesus: who near Zant Island, met with Capellius the Venetian
Admiral with 60 Galleys set forth for their own defense: who though kind to
Auria, yet could not join with him against the Turk, Solomon having lately
renewed an old league with the Venetians: who bare themselves so indifferent at
that time, that it was thought they at one instant advertised Auria of Hymerales,
the Turks laying with 60 Galleys in Ambracia Bay, ill appointed, easily to be
surprised: and warned him also of Auria's coming with a strong Fleet, wishing
him to provide for his better safety: who departed to the strong Haven of
Calcide: So, the Christian Princes being then either in wars among themselves,
or entangled by Solomon in uncertain leagues, omitted the fairest opportunity
for abating the Turks greatness.

Auria (out of hope of doing any good against the Turk's Admiral, being at
Calcide) came to Corone, about 12 miles from Modon, laying hard siege thereto
by Sea and Land, most terribly battering it with 14 great Pieces by Land and
150 by Sea; yet the Turks manfully repulsed the Italians, who under the Count
of Sarne assaulted the City by Land. The adjacent Garrisons did what might be
to relieve it, being discomfited by the said Count, and Zadares their leader
slain, whose head with others were set on stakes, for terror of the Defendants:
who at length, wearied and terrified, and driven from their greatest strength
toward Sea by some resolute Christians, fearing also to want Victual and
Powder, yielded the City and Castle to Auria, to depart with bag and baggage:
Corone was taken, and strongly garrisoned, and the Christian Greeks worn to
them.

Auria came to Patras, which he easily took and ransacked: the Turks also, soon
yielded their strong trench with the Castle covenanting, that they, chiefly
their Wives, might with their Garments, only safely depart into Aetolia; so
that, when some Soldiers (as they passed along) began roughly to handle some
Women, and take away some Jewels.

Auria presently hanged them; And leaving his Army to follow him by Land,
sailed to the Strait of Naupactum, now Lepanto, on which Strait stood two
Castles: Rhium on Peloponesus Coast, and Molycreum in Aetolia, which Bajazet
had greatly fortified with Ordnance.

Auria threatening all extremities to the Captain of Rhium, if he forced him to
plant his battery, he presently yielded, only him and his Soldiers safely to
depart; those who came with him by Sea, had the Castles spoil: whereby those
who came by Land, were about to forsake him. The other Castle being defended by
old Janissaries, was not so easily taken; yet the Christians entering by a breach
made, slew 300 of them, the rest fleeing into a strong Tower, and seeing no
remedy but taking, blew up themselves with Gunpowder, in such sort, that all
the Seacoast seemed shaken with an Earthquake, and the Galleys a bow shoot
off almost overwhelmed with (...) some Piece of very great Ordnance here taken,
were (...) Auria mounted, in token of Victory on the (...) (...) Genua's Haven.

Auria strongly fortifying and storing Corone, promised to relieve Mendoza, the
Governor, a Spaniard, (...) need, if the Emperor deferred to do it.

Salviatus, Naupactum strait laid open, with the Galleys of Malta, did great
harm to the Turks on both (...) of Corinthsgulfe, even as far as Corinth.
Winter approaching, Auria hearing from the Emperor of Solymans departure,
returned laden with poil to Genua.

In 1533, Mendoza advertised the Viceroy of Naples, that he was hardly besieged
by the Turks both by Sea and Land: wherefore, he most earnestly requested, that
the Emperor, if he would have Corone kept, should send him timely relief:
whereupon the Greeks were likely to help expulse the Turks out of Peloponesus:
especially he put Auria in mind of his promise to relieve him, whom Charles
commanded to rig up a Fleet for that service, promising him 12 Galleys new
built in Spain, and requesting the Knights of Malta to aid him: who taking in
his Soldiers at Naples, where the mutinous Spaniards for want of pay, having
rifled Aversa, having pay given them, were embarked for Corone under Macicaus;
also Frederick the Viceroy's Son, with a Company of Gentlemen, went aboard. The
Knights of Malta coming thither also with their Galleys, Auria the while, to
encourage them of Corone, sent thither Palavicine, of invincible courage, with
a most swift Galley, who by daylight, through the midst of the Turk's Fleet,
recovered the Haven to their great joy; and viewing all things, and assuring
the Defendants of speedy relief, he about noon, brake out again through them,
safely escaping for all that they could do to overtake him.

Auria being informed at Messana, of the enemies force, stayed not for the
Spanish Galleys, being told the enemies Fleet daily increased by Turkish
Pirates, and that Assembeg, or the Moor of Alexandria, an arch Pirate, was
looked for, in whose directions, the Turks put the greatest hope; being come to
Zant, he heard that Lutzis Bassa their great Admiral, with two others, and the
Moor, men of great skill at Sea, lay before Corone with 80 Galleys, manned with
old Janissaries. Wherefore Auria sent before Palavicine again, to view their
manner of laying: who returned to Auria confirming the former report: the Turks
Fleer greatly increased; seeming ready to give him battle, when he approached
the City; yet Auria made no stay, and with a fair gale of wind, passing the
Promontory of Acrites, came directly toward Corone. Two great Gallions came
foremost: whom he appointed to turn a little on the left hand, and when the
enemy put off from shore, to cast Anchor betwixt both Fleets, to beat the
Turks Galleys with their great store of Ordnance. Auria himself was in the
middle of the Fleet.

At first sight, the Turks moved not, discharging their Ordnance at them a far
off; then beginning to set forward chiefly by the Moor, who (...) most courage,
assailed the side and rear of the Fleet: for the Christians keeping a straight
course, seemed to flee; and the more, since the right wing Galleys, fearing the
Turk's great Ordnance, fet a great compass: many also of the middle Squadron,
and left Wing, having thrust in disorderly among the Ships, though they had
received little or no harm.

The Moor now requested Lutzis, not to let slip so fair an occasion: who while
he set slowly forward, Auria had put his Fleet in order again, and was come to
Corone. Two Ships falling foul of each other, (...) behind: about which the
Turks flocking, took the lesser, killing all the Spaniards therein: out of
whom, boording the greater, with a bloody fight had won the fore Castle and
waste: wherefore Auria caused all his Galleys to return, to rescue those Ships:
which the Turks seeing and by degrees falling down with the Ships in danger of
the Town-shot, withdrew themselves with their Oars in manner of flight, whom
Auria pursued toward Modon, liberally thundering in their Poups: Antonius
Auria the while, coming to rescue the two Ships, the Spaniards (as revived)
courageously now made resistance: and those with Antonius entering speedily on
every side, slew and took 300 Janissaries, left in those Ships by the sudden
departure of their fellows.

Josuphus, an old Captain of a 1000, being one, to whom Auria at Corone, gave a
fair Suit, and Chain of Gold, freeing him without ransom, to provoke the Turks
to the like. The Moor and the other Captains, wondrously blamed Lutzis, for not
fighting then with the Christians: but he said, he had special charge from
Solomon, not to come to the hazard of a battle.

The besiegers by Land, upon Auria's approach, fled, Mendoza taking great store
of Victual and Warlique provision, left behind them. So Auria furnishing the
City with store of necessaries, committed its defense to Macicaus, and his
mutinous Spaniards, comforting and exhorting the Greeks to patience, in the
calamities of war, telling them, the Emperor next Spring, would free them from
Turkish bondage, by warring in Peloponesus by Sea and Land. So embarking the
old Spanish Garrison, he came even braving the Turks Admiral before Modon; but
seeing he could not be allured out, or assailed as he lay, he departed to
Corcyra, and so to Messana in Sicilie. Few days after which, Assambeg, waiting
for Venetian Merchants Ships from Syria, met with Canalis on Creet Coast, and
fighting a cruel battle by night; of the Moors 13 Galleys, 4 were sunk, 3
taken, the rest fleeing to Alexandria, having lost most of their rowers: 300
Janissaries going to Caire, were slain, and 1000 other Turks: of all taken,
scarce one was saved: the Moor wounded in the face, was, for safety, glad to
discover himself, (for the traffiquing Venctians, show least favor to Pirates)
then was care taken for his wounds, and both Canalis and the Moor, began
notably to dissemble the matter to each other, as mistaking, etc. yet the
Venetians sought to excuse it to Solomon, as done by error and mischance: who
accepted thereof, saying, Canalis had well done, to repulse the wrong offered
him. Three of Auria's Galleys staying behind the rest, were on Apulia's Coast,
carried away by Sinam surnamed the Jew, a notable Pirate also.

In winter, they of Corone, beginning to want Victuals, chiefly Wine and flesh,
the Turks having blocked up the City by Land, the Soldiers requested Macicaus,
they not hoping for relief elsewhere, before April, to lead them forth to some
service against the enemy; but Macicaus; mindful of his charge, sought by many
reasons to dissuade them, etc. yet the matter was so urged by Touarres and
Hermosilla, great Captains, and by a general importunity, that they yielded to
their desire, protesting he did it against his will. A forward man herein, was
one Barbatins, a valiant Greek, who speaking the Turks Language, also, best
knew the by-ways: undertaking in dead of the night, to bring them to the
enemies, undiscovered.

So Macicaus charging Liscanius and Mendosius, not to suffer any to go out of
the City, lest the enemy should know, set forward about 10 at night, toward
Andrussa: and resting all next day in a secret woody valley, they set forward
again at night, and came to Andrussa before day; in which Town, of no great
strength, lay one Caranus with 3000 Foot, half Janissaries; and in the Suburbs,
Achomates with 1000 choice Horsemen. Macicaus went directly to the Town to
surprise it: Hermosilla the while, standing still with some Spaniards, over
against the Horsemen, discovered them by their light matches, who awaking the
careless Watchmen, an Alarm was raised in the Suburbs. Hermosilla, setting
upon the Horsemen, slew many before they could arm; and firing the Stables,
many Turks perished with Horses and Arms. Through the terrible noise,
(especially of the Horses, which burnt tied; or breaking loose, ran up and down
with tails and mains on fire) there was an Alarm in the Town, the Turks
getting to the Walls before the Spaniards could enter. Macicaus striving to
break in at a Postern, was shot in the head and slain, with diverse others near
him: the Turks sallying out upon the small number, forced them to retire to
Hermosilla, by whose direction, they retired in so good order, that those most
forward to pursue, caused others by their death to make least haste.

Achomates hasting thither also with 200 Harquebusiers, taken up behind his
Horsemen, and too hotly pressing on to be revenged, was slain with a Bullet; so
these Horsemen returned from further pursuit. The wearied Spaniards and Greeks
retiring still as ready to fight, returned to Corone. The Turkish Garrison
presently after, removing to Megalopolis, now Londarium, they of Corone came to
Andrussa, and buried their slain fellows, burying honorably Macicaus's Head at
Corone, which the Turks had set on a pole. Not long after, the Plague growing
hot, with many other difficulties: the Spaniards embarking themselves and
Ordnance with such Greeks as would go in Ships come with Corn out of Sicilie,
left Corone empty to the Turks: whilst the Emperor drawn diversely with
consideration of his honor in keeping it, and of his profit in giving it up,
stood too long in resolving; yet thought not to be done without his secret
consent: and the rather, because the deserters of the place, received no
disgrace thereby.

Solomon in 1534, purposing to turn his forces against the Persians, having
done him much hurt in his frontiers, renewed his League with the Venetians, and
some other Christian Princes; but he was most careful of his interest in
Hungary it being reported, that King John, through his Subjects solicitation,
(...) peace with Ferdinand, so he might enjoy the Kingdom during life,
afterward to remain to Ferdinand and his Heirs: wherefore Solomon, that
nothing might be done unknown, in his absence, sent Aloyfius Grittus as his
Lieutenant, to be assistant to John, and so, as that without him he might
conclude nothing in matters of State. With this Commission, Grittus entered
Transylvania (much about Solyman's going against the Persian) with 7000
Attendants; Batianus and Docia Hungarian Captains, with their Companies, being
two, also many being Janissaries. At his first coming, he sent out his Command
to the Governors in that Province, charging them to repair to him as Solymans
Deputy, etc. Cibachus, Bishop of Veradium, was then Vayuod of Transylvania,
whose small (...) to welcome him, etc. very much offended Grittus, who so
desired, at his first entrance, to have his Authority confirm in the minds of
the vulgar, by the ready attendance of the Governor. But it was (...), that
the Bishop upon a Christian Zeal, detested the Turks friendship, lest that
fruitful Country should by some means fall into their hands.

Grittus at Baxonia, heard that the Vayuod was coming with a great Train,
encamping about 10 miles off, with diverse gallant Troops of Horsemen; insomuch,
as the Bishops Retinue made show of a good Army: which moved Grittus
exceedingly, that he should be forced openly to parley with him, as with an
enemy. When these two great ones had met together in the fields, and dined
without any show of friendship, Grittus covertly threatened to be revenged on
all who should make so light of his Authority: and departing, took his Turkish
Cap from his head, and opening it, said, This Cap will not hold two Heads, and
therefore it must be fitted to one, and so put it on again.

Docia deadly hating the Vayuod, (who long before had for his malapert Speech
in a great Assembly, given him a blow with his fist) hereupon incensed Grittus
against him, saying, Thy Honor makes a fit comparison: neither can this
Province contain two equal Governors, nor thou ever enjoy thy power, except
thou this day with speedy resolution, defend both Solyman's credit, and thy
own, etc. Grittus the more enraged with his Speech, commended Docia, promising
him soon to requite his good will, especially, if by some notable attempt, he
would (...) the Bishop's pride. Its said, Grittus once charged him to take the
Bishop, that he might have sent him in Chains to Constantinople, and bestowed
the Vayuodship on Lascus: who because King John could not without danger place
him a Polonian, Governor of so Warlike a people, but preferted this Bishop,
revernced and feared of them: he ever complained, that John had deluded him;
and though he kept within the bounds of Loyalty, yet estranged from him in
mind, was now become one of Grittus his followers.

Grittus, delivering a strong Company of Horse to Docia, came secretly and
suddenly to the Vayuods Camp, having learned by his Hungarian Spies, that he
lay in the fields in his Tent through the heat, without Watch and Ward, his
Retinue being dispersed round about; so that, laying in his bed, and fcarce
well awaked by his Chamberlians, and the noise of Docia; breaking in, cut off
his head as he lay: those laying near, fleeing and leaving their Horses and
other things for a prey. Docia returning, presented the Head to Grittus,
brought by the ear.

Lascus was present, but ignorant of the murder: to whom Grittus said, Lascus,
do thou know this shaven pate: it is a great man's head; but of one very
ambitious, rebellious, and proud: who replied, though I loved him not, yet I
thought it not so, whilst it stood on his shoulders, disallowing therein, the
fact: whereupon, Grittus began to repent it, saying, Though he was worthily
slain, yet he had rather he had been taken. The Bishops friends, and almost all
Transylvania rose in Arms to revenge his death, whom they loved and feared:
4000 Horse and Foot under Stephen Malat, being assembled in few days. Grittus
perplexed, and doubting what to do, speedily got with his followers, to the
strong Town Mege, till either the peoples rage were appeased, or he were
relieved by King John, or the Sanzacks of the Turks frontiers. They of Mege
seeing so many Turks with him, shut the Gates; yet by Docia's and Batianus's
persuasion, they received him into the base Town, having retired with their
substance into the higher, commanding the lower. While Grittus was fortifying,
and sending for aid, the people with hideous noise, approaching, attempted to
scale the Walls and Rampires: which they doing, with more fury than discretion,
were easily repulsed, and many slain. After which, by Malat's direction, they
encamped on every side of the Town, hoping, that unprovided of Victuals, they
could not long hold out: Grittus the while, fell sick, and the rather, not
hearing of any expected aid; for John, glad in mind of the distress of his
Kingdoms Overseer, yet sent for fashions sake, some Troops: who not wholly
ignorant thereof, purposed not to come timely for his good. The Sanzacks
refused, envying his honor, to depart from their charge without Solymans own
Command: and Lascus, departing to procure some relief, did in this extremity,
forsake him also. The Citizens in the upper Town, perceiving their Countreymens
full resolution, and the Turks difficulties, assailed them thence also. Grittus
offered them a mass of money, to let him pass forward into Hungary; but they
were not to be moved from revenge, by Gold. At last, he sent rich Jewels to
the Governor of Moldavia, to be ready to receive him with some Troops, when he
sallied out of the Town. And sallying out at the time appointed, with his
Commission in his hand, missing the Moldavian, fell upon Schenden, the Bishops
Kinsman, and Maylat, his familiar friend: who running on him with tumultuous
speech, caught from his head his rich Cap, and took him, weak and not
resisting: all his followers, chiefly Turks, being slain or taken. Grittus
beset round, and examined in the Generals Tent, why he commanded the Vayuod to
be slain? protested he never commanded any such thing; but all the people
cried, that he should be sacrificed to the Vayuods Ghost: whereupon, Maylat
delivering him to Schenden, his Head was presently struck off. The Nobles and
the Vayuods Kinsmen, dipping some part of their Garments in his blood, the
longer to keep in mind the revenge. This was the shameful end of Aloysius
Grittus, a Christian, (who was in such credit with Solomon) while he climbed
too fast up the ill-staved ladder of ambition.

The Executioner, found about him, Jewels, valued at 40 Millions of Ducats:
ere long, Lascus was examined at Buda by John, upon torture, concerning
Grittus's Commission and purposes, and in great danger of life; but by
Sigismund of Poland's intercession, he was freed, so fleeing to Sigismund's
Court. Docia was rent in pieces by the people.

When Grittus came into Hungary, Solomon undertook two great expeditions at
once: one by Land, against the Persians, the other against the Moors in Africa
by Sea, but we will first declare what his Lievtenants did against the Moors.
Hariadenus, surnamed Barbarussa succeeding his elder Brother Horruccius in the
Kingdom of Algiers, had by many Victories, so enlarged that Kingdom, that his
name was become terrible, both to the Christians and wild Moors, and his fame
in the Turkish Court, the chief Motive of Solyman's invading Africa. Horruccius
and Hariadenus born at Mytilene of Lesbos, weary of their poor estate with
their Father a renegade Grecian, stole a small Galliot, and by chance
consorting with (...), a most famous Pirate: Horruccius became a Captain under
him; and growing rich, and also strong, with Galleys and slaves taken, at last,
consorting with other Pirates, over whom he commanded as an arch Pirate, sought
for purchase as far as Mauritania. Then was Selimes, King of that now called
Algiers, in Arms against his Brother Mechemetes his competitor, who aided by
the Numidians, put his Brother in great doubt: who with a mass of money paid,
induced Horruccius, and his followers, to defend him against Mechemetes: which
he so happily performed, especially by his Harquebusiers, that repulsing those
Savages, he set Selimes at peace in his Kingdom; but Horruccius noting the
Kings mild and simple disposition, (and that the naked Moors were no
Soldiers, always at variance; and the Numidians divided and bare) flew him as
he was bathing himself: and murdering those he thought would withstand him,
also by cruelty and bounty, so wrought, that he was chosen King of Algiers:
shortly after, he surprised Circello, a famous City, 60 miles off, by his
Soldiers in Merchants Habit; After which, he by Hariadenus, troubled the
Mediterranean, and all his Neighbors with his Galleys: and himself by Land so
prevailing, that men of service resorted to him, as the chief man in those
parts.

He drove the Spaniards out of Bugea, famous for great Trade, and once for a
Mohammedan School: there losing his righthand, he obtained many Victories with
an Iron hand; for he overthrew a Spanish Army under Diega, nigh Algiers: and
soon after Moncada, landing from Italy (with the old Spanish Soldiers) in his
Country, he forced him to Sea again: where they, by Shipwreck or driving a
shore, were slain or taken, and thrust into his Galleys at last; and having
overcome the King of Tremissa expulsing him; Charles the Emperor, stirred up
the Christians and Numid ans to aid that his consederate; so that Horruccius
coming to take Ora and Portus he was first repulsed, then quite overthrown,
where most of his Army being slain or taken, he fled with a few over the Sandy
Deserts, scattering much Gold to stay his enemies hasty pursuit, who,
notwithstanding, overtook him, and struck off his Head, which was sent into
Spain and carried on a Lance through the Sea Towns, to the great joy of the
people, formerly hurt by him.

Hariadenus not inferior to his Brother, by the Soldiers general consent, took
the Kingdom, and began to aspire to the Empire of all that part of Africa:
wherefore he held peace with some, and Wars with others, as best served his
purpose: robbing and spoiling the Coasts of Spain, Sardinia, and the Baleares
Islands, becoming famous, and fearful to his enemies: slaying Hamet of the
Numidians, and chasing away Benchades and Amida, two great Princes: overcoming
Moncada the Spaniard who sore wounded, hardly escaped the flight, losing diverse
Galleys: he also at Sea slew Pertundus, admiral of Spain with his Son, taking
seven of his Galleys: sending his Ensign with part of the spoil, a present to
Solomon; but was much more famous, with the Turks, when he had repulsed Auria
from Cercenna, and taken two great Genoway Ships, coming to him with men and
Ammunition, filling Genua with sorrow:

Solomon grieved with his loss in Peloponesus, by Auria, chiefly by Abraham,
chief Bassae's Counsel, sent him Sinas an Ambassador to Algiers: offering him
the greatest honors, and to make him his Admiral, if he would forthwith repair
to Constantinople.

Barbarussa was exceeding glad hereof: conceiving no small hope of the Monarchy
of Africa, if coming to Solomon he might show him the State of Africa, and the
Christians power with their continual discord:

Wherefore committing his Son and Kingdom to two of his faithful kinsmen's
Government: with 40 of his Warlike Galley's, he set forward with Sinas, taking
and burning by the way (after a cruel fight) a Fleet of Genowayes bound for
Sicily: then landing by night in the Isle Elba, he surprised Chium a rich City,
and carrying away their wealth, and them into Captivity, he arrived at
Constantinople in 1533. joyfully received, if but for the boys and maidens
richly apparelled, Eunuchs, Lions, Leopards of Lybia, which he gave Solomon;
but after some days discourse with the Bassaes of Africks affairs, he (envy
soon over-taking him) was seldomer sent for, and hardly admitted into their
company, though offering himself: many saying, the Ottoman Kings used not to
prefer Pirates to the Admiralship: and that there wanted not, nor ever would
men (...) and valiant in the Turks- Court, etc. Whereas he, against all Right,
had intruded into another's Kingdom, and persecuted Mahometane Princes, being
of no Religion himself, etc. Abraham was then gone into Comagena: After long
suit, Solomon answered Barbarussa by 2 Bassaes, that all concerning him should
be referred to Abraham chief-Bassa, by whose counsel he was chiefly sent for,
wherefore he must repair to him in Syria. Though this tended to his disgrace;
yet in hope, by sufferance, to obtain another Kingdom, he posted through Asia
the less (by land) coming over Mount Amanus (covered with Winters deep snow) to
Aleppo, where Abraham honorably receiving and largely hearing him, wrote to
Solomon, wishing him to place him as a 4th. Bassa of his Council; besides his
deeming him the most fit to command his Power at Sea: who returning with this
effectual commendation, the (...) of the Court was suddenly changed upon him.
Who was now in all men's mouths, but Barbarussa. He had brought with him
Roscetes ( Muleasses, King of Tunisselder brother) whom he wrongfully exiling,
he had lived at Algiers; but now came to Barbarussa to crave aid of Solomon.
Him he set out to the Bassaes as a most fit instrument for subduing the Kingdom
of Tunis, as more affected by the people, than Muleasses the Usurper. After
long consultation with the Bassaes about Africks invasion, he, admitted to
Solyman's presence, (...) him in a Speech from diverse motives, to that War: and
saying, by the way as he returned, he would so use the matter, that the
Christians also should have good cause to bewail their calamities: and, if he
happened to meet with Auria, he should have small cause to rejoice of the
mischief he had done; for him alone he challenged to persecure as his peculiar
enemy, both for the harms received, and for the despite he had at his Fame,
who taken out of the way, the Seas should be open only to Solyman's Fleet: And
believe me, said he, he that can command the Seas, shall easily subdue the
Kingdoms by Land. Solomon using well to consider, and afterward to resolve,
commending Barbarussa's forwardness, then brake up the Council. Ere long a
Decree was made, that he should be joined a 4th Bassa in Council, and made
great Admiral, etc. Which proclaimed, Solomon himself delivered him a Scepter
and Sword, willing him by worthy deeds to perform his promise: after which Ajax
and Cassimes the Bassae's, brought him with exceeding pomp to the Navy; all
Tokens of his new Honor being carried before him; and having toward the
Sea-ward, 800000 Ducats out of the Treasury, with 800 janissaries: Not long
after he departed out of Hellespont with 80 Galleys and certain Galliors
toward Italy, leaving Amurathes with 12 Galleys to transport Solomon and his
Army over into Asia, for Persia: which done, he over-took him at Methone, who
suddenly passing the strait betwixt Italy and Sicily, much frighted both
Countries: but passing by the Bay of Hippona, he set upon the Town of Lucidius
(of old Tempsa: which though standing on a Rock with reasonable walls, it was
taken by the Turks violence, with the more hurt to the Inhabitants, because the
Mayor had locked up the gates on the other side to keep them from flight.
Thence with spoil and many prisoners he went to Citharium, where (he heard) a
Fleet was building: this forsaken Town for fear, he ransacked and burnt, firing
7 Galleys unfinished, but being come in sight of Naples: all (along the coast)
were so terrified, that 'twas thought, if he had landed, and gone to Naples, it
would have been abandoned; but coming to Procita, he took and rifled it, and
came to Spelunca, the hithermost part of that Kingdom: which the dismayed
Townsmen yielded without resistance, he there taking 1200 prisoners. Pelegrinus
a chief man there, fled into the Castle: whom Barbarussa promised to let go, if
presently yielding: if not, to make him repent it with his own and the Town's
utter destruction: who forthwith coming out and falling at his feet, he gave
him his liberty, restoring him his Wife, Son and Niece, prisoners: whom he
received with many tears from their eyes for joy.

The same night 2000 of those Turks came to Fundi, 10 miles off, thought to be
conducted by some Italians, who through Turkish slavery, had turned Mahometans.
They came so suddenly, that Gonzaga, Italie's Parragon, could scarce take Horse
half naked, and escape. Barbarussa afterward seeming not to deny, that for her
beauty and perfection, he exceedingly desired her as a present for Solomon:
(...) or taking most of the Citizens, they returned with the Cities spoil.
Others came to Tarracina, all the Inhabitants being fled into the Mountains,
except some sick and aged, whom they slew, spoiling the Temples. It was
thought, if Barbarussa had come but to Ostia, they of Rome had generally (...)
the City; but watering at Pontia, he arrived in Africa, before 'twas thought he
was departed from Italic's coast; For to deceive Muleasses, he gave out, he
would burn and spoil Christian Countries in revenge of Auria's harm done. The
Vonetians also then preparing a great Fleet: did somewhat lessen his fear; but
that which chiefly made him secure, was his hearing by especials, that Roscetes
his Brother, was safely kept at Constantinople, as a prisoner at large; for he
knew his State could not be more endangered, than by producing the Competitor
of his Kingdom. This Muleasses was descended of the Kings or Tunis (who had
ruled that great Kingdom from Tripolis to Bagia, nigh 800 miles, and into the
Main as far as Mount Atlas 954 years: who being appointed by his Father
Mahometes, his Successor, through his mother Lentigessia's importuniry ( Maimo
the eldest son being in durance for his hasty aspiring) was thought to shorten
his Fathers old years: presently after murdering Maimo, executing 17 of his
other Brethren, making three blind with a hot Iron: Roscetes and Abdemelech
escaping, fled to Morhabitus a great Numidian Prince: where seeking by practice
and poison to take them away, at last he offered a great sum for them; which
money the Numidian received; yet suffered them (as if against his will) to flee
to another Prince, Bentiesses; where Muleasses practicing as before, they fled
(at last) to the City Biscaris, far into the main. Where Abdemelech (as one
weary) became a Mahometane Monk; but Roscetes found such favor with Abdalla,
the Prince of Bisearis, that he gave him his Daughter to Wife, and fearing
Muleasses's practices, he seldom suffered him to eat any meat, but what himself
or his Wife before tasted of. Muleasses murdered diverse of his Brothers
children also: torturing to death the Maniset and Mesuar, men of greatest
Authority, and his chief Friends in his aspiring the Kingdom; fearing their
greatness, or grieving at their life to whom he was so much beholden: and by
his mothers instigation, causing diverse of his Fathers Wives and Concubines to
be murdered, inveighing against him as effeminate, who with exceeding charges
had maintained so many, by whom he begot so many Competitors, that he had a
laborious work to destroy so great a brood. Roscetes (...) by his Father in law
and other Princes (to whom Muleasses was become odious) with a great Army, nigh
Tunis, in a sharp conflict, overthrew his Brothers Army, forcing Dorax the
General (with those escaping) to flee to Tunis: and presenting his Army before
the City, hoping, that the Citizens would let him in: and laying there 20
days, to alienate them the more from Muleasses, he burnt and destroyed all the
Olive and fruit trees from the ruins of Old Carthage, to the Walls of Tunis, a
heavy Spectacle to the Citizens; but Muleasses promising every man full
recompense for all harm, and strongly possessing Tunis by his Soldiers, they
would not or could not revolt: The Numidian Princes, weary (according to that
Nation's levity) began to shrink home, persuading Roscetes to provide for
himself in time: Wherefore he fled to Barbarussa, honorably there remaining
till by his persuasion he went with him to Constantinople, where he was
detained: though Barbarussa gave out in policy, he was in his Fleet, and by
Solomon to be restored to his Fathers Kingdom. He landing at Biserta a famous
Port of that Kingdom, the Townsmen weary of Muleasses's Government, hearing of
Roscetes's name, drove out their Governor, receiving in the Turks (for he had
sent Roscetes's familiar friends ashore) saying he was there, but could not
come a-shoar, being Seasick, and having an Ague; Barbarussa now sailing on,
came before Gulletta-Castle (in Tunis-Bay) commanding all Sea passage unto
Tunis: where, in Friendship, mutually discharging their Ordnance, and the
Castle required for Roscetes: they said, he that ruled in Tunis should always
command it. Roscetes's supposed coming, and the great Fleet discovered, set all
the City in an uproar, both for the love of Roscetes, and the hatred of
Muleasses: which he was not ignorant of, who also had made them no recompense
for their goodly Houses and Gardens, formerly destroyed by Roscetes: wherefore
coming out of the Castle, and persuading them to play the men, promising them
what he was never able to perform, they all departed: yet some (in a color)
and Abdahar the Mesuar (next to the King) persuaded him to flee, for all said
the Turks were at hand: Wherefore Muleasses fled in such haste, that he left
behind him his Treasure and Jewels, which his enemies afterward had: Fetuches,
Captain of the Castle, who with Abezes (a great man) first revolted, now
brought sorth Roscetes's Wife and children (long imprisoned by Muleasses)
placing the Royal Seat: and Abezes advertised Barbarussa of Muleasses's
departure, and with what longing Roscetes was expected, sending a goodly
Barbarian Horse richly furnished, with others for his chief Captains.
Barbarussa coming to the City with 5000 Turks, was joyfully received; but
Roscetes being not descried; and hearing only Solyman's and Barbarussas's
names in the Turks acclamations, they distrusted, they had received the Turkish
Government, which they utterly (...) Roscetes's Friends also brought by
Barbarossa to delude the people, now grieving, feared not to tell their Friends
as they went, that Roscetes was left in bonds at Constantinople. Whereupon,
they most furiously assailed the Turks, not yet got all into the Castle.
Abdahar was the chief Leader, who now sought by all means to expulse the Turks
and recall Muleasses, crying to the people aloud as he stood on high: We are
(worthy Citizens) most villanously betrayed, for Roscetes whom we expected for
our lawful King, laments his misery in chains; and except we presently, do
valiantly fight for our liberty, we shall ever serve as slaves to these
Foreign and merciless Pirates: I my self will be your Leader, etc.

Many Turks were slain before aware: the Citizens being numerous enough, but
not so well armed or conducted; yet they swarmed up one of theeasi est Bulwarks
of the Castle, where the Turks had set upon an Ensign; and with Darts and
Arrows made them retire into a stronger place, whence with their Artillery and
small shot, they wonderously slaughtered the naked Moors; Barbarussa though
always acquainted with desperate dangers; yet being suddenly shut upon in an
unknown place, and Victuals but for three days, was not a little troubled;
which his care was much diminished, by the enemies disordered fury, and the
known valor of his Soldiers: chiefly, seeing them fight still as full of
hope, and the Moors as half-dismayed, ready to retire; yet the double assault
was twice as desperately renewed as at first, by Muleasses and Dorax coming in:
in which danger, Halis a runagate Spaniard, said to Barbarussa: that if he
would save his Honor, and hold that Fort, they must salley out upon those
which had never seen a set-battel, etc. Which motion generally approved of,
Barbarussa commanded Halis with other Captains, to salley out at once at two
Ports, so that a multitude of Moors were soon slain: Abdahar the Mesuar being
killed with a bullet, the assault being then given over: and, in the streets
some hours, was fought a most bloody Battle: at last the Citizens overcome,
took refuge of their Houses: and wearied Halis with the rest, returning with
Victory: 3000 Citizens were said to be slain and 9000 hurt: Muleasses hardly
escaping his enemie's hands, by Dorax his Uncle's help, fled with him over
Bagrada River, and came to Constantina, then part of Dorax's Dominion: and
there protected till the coming of Charles the Emperor. The ensuing, both
Citizens and Turks stood upon their strongest guard. And next day the Citizens
craved pardon, excusing their rash attempt, by the name of Loyalty, offering
faithfully to submit: Whereupon Barbarussa granted a general peace, by Oath
confirmed on both sides: the Citizens being bound to obey Solomon, and
Barbarussa as his chief Lieutenant. All things set in order; he won to him by
gifts and rewards, the fickle and needy Numidian Princes: then sending an
Eunuch and Halis, to take in the other Cities of Tunis, they were peaceably
received, except at Carvenna, which holding out a while, received them also for
fear. But let us return to the Wars at the same time undertaken (by Solomon in
person) in Persia, persuaded thereto by Abraham the great Bassa: who being born
in a Village of Epirus, and taken from his Christian Parents by Turkish Tribure
gatherers, being a boy, served Scander-Bassa in Selimus his time, and there
instructed in Mahometanism; but giving himself to all manner of curiosity, he
was commended by his Mistress to her Husband, as a fit Page to attemper his
wayward and melancholy disposition: wherein he excelling, he gave him as a
rare gift to Solomon, with whom he was brought up as his companion and
play-fellow by old Bajazet: where he so framed himself to young Solyman's
disposition, that afterward, he wanted nothing of the Majesty of an Emperor,
but the Name only; and commonly called the Great Commander of all Solymans
Forces: Also he partaked of Solymans secret Delights, that if he were present,
all were well, if away, nothing pleased; that 'twas commonly said, the soul of
Solomon lived in Abraham, whereat, many great Courtiers repined: chiefly
Solymans mother, and fair Roxalana his dearest Concubine. This great Commander,
sought many times in his discourses with Solomon, to persuade him to divert his
Forces from the Christians, over whom he had sufficiently triumphed: and to
turn them upon the Persians by whom he was daily injured, and who were the
wicked and irreligious impugners of the Divine Precepts of Mahomet: also so
famous in ancient time for their Martial Prowess: that the so often vanquishing
them by Alexander, gave unto him the name of Great; therefore he said, 'twas
not so much to have destroyed the Mamrlukes (by condition slaves) as to subdue
them. Alleging what a strong and Warlike people the Germans were: and that it
were not good to provoke Charles the Emperor (of all Christian Princes the
mightiest, etc.) Solomon at length beginning to yield to his persuasions:
Abraham (in himself) greatly rejoiced for many thought he was only in show a
Turk, and in heart a Christian: and the rather, because he very much favored
and protected the Christian Merchants, and furthered (by all means) the Leagues
of Christian Princes with Solomon: laboring always to turn his Forces from
them upon the Persians: insinuating into Solymans acquaintance one Mulcarabe of
Damasco, famous at Constantinople for holiness and the Art of Magic; who
prophesied to him all happiness in so religious a War, and so much (as he
said) pleasing to God. Ulemas also a noble Persian, who (marrying King
Tamasses's Sister) was revolted from him to Solomon) fearing to be called to
account for extortion from the Counties where he governed) furthered Abraham's
purpose: discovering to Solomon the power, and State of the Persian Kingdom:
and plotting the easiest ways for conquering it; he offered also to do his
utmost. So Solomon (...) a mighty Army, commanded them to be ready at Nice in
Bythinia at a certain day: His mother and Roxalana mightily impugned it as that
which wholly proceeded from the Bassa; but his credit was so strong, that all
their devices and prayers were (by Solomon) rejected, and his Counsel regarded:
who (with Ulemas) was sent before him into Syria with a strong Army at Spring,
to invade the Persian: wintring at Aleppo. The Spring approaching, Abraham sent
Ulemas before with the light-Horsmen into Mesapotamia as his guide, following
himself not far behind, and so came to Tauris unresisted, great and rich, but
unwalled and of no strength. The Persian King, Tamas, was then absent. warring
with Kezien-Bassa, a Prince of the Corasine Hircanians; so that the Citizens
presently yielded. Tamas hearing hereof, drew nigh with his power, expecting to
take the Turks at some advantage, as being too weak for a plain Battle: which
the Bassa perceiving, speedily advettised Solomon of Iunis being taken, and the
enemies purpose; and speedily to repair with his Army thither. He was come far
on his way, on the right hand from Nice to Iconium, and by Cesarea to Malathia,
where is the notable passage over Euphrates, bursting out by the Valleys of
Autitaurus, whence Mesapotamia's plains (then part of the Persian Kingdom)
begin to open; through which he peaceably marched, paying for what ever he
took, coming in 54 days from Nice to Coimini Armenia, the greater. But hearing
such news aforesaid, he soon after came to Tauris. Tamas, yet expecting the
Georgian Light Horse men, and hearing with what a multitude Solomon was coming,
that he might cut off his spent, wanting, and diseased people, by advantages,
retired into Sultania, about 6 days journey from Tauris: which Solomon
knowing, departed thence without doing hurt, following after Tamas, to join
Battle, if possible, leaving behind him for haste, many of his Carriages and
much baggage with 500 Janissaries and 3 Zanzacks with their Companies, near the
City Sultania, ruined by Tamerlant, except the Temples. Solomon encamped many
days, expecting that Tamas would come out of the Mountains and give him
Battle; but he comparing his own strength with his enemie's, so retired, that
Solomon could not learn what was become of him. And whilst he lay in those
plain fields, such a horrid tempest (never before seen in the beginning of
September) fell from the circumjacent Mountains (whose tops are always covered
with deep snow) with such abundance of rain, so eagerly freezing as it fell,
that the depth of Winter seemed suddenly to be come; for the raging winds so
swept the snow from the tops of those high Mountains, that the Turks lay, as
buried alive therein; most of their Tents being overthrown: wherein a huge
humber of sick Soldiers, and others following the Camp perished: Others losing
the use of hands and feet for ever, through benumming: most of their beasts for
carriage, chiefly Camels, being frozen to death. Yea, Solomon was endangered in
his Tent; Neither was there any remedy by reason of the night's great
darkness, most of their fires being put out by the storm: a thing accounted by
them ominous; They feared also the sudden coming of the enemy, till the Sun
next morning breaking out, revived many ready to dye for cold, and discovered
the fields clear of enemies: Many Turks vainly thought it was brought on them
by the Persian Magician's Enchantments.

Solomon troubled hereat, after some refreshment of his men, took his way into
Assyria. Ulemas persuading him, chiefly from hopes of taking Babylon, its
Governor being his friend; But Mahometes was not to be won to betray the City.
Wherefore Solomon resolving to take it by force: Mahometes hearing of their
coming, (who thought they would not come so far) being neither provided nor
beloved, fled out of the City: Solomon being soon received by the Babylonians,
It Is called Bagdat (not far from old Babylon, out of whose ruins it role)
standing on the River Tygris: Solomon (according to the old manner) received of
that Caliph (the chief Mahometane Priest) and greatly reverenced; the Ensigns
and Ornaments of the Assyrian Kings, bountifully winning the peoples hearts,
and spending the Winter there. Other Cities ( Babylon being taken unresisted)
yielded themselves; Yea, Ambassadors came to him as far as Ormus City, famous
for great Traffic, out of India suing for peace. Thus Babylon, with Assyria
and Mesopotamia, became Turkish Provinces in 1534. Solomon after Winter past,
placed a Beglerbey, that is, a Lord of Lords: and under him diverse Sanzacks or
Governors for Government: causing his Treasurer for the Wars there to be
hanged, and confiscating all his goods, for his unfaithful dealing.

Solomon being gone to Babylon, Tamas returned to Tauris: Solyman's men, there
left, fleeing away in such haste, that all in their custody was left for a prey.

Solymans Army being much increased by the coming of the great Bassaes of Caire
and Syria with the Sanzacks of Alexandria, Judea and Comagena, departed, by
Abraham and Ulemas's persuasion, toward Tauris; but Tamas (too weak to give
battle) fled from the City into the Hircanian Mountains (destroying all as he
went) and carrying away the Inhabitants: Wherefore he sent Ulemas with all his
choice Horsemen, to overtake and fight him if possible: but after 2 or 3 days,
still finding the Country neither yielding forage nor relief, and no hope of
overtaking him, he in time retired back to Solomon, declaring how it was: who
fretting that Tamas was not to be drawn to battle, he marched to Tauris,
sparing the submitting Citizens lives, but giving the City for a prey to his
Soldiers: They (...) king every corner, abused the people with all manner of
insolence; Solomon razing Tamas's most stately Palace, with the Nobles
sumptuous Houses, and carrying away the best Citizens, and beautifullest of all
sorts, Captives; and so returning again toward Mesopotamia, destroying all as
he went, and killing the very Cattle. He was scarce past Coim, and the Calderan
fields: but some Persian troops were in his rear, taking some baggage, and
slaying diverse sick and straggling Soldiers, troubling his whole Army with
skirmishes: Besides, it was noysed, that Tamas was coming with a great power of
Horsemen, and would be at their backs before they could get out of Armenia;
wherefore he appointed the Bassaes of Caire and Syria, with Ulemas, to follow
him in the rear with 18000 good Soldiers: so keeping on till he came to Amida
(now Caraemida) in Mesopotamia. Tamas the while, returned to Tauris with a
mighty Army, hoping to surprise his enemy; but finding him gone, and the
miserable desolation made, he (with indignation) resolved to pursue him: going
as far as Coim, where, hearing he was hardly to be overtaken, and his Noble
Gentlemen being unwilling in their heavy Armor, to undertake such a pursuit,
etc. Tamas knowing their reasons were good, thought it best to stay there, till
Delimenthes a Noble man, always most forward, offered with 5000 choice Horsemen,
to overtake some part of the Turks Army, and do some good service: which Tamas
accepting of, greatly commending him, and promising reward, sent him ((...)
haste) away; who used such expedition in the nearest way, that he overtook
those 18000 at Bethlis a famous Town, in a pleasant Valley, bordering on
Mesopotamia, with a Garrisoned Castle. The Bassaes with Ulemas (Solomon being
come safe to Amida) (...) secure in that Valley, to refresh their wearied
Soldiers: which Delimenthes (being within a days journey of Bethlis) by
diligent espials, understood, and determining to assail their Camp the night
following, he secretly sent to the Captain of the Castle, to salley out upon
sign given upon that side of the Turks Camp; which his design was much
furthered by the night's darkness, and the abundance of rain then falling. The
Persians did such speedy execution amongst the sleepy Turks, that the Bassaes
and Ulemas hardly escaped, they being slain by thousands, few escaping the
sword. And of 5 Sanzacks, 3 were slain, and one taken: 800 Janissaries (being
forsaken) laid down their weapons, and yielded on Delimenthes's his word. The
Mountain-people also joining to the Persians, revenged their wrongs done them
after Aladules's death, who had the baggage of the Camp. The Turks account that
slaughter among their greatest losses: in memorial whereof, the Persians kept
that day, October. 13. as a solemn Holiday, many years: Delimenthes returning
from the slaughter, and loaded with spoils, was joyfully received, and
honorably rewarded.

This overthrow so daunted Solomon, that he resolved to return, and no more to
prosecute that unfortunate War: whose ill event, his mother (he said) more
truly presaged, than the cold Prophet Mulcarabe; being secretly offended with
Abraham Bassa. At Iconium, Barbarussa and Sinan Bassa, surnamed the Jew, met
him by land, to show joy for his Conquest of Mesopotamia and Assyria, and to
excuse themselves for the loss of Tunis Kingdom, which was, before the end of
the Persian war, wrung from Barbarussa, and restored to Muleasses. They
declaring that whole war, showed, there wanted neither valor, nor direction,
but only fortune. Solomon accepted their excuse, taking them up, prostrate at
his feet, commending them, etc. bidding them be of good cheer, saying, he would
find occasion for them, to recompense that disgrace, etc. Coming to Bosphorus
strait. Abraham had (in sign of triumph) caused along the shore, Persian-silk
to be laid, for him to tread upon as he went aboard the Galley; whence he
passed over with triumph to Constantinople. Envy soon discovering (in Court)
Solymans changed countenance on Abraham, some now sought by all secret means to
work his confusion, especially Solyman's mother: and Roxalana, who perceived
her design of preferring her own son Bajazet to the Empire after Solymans
death, was much crossed by him, who most sought for Mustapha's preferment, the
eldest son by another woman, but that which most impaired his credit with
Solomon, was a report raised, that he, in heart a Christian, did in all things
favor such, and therefore persuaded Solomon to undertake the Persian war: and
to increase the su pition, that he about that time, caused one Nicholas a
Venetian Merchant (who came to him often, while at Babylon, with secret Letters,
etc, not unsuspected) to be murdered in the night, and cast into the sea,
because he should not discover that which might hurt him. Abraham being bid to
a supper about March 14. it is said, after supper Solomon fell into a great rage
with him, for mis-governing the State, turning his Treasures to his own
private, and having traitorous intelligence with Christian Princes: sternly
showing him for proof his own intercepted Letters, often, furiously asking him,
if he knew not that hand and seal: all which he confessed, craving pardon at
his feet; yet the same night, as he was slumbering on a Pallare in the Court
through heaviness, an Eunuch cut his throat with a crooked knife, which
Solomon himself delivered him. He was murdered sleeping, because Solomon had
sworn to him, he would never kill him whilst he lived: the Mufty saying, he
might kill him sleeping, being then accounted as dead, etc, Its reported,
Solomon looking on his dead body, bitterly cursed it, causing it to be cast
into the sea with a great weight tied on it. His abundance of wealth being next
day seized on, and a small part appointed for his Wife; the vulgar devising on
him infamous songs and slanderous reports as of a Traitor, defacing, with
stones and mire, the Trophies of the Hungarian Victory: which he had most
statelily erected before his sumptuous House. He was murdered, March 15, 1536,

It was commonly reported, and justly feared that Barbarussa would the next
Summer, with all his Forces invade Sicily, Italics Garnerie; and then attempt
the Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples: To repress which, and for safety of the
Christian's Frontiers (much subject to the Rapines of Turkish Pirates) Charles
the Emperor whilst Solomon was busied yet in the Persian wars, resolved in
person with a puissant Army to pass into Africa, and to dispossess the Pirate
of his new-got Kingdom of Tunis. Wherefore he levying 8000 foot and 7000 Horse
in Spain, came to Barcelona before expectation: Among many Nobles, there was
chiefly Ferdinand Duke of Alba, whose forwardness, with desire to revenge his
Father Garcias's death, slain by the Moors at Girapolis, made his Contrymen
hope he would prove a worthy Chieftain, as he did.

Auria the while, alone knowing the Emperors full purpose, had with speed
rigged up a great Fleet of Ships and Galleys very well furnished, joining also
17 Galleys, and 3 Galleasses of his own, and embarquing therein the Flower of
Genna and Liguria (they cheerfully offering themselves) and coming to
Barcelona: whither came also Lewis, the King of Portugal's Brother (whose
sister Charles had married) with 25 Caravels (ships used in their Indian
Voyages) one being a huge Galleon, wherein were 2000 Portugals, besides
Marrinets: also 60 sail of tall Ships out of the Low Countries, with a number
of condemned men, spared to serve in the Galleys. Also Pope Paul the 3d. sent
10 Galleys under Sursinus: and the Master of Malta sent his Fleet also. Then
did Davalus Vastius the Emperor's Land-General, take up 5000 new Soldiers in
Italy, led by the Count of Sarne, and other famous Captains. The old Spanish
Garrisons in Lombardie were there left under Leva, though the Emperor's best
Commander, he not daring so well to trust the French and Swissers, who were so
near that Country. Then also came old Eberstern to Vastius, with 8000 Germans,
to Genua; diverse serving voluntarily of their own charges. With these and the
Italians, Vastius embarquing at Portus Veneris in Liguria, had persuaded them
patiently to endure the Sea, and to comfort themselves with the hope of Victory
in Africa, etc. So coming to Naples the Viceroy and diverse Nobles had of their
own charges built or furnished, some one Galley, some more, for that service,
accounted sacred: both the old Soldiers and lusty youths of that Kingdom, won
by Vastius's courtesy, most cheerfully offering themselves; but some mutinous
Soldiers found fault with their wages and (weary of the Sea) fearing dangers
in so long a Voyage, persuaded the multitude to run away: the Authors of which
mutiny, Vastius thrust into sacks, and cast into the sea, in their sight. So
from Naples he came to Palermo in Sicily. The Emperor also came from Barcelona
to Mago port in Minorca Isle, thence to Caralis in Sardinia, whither Vastius
was a little before come. Charles (ere long) passed with a Westerly wind into
the Port Utica or Farina in Africa: in entering whereof the Emperors Galley
struck on the sand sticking fast (which troubled him the more, seeing his
Father Philip was so like to be cast away on Englands coast, sailing out of the
Low countries into Spain) yet by Aurias's direction, they quickly got off, to
all their great joy; So departing from Utica, he doubled the Promontorie of
Carthage, anchoring before Aquaria or the Water-Castle, so called of a Well
beneath it.

The Moors, who from Hills and Watch Towers had viewed the Fleet and its
course, advertised Barbarussa, that the Christians were coming against him with
an innumerable Fleet, for they were almost seven hundred sail, 82 being great
Galleys: but he was most troubled, hearing often, that the most mighty
Christian Emperor was personally there with such a world of people, that Italy
and Spain seemed to be left bare of able men: which, certain Mahometans slaves,
swimming ashoare in the night, reported; for the proud Turks, never thought the
Emperor would have so adventnred, especially in an unknown, barren, and
scorching Country, etc. wherein he was confirmed by Prefenda a German, who was
a prisoner (at large) in Tunis: of whom Barbarussa (...) him with hope of
liberty, if he would declare, had learned many things: but now in his rage, he
charging him bitterly, that he had persidiously told him lies for truth
concerning the Emperor, commanded him to be execused.

Then forthwith casting about how to withstand his puissant enemy: he first of
all calling to Council his Sea-Captains, in whom he most confided; showed them
that they as valiant men, and acquainted with dangerns, were not to doubt of
the Victory, since he saw it as good as already gotten; having before for the
same reasons persuaded himself, that if Charles had not be in half mad, he would
not have undertaken so desperate and doubtful a War: and encouraging them in
a short speech, most earnestly required this one thing, that they should most
valiantly defend the strong Castle of Guletta, as the most assured defense both
of the City and the whole Kingdom, and especially their Navy, which lay there
in safe harbor, etc.

They all answered, they would most cheerfully perform what ever he pleased to
command; nor to do any thing unbeseeming most valiant men.

Guletta Castle stands in the bottom of Carthage-Bay, on a point of Land, where
the Sea on the side by a narrow strait, runs into Tunis-Lake; but now the
Castle is parted on the West side also by the Sea, begun by Barbarussa, but
perfected by others, commanding both sides: He now put into it strongly
fortified, Sinan of Smyrna, a Jew, of greatest account, Haidinus for his fury
surnamed Caccia Diabolo, Salec of Ionia, Tabacches of Laodicea, and Giaffer a
Captain of the Janissaries; most expert and resolute Captains. The Emperor
commanded his men to be landed with all speed, which was so done, that the
Moors terrified with their cry, and not able to abide their shot, were beaten
from shore, suffering them to land quietly: first the Spanish, then the
Italians, and last the Germans whom Vastius caused presently to encamp,
strictly charging none to straggle, till the Horse and Ordnance were landed:
the Emperor cheerfully landing also. Vastius the while, sent out some to view
the near places, and se k out the Cisterns and Fountains of waters, once
serving Carthage; with whom, the Moors (chiefly, the swift, subtle, and
painful Numidian Horsemen) often skirmished; and though but naked, yet on all
advantages, furiously assailed them with Arrows and Darts unawares, and
overloaded with Armor, sparing none that fell into their hands: two of whom,
were Spinnula, a Ligurian Captain, and Noble Carectus, slain by Vastius's side,
as they viewed; notwithstanding, Charles himself would needs with a small Troop,
view the places, even in sight of the Numidians, every where pricking up and
down, though he was often persuaded not to expose himself to endanger his
person and the common safety.

Vastius brought the Army nigh the Castle, casting up a rolling trench as he
came to defend his men: which was done by all sorts, yea many Captains set to
their hands; for the Emperor was a beholder, and cheerful commender of labor
and forwardness, and the busy enemy ever ready to take advantage, often sallying
out and defying them, even at their very Trenches. When all Commanders were to
be appointed to their several charges, the Count of Sarne, requested Vastius to
have the Mount nearest the Castle, a place of most danger, but of greatest
honor: whereat the Spaniards much repined, he set up his rich Tent on the top
of the Mount, in the enemie's sight, there laying with his Italians. Ere long,
Salec with some Companies, salsied forth upon that Mount, as if he would have
assailed it, raising a great Alarm; yet after Vollies of shot on both sides, he
retired, as if constrained: whereupon the Count bitterly in rage, reproving
some Captains not so forward to pursue them; ran furiously down, the rest for
shame following him, slaying diverse enemies.

Salec now turning about, said to his Soldiers, The wished advantage is now
offered, etc. wherefore, show your selves valiant, not letting one of these
proud freshwater Soldiers, escape alive or unwounded; which said, they making
a stand, so hardly charged the Italians, that they fled. The Count fighting
valiantly with his Kinsman, was slain, with many others, and others slain in
flight: the Turks entering so far into the Trenches, that they carried away the
riches of the Count's Tent: No Spaniard once stirring out of their places to
help the Italians. His Head and right hand Salec sent to Barbarussa.

Vastius comforted the grieved Italians, imputing that loss only to the
Count's rashness, for which he had worthily paid the price; but he sharply
reproved the Spaniards, as merciless men, etc.

The Turks by often great shot, showed joy for this Victory; but Tabacches,
soon after, sallying out in daydawning, got to the top of the Spaniards
Trenches, before they were aware, slaying some sleeping, some idly sitting,
others arming themselves: who with their sudden cry, made the rest which lay
near, to flee out of their Trenches: where the Turks taking their trash,
slaying and wounding many with Mendosa a Captain, carried away Sarmentus's
Ensign, on the top of the Trench. The Alarm caused the Emperor to come running
in his Armor, sharply reproving them who forsook the place, and greatly
offended with those who kept such negligent watch, against such an enemy.

This disgrace of the old Spaniards, well comforted the Italians: The tumult
appeased, Vastius calling their chief Captains into his Tent, said, He was sorry
and ashamed to say it, They who elsewhere always valiant, were grown wholly
out of order, and heartless, etc. the Italians worthily laughing at their
negligence, who yesterday smiled at their unskilful forwardness. Wherefore he
exhorted and straightly commanded them, speedily to prepare their Minds and
Weapons for atchieving some new honor, etc. They all answered, they would so
behave themselves, that he should not desire greater courage, etc. in men
desirous of honor and commendation.

'Twas not long, but Giaffer of exceeding courage and strength, issued forth
with Janissaries and Moorish Archers about noon, assailing the utmost Trenches,
hoping in that broyling heat, to find them unprepared. The Spaniards then kept
such negligent Watch, that they discharged their shot and Arrows on them, from
the rampires top, before they were well aware; but the Drum striking up, some
Harquebusiers brake out in two places at once, as Vastius had commanded,
seconding them with Halbardiers, keeping his Squadrons to rescue his
Harquebusiers, if they were forced to retire.

The Skirmish was valiantly maintained on both sides, till Giaffer desperately
fighting among the foremost Janissaries, was slain with two Bullets at once; for
whole body, the Janissaries most cruelly fought, many being slain on both sides,
upon the carcass: at length, being forced to flee, they were so fiercely
followed, that they of Guletta, shut out almost a fourth part of their own men,
lest the Christians should enter with them.

Abila, an Ensign-bearer, advanced his Ensign to the top of a Rampire, and was
slain; but his Ensign was saved by a Soldier. Upon their retreat, they lost
most; for the Turks discharged their shot on them very fast, which they could
not before for their own men. This abated the Turk's pride, and gave hope, the
Castle would be gained without great loss; perceiving being nigh it, 'twas not
so strong as they supposed.

The Emperor after few days, consulting and preparing things, resolved
without delay to assault it with all his forces, for many reasons, chiefly, for
that his men began to grow sickly: scorched as it were, all the day, and almost
starved with cold by night, and exceeding dewes commonly wetting them to the
skin: neither was there good water, or fresh Victual to be had in that sandy
and barren Soil, other than out of the Fleet; for the water was so unpleasant
and brackish, that sick and whole were glad of a Crab to quench extreme thirst;
yet much relief was timely sent from Sicilie and Naples: the Biscuit also
chiefly in the Spanish Galleys, was grown hoary and unwholsom: about July 15th,
he began to place his battery defended with Gabions and Caske of Sand.

Aurias divided his Galleys into three Squadrons, which should by turns beat on
the Castle, his great Ships at Anchor thundered from their fore-Castles with
great Ordnance. Vastius divided Spaniards, Italians, and Germans apart for
assault. There was never strong place since Guns were invented, assailed with
greater force, preparation, or industry. The Earth seeming not only to quake,
but even by and by to swallow them up: the Sea beginning to rage and foam as in
a great storm: the Air became thick and dark with smoke: from daybreak till
noon, the Cannon and Culvering never ceased; so that the Vamures were beat
down, the Castle saultable, and many Turkish Cannoniers and Cannons, buried in
the Walls ruins: which being perceived, upon a Signal given, the Artillery
ceasing, the breach was assailed, and the Walls scaled, and with such
resolution, that the Turks having done what was possible, by casting down
Darts, Wildfire, etc. upon them climbing up, at length as despairing, fled.

Sinan and the other Captains fled forth at the further side by a Wooden
Bridge, and so by Land to Tunis: which way most of his men followed him. The
rest were slain or driven into the Lake, where they were slain coming to Land
by Horsemen; or in swiming, shot by the Harquebusiers: the Lake being even
covered with dead bodies.

This Castle, with all its Warlike Provision, and all Barbarussa's great Fleet,
his and his Pirates greatest grief, Charles gained with small loss. Barbarussa
troubled and terrified, sternly and scornfully received Sinan and the rest,
reviling and calling them faint-hearted Cowards, so soon giving over so strong
a place. Sinan answered, when they were to withstand the Devil and his furies,
etc. it ought not to seem strange, if they sought to escape. Neither did they
count it a disgrace, as men that minded again to fight: from which danger, if
himself had been present, he would have accounted it very good discretion to
escape.

Hairadin now began more temperately to request every one of them courageously
to stand fast to him, well hoping, that the great supply of Moorish foot, and
Numidian Horse at hand, once come, the enemy should not long joy in taking
Guletta. Then he wholly endeavored, to prepare things needful for War,
bountifully bestowing his Treasures among the Moors and Numidians, to confirm
the well-affected, and to win the doubtful.

Muleasses the while, with a small retinue, came into the Emperor's Camp, he
sitting royally in his Pavilion, who being admitted, with a Myter, and a green
and blew silk Garment, he tall and manly, tawny (so squint-eyed, that he seemed
to look spitefully) kissing Charles his hand, sat down with his legs close under
him upon a Carpet, on the ground, after his Countries fashion, speaking unto
him by an Interpreter, that he was come thither, not by any desert of his,
their different Religion so requiring, yet, he verily thought, not but by the
appointment of the most high God, whom both did with like devotion worship, to
take revenge of the most perfidious, cruel Tyrant and Pyrate, whom he saw as
good as vanquished, Guletta and his Navy being taken, etc. which would be the
more to his comfort, hoping thereby to be restored by him, into his Fathers
Kingdom, which he most humbly requested of his justice and honor: not refusing
to pay him tribute, and to acknowledge himself his Vassal: of which the
remembrance of so great a benefit never to be forgotten of him and his
Posterity, was a most great assurance, he abhorring the name of unthankful, and
experimentally finding how much his State and People might be assured to him,
by his near Garrisons in Sicilie and Sardinia.

The Emperor answered, he was come into Africa to revenge the injuries done
often, by Barbarussa upon his Frontiers, and to root out the most mischievous
Pirates: which, by his Savior's goodness, had taken such effect, that he
doubted not soon to obtain a perfect Victory; and then he would grant him what
should stand with the convenience of his affairs, etc. so he would not
falsify his faith, which he might well suspect, if he specially trusted not,
that such a benefit would always remain in his heroical mind; being assured,
that that power which restored him his Kingdom, could take it from him, if his
unthankfulness deserved it.

Muleasses before the Emperor used a full gravity and grace in his Speech; but
exceeding courteous to the General and other Captains: riding up and down with
them, and showing himself a very good Horseman, and of great activity. He would
also reason with learned men after Averroes, of the nature of things, the
Heavens motion, and Stars power: he had a Tent appointed him, and honorable
allowance.

Vastius courteously brought him, when desirous, into all places of the Camp,
to see all things and orders there, demanding of him, whether that puissant
Army brought to his great good, he judged sufficient to subdue the enemy?
Muleasses chiefly wondered at the number and order of the great Ordnance; next,
at the wondrous plenty of things, and the Soldiers quietness in buying them.
Ere long they learned of him many things, well serving for their better
proceeding: which things, orderly reported to the Emperor, confirmed his
former hope of the desired Victory; so that carefully forecasting, he resolved
forthwith to besiege Tunis. But whilst he was preparing, they daily skirmished
with the Numidians: once like to come to a Battle; for the Moors planting
Fieldpieces among the Olive Gardens, shot continually into the Camp: wherefore
the Emperor leaving enough to keep his Camp and Trenches, went forth with his
Horsemen and the rest, sending Montegius General of the Spanish Horsemen before,
who were most, but raw Soldiers. These skirmished a while with the enemy; but
seeing themselves hardly charged, and Montegius greatly wounded, they fled in
the Emperor's sight, to the men at Arms coming after them. The enemy at first,
would desperately charge, then retire to avoid their enemies force, and by and
by turn again with a fresh charge, the light Horsemen fleeing, Charles came on
courageously with his men at Arms, whereby they were put to flight, and their
Fieldpieces taken. Here the Emperor standing foremost, gave the Signal, crying
aloud, St. James, St. James, the Spaniards Patron. He rescued with his own hand
Pontius of Granado, who, unhorsed and sore wounded, was ready to be slain. Also
30000 Moors came suddenly to surprise a small Tower, on a Hill near Carthages
ruins, wherein Soldiers were placed; for it was near the Camp. Before these
went a Numidian Priest, bellowing out certain Charms, and casting abroad
scroles of paper, wherein he cursed the Christians: they brought those in the
Tower with fire and smoke, to great extremity; but the Emperor coming to their
rescue, flew the Priest with others, and put the rest to (...). The
discomfiture of the Spanish Horsemen made many think, that the Emperor's Horse
were too weak for a set-battel, being but few, and inferior to the Numidians.
For which cause and diverse others, some of his Counselors willed him to
proceed no farther in that dangerous War but speedily to return, since he had
won honor enough, by taking Guletta and the enemies Fleet; but he gave them a
resolute answer to the contrary: willing them to cease further to (...) him, no
way dismayed, or to possess his valiant Soldiers with a vain fear, and
resolutely against next day, with him to expect the fortune of the field for a
full accomplishment, who was set down to give battle, or he enemy refusing, to
batter the Walls of Tunis, not doubting but God would stand by him in so good
and godly a quarrel. So garrisoning Guletta, and repairing its breaches, laying
the Ordnance on Carriages, which before, lay bound in unweldy pieces of Timber,
with Iron rings.

Then causing the Country to be well viewed (which betwixt the Olive Groves,
and the right side of the lake, passes directly to Tunis) he set forward with
his Army in so good an order, as still ready to fight, and in his Armor he
rode from squadron to squadron, cheerfully and hopefully recounting the former
Victories they had got for him, telling them, he, that day, expected of them a
most honorable day's service, seeing they were to fight against the naked
enemies of the Christian Religion; and to resolve to endure all difficulties,
till they might join battle with their enemies: where, they should undoubtedly
(by Gods goodness) obtain the Victory, comforting themselves the while, with
the sure hope of a most rich prey, of a rich City. They all answered with a
great shout, he should not trouble himself with those matters, for they would
patiently endure all extremities, and by a valiant fight make him Emperor (not
of Africa) but Asia also.

Vastius made General, chiefly for that day, withdrew two Spanish Companies of
Harquebusiers to skirmish with the Moors, following in their Rear: whom, by
those and some Troops of Horse, the Duke of Alba notably repulsed. The Army
being come to the (...), which Muleasses and others had told them of; the
extreme thirsty Soldiers descrying them afar off, forsook their Colors, and
ran as fast as they could unto them: Vastius labored in vain, by fair and fowl
means to stay them, a great advantage being, by that disorder, offered to the
enemy, not far off. The Emperor himself hasted thither to keep them in order,
yet such was their intolerable thirst, that he could not remedy the disorder,
some (...) in the sands for lack of drink, and some ready to burst their
bellies at the Fountains, so that he beat them away with his Truncheon: One
Cicero of Arpinas, a famous Captain, died there with over drinking. This
extremity seemed just; for Vastius had the day before, commanded every Soldier
to carry a bottle of Wine or Water at his girdle: though he caused what water
he could conveniently, to be carried in Casks for common relief, the Germans
having the most. Some ready to give over, bought a draught of water of their
fellows for two Ducats.

The Army being brought into order, Charles held on his march; for Barbarussa
coming (with a great multitude of Horse and Foot, and a number of Ensigns
gallantly displayed) about 3 miles from Tunis, and some Fieldpieces, went about
to break the Christian's Battle: those Pieces doing little or no hurt, through
the Cannoniers unskilfulnesse. Vastius had likewife commanded the Ordnance to
be brought into the Front; but perceiving what toil and time it required: He
told the Emperor, he thought it not best to stay for them, every man desiring
Battle, lest staying too long upon their great Ordnance, their enemies should
gather courage, and the Soldiers cheerfulness grow cold. The Emperor
cheerfully answered: If thou think good, I like it well, In Gods Name, give the
Signal: That I shall (said he) but first it is reason, that thou which swayest a
great part of the world, at this time obey me, whom thou for this day have made
General of so mighty an Army: wherefore since I may not request, I command thee
to get into the middle of the Battle, lest by some unlucky shot, the whole Army
be extremely endangered by the danger of one man's life; Charles smiling, willed
him not to fear it; saying, Never Emperor was yet slain with a gun; yet he
went into the middle of the Battle. The Signal given by Trumpet and Drum: the
enemy was furiously charged by his Horsemen, who, to avoid the Artillery, made
all haste to come to handy-blows. Noble and valiant Gonzaga being somewhat
foremost at the first onset, slew with his Lance a notable Moorish Captain,
with his sword, so troubling those next him, that he opened a way to break into
the enemies Battle: the Harquebufiers also discharged so fast, that 300 of them
lay dead, before Battle was joined: whereupon the other Footmen fled back (from
their Ordnance) to Barbarussa: who not long enduring the Christians force or
fight, but grinding his teeth for grief, retired with his Turks into Tunis:
(...) himself with hope out of his enemies foreseen distresses, to take some
fit advantage, if he could but a while defend the City: the Numidians and Moors
retired also into the Suburbs, and other places near.

The Emperor glad of his enemies flight (thought to be a 100000) encamped that
night where they before lay, determining next day to batter Tunis's walls:
Barbarussa exceedingly surprised with fear, and distracted with cares, purposed
to kill all the Christian-captives in the Castle; but Sinan the Jew for diverse
reasons dissuaded him from that most execrable fact; Solomon using to derest
and revenge such outrages: who living bound in Chains (if they should lust
after their unlucky liberty) (...) neither give victory to the enemy, nor take
it from him, or hinder it, and might shortly serve him to good purpose; whereat
(he ashamed) went out of the Castle, assembling all the chief of the City into
the biggest Temple, telling them what he would have done for defense, and
encouraging them to fight, from whom a little before Charles his coming, he had
taken all kind of arms.

A constant report of a danger so eminent, run even in the Dungeons of the
Castle; by some manumissed slaves, (who had in heart returned to their old
Christian Religion, secretly encouraging the chief Captives, with whom they
were acquainted, to lay hold on their liberty) two of whom, Francis a Spaniard,
and Caterus a Dalmatian Eunuch adventured to open the prison-doors, giving
Instruments to the poor prisoners: who boldly brake off their chains and Gyves:
and so, about 6000 Christians armed with what came first to hand, chiefly with
stones: brake forth suddenly upon the Turks in the Castle. Ramadas the runagate
Captain, stirred up with the terrible noise, with a few Soldiers, ran to the
gate, where a lusty Cicilian prisoner, had with a bar thereof, struck down one
or two of the Warders, and bolted the Gate. Ramadas (...) him, went forth with
his few followers, carrying news to Barbarussa; the Christians now loosed,
slaying diverse Turks, possessed all the Castle, and breaking open the Armory,
gave signs from a Turret to the Christian Army, by smoke and false fires of
Gunpowder. Lastly, displaying Sarmentus his Ensign (taken by Tabacches as
aforesaid) they were too far off, well to perceive these signs; yet by
fugitives coming often out of Tunis, Charles and Muleasses were persuaded some
great tumult was risen: wherefore 2 Captains with their Companies were sent to
discover the matter. Barbarussa the while, in his fury blaspheming his gods,
and bitterly curling the Jew, came to the Castle-gate, with tears in his eyes,
requesting the late-captives, forthwith to let him in, faithfully promising
them liberty, with a general pardon; but they (...) stones at him, with many
opprobrions words rejected him; So that he enraged, shot at them himse f;
betaking himself to flight: 7000 Turks following him, intending to flee to the
City Hippona (now Bona): for there had Barbarussa left 14 Galleys against any
mischance, having laid up their furniture in the Garrisoned Castle fast by the
Lake.

Charles hearing of his flight, came to the gates, the Magistrates being ready
to submit: only requesting that his Sculdiers might encamp without the City,
and not seek the utter ruin thereof, promising they should want nothing there
to be had: Muleasses also earnestly entreating him in the Citizens behalf; but
he doubting (not without cause) the Moors fidelity, they also delaying the
Soldiers promised wages, expecting the utmost of Barbarussa, he could not be
persuaded to promise them certain safety, moved also by the Soldiers
discontenred speeches: Whilst the Emperor stood thus in doubt, Vastius came
with a few to the Castle gate, and was joyfully received in by the Captives;
but whilst he viewed the wealth and provision, a Ligurian-captive discovered to
him a Well wherein Barbarussa had cast 30000 Ducats in bags, which he easily
obtained of Charles, as well deserving them. The Captives taking the Castle's
spoil: the Army would enter the City, running after the spoil; the Citizens in
vain calling upon the faith of Muleasses. They slew many at first entrance: the
Spaniards and Italians seeking most after spoil, but the Germans filled all
places with dead Mahometans, not regarding sex or age: their Temples swimming
with the blood of those fled into them: which continued, till Charles, through
Muleasse's pitiful request, proclaimed, None on pain of death to hurt any
Citizen, or take prisoners. For all that, many young men and women, were by the
Mariners carried away to the Fleet: many of whom Muleasses redeemed for a
little money: one of his Wives (the dearest) being ransomed for two Ducats.
The Emperor entering the Castle, commended the captives, giving them money, and
promising them shipping and provision to bring every man to his own Country;
unto the manumissed servants, he gave money and apparel, learning of them, of
Barbarussas's purposes and secret disposition. In the Castle's spoil, Muleasses
chiefly lamented the loss of the old Arabian books, containing the
interpretation of Mahomet's Law, and his Predecessors Acts: which loss (he
said) he would most gladly (if possible) have redeemed with the price of a
City: then the precious ointments and perfumes, with the great store of
Ambetgreece, Musk and Civet. Lastly, the rare and rich Colors for painting,
trodden under foot. Here were diverse Head-pieces and other Armor of the French
(laid up in memory of the Moors Victory, who with King Lewis had besieged it
about 300 years before.

Barbarussa easily passed over the River Bagrada or Maior-dech (though pursued
by certain Namidian horse raised by Muleasses, who dared not come near him for
his Harquebusiers and Archers in the rear): and so came to Hippona (yet he lost
Haiden of Smyrna in that passage, who died on the bank with drinking so much)
resting his men two days: He called them together, comforting them with good
words, and persuading them, etc. for he determined (he said) to go with the
Fleet he had, to Algiers: where he would (being recruited) undertake some
Attempt, answerable to their desires and his own credit. It Is reported, Never
was vanquished Captain answered with a more cheerful acclamation, than he then
was. Wherefore he most speedily weighed up those sunk Galleys, furnishing them
against all assayes, casting upon the Lake's-brink a Mount, with Artillary for
defense of the Harbor; not vainly conjecturing that the Christian Fleet would
come to impeach his going out. And indeed, Adam, a German Captain (of no great
skill, yet the Admiral's Kinsman) was appointed with some Gallions and 14
Galleys, to set forward toward Hippona, hoping to purchase great honor of the
unproviced enemy; but being come near Hippona, he was advertised what
Barbarussa had done: Whereat he greatly troubled, upon good advice, returned to
the Fleet for more aid: Barbarussa a while doubting, whether to pursue them
(more in number than his own Galleys) or to persist in his former purpose: unto
which opinion the Captains inclining, he letting slip a fair occasion, leaving
a small Garrison in the Castle, sailed to Algiers. Adam being returned, many
great ones were exceedingly offended, that by some's negligence, and others
unrulinesse, going ashear without leave, so fair an occasion was neglected: for
had those Galleys been sunk or taken, Barbarussa could not have escaped, it
being verily thought, the Numidians (the Turks deadly enemies) would in
advantageous places, have cut off him and his followers in his long and painful
travail by land to Algiers, Auria angry both with himself and those entrusted;
yet not out of hope, went to Hippona; but Barbarussa gone, he took the City
overthrowing its walls: but taking the Castle by force, he placed Gometius with
a Garrison, and so returned. This Gometius (though valiant) became so infamous
for avarice toward enemy and friend, that for fear how to answer such things,
he executed himself: the Castle being afterward razed, as not without
mavelous charge to be kept: after which a Council being held touching
Muleasses, Charles placed him in his Kingdom, to pay him yearly (as tribute) 2
Faulcons, and 2 Numid an (...): also ever to honor the Emperor, and be a
friend to all Christians, and an utter enemy to the Turks; and to defray the
charges of above 1000 Spaniards left in Guletta: whereby he (as it were) kept
the Keys of that Kingdom at his girdle. These things done, he sailed into
Sicily, being received in great triumph at Panormus and Messana, whence he
passed over to Rhegium in Italy, thence by Land to Naples.

Solomon, to increase the glory of his name, and enlarge his Empire, determined
to take away all the Portugals traffic in the East Indies: It grieved him
that the Christian Religion should begin to root among them, not long before,
receiving Mahometanism; he was also credibly informed, that they (in his late
wars against the Persians) had aided them with some Haerquebusiers: sending
them workmen, to show them the making and use of Ordnance: but the chief
motive, was because the Portugals by their Traffic, had cut off all Trade
into the Arabian gulf (whereby the riches of the East, used to be transported
to Caire, thence to Alexandria, whence they were dispersed into all Europe) to
the great binderance of his Tributes and Customs: wherefore, and at the
instance of Solyman-Bassa an Eunuch, Governor of Egypt: he built a great
Fleet in the Red Sea to go against them: the Timber was cut in the Mountains of
Cilicia, thence transported to Caire; where being framed, it was with vast
labor and charge carried on Camels through the hot and sandy Deserts to
Suetia, a Port of the Red Sea, anciently called Arsing, from whence (80 Miles
from Caire) the ancient Kings of Egypt, had with incredible charge (to eternize
their memory) cut through all that main Land, so that Vessels of good burden,
might come up to Caire from Arsing. Solomon Bassa severely commanding all the
people thereabouts to further the building of that Fleet, had (in short time)
built 80 tall Ships and Galleys at Arsing: furnishing them for so long a
Voyage; at which time picking a causeless quarrel, yet (with Solyman's liking)
he confiscated the goods of the Venetian Merchants at Alexandria and Caire,
thrusting the Mariners into his Galleys as slaves: so accompanied with
Assanbeg, he set forward against the Portugals, coming at length as far as the
River Indus, where he assaulted Dium, a Castle of the Portugals: but having
besieged it many days by sea and Land and tried the utmost, he was so
repulsed, that leaving his great Ordnance behind him for haste, he returned to
Aden, a City of great Trade in Arabia Foelix: where, because he would be
thought to do something, he allured the King to come to him upon Faith before
given; but having him aboard, he hanged him up at the Yards-arm of his
Admiral-Galley, taking the Citie's spoil. He likewise murdered the King and
all the Nobili y of Zibyth, another famous Port of Arabia contrary to Faith
given; so traveling by land to Mecca (as if he had been some devout Pilgrim)
he sent back his Fleet by the Moor to Suetia.

At the same time, Solomon ( Lutzis and Ajax, the greatest Bassa's persuading
him) purposed to convert all his Forces upon Italy: whereunto he was solicited
by Forest the French Ambassador, to incite Solomon against the Emperor,
assuring him, he could not (at once) desend Apulia against him, and the Dukedom
of Millain against the French King, who intended that Summer to invade it.
Also, one Pignatellus, sometime Commander in Charles his Army, but then exiled
out of Naples, fled to Solomon, who being like to do him great service, in the
invasion of Apulia, was honorably entertained amongst his Mutfaracas, a
Company of Horsemen chose out of all Nations, having free exercise of their
Religion, only bound to attend the person of the Turk, when going to Wars.
He revolted, because the Viceroy had executed Andrew his Brother, a Knight of
the Rhodes. He, oftentimes called to Council, ceased not to persuade Solomon to
invade the same, assuring him, that they of Apulia and Salerne, grievously
oppressed by the Emperor's Officers, would at first revolt, especially, seeing
any of the French to cleave unto; but the greatest Motive was, the ancient
Turks telling him into what fear all Italy was stricken, when Achmetes Bassa
had taken Hydruntum. Wherefore he made such expedition by Sea and Land, that he
was come with 200000 men to Aulona in Macedonia, before 'twas thought he was
come from Constantinople, where he stayed not long; but Lutzis his Admiral,
with Barbarossa, sailing by Corcyra, where Pisaurius the Venetian Admiral lay,
and, after mutual Sea-salutation done, put into the Haven of Aulona also.

Solomon now commanded Lutzis and Barbarossa to pass over with the Fleet, to
Oiranto, and to prove the minds of the people: with whom went also Troilus
Pignatellus: who knowing Hydruntum and Brundusium, to be strongly kept by
Charles his Garrisons, directed them to the Town Castrum, on the Seacoast,
eight miles from Hydruntum: nigh which stands a Castle, then belonging to
(...), who unacquainted with Wars, and persuaded by Troilus, yielded it up;
the Turks not to violate him or his, in body or goods: on which condition,
Castrum was also delivered up; but the Turks, once got in (do what Troilus
Lutzis, or Barbarussa could) especially the Mariners, rifled Town and Castle,
carrying away Catinarius himself, with the flower of the people to their
Galleys, as prisoners; but Lutzis ashamed, presently freed Catinarius. Then
also, Solomon had, by night, sent over light Horsemen: who running along the
Sea from Tarentum to Brundusium, carried away people and Cattle, and whatever
came in their way, for 40 miles; so that the fear and danger of Otranto, was
likely to have overwhelmed all Italy, had not the rashness of one Venetian
Captain, turned that Tempest from the Italians, upon the Venetians themselves.
For Contarenus meeting with Turkish Galleys, which would do nothing in token of
Reverence and friendship, as they ought in those Seas, fiercely assailed them,
sinking two of them. Ustamenes, Governor of Callipolis, of no small
Reputation, being said to have perished: which outrage, in a most unfit time,
was imputed to a private grudge, the Turks having intercepted a Ship of his,
laden with rich Merchandise, from the East, not regarding what might ensue to
the common State.

Auria, hearing that Solomon with his Army and Fleet, were, at Aulona, put to
Sea toward the Isles Cephalenia and Zante: there chancing upon diverse of the
Turk's Victua lers, which he easily took, chaining the Mariners in his own
Galleys for slaves, and seizing on the Victual, fired the Ships.

Solomon the while, sending Junusbeius, his chief Interpreter, with two Galleys
on a Message to Lutzis: he coming near Corcyra, offered to pass by the
Venetian Fleet, without vailing: upon which his pride, certain Captains so
furiously set upon him, that they were forced to run them ashoare on the Coast
of Epirus: where they were (...) by the people of the Mountainscalled
Acroctraumi. These people live most by theft. Junusbeius hardly redeeming
himself from them, and returning to Solomon. Auria chancing on those sore
bruised Galleys, fired them. For which things, the Turks greatly offended,
grievously complained of the Venetians to Solomon, though the Admiral labored
to excuse the matter, about Junusbeius, as a great oversight on both sides; but
the Turks sought to break the League which was the sooner don, because Auria
diligently looking into every Harbor in the Ionian Sea, lighted on 12 great
Turks Galleys near Corcyra, filled with their best Soldiers Horse and Foot,
the Horses being sent before to the Camp by their Lackies, who with invincible
courage, fought bloudily with Auria, having 30. Galleys till most were slain,
the rest sore wounded: who seeing they must fall into his hands, threw their
Scimiters over board, because those choice Weapons should not come into their
hands.

Auria lost many of his best men, yet with Victory anchored nigh Corcyra: where
he was advertised, that Barbarussa was coming against him with 80 Galleys;
wherefore, as too weak, he returned to Messana, to repair his Fleet.

Solomon now thoroughly junusbeius, cursed Barbarussa, who had done him no good
service in these Wars, grievously threatening the Venetians, who under color
of an ancient League, being secretly confederate with Charles, had helped Auria
with intelligence, and all necessaries, etc: Junusbeius, Barbarussa, and Ajax,
incensing him: the one out of private revenge; these, gaping after the spoil of
the adjacent Venetian Isles: the Wars in Italy, being more difficult than
they imagined; for the French King came not then into Italy: it being commonly
reported, that the Viceroy of Naples strongly garrisoning all Sea Towns, was
coming with a great Army; besides the Horse sent over, ranging for spoil, were
often cut off by Scipio, Governor of Otranto for Charles: wherefore Solomon
proclaiming War against the Venetians, arose from Aulona, encamping near the
Mountains Acrocerauni: where the wild people of the high and rough Mountain
Chimera, for so great a prey (by means of one Damianus a notable Thief, and
perfect in the blind and difficult passages) attempted by night to spoil
Solomon in his Pavilion, hoping (though guarded with so many thousands) to
steal into the Camp undiscovered, and kill him sleeping there.

But having put all things in readiness, Damianus their Ringleader, by secret
ways, stealing down the broken Rocks, came very nigh the Camp, to view the
standing of the Pavilion, with the order of their Watch, and was, by a bough
cracking, espied by the Janissaries in a Tree: where, taken, and tortured, he
confessed his intent, and was by Solomon commanded to be torn in pieces: who
forthwith sent a great party up the Mountains, who hunted after, and slew many
of those wild people: doing what they could quite to destroy them, as enemies
to all men.

Solomon purposing to invade Corcyra, now Corfu, sent Barbarussa before, with
his great Artillery: which Pisaurius timely foreseeing, strengthened both the
Castles with good Soldiers out of his Galleys: withdrawing himself into the
Adriatique Gulf, to join with Veturius: who kept that Sea with another Venetian
Fleet, and so to defend the Venetian Coasts against the Turks: Auria's coming
being also daily expected.

Solomon sending a great part of his Army into the Island, burnt and destroyed
the Villages, leading away a number of people Captives. Ajax and Barbarussa,
came as nigh the City Corfu, as they could, to see how fitly to besiege it; but
perceiving its great strength, they advertised Solomon that it was impregnable.
Ripa and Leonius Senators, were then Governors of Corfu, who, doubting of the
Turks great strength, (...) down the Suburbs, very great and sumptuous, a woeful
thing to behold, when as then also, the Turks had fired the Magnificent Houses
of the Venetian Merchants in every place; but in so great a public danger,
all was accounted lightly of, in respect of lives and liberty, since they might
with new charge, be soon recovered. The two Governors fearing a long Siege,
and not Victuals enough for such a multitude as were there, turned a number of
weak people and Children out of the City; many, chiefly Children, dying in the
TownDitches, in their Mothers Arms, not daring to go further for fear of the
enemy, who had fast by planted his Ordnance on Mounts against the City: only
S. Angelo Castle in midst of the Isle, about 15 miles from Corfu, being
valiantly defended against assaults, saved above 3000, which fled thither; all
being made desolate elsewhere. The Turks on a Hill covered with their Tents,
shot with their Ordnance from the Rock Maripetus, into the Town: and some
standing close in the Suburbs ruins, did kill or wound those appearing on the
Walls. The Galley also often discharging their Pieces: more terrifying than
hurting the Defendants. Solomon seeing he did but loose his labor, determined
to raise his siege, and return to Constantinople, greatly ashamed he had no
better sped; but being about to depart, he was told, how unfaithfully some
Soldiers dealt with them of Castrum: which tending to his dishonor, and the
deterring of others from yielding, he put the authors to death, and those
Captives to be diligently sought out, and sent home. The Turks departed out of
the Island, about September. 12th, in 1537. carrying away above 16000 into
perpetual captivity; so he returned, having done great harm, both in Italy and
Corcyra; but not increasing his Empire or honor.

Before his departure, he commanded Lutzis to return with his Fleet to
Hellespont: who passing by Zante, took diverse Country people prisoners in the
night; but, the City it self being well fortified, he departed to Cythera,
where vainly attempting to take the Castle, he spoiling what he could, with 800
prisoners, returned into Aegium to Aegina a rich City, and well peopled. He
approaching the Isle, sent to the Governor of the City by fair means, and,
then by threats to have the City yielded unto him: and not prevailing, he
landed his men giving the signal of Battle: whom they manfully meeting, slew
many Turks. Lutzis greatly offended, still landing fresh men, oppressed them
with multitude, being but few, and weary of long fight, forcing them to retire
into the City. The Bassa in revenge, planted a battery against the City, soon
opening the walls in diverse places: then assaulting the breaches, took it,
which he rifling, and burning to the ground, razed the walls, killing all the
men, and giving the women to the lust of his men: whom afterward with the
Children, he shipped away into servitude: raging with much like cruelty on them
of Paros, and Islands thereabouts: killing the old men, and such as resisted,
thrusting the rest into his Galleys. And coming to Naxos, all the Island people
fled into the City for fear: where he made havoc of all in his way: sending a
Messenger to the Duke, to yield himself and City to Solyman's obedience: who in
blunt terms said, If he would without more ado, yield to Solomon, he might
save himself with what he had; but otherwise, he should never have the like
offer, etc. That there was present a most mighty Fleet, etc. To be warned by
them of Aegina, Paros, and other Neighbor Princes: That his hap was good, if
he were not misadvised, etc. He being commanded to stand aside a while, the
Duke with his chief Subjects, full of Heaviness, consulted for an answer:
generally agreeing, that since they could not withstand such an enemy, or
expect aid, to yield to the present necessity, etc. So the Duke answered him,
he was ready to yield to Solomon as his vassal, and to hold his Seigniory of
him for 5000 Ducats yearly tribute: which Lutzis accepted, receiving in a
years tribute: this yielding of Naxos, was November. 11th, 1537. whence Lutzis
returned laden with rich spoil, to Constantinople: who, ere long, fell at odds
with his Wife, Solyman's Sister; for keeping in his House, a delicate youth, in
whom he took more pleasure than in her: she of a great spirit, and knowing him,
by marrying her, to have been, of base degree, advanced to the greatest
honors: in great rage, bitterly reproved him, saying; she married him to be
beloved, and used as his Wife, not to be abused by his minions: whereupon, he
gave her a blow on the ear, causing her to be shut up in her Chamber; but she
came weeping and complaining to Solomon, requesting to be divorced from him.
Solomon was so incensed, that he took from him his Seal, and thrust him out of
all, and had put him to death, had not his old love and friendship stayed him;
yet he banished him into Macedonia: where he spent his life as a poor private
man.

Solomon to entangle the Venetians in diverse places at once, commanded his
Lieutenants, bordering on their Seigniory, to vex them with all hostility. In
Peloponesus, Cassumes besieged Mauplium and Epidaurus.

Barbarussa surprised ancient Botrotus in Dalmatia, razing it, and carrying
away the Citizens.

Ustress of Illyria, took Obroatium, with the Castle of Nadin, in Dalmatia: the
Venetians requiring the like, Pisaurius and Veturius took Scardona in
Dalmatia's borders, putting the Turks to the Sword, and overthrowing the walls:
they sent also Ribeus to besiege Obroatium, who upon the coming of Amurathes
fled, and lost most of his men: wherefore Pisaurius had his head struck off
aboard the Admiral Galley, and Ursinus Governor of Jadera upon their frontiers
in Dalmatia, took Ostrovilla from the Turks, burning it down: recovering
Obroatium, and by the Senates Command, razing it, as not well to be kept.

The same Autumn, 1537. King Ferdinand received a great and shameful overthrow
by the Turks. After the battle of Mohathz, the Turks kept Possega of Hungary to
themselves, having thereby, a fit passage from Belgrade, further into Hungary:
The Rivers Savus and Dravus enclosing this rich plentiful and populous Country
on both sides. It bordereth upon Croatia and Corbania, which in time past, had
continual Wars with the Turks Garrisons in Illyria and Bosna. Then was
Mahometes a most valiant Captain, Governor of Belgrade: having the keeping of
those frontiers, and the protection of Hungary in the behalf of King John. He,
the year before, by force and policy, took from the Christians above 30 small
Castles in the Country, joining them to the Regiment of Belgrade: one whereof
called Exek, for his passage over Dravus into Hungary, he strongly fortified:
whence he fetched abundance of prey out of Ferdinands Country near him. Yet was
there then a certain League betwixt Solomon and Ferdinand: which
notwithstanding, did bear with taking of booty, and light skirmishes, without a
great power or Fieldpieces: which Matthias and his Predecessors had long used
with the Turks, doing a like harm with their nimble light Horse; but the
Germans, now serving upon great Horses, with heavy Armor, received great hurt
by those light skirmishes.

Ferdinand not well brooking these injuries, and finding his League with
Solomon, at his going into Persia, to be hurtful to him, determined to take up
Arms, that if he could drive the Turks out of Possega, then to go to Buda
against John. There were some, who wished him not rashly to take up Arms
against so mighty an enemy: foreseeing that Solomon, so provoked, would do as
he had of late done against the Venetians upon a light occasion; but all
Ferdinands Subjects were so earnest therein, that they said, they would never
bear Arms more against the Turks, if he omitted that occasion; for they of
Carinthia, Stiria, Croatia and Noricum, receiving great harms, thought they
might easily be expulsed from Possega, since Mahometes had no great power, not
like to have greater, Autumn being almost spent.

So Ferdinand, with the exceeding joy of his Subjects, very soon raised a good
Army, yet supposed more strong than numerous most being select men: they were
8000 Horse, and 16000 Foot, with store of all sorts of Artillery: Cazzianzer
(as one of great experience, and famous for the defense of Vienna) Ferdinand
made his General; for he (advised by his best friends) never adventured his
person in any battle, chiefly against the Turks, by whom many Christian Kings
had been formerly vanquished and slain.

Mahometes hearing of this preparation against him, sent for diverse Companies
of Garrison Soldiers upon the borders: requiring aid of the Governors the
(...): being chiefly helped by Ustorf, Governor of Bosna who sent him
Amurathes with a great Company of gallant Horsemen: to whom were joined some
Companies of Foot, of the wild and Mountain Dalmatians, kept in order by
Janissaries: also many out of Servia and Rascia. The receiver, giving those
willing to serve, two months pay before hand: neither wanted he aid from Buda;
so that Mahometes soon gathered an Army, not much inferior to Ferdinands,
expecting the enemies coming at Exek.

Cazzianzer, come as far as Caprunza upon Dravus, had before well provided for
victualling his Army: the chief of the Country by the direction of the Bishop
of Zagrabia, promising to serve the Camp with plenty, at a very low rate: which
the people now hindered by Mahometes by Land and water, could not perform; he
also alluring them for a great price, ready money, to bring it to his own Camp.

Cazzianzer scarce came from Caprunza to (...) Castle, (but about 40 miles) in
ten days for the troublesome carriage of some great (...)-pieces: and they
were enforced to spend the Victual, provided, not for the beginning, but the
difficulties of a long protracted War: wherefore he wrote sharply to the Bishop
and the rest, to use all possible speed, and not to let the hope of a notable
Victory, be lost for want of Victual: and there he stayed, expecting its
coming, sending Bachitius before, with 1000 Hungarian light Horse, and some
Italian Harquebusiers, as far as Zopia Castle, by taking some prisoners, to
searn of the enemies purpose: the Turks thinking the whole Army was at hand,
fired the Castle, fleeing down Dravus in Boats; yet Bachitius took some of
them: of whom, Cazzianzer learned what he knew by his (...), that Mahometes
encamped at Exek, resolving to give him battle: who setting forward, came in
eight days to Walpo Castle: where he stayed seven days at the River Crassus,
till a Bridge was made to transport his Army. Entering there into often Council,
for his better proceeding: some said it were best to leave Exek, and besiege
Villach Castle thereby: others more wary, thought it best to stay there, till
the expected aid and Victual were come; but the greater number prevailed for
going to Exek, delay breeding danger, saying there was strength and Victual
enough, for obtaining of the Victory, etc.

The young Soldiers having no proof of the Turk's manner of fight, thought two
days staying a long delay of so ready a Victory: wherefore the Army was
mustered, and 10000 Horsemen found (for diverse Germane Troops were come to the
Camp): a more gallant Company seldom seen, so suddenly raised; but the Foot
were scarce 8000, many being sick, and others weary, who lingringly stole away:
and generally those left, moyled with dirt, wet with rain, almost starved with
cold, and pinched with hunger, were thought scarce able to endure the hardness
of the War. Command was given, every Soldier to carry with him three days
Victuals: and Proclamation made, none on pain of death to take any Turk
prisoner, though yielding, or charge himself with any spoil; for the Captains
would afterward divide that among them.

Thus setting forward, they the third day encamped in a Valley three miles from
Exck: next day, some Turks appearing, were by the Ordnance repulsed: the day
following, the enemy sallyed out with often skirmishes, many being flain on both
sides; but more wounded of the Christians: certain (...) being mingled with the
Turk's Horsemen: wherefore the General forbad all such light skirmishes,
commanding his Cannoniers so to place his Ordnance, that the Turks sallying
forth, received great hurt thereby. That day came the Bishop with his Horsemen,
and a certain provision of Victual, well easing their fear. Mahometes now to
annoy them by other means, sent many small Boats, manned with Harquebusiers
and small Ordnance into the lake nigh the Camp, to keep them from watering, and
shooting often into the Camp: nigh which, was a Hill, having a Village, wherein
were some Turkish Companies, to skirmish upon occasion with the Christians: to
displace whom, the Army was put in battalia, and the Ordnance bent upon them:
whereupon, the Turks firing the Town, retired to Exek. The Christians being
come up the hill; might see Exek, about two miles off in a fair plain, near
Dravus: which low ground, was so subject to the Castle, that it was thought too
dangerous to attempt that way to batter the Castle; but descrying a rising
ground on the other side of the City, they thought best, on that side to plant
their battery against it; but to come thither, was thought a matter of no small
trouble, for the 3 miles foul and troublesome compass they were to fetch: and
the Army being like soon to feel want of Victual, which would hardly be had;
the enemy besetting every passage, and scouring about: wherefore, some thought
it best to stay there, till more supplies were come; but others said, the enemy
was but barely victualled himself: which they understood by some Christian
fugitives; and that Mahometes had put his chief substance into Boats, purposing
to flee after 3 days siege: they thinking the Forest would well enough be
passed through; beside, winter coming so fast on, suffered no delay: wherefore
next day, the Army marched in good order through the Forest. Which Mahometes
perceiving, sent forth a 1000 light Horsemen, and some Companies of Janissaries,
to trouble them, suddenly charging the reareward, being Bohemians and Italians
(the first quickly (...) the other hardly endured the charge;) but being
relieved by men at Arms, they put the Turks to flight: so the Army with small
loss, came to the place desired: where, after placing all things in order for
the siege, they offered the enemy battle; But he, reported not above 16000
strong, kept within the Town, shooting at them with his Ordnance: they also,
with two great Pieces on the Hill, shot through both Walls and Bulwark, to the
Defendants great terror. Having stood almost all day vainly expecting their
coming forth to fight, returned at night into their Camp; for Mahometes, kept
in his earnest Soldiers, knowing the Christians want of Victual: the fugitives
reporting also, that Solomon charged him upon pain of a most shameful death, to
defend it to the last.

The Christians, in few days, began to feel a general want: neither saw they
plainly how to be relieved, so that they began to fear some general mischief.
Baltazar Pamphilus, a Noble Hungarian, sitting in Counsel, advised them for
relief of the Army, presently to remove to Hermande Castle, about ten miles
from Exek, with whose provision (not like to be small) they might refresh their
whole Army, and so proceed further, as occasion required.

Fast by the Castle, was a pretty little walled Town, without flankers, easily
(he said) with the Castle, to be taken, who was sent with some Companies
thither: which at his first coming, was surrendered to him, but no such store of
Victual as he hoped for therein; yet were there some Vessels of Wine, to the
great relief of the weak men: Hereupon, the Camp removed from Exek, about 10 at
night; but very disorderly: yet the Turks stirred not out, misdoubting some
deceit. The Army being come, the Victual was equally divided, and next morning,
battery laid against the Castle: which, but 20 Turks defended half a day, then
yielding on composition; but there was found in it, but two Barrels of meal,
and two of Millet. Then the very Captains hung their heads, as struck with
fear, who found naught but a few Women and Children there, and scarce Victual
enough in Town and Castle to serve two days; yet they fed the Soldiers with
better hope, after the Bridge over Bodrog running by the Town, was repaired:
which the Turks had broken: so, Carpenters, and every man helping, it was in 3
days repaired. Next day, the Bridge overcharged with the wondrous weight of
the 7th Battering-piece, began to break; so that they brake it, carrying it
away by pieces. All things being passed over, the Bridge was again broken, that
the enemy should not pursue them, that (much the nearest) way. Cazzianzer
himself, upon debate, thought the great Ordnance were best be broken, promising
to new cast them of his own charge. As for scaling-ladders, etc. they burnt
them; but most thought it not best to break those goodly Pieces; but to march
on through Possega to Juvancha, which Town with Gara Castle, fast by, stored
with provision, they said, would easily be taken before the Turks could come so
far about the Lake: and a great shame it were, to return doing nothing.
Cazzianzer with great toil, came by night to Juvancha, but 3 miles off: where
the Turks with exceeding speed, at the same time arrived. The Turks fleeing out
of a small Town nigh the Castle, the Christians received in the Soldiers, who
so filled themselves with Wine, that they were hardly driven out to the Camp:
which Town, the Turks that night burnt, with what the Christians had there
left; and in the dawning of the day, began hotly to skirmish with the
Christians, especially in the Bohemians quarter: whom, Rascinius (grieved) with
a Troop of his best Horse, forced to flee; but they soon returning, and being
relieved, beset the Bohemians, and slew many.

Rascinius with his followers, being slain, Cazzianzer purposing to retire
home, placed 4 ranks of Wagons on each side for defense, the weak and sick in
the Vangard; yet in the front were some lusty Companies, but in the rear the
greatest strength. They met often with woody Hills hindering their way; yet the
Turks could not so conveniently assail them thereby: wherefore Mahometes sent
Janissaries and nimble Footmen before, (knowing well the passages) with some
small Pieces to take the Straits, and to gall them in their passage: and when
they could keep a place no longer, to flee back to another: and in the open
places, were light Horsemen busy with them, whereby they received much harm:
which grieved them the more, for that the Turks were but in straggling
Companies. At a strait bigger than the rest, Bachitius a Hungarian Captain (in
whom they generally reposed their greatest trust) was slain with a
Faulcon-shot, with diverse valiant Hungarians: who seeing there more than in
other places, thought to do some good service on them.

Bachitius's death, brought a fear on the whole Army; yet in revenge, the
Hungarians did so repulse them, that losing many men, they ran away, leaving
their small Pieces behind them; but the nimble Turks, with shot out of the
Woods, stayed the Hungarian Horse from pursuit, recovering their Pieces, before
the Christian Foot could carry them away; so still troubling them as before:
who thus beset, and almost spent for want, did generally fear some extreme
calamity: and the more, hearing that Mahometes expected supplies from Belgrade,
Samandria and Nicopolis: and many Hungarian light Horsemen, stealing away from
them: neither saw they any comfort now, in their dismayed Captains; but being
come into a fair Field near the Town Gara, they heard, the Enemy had in the
Woods before them, cut down great Trees acrosse the ways, so that neither
their Ordnance, Wagons, or Horse, could pass without breaking their order.
This filled them with despair; and the more, for that, Moreus and others, said,
there was but two ways to escape: one through those Woods to Walpo, about 10
miles: the other toward Zenthner-Zebeth Castle, in Moreus his Country, some
miles from Gara, by taking whereof, the enemy (through the straitness of the
passag) must needs give over his pursuit; yet it was resolved in Council, to
take the way through the Woods, there being in the Castle Victual enough, and
money from Ferdinand, to pay the Soldiers for all that winter. So leaving the
great Ordnance behind, and burning the Powder, with what could not well be
carried, upon the sound of a Hoboy to set forward. Many much disliked this
resolution: saying, (amongst other things) that to run away, would be a
dishonor to the Captains, and also dangerous to them, who respected nothing
but life: wherefore they thought better to fight a Battle with them, and not
believe the false reports of new supplies come unto them, and that God would
undoubtedly aid them, etc. After this, they consulted and determined, that the
sick and wounded should be carried on the Wagon and Cart-horses, (before
carried in the Wagons or amongst other baggage) and that such as could not stay
themselves should be holden by others riding behind them. Those who were so
desirous to go, said, This their departure was not a shameful flight, but a
right honest and necessary manner of retiring, seeing they were stronger than
their enemies in Horse, and equal (if not stronger) in foot, though they were
sore weakened with sickness. Every Captain the while, not regarding shame,
bethought how to betake himself to flight, the uncertain hope of desired life.
Mahometes using most certain spies, did by most diligent watch, and Troops of
Horse, (besetting all passages) most vigilantly attend their motion, having
shut them up as in a toil. It was now almost midnight, and the Army expecting
the sign of setting forward, many great Captains upon a cowardly conceit,
departed before the rest without leave. The Hungarian Horsemen are reported to
begin it, who knowing the ways, made haste to Walpo. Moreus going the other
way to his Castle, after whom followed in great have, Hugonot with his Stirian
Horsemen: the Bishop fled also, known by his great Lanthorn, wandering in the
Wood.

Cazzianzer hearing hereof, and that all the rest were upon fleeing, presently
got to Horse, forgetting the Signal, thinking (as he said afterward) they were
all gone before; and unarmed, fled, leaving rich furnished Tents behind for
have. In this tumult, famous Lodronius, was called up, and told by his
Servants, that the General was fled: who answered, without doubt not so, that I
should be so perfidiously betrayed of him; and so as megered with watching and
labor, laid down again to sleep. Mahometes hearing the stir in the Camp, rose
to assail his enemies; yet for better assurance of the enemies action, he
stayed for daylight in order of battle, his men very silently to expect the
sign of setting forward: which was by the soft sound of a Horsemans Drum,
passing through each Company. The day appearing, Lodronius awaking, heard a
confused noise of the Turks; and being forsaken by most of the Horsemen,
complained, he was betrayed; yet as nothing discouraged, he cheared up the
Footmen, exhorting them to remember their former valor, etc. himself who had
been their happy General in many battles, being resolved (by repulsing the
enemy) to bring them into a safe place, or valiantly fighting with them, to end
his days.

The Carinthian, Saxonian, Austrian, and Bohemian Horse, came the while, to
Lodronius, beseeching him, to take on him their treacherous General's place,
etc. who modestly protested himself unworthy thereof; yet as a man of courage,
and moved with the Armies hard estate: he solemnly promised to execute the
place in best manner he could. It Is reported, as Lodronius was inveighing (to
his foot) against shameful flight, an old German said, Worthy Lodronius, thou
can never be thought to flee shamefully, with a Horse of such a price under
thee: whereupon he alighting, hoxed his Horse, saying aloud, That, that day,
they should have him fighting on foot, as one of themselves: See (says he) ye
deceive me not, etc. All his other Horses, he gave away to sick and wounded
Soldiers he best knew. The first Troops and Bands were scarce out of the Camp,
but the Turks with a hideous cry assailed them on every side: the Christian
Horsemen repulsing the proud enemy, still busy with them. In these skirmishes
as they marched, Fuchstat General of the Carinthians was slain, supposed for
his brave Armor to have been General of the field: 24 Horsemen of great name
being slain also (and their Guidon taken) 3 being Noble men. In another place
was a most cruel skirmish with the Saxon Horsemen, and those who followed their
Ensigns: above 36 worthy Captains, Lievtenants or Ancients being slain: and
Chuenricus a principal Captain taken, who died afterward in bonds: Likewise
the Austrian Horse, courageously resisting a while, were overthrown: 2 Noble
men being slain with others of great place and reputation: But the greatest
slaughter was of the Bohemians, by the breaking in of old Garrison Troops with
their Scimitars and iron Mazes. The Foot being sore gauled by Janissaries and
Archers of the Asapi (discharging on them in their march from a Woody Bank)
were on the other side so charged by Amurathes, troops of Bosna, that they were at
last broken, and slain without mercy. Lodronius was driven into a marsh, where,
after sore wounding, and almost fast in the mud, having done his utmost, by the
Turks fair entreaty, yielded himself, with 3 Companies, and were all saved; for
now the Turks seeking after spoil, hunted after them who dispersedly fled,
taking and leading away a great number for slaves.

Mahometes having thus obtained so great a Victory, almost without the blood of
his Soldiers, and taking the spoil, pitched his Tents in a little Meadow
cleansed of dead bodies: and after feasting with his Captains, he commanded the
chief prisoners, spoils, and Ensigns to be brought; and commending the
Captains that had done any good service, He rewarded the Soldiers, some with
Gold, some Silver, as they deserved; and diligently viewed all prisoners, not
common Soldiers, He caused every ones name and Office to be enrolled: giving
one reward or other to such as brought in the Heads, Ears, or Hands of
Christians with Rings upon them. Lodronius, being for his deadly wounds thought
unable to endure travel, was slain by his keepers, and his Head sent afterward
to Constantinople; for many (who were afterward ransomed) have reported, that
amongst the Prisoners, fair Ensigns, guilt Armor, etc. presented to Solomon;
Bachitius, Macer, and Lodronius their Heads were seen and known, in a silver
Basin: which after he had looked asquint upon, he sternly commanded all the
prisoners to be slain: but the Janissaries, interceding for them as valiant, and
to whom they had given their Faith, and might do him good service, he saved
many of them; but Cazzianzer fleeing to his own Castle, was of all men accused,
and commonly railed upon; so that it was reported, he durst nor show his face
for shame: Infamous Libels being sung in the Cities of Germany, of him and the
other runaway Captains: Whereat he was so grieved, that he requested Ferdinand,
safely to come to Court, to answer what could be laid against him; the King
receiving him there with doubtful countenance. Bnt his hearing being somewhat
protracted, and he the while (half doubtful whether to be quitted or condemned)
kept in safe custody; feigning himself sick, by degrees brake through a brick
Pavement under his bed, with his knife, and by his sheets escaped, Posthorses
being ready without the Castle. Not long after, he fled to the Turks: Mahometes
gladly received him and promising him the Government of Croatia, as a
tributarie King, if he would faithfully serve Solomon, and help him subdue the
Cities of Austria: after this agreement for his more credit, he dealt with
Sirenus a Croatian Noble; and his supposed dear Friend, to revolt with him,
assuring him of Solymans kind dealing with them: who promised to go over with
him to the Turk, with a troop of his best and most trusty Horsemen, but changing
his purpose, after he had well feasted Cazzianzer at his House, he caused him
to be slain, sending his Head to Ferdinand: of whom he received in reward, his
Castle, with all his substance.

In the mean time, the Venetians provoked, resolved without delay to War upon
the Turk also, being animated by the Emperor and Pope Paul's who lately warned,
thought it more safe to keep the Turks busied farther off, than to suffer them
to be too much acquainted with the Ports of Italy or Cicilia: Wherefore, their
Ambassadors consulting all the following Winter; at last agreed (at Rome) the
Emperor to set forth 82 Galleys, the Venetians as many, and the Pope 36; in
all 200. The Venetians were to lend the Pope as many rigged Galleys as he would
furnish with men: and the Emperor and State of Genna to find shipping, to
transport the Land Forces and Victual. Auria was Charles his General: Grimmanus
a Patriarch, the Popes: Capellus for the Venetians: to whom was joined,
Justinianus, a chief Senator very expert in Sea-matters. Gonzaga Viceroy of
Sicily was to command the Landforces: and what ever was gotten from the Turks
in Greece, the Islands or Dalmatia; was to be the Venetians, who had been so
injured by them. Charles also promising the Confederates, to have what wheat
they would out of Sicily, for reasonable price, and without Custom.

Solomon understanding this, commanded Barbarussa to make ready his Fleet, and
do all harm he could to the Venetian's Islands: who with 130 Warlike Galleys
with the first of the Spring (in 1538) departed to Creete, where he unadvisedly
landed most of his men, to surprise the City Canea. For Grittus with a strong
Garrison, so vexed the Turks with great and small shot, and the sallying out of
two Italian Companies, that he (having lost many) retired in such haste, that
he left a 1000 Turks behind him, gone after booty; who were all slain by them
of Creet. Then attempting diverse other places, he was notably repulsed, with
the City of Candia, not daring to meddle; but sailing almost round, took little
Sicilia forsaken by the Inhabitants, which he firing, departed from Creet: for
he heard, that Capellus, (come to Corcyra) would soon come to relieve it.
Auria, came to Corcyra also, joining with Capellus. Barbarussa then lay in the
Bay of Ambracia, expecting the Christians entrance of its Strait, that he might
sink them, with his Ordnance placed on both sides; for Grimmanus had (a little
before) begun to besiege Prevesa upon the Promontorie of Actium, fast by that
strait, so battering the Castle, that had not the Turks from Aetolia come to
relieve it with a strong power he had probably taken it; wherefore, the
Patriarch, returned to Corcyra, having well viewed the Straits of that Bay, and
the Turks Fleet at Anchor therein: upon whose Relation, the great Commanders
consulted what course best to take, for their better proceeding: Gonzaga was of
opinion, Prevesa's Castle was with all their Force to be assaulted, which
taken, all passages might easily be taken from the enemies Fleet in the Bay, by
sinking a great ship in the strait's mouth: and moaring three great Galleons
full of Artillary; so that if Barbarussa would adventure forth, he must needs
be sunk. Auria replied, (...) Counsel was in show glorious; but most dangerous
to execute, both for the peril of landing Soldiers and Ordnance: it being to
be thought, the Aetolian Horse, would (as before) speedily come for relief,
whose force their Foot could scarce abide. And if the Fleet ( Autumn
approaching) should by force of Weather forsake that coast: whence should the
Landed men get any Victual in the enemie's Country? etc. Wherefore he thought
best, if the enemy could not be drawn out to Battle, to go into Naupactum- Bay,
taking that Town, not greatly fortified, so to ransack all Towns to the bottom
of Corynth Bay, which the Greeks in the Fleet said, might easily be done;
whereby it might happen, that Barbarussa, would for shame come out and join
Battle. This counsel was best liked of, and Auria came to Ambracia Bay, so
placing his Fleet (250 sail) that the Turks might easily number them. At which
sight Barbarussa (though courageous) was exceedingly moved: So that an Eunuch
(sent by Solomon as Barbarussa's Companion) seeing him to delay the time, did
uncivilly and proudly take him up, because he would not forthwith go out of the
Bay, and fight with the daring Christians: concluding, he should beware, that
he fearing a most honorable death (uncertain though the battle were lost) drew
not on himself the sure danger of a most shameful death by Solyman's
displeasure: Whereupon Barbarussa turning him to Salec, said, We ought, for
that I can see, adventure this battle although much disadvantagious, left happily
we perish by the complaints of this barking Demie-man; So weighing Anchor at
the time that Auria was on his way toward Naupactum, thinking he durst not come
out, who being come to Leucade, the enemies Fleet was deseryed from the top of
(...) great Gallion, making toward them, keeping close by the shore: the
crafty Turk, counting it less loss (if the worst should happen) to lose the
Galleys than the men. Auria somewhat troubled hereat, yet commanded the Fleet
to prepare to battle, and follow his Admiral Galley. The Turks Fleet was come
into the open (...) in such order with 150 Galleys, that Auria confessed
afterward, a more firm and orderly Fleet, could not have been brought out by
any: before which came Drogut an arch Pirate with about 20 nimble Galleys.
Capellus came in his long boat to Auria, requesting, that he with his Galleys
might give the first charge: whom Auria thanking and praising, requested him to
follow him, to whom he would give a seasonable sign what to do. The foremost
of the Turks Galleys was come to the great Galleon (the foremost of the
Christian Fleet) whereto were sent some Galleys from Salec, to help assayl it,
which shooting afar off, did no harm, nor Bondelmerius them; who suffered not a
piece to be discharged, expecting them to come nearer: who coming accordingly,
were by the great and small shot glad to stay and retire: Auria the while,
called back the Ships gone before, towing out his Galleon, and charging the
Captains of the Galleys to make ready upon signal given; yet was he not minded
to fight without his ships: which the enemy perceiving, sought by all means to
fight before the coming in of the tall ships: for it was so calm, that the
ships could not keep way with the Galleys and the smooth water offering an
opportunity for battle: so that Grimannus ctyed aloud to Auria, to give the
signal, etc. who fetching a great compass, held a strange course (hovering
about his ships) of purpose to draw the enemies Galleys within danger of his
great ships; but Barbarussa doubting to be circumvented with some finenesse,
stayed his course, expecting to what purpose that his strange course tended:
both his wings the while, had begun in diverse places to encounter with the
Christians: some still vainly assayling Bondelmerius: others had sore beaten
two ships with their Ordnance, wherein 2 Spanish Companies were embarked, many
men being slain: 2 other ships laden with victual were burnt, and some few men
saved by their shipboats, and by swimming to the next ships. In the close of
the evening, Salec took 2 Galleys straggling behind: After which, was taken the
ship of Figaroa a Spaniard, (though his men fought most valiantly for a time)
whose son taken with him (beautified with nature's gifts) was afterward
presented to Solomon, turning Turk, and growing in credit, obtaining his
Fathers liberty after 3 years miserable imprisonment, sending him home well
rewarded. Whilst both Fleets lay expecting their most advantage, a great
tempest os Thunder, Lightning and Rain, with a fresh Easterly gale, arose. The
Christians seeing the Turks hoysing up their small sayls, hoysed up both small
and great, sparing no Oar, to clear themselves of the enemy, and that
disorderly and in great haste: So that Auria, (called a second Neptune) was
that day accounted no Captain. Barbarussa is reported, to have pursued them a
while, till through the night's darkness, he stayed his course; for the
Admirals had put out their Lights in the poupes: whereat he laughing, said often
in Spanish, Auria has therefore put out his Light, The better in the dark to
hide his flight. Being come to Corcyra, they generally thought, by that sudden
storm, they had avoided a great danger. The Emperials (to excuse Auria) imputed
it to the Venetians; who would never take any Spaniards into their Galleys:
wherefore Auria doubting of them, refrained battle: and the rather, because
they had hoysed their sayls tied to their Yards with lines: which they cutting,
might fly which way they would. Shortly after, came Barbarussa to the Isle
Naxus, about 4 leagues from Corcyra Eastward braving the Christians: Gonzaga
grieving, requested the 3 great Commanders, for the Christian's Honor, to
repress their insolence; at last (the Venetians taking in some Spanish
Companies) they were to give battle in 4 squadrons; but it was so long
protracted, that Barbarussa fearing Tempests, returned about October. 7. into the
Bay of Ambracia: After which, the Generals went to befiege Newcastle, a strong
Turkish Town in the Bay of Sinus Rizonicus: the people were Dalmatians; Epirots
who had renounced their Religion, and some Turks: which they soon won, with a
great prey, and a number of captives: and 3 days after the Castle was also
yielded, the Turks covenanting in vain to depart with life and liberty.

This Town (for all the Covenants of the League) was reserved for the Emperor:
and Sarmentus with 4000 old Spanish Souldlers left in Garrison: Capellus urging
in vain the Venetians right: Wherefore the grieved Senate (now assured of an
ill neighbor to their Town Castrum) decreed to sue to Solomon for peace: which
they easily obtained a little while, by Grittus their Duke's son, and Ryncus
the French Ambassador, who told the Bassaes, that the Venetians League with
Charles, was made without most of the Senates consent.

Barbarussa putting to sea to relieve Newcastle, many of his Galleys were by a
Tempest, cast away on the Acroceraunian Rocks: 20000 men being reported to be
lost. Capellus would have persuaded Auria to pursue Barbarussa so distressed:
which, Gonzaga well liked, to recompense the former disgrace; but Auria not
liking the matter, presently hoysed sail for Italy, leaving Capellus in such a
rage, that he detested himself for submitting to another man, wishing the
Captains present, never to be subject to a'stranger, etc. But Auria referring
all he said, and did, to the Emperor's profit, so far, that Ursinus (then
serving the Venetian) merrily said, Auria had done nothing, but politiquly to
set the Venetians and Turks together by the ears: opening a gate for a long
War, etc. without his losing one Galley; for many thought that would sort to
Charls's great good: when the Venetians, spent with long and chargable wars,
should be stripped by force, or wrung by necessity, from Lands and Territories.

Solomon grieved, determined to besiege Newcastle again by sea and land,
caufing also Nauplium and Epidaurus in Peloponnesus ( Venetian. Cities) to be
besieged; yet he took singular pleasure, that Barbarussa (the worst fu. nished)
had driven the great Christian Fleet out of the sea. Wherefore at Spring, 1539.
Barbarussa repaired his Fleet, notably furnishing it, and manning his Galleys
most with select Soldiers; and, Summer well come on, He came to Rizonicus Bay;
when Ulames Governor of Bosna, appeared with his Forces on the Mountains, as
he had in charge. Barbarussa sent before him Dragut and Corsetus with 30
Galliots who landing their men at Castronovum or Newcastle, were encountered by
Sarmentus, and forced to their Galliots, many being slain and taken: After
which, came Barbarussa with 60 Galleys, and 3 tall ships, which carried all
warlike provisions: spending 3 days in landing his Ordnance, and casting up
Trenches, done but by night, for the Town-shot, which slew in that space about
1000 Turks: Agis Hariadexus, as it were a King at Taiorea in Africa, being one,
to Barbarussas's great grief: who gave a fourth part of his 54 battering pieces
to Ulames on the North side, himself bat ering the East side in 3 places; and
Salec from sea battering another part. Sarmentus thus assailed, did what he
could to repair the breaches: the Turks the while taking a Tower, whence
(having displayed their Ensigns) they sore troubled the Spaniards: Ulames also
had made a breach, and was ready to enter. Whereupon Sarmentus commanded the
hurt Soldiers to get into the Castle below, and the rest with him to take the
Marketplace: where the Turks (breaking in) made a most bloody fight: the
Spaniards being almost every man slain. Sarmentus (wounded in the face with 3
arrows, and wearied) seeing Fria a Captain ready to flee, sharply reproving
him, caught him by the hand, making him tarry, till, both slain, many valiant
Captains were there lost. Arius with the wounded Soldiers in the Castle, now
yielded: whose lives Barbarussa (as he promised) spared, but carried them into
captivity; and desirous to send Sarmentus's Head to Solomon, he offered money
and liberty for his body, but it could not be known among so many dead heaps.
Barbarussa proud of this Victory, wrote threats to Bembus a Venetian Senator,
Governor of Cattarus in the bottom of that Bay, to deliver the City, else he
would assault it. Bembus answered, in so doing, he should violate the late
League, and that he should find him ready to repel his Forces: He displeased,
sent some Galleys, discharging great pieces at Cattarus, as if come to besiege
it: Bembus discharging as many more at them, showed his men on the Walls;
whereupon Barbarussa returned to Castronovum, and (appeased with Presents from
Bembus) he departed out of the Bay.

The long wars between the Emperor and French King were now well pacified, and
such show of Friendship betwixt them, that most men thought they would (as one)
go against the Turk: which opinion (not wholly believed by the wiser sort) this
also confirmed, that Vastius and Hanebald (2 of their most famous Captains)
were sent Ambassadors to draw the Venetians into the confederation of that
War: who gallantly coming to Venice, were by Duke Laudus and the State,
magnificently received, the people flocking together to behold them, especially
Vastius with his tall and comely person. They having audience in the Senate,
Vastius arising from the Dukes side, made an oration, showing, That by Gods
great Providence, two of the mightiest Kings of Europe, having had long mortal
wars, were (being touched with zeal of Religion) become great friends, to
revenge so many calamities received from the Infidel: that they were sent to
kindle in them the like zeal, who being of such power at sea, were wished for
(of all other) as their Confederates in that sacred war, and hoped Victory. As
for Land Forces, unto those lately brought into the field at Vienna, should be
joined all the horse and Infantry of France and all the forces of Sigismund
King of Polonia. Wherefore the Victorious Emperor, and most Christian King
Francis did most instantly request them to enter into the like godly
cogitations, etc. For it might worthily seem a most shameful thing unto them to
have renewed their League, etc. Neither did it beseem that most wealthy State,
to be terrified, with any charges, from what was good and right; for by the
profit of one sea or land-Victory, they should to their incomparable praise
recompense all former losses.

The Duke answered in the name of the State; Never any thing happened to them
more honorable, or more desirable, than the hope of such a peace, wholesome to
the endangered Venetian State, and wondrously to be desired of all Christian
Princes; if those two (most mighty) would sincerely, religiously, and unitedly
resolve upon that sacred War: for then would the Venetians not be wanting, etc.
but end their League with the Turk: wherefore it was to be requested of the
Almighty God, that they would speedily and seriously fulfill that hope of Peace,
which they had in show promised.

Few days after, some select Senators sitting in Council, calling the
Ambassadors, asked them, if they knew any thing of the Capitulation of that
League: and whether they thought, Charles in regard thereof, would give Francis
his son the Dukedom of Millane, as was reported? Hanebald was silent: Vastius
said, He knew no more but that they had agreed betwixt themselves, and that the
Emperor's desired peace, to help the afflicted etc. could not be effected
without yielding in many things to the requests of the French King, etc. The
Nobility and Authority of this Embassage, more moved the Senate, than, he
former Ambassadors, Mendoza a Spaniard and Pellicerius a Frenchman, then
present; yet they much suspected it, because containing no certain resolution,
etc. yet all seemed to rest in this point, that the Venetians in hope of this
League, should neglect the renewing of lastyears League with Solomon, now
almost expired. On which uncertainty the grave Senators thought it too
dangerous to depend: yet the Senate was wonderfully divided. Some inveighed
against the renewing of that shameful League with the Infidels, urging with
many reasons the Christian Confederation: Others of deeper reach, considering
their exceeding harms by falling out with the Turk, and suspecting the
Emperors drift, with the great dearth then in the City; not to be relieved but
out of Macedonia and Greece: Charles having then imposed a Custom on all Corn
(coming out of Sicily) amounting to the price of the Corn and freight: which
mischiefs, they said, were to be prevented by renewing of the league: They
speut almost whole Winter-nights in the Court, consulting what best to do, but
all there said, or decreed, was made known; not only to the Ambassadors, but
in Provinces far off, never before in that State known. Foscarus, an old
Senator perceiving it, said, The State was betrayed by multitude and
corruption of Voices, and must shortly perish, if not speedily committed to
some few (for there were almost 200 Voices) reducing them to 50, who were
holden for men of greatest gravity and secrecy; but Foscarus, soon after fell
into such hatred, that he was by the Voices of the multitude thrust out of
Council himself, and kept a great while from all City-preferments: which
disgrace turned afterward to his great honor and credit (as one foreseeing
much) when they were found out and condemned, who had traitorously revealed the
secrets of the State.

The result was, That they doubting of the union of Charles and Francis, yet
expecting the event, they sent two Ambassadors to them to discover their
designs, and a third Badoerius, a wise man to Solomon, to prevent the fame of
the distrust of their agreement, and to spare no cost to save Nauplium and
Epidaurus, which he required of them before he would grant a peace: And if it
could not be obtained, to conclude a peace on any conditions: which the
Decemviri thought to be most expedient; yet gave him secret instructions for
yielding up the Cities, fearing the force and tumult of the multitude; for if
they had sought for peace too late, Solomon would have increased his insatiable
desire, not granting peace except they (low and forsaken) would deliver the
Islands Cephalenia, Zante and Corcyra, as grievous as the destruction of Venice
it self. So Vastius and Hanebald, coming to hinder the League, wrought no more
by their great diligence, than for the Venetians foreseeing the danger, to
hasten to conclude the same: and undoubtedly Hanebald was sent but for fashion,
and secretly, by Pellicerius, persuaded them to hasten the peace with Solomon:
which Badoerius carefully soliciting, and loath to yield the Cities, offered
Solomon a great sum instead of them: who threatningly took him up as a
shameless dissembler: protesting, he would never grant him peace without it,
rehearsing the most secret points of his Embassage, which Badoerius little
thought he had known: wherefore (he also doubting of his life) accepted of
peace, yielding those Peloponesian Cities, and with them 2 Cities of Dalmatia,
to the Senates great grief. The common people thinking he of himself had done
it, were so enraged at him, that with much ado he was saved from exile, and his
goods from confiscating, though the Traitors who had discovered the secrets
were known: These were Leonius a Senator and Cabatius Secretary to the
Decemviri (who fled into France) and Valerius a Senatour's base son, the
disperser of the Turks money: who with his accomplices were hanged in the
Marketplace. About which time, in 1540. John King of Hungaria died, after
which great wars ensued, and the subvertion of that flourishing Kingdom; for
Ferdinand and John had made a League profitable to them both, and most welcome
to the Hungarians, who divided into factions, yet enjoyed their Estates hereby,
the strong Holds being kept by them who possessed them at the making of the
peace: in the Capitulations whereof, Ferdinand was thenceforth to call John a
King, who before called him but the Vayuod; also if John died, Ferdinand should
succeed him in the whole Kingdom, which diverse of the Nobles subscribed to:
which condition was kept very secret for fear of Solomon, who accounted of that
Kingdom as of his own. This matter is reported, to have been revealed by Lascus
unto Solomon, to bring John into hatred. Whereupon Solomon exceedingly angry,
called John unthankful Churl, saying to Lutzis Bassa: How unworthily do these
two Christian Kings wear their Crowns? etc. who are not afraid for shame, or
fear of God, for profit, to falsify their Faith; but John greatly afraid, did
by Friends and Presents pacify Solomon, laying the blame upon Ferdinand, as
better able to bear it. Not long after, John having set all in good order, and
fortified Buda, being far in years, at the earnest request of most of his
Nobility and other Friends, married Isabel Sigismund's Daughter of Polonia,
begotten of the Lady Bonasfortia Daughter to Galeasias Duke of Millane: which
Solomon liked well of, having often condemned his single life; but Ferdinand
disliked it, foreseeking if he should have a son, himself should be rejected as
a Stranger. Isabel soon conceived with child, and was very big: when John was
forced personally to go against Maylat and Balas, Governors of Transylvania:
Maylat seeking to make himself King. But Solomon deresting his arrogance, and
hating him for the death of Grittus and the Turks then slain, wished John to be
more circumspect, whom he trusted with such a Country; So Maylat fearing to be
thrust quite out of Government by John, thought best to raise up all the
Province into Rebellion, taking part with Ferdinand, who secretly furthered it
to the utmost: (for these two Kings in heart envied each other). John then
exacting (chiefly of the Transilvanians) a great sum to pay the Turk his two
years Tribute, was a fit occasion to raise the people: to appease which
dangerous troubles, John sent a great power into Transylvania, following after
in his Chariot, not well recovered of his sickness. The Noble men entering it in
two places, the tumult was by force and policy well pacified, and some chief
offenders executed: Maylat retiring with all his wealth, into strong Fogaras,
which they shortly after, hardly besieged: John himself laying sick of an Ague
at Sibynium about a mile from Fogaras (into which he relapsed through too much
care and pains in traveling in that hot season). News was brought (the while)
that his Queen was delivered of a son: which once bruited, the Hungarians as
overjoyed, came to the Court, discharging their pieces in triumph, with all
signs of joy possible: the Noblemen came from the Camp to rejoice with the
King, and all the Army was filled with gladness: and a royal Feast was
prepared, which they would have the King honor with his presence (though
unwilling) as but a little recovered; yet he yielding to their importunity, he
forgot himself, eating and drinking more liberally, than was for the health of
his weak Body: whereby his Feavour was renewed; Wherefore feeling his end draw
fast on, he appointed his son his Heir, committing his Tuition to George Bishop
of Veradium and Peter Vicche his nigh kinsman, requesting the nobles to prefer
his son before a Stranger; saying, Solomon would surely protect the Kingdom and
his Son, if they in time sending Presents, promised he should reign as his
Tributary; so presently after dying.

This King, besides his vigilant, courteous, gentle and bountiful Nature and
Learning, used often to say, that the love of valiant men got by bounty and
courtesy was the best Treasures of a Prince: for that the thankful did often in
some worthy service, fully repay what had been bestowed: the unthankful
shamefully bearing the witness of another Virtue. His death was concealed till
the Nobles had agreed with Maylat to take the oath of Allegiance to the King
and his Son, and to enjoy his former Government.

Then they decreed in Council to send the appointed Embassage to Solomon: so
Exechius Bishop of QuinqueEcclesiae, and Verbetius the aged Chancellor, were
dispatched with ten curious wrought Bowls of Gold, 600 of Silver-guilt, and
engraven: 50 pieces of Purple silk and gold-cloath, and 30 pound of coined
Gold, as two years tribute, who came to Constantinople.

The Kings dead body was the while with much heaviness, and most of the Army,
solemnly buried at Alba Regalis: After which the young child (was Christened
and called Steven, and Crowned with the Ancient Crown of King Steven, who first
erected that Kingdom; yet the Royal Dignity was given given to the Queen, so as
in all public Writings, etc. The Bishop was Treasurer, and commanded the
strong Holds: yet the Soldiers were at the devotion of Thuraccus: and Vicche
(as a middle man) was named High Constable.

This Bishop was born in Croatia, and brought up from his youth in the House of
King John, where Virtue and Industry never wanted relief. Having forsaken his
Monastic Prof ssion, as weary of its straitness; he still followed John
driven out of his Kingdom, winning such credit, etc. that he obtained the
Bishopric of Veradium after Sibbachus slain by Grittus's treachery: He was
such a notable man in his religious service, and otherwise, that John would
confess himself to reign by his special industry: and King Ferdinand would often
say, he envied at John for nothing he had, but for one hooded fellow, better
for defense of a Kingdom, than 10000 with Helmets on their heads. Taking on him
the tuition of the young King, he was busied in all weighty causes, civil and
martial: carefully laboring for the Hungarians concord in love and unity, and
that no tumult or rebellion should arise. But Ferdinand now thought it a fit
time to recover that so long desired Kingdom: being pricked forward by 7 men of
great account in Hungary, who having taken Ferdinand's part, lived in exile,
concluding their motives to him: What could be more dishonor to him, so great
a King and Emperor Elect, than by shameful delay, to forsake them, being noble
and valiant, who had followed his part, and were then ready with strong Troops,
to do him their best service.

The Germane Captains also persuaded him, who, as martial men, desired honor,
pay and prey. But Lascus (who in matters of Peace and War saw more than they)
was of a contrary opinion, telling Ferdinand plainly in a Speech, that the
Kingdom of Hungary was to be obtained rather by policy than force, by craving
it of Solomon, to hold it of him by tribute, as King John did: saying, that if
he should once join battle with the Turks, if the best did happen, etc. he
should have endless War with such an enemy, etc.

His Speech so moved Ferdinand, that though purposing to proceed, yet he
thought good to prove Solymans mind also: none being thought fitter for that
Embassage, than Lascus himself, who being furnished with all necessaries,
departed from Vienna, to Constantinople: yet Ferdinand withal, prepared for
Wars, trusting to the Emperor's Brother, and the coming over of the
Hungarians for present profit; but before open War, he sent the Count of
Salma to the Queen, to show her the Instruments of the last League betwixt her
late Husband and him, exhorting her to yield up the Kingdom, and not by delay
to hurt herself and Son; for Ferdinand offered to give the Child the Province
of Sepnsia, as was before agreed in the League, and to the Queen a great
Revenue, beside her Dowry; but if she would forget that League, he threatened,
Neither Charles his Brother, nor he, wanted force, etc.

The Count hardly obtained admittance to the Queens presence; for George and
Vicche mistrusting her courage, said, she was not to be spoken with, for
sorrow; and that they were of Authority to give him audience and answer: which
opinion of her weakness, She of an Heroical Spirit, took so in disgrace, that
she said, She would kill her self, if the Ambassadors were not suffered to come
into her Chamber, (dark and hung with black) she sitting on a low Pallet,
negligently attired, pale-coloured, yet then shedding no tears; yet her voice
and countenance such as might show her sorrow was nothing abated; for
contemning all dangers, she resolved for defense of her Sovereign, to call in
the Turks.

After the Counts admittance, and delivery of his Message, she answered, Such
was the fortune of her Sex and years, and griess of body and mind, that she
could neither take nor give counsel: wherefore she requested a convenient time
to ask Counsel of her Father Sigismund, to whose just judgment she would
stand, as she thought the Nobility would also; but if they would needs
forthwith make War upon her, she said, the Emperor and Ferdinand should win
no great honor to oppugn a Widow consumed with tears, and a young Child yet
crying in his Cradle.

The Count returning, told Ferdinand, he had heard and seen, that the Queen was
wholly in the power of the Bishop, etc. the rest shifted among them the honors
and preferments of the Realm, etc. wherefore all the hope was in speedy War,
the Queen (with her Son) to be driven out of Buda, before they could take
Arms, or well advise what to do: She delaying but to make her self stronger,
and the while, to call in the Turk.

Ferdinand, furnished with money from Charles, soon raised a great Army, which
he sent down Danubius to Strigonium, always faithful to him. Velsius a Noble
Rhetian was General: who to open first, the way to Buda, after nine days
siege, took Vicegrade, (but not the Castle) with the loss of about two hundred
men. Then passing Danubius, he took Pesth, forsaken by the enemy: also the City
Vacia, without loss: whence crossing the River, he came before Buda, to
terrify the Citizens, and discover what he could, the Queens purpose, where
Perenus, Rascaius, and Francopanes, Bishop of Agria, revolted to Ferdinand: the
Bishop was reputed to go upon mere conscience: yet George challenged him by
Letters, in hope to be made a Cardinal.

Velsius lay as if he would rather besiege than assault the City. the Germans
fetching in great booty round about, burning and carrying away prisoners:
wherefore the Hungarians fell often together by the ears, with them; they of
Buda also, with their Troops, skirmished with them, if they did but stir out of
the Camp, well defending the Villages; for Thuraccus had taken into the City, a
multitude of light Horsemen.

Balthazar Pamphilus coming to the Gates, desired the Warders to give him leave
to talk with his old Friend Thuraccus, and confer with him concerning the good
of the State, which the General granting, he was let in with his Troop: and
soon returning to the Camp, he reported, that viewing the strength of the City,
he perceived, it was not to be taken without greater power, and a better season
of the year. Wherefore Velsius, doubtful of the Hungarian his fidelity, in
anger bid him void the Camp: who without his leave, had private conference with
the enemy, and discouraging the Army.

Wherefore Velsius returned to Vicegrade, taking the Castle (wherein the
ancient Crown was kept) with less loss than he had the lower Town. Ere long,
he marching to Alba Regalis through Perenus, it was delivered him garrisoning
it for Ferdinand.

Then he retired to Strigonium; and the rather, because the rough Germans and
Hungarians could not agree together; so that Velfius parting them, was wounded
in the Thigh, and Perenus hurt with a stone: Winter was also come far on, and
the Soldiers crying out for pay.

Wherefore he also sick of the stone, billited his men that Winter, about the
Country, having new fortified Pesth; because 'twas reported, the Turks on
their frontiers were preparing to aid Buda.

While Ferdinand was levying his forces, the Queen had craved aid of the Turk's
bordering-Lievtenants: who answered, they might in no case, without express
Command from Solomon, depart from their charges: besides, Mahometes was
overcome by rewards from Lascus (in his passage) not to stir: wherefore she
certified Solomon, what danger they were in, craving his speedy aid.

Lascus falling sick by the way, sent his Physician before, to the great
Bassaes, chiefly to Lutzis, by whom he hoped to obtain his desire: but in vain;
for Solomon, besides defending his own right, thought it would redound to his
great profit and glory, if he undertook the protection of the Widow and
Fatherless Child in so great distress: wherefore he said to the Ambassadors,
that to declare his constancy, inseparable from his bounty, he would take such
course, that the Germans should not long rejoice of the Wars begun: and in
token of friendship, gave them a royal Robe, a Buckler with a curious Bosse, a
Horsemans Mace, with a golden handle, and a Scimiter with a Scabbard richly set
with Stones, writing to Ustref and Mahometes, speedily to aid the Queen: who,
if harmed through their cefault, it should cost them their heads.

The Ambassadors were scarce gone, when Lascus came to Constantinople: whose
success he understanding, yet he proceeded in his business, etc.

But when he often mentioned the Emperor, as if he would aid his Brother with
all the power of Germany, Solomon was so moved, that he was presently
imprisoned: young Rustan Bassa especially, chiding him as worthy of death, for
offending by his liberal speech, so courteous a Prince, and as it were, mocking
the King of Kings, requiring friendship, while his Master most impudently
warred in Hungary.

Ustreff and Mahometes, assembling their dispersed forces, by shipping brought
them down Savus and Dravus into Danubius; (for it is hard to perform any great
matter by War in Hungary, without the help of a great Fleet); but Danubius
was then so frozen on both sides, that the middle was scarce open: so that the
Turks not daring to return, were enforced to abide the Winters incredible
hardness in their Tents, to show their readiness: their most dear Horses
starving for cold, and want of meat.

The Spring coming on (in the year of Christ 1541) they entered Hungary: with
whom, Thuraccus the Queens General, joined also: the Queen, sending presents to
the Turks Generals, victualling the Camp, and furnishing them with Ordnance,
for besieging of Cities holden by Ferdinand: who took Vacia, but badly
defended, putting many to the Sword, and burning the City: thence removing to
Pesth, a Hungarian and a German, so vallantly defended the City, (and the Turks
not well relieved with Victual) that they passing Danubius, and restoring the
Ordnance, returned home; but in their retiring the Hungarians, led by Gnarus,
slew many, Achomates one of their best Captains being one.

The Turks gone, Ferdinand, persuading the Emperor not to give over the War so
fortunately begun, the late supplies for Velsius, were sent into Hungary, under
Lord Regendorffe; then gone as far as Possonium, to relieve Pesth: unto whom
Velsius gave place, who joining with the old Army, marched to Buda, besieging
it.

Upon a great Hill called Gerard's Mount (whose middle was equal with the top
of the Castle over against it (a great Valley and deep Ditch laying betwixt)
Regendorffe planted his Battery, so shaking a new Tower thereof, that it was
thought it would fall: if it had, yet supposed dangerous to assault it, having
a treble Wall; but he sparing the sumptuous Turrets and Galleries of the King's
Palace therein, sent to the Queen: wishing her to break (...) sunder the
Bishops Fetters, and accept of Ferdinands offer: ready to bestow on her, a
goodly Seigniory, honorably to live and bring up her Son in safety: which if
she as a simple Woman, and ignorant of her own danger, should refuse, he would
beat down the Palace about her ears.

The Bishop answered in her behalf, she was not such a fool, to exchange the
Kingdom of Hungary, for the principality of Sepusia: scornfully answering him,
as a very doting and mad old man, etc. And above all, requesting him of private
courtesy, to discharge his Pieces with a little less noise, lest his Sow at
home, great with Pig, terrified, should farrow before her time, to the great
grief of his Guests; for he was of a sharp and taunting spirit: so contemning
the Germans, that two being taken burning Houses in the Kings Orchard, he
hanged two Hoggs on the Gallows with them.

Ere long, Regendorffe removed to a place called the JEWS GRAVES, near Jews
Gate: the Bishop quipping him now, as a proper wise man: who had pitched his
Tents in a most fit place, among the dead, etc.

But he battering the Walls in two places, a great part thereof was beaten
down; another part overcharged with Earth (cast up within side, for
strengthening it) then fell down also, to the exceeding dismaying of them in
the City: which opportunity, Regendorffe let slip, either (through the smoke
and dust) not well aware, or doing all things leasurely and suspiciously, and
the Germans not so easily brought to a sudden assault, as Spaniards, Italians
and French; so that it was deferred, (night coming fast on) till the next
morning: the Budians the while, with incredible diligence, rating a rampire
instead thereof.

In the morning they fiercely assaulted it, so that Fotiscus, with some
Companies, entering a shattered adjoining House, had almost recovered the top
of the Rampire; but they of Buda, wondrously withstanding (the Bishop
encouraging and fighting amongst them) the Germans were forced to retire, above
800 men being lost: Perenus being also repulsed, (but with less loss) at the
breach at the Gate Sabatina.

Then he began to undermine the City; but, by countermines, was disappointed:
yet, the common people in the City, pinched with hunger, mutinously cried out,
'twas time to yield, and end those common miseries; but the Bishop showing but
himself in the Marketplace, as if he would have preached, could turn the
peevish people which way he pleased.

After this, the City had almost by the treason of one Bornemissa a Lawyer been
lost; who hating the Bishop, for taking part with a Banckrupt Jew against him,
promised Revalius the Enemies Marshal, to open a blind Postern in St. Mary's
yard, whereby he might enter.

Regendorffe so liked thereof, that he thought not good to use the service of
the Hungarians therein: against the request of Bornemissa, that many guiltless
people might not be slaughtered by the Germans; but he hoping by excluding the
Hungarians to have all the glory of the Victory to himself, made as if he would
use the Hungarians, glosing with Revalius, whose Son he took as a pledge.

About midnight, he sent four Select Companies of Germans, with great silence
to the Postern: his Son Condi standing ready to enter with a strong Troop,
when the Germans let in, should break open the great Gate.

Bornemissa opening the Postern, had silently received in most of them; but
still asking softly for Revalius, and they answering in the German Tongue, he
was so surprised with fear, that as amazed, he forgot to conduct the Germans:
who knew not which way first to go, stealing on softly for fear of treason,
still asking for their Guide; but by their matches and noise of Armor, being
(...) yed by the Watch: they not giving the Word, an Alarm was raised, who
ignorant of the way, and now chased with their own fear, ran back to the
Postern in such haste, that they sadly wrung each other in getting out. And the
passage being much let by the Weapons of the first, cast acrosse the way to
run the lighter.

Bacianus who had charge of the watch, first set upon them: then Vicche from
the Market place came thither, with a strong company: many of the valiantest
Germans were slain or taken, some being Bornemissa's Friends (himself being got
out with the foremost) whom the Bishop by torture wrung the plot out of, then
executing them; Revalius Bornemissa lamenting, that besides the name of a
Traitor, he had lost all and undone his Friends and Kindred. Regendorff
(condemned even of the common Soldiers for his foolish pride, etc.) from that
time set him down (by long siege) to win the City.

Solomon hearing of the Queen's distress in Hungaria, consulted with his
Bassaes of the purposes and power of his enemies, there and elsewhere: and sent
first, Solomon Bassa to Babylon, to defend Mesopotamia, and his Frontiers along
Tygris against Tamas the Persian King: sending Mahometes Bassa into Hungaria:
and after him Ustreff Bassa with another Army, to stay at Belgrade, in
readiness to aid Mahometes upon occasion: committing his Navy to Barbarussa,
for defense of Greece and Epirus against Auria: who a little before had driven
the Turks and Moors out of 5 Cities, and all along the Coast of Africa called
Mahomedia, except Leptis, now called Africa, causing those Cities to submit to
Muleasses of Tunis. And because Maylat the Vayuod took part with Ferdinand, he
sent against him, Achomates Governor of Nicopolis, commanding Peter of
Moldavia, Prince of Vallachia to aid him: who came with 30000 Horsemen. Himself
also doubting more of the Christian Princes purposes, than he needed, raised a
third Army, about Hadrianople, to aid Mahometes and Ustreff, keeping with him
his son in law, Rustan made 1 of his 4 great Bassaes, having thrust out
Luftibeius or Lutzis as aforesaid, but at this time done. Mahometes entering
Hungaria about the midst of June, 1541. took along with him the other
Mahometes, Governor of Belgrade, joining with him, the power of Bosna under
Ulemas the Persian, for old Ustreff was lately dead. The Christians now
consulted, whether to continue. the siege, or go meet them and join battle; but
Regendorff prevailed for continuing the siege, though diverse persuaded him to
cross the River to Pesth, or retire to Vicegrade or Strigonium: Wherefore
removing, he encamped on the further side of the City at the foot of Gerrard's
Mount, where the Hill leaves a fair Plain toward the East, that the Turks,
whom he knew would not go far from their Fleet and the river, should be forced
to pass by his great Ordnance, aptly placed on the Front of his Trenches. On
the right hand, on a small rising ground, he placed the lesser Camp of
Hungarians: making also a bridge from his Camp, into a small Island in the
River, and, with a Fort, commanded both the River and Plain; to beat their
Fleet coming up, and themselves marching in the Plain. The Turks being come
nigh the City, Valentinus Thuraccus met them with 2000 Horse, instructing them,
what the Christians did, what their strength, and the most conveniently to
encamp. Wherefore, the Bassa boldly came within half a Mile of the Christian
Camp; strongly intrenching himself round: but Mahometes of Belgrade politiquely
took the higher ground next the Hungarians Tents. The Christian Fleet had 24
Galleots, about 80 small Pinnaces, and little less than 100 ships of burden,
and other small boats; the Turks Fleetnot thought above half so great. Near the
little Island aforesaid, had the Turks taken the Island Sepelia, over against
their own Camp, where casting up a great Bulwark, they thence shot at the Fort,
in the little Island, and at their vessels in the River as the Christians did
at them. Cepelia, lays about 40 miles long in Danubius full of Villages: so
commodiously, that if Regendorff had at first fortified it, as he was
persuaded, the Turks could not have encamped in the Plain, to their great
disadvantage; but he was not willing to divide his Forces, till he had some new
supply from Ferdinand. The Armies thus laying, there were light skirmishes
every day, and sometime one brave man challenging forth another hand to hand:
which was so pleasant to behold, that both Armies many times would forbear to
shoot to see those prove their manhood on each other with spears and swords
only. In which skirmishes the Germans were often put to the worst, by reason of
their heavy Horses, fitter for a set-battel: but the Hungarians acquainted with
the Turks manner of fight, and better Armed, did foyl them, though more in
number. Noble Rayschachius (a German) his valiant son, going forth, unknown to
his Father, bare himself so galiantly against the enemy in his Father's and
Armie's sight, that he was highly commended (chiefly of his Father); yet was he
encompassed and slain. Rayschachius moved with his death, said to the other
Captains: This worthy Gentleman, whoever he be, deserves eternal commendation,
and to be most honorably buried by the whole Army. As the other Captains were
approving his speech, the dead body was presented to the Father, all there
present shedding tears: but Rayschachius was so struck at heart, that standing
a while speechless, with his eyes set, he suddenly fell down dead: After
which, the General commanded none on pain of death, to skirmish without leave,
hanging one or two for so doing. So that the enemy would sometimes brave them,
on the top of their own Trenches.

Many days having now passed: the Turks and Budians, daily increased in
strength and courage: when on the other side, the contrary. Only the often
Letters of Ferdinand, and the firm opinion, that Charles would not in so great
danger, fail to aid his brother, and the General's firm resolution, upheld
their fainting minds. The Turks from the higher ground, and out of Cepelia,
perceiving the Germans in the little Island as careless, agreed, at once to
assayl diverse of their Forts: landing at break of day, so closely and suddenly,
that they slew 600, ere well awake or armed: the rest fleeing to the Camp in
such haste, that many fell beside the bridge and were drowned. The whole Camp
was wondrously troubled, the Turks with hideous cries raising the Alarm in
diverse places at once; yet Herbestulfe the Camp master persuading some
German-companies and Soldiers in the Fleet, not to suffer the Ensigns and
Ordnance to be so shamefully carried away: and Marius then landing diverse
Companies in the Island, they drove the Turks again to their boats, receiving
no less loss themselves, than had the Germans before; It was said, the Turks
Fleet might have been quite overthrown, if the Christians had courageously
pursued them and landded with them; yet 4 Turks Pinnaces were sunk, 3 taken,
and many Turks slain, or drowned in the River. Shortly after, the Turks did so
assayl the Camp on every side, that they left them almost no time of rest; so
that they almost despaired long to defend it; for the Bassa at Belgrade, taking
to him the sick and wounded, sent fresh men still, in their stead: and
Valentinus with Harquebusse Janissaries had driven Perenus with the Hungarian
Horse out of the upper Camp, so that the nether Camp was hardly beset; yet the
great Artillary from Pesth much troubled Valentinus, assayling it on that side.
Some say, Valentinus did privately wish Perenus speedily to provide for himself
and his Hungarians: for there was a great Beast coming, which (at one morsel)
would devour them all: This was Solomon coming in haste with a great Army:
Wherefore Perenus told Regendorff. Except they would presently depart with the
Army, he would in time shift for himself and Countrymen: at last they agreed,
it was best, next night, to pass the River to Pesth only the General said, he
would not depart from Buda without Ferdinands command; so sending the Count of
Salma swiftly up the River to Vienna, to know his pleasure ( Perenus fretting
at their long stay) 'twas resolved, next night when the Moon was down, to pass
over in 4 Convoys: for 'twas not so easy to make a bridge over Danubius as was
supposed: which being almost planked, such a wind and tempest arose, and the
River was so rough, that the bridge was loosed and broken, many of its boats
being carried away with the streams force. The 2 first Convoys passed well
over; for though the Budians and Turks (seeing by day the Fleet drawing into
one place) might suspect, yet could they foresee nothing of their sudden
departure; but the vigilant eye was not long deceived, and the less, for that 2
Fugitives then discovered to the Bishop their flight: who presently certifying
the Bassaes thereof, they eame to assault the Christians in their Camp with a
horrible cry assayling their Trenches: The Germans began to quail, yet, with
the Bohemians, a while, notably resisted: All the Camp was filled with
confusion, every man at the Riverside striving to get aboard disorderly:
Regendorff's Authority (through the nights darkness, so great noise of people,
and Ordnance) being as nothing: who then lay in bed wounded in the shoulder by
a Faulkon-shot falling in his Tent (as he was writing Letters to Fordinand)
striking a chest in sunder. The FootCaptains envying at the Horsemen so well
escaped, faintly resisted the enemy: the upmost Tents were first taken, and the
German-Foot chased all over Gerrards Mount. They of Buda also entered the Camp
on the Cities side, burning the Tents, a little before forsaken, and the Bishop
firing a great stack of straw nigh the Rivers side, it gave such a light, that
one might plainly see over Danubius to the Walls of Pesth: whereby, their
flight by water, and confusion by land was discovered. Then was the Ordnance
from every place, discharged upon the Fleet: Cason the Turks Admiral with his
light-boats, setting on the ships crossing the River, taking diverse boats laden
with Soldiers, sinking others with his Ordnance. After the Janissaries brake
into the lower Camp: the Germans, fleeing over the bridge into the little
Island, were slain without mercy by the pursuers, many leaping into the River
and perishing: 300 sail of all sorts were mingled together, covering the River
as with a Bridge, but the Christian Fleet, clearing themselves, and beating the
Turks back with their Ordnance, got up to Comara. The other LandForces enduring
the same fortune in the Camp; the Bohemians died there in fight. Many were
slain or saved by the Budians, as they fell into the hands of a merciful or
merciless man. But the Sun rising, plainly discovered the slaughter and the
Victory. About 3000 taking a little Hill by Gerards Temple, stood on their
guard till above 2000 were slain: the rest yielding in hope of life, were
reserved for a grievous spectacle. Cason coming to the shore of Pesth, so
feared those escaped thither only with the cry of his Soldiers and noise of
the Artillery, that the Horsemen for haste to get out, were like to overrun
each other, leaving behind them whatever good thing they had; yet some
Hungarians stayed behind, rifling the Merchants shops: for Pesth was now become
a notable Mart-Town, as of more safety than other Cities; but Cason entering it,
slew some of those greedy Hungarians: sparing neither man woman or child,
except some few reserved for the Turks lust or slavish labor: Above 20000
Christians being one way or other reported to be slain in this War. There was
taken 36 great battering pieces; Fieldpieces 150, and wondrous store of Arms
and Ammunition and Victual. Regendorff was against his will carried aboard a
Pinnace by his Physician and Chamberlain, and so was conveyed to the Island
Comara; wherefore he shortly after, partly for his Wounds, but more through
grief, died in the Village Samarium. Solomon still doubting the coming of
Charles and Ferdinand to Buda, was coming in such haste, that he caused his
Janissaries to march as fast as his Horsemen: but hearing of the Victory he came
more leisurely to Buda, in August, encamping on the other side of the City (the
dead bodies laying yet unburied) and making one huge Camp of both Armies. He
especially commended the two Mahometes: making him of Belgrade General of all
his European Horse, the Victory being gotten chiefly by his means; rewarding
the other Captains as they deserved, and augmenting their pay. After which, he
commanded the prisoners about 800 to be brought forth, and led in long ropes
all along the raunged Army in derision, then to be slain by his young
Soldiers: sternly saying, they were worthy of such death who had waged war,
while entreating a peace. There was one Bavarian exceeding tall: whom (in
despite of the German Nation) he delivered to a little dwarf to be slain, his
head being scarce so high as the Captives knees, who being long mangled about
the legs with his little Scimitar fell down, and was with many feeble blows
hardly at last slain: others heartning the Dwarf on, to satisfy the eyes of
the disporting Princes. This done, Solomon sent Ambassadors with Presents to
the young King: 3 fair Horses with Golden-bridles, their trappings set with
precious stones: 3 Robes of cloth of Gold, and to the chief Nobles, rich Gowns
and Gold Chains: courteously requesting the Queen to send the young King
attended with his Nobility, into the Camp, and without all fear to hope that
all should go well both with her, and her son, and c. That Solomon would
always account of her as of his Daughter; but he came not to see her, as in
courtesy he desired, because, by ancient custom, the Othoman Kings were
forbidden to visit other men's Wives in their Houses, and c. The Queen answered
very doubtfully; but the Bishop persuading and instantly requesting her, not to
give the Turks occasion to suspect her distrust of them, by her delay; She sent
him in Princely swathing clothes in a rich Chariot with his Nurse, and certain
great Ladies, with almost all the Nobility, to whom Solomon had sent presents,
who was met on the way by Troops of the Turks brave Horsemen: and as he passed
in the Camp, orderly stood the Janissaries of Solymans guard: Being brought into
the Pavillion, Solomon looked on him familiarly, talking with the Nurse and
commanding his Sons, Selimus and Bajazet, begotten of Roxalana, to take him in
their arms and kiss him, in sure token of the love they would bear to him, whom
they were in time to have their Friend and Tributary: But Solomon, while the
Nobles were dining with the Bassaes, had commanded certain Companies under
color of seeing the City, to take the Gare Sabatina, and chief streets: which
was so quietly and cunningly done, that a wary watchman beholding the manner of
the Turks going to and fro, could scarce perceive how the gate was taken, till
it was too late. The Gate, Marketplace, and chief streets so finely taken: the
Captains of the Janissaries made Proclamations, That the Citizens should without
fear keep in their Houses, and forthwith to deliver all their Weapons: which
they did, receiving the Turks into their Houses, as their unwelcome guests; but
such was the severity of their Martial Discipline, that none was wronged by
them in word or deed. Solomon hearing of the City thus taken, sent the child
back unto the Queen; but the chief Nobles he retained with him, to wit, George
the Bishop: Vicche, Thuraccus, Verbetius the Chancellor, Urbanus Governor of
Buda; whose minds, this sudden and unexpected change troubled the more, because
the great Bassaes began to pick quarrels with them, and as it were to call them
to account for all they had done. The Queen fearing and grieving, by humble
Letters, requested Solomon not to forget the Faith given, and of late
confirmed; but to send back the Noble men, who for their fidelity and valor
had well deserved both of him and her: This she did by Rustemes Bassa, whom she
had loaded with gifts, sending him a fair Coronet of her own, of Orient Pearl,
and a goodly Jewel set with rich stones, a present for his wife, Solymans
Daughter. After which, Solomon consulted 4 days what order to take with that
Kingdom. Mahometes advised him, to carry the child and all the Nobles to
Constantinople; and to leave such a Governor in Buda, as might put the people
out of fear of servitude and bondage: yet by degrees to lay on them the Yoke of
the Turks Governmeut; but Rustemes (before corrupted) stood wholly upon terms
of Honor; saying, Nothing could be more dishonorable to so mighty a Monarch,
who had never blemished the glory of his Name, than after Victory, to break his
Faith with a weak Woman and silly Infant, whom he had taken upon him to defend;
but Mahometes of Belgrade then extraordinarily admitted into the Council among
the great Bassaes, disliked of both the former opinions, as too full of Lenity:
and being asked his opinion, delivered it in a mischievous speech: saying
toward the latter end thereof: Every year to take in hand so long and
laboursome an expedition of an Army of Horse, Foot, Artillery, and a Fleet of
Ships for defense of another man (as commonly we do) seems to be mere
madness: Neither do I think it to stand with the Majesty of the Othoman
Emperors, thus to be moved every year at the request of a puling Woman, crying
for help; except you think it more profitable and honorable to maintain a
defensive than an invasive War: wherefore I think it best to turn this Kingdom
(so often conquered and defended by Law of Arms) like thy Ancestors, into form
of a Province: the Queen I would have sent to her Father, and her son brought
up in thy Court, and instructed in our Religion: the Nobility I wish to be
slain; their Castles razed, and all their notablest Families to be carried away
into Asia: the multitude kept under with good Garrisons, to till the ground and
inhabit the Cities: so shall the Hungarians perceive themselves conquered, and
the Germans forbear coming into Hungary, unless they will hazard both Stiria
and Austria.

But Solomon, before he would resolve of so great a matter, entered Buda with
his two sons, Aug. 30. 1541. and in the Cathedral (before purified by his
Priest) offered the first Mahometan-sacrifice in Buda. Shortly after, he (for
his own security and Honor) as it were moderated their opinions, publishing a
Decree, That Buda should thenceforth be kept with a Garrison of Turks, and the
Kingdom turned into a Turkish Province; the Queen with her son forthwith to
depart and live in Lippa, a quiet and fertile Country beyond the River
Tybiscus, and near her Fathers borders: safely to be conducted thither by
Janissaries with all her wealth: Wherefore she and her son, with mourning and
tears (detesting inwardly his perfidious dealing) departed from Buda. The
Nobles went with her also, who though sorrowful for this unexpected change, yet
very glad of liberty and safety, whereof they had for 3 days despaired: only
Thuraccus was kept in safe custody, because he was a martial man; and much also
hated by the Turks, for the hard pursuit of Cason in Austria.

Ferdinand hearing of this shameful overthrow, and that Solomon was coming
toward Vienna, sent Velsius (who never liked of Buda siege) to Comara, to stay
their further flight, and gather together the dispersed Relics of the Army,
and to comfort the men with hope of new supplies. And somewhat to stay Solomon,
he sent Count Salma and Lithestaine Ambassadors with Presents and new
conditions of peace: The Presents were, a high standing Cup of Gold, curiously
set with rich stones: and a wondrous Globe of Silver, daily expressing the
passing of the Hours: the Planets motions, the change and full of the Moon,
the motion of the upper Orbs: and that exactly, by certain wheels and weights
within, devised and perfected by the most cunning Astronomers, for Maximilian
the Emperor.

They at their landing, were first received by Cason, and brought into a rich
Tent, the ground being covered with rich Carpets: to whom Rustan Bassa sent
such cheer as the Camp afforded, especially most excellent Wine; Next day the
Bassaes feasted them: not sitting with their legs under them on the ground, as
their manner was, but in Chairs at a Table; only Mahometes of Belgrade, an
extraordinary guest, sat down upon a Cushion beneath the Bassaes. Their cheer
was but Rice and Mutton, as if noting thereby the Christians excess: and the
Bassaes drink, fair water out of Danubius. After dinner, they were brought in
to Solomon, each of them led betwixt 2 Bassaes, holding them fast by the arms:
so to kiss his hand; yet has the Turkish Emperor sitting in his Throne, for
fear of violence, laying by him, a Target, Scimitar, Iron Mace, with Bow and
Arrows. The great Globe being brought in, filled Solomon and his Bassaes with
Admiration; for Solomon had curionsly studied Astronomy, and especially
Cosmography, as his leisure served.

The Ambassadors desired him to give the Kingdom of Hungary to Ferdinand
almost on the same conditions that Lascus had required it for him, paying him
such Tribute as John had done; promising to draw Charles into the same League;
so that he might then at pleasure, turn his Forces upon the Persian: and urging
Ferdinand's League with John, and so excusing him of the late war, they
concluded, Nothing could be to him more commendable, profitable or Honorable,
than to call such a King as Ferdinand, and also Emperor Elect, and brother of
the great Emperor, his Tributary. Solomon 2 days after, answered by Rustan,
that this was his resolute condition of peace: If Ferdinand would restore all
places before belonging to King Lewis, and for ever abstain from Hungary; and
for his often provocations, great travel and charges, he could be content to
impose an easy Tribute upon Austria. But if those conditions seemed too heavy,
he would cause by continual War, that such things as were taken from Hungary,
should be requited with the destruion of Austria. Though the Ambassadors were
much moved at the latter demand, yet they, to win some time, required a truce
till Ferdinand and the Emperor might be made acquainted with the matter: which
the Turk, winter coming fast on, would in no case grant. And being rewarded and
sent away, Solomon commanded Mahometes of Belgrade to spoil the borders of
Austria all along Danubius: Cason also General of Acanzii, he sent into
Moravia, but neither did any great harm: the Rivers rising, and abundance of
Rain falling. Solomon made one Solomon a Mohammedan Hungarian, Governor of
Buda: who by justice and courtesy (with Verbetius the Chancellor) should
endeavor to put the people in hope of long peace; which done, after about 20
days stay, because of the rain and cold, and fearing to be shut in with the
rising of the great Rivers, he determined to return: setting Lascus (in prison
at Belgrade) at liberty, who soon dyed of the Flux in Polonia, supposed to be
poisoned by the Turks, whose death the King himself much lamented.

Solomon being come to the River Dravus, it was told him that Maylat was taken
by the cunning of Peter of Moldavia, and that Transylvania was well pacified,
yielding to his obedience; whereof he was passing glad, for he hated Maylat for
Grittus and the Turks by him slain, and knew that the Transilvanians an
invincible people was by him stirred up. This Peter uniting with Achomates
against Maylat, they were 50000 Horse besides Foot, which (after the manner of
those Countries) were not many: Maylat finding himself too weak, and despairing
of aid from Ferdinand, fled again into Fogaras: where, as in a most strong
place, he had laid up his greatest substance and warlique provision, especially
the rich spoil taken from Grittus: Acho mates coming and perceiving, it was not
to be taken but with much labor and time, craftily sent a Messenger to him,
persuading him to yield to Solomon: choosing rather to be called his Friend
than his Enemy, etc. promising he would labor for him as his Friend; that he
might still enjoy the Government of Transylvania, paying him some small yearly
Tribute, as he had before requested, etc. saying, Solomon was coming with his
Victorious Army, who would with assured death revenge his vain hope of holding
out. Maylat foreseeing it better to make a certain peace, than to endure an
uncertain War, answered, He could be content to conclude a peace, so it were
not on any hard conditions, etc. Wherefore, he demanded Achomates's valiant son
in Hostage for his coming into the Camp: Achomates said, he had given him to
Solomon, and so had over him no power, but he promised him 4 of his best
Captains: which Maylat accepting, came with a gallant retinue, and was
honorably received.

The Parley was deferred till next day, that the Moldavian might take him, whom
he invited to a Banquet; about mid-dinner, Maylat (of a very proud and
choleric nature) was by some insolent speech (of purpose) so fretted, that
with his hand on his sword, he in a rage flung from the Table: the other guests
starting up also, took him fuming, and crying out, he was shamefully betrayed
(his followers being stripped of all): Incame Achomates the while, with deep
dissimulation sharply reproving the Moldavian: whereto he scornfully (as if in
contempt) answered, He had upon good cause taken Maylat prisoner, and would
safely keep him for Solomon, to whom it only belonged to judge; Ere long,
Fogaras was delivered with the Hostages, through fear or corruption.

This Town surrendered, almost all Transylvania was by Solomon given to the
young King; to whom all the people most willingly submitted, swearing
obedience, his Father having almost thirty years with justice and quietness
Governed that Province: honoring him, the Queen, and his two Tutours, laying
in Leppa, with many Presents:

At the same time, Charles the Emperor at the importunity of his Subjects of
Spain, greatly prepared for conquering of Algiers: whose Pirates so insested
all the Coast from Gades to the Pyrenean Mountains, that (all Merchandise set
apart) they were glad to keep continual watch and ward: wherefore though he
knew how hardly he was spoken of (for leaving his brother so hardly bestead)
yet he departed out of Germany into Italy: where, nigh Verona, he was met by
Farnesius his son in law, Vastius, and the Venetian Ambassadors, and brought
to Millane: where he was with great solemnity joyfully received, and, under a
Canopy of Gold, brought to the Palace, in a plain black Cloak and Cap,
mourning-wise; when as the vulgar expected him in his Royal Robes, and the
Imperial Crown on his Head: his heavy countenance presaging the woeful
overthrow the day before at Buda, not yet known in Italy: Thence departing to
Genua; he was advertised thereof from Ferdinand and of Solyman's coming;
Whereupon, Vastius and Auria persuaded him to defer his African expedition till
Spring: and with his present power to stay in Italy, making show of returning
to help his brother; and the while, to assure his State in Italy against the
French: but he answered them sitting in Council; If he should then stay in
Italy, 'twould be thought, he was for fear of the Turks fled out of Germany
etc. hoping that Algiers might be won before the seas should grow rough and
dangerous; which if so falling out, he would not much care what the French
could do. There was a new grudge between him and them about the death of Rinuo
the French Ambassador for certain years to Solomon, who returning to
Constantinople with new instructions from his Master, for confirming a further
League: he was belaid (by some old Spanish soldiers upon the River Padus) and
slain, together with Fregosius: or first tortured to get from him the secrets
of his Negotiation, and then slain: Vastius in purgation of his credit,
offering the combat to any of like quality that durst charge him with the
truth thereof; but many thought he was worthily served, who stirred up the
Turks against the Christians, discovering to them the Emperors designs; but
whether well or ill, Pope Paul 3d. meeting Charles at Luca, could not, or would
not determine. The Emperor there came thrice to talk with him, the Pope to him
once: who not prevailing with him, for the appeasing the troubles like to arise
betwixt him and the French King, persuaded him what he might, to employ those
Forces in defense of his Brother Ferdinand and Austria, if Solomon should
pursue his Victory; so prevailing little in the greatest public matters, he
took his leave, returning to Rome.

Charles the while, with some Italian Bands under Columna, and Spinula, and 6000
Germans came to the Port Lune, embarquing his Soldiers in Merchant-ships, and
35 Galleys; directing their course to the Islands Baleares; but were by a
sudden tempest brought in sight of Corsica; and after 2 days tossing to and
fro, the wind somewhat failing, they put into the Haven of Syracusa, now
Bonifacium. Then putting to sea again for those Islands, he met with a Tempest
from the West, more terrible than the first, diverse Galleys losing their Masts
and sayls, being glad with extreme labor and peril to get into a Harbor of
Minorca. Thence he passed over to Majorca, very glad that Gonzaga Viceroy of
Sicily was come with 150 Galleys and ships, bringing Victual enough for a long
war: Mendoza by reason of contrary winds, cut over directly with his Spanish
Fleet to Algiers: so the Emperor by Auria's persuasion, hoysed sail, and in
two days came thither, anchoring in order before the City. Two Algier-Pyrates,
not knowing of the Fleet, fell into the Bay ere they were aware: the bigger,
Cycada stemmed and sunk; the other with wondrous speed got into the Haven.
Mendoza having passed the Cape of Cassineus, saluted the Emperor with all his
Ordnance, giving knowledge the Spanish Fleet was not far behind: which were
above 100 tall Ship, and of smaller Vessels far more: besides, the Foot
embarked therein, were a great number of brave Horsemen: over whom the Duke of
Alba commanded. These ships could not double the Cape, as did Mendoza with his
Galleys, for it was a dead calm; but the billows went yet so high that the
Soldiers could not land, but they must be washed up to the middle: which the
Emperor thought not good to put them unto. He also stayed for the Spanish
ships, both that with united power he might more strongly assault the City, and
to commuicate the whole glory of the action with them, at whose request,
forwardness and greatest charge he undertook it: which did not only disturb an
assured Victory, but opened a way to all the ensuing calamities. The Emperor
sent a Messenger to Asan the Eunuch (born in Sardinia) and brought up from a
youth in the Mohammedan superstition by Barbarussa (whom he left to keep his
Kingdom in his absence) requiring him forthwith to deliver the City to Charles
the mighty Emperor, come in person to be revenged on those horrible Pirates:
which if he would do, the Turks should depart whither they would: the Moors to
abide with goods and Religion as formerly; himself to receive great rewards in
peace and war: so he would accept of that the fairest occasion to return again
to the worshipping of the true God, and to enjoy the favor of the Emperor,
and to revenge himself of Barbarussa's unnatural villainy on his person: who
answered, he thought him mad, that would follow his enemies Counsel, grinningly
asking him, Upon what hope the Emperor trusted to win the City? the Messenger
pointing to the Fleet, told him, That which thou see, etc. who scornfully
laughing, replied, And we with like force and valor will defend it, and make
this place famous for your overthrows here twice, the 3d. time most famous by
the Emperor's discomfiture: Its reported, there was an old Witch in Algiers,
who had foretold the shipwreck and miseries of Verra and Moncada: prefixing a
time, when the Christian Emperor, besieging the City, should receive a great
loss by Sea and Land: which Assan so fed and augmented, that he not only
encouraged his own men, but terrified the weaker sort of his enemies therewith,
they being on so dangerous a coast, nigh Winter. There was in Garrison but 800
Turks; the other multitude of natural Moors, and those born in Granado, scarce
made 5000: to whom was joined many rebellious fugitives, who fled thither out
of the Baleares; But the wild Numidians made up a great number, which should
molest the Christians in the open fields: Assan having allured the brutish
people of the Countries thereabouts to aid him, for rewards and hope of spoil:
proposing also pain of death to any who should but look out heavily, or speak a
word savouring of fear. The Emperor, after a convenient and soon landing of
his Soldiers with plenty of Boats, and a little resting of them, divided his
Army (which was about 20000 Footmen, besides Horsemen and other Volunteers) into
3 equal Battles: and 3 Fieldpieces to a Battle, to terrify the Numidian
Horsemen still ready to charge them, if upon advantage. He encamped nigh the
City between 2 deep Ditches, that none could well pass but by Bridge; and
fastby on the left hand, was a Hill, whence it seemed, the City might well be
battered. Algiers is like a Triangle, fast by the sea, having a Haven neither
great, nor safe from the North Wind: the Houses farther off, standing in seemly
order on the rising of a steep Hill, as it were by degrees, most beautiful to
behold. The Emperor was in great hope to win the City; and the rather, because
while he assaulted it on the East Side, his ships and galleys on the North,
might with Ordnance beat the enemy all along the wall.

Nigh the Hills-rising, lay the Spaniards in the midst of the Germans with the
Emperor: in the plain nighest the sea, the Italians. All that day, the
Ordnance was landing, and the Horses shipping: The Numidians from the Mountains
skirmished afar off, with small danger, but much trouble to the Spaniards: and
at night they never left shooting, and where they saw fire, came Arrows thick
as Hail; so that the Spaniards put out their fires, silently expecting the day;
which being come, by the persuasion of Sands the Camp-Master, they climbing up
the Mountains, put the Numidians to flight, laying there (as it were encamped
in the Shepheards-Cottages) but that day, such a multitude flocked about them,
that they were glad to fight in a Ring; yet their fierceness was soon
repressed, by the Sicilian Companies of bright-armed pike-men and Harquebusiers
close by them: the Numidian Foot are most youths, half-naked, using naught but
Darts; of wondrous ninblenesse, fighting mingled with their Horsemen, who use
long spears armed at both ends: As the Emperor was beholding the unshipping of
the Warlike necessaries: a storm of wind and rain began about 6 in the
afternoon, holding on all that night with such rage, that the whole Army at
land was wondrously troubled, and a great part of the Fleet, driven aground,
perished: and 3 Italian Companies who lay without the Trenches against sudden
assault, were exceedingly overcome with extremity of the weather; for they
could neither well stand nor lie down, sinking up at every step to the calf of
the leg in mire: upon these the enemy, perceiving their distress, sallyed out
at day-dawning, and so charged them, that their match and powder being wet,
they all fled but a few Pikemen, quickly slain, they pursuing the rest over the
Trenches into the Camp; Whereupon, Columna being sent thither with certain
Companies over the Bridge, the Enemy did indeed or in show disorderly retire:
Gonzaga the Viceroy coming in also, and angry with them that fled, persuaded
them to recompense their flight by driving the enemy to his own door, which
Columna said could not be done without great peril; but Gonzaga thinking also
that perhaps the enemy being hastily pursued, they might together with them
enter the City without danger of the Artillery; Spinula led forth the other
Italian Companies, who put them to flight, pursuing them to the very gates,
where many (shut out for fear) escaped some to another Gate, some to the
Mountains. But then they began to overwhelm them with darts and shot from the
Walls with terrible outcryes, and those shut out returned again to fight: they
also within sallyed forth, hardly charging them: who gauled with shot from the
Walls, and rent in sunder with the Ordnance, fled most disorderly; for they
were but raw Soldiers: Assan also sallying out, pursued the chase with his
Turkish-troops and Moorish-foot: only some Knights of the Rhodes fought
valiantly (retiring orderly) and Spinula with others, making a stand at a
little Bridge, somewhat stayed the enemy, saving the lives of many. The
hindermost Italians covered the fields with their dead bodies for half a mile;
chiefly those who fled toward the sea, who were slain by the Numidians, who
beholding the shipwreck were come down for prey; but the foremost Companies
fled in so much haste, that, no Leader performing the duty of an advised
Captain, all seemed at once lost both at sea and land: only the Emperor was
that day the greatest Captain; for he in good time came on with the Germans,
sending before 3 Ensigns to stay the flight, and guard his Camp beyond the
bridge over the ditch; but these (as if afraid of the Turks white Caps, never
wont to turn their backs) shamefully fled for company with the Italians: then
the Emperor galloping forth with his sword drawn, reproved them, setting
forward with his Germans, stoutly speaking to them: When will you
(Fellow Soldiers) show your faces? if now when you should fight, etc. in
presence of your Emperor, you fear a few disordered and naked Barbarians?
Immediately hereupon they issued out against the enemy, who moved with their
coming, stood a while, and began to retire: many of their men hasting to the
seaside in hope of a more certain prey, where no enemy was to be feared; for
the blustering winds had made such huge billows, that the ships put from their
Anchors, fell foul of each other and were lost, or beaten in pieces upon the
Main in sight of the Army, so that the seacoast from Algiers to Cercello, lay
full of dead men; Horses and ribs of ships; the Numidians coming down, and
slaying all that came alive to land. In few hours was lost above 140 ships, and
all the small Boats and Carvels. Some Galleys having from midnight to noon
next day, by painfulness and skill rid it out: being no longer able to endure
the rage of the tempest, ran a ground, but the men swimming to land, were by
the Numidian Horsemen slain. There did Freemen commend their lives and Liberty
with tears to their own Galley-slaves, by their entreaty to be saved from the
cruelty of the Numidians: yet most chose rather to abide che danger of the sea,
than to hasten their end by the enemies hand; whereby many Galley's were saved,
which should otherwise have been run on ground: but the Jannetin ( Auria his
Galley) being driven on the sands, the Emperor not enduring to see so valiant
a man slain by the Moors in sight of Auria, his Uncle sent a Captain with 3
Italian Bands to the seaside, whereby the Moons were put to slight, and they
in the Galley saved; but many others trusting to the rescue of the Soldiers,
ran their Galleys on ground: and had not some bold Captains with their
drawn-swords threatened death to the Galley slaves and Mariners, most of the
Galleys had likewise perished.

Auria angry at the Emperor, for undertaking that great expedition
unseasonably, strove invincibly against the violence of the tempest, bestowing
some under the Hatches, who requested him to save himself whatever became of
his Galley. Also 4 Galleys of Ursinus Earl of Anguillaria, and as many Rhodian
tid it out. Some also of (...), Naples and Spain endured it; yet was there
fifteen great Galleys cast away, whereby, besides the loss of so many ships,
the Tempest still enduring, the whole Army was utterly discouraged, for all
their Victuals was lost, wanting Tents to shroud them in such perpetual rain
and dirt, and a heavier care troubled them, doubting how to return home; yet
the notable courage of the Emperor still kept the distressed men in hope: who
having assured his Camp, He commanded the wearied Captains chiefly the Duke of
Alba, to take rest, comforting the wounded, and causing them to be cherished in
the Tents yet standing; not sparing any pains, being in his Armor and through
wet. About 3000 men were lost, 5 being forward Captains, and 3 Knights of the
Rhodes: but many more hurt. Shortly after, Auria foreseeing a tempest, departed
with his remainder to the Cape Metafusium, advising the Emperor to march
thither by land: who first commanded all the draught-Horses, then the Horses
for service to be killed, and divided among the hungry Soldiers: they having
plenty of the broken ships to make fire of: next day departing from Algiers,
the sick and wounded being in the middle of the Army: and marching 7 miles,
(the enemy hovering about him) he came to the Brook Alcaraz, which was now
grown so high, that it was not to be passed over by a good Horsman: wherefore
he there encamped in form of a Triangle; two sides of his Army being defended
by the sea and the Brook, and the other with a strong guard. Many adventuring
to swim over, were carried away by the stream, and drowned; wherefore a Bridge
being made with Masts and Sayl-yards, the Italians and Germans passed over: the
Spaniards foording it over higher up: after which, the Turks pursued them no
further, but the Moors and Numidians following at hand, were easily repulsed by
the Harquebusiers and fieldpieces: yet on such sick and wounded as could not
keep way with the Army, they showed all manner of cruelty. Next day wading up
to the breasts over another little River, they came in 3 days to the place of
the Fleet, encamping in the ruins of the old City Tipasa, serving them in
stead of a Fortress.

The sea being now calm, the Emperor commanded every man to make ready to go
aboard: first the Italians, next the Germans, lastly the Spaniards: but it was
thought there was scarce Vessels enough left to receive the whole Army, though
close crowded; Wherefore he commanded all the horses, though of great worth, to
bo cast over board, to the great grief of the owners: who said, they should
also lose the most notable Race of Horses in Spain. But scarce half the
Soldiers were embarked, but the East and North wind, and then contrary-winds
rose: whereupon the ships already loaded, without command, for fear of being
driven on Rocks, directed their course with full sayls along the Coast: who
were soon dispersed with (...) Tempest into several Countries: some being in
sight of their fellows, swallowed up in the sea, and 2 Spanish ships were
driven again to Algiers, falling on the shore, where the Numidians and Moors
came running to kill them as they came ashore; for the barbarous people would
not receive them to mercy: which cruelty the Spaniards (...), got to shore, and
standing close, desperately withstood them, who with their multitude quickly
encompassed them: yet they made their way through them unto the gates of the
City; but seeing the Turks salley out, they offered to yield themselves
prisoners to Assan, if they would assure them of life; so Assan coming forth
gave them his Faith, and beating away the Barbarians, saved them all, to his
great gain, and commendation of clemency. Above two parts of the Germans were
either lost by shipwreck, or dead of sickness. The Emperor overruled by
Auria, sailed along the coast Eastward to Buzia: in whose Castle, kept by
Spaniards, he found some fresh Victual, while he lay here for fair weather. A
great Genuan ship laded with Victual, came into the Bay; yet, through the
violence of the Tempest, she was cast away upon the flats: yet part of the
Victual (half-spoyled) was driven ashore, well relieving their increasing want.

The wind, of North, being come to Northwest, he sent away Gonzaga with the
Sicilian and Rhodian Galleys, putting them in hope to adventure again to sea:
So with a troublesome course, they soon came into the Port of Utica, or
Farinas: where Muleasses hountifully relieved them, whence they safely landed
in Sicilia. The rageing sea becoming calm, they reasoned in Council often, what
course best to take; but the wind coming fair at East, the Emperor sailed to
the Baleares, thence arrived at length at the Port of new Carthage in Spain,
greatly commended even of his Enemies, for his wondrous conrage and constancy
in so many extremities.

About this time the dissembled Friendship, betwixt Charles aod King Francis
brake out into open hatred; this thinking himself deluded by the other, who had
fed him with vain hope of restoring the Dukedom of Millane: and lately abused
by the death of Rinco his Ambassador: wherefore he raised a great power in
France, sending Charles his son with one part into the Low Countries, and Henry
his other son with the other part, to invade Spain: setting on the Duke of
Cleve in the Low Countries, and soliciting Solomon by Polinus his Ambassador,
to spoil the borders of Spain with his Galley's, while Henry was besieging
Perpenna; for which he was of most discommended, as too much favoring his own
grief. Polinus passing by many by-ways to Venice, and crossing (...), met with
Solomon in Misia coming from Buda, first offering him a curious Cupboard of
Plate, weighing 600 pounds, and 500 rich garments for the Bassaes and great
(...). Solomon reading the French Kings Letters, and hearing what he had
further to say, promised him he would not be wanting by sea or Land, to give
him aid in his just wars against Charles his enemy; telling him, when he was
come to Constantinople, he should have answer (by his Bassaes). Of all Polinus
chiefly desired him to send Barbarussa with his Fleet against next summer, into
Provence, to be employed against the Emperor out of the French Harbor: also
to request the Venetians to join in League with his Master against Charles, who
began to be dreadful to them: when they were come out to Constantinople in the
latter end of December. Solomon advised Polinus (...) return to France, and to
bring him certain word of the determinate time of undertaking those wars: and
that he would the while, send (...) to Venice, who would provide such a Fleet
in readiness as he desired. He exceeding (...), speedily returned, with 2
goodly Horses and a rich sword, presents from Solomon to the French King: who
discoursing with Polinus 3 days together of his proceedings, soon sent him back
with full instructions of time and place, with other circumstances of the
intended War. He coming to Venice, found not Junusbeius there: yet with
Pellicerius the French Ambassador Legier and others of that faction, he
labored with the Senators in behalf of his Master; and having audience in the
Senate, notably pleaded the French Kings cause, grievously lamenting the death
of the Ambassador slain by the Spaniards and bitterly inveighing against the
Emperor's ambition. The Senate declaring the time for Junusbeius his coming,
gravely answered, (...)' (...) with the French King, ought to be an Ornament to
them, but no burden: the like they held with the Emperor, whom they would in
no case seem to cast off, though they had been by him over-raught: that they
were generally of opinion to preserve their peace, having in hard times of war
endured great extremities, hardly to be recovered with long peace: whether
'twere good for them to thrust themselves into war, being in League with 3 of
the greatest Princes of the World. Junusbeius the while arrived there,
requesting, that the League made by Badoerius might be confirmed: and requested
only to join further courtesies to that amity which they held with the French
King; and the rather, because Solomon, accounting him for his Brother, had also
undertaken to aid him against Charles: but as to join in League, or in his
quarrel to take up arms, he requested nothing: Wherefore Polinus and
Pellicerius, thought the Turk, who had spoke so coldly in the cause, to be
corrupted; but it afterward appeared, there was such equity and modesty in
Solyman's Letters, that he would not then exact any thing of them, not standing
with the good of their State,

Polinus traveling by Land to Gonstantinople from Regusium whither he was
transported, found all things more difficult than he dreamed of; for the great
Bassaes said, there could be no Fleet set out that year, he being come too
late, the spring being past; Polinus was exceedingly vexed with grief and care:
Dixius also being come to carry news into France of the coming of the Turks
Fleet: who told Polinus, The Kings sons expected nothing more than their
coming: Wherefore he wondrously tormented himself, cursed the froward and
unconstant manners of the Bassaes, calling upon the Faith of Solomon,
beseeching the Bassaes one by one, against their promise not to forsake the
King, since by that delay his Majesty was betrayed, and a Victory now as good
as gotten, quite marred. He was so (...) and (...), that becoming rather
loathsome than gracious unto them, they sent for him and his followers to
Court; Barbarussa sitting with them: who being entered the Council Chamger;
Solomon Bassa, the Eunuch made a sharp speech unto them, telling them: In their
Demands, was no equity nor Modesty: that they Frenchman were ever forgetful and
negligent in the Turks dangers, but in their own always mindful and diligent:
showing themselves friends to them when need was, not in deeds and certain aid,
but only in bare Letters and Embassages, instancing in particulars: and saying.
A Fleet would be rigged in Winter, furnished and set forward in Spring: In
summer was safe sailing and making war: Which that it might be so, they would
for the Commonwealths sake persuade the Emperor: If (...) be wise, says he,
to Polinus, take these things in good part, as friendly spoken, etc.

This severe speech troubled him the more, because they seemed to be sent from
Solomon himself, who was thought to have heard all; for behind the Bassaes was
a Window, where the Emperor (unperceived) might when he pleased, hear the
complaints, and suits of Nations: and note the Bassaes manners: whose care was
the greater, for fear of his presence, yet did not Polinus so give over his
suit; but by gifts to the Capiaga or chief Porter, labored to be brought to
the speech of Solomon himself. So being brought to Solyman's presence, he most
earnestly requested him not to fail the King, of the promised Fleet: who was
then invading his enemies in 3 places. Solomon expressly answered, The
opportunity was past, not by his will, but by his late-coming; but promised
next spring to send unto his friend and brother, twice so big a Fleet as he had
desired: with which answer he dispatched Dixius into France: whereupon King
Francis, called back Henry his eldest son from besieging Perpenna.

The Princes and (...) of Germany, at the request of Ferdinand and the
Hungarian Nobility decreed about this time, to take up Arms, for recovering
Buda and other lost places: for they saw, if the Hungarians were not speedily
relieved, they should soon be forc ed to fight for all they enjoyed, against
the Turk at their own doors. Wherefore they sent out 30000 Foot and 7000 Horse,
Joachimus Marquess of Brandeburgh being General; yet so, that to him were 8
others (aged and experienced men) joined, by whose counsel he was to be
directed. Ferdinand's power met them at Vienna: (...) Governor of Stiria
coming in with 10000 Horsemen: unto whom Seredius Bathor, and Perenus Nobles of
Hungary, joined with 15000 Horsemen: whither also Pope Paul 3d. sent 3000 choice
Footmen out of Italy, under the conduct of famous Vitellius. The Marquess with
his Army marched from Vienna, so softly that the Hungarian and Italian Captains
said, The best part of summer was spent in loytering: chiefly Medices, who had
persuaded the King, to be ready to set sorward with the first of the spring,
before the Turks could augment their Garrisons: which wholesome counsel
Ferdinand (too much crediting his great Courtiers) rejected, first expecting
the assembly of all his Forces. At length they came to Strigonium: where it was
reported, that Solomon fearing to lose Buda, was coming himself, or sending the
General of his Europeian Horse, who never warred without 60000 Horsemen.
Wherefore the Germans made no great haste, doubting how to return if they got
not the Victory. Besides 'twas thought, the Marquess purposed only to defend
the bounds of Austria, and by showing the strength of Germany to terrify the
Turks; but it being certainly known that that report of the Turks Army was
vain, and that there was scarce 1000 Janissaries and 2000 Horse come to Buda,
the Turks Fleet also inferior to the Kings: they set forward with more
cheerfulness, much encouraged by the Hungarians, assuring them, if they would
speedily march on, they should not find at Buda, any Turks worth the name of an
Army; for Solomon used to make war but every second year: Wherefore the
Marquess appointed to pass over Danubius: which Perenus Huganot and Medices
liked not of, rather to hold on his way directly to Buda: but the General and
his Counselors said, The Soldiers would with much more coutage and
cheerfulness endure the siege of Buda, if they had first beaten them out of
Pesth; so the Army by 2 Bridges with great labor made, was transported over.
Then did Medices an Italian, the Kings Admiral take the Island of St. Margaret,
a little above Buda, repulsing the Turks Fleet to the Suburbs of the City. The
Marquis to avoid the danger of the shot from Buda, fetched a great compass, and
came to the North side of Pesth; for Buda standing on a Hill, and divided from
Pesth only with the River, so commands all the plain thereabouts, that none can
stir without danger on any side but Northward: Coming thither, he was told by
some fugitives that Bulis Governor of Buda (for Solomon the Hungarian was dead
of the plague) had in Garrison, 2000 Horsemen, and that Ulames of Bosna was come
with 3000 more: whereto Amurathes had joined another 1000 from Dalmatia: and
that Segemenes was come with 1000 Janissaries, the other foot being but
Country People: also that their Fleet was 60 small Pinnaces, 10 Galleys, and a
few great boats: that Solomon had commanded them to defend Pesth and Buda to
the last man, proposing great rewards to the valiant, to the cowardly extreme
punishment: and if need were, to send to Sophia for Achomates General of his
European Horse; Upon their approach the Turks issuing out, skirmished with the
Hungarians; but some few being on both sides slain they both retired. Next day,
Vitellius coming nigh the City, to choose a place for battery; the Turks sallied
out at 2 gates at once: the fight being begun with like courage and force, the
Turks still sending forth supplies, forced them disorderly to retire, losing 4
Captains and 2 Ensigns: and had not Vitellius with one troop valiantly repulsed
the Janissaries, the loss had been much more: Vitellius exceeingly grieved, and
perceiving their manner of fight; encouraged his Soldiers, requesting Perenus
to be ready to join with him upon occasion: and going out of the Kings
walled-Orchards (where he lay encamped) with 12 Companies, he commanded the
rest to stand ready at all assays: so fetching a compass, marched toward the
City. The proud enemy speedily sallying out, courageously charged them; whom
Vitellius (covering his shot with his pikes and stand standing close); received
by whose shot, often on their knees, many Turks were laid on ground, while they
desperately sought to break their order: when many Turks had come out of the
gates, and diverse come over from Buda to partake of the Victory, Vitellius (of
purpose) by little and little retired: then the enemy with a great shout began
more fiercely to assayl them, their Horse also clapping behind them; whereupon,
Perenus suddenly clapped in with his Light Horse betwixt the City and Turks:
after whom followed Mauritius (about 20 years old) afterward Duke of Saxony,
with a strong troop of Germans.

The Turks thus shut in, began to retire; Vitellius coming on, charged them
fiercely, and the Horse breaking in on the other side, made great slaughter of
them: who run to the gates in such fear, that many thrust each other through
with their pikes: diverse being driven into the River and drowned, a 100
Janissaries, and 400 others being lost. Mauritius having his Horse slain under
him was in danger to be lost, had not Ribische covered him with his own body
till rescued, Ribische presently dying of his wounds. The battery was now
presently planted, at first so far off, (doing little harm) though the walls
were old and thin: the Ordnance also mislaid, either shot short or quite over
the City; the battery being removed nearer, a fair Breach was soon made in the
wall. Vitellius first offered to assault it, so the Germans would presently
second him, which they all by holding up their hands, promised courageously;
but cowardly by and by, about to break the same: the Hungarians also promising
not to be behind; Segemenes receiving new supplies from Ulames, had cast a deep
Countermure against the Breach: and within that a strong Barricado, with
Vessels filled with sand and earth: behind which stood the Soldiers in order
with so much silence, that many thought they had been fled over to Buda. The
signal given, 4 Italian Captains ran with their Companies to the Breach; but
while they set up their Ensigns, and wondering at the Fortification, were ready
to leap down, they were suddenly overwhelmed with Arrows and Bullets; yet
Vitellius encouraging them brought them still on; but the German Foot with
their General stood still under the walls, the Hungarians retiring without
looking on the enemy; 2 Italian Captains were slain, and Vitellius his Nephew
shot in the shoulder. The Turks repulsed and beat down the Italians: the idle
Germans being more galled than one would have thought; for there they still
stood for shame: Wherefore Vitellius would in no case depart from the breach,
that the Germans might not say, they stayed longest; of whom he complained, he
was cowardly betrayed. A Turk spoke (...) in the Italian Tongue: Why do not
you, valiant Italians, spare your selves, and give place to those lasie
Germans? We all wish to spare you, and to beat the drunkenness out of their
most cowardly heads, that they should no more hereafter provoke us. At length
the Germans weary, got farther off: the Italians forthwith retiring, but very
disorderly to be out of danger of shot: 700 were there slain, and many more
hurt, who afterward dyed of their wounds.

All this while, the Marquess and Huganot were not to be seen, till two
valiant Captains finding them out, wished them for shame to appear, to comfort
the Army: who consulted whether to forsake or continue the siege: most of the
German Captains liking to be gone, though Vitellius and others spoke earnestly
against it; but a Spy then bringing news (either feigned or vainly believed)
that Achomates was coming to Dravus, the Germans resolsolved to return to
Vienna: which made many old German Soldiers hang their heads for shame; and
the Hungarians to curse the Germans, and the hard fortune of their Nation,
vainly wishing for a more courageous General.

Segemenus early in the morning, sent out all the Horsemen, and after them some
Foot-companies for a relief in retiring: who skirmishing with the Hungarians in
many places, many of the most notable Soldiers on either side, regarded no
other enemy, but him whom every one had singled out to encounter hand to hand.
A notable Turk desired to see Vitellius: who being showed to him, he ran to
embrace him for his Honor, and departed. About 500 Horse encountered hand to
hand, many being slain or hurt. The Turks perceiving the Christians to be
departed, the night following, sallyed out, upbraiding them aloud of cowardice,
and hardly pursuing their rear. Ulames, come from Buda, so eagerly followed
them, that Vitellius made a stand, requesting the German and Hungarian Horsemen
to turn upon them: who put Ulames to flight, slaying many in chase: then they
passed on quietly: Yet 700 sick and straggling Germans were slain in sight of
their fellows: who, thrice soyled by the Turks, returned full of heaviness.

The Army coming to Vienna was broke up, and the Italian's sent home, who most
dyed by the way of Infection taken in the Camp.

But to cover the shame of this unfortunate Expedition, Perenus was picked out
to fill men's mouths with: who, through envy of the Court, was for suspicion of
aspiring the Kingdom of Hungary, by Ferdinands command, apprehended in the
Castle of Strigonium as a Traitor, and delivered to Medices to be conveyed up
the river to Vienna. Liscanus the Spaniard apprehending him, took from him his
rich Chain and Cloak: whereupon, above 12000 Hungarians presently returned
home, cursing the Germans to the Devil. Perenus was one of the greatest Peers
of Hungary, but most haughty and Magnificent, sometimes having almost a 100
goodly Horses led before him without Riders, and speaking too freely against
the barrenness of Ferdinand's Court: who, polled by his Courtiers, hardly
maintained his State: Wherefore the other great Courtiers, conspiring his
overthrow would also point at him; saying He savoured of a Crown. Who as he had
many Virtues; so was not causelessly noted of ambition and unconstancy, as is
before declared,

First it was given out, that his son, who had many years been detained in
Solyman's Court, as a pledge of his Fathers fidelity: was then, under color of
a feigned escape, come into Transylvania, agreeing with Solomon; that his
Father, should, by promising them all freedom, allure them to Turkish
subjection: for which he should be made Governor of Hungary, and in hope to be
made Tributary King, if the Child should die: Besides, he had very
suspitiously, the Winter before, sent the Turks Captains great presents,
receiving the like: Lastly, his Letters seeming to promise some Hungarian
Captains, greater entertainment than agreed with his estate: all which,
Ferdinand (hardly conceiving ill of the Germans, but any thing of Strangers)
soon believed.

Perenus being come near the Gate of Vienna, hearing Torniellus with other
brave ones were come to meet the Admiral; requested, he might speak to them out
of the close Coach (being opened) wherein he rode: which was easily granted; he
seeming to those who had charge of him, unworthy of such suspicion; he made a
lamentable speech unto them concerning his being apprehended: saying, As for
the Kingdom of Hungary, he might well have affected it, and easily have
deserved it of Solomon, when Ferdinand ( John being dead) was preparing for
that war; at which time his friends and followers with the Hungarians love
toward him, might have ministered no unreasonable or unseasonable hope to have
drawn a man into courses, not wholly beseeming a Christian: wherefore (says
he) I have, and will (while I live) fight against the Turks, if King Ferdinand
shall show himself an indifferent Judge in this accusation, falsely surmised by
the malice of mine enemies.

The Admiral Medices, persuaded him to hope well in the most just King's
clemency; and soon after, he and Torniellus entreated the King while hunting,
to deal favorably with him; Yet Perenus could not obtain an open hearing, but
was committed to perpetual imprisonment, either for surprision of new Treason,
or for his old inconstancy. This end had the Wars undertaken by general
consent of the Germans against the Turks in 1542. Ferdinand (...) spent in
vain, a mass of Treasure, and lost the opinion before conceived of the
strength of Germany.

Polinus in 1543. ceased not by all means to solicit Solomon to aid his Master
against Charles in Italy, Sicily, and Spain; but he was so crossed by Solomon,
(then Vizier) that he almost despaired; for the (...) being a great Seaman,
envied the honor of Barbarussa, protesting in Council, he saw no cause why
Solomon (...) send out such a Fleet, but to serve Barbarussa's own turn; but
Solomon decreed according to his promise, to send his Fleet to the French King
by Barbarussa: two days after which, Polinus was (...) by Rustan Bassa, and
Solomon the Eunuch (for it was their Master's pleasure) both joying of him for
the friendship confirmed betwixt the two Princes. So after diverse (...)
bestowed on him and his chief followers, Solomon at his departure, gave him
great charge of his Navy, after the service done, to be again returned,
delivering him Letters to King Francis, to the like purpose, telling him, all
things should (...) out, according to both their desires, if he took heed, that
Charles did not again deceive him with the motion of a deceitful peace.

Polinus returned from Hadrianople where Solomon then lay, to Constantinople,
finding Barbarussa ready to put to Sea with 110 Galleys, and 40 Galliots: so
setting forward, April 28. 1543, he arrived first at Caristius, in Euboea:
thence to Malea, and, cast by contrary winds into Lacedemon. Bay, staying nine
days ere he could double the Cape Metapanium. Then from Methone, he came to
the Strait of Messana, where, in sight of Rhegium, they began to land their
men; wherefore they of the City, fled forth for fear; but the Castle was kept
by Gaietane, a Spaniard, who refusing parley, slew certain of the Turks with
shot: wherewith the rest enraged, fired the desolate City, sore against Polinus
and Barbarussa's will, who sought for the Authors to punish them. Ordnance
being planted against the Castle, a few shot so terrified the Captain, troubled
with his Wives outcry, that he yielded it with all therein to the enemy: to
whom, with his Wife and Children, he granted life and liberty, (...) up the
rest, and giving the spoil to his Soldiers: there was about 70 Spaniards, and
many more Citizens, all carried away prisoners. Old Barbarussa becoming amorous
of one of the Captains very beautiful Daughters, entering her into Mahometanism,
made of her as his Wife, bountifully entertaining the Captain as his Father in
Law, who came to see her at Hercules Port in Tuscany: Barbarussa came to Ostia,
in the mouth of Tiber, so frighting them of Rome, that they were ready to
forsake the City, had not Polinus by his Letters to Rodolph, Pope Paul's Legate
in the City, in part stayed the sudden tumult.

The Bishop was then at Buxetum, traveling in show, with (...) Emperor to
make peace betwixt him and the French; but secretly laboring to buy of him the
(...) of (...), for Octavius his Kinsman, Charls's Son in Law: As Polinus
comforted up Rodolph the Cardinal, so also them of (...) and Ostia; so that
they brought the Turks all manner of Victual, and sometimes four Sheep, or two
Oxen, redeemed a Prisoner of Naples; yet many of the weaker sort fled out of
the City by night, though the Magistrates did what they could to stay them.

Barbarussa laying there three days, and watring, passed along Etruria and
Liguria, without doing harm, and so sailed to Marselles, where we leave him for
a while.

Solomon came with a great Army into Hungary, for the more assured possession
of that Kingdom, sending Amurathes and Ulames to besiege Walpo, strong, and
situate upon Dravus, not far from Exek: after whom followed Achomates with his
European Horse. This Town Perenus's possession, was by his Wife and her
friends, worthily defended three months: at last, delivered to the enemy by
the Soldiers, who when they could not persuade their General to consent to a
yielding, took him perforce, delivering him with the Town to the Turks, who
received him with all courtesy, but the traitorous Soldiers were all put to
the Sword: the other Citizens being well used; the Bishop and chief men of
Quinque-Ecclesiae, not far off, now fled for fear, the meaner sort willingly
yielding it to the Turks. Next strong Town was Soclosia, belonging also to
Perenus, which (diverse Gentlemen, encouraging the Citizens to stand on their
defense) held out a while; but after much harm on both sides, they retired into
the Castle, hoping to save themselves by yielding; but Amurathes was so
offended, that (promising them only to come forth at their pleasure) as they
came out, slew them all to terrify others.

Solomon giving those Towns to Amurathes, departed from Buda to besiege
Strigonium, kept by Liscanus and (...), two Spaniards with (...) Soldiers.
Paul the Bishop, got away betimes, despairing of mercy, who by Solyman's
interposing had been reconciled to (...), (...) again revolted to Ferdinand.
The Castle stood on a high Hill, overlooking Danubius underneath it: the Walls
were built after the old manner, before Guns were invented: wherefore,
Vitellius and Torniellus, sent the year before to view the place, thought the
City could hardly be defended, if besieged by a strong enemy, being also
subject to a Hill not far off; so that the old Garrison cast up new Bulwarks
and Fortifications, and making great boast, seemed to wish for Solyman's
coming; but when he had with his Tents, covered the places round about, and
brought a (...) Fleet up the River, every man began to doubt of his own safety.

This fear was increased by Messengers from Solomon, who hearing of what
Nations the Garrison consisted, sent three Renegates of his Guard, a Spaniard,
Italian and German, to speak to their Countrymen in their own Language. They
offered great rewards and (...), to such as would yield in time, denouncing all
torture and extremities to those who endured the Summons of a Cannon. It was
answered by the Captains, those faithful and valiant Soldiers were not to be
won with Gifts, nor terrified with threats. The same day, the Ordnance was
planted on the Hill before the Gate, and all the weakest (...) of the Walls so
well picked out to be assaulted, that its to be thought, the Christians wanted
faith among themselves.

Salamanca d strusting the Suburb's Fortifications, retired into the City,
contrary to what he had boasted.

Achomates (...) that part next the Bishop's Gardens: Ulames, the Tower next
the Gate toward Buda: the Asapi were brought on to dig Trenches, and cast up
Mounts: the (...) was so discharged without (...) that the Tower, with much of
the Wall near it, fell down, as if shaken with a terrible Earthquake: the
(...) Janissaries also, fetching off any man that stood on the Walls: many
further off being grievously wounded with Arrows falling from high; and the
(...) broken with the great shot, killed or maimed the Soldiers near hand:
wherefore they forsook the uttermost Wall, casting up new Fortifications
within. The enemy also, thrice desperately assailed the breach, but still with
loss repulsed: Bultazes Sanzack of Selymeria, a man of great account, being
lost. Many the while, who came up the River, with necessaries for the Army,
went ashoare, and lay in the Suburbs with great security: wherefore they in the
City, suddenly sallying out, slew many before they could arm, driving the rest
to their Fleet: so that there was about 200 slain. Zymar the Persian Admiral,
in rescuing them, being slain with a small shot. While the Turks did with
greater force, daily assail the City, and the (...) despairing of relief, more
and more discouraged: an old Calabrian Engineer, fled out to the Turks, who
satisfied them in all their questions, directing them in planting their
batteries in the most convenient places. It fortuned, that a gilt Brazen Cross
on the Steeple of the Cathedral, was by the Turk's shooting thereat, at length
beaten down: wherefore Solomon is reported (taking it as a token of good luck)
presently to cry out, Strigonium is won.

Liscanus and Salamanca secretly conferring together, resolved to give up the
Town; for Liscanus was no great Soldier, yet by spoil, exceeding rich; and
therefore thought it folly to buy the name of resolute Captain, with the loss
of life and wealth: the like feeling was also in Salamanca.

This secret purpose was noised among the Soldiers, a third part being slain,
or weak with wounds or sickness: yet they thought generally, they were able
still to (...) the Town; but the under-Captains, etc. flatteringly, liked the
motion, rather to yield on reasonable terms, than to expose themselves to most
certain death, and not better Ferdinands cause. Ere long, an Ancient was by
night let down over the Wall, and receiving the Turk's faith, called forth
Salamanca; who coming out, went to Achomates, commanding, before he went, them
who defended the Water-Towre (of great danger) for safety of their lives to get
into the City: who hastily retiring, the vigilant Turks suddenly breaking in,
slew such as were not gone, possessing the Castle; but Salamanca, when he had
stood upon many nice terms with the Bassaes, obtained only, without delay to
yield, and put themselves wholly on Solyman's mercy; so being there stayed, he
wrote to Liscanus, how he sped, wishing him, if he loved his safety, to yield
the City without further terms.

Liscanus hereupon, declared to the Soldiers, the necessity of yielding up,
and what hope of life and liberty; but whilst the angry Soldiers stood as in
a doubt, Halis, Commander of the Janissaries came, not sternly requiring the
Gate to be opened to him, according to Salamanca's agreement: which was done,
and the keys delivered to him: they entering peaceably, possessed themselves of
the Walls and fortresses, choosing all the beardless youths out of the
Soldiers, commanding the rest to cast down their Weapons in a place
appointedw;hich they did, expecting nothing but some cruel execution: which
fear, was the more increased by a strange accident; for while with their
Harquebusses, they cast their flasks of powder also, one of them suddenly took
fire of a match, which firing the rest, blew abroad that heap of Weapons among
the Janissaries: whereupon, they slew diverse Christians; till Halis, persuaded
'twas rather by chance, than malice, commanded them to stay their fury. Then he
proclaimed, that all Christians, who would serve Solomon, should have places
answerable, with large entertainment; yet were there but seventy, which
accepted the offer, for fear of their lives: whom Halis sent down the River
with the culled out youths to Buda: the other helped the Turks to cleanse the
Castle; but Liscanus was glad to give Halis the Chain of Gold he took from
Perenus, he requiring it as of military courtesy, (a strange Ornament with the
Turks) hoping thereby to save his other Coin; but when the covetous Coward was
about to depart with his Horses of service, and Saddles cunningly stuffed full
of Gold, the Turk laughing at him, took them also so furnished, saying, He who
was to go by water, needed no Horses: The rest, were conveyed over Danubius:
traveling to Possonium, where Count Salma by Ferdinand's Command, committed
Liscanus and Salamanca and some others to custody, to answer their cowardly
yielding up the City: which Solomon entered Aug. 10. 1543, and turning the
Christian Temples into Mahometane, first sacrificed for his Victory, as before
at Buda, and speedily so fortified it, as if to take away all hope of recovery
thereof: deriding the Germans negligence, who keeping it 14 years, had not
fortified it.

Solomon leaving Ossainus Governor there, sent his Tartarian Horse to spoil
the Country, as far as Alba Regalis, going himself to besiege Tatta Castle,
(...) terrified Soldiers, upon the first Summons yielded, and quietly
departed: the Castle, (the Turks keeping their Provinces under, by few, but
very strong holds) being presently rased to the ground: Torniellus causing
Hanniball the Captain to lose his head for his cowardly yielding up his charge,
thereby to admonish others.

Solomon marched thence to (...) Regalis, which stands more into the Land, than
Buda and Strigonium, strongly seated in midst of a Lake, but not so wholsomly,
especially in Summer.

From the City through the Lake, lay three broad and high Causies, built with
fair Houses, and Gardens on each side: at the end of every Causey, toward the
Land, were strong Bulwarks, which the Citizens used not to watch, but in
dangerous times of War: the City thus standing, and compassed about with a
strong Wall, with a deep ditch always full of water, was hardly to be
besieged: wherefore a great number of people, fled into it with their Cartel,
as into a most sure hold. There was two German Companies, and 200 Horsemen,
with 500 Hungarian Horsemen, who, living by robbing, are infamously called
Usarous.

Tornicllus the Italian, sent in four Companies of Italians, the most forward
in that service: Then came Borcocius Captain of the King's Guard, with a
Company of Horse, as General: who no sooner come, but news was brought of
Solyman's approach: wherefore he convened the Captains, with Birrous the Mayor,
and other chief Citizens, what was best to be done; but chiefly, whether the
Suburbs were to be destroyed or not? that the City might with less labor and
danger, be defended.

This question was seriously debated, and great reasons alleged on both sides:
at last, the Citizens cried out with one voice against the matter: of which
opinion, was Serofactus, an Italian Captain, saying, both City and Suburbs
might with like danger be defended, since both were equally fortified with the
Marish; and at the worst, the Defendants might safely retire into the City: at
last standing up, he said (...) Gentlemen, what show will you give of your
valor, etc. If you shall defend so famous a City, by deforming it your selves,
etc. before the danger? Verily ye shall do nothing, etc. un ess this City (if
God please) be of you whole and sound, valiantly defended. Hereupon they all
rose, the wiser yielding to the (...) of the simple: Barcocius also, setting a
good coun enance on that which liked him not) declared to the Soldiers, the
reasons thereof, exhorting them with the like valor, to answer that honorable
(...), promising to provide all necessaries for a Victory, and (...) those
deserving of great rewards. The Suburbs were quickly fortified, the Ordnance
conveniently planted, and Watch and Ward kept by turns, day and night.

The Turks bent their forces only against the Suburbs of the Gate, toward
Buda, because the Lake was there driest, and the ground sandy, more unfit for
Fortifications.

Barcocius drew all the Italians and Germans into the Suburbs of that Gate,
leaving the Country people in their places. At first, they sallying out, made
light skirmishes for three days, without any great harm on either side; but
Solomon himself being come, and besetting the City far and near with his Tents;
they shut up the Gates, and sallyed no more out: wherefore the Hungarian
Usarons, that they might not be coupt up, as they termed it, asking-leave for
fashion, sake, by night departed, though entreated to stay, escaping through the
Woods from the enemy. The Turks the while, being come with Winding Trenches,
within shot, so scoured the top of the Bulwark, that none could appear but he
was wounded: the Ordnance also soon battered asunder the Planks and Timber,
which kept in the sandy mould; and the shot flying quite through, slew and
wounded many far off, the Asapi the while, in 12 days, making a way to pass
over to the Bulwark and Suburbs, with Earth and Wood, brought thereby, in 600
Wagons, thought impossible to have bin done. The Ditches (...) filled up, the
Turks sought by force to enter the Bulwark: first the Asapi: then the Horsemen
now on foot, covering the Janissaries, who on their knees with Harquebusses,
sore gauled the Defendants: they fought above 3 hours with equal hope; but the
Turks still (...) afresh, gained the uttermost Bulwark; yet the Italian Fort
was valiantly defended, the Women and religious helping; and a tall Hungarian
Woman, thrusting in upon the top of (...) Fort, struck off two Turks Heads with
a Sith at one blow.

This assault was Aug. 29. on which day they took Belgrade, and slew King
Lewis, hoping to take the City then, as on a fortunate day, but they were
forced to retire. Solomon (...), sharply reproved Abraham Achomates, and Halis,
because, the Bulwark being won, they had not more courageously prosecuted the
Victory, etc. sternly commanding them to prepare for a fresh assault within 3
days, uever to return to him without winning the City: who answered, They
would in short time accomplish his desire; and encouraging the Soldiers, they
terribly assailed the Rampires: and (through a thick mist) they got up to the
top thereof with great silence, coming to handy blows ere they were well
discovered. The fight was for the time terrible; but the Janissaries at length
put the Germans, then the Italians to a hasty flight, which (...) availed,
seeing they were to pass through a little narrow Gate; and they in the City,
without regard of them that fled, had plucked up the Drawbridge over the
Ditch; so the Turks pursuing them all along those Suburbs, many notable men,
some fighting, some fleeing, were slain; Serosactus being one: Barcocius
fleeing to the little gate not to be passed through on Hors-back, and crying in
vain to have the great Gate opened, was by the Janissaries slain, whose Head and
right hand full of Rings, was carried about in derision on a Lance. The rest
finding the little gate shut up with dead bodies, and the Bridge drawn up,
threw themselves into the Ditch: where some taken hold of by others that could
not swim, were drowned together. Some hardly crawling over, were shotwith
arrows: others sticking in the mud, were shot to death also; some few got over
and were saved. The General of the German-Horse and Uscasades an Italian,
gathering the remainder, placedthem on the Walls: but Birrous, the Aldermen and
others, were now so overcome with despair, that they thought of no hope but in
the mercy of Solomon; wherefore Birrous spoke from the Wall, safely to send to
Solomon; to treat upon reasonable conditions of surrender: which Achomates
easily granted. The General of the German Horse, and Rufus an Italian (the most
valiant men in all the assaults) went with the Ambassadors: who requested
(upon yielding) for their lives and Liberties: who so answered, as that it
seemed all should not be pardoned. Rufus easily obtained, the Italians to
depart with bag and baggage to Vienna: so did the German General for his. Rufus
refusing to serve Solomon, as bound by oath to Ferdinand, Solomon Bassa gave
him a rich Cloak in Honor of his Valor. The Ambassadors returning, and
telling their success, freed the Citizens of a great fear.

The City yielded: Achomates openly proclaimed, the Italians and Germans to be
ready to depart next day, and to beware that no Hungarian went with them: the
Citizens also to keep their Houses till they were departed: whom Homares
faithfully defended against the roaming Tartars: losing nothing but their dags,
carried at the Germans saddle-bow: The Turks delighting to see them shot off
with a Fire-lock, as a Novelty; but they (after Homares departure) had hot
skirmishes with the Hungarians, in their passage, being rescued from danger by
the Kings Garrisons: which remainder came to Vienna more like ghosts than men.

Solomon entering the City, and visiting the King's Sepulchers: proclaimed, the
Hungarians should not fear; for he came not to Conquer them, but to free them
from German-bondage; so to restore that Kingdom entire to young Steven. But 3
or 4 days after, he called out the chief Citizens into a field, where
condemned men were buried, as if to swear them to fidelity: whether they coming
as to a solemn feast, the Tyrant slew them all; yet some report, they were only
such as bare Office when they revolted from the Queen, and Infant-King to
Ferdinand, the rest being exiled to Buda and Belgrade. So leaving Balibeius the
Governor, and Mahometes of Belgrade his Lieutenant, for the whole Kingdom, he
returned to Constantinople. All this while, Ferdinand had no power worth
speaking of to withstand so mighty an enemy. While Solomon lay at this siege,
he sent his Tartarian Horsemen to spoil the Country round; about 3000 in diverse
places were slain by the Hungarians: one of them being taken, had half a child
of two-years old in his Snap-sack.

Barbarussa fretted exceedingly, that he had all this while layen at
Marceilles, doing nothing: the blame whereof, he said, would be imputed to him:
and that Solomon would take it ill to have it reported, that he had set out so
great a Fleet, and so far off to help his Friend, and to do nothing; also he
took on like a Turk, that he should now blemish his former credit, by laying
still all that Summer, where his Soldiers grew lazy; Wherefore Polinus told
the King hereof, bringing order to Barbarussa to besiege Nice a sea-City in
Provence, pawned by a French King to the Duke of Savoy for a great sum of
money; which Francis had often offered to repay, but could not get it out of his
hands. He sent also 22 Galleys, and 18 ships of his own, with 8000 Foot and
much Victual: 2 days after which, came Barbarussa also to the Port of Monoc
with 150 Galleys; whence Polinus wrote to the State of Genua not to fear, that
Fleet being not to hurt so much as them of Nice, if they would yield: and for
more assurance, had diverse Genua captives freed out of the Turks Galleys
without Ransom. Then he friendly exhorted them of Nice, to yield to their (...)
and Lawful Prince, rather than to adventure all extremities for that distressed
Duke, between the Emperor and French King, spoiled of most of his Dominions,
etc. The Magistrates answered, They knew no other Sovereign but Charles their
Duke: wherefore he should desist further to solicit them, etc. Wherefore they
besieged it in 3 places. They had lately new fortified their walls by Simeon
Capt. of the Castle, and an experienced Knight of the Rhodes his direction: who
for their more resolute withstanding the Turks, took their wives and children
and the weaker sort into the Castle, thence furnishing the Citizens with all
necessaries. The City being battered in diverse places by sea and land at once,
the Turks had much beaten a new Bulwark, attempting to enter: Leo Strozza with
a Band of Italians, seeking also to enter, but they manfully repulsing both,
caused them to retire, about 200 Turks being slain, and of Strozza's men 22.
Barbarussa battered it afresh, so terribly, that their walls being opened, the
Soldiers sore wounded, and no hope of timely relief: parlyed with the General
from the wall, to yield the City, living under the French King in all respects,
as they had under the Duke: for which he gave them his Faith: but fearing the
Turks would violate this Composition, he entreated Barbarussa to cause his
Soldiers to go aboard: Wherefore, the Janissaries deceived of their hoped prey,
were about to have slain Polinus and Strozza coming from Barbarussa.

The taking of the Castle now, consisted in assailing the Castle it self, and
defending the City from salleys, and from an enemies raising the siege.
Barbarussa put the French to choice which to take: Who standing in doubt, he
scorning their slownesse, conveniently placed 7 battering-peeces, 2 being very
great, in a trice to their admiration: wherewith he quickly beat down the
Battlements and Sentinel-houses, so that none could appear on the walls: the
French also bartered the Castle; but through long shooting, Polinus requested
to borrow, or buy powder and shot of Barbarussa: who fumed exceedingly, that
they in their own Country should want provision, etc. not forbearing to taunt
them, and often complaining, that he was deluded with hope of great matters
promised: threatening to lay hands on Polinus, who had brought him, where he
must lose his Honor; or, having spent his Ammunition, expose his Fleet to all
dangers: Wherefore, calling a Council, He gave out, presently to return to
Constantinople, seeing, among those cowardly and unskilful men, he found
nothing ready, or according to promise; yet by entreatance and large promises,
he was persuaded to continue the siege; but presently Letters were intercepted
from Vastius to the Captain of the Castle, to (...) out a while, till he (who
had sent his Light-Horsmen before) might come with his men at arms, who would
in 2 days (with slaughter of the Turks) put him out of fear: Whereupon, such a
fear came on the besiegers (next night being also very rainy and Tempestuous)
that leaving all, and by narrow-paths, climbing over the High-Mountain, they
came down to the Fleet; but at day (no enemy to be seen) they (ashamed) came
again to the siege: Ere long, when the Castle (standing on a Rock) was judged
hardly to be battered or under-mined, they thought good to depart: the Turks
then, taking the spoil of the City, set it on fire. Barbarussa retiring to
Antipolis, came to Anchor at the Island Margarita: Vastius the Duke, with
Auria, then arriving at Villa Franca. In which Haven's entrance, the Galley
wherein Vastius went, was like to be lost: 4 other being, by Tempest driven
upon Rocks, and so suddenly beaten in pieces, that the Galley-slaves could not
strike off their Irons, but were drowned.

Polinus hearing hereof, sent to Barbarussa, persuading him to hasten thither,
as to an assured Victory; who promised to go, yet moved (...), let as was
thought by contrary weather. But the wind fallen and sea calm, and he setting
slowly forward, coming again to an Anchor: the Turks Captains scoffingly said,
Barbarussa did but reason to deal kindly with Auria, who had received the like
Friendship at his hands, in letting him escape at Hippona: who answered then
and afterward, only, That (...) an old Commander and half-blind, (...) more in
the matter than all those green Captains with their sharp sight.

Ere long he returned into the Haven of Tolon. Vastius and the Duke coming to
Nice, commended Simeon, preferring the Turks Fortifications before the
Christians; Barbarussa, with all courtesy entertained, sent Salec and Assanes
his Kinsman with 25 Galleys, who riffled some sea-Towns in Spain: taking great
prize about the Promontorie of Creum; and a Merchant-ship, and a Galley in
Paiamos-Haven: passing to Algiers to winter, and at spring to return to
Provence.

Barbarussa that Winter repairing his Fleet, had many necessaries from the
Genowayes: especially from Auria, and that under color of redeeming prisoners:
for he would not show an enemies mind by denial of a little sea Furniture, lest
he should have hurt his Native Country Genua.

But Muleasses hearing of Barbarussa's coming with this great Fleet, doubted
(not without cause) lest it was prepared against himself. Besides, five of his
great Cities ( Constantina, Mahemedia, Mahometa, Leptis, and Adrumentum) were
then holden by the Turks: Wherefore about the time that he sailed along Italy,
himself passed into Sicily to have met the Emperor at Genua for greater aid
against the Turks: committing the tuition of his Kingdom to Mahometes (
Manifaet) to Govern the City; Corsus or Fares to keep the Castle, whose brother
Mahometes and son Fares were left pledges to Tavarres (Captain of
Guletta-Castle) of his Faith; but to his son Amiva, he committed the leading of
his men of War.

Passing out of Sicily, he was driven by contrary winds (at length) to Naples:
being Honorably entertained by the Viceroy: The Citizens wondering at his
people's strange Attire, with their costly Dishes, putting therein Odours of
exceeding price; so that a Peacock and two Fea sants dressed, cost above 100
Ducats: all dwelling near partaking of the smell. While he abode at Naples,
(the Emperor from Buxetum so willing him) attending what course Barbarussa
(disappointed at Nice) would take; he was advertised out of Africa that Amida
his son possessing his Kingdom, had slain his Captains, polluted his Wives, and
taken Tunis-Castle; Wherefore Muleasses exceedingly troubled, with all haste
opened his Coffers, entertaining Soldiers: the Viceroy giving leave to all
banished men to come and give their name to go into Africa: whereupon a great
number of Malefactors and condemned persons flocked to Naples: of which
infamous men, one Lofredius (of a fierce and covetous disposition) undertook
the leading; who having three months pay before hand; leavying 1800 men, and
keeping most of their pay, passed over with the King into Africa.

Amida rose up against his Father by means of certain Noblemen about him, who
ruled him at their pleasure: the chief was Mahometes son of Bohamer ( Manifaet)
in the Reign of Muleasses's Father, whom Muleasses reigning slew, by cutting
off his privities, for deceiving him of Rahamana a maid of exceeding beauty
whom he most passionately loved: for which Mahometes had long conceived a
dissembled deadly hatred against him.

Next was Mahometes Adulzes, whom Muleasses used to call his worst servant
These two with others, gave out that Muleasses was dead, having first revolted
to Christianity, persuading him quickly to enter into his Fathers seat, lest
Mahometes his younger Brother in Hostage at Guletta, should by the help of
(...) be preferred before him; for he was 18 years old, resembling (every way)
his Grandfather, and therefore best beloved of those of Tunis. Wherefore (...)
came in post to (...), to lay first hand on the Kingdom.

The people as yet hearing not of his Fathers death, marvelled at his
rashness: Mahometes the Governor sharply reproved him of Treason, persuading
him to return to the Camp; and seeing him stay, thrust him out of the City: who
got him into the pleasant Country of Martia: but the Governor got him
speedily to Touarres, to know more assuredly if there were News from Sicily of
the Kings death, complaining of Amida; where staying somewhat long, and then
returning, the Voice went, he had practiced with Touarres, to make Mahometes
King; whereby some Citizens (hating the very name of Muleasses) speedily
certified grieving-Amida how all stood, etc. Who now revived, and encouraged by
his followers, returned to Tunis; and entering in at the open Gate, ran to the
Governor's House, who not at home, he slew all his Household, going presently
to the Castle: Where, Fares, the Captain, laying hands on his Horses-bridle to
keep him out, was by an Ethiopian thrust through with a sword: over whose
sprawling body Amida riding, brake into the Castle with his followers, where he
slew the Governor of the City: after which, murdering his younger brethren, he
polluted his Fathers Concubines.

Muleasses (landing at Guletta) was advised by Touarres not to go to Tunis with
so few men, before assurance of the Citizens good disposition toward him: being
the more earnest with Lofredius: because the Viceroy had written, he should in
no case go further, except the the King (as he promised) had also a good
strength of (...); but some Moorish Nobles fleeing under a color, out of the
City, putting their swords to their throats, and (swearing to be faithful)
(...) (...) them forward: saying, (...) ((...) the (...) of his Father) would
flee; so they (...) (...) with (...) displayed; Touarres requesting (...)
(...), (...) (...) of the Moors treachery.

Muleasses being now descryed from the Walls, a strong Troop suddenly (...) out
with a terrible cry, and a fierce assail, many falling on both sides. Muleasses
fighting courageously, was wounded in the face, bleeding exceedingly, whose men
doubting of his life, fled: a great number of Horse and Foot, suddenly
besetting Lofredius round, out of the Olive Gardens, on whom the Italians
discharged some Fieldpieces; but had no leisure to charge again, they coming
on so thick and fast; so the Italians, discouraged, let fall their Weapons, and
cast themselves into the Lake, to save themselves by swimming, and taking hold
of small Boats, which furnished with small Pieces, did repulse the Moors
pursuing them into the Lake with their Horses.

Lofredius was unhorsed in the Lake andslain, as were diverse with him. A few,
chose rather to die in midst of their enemies, than to be strangled in the
stinking Lake.

Muleasses soyled with blood and dust, was taken: nothing bewraying him more
than his odours. 1300 Italians were slain: Touarres relieving the rest, shipped
them into Sicilie, who came to Naples exceeding poor. Amida, victorious, cut
out his Fathers eyes with a hot Pen knife, to make him unfit for Government: so
he served his two Brethren, taken with him. Then he certified Touarres, he
would deliver to him a few youths, taken prisoners; and that he had bereaved
his Father of his sight, deserving worse, as having done the like to his
Brethren, etc. confirming, upon conditions, his Fathers League with him: which
Touarres refused not, as profitable at present; for he was to give him money to
pay his Soldiers: to deliver the prisoners, with the Ensigns and body of
Lofredius, giving Sehites his Son, nine years old, in hostage for more
assurance yet, Touarres safely to restore him, if they must needs enter into
War; but Touarres thought it not wholly agreeing with the Emperors honor,
that he should enjoy the Kingdom, who treasonously and villanously, had thrust
himself thereunto, without his leave. Wherefore (there being among the
Numidians, one Abdamaelech, (an exile ever since Roscetes fled to Barbarussa)
Muleasses's Brother) Touarres (...) for him, putting him in hope of the
Kingdom, supported by (...), a great Numidian Prince, who had long (...) him:
he was encouraged also by predictions of Astrologers, who foretold him, he
should die King of Tunis. Amida was gone to Biserta (casting no peril) to take
order for his Customs there great upon fishing: wherefore; Touarres sent back
Sehites in a Boat to Tunis, and received (...), secretly come thither, and
after a few (...) rest, he posted with (...) Numidian Troop to Tunis, entering
the Castle without resistance, the Warders thinking him to be Amidae, come from
Biserta; for Abdamaelech had (...) their manner, covered his face with a
Scarf, as if to keep him from the Sun and dust. The Warders perceiving their
error, in making resistance, were soon slain by Abdimaelech's Numidians: who
letting his many friends in the City, into the Castle, was presently saluted
King, the rest well (...) it, or not daring to stir. But this new King sickned,
and died, having reigned but 26 days, and was royally enterred: whose friends
encouraged by (...), chose Mahometes his Son (scarce twelve years old) to
reign: (...) Abdalages ( Maxiphaethis his Brother, whom Amida slew),
Abdelchirinus, Mesuar, Schyrifsus, and Perellus a Christian Knight, to be his
Directors and Governors; but Abdelchirinus, devising how to set up one of the
Royal blood, able of himself to govern, was by the other three slain, with all
his Kindred and known friends: so setting up a kind of Triumvirate Government.
Amida thus shut out, wandered up and down to many places, (...) aid of all to
recover his Kingdom, miserably rent (he said) by most wicked men, tryumphing
over the boy-King: which they of Tunis knew to be true, complaining of (...)'s
death, whom they called the Father of his Country: (...) the while, obtained of
the young King some time to go out of the Castle to the Temple, (...) color
whereof, he took Sanctuary, a most inviolate refuge to all as fled thereto,
(...) long, when Mendoza the Spanish Admiral, came to Guletta with his Fleet,
Muleasses at Touarres's request, was conveyed out of the Sanctuary, to
Guletta, to be present at a consultation, for the utter subverting of Amida,
and driving the Turks out of some Cities along the Coast.

Muleasses hardly escaped before at Tunis, an old Woman hiding him under a heap
of Garlic; and had he not now escaped to Guletta, he had again fallen into
Amida's hands, who soon after recovered his Kingdom (saying, he would not have
spared him for reverence of any Sanctuary); for the Citizens weary of the ill
Government, and offended also with the King himself, for espousing one of
Muleasses's Daughters, his Cousin, secretly encouraged Amida to repair to the
City, etc. who came in such have, that the young King had scarce time to get
away.

Amida easily obtaining the Kingdom, exercised most exquisite cruelty, causing
some enemies to be devoured of fierce Mastives, first kept hungry: torturing
Perillus, cutting off his secrets, and burning him to ashes in the Marketplace.

But Muleasses stayed not long at Guletta, offended with Touarres, who had
avaritiously deceived him (he said) of a part of his Household Stuff, precious
Stones, and some Treasure, with which he entrusted him; for deciding whereof,
they were commanded to repair to the Emperor in Germany: where in conclusion,
Touarres was discharged of his Government; and Muleasses sent into S(...) to be
kept at the common charge thereof: who coming to Rome, by the way, was
honorably feasted by Cardinal Fernesius; but would only kiss Pope Paul's
knee, not his foot.

Barbarussa in 1544, requested King Francis, thoroughly to employ him, or to let
him depart, offering to spoil all along the Coast of Spain; but he knowing what
hard speeches ran of him in all parts, for bringing in the Turks, was loath to
leave such a slaughter to the memory of Posterity: besides, the Turks did much
harm in the Province where they lay, being reported to snatch up now and then
one, for slaves in their Galleys: wherefore, the King giving Barbarussa about
400 Mohammedan slaves, for the Turks that were dead, with all kind of provision,
and great gifts to him and his Captains, sent him away, and Strozza with some
Galleys, his Ambassador to Solomon; so (...) being come to Savona, the Germans
sent Presents and fresh Victuals to Barbarussa; for which, he protested not to
hurt any of their Territory: thence sailing to Elba Island, belonging to the
Duke of Florence, he wrote to Appianus the Governor by promises and threats,
to deliver a Son of Sinan the Jew, there kept prisoner.

Appianus showing his men on the Walls, as not afraid, answered, The young man
was become a Christian, and so might not be delivered to the Turks, but he
would in any other thing gratify him, and for his sake use him as his Son,
sending him fresh Victual and Presents; but he offended, landed his men,
commanding them to make what spoil they could, who hunted the people up and
down the Rocks and Mountains, till Appianus doubting an utter spoil, delivered
the young man to Salec, who brought him to Barbarussa gallantly attired, of
whom he was joyfully received, giving Appianus great thanks.

Barbarussa gave him Command of 7 Galleys, and afterward sent him to old
Sinan, at the Port of (...), Solyman's Admiral against the Portugals; but he
overjoyed with the unexpected return of his Son for many years counted lost, in
embracing him, fainted, and presently died.

Barbarussa came from Elba, into the Bay of Telamon, in Tuscanie, taking,
spoiling and burning the City, chiefly the House of (...), whose late (...)
body, he plucked out of the Grave, and scattered his bones, for (he being the
Popes Admiral) wasting his Fathers poor possession in Lesbos. He surprised
also Montenum by night, captivating almost all the Inhabitants: doing the like
at Hercules's Port; but was repulsed from (...), by Luna and Vitellius, before
sent thither; yet having done great harm, and exceedingly frighted all
Tuscanie, he landed at the Island Giglis, about 12 miles from Hercules's Port;
where, (...) the Town, he carried away a huge number into captivity.

Passing the Cape Linar, he had burnt Cantumcelle, for the same reason as he
did Telamon, had he not been persuaded by Strozza, fearing his Masters further
obloquie. Thence he came to the Isle (...), where, in the night, he intercepted
most of the Inhabitants fleeing into the Mountains: and, in revenge against
Vastius, about the Siege of Nice, he burnt three chief Towns thereof; but
Pithacusa, Vastius's dwelling places, standing on a Rock, and somewhat from the
Sea, he durst not attempt; then doing less hurt along Prochita, because most
of the Inhabitants were fled to Pithacusa, he put into the Bay of Puteoli,
sending Salec to try if the City might be battered by Sea: who shooting into it
with his Ordnance, slew Saiavedra, a valiant Spaniard, on the walls, putting
the unprovided Citizens in great fear of the whole Fleet's (...); but the
Viceroy coming with a power from Naples, Barbarussa discovering them, re-called
(...). Then he was about to seize on Salernum; but a sudden Tempest dispersed
his Fleet, driving him upon the Coast of Calabria, where he did exceeding harm,
chiefly at Carreato. Departing to the Isle Lipari, he miserably spoiled it; so
battering the City with 40 great Pieces, that they were constrained to yield:
whom he carried all away (about 7000) burning the City; so he returned toward
Constantinople, some Captives almost every hour being cast dead overboard, who
were all shut close up together among their excrements, all detesting the
hatred betwixt Charles and Francis, the grounds of these, and thousands of other
calamities. He arriving at Constantinople, in beginning of Autumn 1544, was
honorably received of Solomon, and highly commended for his good service.

Solomon, while tryumphing for his good success in Hungary, was advertized of
the death of his eldest and dearest Son Mahomet, whose body was brought from
Magnesia; and with exceeding solemnity and mourning, buried at Constantinople.

Solomon not only built him a stately Tomb, but a Temple, called the Temple
of Mahomet the lesser: annexing thereto, a Monastery and College, with many
things more, for the health of his soul. After which, he ceased from Wars two
years: in which time, Francis the French King died; also Barbarussa, of great
years and Fame in 1547, buried at his own House called Bejactas, about four
miles from Pera, on Europe side, where he at one time sold about 16000 Captives
from Corcyra: he there also built a Mohammedan Temple, yet with his Sepulcher to
be seen, that place was called Jasonium: about which time also, famous Vastius,
at 45 years old, died of conceit: at which time Charles the Emperor, concluded
a peace with Solomon for five years: Ferdinand being included, which was broken
by Solomon, at the request of Henry the French King, before its expiration.

Ercases Imirza, King of Sirvan, through the often injuries of his Brother
Tamas the Persian King, fled to Solomon, craving aid against him.

Solomon glad of the occasion, used him with all courtesy, promising to take
his quarrel upon him; And making all things ready, he passed into Asia, entering
at last into Armenia, besieging the City Van, yielded to him after 10 (...), on
condition that the Persian Soldiers might with life, liberty, and Arms,
depart. Thence he sent his chief Commanders to burn and spoil the enemies
Country: who running far, strove as it were, who should do most harm: Imirza
being as forward therein as any, presenting the richest things he got, to
Solomon, to draw him on still in that War; but Tamas, without showing any
power had (as he was wont) withdrawn his people far into the Mountain-Countrey,
leaving nothing behind, but the bare ground; so that, the farther the Turks
went, the more they wanted, without hope of better success than formerly:
wherefore the Captains and Soldiers, (to end such a War, taken in hand for
another good) consulted either to kill Imirza, or disgrace him with Solomon:
some cunningly filling Solyman's Head with distrust of Imirza's treacherous
dealing, and others Imirza's with fear of danger he was in: they persuading the
Hare to flee, and the Hounds to follow.

Imirza doubting some sudden mischief, fled to a Chaldean Prince, his old
acquaintance, who treacherously sent him in bonds to Tamas: who glad, cast him
in prison; and there murdering him, that none should in his behalf, prosecute
the War, or by his means hope for Victory.

Solomon was occupied a year and 9 months, in this expedition: the Turks
enduring great troubles, and hard distresses by the Persians: till he weary,
returned to Constantinople, having got neither honor nor profit.

In the mean time, one Raises a notable Turkish Pirate, craftily surprising the
City Africa in Tunis, and also Mahomedia, there settled himself, exceedingly
troubling the Christians by sea and land, chiefly those trading in the
Mediterranean; so that the Emperor moved, commanded the Viceroy of Sicily, and
Anria, to leavy a sufficient power to repress him before he grew stronger.
Whereupon they, aided also by the Knights of Malta, passed into Africa,
besieging the City, and making it saultable with battery: and hearing that
Raises was coming to relieve it, they speedily assaulted it by sea and land,
taking it in few hours, Sept. 10. 1550. many enemies being slain, the rest
taken. Auria, considering the City was not without excessive charge to be
holden there, razed it to the ground, carrying away 7000 Captives, and all its
spoil: doing also, all harm he could with fire and sword all along the coast,
that the Turks might find no relief, taking 12 prisoners out of Monasterium,
and returning to Sicily.

Raises thrust out of all, (...) with a few to Solomon, and so incensed him
with complaint of the wrong; that he resolved to make War upon the Emperor and
Ferdinand, though the 5 years-League was not expired. So comforting up the
Pirate, the spring following, 1551. he furnished him with a great warlike
Fleet, 140 Sail, Sinan Bassa commanding in chief, who arriving in Sicily,
suddenly surprised the Town and Castle of Augusta, which they sacked. Thence
they came to Malta, landing their men in the Port of Marza or Moxet, battering
the Castle with Ordnance to no great purpose: yet some Turks running farther
up, made havoc of all in their way.

A few days thus spent, and they valiantly repulsed, and in other places by
Ambushments, etc. cut off; they removed to Paul's Road, landing their Ordnance
to besiege the City; but perceiving small hope, and their men dyng through the
extreme heat, they went to the little Isand Goza 5 miles off, westward (subject
to the Knights) miserably spoiling it, and carrying away of all sorts 6300
captives, whence they sailed to Tripolis in Barbary (then kept by the Knights
of Malta, given them by Charles) for taking whereof, landing their Forces, they
drew as near it as they could by long-winding Trenches, not without great loss;
for they of the Castle with continual great shot often enforced them to retire:
yet they came at last within 800 paces of the walls: where the Bassa by night,
planting his battery; next day, Aug. 8. the Canon began to play, and was
answered with the like, every hour some of the Turks being slain; 4 of their
best Canoniers were that day slain, with others of good account; the
well-beloved Clerk General having his Hand shot off: breaking one of their best
pieces, and dismounting four others, which made them that day to leave the
battery.

Next night they approached nearer: the Christians (in daybreak) sallying out
to their very Trenches, and so retired. The Turks at Sunrising renewed a more
forcible Battery; but the fire happening into their powder, 30 were burnt, many
hurt, and one piece broken. At length, the Turks continuing a furious Battery
within 150 paces of the wall, made a fair Breach: but they repairing by night
what was beat down by day, it was not to be assaulted. Yet a corrupted
Soldier, fleeing out of the Castle, declared to the Bassa the weakest places
thereof, ispecially that against the Governors Lodging, which standing toward
the Ditch, and Cellars to retire the Ammunition into underneath it, could not,
if battered, be well repaired or fortified: Wherefore, the Bassa laying the
pieces low, did easily so beat the Cellars, that the rampires above the walls,
greatly sunk, which so amazed the Soldiers, that they requested the Governor,
since the matter began to grow desperate, etc. he would, in time, take some
order with the enemy for their safety: Whereat, Vallier was exceedingly
troubled; which Peisieu the most ancient Knight perceiving, declared, in the
others name, unto them, that the Breach was defensible enough, if they would
courageously repair it: saying, It was more Honorable to die, fighting against
the Infidels, etc. than to yield to the mercy of those, from whom (...) cruelty
was to be expected, persuading Vallier to hold out to the last; yet he overcome
with the importunity of those who would needs yield, consented, A (...) Ensign
to be displayed, in token of parley; whereto the Bassa willingly consenting, 2
Knights were sent out, offering him the Castle, so he would (...) them with
ships to bring them with bag and baggage to Malta: who answered, if they would
pay all the charges of the Army, he would grant it, or all within the Castle to
remain his slaves and prisoners: yet he would exempt 200 of them, if they would
incontinently yield. But afterward he solemnly, though dissemblingly swear
twice (first to the Messengers) then before Vallier the Governor himself, whom
by a subtle Turk he drew out of the Castle, and who had answered the Bassa
warily, that they should all be delivered and set at liberty without paying the
charges of the Army: which good news being reported to them, they ran in press
who should first get out with their wives children and movables: but, being
issued forth, they were spoiled of all, and taken, part of the Knights being
sent to the Galleys, the rest to the Bassa: whom the Governor (minding of his
Faith twice given) he answered, there was no Faith to be kept with dogs: they
having first violated their oaths to Solomon, at giving over the Rhodes, never
to bear Arms against the Turks. Thus the strong Castle and City of Tripolis,
was delivered to the Turks, Aug. 15. 1551. the Castle being spoiled, and about
200 Moors, who served the Knights, cut in pieces: with a great peal of
Ordnance, and great cries and shouts in token of Victory. Lord Aramont, the old
French Ambassador, sent again by Henry 2d. to Constantinople, came to the Turks
Camp at the great Master's request, to dissuade the Bassa from the siege, but
not prevailing; yet grieved at the faithless Bassaes dealing, he put him in
mind of his promise by oath, at least to release 200, as he offered: but (...)
still said, no faith was to be kept with dogs, etc. yet he freed 200 of the
eldest and most unfit for service: of whom were the Governor and some old
Knights transported to Malto in Aramonts Galleys, but hardly welcome for that
cowardly surrender, Aug. 16. The Bassa for joy made a solemn (...), inviting
the Ambassador and Vallier. It was kept in the Castle-ditch against the Breach
in 2 stately Pavillions: one for the Bassa, the other for Aramont and his
company, feasted with great (...) of flesh, fish, and wines found in the
Castle, with Music, and above 100 Officers most in rich long Gowns: all the
Ordnance of the Fleet being discharged. After dinner, Aramont and Vallier
entered the Bassaes Pavilion, obtaining 20 more to be released upon the
Ambassadors promise of 30 Turks, taken at Malta, to be released at the Feast.

The Turks bringing forth John de (...) (an ancient Gunner of the Castle, who
shot off the Clerk Generals hand) into the Town cut off his Hands and Nose, and
setting him quick into the ground to the waste, shot at him with Arrows for
pleasure, and then cut his throat. The Bassa departing, left Raises Governor
of Tripolis, giving him the Title of Zanzack; whence he many years greatly
troubled the Moors nigh him, by Land, and the Christians by Sea. That year,
1551. Solomon for all the peace with Ferdinand, at his going into Perfia, sent
Achomates into Hungary with a great power, who with Hala the Bassa took
Temesware (slaying the Garrison contrary to their Faith given) then also
Zolnock Castle, first forsaken, with other small ones; but besieging Ersam,
they were by the Defendant's valor, and winters coming on, forced to get into
their wintring-places.

Queen Issabel, seeing the Turks daily encroaching on that little they left
her, by George the Bishop his advise delivered to Ferdinand the Government of
Transylvania, with all the royal Dignity of Hungary, for Cassovia and 100000
Ducats yearly pension and so returning into (...); but the Bishop (made a
Cardinal) being suspected by Baptista the Italian, to favor more the Turks
than Ferdinand, thereby to get the Governmeut, was by his device murdered at
his own House at Veradium.

Haly Bassa of Buda proud of his success, purposed (in 1552) to besiege some
chief Hungarians withdrawn into the Castle of Agria: so, aided by Achomates,
Chasan, and others ready at his call; he came with 35000 Turks, Sept. 10. round
the Castle, beginning a most furous battery:, attempting also to undermine it.
But all in vain, for the Hungarians by Dobus the Captain's good direction, very
manfully repulsed them, Sept. 29. they with 28 choice Companies gave a fresh
assault, and were forced to retire; 24 Barrels of Gunpowder firing, blew up
diverse with much harm to the Castle, and to the great dismaying of the
Defendants, October. 12. they assaulted it fiercely from morning till night,
leaving nothing unattempred; but were forced at last with great loss to give
other. Then he would by large promises and offers have bought them out; but his
Letters being scornfully burnt, he brought on his Soldiers most furiously
again, but with no better success than before. So after 6 weeks siege he
retired to (...), having battered the wall with 12000 shot, 6000 Turks being
slain, and 300 Defendants: Ferdinand making the Captain Vayuod of Transylvania
and bountifully rewarding he rest.

Henry the French King, so wrought with Solomon by Aramont, that in 1553, he
sent a great Fleet into the (...) sea, doing great hurt, that and the year
after, on Calabria and diverse Islands and places on the Emperors Frontiers;
yet were the Turks in most places notably repulsed by the people. In which year
Solomon seduced by Roxalana then his imperious wife, not Concubine, and Rustan
Bassa his son in law, murdered his eldest son Mustapha, the mirror of the
Othoman family: who was begotten on a Circassian Bondwoman, and for his
towardliness and perfection, had in the greatest expectation and admiration
among the Turks: while he thus grew, Solomon became amorous of Roxalana, Rosa
(or rather Hazathya) a captive, but so beautiful and Courtly, that she soon was
commandress of him: having made him a Father of 4 fair sons, Mahomet, Selimus,
Bajazet and Tziander, and one Daughter married to Rustan, called Chameria:
Mustapha embarring one of Roxalana's sons (she thought) of the hope of the
Empire; she procured him and his mother (with a Princely allowance) to be sent
to govern Caramania afar from Court attended on (after the manner of sons so
sent) with a Bassa, and a grave Doctor of their Law; but she saw, Mustapha's
utter destruction was not to be brought to pass without some Accomplices:
pitching at last on Rustan (her son in law, among many conceited of) who was of
a mean birth in Epirus, and though none of the best Soldier yet by
dissimulation and flattery, grew to be the greatest man in the Court: and whom
she knew was especially odious to Mustapha, for attempting to cut off some part
of his allowance (as he did the pensions and fees of the Officers and
Servitours at Court) thinking, if he obtained the Empire, he would not forget
it. Having broke with Rustan upon the matter, she suddenly became very devout,
and being exceeding rich, pretended (as for the health of her soul) to build an
Abbey, with an Hospital and Temple, demanding of the Mufti or chief Priest, if
such works of Charity were not acceptable to God, and available for her souls
Health? who answered, They were gracious in Gods sight, but not meritorious for
her soul, being a Bondwoman, yet very profitable for Solyman's soul, to whom
she and all she had appertained. Whereupon, she became wondrous pensive and
melancholy, her eyes flowing with tears, and c. which Solomon perceiving, sent
her word to be of good cheer, promising shortly to ease her of all her griefs,
which he did, manumissing her from her Bond (...): wherefore she began those
intended works: and hoping thus a good while, busied her self; Solomon, not
able longer to forbear her company, sent for her by an Eunuch to his
Bedchamber, to whom she with eyes cast-upward, demurely answered, All was at
her Sovereign's command; but to yield her body to him being now free, she might
in no case do without the great offense of the High God, referring her self to
the judgment of the Mufti, with whom she had fully conferred. Solomon ravished
with her love, required the Mufti's judgment: who agreed with Roxalana,
aggravating the fact, if he should enforce her as his slave, whom being free,
he might not touch unmarried; Whereupon, he became a fresh Suitor to her for
marriage (the mark she aimed at) and speedily (contrary to the manner of those
Emperors) solemnly married her; with 5000 Sultanyns yearly for her Dowry, who
now became the greatest Empress of the East; yet Noble Mustapha, Heir of the
Empire, in midst of her bliss, suffered her to take no rest: Wherefore she
labored cunningly by degrees, to breed in Solyman's Head, no small suspicion
of him, that he haughty, and generally beloved, and c. left nothing to be
expected of him, but when (as did Selimus) he should lay hand on the Empire,
and work his aged Fathers destruction. Rustan also omitting nothing that could
be slily devised for disgrace or confusion of the young Prince; for he secretly
told all, (...) Governors into Syria, that Mustapha was suspected by Solomon
of aspiring to the Kingdom, charging them to observe his actions, and c. and to
advertise him of whatsoever he should see or hear: and saying, The more
odiously they should write of him, the more acceptable it would be to the
Sultan? Wherefore, he often certified of his Princely disposition, etc. whereby
he had won all men's hearts, saw plainly he would at length be preferred to the
Empire; yet durst he not adventure to tamper with Solomon, but still delivered
the Letters to the malicious Woman: who ceased not upon occasion with pleasing
Allurements to infect Solomon, that whenever he spoke of Mustapha she might the
fitter produce those Letters; and with trickling (...) told him in what danger
he stood: recounting, how his Father Selimus had dealt with his Grandfather;
instantly (as if out of a careful love) beseeching him, to look to himse f; but
she little prevailing by those light Arguments of suspicion, sought how to
poison Mustapha: and rich apparel being sent him by her in his Fathers Name,
he fearing, would not touch it before one of his servants had worn it. Yet was
she still plotting new devices, and obtained that her sons might (by turns) be
present in the Court: thereby, more and more to procure their Fathers love; and
if Mustapha should chance to come thither, that she might the better dispatch
him; if not, to expect some other fit time; but he never coming (as not having
leave) she devised that her sons should wait on their Father into the Provinces
also; so that Ttzihanger, surnamed Crouchbask, always followed his Father in
the Camp: at length, she got suspicious Letters from the Bassa (who governed
Mustapha and the Province Amasia) that there was a speech of a marriage betwixt
Mustapha and the Persian Kings Daughter: which he thought good to give the
Council notice of. Rustan receiving the Letters, opened the matter to (...),
both of them going and declaring it to the Emperor; forcing their wits to fill
his suspicions Head with the fear of his most dutiful son; by their accusations
so prevailing, that at length, he resolved to work his safety by his sons
death: Proclaiming, almost in all his Provincos in 1552. that since the
Persians invaded Syria, burning and destroying, etc. he was forced to send
Rustan Bassa with an Army (which was soon raised): commanding Rustan with what
secrecy and quiet possible to apprehend and bring Mustapha bound to
Constantinople: otherwise by any other means to take him out of the way.
Mustapha hearing of his coming into Syria, made thitherward with 7000 of the
best Horsemen in Turkey: Wherefore Rustan returned to Constantinople so
speedily, that he endured not to see the (...) raised by his men, much less his
presence giving out: He heard the Province was in quiet, as indeed it was; but
he maliciously told Solomon, he manifestly perceived the whole Army so inclined
toward Mustapha, that if he had attempted any thing against him by force he
had been utterly forsaken. This raised in him new and great (...): Wherefore in
1553, he raised a great Army (giving out the Persians had with greater power
invaded Syria) and therefore he determined to go in person to repress the
attempts of his enemies) so coming at length into Syria, he (by trusty
Messengers) commanded Mustapha to come unto him to Aleppo, where he encamped;
yet (...) his close hatred against him perceived by great men about him:
Wherefore Achamat Bassa, secretly gave him warning thereof. Mustapha himself
also marvelling; that his aged Father should come so far without apparent
reason, with so great an Army; yet, being innocent, though-much perplexed, he
resolved to obey his Fathers command: thinking it more commendable to incur the
danger of death, than, living, to be suspected of (...) Loyalty: and after
much discourse with himself what best to do, He asked the Doctor (always in
his Court) Whether the Empire of the world, or a blessed life, were most to be
desired? who answered, the Empire (on due consideration) brought no felicity
more than a vain show of good, nothing being more frail than worldly Honor,
bringing with it, fear, vexation, murder, wrong, captivity, and abundance of
like mischiefs, whereby the blessed Life was to be lost, and not gained; but
those to whom God had given Grace rightly to consider these things, and
striving against the Vanities of this world, and to embrace an upright Life,
had surely a place prepared in Heaven, where they should at length enjoy life
and (...) eternal.

This answer very much satisfied his troubled mind, foreseeing as it were his
end approaching; and so, hastening toward his Father, pitched his Tents in the
open field, not far off from his Camp; But this his hasty coming, the more
increased the (...): Rustan craftily increasing the same. For he caused the
Janissaries and chief men to go meet Mustapha, as if for Honours-sake: and the
while, with troubled countenance, came in haste to Solomon, falsely telling him,
that almost all the best Soldiers of the Army were without leave gone to meet
him, he fearing what would ensue: Whereat, he became pale for fear, and going
out of his Tent (finding them gone) he easily believed all to be true. Mustapha
also, the 3d. day before his setting forward, falling asleep in the evening,
seemed to see Mahomet in bright Apparel to lead him by the Hand into a most
pleasant place, with most glorious Palaces and delicate Gardens: and pointing
to every thing with his finger, to say, Here they rest for ever, who have led
an upright and godly life, etc. Then on the other side, to have shown him 2 great
and swift Rivers: one boiling with water blacker than pitch, and in them
numbers of men, tumbling some up and some down, crying horribly for mercy:
saying, There are all punished, who have been malicious workers of iniquity,
the chief being great men of the world. He awaking, asked his Doctor what it
might signify? who musing a great while full of grief, answered, This Vision
was to be feared, as (...) the extreme peril of his life, and therefore
requested him to have great care of Life and Honor: but he stoutly replied,
Shall I suffer my self to be terrified and overcome with childish and vain
fear? Why rather haste I not? etc. and the more boldly, because I know I have
always reverenced his Majesty, never turning eyes or foot against his
Royal-Seat; much less affecting his Empire, except God had called him to a
better Life; nor then without the general choice of the Army, that I might
without murder, blood and tyranny, well and justly reign; and, in love and
peace inviolate, live with my brethren, etc. So he came, as was said, to the
Camp all in white, in token of Innocence, and wrote Letters (as the Turks
superstitiously do, when going to any dangerous place) and, putting them in his
bosom, came with a few trusty followers, with great reverence toward his
Fathers Tent, to kiss his Hand: and remembering his dagger girt about him,
entered not till he had put it off; being come into the inner-Rooms, he was
sutably received by Solymans Eunuch's; but seeing but one seat, he perplexed,
stood a while musing, then asking, Where his Father was? who answered, He
should by and by see him: and looking aside, he saw 7 Mutes (strong men bereft
of speech) whom the Turks has always ready for the more secret execution of
their Butchery, coming toward him: saying no more, but Lo my death, and arising
was about to flee; but, he was caught hold of by the Eunuchs and Mutes: and
being drawn to the appointed place, they cast a Bow-string about his neck, he
striving and requesting to speak but 2 words first to his Father. All which the
Murderer heard and saw by a Travers on the other side, saying to the Villains,
with a most terrible Voice; Will ye never dispatch what I bid you? will ye
never make an end of this Traitor for whom I have not rested one night this
ten years in quiet? Whereupon, they threw the poor Innocent on the ground, and
withthe Eunuchs help drawing the knotted string both ways, strangled him, he
doing the like to his Son shortly after. But presently commanding his Bassa to
be apprehended, and beheaded in his presence: Then sending for (...) the
crooked, bid him in sporting-wise, go meet his Brother Mustapha: which he
(ignorant) hasted to do, as glad of his coming; but when he came to the place
where his brother lay dead on the ground, he was beyond measure tormented.
Solomon sent to him, offering him all Mustapha's wealth with his Government;
but Tzihanger calling his Father ungodly Caint, and Traitor, and most highly
commending Mustapha: said, Himself would provide, that none should so
shamefully triumph over a poor crooked wretch, stabbing himself with his
dagger, and shortly dying: Whereat, the old Tiger exceedingly grieved: His Body
being Honorably buried at Pera. He forthwith commanded all Mustapha's riches
to be brought into his Tent: which the Soldiers hoping for, hasted to perform;
but Mustapha's Soldiers, not knowing what was become of him, (...) such a
multitude thrust into their Camp without order, notably repulsed them, not
without much bloodshed. The rest of the Kings Soldiers hearing the stir, ran
to help their fellows: so that in short time 2000 were slain, and more wounded:
neither had the broil so ended, had not Achomat Bassa, a grave and experienced
Captain of no small Authority, kept back the Janissaries, and likewise appeased
the rage of Mustapha's Soldiers by gentle and mild words, and courteous
persuasions: whereby they were so mollified, that they suffered all that was in
Mustapha's Tent, to be carried into Solyman's; but when Mustapha's death was
blown about the Camp, another worse tumult arose; They in a rage breaking into
Solymans Pavilion with drawn swords: which so frighted him, that he was with
extreme peril about to flee; (...) being holden by his Friends, and making a
Virtue of Necessity; he went forth of his Tent, but with a pale countenance,
speaking unto them: What broil is this? etc. What means your fierce and angry
looks? know ye not your Sovereign? Have ye resolved to stain your own and
Ancestors invincible Honor, with the blood of your Lord and Emperor?

They boldly answed, He was the man whom they had long before chosen; but they
had got and preserved for him a large and mighty Empire, that he should govern
them virtuousty, and not lay his bloody hands on every just man etc. and that
they came thither armed justly to revenge the death of guiltless Mustapha, for
which he had no just cause to be angry: protesting they would never lay down
weapons, till the Accuser of him for treason appeared commencing his accusation
judicially, upon pain of the like punishment, if he (...) in proof.

The late heinous fact made every man the while, to shed tears, so that Solomon
seemed to be sorry for his murder: promising the Soldiers whatever they
required; yet lest he should slip away, and deceive them of what he had
promised, they kept most diligent watch and ward: Wherefore to appease them, he
deprived Rustan Bassa of all Honors, and of his Seal which he delivered to
Achomates; But Rustan, now in no safety in his own tents: secretly asked
Achomates, what course best to take in so dangerous a case? who answered, to do
what the Emperor advised and commanded: Which was, without delay to get him
out of his sight and Camp: which he said he could not do conveniently, being
disfurnished of all necessaries: Solomon sent answer again, He were best to be
gone for fear of further harm. Whereupon, the guilty Bassa, but with 8 Friends
posted to Constantinople: where, with Roxalana, and other contrivers against
Mustapha, he in great great fear expected the event.

Mustapha was generally beloved, for his Virtues; but of the Soldiers, most
for his Martial disposition, and readiness to shed Christian-bloud: When in
private or public actions they fail of any great hope; They use to say, Gietti
Sultan Mustava: Sultan Mustapha is dead. When Achomates Bassa received the
(...) from Solomon; he told him, as he did frankly bestow it on him, (...) he
would to his disgrace take it from him: who swear to him, not to displace him
so long as he lived; yet Solomon falling in dislike with him, and willing to
promote Rustan to that the greatest Honor, to save his Oath, he resolved to
put Achomates to death: whereof, he (ignorant) came (as he was wont) into the
Divano; receiving word from Solomon, he must presently die, the Hangman being
ready to strangle him: whom he thrusting away with his hand, (showing no more
trouble than if it had not concerned him) looking round, at last espied an
honest man, whom he had often pleasured; He earnestly requested him to strangle
him as the greatest good turn he could devise, detesting to die by the
Executioners hand: which he at last undertaking; Achomates willed him not at
one twitch to do it, but slacking the string agaiu, to let him once breathe and
then dispatch him: being (it seems) desirous first to taste of death, and not
to die all at once. Rustan was presently restored to the Visiership, which he
enjoying about 6 years, died of the Dropsy. Solomon is reported to say, 'Twas
better for Achomates once to die, than to die 1000 times, in seeing his Honor
bestowed on another.

The Turks Galleys brought by the French into the Tuscane-sea did much hurt, in
1554, and diverse years after; Then did Contarenus the Venetian Admiral, chance
to meet with the Bassa of Calipolis (who the year before had rifled certain of
their Merchants) and having greatly spoiled them, he ransacked Dyrrachium a
Turkish Port in Dalmatia. Next year 1555 that Bassa recruited, surprising the
Isles Plumbis and Elba, subject to the Duke of Florence: and persuading Solomon
to take Arms against the Venetians, who had broken the League.

Then also did Haly by policy surprise Baboza-Castle in Hungary, hoping to do
the like to Zigeth Town and Castle: but his purpose failing, he in 1556
encamped before it with a great Army, June 13: wherein was valiant Horwath, and
a notable Garrison. During his terrible battery, they sallying forth slew many:
yet June 20. they won the uttermost wall, hoping at the 6th. assault to win the
Castle also: but the Christians sallying out, slew 800 of them, driving the
rest from the wall; yet the Turks with abundance of Carts labored to fill up
the Marsh and Ditches about the Town, which they also (...). The Bassa now
persuaded them to yield on composition; but failing therein, He beginning July
12. assaulted the City 5 days together without ceasing, still sending in fresh
men, yet was the City notably defended; so raising his siege, July 21. He in 6
days after returned from Quinqe (...), assaulting it afresh, but at last was
glad to be gone, losing above 2000, his best Soldiers, and but 120 of the
Defendants being slain: He had battered the Town and Castle with 10000 shot
found. The Turks the while, did what harm they could in the Tuscane-sea,
miserably again spoiling Corsica; for withstanding of whom, the Pope exacted of
his people a great subsidy, stripping the Jews of their money, and seizing on
their rich Merchandise; at whose earnest suit Solomon wrote to him briefly:
requesting him (having called him most mighty Lord of the professors of the
Messiah Jesu) to restore them their goods, that they might pay him his tribute:
which if he should do, he should feel his favor.

Haly Bassa grieved, besieged Zigeth again next year; when as Ferdinand sent
Polwiler and Count Serinus with a power to recover Baboza Castle: Wherefore
Haly rose from Zigeth, and met with them not fat from Baboza: who after a sharp
fight, put him to flight. Upon (...) Victory, and young Ferdinands coming with
new supplies, the Turks for fear forsook Baboza, Samartin, San-Lawrence, and
diverse other small Castles, (...) to Quinque Ecclesiae; the Governor of
Zigeth, slaying many in their flight overthrew a Troop, and taking the money
they were bringing for (...). Then also the Governor of Rab, or (...), burning
the Suburbs of Alba Regalis, and driving away 1000 of Cattle: and at Sian
overthrew 500 Turks, and as many fugitive Christians: so with little or no loss
returning.

Henry the French King, troubled with the overthrow of his Army by Philip of
Spain, not far from St. Quintins (Duke Montmomence the General, with his son
and diverse Nobles being taken) solicited Solomon by (...) to invade Naples and
Sicily by sea, to withdraw the Spanish out of France: which, he (offended with
the Ambassadors insolence) refused; yet commanding his adventurer's along
Africa, to do what harm they could; so that the Viceroy of Silily was fain for
defense of those Countries to lay with his Galleys in the Port of Caletta and
Naples.

The Grand Prior of St. John's Knights in France (brother of the Duke of Guise,
General of the French in Italy, who upon the overthrow at St. Quintins, called
rhence, soon after took Calis) went Eastward with 4 Malta Galleys to wait for
the Turks: meeting with 2 great ships of Merchandise, which he took, and by and
by had a great fight with 4 Turks Galleys, sinking one, burning another, and
taking the rest: but, in his return, 4 other great Galleys met with him, in
revenge setting upon him: who seeing no remedy, encountered them: but before,
losing some men, and 72 Knights laying sore wounded, he re urned toward Malta:
one of his Galley's with 52 Knights being taken by the way; yet he brought away
the prizes, staying that Winter at Malta: then sailing into France to partake
of long troubles shortly beginning.

Solomon had now only remaining alive, Selimus, and Bajazet his younger
brother, both men grown, but very much differing from each other, both in
feature and disposition. Selimus (most like his mother) was secretly determined
Heir of the Empire by his Father. Bajazet (much resembling his Father) was
strongly supported by the (...) love of his Mother, whom she would have
preferred before Selimus, if it had layen in her power. Bajazet, not ignorant
of his Fathers resolution toward Selimus: (being comforted by his mother
Roxalana and Rustan Bassa) resolved rather to end his days by proving his
Fortune, than upon the death of his aged Father, to be but jeered by his
Brother, being already fallen out with him. He knowing the disposition of the
people for the unworthy death of Mustapha: and some fearing to be called to
account for their immoderate affection they had born toward him; found out a
notable bold obscure fellow who should take on him the name and person of
Mustapha: from whose stature, countenance, and proportion, he not much
differed: who came (as if by chance escaping) into a part of Thracia (not far
from Moldavia and Valachia) best stored with Horsemen, and most Honoring
Mustapha (slenderly accompanied, as if, at first, not desirous to be known);
his followers rather fearfully giving them that asked, occasion to guess, than
plainly to tell them, it was Mustapha: neither did he himself much deny it,
whereby the people were more and more desirous to know him. Afterward he began
to give God thanks for his safe arrival there, telling them, that when he was
sent for by his Father, he by his friends counsel, persuaded (with great
promises) one mavellous like (...) to go in his stead: who, before he was
admitted to his speech, was strangled, and cast out before his Pavilion, the
greatest part being deceived in the miserable dead man, who was much altered
with the terrible pains of death: wherefore he presently fled but with a few,
and passing above Pontus and the people of Bosphorus, was now come thither,
where he hoped to find much help from his Friends: whom he requested not now to
forsake him, or less to account him, disgraced by the malice of his stepMother,
than they had in his prosperity; for he was minded to revenge the wrong done
him, etc. who had the Janissaries, with most of his Fathers family, and great
multitudes on his side: giving out those things, at last, openly wherever he
came. The same also did they report, whom he said were the Companions of his
flight, confirmed by diverse of good account, whom Bajazet had dealt with to
that purpose; so that a great number were hereby seduced. And Mustaphas
followers who knew the deceit, yet blinded with fear, grief, and desire of
revenge, were the first who offered their service to this Counterfeit: who kept
with, or entertained, some with fair promises, some with courteous speeches,
and many with Rewards; which he said, he had still reserved. So in few days,
enough almost for a whole Army resorted unto him. Solomon advertised from the
Zanzacks thereabouts, of the danger like to ensue, and suspecting it was not
done without the privity of one of his sons, reproved the Zanzacks by Letters
that they had not in the beginning suppressed the same, grievously threatening
them, if they did not speedily send that Counterfeit with his Accomplices, bound
to Constantinople: promising to send them Partau Bassa (who had married
Mahomets Widow, Roxalana's eldest son) with a strong power; but if they would
be excused, to dispatch the matter before his coming. Partau's squadrons of
Court-souldiers, were not so many, as notably faithful: for the common
Janissaries, standing in suspense at the fame, and expectation of some Novelty,
favored that broil. The Zanzacks began now to encourage each other to bestir
themselves, and (with all possible speed and power) to oppose the attempts of
this newfound Mustapha: by laboring to stay such as were coming to him, and
to disperse those already come, by showing them the danger, and threatening all
the extremities: Partau the while, being come not far off, the Counterfeit's
Soldiers, seeing themselves beset, a few slipped away, and afterward every man
fled whither he thought best: the Captain also seeking to do the like, was with
his chief followers delivered by the Zanzacks to the Bassa: who sent them to
Constantinople; where Solomon by most exquisite torments, drew from them all
the secret devices of his son Bajazet: causing them to be drowned in the sea,
at midnight, that his domestique, yea bleeding wounds, might not be laid open
to his Neighbor Princes.

Yet being greatly offended with Bajazet, he cast in his mind how to be
revenged on him; which Roxalana not ignorant of, when his fury was over-past,
fell into talk with him about it, alleging in her sons behalf, the
undiscreetnesse of youth, the necessity of the fact, and example of his
Ancestors in like case, etc. That it was reason he should forgive him this
first fault; but if he should again relapse, time would be to punish him for
both faults: that if he would not pardon him for his own sake, yet for hers,
etc. requesting him to prefer Clemency before just Indignation: since God
himself did deal with finners for most part in mercy, else all mankind would
not suffice his wrath: And would mercy in any place be more fit, than in the
Father toward his child? promising, he should thenceforth remain in most
dutiful obedience toward his Majesty; the remembrance of which Fatherly
forgiveness, should be a stay to him for ever doing the like: which, and such
like words, with tears and other gestures, so wrought, that Solomon resolved to
forgive the fault: but he should come and submit, and receive from him his
charge. Wherefore, she speedily and secretly advertised Bajazet, not to fear
coming to his Father when sent for: assuring him, she had made his peace.
Bajazet comforted, resolved to go when sent for: yet full of fear, often looking
back to his brother Mustapha. Yet he came to a common Inn at Carestan, a few
miles from Constantinople, the place appointed; for the Turk in these times
suffers no son, when a man, to come into Coustantinople: Bajazet alighting, his
Fathers guard were ready to receive him, commanding him to lay aside his Sword
and Dagger. But his kind mother (foreseeing in what perplexity he would come)
called unto him (in passing by) out of a little Casement, covered with a thin
linen cloth: saying, Corcoma Oglon, Corcoma: that is, Fear not my son, fear
not; not a little comforting and encouraging him. But having done his duty to
Solomon, he bid him sit down by him, reproving him of (...) and want of
discretion in taking up Arms, etc. And so having in other words also reproved
him of disloyalty, pardoned him: and telling him, if twere his destiny to enjoy
the Empire, it was not by man's power to be kept from him (as ordained by God
for him); but if otherwise appointed by God, then were it a mad thing for him,
to labor in vain against Gods will; Wherefore, he should cease to rage and
molest his brother and aged Father; for if he should raise new stirs, no place
of mercy would be found for his second offense. Ba jazet, rather craving pardon
for his trespass, than excusing himself, promised thenceforth to live most
loyally: Solomon calling for drink for Ba jazet, who drank what he thought
good; doubting it might be his last, but his Father forthwith drank a good
draught of the same Cup. So Ba jazet returned to his former charge, behaving
himself with all dutiful and brotherly kindness from that time, 1555. while his
mother lived, rather to keep her favor, than for any confidence in his Father,
or love to his brother; but she dying about 2 years after, he, by secret
practices to make away his brother, and by open force entered his Province not
far off, evil entreating some of his followers: omitting nothing tending to his
disgrace, whom he wished (of all other) dead. He sought also to gain the
Soldiers love by some favorites at Constantinople, passing thither himself
upon occasion, secretly there lurking with those of his faction: Of all which
(chiefly by Selimus, his Letters, wherein he also advised him to have a care of
his safety, etc.) Solomon had knowledge: Wherefore, he by Letters put Ba jazet
in mind of his duty, promise, and his courtesy toward him: that there would
not be always place for forgiveness; and that, after his death, God would
assign them both their Fortunes: But Ba jazet was fully set down to hazard all,
rather than to be slain by his brother: yet answered his Father not
impertinently, but his deeds agreed not with his saying; Wherefore Solomon gave
his sons to understand, that both of them within a prefixed time should remove
their Governments farther off, Ba jazet from (...) to Amasia, (...) from
Magnesia to Iconium: He commanded them both to remove, to seem indifferent,
adjoining this: that the farther they were off from each other, they should be
so much the nearer in mind and brotherly love, etc. to do in any case as he
commanded, and he who stayed longest should not be free from the suspicion of
contempt. Selimus made no long stay; but Ba jazet hung back, staying a little
way off, complaining of the unlucky Province of Amasia: stained with Mustapha's
blood, etc. requesting, to Winter in those places where he was, or there from
whence Selimus was departed: but Solomon would not hearken to him.

Selimus with some Troops from his Father beside his own, returning and
fetching a compass, appeared at his (...) brothers back, marching toward
Prusa, not without his Fathers privity: who thought it best for Selimus to stay
there, the fitter to help one another: if Bajazet should, as was feared, turn
upon either of them.

But when he saw this contrary to his expectation, and that Selimus should be
Heir of the Empire: He wrote unto his Father, accusing his Brother that he
thereby declared how maliciously he affected him, only to aspire to the Empire;
and have a short cut over to Constantinople, if his Father dyed, which he gaped
after: but otherwise, by secret Ministers of his Treason, to dispatch him, etc.
yet this man, as a most dutiful son, to be much made of: whereas he, meaning
well, etc. was not had in any regard, whose greatest request was but to shun an
ominous Province. Then he prayed, requesting his Father to gratify him, if it
were but with that Province which his Brother left, or any other more lucky
than Amasia, etc. However he was ready to go whither he should command: It Is
the manner of the Turks, of the smallest things to divine upon the greatest;
but Solomon not ignorant of his sons tears, knew he sought but for a more fit
place to raise new stirs in, nearer Constantinople. So Bajazet the while,
augmented his strength, and whatever else served for his own defense, and
impugning his Brother: which Solomon took as intended against himself; but
would not, by taking notice thereof, drive his too hasty-son head long; knowing
also, the eyes of all Nations were bent upon this discord: Wherefore, he
answered Bajazet courteously, they should both do well to go to their appointed
places, which he could not alter. For the rest he would so order it, that
neither of them should justly complain: Partau Bassa was sent with this Message
to him; and Mehement with the like, to Selimus: who were commanded not to
depart from them, till come to (...) assigned places of Government. Selimus
took it in good part, but Ba jazet thought nothing more unfit for his designs,
than to have one of his Fathers greatest Councillors still at his elbow, as a
Censor: Wherefore he dismissed him (though unwilling) with this excuse, that he
would use him as his Patron, having none other to defend his cause in Court,
promising not to be to him an unthankful Client; and to carry word to his
Father, he would (above all) have care of his command, if he might for Selimus:
whose wrongs and treacheries he had much ado to brook. Partau assured Solomon
of Bajazets very purpose: and, although he made show to go to Amasia; yet
Solomon made all preparation against him, sending the Beglerbeg of Greece with
his Horsemen, and Mehemet with some trusty Janissaries, to aid Selimus: himself
making semblance, as if he would have gone over: but the Court-Souldiers
detested that War between the Brethren: saying, It might well be let alone, and
not they to be forced to embrew their hands in each others blood: saying, What
Bajazet did, was to be excused as from necessity: which speeches Solomon
declared to the (...) as to a most sacred Oracle; demanding How he was to be
entreated, who of himself levied Soldiers, and troubled the State of the
Empire; and what he deemed of his followers, and of those who refused to bear
Arms against him: saying, He had not offended? Who answered, That he and his
partakers were worthy of death: and those refusing to take up arms, etc. as
profane men to be accounted intestible.

Which answer published to the people, was sent to Bajazet by the chief Chiaus,
to see if it might move him: who in few days after sent to his Father by an
intercepted Chiaus sent to Selimus, That he was in all duty his, but he had
only to do with his brother, and with him to fight for his life, by whose sword
he must needs die, or he by his, etc. Therefore, he should do best not to
meddle in the quarrel: but if he would needs pass over to aid Selimus, he
knew, if the worst came, how to escape: and would (ere he could get into Asia)
spoil with fire and sword more then Tamerlane or any other: which not a little
troubled Solomon, and it was reported that Axuar, where Selimus's son was
Zanzack, was taken by Bajazet and sacked. But Selimus hearing Bajazet, was gone
as far as Ancyra toward Amasia, being now out of danger on the way, hasted
toward Iconium, kept with a strong Garrison for him; for Solomon feared, lest
Bajazet intercepting it, should get into Syria, thence into Egypt, not yet
forgetful of the Mamalukes Government: and therefore desirous of change: out of
which open Country it would be hard to drive him out; chiefly the Arabians
being ready at hand: and whence he might transport himself into any Christian
Kingdom: Wherefore, he also commanded most of his Asian Commanders, to be
always ready to aid Selimus: with whom he lay under the walls of Iconium,
attending Bajazets motion, and expecting more aid from his Father.

Bajazet the while, first entertained Chiurts Horsemen, supposed to be of the
Gordions (famous for their known (...)) laying in the fields by Ancyra, in
whose Castle he put his Concubines and Children: taking up money of rich
Merchants, to be re-paid with use upon the success of the war: taking thence
also all needful Furniture for his men: Besides his own very great Family, and
those Chiurts; many repaired unto him both of valiant men and expert Soldiers,
and an exceeding Rabble who desired some change: many were drawn out of pity
to him, who (...) resembled his Father, but Selimus his mother, who was
generally hated of the people: He went heavy with a fat paunch, blub-cheeked,
and very red-faced: the Soldiers saying in sport, he was (...) with green
Malt, he was given to eat, drunkenness and sleep, not courteous, who would
not, He said, offend his Father, by being popular: so he was of all other men
hated, he most misliking those who hoped in a bounteous and courageous Prince.
They used to call Bajazet Softi, or one quiet and studious; but now they began
to admire him as a man of valor: asking each other: why his Father should
reject him his express Image, preferring that gor-bellied sluggard, in whom no
spark of his Fathers valor was to be (...)? saying, This was no fault in
Bajazet, being necessitated to take up Arms: for, did not Selimus the
Grandfather the like? etc. yet this man, they said, intended no harm against
his Father, nor yet his Brother; if he might by his leave but live, he ceasing
to do him wrong. By such affections, Bajazets power daily increased almost to a
full Army, who marched forthwith against his Brother; for whose coming Selimus
waited before Iconium, with an exceeding strong Army, and many notable
Commanders: who lay covered, with their Ordnance conveniently planted; But
Bajazet, come within sight of them, exhorted his Soldiers to play the men, for
now the time and place was come, where they should show themselves courageous
and valiant, and he would make them all rich and fortunate, etc. saying, It was
only Selimus who withstood his welfare, and theirs, whom they should seek for
as their common enemy, and not fear his multitudes: since Victory was to be
gained not by number, but valor; and the most mighty God was present not with
the most, but best; concluding, if they fought for his Honor, as they should
see him do for their profit, he dared assure them of Victory: which said, he
performed all the parts of a worthy Captain: so that he was alike commended of
his own, and enemies. The battle was terriblo, many falling on both sides,
40000 Turks in all being slain, but at length the Victory inclined to the
stronger, juster, and better Counsel'd-side. Bajazet retiring, but so
leisurely, and without show of fear, that he seemed well near to gain as lose
the field: neither durst Selimus pursue him, being most glad to see his back.
But Bajazet thus disappointed of his journey into Syria, began now in good
earnest to go to Amasia.

Solomon speedily hearing of the (...), passed into Asia, his great Bassaes now
thinking it not good for him longer to stay, left Bajazets overthrow might
occasion his secret Favorites to raise greater troubles: but hastily to pursue
Bajazet, and not suffer him (as his Grandfather Selimus) to gather greater
courage; and indeed this battle got Bajazet great admiration and love, though
unfortunate, who with so small a power durst encounter, and so behaving himself
in fight; men saying, Selimus might boast to his Father of the Victory; but
Bajazet deserved to overcome, etc. These speeches doubled his fathers care,
increasing his hatred; so passing into Asia, he purposed not to go far from the
seacoast, but, as it were, a far off to countenance Selimus's proceedings:
doubting (by coming too near with his Army) of the sudden revolt of his
Janissaries. Augerius, the Reporter of this History, saw him depart out of
Constantinople, June 1. 1559. who himself was sent for within few days, the
Bassaes thinking it not amiss to have him in the Camp and use him as their
friend who was assigned to lodge in an Inn near the Camp: he descryed the good
order, and great quietness and cleanliness of the Turks Camp, who when they
disburthen nature, dig a hole and bury it: Also their opinion of those dying in
their wars, that no souls go more speedily to Heaven than of such, valiantly
dying; for whose welfare their maidens make daily prayers and vows: He also saw
their Butchery, but very small, the Janissaries using a spare diet, and in their
Fasts being very precise, preparing themselves to abstinence the day before:
not, as a Turkish Ambassador reported of the Germans, saying, The Christians
on certain days did riot and become mad, till besprinkled with ashes in the
Temple, they came to themselves again; meaning their disorder at Shrovetide,
and the Ceremonies used on Ash Wednesday: whereat the Turks marvelled the more,
as having many Medicines to drive away madness, but few or none which
presently ease the same. While I lay here, says he, one learned Albertus came
from the Emperor, with Gilt-plate, and a rare Clock, carried on an Elephant,
and Crowns for the Bassaes, presents for Solomon: who, that their friendship
might the better be known, and that he needed not fear Christian Princes, would
have them presented, in the Armies sight.

But Bajazet retired to Amasia, as if he would there have lived quietly, if his
Father would suffer him ceasing not by Letters and fit men to prove his mind:
who at first easily heard the Messengers, read the Letters, and courteously
returned answer; so that it was commonly reported, the Father and the Son would
agree; but this was but (by the Bassaes counsel) dissimulation, till he had got
him into (...) hand; fearing lest he, despairing of pardon, should break with
such a power into Persia, as might prevent the diligence of the Lievtenants on
those Frontiers: whom Solomon charged to (...) exactly all passages.

Solomon the while, torturing an making secretly away all in his reach, that
were but suspected to take his part: and some, whom Bajazet (...) sent to
excuse themselves. Bajazet was often warned by some friends, not to trust his
Father, but speedily to provide for his (...). But Solomon thinking he could
now by no means escape, returned to Constantinople the day after their Easter;
but Bajazet upon the very Feast Day after its solemnities, trusted up all his
things, setting forward toward Persia: who though he went to the ancient enemy
of the Othoman Family; yet resolved to prove any man's mercy, rather than to
fall into his angry Fathers-hands: some weak ones were left behind, amongst
whom was Solomon, his son, newly born (with his mother) whom Solomon commanded
to be nursed at Prusa. Bajazet used such speed, that he lighted on many
appointed to stop him before they were ready or aware: deceiving (...) Bassa of
Sebastia by seeming Fugitives, telling him, he was gone the other of the 2
ways, only to pass: and him of Erzirum under the pretense of desire of leave
to shoo his Horses and refresh them, in his Territory; who hearing he came
still on, made all haste, joining his Forces to the Bassaes, following fast
after him: who with Zanzacks, were on pain of their Heads, to bring him back,
alive or dead; but he made more haste to flee than they to follow; yet the
Bassa of Erzirum was displaced, and afterward slain by Selimus with his 2
stripling sons, in despite having abused them against nature. Solomon was
grieved above measure at his departure, and would presently have gone against
the Persian to terrify him from relieving his rebellious son: but these raging
fits, his grave Councillors for 2 weighty reasons, moderated. Bajazet, as he
went, wrote on gates and doors, he would give double pay to those who would
follow him: Wherefore the Captains distrusted their Soldiers, who also heard
their often speeches of great love toward him. Being come to the River Araxis,
he left certain followers upon the Bank to keep the Zanzacks, who still pursued
him, from passing over, whom they repulsing, passed the River, entering far into
the Persian Kingdom: till some Persian Nobles with great Troops, met with them,
demanding what they meant and sought for in another Kingdom? who answered, they
pursued their Kings-fugitive son: they replied, they did not well, against the
League to come Armed beyond their bounds, etc. As for Bajazet, their King would
consider what was meet for him to do; in the mean time to be gone, etc.
whereupon the Turks retired. King Tamas sent Messengers to salute Bajazet, to
know why he came, and see his strength, which some reckon about 20000: who
declared, through his Brothers injuries and Fathers hard dealing, he was fled
to the Persian-King, as his most assured Refuge, etc. but otherwise wholly
destitute. The Persian replied, He had done very unwisely, in respect of his
and his Fathers League: being, to account the eenemies of one, the enemies of
the other, and on the contrary: yet since it was so, he was welcome as to his
Friend, who would leave nothing unattempted to reconcile him to his Father,
which he despaired not of.

At their first meeting there was friendly countenance, often conference, and
great Feasting each other: Also there was a motion, one of the Kings Daughters
to be promised to Orchanes Bajazets son, and he put in hope that Tamas would
never be quiet till Solomon made him Governor of Mesopotamia, Babylon, or
Erzirum far off from both Brother and Father: where his Brother the
Persian-King might be his sure Refuge from danger.

Bajazet seemed by these speeches, so assured of Tamas's love, that when his
Ambassador went to Constantinople for a reconciliation (as was supposed); He
bid him tell Solomon, he had lost a Father at Constantinople, and found another
at Persia; but (the while) all things were plotted tending to his destruction:
which being ripe, a motion was made, that it was more convenient to have
Bajazets multitude, billeted thereabouts farther asunder, both for the better
Victualling them, and other purposes also. And indeed Tamas (unlike his Father
Hysmaell) was in fear of Bajazet; yet many thought he was enforced to destroy
him (not at first so minded) by reason of some of his followers: who persuaded
him to thrust him out of his Kingdom, whereof there was many tokens: Tamas
hearing also, that a chief Captain said, Why stay we to kill this Haeretical
King, and possess his Kingdom, by whose treachery we shall surely be all
destroyed,

Bajazet might not (then) well gainsay the dispersing of his Forces: though
many of his wise followers did shrewdly suspect the sequel; They so being
bestowed in Countrey-Villages where the Persians saw good: ere many days, they
few and scattered, were enclosed and slain: and whatever they had, became a
prey. Then was Bajazet and his sons cast into bonds; and that (as many say)
while merrily at dinner, at the Kings Table: who seemed to foresee, that it
stood far better with the safety of his estate, that Selimus should reign, than
Bajazet a courageous Prince, and much better Soldier than his Brother.

Bajazet imprisoned, Messengers ran to and fro betwixt, Solomon and Tamas; This
sending the Turk curious Tents, costly Carpets, one of their Alcorans, and
strange beasts by a solemn Ambassador, pretending to reconcile Solomon and his
son: Solomon craving to have him delivered to him, and the Persian seeming to
defend him: whom Solomon sometimes spoke fair, minding him of his league;
otherwhile denouncing War, strongly Garrisoning all his Frontiers toward
Persia, filling Mesopotamia and Euphrates (...) with Soldiers: Mehemet the 3d.
of the (...) Bassaes, and the Beglerbeg of Greece commanding them; inciting
also the Georgians against the Persians: who answered, they were not so
confident in themselves as to provoke Tamas: but when they saw Solomon himself
in field, they knew what to do, etc. He made show as if he would go in person
to invade Tamas on the side of Aleppo (who was somewhat fearful) having proved
Solomon to his cost; but the Soldiers unwillingnesse (many of whom without
leave returned to Constantinople yet unwillingly going again to the Camp when
commanded) easily stay the raging Turk; who perceiving that Bajazet could not
be got alive from the Persian, excusing himself by fear of his revenge, if he
should any way escape, thought best to have him there slain: which he hoped the
rather, because Tamas lately wrote to him, He could not but marvel he dealt so
slenderly in so important a matter: That he should do well now to send him men
of account, with whom he might confer and conclude according to the
weightinesse of the cause: Bajazet having also been to him no small charge,
before he could get him into his power: whereby Solomon perceived money was the
thing sought after. Whereupon Hassan Aga, and the Bassa of Maras departed
toward Persia in the depth of Winter, and with great speed, losing many
followers by the way. Being come to the Court at Casbin; they desired first to
see Bajazet, close shut up, wan and pale and not to be known before he was
trimmed; and then Hassan knew it to be him, who was brought up with him from a
child. But after long discourse with the King: it was agreed that Solomon
should recompense all his charges and harms, since Bajazet came into Persia,
with a reward suitable to so great a good turn: and then Solomon might have him
made away.

Hassan posting to his Master, he forthwith made all ready, sending it to the
borders of Persia by a safe Convoy, the Persians receiving it, Hassan coming
presently after, and (...) him (with a Bow-string) himself, as Solomon had
straightly charged him, not being suffered to see his Children first, as he
requested, as is reported: 3 of his sons, Omer, Amurat, and Selym, being there
also strangled, whose bodies with their Fathers were buried at Sebastia; but
young Muhamet at nurse at Amasia, was now commanded to bestrangled also: the
Eunuch sent, loath to do it himself, took with him a hard-hearted Porter of the
Court, who coming, and fitting the string to the Child's neck, it swiled on him,
and lifting it self up as it could, offered to embrace his neck and kiss him:
whereat the stony-hearted man fell down in a swound, and lay for dead. The
Eunuch standing without the Chamber, and marvelling at his long stay, goes in,
where finding the Ruffian on the ground, strangled the guiltless child
himself. So long as it was uncertain what success Bajazets attempts would have,
Solomon spared the Infant, lest upon his good hap, he might seem to strive
against the will of God: but his Father being dead, and his quarrel by the ill
success condemned as it were, by the Sentence of the Almighty, he though not
good to suffer him longer to live, lest of an ill Bird might come an ill Chick;
for the Turks judge all to be well or ill done by the good or bad success,
though brought to pass, or endeavored by never so bad or good means; as
appeared by a Chiaus in his talk with the Author of this History, who justified
Selimus, Solyman's Father, but exclaimed against Bajazet.

This Year, 1558. the Emperors Charles 5th, who had 2 years before, delivered
all his Haereditary Dominions to his son Philip: on Febr. 24. the day of his
birth, by his Ambassadors, resigned the Empire to his brother Ferdinand,
requesting the Electours to confirm him therein, which they did March 13.
following; so as a private man in a solitary life, whereto he had certain years
before retired himself. He died Sept. 21 after, living 58. and reigning 39
years: About which time also died Mary Queen of Hungary, and Eleanor the
French Queen, his Sisters.

The Knights of Malta, had at length so prevailed with the Pope and King of
Spain for recovery of Tripolis in Barbary: and the Island Zerbi betwixt
Tripolis and Tunis (then also surprised by the Turks) whence they much troubled
the Christians; that the King made ready a great Fleet in September. 1559. unto
which, the Pope, Duke of Florence, the said Knights, and others, joined their
Forces, there being 100 Galleys and ships met together in Sicily, Gonzaga being
General; but whilst they wintred in the Haven of Marza-Moxet in Malta, many
Soldiers died.

Spring being come, the Captains consulted, whether first to set upon Tripolis,
or Zerbi, otherwise Mening. The Knights thought best to besiege Tripolis
speedily, before Dragut should come to furnish it. Others rather, first to
invade Zerbi Island, where the Army might be relieved with plenty, and whence
they might, in danger, safely retire, and thence go to Tripolis as time should
serve: Which most agreeing to, in Feb. 1560. they sailed to Zerbi. Dragut the
while being come to Tripolis with 800 Janissaries had also notably sortified the
City, certifying Solomon of the Christians Fleets arrival: who at their first
landing on Zerbi, were encounted by the Moors, whom they repulsed, and landed
at pleasure. It is not far from the main, no River in it but boggs and Marshes,
and somewhat Hilly in the middle. About 30000 men inhabited it, dwelling in low
Cottages, yet is the Island, reasonable fertile. The Christians sent for
Carvanus thither, a poor King, from whom Dragut had taken it, to use his
Counsel: and going with 8000 to besiege the strongest Castle in the Island,
they lighted on 10000 Moors; which lay in ambush in a Wood: 700 of whom being
slain in skirmish by the Spaniards, (who went foremost) the rest fled; so
laying hard siege to the Castle, the Captain fled secretly with his Turks,
leaving it for the Moors to defend: who (to depart in safety) yielded the
Castle: three Spanish Companies being there left, Caravanus the Moor-King (with
the King of Tunis's Son) came the while, to the Camp, sitting on the ground,
and wisely discoursing with the General, how the Turks were to be removed out
of Africa; but suddenly, a Pinnace brought news, that Piall the Turk's
Admiral, was coming with 85 Galleys (more repairing to him daily) with a
number of the Turk's best and most approved Soldiers (for the Turks had a
great opinion of the valor of the Spaniards: they were doubtful also of the
long journey; so many of them before setting forth, making their wills; so that
all Constantinople was in a confused fear). The Christians were not a little
troubled hereat: yet they new fortified the Castle, agreeing with the chief
Moore in the Island (who had set up the King of Spain's Ensigns, instead of
Draguts) to pay yearly tribute to the King (as before to Dragut) 6000 Crowns, 1
Cammell, 4 Ostriches, 4 Sparrow-Hawks, and 4 blew Faulcons.

But May 9th, the Master of Malta gave those at Zerbi to understand, that the
Turk's Fleet was even at hand, advising them to get them to some more safe
place, or come to him for fear of being by so great a power oppressed:
whereupon, Auria the Admiral requested the General presently to come aboard;
but he for all that, stayed at the Castle, where they had built four strong
Bulwarks, not yet all perfectly finished; but whilst he is thus busy, next
day, descrying the Turks from far, he hasted to be gone, with the Admiral, and
was twice by a contrary wind, driven again into the Haven; so that with much
ado, they got into the Castle; for the wind brought the Turks so fast on, that
the Christians dismayed, knew not well which way to turn; but most of the Ships
and 14 Galleys, were gone the night before, and the Master of Malta had called
home his, in April: of the rest, some few Galleys escaped, others ran aground,
10 whereof, were taken by the Turks; and the rest that were left, though they
(awhile) did what they might to save themselves. The night following, the
Viceroy and Admiral, secretly got away to Malta.

Auria gathered together the remainder of the dispersed Fleer, having lost 17
Galleys, and a good part of the Ships. Don de Sands was left as General in the
Castle, with 5000 Foot, some Germans and Italians, but most Spaniards: besides
1000, no Soldiers.

The Turks besieging it May 17. were notably encountered, and repulsed in their
assaults. Dragut came at length to the siege, increasing the battery with 15
great Pieces. The Christians also with 40 great Pieces, slew a number of Turks
and Moors, and sallying out, fought with them, slaying and wounding many. Thus
the siege continued three months; but in the Castle was but one great Cistern,
which though yielding some store of water, yet was not enough to suffice so
great a multitude in that hot Clymate and season; but was sparingly measured
our to the Soldiers, as far as it would go: which some augmented by distilling
Seawater, mingling it with their allowance, till they had spent all their
Wood. Many half dead lying on the ground, gaping and crying, water, water, into
whose mouths, if any one powered a little they as revived, would sit up, till
for thirst they fell down again, at length giving up the Ghost.

The Governor considering the great extremity attempted with Doude Leyva, the
Neopolitan Admiral, and Bellingerius the Sicilian Admiral, and others to escape
by night, into a Galley under the Castle; but, in so doing, were all taken:
whereupon, the Soldiers, covenanting only for life, yielded themselves into
captivity. In this expedition, about 18000 Christians one way or other,
perished.

Psall sent news hereof, by a Galley, to Constantinople, dragging (as a token)
at its Poup, a great Christian Ensign, having the Picture of Christ crucified,
the Turks exceedingly rejoysing for so great a Victory; yea, many came by heaps
to the Emperors Ambassador his Gate, deridingly asking his servants, if they
had any Brethren, Kinsmen or friends, in the Spanish Fleet at Zebri, saying, if
they had, they should shortly see them there: bragging also of their own
valor, and scorning the Christians cowardice, asking, Who could withstand
them, now the Spaniards also were overcome.

In September, the Victorious Fleet returned, with the prisoners, spoils, and
Christians Galleys, anchoring that night near the Rocks in the face of the City.

Solomon, from a Gallery near the Havens mouth, joining to his Garden, beheld
the coming in of the Fleet, De Sands, De Leyna, and Don Bellingerus, being on
the Poup of the Admiral Galley, to show; the Christian Galleys difarmed and
unrigid, were towed at the tail of the Turk's Galleys: no man perceiving in
Solyman's countenance, any sign at all of insolent joy: so capable was the
great heart of that old Sire of any fortune.

Few days after, the Captives (almost starved) were brought to Court: many
could scarce stand, some fell down and fainted, others died: they were
scornfully led in triumph, with Arms disorderly put upon them: the Turks
insulting about them, promising themselves the Empire of the whole World, and
asking, What enemy they were to fear, now the Spaniard was overcome: De Sands
was brought into the Divano, and demanded by Rustan Bassa, What his Master
meant, being not able to defend his own, to invade other men's? Who answered,
that it beseemed not him to judge of it: himself to have done but his duty,
etc. though he had no good fortune therein. Then he besought the Bassa on his
knee, to speak to Solomon to spare him, for his poor Wife and small Children's
sake at home. Rustan answered courteously, his Sovereign was of a mild nature,
and that he was in good hope of his pardon: So he was sent to Caradines Castle;
but not gone far, he was sent for back again; for the great Chamberlain had not
seen him: whereat, he was much troubled, fearing the Bassaes would have put him
to death. The rest, of the bettersort, were committed to Pera Castle; yet the
three chief aforesaid, were with much ado, at the Emperor's request, and his
Ambassadors dexterity set at liberty, though Solomon had denied them to the
French Ambassador, an earnest intercessour; yet the Mufties opinion was first
asked: whether many Turks might be changed for a few Christians? (for 40 common
Turks were to be freed for them) who answered: some of their Doctors said it
was lawful, and some, not; yet himself then resolved on the more favorable
part. There were two other noble persons taken at Zebri, Don John
Bellingerius's Son in Law, and Don Gasto, the Duke of Medina's Son, yet a
youth. Don John had ordered a great sum to be left in Chios, as the Turk's
Fleet went by, whence he got into Spain; but Gasto was by Piall (in hope of a
great Ransom) hidden; but Solomon having an inkling thereof by Rustan, labored
to have Casto sought out, to have a more just occasion to put Piall to death;
but Gasto was dead, either through the Plague or Piall's means, lest the truth
should be found out: whose Fathers servants seeking for him with great care, he
could never be heard of: yet Piall took occasion with a few Galleys, to wander
among the Isles of Aegeum, as if he had something to do; but indeed, shunning
the sight of his angry Lord, lest he should have answered the matter in bonds:
till at the request of his Son Selimus, and Suleiman Bassa, the Eunuch and
Chamberlain, he was appeased, saying: Well, has he from me pardon for so great
an offense; but let God the most just revenger of all villainies, take of him
due punishment after this life.

Busbequius the Emperors Ambassador, easily obtained of a Turkish Colonel,
the Emperial Ensign of the Galleys of Naples, containing within the compass of
an Eagle, the Arms of all Provinces belonging to Spain: an Ensign of Charles the
5th, by sending him 2 Suits of Silk, (such as the Turks make reckoning of) for
it.

November. 25. this year, died Andreas Auria. 94 years old, of great fame and
reputation, chiefly with Charles the 5th, in whose service he did much; yet the
notablest thing, was the kindness he showed to Genua his Native Country, which
he freed from French oppression: not taking on him the sole Government, (as
others had done); but appeasing the great long dissension there, he established
such a wholesome Government (no man's liberty infringed) as that it has ever
since flourished in Wealth, State, and Freedom.

In 1561, the Turks robbed and spoiled upon the Coasts of Italy, Sicily, and
Malta, against whom Philip of Spain sending his Galleys, lost 25 by Tempest,
with Mendoza the Admiral, September. 18. Ferdinand the Emperor, having with long
suit, and much entreaty, obtained peace of Solomon; and being well stricken in
years, commended to the Princes Elector, his Son Maximilian, King of Bohemia,
to be chose King of Romans: whereupon, an Assembly of them met at Frankford;
and November 24, they chose Maximilian accordingly, solemnly crowning him: who
Sept. 8th, 1562. was crowned King of Hungary at Presburg. Unto this Assembly,
came Ibraim Bassa, or Abraham Strotzza (a Polonian born) Ambassador from
Solomon, with Presents and Letters to Ferdinand, to confirm the aforesaid peace
for 8 years: where having audience, after much speech in setting forth his
Masters greatness with his love toward the Emperor, and his Son the new
chosen King, he delivered his Letters of credence to the Emperor, notably
showing Solyman's most insolent pride and presumption, and miserable Estate of
Hungary, divided as it were at his pleasure, betwixt him and the Emperor:
laying down the several conditions of the peace to be observed: promising
toward the conclusion, that he should give unto that new-made friendship, so
great Honor, Reverence, and Authority, that what might even in the least
things be had, should not on his part, be wanting: in token whereof, (says he)
we have suffered certain Christian Captives, to return unto (...) without
ransom, as thou requestedst by thy Ambassador, who could never have been
redeemed, if in regard of this amity we had not granted them liberty: trusting
thou will likewise set at liberty, such of ours as thou have Captives.

The gifts presented, were two natural Crystal Cups, curious, and set with
precious stones: a courageous Horse, with a golden wrought Saddle, and
Trappings set with precious stones, and chains of pure Gold, and 4 very fair
Cammels: the Bassa making excuse, that the Horse and Cammels had lost their
beauty, being somewhat lean and weary, with 4 months Travel. This peace held
firm till the death of Ferdinand, who about two years after July 25. died,
(being 60 years old) in 1564. In whose place succeeded Maximilian his son. Then
began the Emperor's Captains on one side, and the Turk's Captains, with the
Vayuod of Transylvania, on the other, to surprise strong Holds in each others
confines, in Hungary.

Melchior Balas, first surprised certain Towns, on the frontiers about
Transylvania: in revenge whereof, the Vayuod set upon Sackmarin, the Emperors
Territory, which he took, with Balas his Wife and Children: wherefore, Balas
ransacked and burnt (...), a great Town of the Vayuods. Ere long, the Vayuod
aided with 4000 Turks, and 3000 Moldavians, did much hurt on the Emperors
Frontiers in Hungary, taking Hadad, and besieging Ungar: wherefore Maximilian
sent Suendi with 8000 men, besieging, and taking the Castle of Tokay, Feb. 5th,
1565. and afterward rich Erden.

Solomon the while, to stay the Emperors proceedings, till he had better
leisure to be revenged, (for he was then preparing for Malta) sent Lilinesius,
a Renegate Transilvanian, his Ambassador to Maximilian, to mind him of the
League with his Father, etc. Whereupon, he commanded Transylvania, nor the
Turk's part of Hungary, to be no more invaded; yet while this Ambassador was
at Vienna, the Bassa of Temeswar, made diverse incursions, besieging Jula Castle
with 6000 men, many Turks coming daily into Transylvania. Then also Suendi, by
Messengers, wished the Emperor not to give credit to the Turks Ambassador, who
under color of peace, sought but to take him suddenly, unprovided. But in
June, the Transilvanians besieged Erden, before taken by the Imperialls, and
after two months, had it yielded to them: Chernovich also, the Emperor's
Ambassador, returning from Constantinople, assured him, that the Turks meant
nothing indeed, but Wars, greatly preparing by Sea and Land: Whereupon, he
raised new forces, diverse Nobles coming to him with their followers; and
Romerus, a Knight of Malta, and diverse of his Brethren, sent by Rochenheim
(their grand Prior in Germany, and then confirmed a Prince of the Empire).

The Turks being then busy upon the borders of Stiria, and thereabouts, were
often cut off by Charles the ArchDuke, upon advantage, (...) 3000 at one time; yet
was the Turk's Ambassador at Vienna, entreating for peace, and so cunningly,
that Salma a valiant Captain, having corrupted the Judge and others, of Alba
Regalis, to have betrayed it, (giving their Wives and Children as Hostages) and
was on his way from Rab (but 8 miles off) was by Post-letters called back by
the Emperor, for corrupting the hope of peace; the Turks afterward, of 40 of
the conspirators, impaled some on sharp stakes, hanging others on Iron hooks,
by the jaws, till they were dead. The Turks shortly after took Neostat, which
was ere long, recovered again. At the same time, a Turkish Spy was taken at
Zigeth, who was sent from Constantinople, to view its strength and scituarion:
who said (before the Archduke) that Solomon would personally come at Spring,
to besiege the Castles of Zigeth and Jula.

Count Serinus took also other spies, by whom he was advertized of Solyman's
coming: besides, the CountreyContributors to both parties, were straightly
commanded to pay no more Contribution to the Imperials: whereupon, what Suendi
had often written, was easily gathered to be true: Also the Turks made daily
incursions into the Emperors Territories: wherefore (being also warned by many
letters) put strong Garrisons into his Frontier-Towns, chiefly Rab and Zigeth;
but he likewise resolved to call (against the next year) a general Assembly of
the Princes of the Empire at Augusta, for the better withstanding of the common
Enemy. Solomon at that time, in revenge of the manifold injuries done to his
Subjects, by the Knights of Malta, made great preparation by Sea and Land:
whereunto he was much incited by Cassanes Barbarussa's Son, King of Algiers,
and Dragut of Tripolis; and having understood in what forwardness things were,
he called a great Assembly of his chief men, making known his mind in a speech
for the invasion of Malta: calling the Knights crossed Pirates, whom utterly to
root, he thought by God and his Prophets favor, he had now obtained leisure,
which he wished for always, 40 years: neither could any thing happen more
pleasing or honorable, than before he died, to win Malta, and leave all things
in order, in Hungary and Polonia. But some will say, (says he), Malta is
nearer Italy, than the Rhodes, Syria, or Jerusalem, whence aid may be easily
sent, etc. Believe me, they will never fight with us at Sea, who have been
there so often by us overthrown: nor can so small a place contain any great
Garrison, or (if it could) could it long feed them, etc.

After the matter well considered, and they which best knew the strong Holds,
and manners of the Malteses, had declared what they thought most expedient, it
was decreed speedily to set forward.

John Valetta a Frenchman, Grand Master, being adverrized hereof, by his fit
Intelligencers at Constantinople, was not afraid; but assembling his Knights,
briefly said, The enemy, with his insatiable ambition, strength, and mortal
hate against them and the Christians name was known: wherefore they should by
amendment of life, and religious worshipping of God, first reconcile themselves
to Him, by which means, their Ancestors obtained many Victories against the
Infidels in the East; but since God usually helped not the negligent and
sloathful, they must join those helps which their profession and the course of
War required, consisting in themselves and other Christian Princes: saying, The
cruel Tyrant should feel the sting of the Cross, which he so much contemned,
even in Constantinople, and his Houses of pleasure; for, (says he) we shall
not have to do with him now in the Island of Rhodes, far from help of friends',
enclosed with enemies by Sea and Land; but in the eyes of Italy and Spain, in
strong places, whence the enemy may be easily circumvented; for which, let us
not cease to pray unto Almighty God. This said, all present promised rather to
lose their lives, than to fail the cause, or come into Solyman's power. Then
was public prayer made throughout the Isle, and three most expert Colonels
chosen, diligently to provide for all. Warlike necessaries: by whose
appointment also, the supposed hurtful Suburbs and Trees were overthrown:
Letters being sent from the Grand Master to the Pope, and other Princes,
requesting their aid: Messengers also into diverse places, certifying the
Knights of the Order, and others of the Turk's preparation, who departed from
Constantinople March 22, 1565. And at Methone, Mustapha Bassa, 75 years old,
and General, mustered the Army, 7000 Horsemen, called Spahi, 500 out of the
lesser Asia: out of Mytilene 400, Janissaries 4500, (whose Aga, or chief
Captain, leaves not the City, but when the Sultan himself goes) 13000 who
lived of the Revenues of their Church, who had vowed their lives for their
superstition: 1200 Horse from Thrace and Peloponesus; and 3500 Volunteers out
of diverse Countries. In Piall's Fleet were found about 77 Galleys, Ships, and
Galliots, beside one ship cast away near Methone, with 6000 Barrels of Powder,
1. 3000 great (...), and 400 Spahi. This strong Fleet arrived at Malta the 18th
of May, and put into the Haven Marzasirock; but not being there safe, they
removed to the Port Mayor.

Malta lays betwixt Africa and Sicily, and is twenty miles long, and 12
broad: looking to Africa Southward, and ` Sicily Northward, seeming to be
called Melita, from Mel honey; whereof it yields plenty: it is in some places
stony, gravelly, and bare of Wood, great Thistles serving for fuel: fresh
water is exceeding scarce, their Wells filled with rain in Winter: in Summer
being dry, or the Water braccy: the Inhabitants differing little in color from
the Aethiopians: their Buildings, except the City, in midst of the Island,
being long and low, covered with Turf or Reed. Its rather to be thought from
Act. 27. and 28. that Paul was cast upon the other Melita, between Corcyra and
Illyria: the trouble and shipwreck being in the Adriatique Sea, out of which,
'(...) not to be gathered they were driven.

That side of Malta toward Sicilie, has many good Harbors and Havens; two
whereof, Mayor and Marzamoxet are divided by a narrow piece of ground: on the
head of whose high ridge stands St. Elmo Castle, of great strength. On the left
hand of the Haven Mayor, are promontories: on the first stands the Gallows,
whence its named: on the point of the second, on a rough and high Rock, stands
the most strong Castle of St. Angelo, the Town adjoining, in which resideth the
Grand Master, and the Soldiers in the Town or Burg: on the 3d, stands the
strong Castle, or Burg of St. Michael. Valetta had to defend those three
Castles and Towns, 1300 Mercinaries, Spaniards, French, Florentines, and
Neopolitans: 1000 Seamen of the Knights Fleet, and 500 in St. Angelo, 5000
Country people, which fled into the strong places: 500 Knights, besides
Priests and Squires; (for these 3 sorts are called Brethren of the Order.)

In the City Melita it self, was 200 Soldiers, and as many Citizens, with 300
Country Horsemen, commanded by valiant Vagno: Every place being furnished with
whatever was needful for a long fiege; and minds armed with invincible courage
against all chances: 200 Turks going ashoare, met with Riverius and 8 Knights
more, whose Horse being killed, and one Knight slain, they were all taken.

The Turks returning with their Fleet to Marzasirock Port, landed 2000
Soldiers, and 5 Fieldpieces, so intrenching themselves, Piall Bassa went to
view Michael Castle, but for fear of great shot, durst not come nigh it; yet
they sallying out, skirmished with the Turks.

Curfelinus, and but one Spaniard with him, taking an Ensign from them, and
slaying a Sanzack with diverse others: Piall being returned, the General in
consultation, agreed with the Captains to besiege Elmo Castle; and going up the
Hill to view it, they were encountered by the Garrison Soldiers, some few being
lost on both sides. Things growing hotter and hotter, Valetta sent Salvagus a
Knight, in a Galley by night, to certify Garzias, Viceroy of Sicily, how
things stood, that he might the sooner come to their rescue.

The Turks the while, cast up a Mount to batter the Castle, and beat the
Galleys in the Haven Major, for their Fleet to enter; but it was forthwith beat
down again by thundering shot from the Castle, much abating their courage.

(...) came to them with 6 Ships, and 900 Soldiers: They cast up another Mount
on higher ground, annoying with 3 great Pieces, not only the Haven, but Angelo
Castle, and with a rolling Trench, drew nearer and nearer to Elmo Castle:
which, though at first hindered by the Defendants, yet at last, they brought to
perfection, and soon so planted their Ordnance, that they batter both Elmo and
Michael Castles.

A Spanish Gentleman, then a slave to the Turk advertised Valetta of the
Enemies purpose: who sent forthwith two Spanish Companies into Elmo Castle, a
great strength thereunto. At length came Dragut long looked-for, with 13
Galleys, and 1600 Soldiers: 10 Galliots following him from Bona, with two
Companies.

Salvagus having done his Message at Messana, was commanded to return to Malta
in a Galliot, conducted by 2 Galleys: who bringing him near the Island,
returned; but he in the 3d Watch of the night brake into the Town through the
midst of the Enemie's Fleet, losing but one man: where delivering the Viceroy's
charge to Valetta, he was sent that night, back again into Sicily: to request
him with all speed, to send him supply: who soon arrived at Syracusa, sending
thence in the two Galleys, 400 Soldiers, diverse being Knights, and some
skilful Canoniers: willing them to shun the West part of the Island, and pass
by the East end thereof, farther about, but safer.

Then he went to Messana, declaring to Garzias the danger, requesting 1000
foot: which with those already sent, he thought would hold out, till he might
with his Fleet relieve them; but while these things were slowly providing: the
Turks June the 3d, assaulted Elmo Castle, hoping with short Ladders, to get
over the Rampires, nearest to the Castle-Bulwark; but the Defendants having
made a large strong Flanker, the Castle also helping them, filled the ditches
with their dead bodies: who thrust still on with their multitude, till they had
gained the Flanker: where they so speedily fortified themselves, that they
could not be hurt: their Ordnance on the other side of the Haven Marza, driving
the Defendants from the place, beating down the corner of the Rampire, and
battering the front of the Bulwark. But night coming on, five thousand of the
nine thousand Turks, tarried there, the Christians being forced to retire into
the Castle.

The Turks filling up the Ditch under the Bulwark, with Sacks of Tow and Earth,
gave a fresh assault, 800 Janissaries and Spachi being slain, and many wounded,
most of whom remained in the Ditch, where they perished: 45 Christians were
lost, 5 being Knights of the Order.

That night, Valetta sent 200 Knights, and as many Soldiers into the Castle:
who, if they had been more, with the 400 there before, might perhaps have
driven the Turks from the Rampires and Flankers, and kept the place longer. But
the grand Master, marvelled exceedingly, that no (...) came; for (...) two
Galleys (through the Master's fear) kept not the appointed course, he vainly
affirming, he saw some Turkish Galliots before the Port Milleria, shaping his
course to the Island Gaulos: which much grieved the Viceroy and others,
especially Salvagus; for he saw what would come to pass. Yet in the mean time,
six hundred Soldiers were taken up at Rome, by Pope Pius the 4th, His Command,
under Columna: whom his Legate Me dices accompanied; and for example to other
Princes, gave 100 l. of Gold to the Legate of the Order, with Gunpowder, and
other Warlike necessaries. With these went many Volunteers, and that with a
most ardent desire: who found John Auria and others, at Naples, with 36 Ships,
wherein these Footmen being imbarqued, were transported to Messana, where the
King's Fleet was providing. But the Turks, resolved to prove the utmost, before
the slow Christians strength were ready, assuring themselves more easily of the
rest, Elmo Castle being once taken: wherefore they began again to batter it
furiously for four days, without ceasing: the night following, giving a great
assault, almost gaining the top of the wall: the Defendants driving them down
with such force, that they never durst set Ladder to the wall, till the last
conflict.

Dragut's Soldiers the while, upon a bravery, went to Martia Scala, (betwixt
the Gallows and (...). Thomas Road) as if to do more than the rest; but, they
of St. Angelo sallying forth, they were glad after a great loss to retire
whence they came: Bonnemius one of the Knights, and 7 others, being slain.

Monferratus was then sent into Elmo Castle as Governor, instead of Brolia,
sick through watching, and pains taking, who had often written to Valetta, that
he thought it unpossible to be won.

The Turks not discouraged, battered the Castle with greater fury than before,
and presently gave an assault, having made a Bridge over the Ditch, that ten
men might go abreast: placing 4000 Harquebusiers about the Ditch, with their
Fleet at Georges shore, not far off: And hoping even presently to win the
Castle. Beragamus a Knight, and Medranus a Spanish Captain, with others, ran to
the Bridge with great admiration, opposing the multitude: the fight hand to
hand, being on both sides terrible: a Turk advancing an Ensign on the Bulwark,
Medranus laid hold on it: who in striving together, were both slain with a Turks
Bullet. Some of the 400 sent in a little before, thrust Barrels of Gunpowder
under the Bridge, some cast down Wildfire, Stones, etc. on the enemy; others
gauling them with Harquebusses. So the Bridge was burnt and blown up,
overwhelming 800 Turks in its fall: the rest retiring, most being wounded: The
Defendants having plucked down Mustapha's and Dragut's two Ensigns, set upon
the very Battlements of the Walls. Toward the South-west, some Turks got up to
the top of the highest Rampire, whom they of Angelo Castle, thinking to beat
off, slew seven Defendants thereon; but at the next shot, they rent in sunder,
four Turks Captains, and twelve the most forward Soldiers: other Turks casting
up a Trench on that side toward St. Angelo, they were soon driven forth by
fire, etc. cast down upon them. They retired, having lost 2000 of their best
Soldiers: almost 100 Christians were slain, and as many wounded The same day,
Valetta had a sight Brigandine, carried over Land to Martia Scala, thence to
send into Sicily, to certify by Letters the Viceroy and Pope, what was done,
and the danger, requesting speedy relief, saying to the Viceroy, Our lives lay
in thy hands, on whom next unto God, rests all our hope: wherefore, we most
instantly request thee not to forsake us.

Garzias greatly moved, seemed desirous to bring forth his whole Fleet against
the Turks; but seeing the supply of Ships from Genua and Spain, was not yet
come, he sent Cardona with 4 Galleys joining Robles Camp master, with a choice
Company of Spaniards; also 80 Knights went with them, staying at Messana for a
fit time to pass over: who let by Tempest and otherwise, came not before
Elmo Castle was lost; yet served they in great ste^d.

The Turks desperately renewed the fight, first thundering day and night with
their Ordnance on the Castle, then assaulting the breaches, with an exceeding
multitude and force, five hours endured that most terrible assault; at length,
the Turks repulsed, retired; yet the night following, they did so beat the
Defendants with their Ordnance, that they had much ado to keep them from
scaling the Walls: the Christians lost two hundred, and the Turks an exceeding
number: Dragut himself, dying two days after of a blow in the Head with a
stone: whose body was buried at Tripolis.

The Turkish Commanders, more and more enraged with the Christians valor, and
their own slaughter, commanded their Fleet to compass the Castle, purposing by
Sea and Land, to send in fresh supplies, till they had taken it; with great
industry, preparing what ever was needful for the assault: which Valetta
perceiving, and fearing they should not be able longer to endure such a fury,
called his Knights together, requesting them to declare, what they thought best
to be done for their safety: whose (...) (...) delivered, a Decree was made,
that 12 Pinnaces should be sent to fetch them away; But first, 3 Knights were
sent thither the night following, to tell them what was agreed on, and
carefully to consider the state of the Castle, which if the Defendants thought
was to be abandoned, then to poison the water, and clay the Ordnance.

The Knights, oftentimes shot at by the Turks, got into the Castle, declaring
the care taken of them: who all gave thanks therefore, saying, if they
considered the places straightness, the few Defendants and the enemies
multitude, they should well perceive the danger they were in, if such assaults
should be (...) renewed; yet since they had hitherto felt the help of God,
present, etc. they, for all the most manifest danger of their lives, would keep
it to the last man; for perhaps the like honorable occasion to show themselves
in, (...) never be offered, etc. requesting the great Master, not to be too
careful of them; but promise himself of them what beseemed resolute men.

The Knights having diligently viewed the Castle, returned to Valetta, who with
his Knights, heard the answer of the besieged, and would needs hear the three
Knights Opinion: Castriot, thinking the place was still to be defended, etc.
But Recca was of another mind, saying, If Julius Caesar were alive, he would
not suffer so many valiant Soldiers to be lost, but reserve his men to further
service.

Medina said, he thought it not good, the place should be so easily forsaken,
since the Ditches and Bulwarks were yet defensible; and there being so great a
consent among the Defendants. So it seemed good to the greater part, that they
should for certain days hold out, that the enemy might see his pride abated;
for the Knights used not easily to abandon their strong Holds. But the Turks,
June 23. in the dead of the night, battering the rest of the Walls yet
standing, presently gave a most terrible assault: the Defendants beating down,
repulsing, and slaying. Great were the outcries on both sides, mixed with
exhortation, mirth, and mourning: it was now the third hour of the day, when
still the Victory stood doubtful; but the very Rock bared of Walls and
Defendants, above four hundred being slain, a man could scarce appear, but he
was struck in pieces.

Montferratus the Governor, and Garas of Euboea, were both slain with one
shot: yet the rest fought with greater force than before, overthrew the Turk's
Ensigns, set up: slaying the Ensign-bearers, Captains, and Colonels: by which
time it was noon, very hot, and men exceeding (...): the Ordnance never
ceasing, and the enemy sending in fresh men: and so the Castle was won; but it
was a wonder, that so many should be (...) of so few: the Defendants were every
man slain in fight.

The Turks, finding certain Knights yet breathing, and but half dead, cut out
their hearts, then their heads from their bodies, (...) them up by the heels,
in their red Cloaks, with white Crosses, (black in time of peace) in (...) of
other Castles.

Mustapha, commanding them afterward to be bound together, and cast into the
Sea: who being cast up in the Haven Major, were honorably buried by sorrowful
Valetta: who, moved with such (...), put to the Sword all Turks before taken,
casting their Heads over the Walls, and every one that should be taken, to be
presently slain.

From the first of the siege, to the taking of the Castle, were slain 1300
Christians, 130 being Knights of the Order.

Valetta, though exceedingly grieved, yet seemed otherwise, because of daunting
his Soldiers: telling them, nothing was happened unprovided for, or
unforeseen: that it was the will of God, and chance of War, sometimes one,
sometimes another, to be overcome, etc. so encouraging them: then withdrawing
aside, he (among many things cast in his troubled mind) determined to write to
Mesquita, Governor of Melita, to certify him, the Knights at Messania, and
the Viceroy, of the loss of St. Elmo, saying in his Letter, He for all that,
thought it not lawful, to doubt of Gods mercy and power, though yet, he might
complain, that they were forsaken of whom it least beseemed: saying, all their
welfare consisted in celerity of relief from the Viceroy, bidding Mesquita to
send him three Captains, with their Companies, and praying God to send them aid
from some place.

Mesquita sent Codonellus a Knight, in a Galliot into Sicily, requesting him
with all possible speed, to pass over with those Letters: Mustapha the while,
sent a Messenger to Valetta, promising a Spanish captive liberty for going with
him, to try if he would come to any agreement for yielding up the Town:
whereinto the Christian being entered, (the Turk waiting at the Gate) declared
his Message to Valetta, who was so angry at the name of composition, that had
he not been a Christian, he would presently have hanged him: giving him his
choice, either to tarry still in the Town, or to go tell his Companion, if he
packed not quickly away, he would send him farther off with a great shot.

The Turk returning with this answer, Mustapha, enraged, protested, never to
forbear any kind of cruelty against the Christians.

One Philip, of the Grecian Family of Lascaris, then with Mastapha, (who had
been courteously used by the Christians in Patras, by whom he was taken
prisoner of a boy) had often attempted to flee to St. Michaels Castle, at length,
July 1. he swum to the Castle, being many times shot at by the Turk's Arrows,
and small shot. He revealed to Valetta, many of the enemies secrets, (...) him,
how to srustrate the enemies purpose, for assailing Michaels point, with other
things, no small help to the Defendants, fighting himself valiantly during the
Siege.

Codonellus, coming safely to Messana, found the Christian Fleet not ready:
wherefore, the Knights, after debate, resolved by all means possible, to help
their Brethren: choosing two Generals of their own fellows, the Commanders of
Messana and Baroli, who declared to Garzias, what the Knights of their Order
had done for the King of Spain and the Christian Commonweal, and what charge
they had been at the year before, in the Pinionian expedition; beseeching him
also to consider, of what concernment the loss of Malta was: therefore
requesting of him four thousand Footmen, with whom all the Knights there, and
many Volunteers would make all speed to relieve the besieged.

But whilst the Viceroy considers of an answer, a Messenger came from Spain;
whereupon, he answered, he could not grant their request; for so he should
disfurnish his Fleet; but they might transport the Knights, with part of the
Bishop's Soldiers, with their own two Galleys, to whom he would join another.

Those four Galleys aforementioned, with the eighty Knights, and six hundred
Soldiers, (through a great tempest, hindering the Frigot's return, which they
sent to see whether Elmo Castle were still holden; and afterward, by
mistrusting a fire, which they saw within two Leagues, where they thought to
land, (which yet was made as a sign, that they might without fear, come
forward) arrived not at the black Rocks, on the South side of the Island, till
June the 29, about midnight, getting unseen to the (...) Malta, there expecting
what Valetta should command: in the mean time, a great fogge (seldom there
chancing) arising, a Boy looked out of a Window in the Castle, crying out (as
afraid) that he saw a Turk going from the City, to Michaels Castle: wherefore
some of the Knights running out, found a Greek of the City, who upon
examination (for none (...) to go forth without a Pass) confessed, he intended
to give the Turks notice of those Soldiers coming, that they might be
intercepted as they came to the grand Master; for which, he was cut in four
Pieces. Three days after, in the first Watch, they came safely to Valetta,
except two or three Boys, who charged with Armor and Baggage, could not keep
way with the rest, The besieged, incredibly rejoiced at their coming, chiefly
Valetta: who with tears trickling down, and eyes caft up to Heaven, said, I
thank thee ( O Heavenly Father) which hear my prayers, and forsakest not
this thy little Flock, beset round with most ravening Wolves: these are the
works of thine everlasting goodness, mercy, and providence.

Valetta easily granting their desire, to be put into St. Michaels Town; (yet
not removing the old Garrison) they next day sallyed out; and having slain 200
Turks, and wounded as many, returned without a man lost. Mustapha knowing it
was they which came lately in, fell in rage with his Captains, as that they
entered by their negligence. But the suspicion was the more increased on them,
which kept the uttermost part of the Island, because 3 Galliots of Algiers had
withdrawn; so that he neither trusted them, nor the Renegate Christians, who
fled daily from him: wherefore he proclaimed, those who lay out of the Galleys
by night, should be burnt, or impaled on stakes; and changing his Warders,
appointed Sales with his Galliots, to keep the Island: chaining together diverse
Galleys in the entrance of the Haven Marza-Moxet, causing the rest of the Fleet
to ride nearer together than before. Three places were also assigned for the
wounded: and the then exceeding many sick in the Turk's Camp. Mustapha then
appointed Ochiall Bassa, Governor of Tripolis; who going thither, and setting
things in order, returned again: having carried two Ships of Corn there, to
make bread, whose want they began to feel. He sent also a Colonel to Solomon,
to certify him of the winning of Elmo Castle, with a description of the Isle,
as they found it: and to declare, that the Malteses were stronger and (...)
provided, than was supposed: wherefore if he should continue the siege, he
should send a new supply of Men, Victual, etc. and while he expected an answer,
he would do what possibly he might: who began his battery in fourteen places,
with seventy great Pieces, three being most huge Basilisks, so incessantly
battering the Towns and Castles of Michael and Angelo, that scarce any could be
safe therein: which most troubled the Women and Children. But the Turks were
far more safe in their Trenches; yet they durst not stray far from the Camp,
but with a multitude, and then also were cut off by the Horsemen of Malta, who
were ever ready at their heels.

At Rome, some were sorry for the dishonor at the loss of Elmo Castle: others,
fearing lest the calamities of the Malteses, should redound unto themselves:
There were also a sort of men, unacquainted with Martial affairs, who shamed
not to lay the blame upon Valetta: whom his own valor, the testimony of so
many famous men present, and this History shall now and hereafter acquit of so
false a slander.

But when the three Galleys (containing besides Knights, six hundred Spaniards,
and three hundred of the (...) Soldiers) which through diligence, departed
from Messana, July the 7th, with five hundred bushels of Wheat, (beside
Gunpowder, Saltpeter, and Lead for shot) approached the Island; their Scout
perceived by the sign, that they should retire: the Turks presently obscuring
the Air with smoke, etc. that those Signs should not be discerned; but they
were already descryed: so they returned to Sicilie; about which time, those in
the City Melita, pursued the Turks, when they were fetching in booty of Cattle,
slaying diverse, recovering the prey, and chasing them even to their Camp; but
the other Turks, seeing them flee so hastily toward them, raised an Alarm, ran
to the (...) Tent, and for that time, ceased their battery.

Valetta, conjecturing, the Turks would soon assault the Town and Castle of
Michael: was about himself to have gone thither, by a Bridge made of Boats,
from one point to the other; but hearing the certainty thereof, returned into
his Castle.

Some think it had been full of danger, for him so to have done; and therefore
to have been discommended.

Others think the Generals presence, chiefly in great dangers, is
prayse-worthy and most necessary: after the examples of Alexander the great,
Julius Caesar, Themistocles, Marius, and others: who said to their Soldiers, I
my self will be your Conductor in field, in the Battle partaker of the same
danger, ye shall be in all things as my self.

The King of Algiers came to the Turks, with seven Galleys, ten Galliots, and
2200 Soldiers: who requested Mustapha, for the first place in besieging
Michaels Castle, which he granted him, joining to his forces, two thousand of
his best Soldiers: who commanded 90 small Vessels to be carried by Land out of
MarzaMoxet, to Aqua Martia, on that side, to besiege the Castle by water:
Wherefore Valetta demanded of two skilful Shipmasters, what they thought best
to be done, to keep the Turks from landing: who thought their purpose might be
defeated, if a Chain of Masts and Sailyards, joined together with Iron Rings,
were drawn from the corner of St. Angela, to the place where the Enemy thought
to Land, which was done the night following: the Turks perceiving this bar,
when 'twas day, knew not how to Land their men; but a desperate Christian
fugitive, promised the King to break the Chain, and swimming to it, two or
three more following to help him, they got up upon it, hewing apace with their
Hatchets.

Wherefore five or six Malteses swam thither with their drawn Swords, slaying
two, and causing the rest to flee: after which, none attempted the same; yet
the barbarous King, diligently prepared for the Siege, which July the 15th,
began by Sea and Land; but the Defendants (in the three hours assault) slew
with their Ordnance two thousand Turks, and sunk twelve Galleys: the rest,
coming to the Chain which stopped them, turned their prows on the corner of the
Castle, but were glad at last to retire.

The Land-assault, endured also five hours: many Turks being slain, and two
hundred Defendants, four being Knights: Medina was also wounded, whereof he
died.

But Valetta considering what danger was like to be, if he should fight many
such fights: July the 17th, sent a Messenger into Sicilie, who swam from the
Castle to Aqua Martia, thence escaping unknown, through the Enemies, to Melita,
and so came to Messana: (...) Letters, requested the Viceroy, to send Valetta
his own two Galleys, with those Knights there, and what Soldiers might be
transported therein: at which time, the Fleet from Spain came to Messana, with
many Knights from diverse Nations.

The Viceroy sent Letters before, to Valetta, in Caracters, by two Frigots,
requiring some sign from him, whereby the Galleys at their coming, might know
whether to enter or retire: one of which Frigots, laden with Medicines, was
intercepted, the other came to Melita; yet since all passages between that and
St. Michael, were shut up, and the Haven straightly kept, there could be no
further direction from Valetta, for their safe sending; yet the Knights of
Messana, thought good to adventure 40 Knights, with other Soldiers.

Salazar a Spanish Captain being sent with them to be landed in the Isle
Gaulos: who should thence in a boat pass over to Malta as a Spy, to view the
City and enemies Camp: The Turks the while, in revenge of the former loss, so
battered the Castle, that they beat down by day what was repaired by night,
laying a Bridge over the Ditch, July 20. that they might come to fight hand to
hand: which seen, Parisot and Agleria Knights, with some Mercenaries, sallyed
out to burn the Bridge, but they were (with the Knights) almost all slain, and
the exploit unperformed. The Turks battered without ceasing, till July 28:
which afternoon, they assaulted it in diverse places, with 3 fresh supplies: but
the Defendants so repulsed them with weapons, shot, fire and force, that with
no small loss they enforced them to retire: Wherefore now they made small
reckoning of the enemy, who now determined to prove what might be done by
undermining, which they almost perfected undiscovered; for they caused 2
Galleys to come as near as they could, and to batter that place, hoping thereby
that the Defendants should the less regard what they were working in secret;
yet the besieged, perceiving their purpose, with a Countermine, defeated their
Mine; One Ancient, especially, casting pots of Wildfire before him, and
following after with a firework in his hand, forcing them out; for which he was
rewarded with a Chain of Gold weighing 5 l. And next day, Aug. 1. the Bridge,
was (by a salley made) burnt down with fire and Gunpowder cast thereon,
seasonably done; for next day the Turks again assailing that part, where Rufus
had the charge, were valiantly repulsed, 300 being slain in that 3 hours
assault, and Rufus himself with Baresus Knights, and some Mercenaties. At this
time, the Christians could not look into the Ditch or show themselves, but they
were set off with great Ordnance; yet Calderomus a Spaniard, seeing some
viewing that part of the wall, most battered at, the Castle-Bulwark, sallied
out, but was presently slain with a bullet: which did the more incense (not
terrify) the rest so that when they saw the enemy busy in filling the Ditch,
100 Knights and Soldiers sallying forth, made the enemy betake himself to
flight, slaying 80, and losing ten. men, 2 being Knights, whose Heads next day,
the Turks set on spears upon their Trenches. The same day, they of Melita (at
night) made many fires, discharging great Valleys of small shot, etc. done only
to show their cheerfulness, and keep the Turks in suspense: who for all that
filled up the Ditch at the Castle-bulwark, whereby they might without stay
pass unto the over-thrown Wall: with 2 great pieces from a High Mount cast up,
playing upon the Castle, shooting at first shot in Castilia's Loupe, a Spanish
Knight being there slain with a small shot: on which day a Spanish Soldier
fled out of the Town to the enemy, assuring them, they should by a fresh
assault win the Town; there being but 400 alive in it and they (he said) almost
spent with labor and wounds. Wherefore Aug. 7. they at one instant assaulted
the City at the Castle-bulwark, and the Castle at the Breach, with an exceeding
multitude; the noise of Warlike Instruments and cry of men on both sides, being
exceeding confused and great: which the Knights in Melita hearing, and seeing
the smoke, fearing the worst, All the Horsemen issued forth to avert the Turks
from the assault by setting upon those at Aqua Martia; who fled, these hardly
pursuing them with bloody execution, who pitifully cried for help: whereby the
other gave over the assault, to rescue their fellows; having lost 1500, besides
those slain in chase: the Defendants in both places losing above 100 and almost
as many wounded. Valetta going that day and certain others, to the Temple to
give public thanks for that Victory; Garzias was advertised, that some ships
with men and warlike provision were coming from Constantinople to Malta: who
sent 2 Noblemen with 5 Galleys to meet them: who met only one Frigot and a
Galliot, taking the one, the other escaping to Malta. Mustapha commanded his
Soldiers again to assault the Breach at Michaels Castle; where they were (with
no small slaughter) soon repulsed; He gave so many assaults, more to show
valor, and satisfy Solomon, than for hope of Victory, who had commanded,
either to win the Island, or to lose all their lives. Mustapha also sent in
haste to Solomon, showing the state of the Fleet, the Armies difficulties,
their small hope to win, how well the Christians were provided, etc.

The 2 Galleys aforesaid going out of the Haven of Syracusa met with a Maltese,
coming from Pozalo in a boat sore wounded, telling them, that landing by night
with one Companion, he was requested by 2 Sicilians to rest there that night,
and 5 Turks breaking into the House, killed his Companion, carried away the
Sicilians, wounding him thus, who hardly escaped by benefit of the night;
Moreover, that the Sicilians told the Turks, two Galleys were come into that
Port, bound for Malta: whereby they perceived their coming would be discovered;
yet they kept on their course as far as Pozalo, whence they certified the
Viceroy what had happened, and the South Wind blowing stiffly against them, they
returned to Syracusa expecting his further direction, which was to stay for the
coming of the whole Fleet, ready shortly to pass to Malta: but Salazar in his
little boat, from Pozalo, soon arrived at Malta, and came to the City, and in
Turkish Apparel, with a Companion who could speak their Language, by night got
into the Turks Camp, where they perceived there was scarce 14000 Soldiers in
all, many being wounded and sick, the rest but unserviceable and feeble. So
they returned to the City, whence Salazar with one Paccius a Spaniard, went to
a place nigh the Watchtower of Muleca, which they curiously viewing, Paccius
was there left, that observing the signs from Gaulos and Melita, he might give
knowledge to the Viceroy at his approach: Salazar himself returned to Messana
in his little boat, declaring to the Viceroy all he had seen; and affirming,
the Turks Fleet was far unable to encounter with 10000 Christians: one of the 2
Frigots sent to Malta, returning with another Spaniard and a Turkish fugitive,
and 4 Galleys coming in with 14 Turks taken about Malta, confirming the same,
and saying, that the Turks seeing the Christians invincible courage, and skill
in shooting, repented that ever they took in hand that expedition; many
stealing away, especially the (...) of the Christian Faith, etc. There was in
the Castle one Givara, Captain of the Vaunt-guard, who about 10 foot from the
Wall beaten down, drew a Curtain 50 foot-long, and 5 foot-thick, with Flankers
at both ends, a great help to the besieged: the enemy the while began a Mine
under the Corner of the Town-ditch, defeated by a counter-mine. As a fugitive
was swimming to the (...), he was taken by the enemy, which much grieved the
besieged. Now part of the Turks assailed the Castle, and part thought to have
blown up the Castle-bulwark; but many were in both places slain, and some baggs
of powder taken from them in the Mine. Mustapha and Piall disappointed of their
hope, consulted with the other great Captains, whether to continue that
desperate siege or depart; most thinking, it was best betime to depart, yet
Mustapha said, He would stay till the Galliot were returned from Solomon: and
the while, by force and policy to seek after Victory: which he did too often,
either for his Armie's or the besieged's estate, bringing all to such
perfection in short time, as might have carried a stronger place, had not the
Defendants valor far exceeded all his devices. Robles Governor of the Castle
viewing by night the Walls-ruines, was struck in the Head with a (...) shot and
slain, A man for his many good parts beloved. In whose stead, Valetta, sent an
expert and resolute Colonel, who so vigilantly discharged his place, that the
Turks were repulsed with loss, so often as they attempted the place.

Two Galleys with a Galliot (...) by the 2 Galleys of Malta, told Piall, The
Christian Fleet was ready to come forth: Wherefore he caused 70 Galleys to be
in readiness, keeping himself by day in the Port Mayor nigh the shore, putting
to sea by night, expecting their coming; but (after long looking) when he saw
none, he landed his men again, taking out of every Galley most of the powder
for the Bassa, (...) land. After which, they (with a greater fury) battered the
Walls of both Towns, especially with Basilisks, whose shot was 7 hands about:
the Walls of Michaels-Castle being (...) flat: and the Castle Bulwark of St.
Angelo was almost fallen quite down, Wherefore Aug. 18. (at noon) they fiercely
assaulted both Towns, being thrice repulsed, and still coming on afresh; yet at
length with greater slaughter they gave over the 5 hours assault: Wherein
Valetta armed with a (...), was still valiantly fighting in the face of the
Breach, so encouraging even the boys and women to fight, yet part of the Turks
stood still in the Town-ditch, having cast up a defense of earth, faggots, etc.
to save themselves, in approaching to undermine the wall; but the besieged
bending their Artillery upon it, slew many, (...) what was left. Next day the
assault was renewed at the same places: first battering both Towns all day, and
the Moon rising, about mid night with a horrible cry, began a most terrible
assault; yet the Christians (at first much troubled) with weapons and
fireworks, made the enemy after 3 hours fight, to retire ill-intreated: on
which day a Mine was perceived at the Castle-bulwark, wherein 100 Turks were
almost all slain, and the Mine destroyed; yet next (...) did the enemy, give 7
assaults, using fireworks also, Bobinsegna losing one of his eyes therewith.
The Turks also mightily labored to enter the Castle at the Spur; but Centius a
(...), with a pike, thrust them down (...) were climbing up the Rampire,
thrusting one through; but himself shot in the arm, who withdrawing to have his
(...) bound up, returned to the Rampire, never departing, till (as a
Conqueror) he had preserved the place. So the Turks with great slaughter, left
the Christians Victors of whom almost 100 were slain: one Knight at St. Angelo,
and diverse at St. Michaels, where the Turks also having wrought a Mine, it was
destroyed.

Certain Knights fearing, lest that so often attempted by the enemy, should at
length be effected, told Valetta, they thought it meet and needful, to remove
all the Records, Pictures, relics of Saints, etc. into the Castle of S.
Angelo, a place of more strength: He, exceeding moved (though he knew they
spoke it of a good mind) answered, So to do, were but to discourage the
Malteses, and also the mercenary Soldiers: Wherefore, he would keep all, or
lose all. And because none should hope in the strength of that Castle, he would
bring forth all the Garrison into the Town, leaving nothing but Gunners in it,
to shoot at the enemy as need required. But with the dawning of this day, the
Turks assailed the same places with the greatest fury, chiefly at the ruins of
the Castle, where Romanus an Avergnois lost his transitory life, and at
Michaels diverse Knight were grievously wounded; for the enemy suddenly
retiring, mightily thundered into the breaches with great and small shot.
Valetta thoroughly wearied, had withdrawn himself but a little when a Priest came
roaring out, that all was lost, 3 or 4 Ensigns being by the Castle breach,
broken into the Town: whereupon he clapped on his Helmet, and with pike in hand,
uttered a brief comfortable speech to those about him, concluding, Wherefore
follow me, valiant hearts: and so hastened to the place of most danger, with
Soldiers, Citizens, men and women, old and young, yea the very Children. There
was a most dreadful and dangerous battle: within, without, all was covered with
Darts, Weapons, dead bodies and blood: Valetta being every where present,
commending, exhorting, directing as occasion required. At length the Turks with
sunsetting retired, above 2000 were slain, besides every one of them who were
entered: Valetta losing in this fight above 200 men.

(...) the Viceroy, Aug. 20. with 72 Galleys, set forward ftom Messana to
Syracusa, with 1000 select Soldiers, above 200 being Knights of St. John, and
about 40 of the order of St. Steven, instituted by Cosmus Medices, Duke of
Florence in 1561, and residing in Cosmopolis, a new-built City in the Island of
Elba. There were also diverse noble and valiant men. The Viceroy sent Auria from
Syracusa to land a man, to know of Paccius what news, or what he had seen? who
said, there was but one Galliot seen at sea, which Aug. 21, made toward
Gaulos, and the same day 16 Galleys came to water at Saline, but the nights
coming on, hindered a further deserying of them. The besieged had notably
repaired the breach at the Castle-bulwark, placing Ordnance in diverse places to
flanker the Ditches, and beat the Mount cast up by the enemy to annoy the
Castle with small shot: who, at once to assault both Towns as before, brought
an Engine to cover 30 men under the breach at Michaels; so that the Defendants
could not (without danger) there appear: Wherefore sallying out, they put them
to slight under it, burning the Engine. So also they did at the new City: and
next night some issuing out of the Castle, destroyed the Engines prepared, slew
the keepers thereof and safely returned: but the enemies (...) not, but
repairing things, labored to beat the Ch (...) from the walls in both places,
and were by valor and industry frustrated. The besieged made a Mine at the
Castle-breach to blow up the enemy, if he should again assault it; but the
Turks there working a Mine also, lighted on theirs, spoiling it and carrying
away the powder. Mustapha considering the summer to be far spent, determined
with all his power, once more to assault Michaels Castle: Wherefore displaying
of his Emperors stately Standard, he commanded his men to enter the Breach,
where was made a most terrible and doubtful fight; but the Turks having been
twice beaten down, Mustapha came himself to the places, praying and exhorting
his Soldiers, faintly fighting, not to be discouraged, but to confirm their
former labors and Victories, and not suffer their vanquished enemies to
triumph over them, etc. promising Money, Honor and Preferment, threatening and
requesting. Who, moved, gave a fresh and fierce assault; yet the Turks were
again forced to retire, for the Defendants with 2 Field pieces from a Rampire,
at first shot, struck in sunder their strongest wooden-Engine (covered with raw
Hides) with 40 Soldiers under it: and they in the other Town, sallying forth,
destroyed all their defenses: and (though but 25 of them) they drove almost 300
Turks from a Mount. The Defendants had made another Mine at the Castle-bulwark,
but seeing it in danger to be found, they fired it, 60 Turks within danger
being slain.

Garzias the while, departed from Syracusa to Pachinum, overtaking a tall ship
driven thither by Tempest, who was carrying shot and powder to the Turks, which
he sent to Syracusa. A Tempest arising from the East, drove the Christian Fleet
to the Island Aegusa, 220 miles west of Malta, whence Valetta had Letters, Sept
1. that the Viceroy would shortly come and relieve him: on which day a
Christian captive, fled to St. Angelo, reporting, that the Turks had few men
able to fight, and that great numbers died daily, yet that they determined to
besiege Melita, and had already mounted 5 great pieces for battery: Having
taken first 12, then 14 Horsemen of the Garrison. The Fleet coming from Aegusa
to Drepranum, thence toward Gaulos, 2 Malta Galleys (by the way) took 2 Turks
Galliots. The Viceroy perceiving not the appointed signs, returned from Gaulos
to Pozalo, but Auria following, and telling him, he had seen the signs of safe
landing, he next day returned again to Gaulos. On which day, a Christian
captive fled to St. Angelo, and told Valetta, the Turks would prove their last
fortune in astaulting Michaels Castle next day, and if they had not answerable
success, forthwith to be gone: Mustapha promising 5 Talents of Gold to those
who first advanced their Ensigns on the Walls, and promote them higher, and to
reward the rest according to their desert. Valetta first gave thanks to God,
for such discoveries from time to time, then preparing necessaries for
repulsing the enemy: but the Turks all that day battered the new City, and the
shipping in the Haven, sinking one great ship. Garzias in the morning arrived
at Malta, landing his Forces, and going forward with them about half a mile,
instructed the chief Commanders what was to be done; all things to be in the
King of Spain's name, but till they came to the Great Master.

So exhorting them to play the men, he left them marching to Melita, in sight
whereof he came with all his Fleet: they of the City discharging all their
Ordnance, which was answered from the Fleet twice. Then he returned into Sicily
to take in the Duke of Urbins companies, and some Spanish Bands, and so to
return to attend the Turks Fleet's departure, as good as half overthrown.
As Soon as the Turks heard the Army was landed, there arose a wondrous confusion
among them: some crying Arm, arm, and others To be gone; the greatest number,
burning the Engines and Fortifications, with all speed embarked their Ordnance
and baggage: which they in St. Angelo perceiving, sallyed out (without command)
to Burmola: where some Turks fleeing from a huge piece of Ordnance which they
kept, they drew it within their Walls: and, had the new-come Forces charged the
enemy, as they disorderly ran to their Galleys, perhaps they had found occasion
of Victory, or taken most of their Artillery: but they thought it not
convenient to leave the things brought for relief of the besieged, which for
roughness of the way, and want of Horses, were hardly carried, Sept. 11. a
Genuan fugitive came in haste, telling Valetta, that 1000 Turks were marching
to meet with the Christians on the way: whereupon, he sent Soldiers to St.
Elmo Castle, to set upon an Ensign of the Order: who found 24 great Pieces
which they could not (for haste) remove.

Mustapha being landed from Marza Moxet at St. Paul's Port (with 7000 men) by
the Fleet; and being falsely informed, the Christians were not above 3000,
marched toward Melita, and at the rising of a Hill, both Armies meeting, gave a
great shout, the foremost beginning Battle, a few being slain on both sides: but
the Christians growing on them in number and strength, they fled, the
Christians killing of them to their Galleys, where, striving who to get in
first, about 400 were drowned, besides 1800 slain. The Turks lay in the Haven
all next day, and most of the night following: and upon shooting of a great
piece, hoysed sail, leaving Malta sore wasted, losing in all about 24000, most
being their best Soldiers, About 5000 Christians were slain, besides 240
Knights, honorably buried. The Turks spending 78000 great shot in battery. All
things considered, a man shall scarce find a place these many years more
mightily impugned, or with greater valor and resolution defended.

Valetta thus acquitted, commanded public prayers with thanksgiving to be made
to the giver of all Victory; then rewarded the Valiant, commended the rest,
thanked all, relieved the sick and wounded, bewailed the spoil, provided for
reparation of Breaches, etc. And yet in all this was not secure; but because of
the great harms, and the enemies return, next year feared, He by Letters to
diverse Princes, chiefly to the grand Priors of the Order in diverse Countries,
requested help: containing also briefly in his Letter to George, grand Prior of
Germany and founder of Elmo Castle, what has been largely written in this
History. And being bountifully relieved by those he wrote to, he both repaired
and with Fortifications strengthened places, subject to the enemies force.

Solomon exceeding angry with the Governor of Chios Island (who during the
siege had intelligence with Valetta, revealing many of the Turk's designs, also
for detaining 2 years Tribure, 20000 Ducats, and not sending his wonted
Presents to the Bassaes) commanded Piall to prepare his Fleet, and take that
Island into his own hand: who April 15, 1566. with 80 Galleys, there arrived:
Whereupon, the chief men, sent him Ambassadors with presents, offering him the
Haven, and whatever he should require; who kindly accepting thereof, and
landing sent for the Governor and 12 Citizens, as if he had some special matter
to confer about from Solomon, before he went thence for Malta or Italy: who
coming to him with great fear, he cast them into Irons; the Soldiers taking
the Town Hall, pulling down the Towns-Ensign, having in it St. George with a
Red-crosse, and setting up one of the Turks, and so was it through the whole
Island. Then rifling the Temples, they consecrated them after their manner. The
Governor and Senators with their Families were sent to Constantinople: the
vulgar to tarry there or depart. So Piall placing a Turkish Governor, and a
strong Garrison, departed from that fertile Island for Italy: burning and
destroying the Villages along Apulia, and carrying the people into captivity,
so returning. John the Vayuod of Transylvania grieved with the harms from the
Emperors Captains (whereof he was the cause) and vainly hoping (from Solomon)
to have most part of Hungary, calling himself King thereof, ceased not to
solicit him to come personally to make a full Conquest, summoning the Nobility
and Burgesses (as if by Solymans appointment) to meet at Thorda, March 9. about
matters for the common good; which Swendi the Emperors Lieutenant hearing,
counter-manded them, persuading the Hungarians not to listen to the Vayuods and
Turks charms tending to destruction, but to obey Maximilian, who purposed to
protect them in peace.

Hence it was, that the remainders of this sore-shaken Kingdom (divided) began
afresh to work each others confusion, serving the Turks for a further
encroachment: who then surprised Ainastch (in the Captain and some of the
Soldiers absence) putting all to the sword: but they were by valiant Serinus
at Sigeth after 4 hours hard fight overthrown and put to flight; not long
after, they ranged up and down fetching in booty, and doing much harm;
Wherefore, Maximilian appointed his Captains to raise such Forces in Germany,
as were lately granted him by the Princes and States of the Empire at Augusta,
going himself to Vienna; for Solomon was set forward with a mighty Army, and
come to Belgrade, where the Vayuod of Transylvania met him, kissing his Hand,
and commending himself and all his State to his protection. Then did Swendi
hardly besiege Husth in the borders of Transylvania: and the Bassa of Buda (on
the other side) besieging Palotta, had, by 8 days continual battery, greatly
endangered it, though valiantly defended by Thuriger; but the Count of
Helffenshein approaching with some Companies, he rose in such haste, that he
left some Ordnance and much baggage behind him. The Count had the Breaches
repaired, strengthening the Garrison with a supply. After that, he strengthened
by Count Salina, with some Companies from Rab, came to Vesprimium about 2 miles
off, which he taking by force, June 30. left not a Turk alive, who had lately
slain some Christians which they took: so leaving a strong Garrison they
returned to Rab.

Shortly after, Count Salma besieged Tatta or Dotis, taking it by assault, July
28. slaying all the Turk's but 50, who fleeing into a Tower of the Castle
yielded on composition, the Governor and 2 other chief ones being sent
prisoners to Vienna. He was on his way to besiege Gestes nigh Palotta; but the
Turks seeing his Army, left all and fled to Strigonium: 3 other Garrisons of
Castles, firing what they could not carry, doing the like; for which good
success, Maximilian caused public prayers and thanksgiving to be made all
thereabouts.

Count Serinus certainly advertised of Solymans coming to Zigeth, sent 2 of
his Captains with 1000 Foot, and 500 Horse to lie in wait for the forerunners
of his Army, who not far from Quinque Ecclesiae, next day about night, suddenly
set upon them, who disorderly fleeing several ways, were most slain or wounded
in flight. Halibeg sore wounded, perishing in the Marshes: whose son and many
others were carried prisoners to Zigeth: beside store of Plate and Coin, they
took 8 Camels, 5 Mules, and 6 Carts laden with all manner of spoil, and many
rich Garments, with 2 fair red-Ensignes. Maximilian besides his own Forces,
procured great aid of the States of the Empire and other Princes, who met at
Rab; beside which Landforces, he had 12 Galleys and 30 ships: so made, that
the men could not be hurt with Arrows: wherein was 3000 Soldiers, most
Italians, under Flachius a Germane, and a Knight of Malta; afterward, one of
the number of the Princes of the Empire.

Solomon commanded a bridge to be made over Dravus, and the deep (...) on
the other side, for transporting his Army, so difficult, that (...) thrice begun,
it was given over as impossible. Solomon swearing in his rage to hang up the
great Bassa who had the charge thereof, if he did not with all speed-perfect
it: whereupon all boats to be found, were taken up, and timber brought from
far, not only the vulgar, but the Gentlemen of the Country were forced to work
day and night, till the Bridge was, in ten days space (by such a multitude)
finished: Over which (a mile long) Solomon passing, encamped at Muhatchz^
staying till his huge Army was come together. July 30. 90000 (the Vantguard)
encamped within a mile of Zigeth: 100000 more following soon after, many in
their approach being slain from the Castle, yet they encamped and began the
siege: Zigeth is strongly situate in a Marsh on the Frontiers of Dalmatia,
denominated from the Country it commands, and a strong Bulwark against the
Turks further entrance that way toward Stiria. Serinus the Governor seeing
that huge Army, called together the Captains of the Garrison (being 2300 good
Soldiers (into the Castle, making a short but comfortable and resolute fpeech,
saying toward the end, I am resolved, as I hope ye are, that as I am a
Christian and free born so (by Gods Grace) in the same faith and freedom to end
my days: neither shall the proud Turk, while I can hold up this hand, have
power to command over me, or the ground whereon I stand: which to perform he
solemnly took oath, persuading them to the like; so every one returned to his
charge.

Aug. 5. The Army encamped a mile off, and next day Solomon came into the Camp,
the great Ordnance exceedingly thundering, and the Turks (as they were wont)
crying aloud, Alla, Alla, Alla, the Christians answering with the Name of
Jesus, Aug. 7. They cast up a great Mount, planting some great Ordnance. Next
day, they most terribly battered the new Town in 3 places, casting up a Mount
in the midst of the Marsh: whence, next day and night, they battered the inward
Castle without ceasing, greatly hurting both Castle and Defendants. Serinus
seeing the new City was not now to be defended, set all on fire, and retired
into the old, Aug. 10. they furiously battered the old Town in 3 places,
bringing their Ordnance into the new Town, and making a bridge the better to go
over the marsh: 2 plain ways of wood, earth, stones, faggots, etc. being (with
wondrous labor) made through the deep Fenne from the Town to the Castle, where
the Janissaries defended with Wool-sacks, etc. (the Defendants could not show
themselves on the Walls without great danger for their small shot. So the Turks
(yet with great lols) by force entered the old town, Aug. 19. and with such
speed, that rhey slew many of the most valiant before they could recover the
Castle. Next day they planted their battery against the Castle in 4 places,
making 2 plain ways to it through the Marsh; and Aug. 29. they flercely
assailed the Breaches; but having lost many men they were forced to retire, a
great Bassa being also lost.

Solomon (the while) distempered with long travel fell sick of a looseness,
retiring for Health-sake to Quinque (...) near Zigeth, where Sept. 4. 1566. he
died of the Bloody Flux, 76 years old, Reigning 46. who was tall and slender,
long-necked, pale and wan, long and Hooknosed, ambitious and bountiful, more
faithful of his promise than most of his Progenitors. Muhamet the Vizier Bassa,
fearing the insolence of the Janissaries, and some tumult in the Camp, concealed
his death, and to that end, had his Physicians and Apothecaries secretly
strangled: willing Selimus then at Magnesia by a (...) Post to hasten to
Constantinople, to take the possession of the Empire, and so to come to the
Army; but the Janissaries began to mistrust the matter. Wherefore Muhamet caused
the dead body of Solomon to be brought into his Tent sitting upright in his
Horse-litter, as if sick of the Gout, whereby he contented the Janissaries, who
began now to undermine the greatest Bulwark, whence the Defendants did most
annoy them; and September. 5. had set all the Bulwark on a light-fire. Whereby
possessing it, they with all their force assailed the Bulwark next the
Castle-gate, whence they were with great slaughter twice repulsed; but the fire
increasing, Serinus was was forced with those left, to retire into the
inner-Castle, where was but two great pieces, besides fourteen others.

September. 7. They furiously assaulted the little Castle, whereinto they cast so
much fire, that it set all on fire. No place being now left for the Count
safely to retire unto, He went into his Chamber, putting on a new rich suit,
and came presently out with his Sword and Targuet, speaking a few, his last
words to his cheerful Soldiers: That the hard Fortune of that sinful Kingdom,
with their own, had overtaken them, but they should with patience endure, and
since the place was no longer to be kept, and c. They should valiantly break
into the utter Castle, there to die and live with God for ever; saying, He
would go out first, they to follow like men.

So with Sword and Targuet, calling thrice on the Name of Jesus, he issued out
of the Gate with the rest, where valiantly fighting on the Bridge, slaying some
Janissaries, he fell down dead with a shot in the Head (being first wounded
twice with small shot) the Turks crying for joy, Alla: the rest fleeing back,
were all slain, but a few whom some Janissaries (for their valor) by putting
their Caps on their Head, saved from the others fury. The Turks reported, they
lost 7000 Janissaries, 28000 others, beside Volunteers not enrolled, and three
Bassaes.

Serinus Head was cut off, and next day (with the other Heads) set upon a pole;
then, by Muhamet, sent tothe Bassa of Buda, who sent it to Count Salma in the
Camp at Rab, covered with a fair linnen-cloath, with a few quipping words in a
Letter: Whose death was much lamented of all the Army, and his Head honorably
buried with many tears by his son among his Ancestors.

Solomon purposed (before his return) to Conquer both the remainder of Hungary,
and to attempt Vienna again.

To which end, he sent Parthau Bassa with 40000 Turks to help the Bassa of
Temesware, and the Tartars besiege strong Giula, in the Vayuods behalf; not far
from whence, Swendi in Aug. before, had slain 10000 (...), called in by Solomon
to aid the Vayuod. He then also sent Mustapha of Bosna and Carambeius with a
great power, who with the Bassa of Buda, should busy the Emperor, whilst he
besieged Zigeth. Parthau was still notably repulsed by Keretschen the
Governor, before Giula, having some of his Ordnance taken from him, and the
rest cloyed; but this brave Captain, was at last persuaded by his Kinsman
Bebicus (from whom Swendi had taken some Castles for revolting to the Vayuod)
for a great sum to deliver up the Town: the Soldiers all to depart with bag
and baggage; who were not gone past a mile, but they were all slain by the
Turks, but a few who crept into the Reeds in a Marsh. Keretschen himself being
carried in Bonds to Constantinople, where, upon complaint, how hardly he had
used some Turks taken, he was by Selimus's command rolled up and down in a
closed Hogshead stuck full of Nails with the points inward, till he died, with
this inscription, Here, Receive the reward of thy avarice and Treason: Giula,
thou soldest for Gold. If thou be not faithful to Maximilian thy Lord, neither
will thou be to me.

Many hot skirmishes passing between the Emperors Camp at Rab, and the Bassa
of Buda and Bosna at Alba Regalis, September. 5. The Turks came in great number
out of the Camp, lighting on a few Forragers, slaying some, the rest fleeing
and raising an Allarm: whereupon, some issuing out, pursued the Turks, and slew
diverse: Thuriger descrying the Governor of Alba Regalis, never left him till
he took him, and presenting him to the Emperor, he was Knighted and rewarded
with a Chain of Gold: When a Spaniard charged the prisoner before the Emperor;
that he heard him say openly at Constantinople, He with his power only could
vanquish the Germane King (as the Turks term the Emperor.) The Turk answered
him: such is the chance of War, Thou see me now a prisoner and able to do
nothing.

Muhamet Bassa, repairing, strongly Garrisoning, and placing a Governor in
Zigeth, called back the dispersed Forces, and retired toward Belgrade,
carrying Solymans body sitting upright in his (...)-(...), he having been many
years so carried; whose fortunate presence, though he could do nothing, the
Janissaries still desired.

The Life of Selimus the Second, fifth Emperor of the Turks.
SElimus hasting from Cutai in Gallatia, was from Scutari conducted over the
Strait to Constantinople, by Bostanges Bassa, where he was conveyed into the
Palace, September. 23. 1566, and by the Janissaries, saluted Emperor, a man
unconstant, hasty, wholly given to wantonness and excess, never going to Wars
himself, contrary to his Grandfather's charge to Solomon, of which he was
always mindful.

Next day he came abroad in his Majesty, causing prayers and Sacrifices to be
made for his Father in the Temple of Sophia, then giving 100000 Sultanies to
the Janissaries, with promise to augment their wages; and setting forward
September. 27. he met the Army a little from Belgrade, October. 20. gallantly
coming from Sigeth, with Solyman's dead body, whom the Soldiers supposed to be
alive.

Selimus coming in mourning attire to the Horse-litter, looked upon, and kissed
the dead body, weeping over it, as did the other great Bassaes; and to make
known his death, the Ensigns were trailed on the ground, a dead march sounded,
and a heavy silence commanded. Shortly after, Selimus was with great applause,
proclaimed Emperor, his Ensigns advanced, and all the great Commanders
admitted to (...) his hand. So returning to Constantinople November. 22, and
thinking to enter the Palace, or Seraglio, he was by the discontented
Janissaries (demanding a greater Donative, and the confirmation of all their
privileges) prohibited; against which presumption, the Vizier Bassaes, and Aga
opposing, and seeking to (...) them, were fowly entreated, and well rapped
about the pates, with the Stocks of their Collivars; chiefly Muhamet and
Partau, as chief Authors, that their Lord dealt no more liberally with them.

Selimus not a little troubled, demanded of the Aga, the cause of that mutiny,
who with tears, told him 'twas for money: which he promising them, with the
confirmation of their liberties; and the Aga with fair words and heavy
countenance, entreating them, and assuring them to content them to the full of
their desires, all was (...), and Selimus into the Seraglio received; yet
Muhamet, chief Vizier, kept himself close for certain days, for fear of
greater mischief.

Selimus now buried his Father with all royal solemnity, in a most stately
Chapel, which he had in his lifetime built, with a College and an Hospital;
for maintenance whereof, the Revenues arising about Sigeth, were given. Fast by
Solymans side, is the Tomb of Roxalana, and certain of his murdered Children;
and by him hangs his Scimitar, in token, he died in the Wars. That great
Army withdrawn by Solyman's death, somewhat assuaged, but not wholly appeased,
the troubles of Hungary.

Maximilian on the one side, and the Vayuod with the Turk's Captains on the
other, renting it in pieces; The Vayuod hardly besieged (...) Castle in his
Frontiers, lately taken from him by Swendi, and brought it to great (...),
though notably defended by Raminger; but the Tartars (whom he had called in to
his aid) burning and destroying his Country, so that the people were glad to
take up Arms against them; he left the Siege, and after much bloodshed,
overcame them with much ado, ridding himself of them.

Swendi (the while) had taken the Castle of Zackmar, and had Muncatz Castle
yielded unto him, then besieging Husth; so that the Vayuod craved aid of
Selimus: who sent Partau Bassa his Lieutenant in Romania, with his forces into
Transylvania; but Ambassadors being coming from Maximilian, he recalled him,
till he had heard the effect of that embassage.

The Bassa of Buda also sent Presents to the Emperor, requesting him to remove
some Captains from the Frontiers, lest they should interrupt the Treaty of
peace purposed, promising to put to death all Turks, as should raise any new
troubles: he wrote also to Count Salma, marvelling, why Maximilian was about to
treat with his Lord of peace, whilst Swendi raged in Transylvania, then under
his protection, saying, If he proceeded, Selimus would turn all his forces that
way: requesting him to persuade the Emperor to take some easier course,
promising, he would travel with his Master, better to like of peace than War,
wishing him to do the like. Which the Emperor hearing of, commanded Swendi
from the siege of Husth, and to be quiet, till he might understand what the
Turk proposed.

Both Maximilian and Selimus, were secretly desirous of peace; for Maximilian
wanted money: and Selymus, (beside other troubles) was to appease a great and
dangerous Rebellion in Arabia faelix, where the people having slain the Bassaes
and Zanzacks, were ready to cast off the Turkish obedience, the Persians being
reported ready to war on him: neither could he send any (...) Army into
Hungary, for want of many necessary (...) in a Country so impoverished.

So it was at last concluded, (by Messengers sent up and down to
Constantinople) that if Maximilian would send Ambassadors with the Tribute yet
behind for Hungary, and a large Commission for a Treaty, Selimus should give
them his safe Conduct, with liberty to return, in case of Peace or War: which
agreed to, Selymus set at liberty L. Albert de Vuis, Ambassador Lieger six
years in Constantinople, who had been so closely imprisoned in his own House,
that beside Watch and Ward there kept, his Windows were boorded up, that
neither he, nor any of his Household, should look out any whither, but into the
Court only.

Maximilian, for the bringing so weighty matter about, chose Lord Verantius of
Agria, (of his Counsel for Hungary) his Ambassador, who being 63 years old,
besides his great learning, had the experience of 27 Embassages, always
contenting his Prince, (and now returning from Selimus, with good success, was
by Maximilian created a Prince of the Empire, and Bishop of Agria) to whom he
joined Teusenbatch, a most honorable Baron, one of his Counselors also for
the Wars: who, with full instructions, taking leave of the Emperor, (then
holding a Parliament at Presburg) set forward with a great and honorable
Retinue, July 1. 1567, and came to Comara, but a League from the Turks
Frontiers; and being met by an Aga of the Turks, with a Chiaus in some Galleys
with Turkish Soldiers, they sailed to Strigonium, by whose Governor they were
denied landing; for which he was (...) rebuked by the Bassa of Buda.

Next day, they, with five Leagues-sailing, came to Buda, (in whose Castle
lays a Captain, with 500 Soldiers, or not so many, who loses his Head, if
he stir from his charge, having also Commission to deny the Bassa himself
entrance, unless he come very slightly accompanied); and next morning after,
(...) the Bassa with two great gilt Cups, a Clock all curiously wrought in
Gold, and one thousand Dollars, they delivered a Speech in the Italian Tongue,
(after the Emperors Letters and greetings) that for the common benefit of
their Subjects in Hungary, the Emperor requested him to continue his dealing
for peace, and to give safe conduct unto them, till come to the Turk's Court:
and so having stayed two days at Buda, the Bassa sent with them his Chechai
(the Steward of his House) and Becram the aforesaid Chiaus, with a Guard and
some Janissaries, who were also to provide all necessaries for them and their
Horses, at the Turk's charges; so they came down the River to Belgrade, July
18. thence ((...) their Coaches) they gathered fast upon Constantinople, Aug.
22. where many Spabies and Chiausais of the Court, with a number of Janissaries
and other Soldiers, came to meet them, conducting them to their Lodgings about
the midst of the City: where Lord De Vuis, having long looked for their coming,
most joyfully received them: who Aug. 28. went all three to visit Muhamet, or
Mehemet, the chief Vizier, giving him Presents; and besides the Contents of the
Emperors Letters, declared to him the cause of their coming, and c. turning
the blame of the late Wars upon others. Neither was the Bassa to seek of good
words.

That day also, they saluted Partau and Ferat, Bassaes, giving them Presents:
and next day visited Acomat, Piall, and Muhamet, the other three Vizier
Bassaes, with Presents.

Then to set their (...) on foot, they September. 4th, closed with Mehemet, who
had the especial ordering of State-matters: yet because they must first do
Selimus Reverence, and deliver him the presents, with the Emperor's Letters;
for few days, there was no point of their business handled; but Selimus
returning from hunting September. 21. they were appointed to have audience (...)
Court, choosing but 12 persons out of their followers, to attend them; for they
to whom this charge was committed, said, they might bring no more before so
great a Prince. The Presents were 15 Cups, all of silver, and guilt; two
exceeding precious Clocks; and 45000 Dollars, for the Tribute behind.

They were honorably conducted to the Court, and through two Gates of the
Palace, before they entered the third Gate. Which leads into the privy
Palace of the Turkish Emperor, into which, none enters, but the Capitzi
Bassa, or chief Porter, who keeps this Gate, and the Cesigniers, that serve in
his meat, with the Bassaes, and some few great men, and that only when they
have some great business, or sent for by the Sultan: who himself, with his
Eunuchs, and the young Pages his Minions in the Eunuch's Custody, have here
continual abiding.

Being entered in, the Capitzi caused them to stay, setting them about five
paces asunder in a little room, passing delicate (between the Gate and the more
inward Lodgings): on both sides whereof, certain little Birds only, were heard
to warble out their sweet notes, and flicker up and down the green Trees of the
Gardens.

Selymus was in great Majesty, set in an under-Chamber adjoining to the Room,
where in the Ambassadors followers attended, whereinto he might look through a
little Window.

The Ambassadors entering in, were led one after another, to make their
Reverence (...) him; and the while, certain of the Capitzi, with the Presents
in their hands, fetching a compass before the Window, mustered them in his
sight: all this while not the least sound being raised.

Their followers were fetched in one by one, and having done their Reverence,
were sent out another way into the Court: the Capitzi Bassa, and the Odda Bassa
taking them by the Arms and Neck, leading them apace; and, by the way, softly
feeling their wrists and hands, lest they might have some short Weapon in their
sleeve; yet were they not all thus groped: who kneeling down, and kissing the
hem of his Garment, he not daining to give them a look, they were led back
again, going backwards, till out of his presence; and then the Ambassadors
delivered to Selymus, the Emperors Letters, briefly declaring to him their
Message: who answered in four words, Confer with my Bassaes, and presently they
were dismissed; and coming out of the two inner-Gates, they mounted on
Horseback toward their Lodging, being accompanied with the Aga and his
Janissaries. Among whom were certain of their Religious, called Haagi, (who use
to follow the Janissaries) continually turning about, and in their going,
singing, or rather howling out, Psalms and Prayers, for the welfare of their
great Sultan: Many more also on Horseback, attended their forthcoming: The
Ambassadors, to requite their greedy courtesy, distributing among them, above
4000 Dollars, and yet not well contented them.

The Ambassadors after this, having diverse times conference with the great
Bassaes, concerning peace, they among other unreasonable requests, demanded to
have their Subjects freed from paying any Taxes or Tributes unto their old
Lords, living in the Emperor's jurisdiction in Hungary; and yet the Emperor's
Subjects to pay their Lords in the Turks jurisdiction as formerly: to which,
the Ambassadors would by no means consent, till they knew Maximilian's further
pleasure therein: whereupon they dispatched one Odoardo a Mantuan, who had been
employed diverse times from Vienna, to Constantinople, in the Emperor's service.

Selymus, October. 20. departed in great magnificence to Hadrianople: after whose
departure, the Ambassadors having fully viewed the City, embarked, and crossed
the mouth of the Haven betwixt Constantinople and Pera, passing all along the
Coast on Europe side, unto the (...) Sea, and back again by the other side
thereof, noting the great ruins of the Cities of Bythinia, with others along
the Asian shore, with their former pleasant situation, and so returned; but
while they lay long expecting their own Messengers return, and of Selymus
himself, they were advertized in haste, to repair to Hadrianople, whither the
Messenger was now come with full instructions: who setting forward, Jan. 1.
1568. arrived at Hadrianople, (about 153. Italian miles from Constantinople)
after nine days; and Febr. 17. the peace was concluded: whose chief
capitulations were, that both Princes, should hold what they had got each from
other: the Emperor to pay 30000 Ducats, yearly Tribute to the Turk for
Hungary, to begin January last 1568: that either Subjects should be free from
the payments aforesaid; and so firm a peace to be betwixt the two Monarchs for
8. years: wherein the Vayuod as the Turks Tributary was to be included. Yet the
Turks raising sundry Cavillations, and many doubts, did what they might, to
have somewhat altered what they had agreed upon: and with many unreasonable
demands, stayed the Ambassadors, till March 20 following; and then with Hebraim
Beg ( Selimus's Ambassador to the Emperor) they returned to Vienna, May 10th,
with joyful news of peace, being two days after, most honorably received at
Court; five days after which, Hebraim had audience: who well rewarded, soon
returned with a full conclusion of peace.

But whilst the Ambassadors were resident at Hadrianople, February 16th, came
an honorable Embassage from (...) the Persian King to Selimus, to entreat, or
rather to conclude a peace with him, before agreed upon controversies, for
which they afterward fell to open Wars.

He was with the greatest pomp entertained by the Turks at his first coming to
Hadrianople: who seeing some of the Emperors Ambassadors Retinue before their
door, asked of the Capitzi Bassa, what people they were? Who told him, they
were the followers of the Christian Emperors Ambassador, who was desirous to
make peace with his Master: the Ambassador replied, he would willingly salute
them; the Capitzi turning his Horse toward the place, the Emperors Ambassador
went forth upon the Threshold, and so they with signs and words saluted each
other. He said also, he would gladly talk with them, if it might please the
Grand Seignior, but they never after came together. Two days after, his
Steward presented all the Vizier Bassaes with diverse rich Gifts and Presents:
and the day after going to visit them himself; a Giamoglan meeting him, shot at
him with a Harquebusse, but missed him, hurting one of his followers in the
Arm, He supposed he was betrayed, turned his Horse to go to his Lodging, but
the chief Vizier sent out his men to guard him, and excuse himself of the fact;
so he held on his way. The fellow being apprehended, was asked by the Bassa
before the Ambassador, why he did it? why boldly answered, because the
Ambassador was an Heretic, and sent from an Heretical King, and an enemy to
their Religion: Wherefore 'twas not meet he should come to treat with his Lord
of peace; adding, he was not worthy of any peace; Wherefore the Bassa adjudged
him next day, to be drawn at a Hors-tail through the City, then to have his
right hand cut off and afterward his Head, which was done. Febr. 22. he went to
deliver the Presents sent to Selimus, and to kiss his Hand, sending them before
upon 34 Camels of the Persian King, and 10 of his own. There was an Alcaron
with the Anthority of Hali (for they always present one such Alcoran to whom
they send Ambassadors). It was rich with Gold and precious Stones: also a rich
Book of Histories: a Box with a very fair precious Stone, called Balasso, and 2
wondrous great Pearls, with 2 purses of a handful-long full of Jewels: 8
Firvari or China dishes: 2 most stately Pavillions: 20 great silk Carpets, and
many other less of Silk and Gold: also 9 fair Canopies to hang over the ports
of their Pavillions: 9 very fair Carpets of Camels-hair: 9 Saddles set with
stone after their fashion: 7 Staves of silver: 7 Scimitars with red Scabberds:
7 Bows with Arrows and Quivers richly wrought: also many other Carpets called
Testich, of the finest Lawn, 7 men could scarce carry one of them: all the
Faulcons died by the way. In his own name he gave an Alcoran, a large and fair
Pavillion, Scimitars, rich Bows and Arrows: some Carpets of Silk and
Camels-hair.

After which, and reverence done to the Sultan by him and 30 of his followers
in cloth of Gold, he returned to his Lodging very Honorably accompanied, both
by the Turk's and his own retinue: and although the Persians (as may be
thought) showed all their pomp, yet they made nothing so fair a show as the
Turk's: nor are they so fair, but most of a swart and brown color, and rather
little men than otherwise, not much unlike the Spaniards. Selimus allowed for
their ordinary charges, 500 Ducats a day, their number being great, and their
beasts many: which expenses do begin as soon as Ambassadors do enter into the
Sultans Dominions: and end as soon as their business is finished. He having
concluded a peace beewixt Tamas and Selimus, ere long returned into Persia. The
Venetians also sought to renew their League, now expired: which was easily
obtained, but of small assurance.

Selimus now, in 1569. purposed to build a Magnificent Temple at Hadrianople
for his own Sepulture, with a Monastery, a College, and an Almshouse; but was
troubled how to (...) them with Revenues sufficient; for the Mohammedan Kings
are forbidden to convert any Lands or Possessions to such holy uses, but what
they have won from the enemies of their Religion; which is as a Spur to prick
them forward to add to their Empire; Nothing that was presented so pleased him,
as the taking of the rich Island Cyprus from the Venetians: which Conquest
would be enough, with a large overplus to supply what wanted in his Fathers
devout works: but that which moved him most, was the glory of such a Conquest.
His Predecessors usually in the beginning of their Reign, doing or attempting
some notable thing against the Christians. The matter being propounded to the
great Bassaes, Muhamet chief Vizier, and a secret friend to the Venetians,
persuaded him not to yield thereunto, alleging, besides the danger, that
Solomon at his death, charged him, the League with the Venetians to be
religiously kept, which he also had lately most solemnly confirmed. But
Mustapha with Piall, Bassaes, so (...) what he said (envying at his Honor),
and so showed both the Honor, profit and easiness thereof (much of the
Venetian Arsenal being also burnt) that Selimus calling Muhamet in his choler
Christian (no small disgrace) presently prepared by sea and land for
performance of his resolution: which was discovered by Barbarus the Venetian
Ambassador, and suspected by their Merchants; whom the Turks began (...) cut
short in their Traffic, looking big on them, and giving them hard speeches.

The Ambassador came to Muhamet, complaining of the breach of the League, and
remembering him of the Venetian State's fidelity, requesting Selimus (before he
began that War) to declare his mind to the Senate, that so happily all might be
(...) to the good of both parties: which he did not for hope to avert the War,
but to win time, till the State might make ready their Fleet and Forces:
neither left he the Bassa, till he procured Cubates to be sent Ambassador to
Venice, to prove, whether the Senators, would deliver the Island, or adventure
the taking it from them by force. These, and such like things made known at
Venice, brought a general heaviness on the City. Cubates, come to Ragusium,
Surianus sent to meet him, brought him to Venice in his Galley.

The Senators the while, were divided in opinions; some thought it not good to
wage War against such an invincible Enemy, etc. alleging, they had always
in the winding up of the Wars, lost something, besides losses already
sustained; that it were better to part with Cyprus, so they might quietly enjoy
the rest: saying, time would give them some fit occasion, to recover what they
had lost: to trust in their confederates, was but to deceive themselves,
destruction having come thence, whence aid was always to have bin hoped for.
Others said, nothing could be more dishonorable, than without Fight, to (...)
with so notable a piece of their Seigniory, etc. that the Turks would
afterward seek also after Creet and Corcyra, and so they yielding one thing
after another, to spoil themselves of all, etc. that hard beginnings had
oftentimes merry endings: that the favor of that insolent and greedy Nation,
was not to be gained, but with such a costly peace, much more hurtful than
War it self. Besides, it much concerned Christian Princes, to have their
State preserved: wherefore 'twas to be hoped, they would aid them to the
utmost. In the end it was resolved on, by plain force to withstand the Turks.
So when Cubates came to Venice, no man met him, or showed him common courtesy;
but being admitted into the Senate House, with his two Interpreters only, he
delivered Selimus's Letters, which whilst they were breaking up, and
translating, he delivered also his Message, the effect whereof was, that
Selimus worthily grieved, that the like care of keeping faith, did not appear
in them, as in him: who harbored Pirates in their Havens, murdering his
Subjects: which injuries longer to forbear, might rather be imputed to him for
cowardice, than courtesy: that the only remedy of falling out, by new
quarrels daily arising, was to deliver to him the Island Cyprus, the cause of
all those grievances: to which small request, if they did not yield, he
purposed not only to take it from them, but prosecute them with most cruel
War by Sea and Land: taking God to witness, all the calamities to ensue
thereof, to be imputed to themselves. Then, he in Muhamet, the Visier's name,
told them, that he was right sorry for this breach, etc. most instantly
requesting them, and advising them, not wilfully to plunge themselves into such
dangers, as they could hardly or never find the way out, etc. telling them,
Selimus did nothing but thunder out most cruel threats; which his indignation
was raised of the manifold complaints brought against them.

Selimus's Letters were also full of false surmized grievances, as that they
had in Warlike manner, entered his Frontiers in Dalmatia, doing great harm: that
they had put to death, certain Turkish Pirates: that Cyprus was a Harbor for
the Pirates of the West: wherefore, he required them to yield it to him, or
else he would by force, take it from them: saying, he renewed his Fathers
League with them, not for any liking thereof; but because, he had resolved, at
first, peaceably to endure all things.

The Venetians answered the Ambassador, that they had always inviolably kept
their Leagues with the Othoman Emperors: in regard whereof they had let slip
many opportunities to augment their Dominions in: That they had never passed
their own bounds or invaded the Turks: only to have taken order, that no
Pirates should roam up and down at pleasure: taking God to witness, they were
the Authors of Peace, and Selimus of War, who contrary to the League, had
denounced war against them: Wherefore, they would defend that Kingdom, which
they by Ancient and lawful right possessed: and that the same God would be
present to their (...) complaints, etc.

Cubates departed at a secret Postern, guarded for fear of the people; who in
great numbers were assembled to the Court-Gate, muttering, It were well done to
rend him in pieces, that accursed Turk the Messenger of his faithless Master:
he as he went, storming and swearing by his Mahomet, to be revenged of so great
an indignity. The Senates answer, was of some highly commended: others deemed
it too sharp, to the further incensing of the Turk, thinking they might have
obtained a more indifferent peace by courtesy, etc.

The Venetians forthwith, sent Letters to the Governors of Cyprus, with all
care and diligence to prepare to withstand the Turk: and made choice of most
valiant and expert Captains by Sea and Land, for the defense of their dispersed
Seigniorie, with the leading of their forces. Zanius was Admiral: Noble
Singliticus was sent with 1000 Footmen into Cyprus (who led also all the
Horsemen in the Island). Martiningus, promising to follow with 2000 more. Their
strong Cities were new fortified, and provided with all necessaries, for
defense of their State; earnestly soiiciting the Christian Princes, to give
them aid against the common enemy; but Maximilian excused himself by the 8
years League made with the Turk: as also Charles the French King, and Sigismund
of Poland, upon the same account, yet seeming very sorry for the breach betwixt
them: yet Charles offered to be a Mediator, (if they pleased) betwixt them and
Selymus.

Sebastian also of Portugal, made an excuse from the great Plague that had
lately raged in his Kingdom: also that he was to maintain Sea-Warres, against
the Turks in the East-(...). Only Pope Pius the 5th, and Philip of Spain, with
the Duke of Savoy, Duke of Urbin, and Duke of Florence, and Knights of Malta,
promised them, and performed their aid.

Selimus was with the Venetian's short answer, and Cubates's contemptuous
usage, farther enraged, they also having in their Letters omitted his glorious
Titles: wherefore he imprisoned their Ambassador, and all the Christian
Merchants of the West, throughout his Empire, staying their ships under Arrest,
setting himself wholly to prepare things needful for the intended War.

Cyprus lays in the farthest of the Cilician Sea, between Syria East,
Pamphylia West, Egypt South, and Cilicia (now Caramannia) North. It is in
length, (after Strabo) 175 miles; in breadth 65, in circuit 427. It abounds
with what ever is needful for the sustentation of man: sending forth great
abundance, and craving no help again.

The people generally lived so at ease and pleasure, that the Island was
dedicated to Venus, who was there chiefly worshipped, and thereof called
Cypria: Marcellinus says, that Cyprus is, of it self, able to build a tall
Ship from the Keel to the Top-sail, and put it to Sea, furnished of all things
needful: In the heart whereof, stands Nicosia, sometime its Mother-City; and in
the East end thereof, Famagusta the chief and only Port of all that most
pleasant Island. It came first into the hands of the Venetians, as has bin
before declared, by Catherine Cornelia, the Wife of James the King thereof, and
adopted Daughter of the Senate, who (her Husband being dead) by the persuasion
of her Brother George Cornelius, (all the Island being ready to revolt, after
the death of her young Son a Posthume) coming to Venice, and with the
greatest honor received; in the Senate House, before the Tribunal of Duke
Barbaricus, laid down her Crown and Scepter, and, as a loving Daughter,
resigned up her Kingdom to the great honor and profit of her Country, (in one
thousand four hundred seventy three) then paying to the Sultans of Egypt, such
yearly Tribute as James did; and afterward the same, to the Turk by Law of
Conquest. But now, this Selimus the 2d, made no account of the accustomed
Tribute, but of the fruitful Island itself: who, in the beginning of February,
1570, sent a great power into Epirus, and the Frontiers of Dalmatia to forage,
especially about Jadera, to withdraw the Venetians from the defense of Cyprus,
so far off: and in April following, he sent Piall, (who was a Hungarian, born
of mean Parents) with 80 Galleys, and 300 Galliots, to keep the Venetians from
sending aid to Cyprus: who coming to Euboea, so lay certain days, as if he
would give them battle; but understanding that they, grievously visited with
the Plague, and slowly relieved by friends, were not like in haste to come out,
he sailed to have taken the Island Troos from them, stronger by the Defendants
industry, than by nature: who (though far from Christian Countries) could
neither for fear or danger, be removed from Christian Religion, or submit to
the Turks Government, as most of the Cyclades had done.

Piall by fair means and fowl, persuaded the Inhabitants to yield their Town;
but getting nothing from them, but fowl words again, he valiantly assaulted it
two days; but seeing how little he prevailed, and the Defendants resolution,
he abandoned the Island, sailing toward Cyprus; for Mustapha (a hater of the
Christians) was made General, who appointed Piall to meet him at the Rhodes,
where, he that came first, should tarry for the other, to sail together to
Cyprus.

Mustapha having sent a great part of his Army by Land into Pamphylia, departed
in a royal and wondrous great Galley, (together with Haly Bassa, General of the
forces at Sea and the rest of the Fleet) from Constantinople May 26, meeting
with Piall at the Rhodes, and to color so manifest a wrong, according to the
Turkish manner, a little before his arrival at Cyprus, sent Letters to the
Venetians: that Cyprus, together with Egypt, which was conquered by the Turks,
was become of right, a part of the Othoman Empire: which they came to
challenge, leading after them 200000 valiant Soldiers, etc. And if they should
prefer their vain hopes before the wholesome Counsel of leaving the Island
without resistance, they were to expect all the calamities of War, etc. he
giving them a months space to bethink themselves. The whole Fleet consisted of
200 Galleys, diverse Galliots and small Men of War, with diverse Vessels for
transporting of Horses; whose coming, the Islanders from their Watch-Towers,
first discovered at the West end: whence, (on the right hand) passing the
promontory of Del legate, they landed diverse of their men: who, burning and
spoiling some Villages, with spoil and prisoners, returned to the Fleet, which
coming to Salinae, a place (so called from abundance of Salt there made) they
came to an Anchor in an open Road, landing their Army on a plain shore,
unresisted: which exceedingly encouraged the Turks, thinking they should not
have so done, without a bloody Fight; but the Christians (all whose hope was to
have (...) them from landing) either terrified with the greatness of the Fleet;
or prevented by their celerity, to their great hurt omitted so fair an
opportunity.

The Bassa entrenching his Army, sent the Fleet to transport his other forces
out of Pamphylia into the Island; and Scouts to take some prisoners, of whom
they might learn many things of concernment; but the greatest question among
themselves was, whether they should first set (...) Famagusta or Nicosia?
Famagusta standing low, and wholly subject to the then scorching heat: the
Bassa for fear of Diseases, thought it better to begin with Nicosia. So put ing
all things in order, and well viewing the Country, he set forward: it was
about 30 miles distant, being the chief and richest City of the (...). The
spreading Army, the nearer it came, the greater was the (...) of the people,
and the number of prisoners; but the Enemies approaching, a general fear
possessed all men: there being in the City no renowned Captain, nor any strong
Army without, to oppose the enemy.

Dandulus was Governor of the City, too weak for so great a burden, being
brought up in civil Affairs: who had taken up 4000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, raw
Soldiers, commanded by the Gentlemen of the Country: The greatest hope being
reposed in 1200 Italian Foot, and 600 Horse: the whole number of Soldiers in
Garrison were deemed about 8000 Horse and Foot, too weak a Company against so
fierce and strong an enemy, under an old and expert General.

The Venetians having ever great care of Cyprus as remote, often intended to have
fortified it; but, lest they should seem to distrust or dread the Turks, left
it still undone.

Nicosia stands in a Champain Country, about five miles in circuit,
magnificently built, and for its wholesome and commodious situation, notably
peopled: the Venetians had fortified it lately with new Walls, thick Rampires,
11 strong Bulwarks, and 3 great Fortresses, for defense of the Wall: which they
did well furnish with Men, and Warlike Provision; yet they found that
Fortifications are strengthened by Defendants, rather than Defendant, by
Fortifications.

July 22. the Bassa encamped within a mile and half of the City: the Turks
issuing out, rode before the Walls and Gates, and with often and loud
outcries, upbraided the Defendants: whose silence was taken as a token of fear.

Mustapha also coming, and fully viewing its Walls and Situation, shortly
after, they drew nearer, filling with their Tents the lower part of the Hill
Mandia: setting the Bassaes Tent upon the Hill, to the terror of the
Defendants, and encouragement of the Turks, who brought their Trenches from
far, casting up a few Forts; but, as their Army increased, many more; which
they raised above the Walls, making the City more dangerous to defend.

There, with 70 great Pieces, they battered the City day and night, without
ceasing: many being slain with the shot, and the pieces of stones beaten out of
the walls. Never such a fear as then, within Nicosia: the enemy with restless
labor, bringing his Trenches to the very brim of the Town-ditch, which had not
been well scoured. Being so nigh, they first skirmished a far off, with small
Pieces: but afterward, they battered with their great Artillery, and
overwhelmed the Defendants with thick small shot, Arrows and stones, to drive
them off the Wall and Rampires. Not only the Curtains betwixt three Bulwarks,
were soon (...) down; but all places thereabouts, lay full of the dead bodies
of Assailants and Defendants. These (through desperation, joined with
necessity) besides, defending their Walls, with small shot, stones, etc. often
made great slaughter of them, with their Artillery and murdering Pieces;
dismounting also many of their great Pieces, and with Feather-beds, and Sacks
of Cotton-Wooll, making up the breaches: which the Turks labored to burn with
Pitch Barrels, and Pots of Wildfire; and after long fight, entering the Ditch,
made two ways to the Walls, which they so fortified on both sides, that they
were safe from the loups of the Bulwarks, flankering the Ditch: presently
setting up Scaling Ladders, filling the Ditches, and were digging down the
Foundation of two Bulwarks.

The Christians in the first assault, struck many down dead, climbing up the
Ladders; and soon (...) more than themselves were, forced the rest to give over
the assault: in these first and hard conflicts, a number of Soldiers were
lost, and most of the Cannoniers slain. After this assault, both parties were
busied a while, in ingenious devices.

The Venetians had in good time, put their Fleet to sea, but being too weak,
they lay still about Jadera, expecting the coming of the Spanish Admiral with
his Galleys: Two months were past, and no news thereof; so that the Venetians
speed and industry was marred by the Spaniards delay and lingering; besides the
plague (at length) grew so hot in the Fleet, that there was neither Mariner
nor Soldier left in many Galleys: 20000 dying thereof, among whom were many of
great account. The plague well ceased, and Zanius weary of expecting the
Spanish Admiral, collecting his dispersed Fleet, sailed to Corcyra, where he
met with Venerius, who had lately taken from the Turks, Suppoto a sea-Town over
against it. All their Fleet was now 117 sail, 12 being Galleasses, but too weak
for the Turks, they being weakly manned; yet the Admiral sorry for Cyprus's
spoil and the distress of Nicosia, landed at Suda in Creet, Aug. 12. In the
latter end whereof, Columnius for the Pope, and Auria for the Spanish King
arrived there also, welcomed with great triumph; so that there was now 192
Galleys, 12 Galleasses, (...) Vessels laden with provision, and Ammunition,
etc. The Pope set forth 12 Galleys, the Spaniards 42, proportionably manned.
The 3 Commanders after long consulting, by Zanius's persuasion, about the midst
of September. (with a fair gale of wind) set forward for Cyprus, keeping such
order as if they should presently have met with the enemy: Loredanus Duke of
Venice died in these troubles, leaving the rest of the care to Moscnicus his
Successor.

While the Christians slowly proceed, Mustapha dividing his Army into 4 parts,
assaulted 4 Bulwarks of the City with greater force than before: the presence
of the General, besides their natural fierceness, carrying the Turks headlong
without peril, and the fear of life and liberty, with hope of relief,
encouraging the Defendants to dare any thing: many Turks were slain and their
Ladders overthrown: the poor Defendants being brought to a small number, few or
none escaping unwounded: many thought the City might then have been taken, if
the Bassa had still brought on fresh men: but his loss was such, that for that
time he gave over the assault.

After this, some thought good (whilst they had some reasonable strength) to
salley forth upon the enemy, which Dandulus in no case liked, as loath to
diminish the number of the Defendants, yet he yielded to the desire of the
Captains: so in the hottest time of the day, some Italian Companies under
Caesar and Albertus, issued forth, and suddenly brake into the enemies
Trenches, where the Turks were playing and sleeping. At first, the Italians
brought great fear upon that quarter, and slew many: but the Turks running in
on every side, they were glad to retire, diverse being slain and their 2
Leaders; so that this salley only weakened the Defendants, and caused the Turks
to keep better watch and ward.

All hope of long holding out now almost lost, the Defendants scarcely showing
their Heads without danger, They sent out skilful Scouts to the Country people
(who in great multitudes had (...) (...) the Mountains) to tell them, if they
came not in time to their relief, their wives and children sent into the City,
must shortly fall into the enemie's Hands or perish with Hunger; but these
being intercepted, were in sight of the (...) tortured to death.

When diverse Letters were shot into the City, persuading the Christians by mild
promises and extreme threatenings to yield, but in vain; Mustapha called forth
certain Soldiers on a Bulwark, to parley, some being sent to him, who
complained that no answer was given to his Letters, setting forth the power of
the Turkish Empire, propounding great miseries, and showing the profit of
yielding up the City; offering them large entertainment: concluding, they
should never find so much offered grace afterward. The Bassa did this, doubting
the coming of the Christian Fleet, and his Army being exceedingly troubled with
diseases; but the Soldiers answered, they yet doubted not of their own
strength, being ready to endure any thing, rather than prefer the uncertain
friendship of an unknown prince, before the favor of such worthy Princes as
they had so good experience of.

The Bassa grieved and enraged, made ready for the assault, promising great
things to those who should first or second mount the Walls: encouraging them
with the small number and feebleness of their enemies, the approach of hoped
rewards and end of their labors, etc. Some he reproved in that general
assault; some mindful of promises, others of disgrace, with their thick shot
and Ordnance suffered none to stand safely on the walls: by whose ruins, and
in other places they attempted with scaling-Ladders to enter, which they
maintained for diverse days without intermission, fresh men still coming on:
yet the Defendants performed what was possible for so few to do: still in hope
that relief might come by the approach of the Christian Fleet. At length, when
the Turks were in great hope to gain the walls, and Mustapha guessed the
Christians to be weary, and sore weakened, which was also confirmed by some
fugitives: yet he sounded a retreat, laying still all next day. The Defendants
thinking he had given over, because of some aid coming to them, upon that vain
Hope became more careless. But the Bassa choosing out about 200 of his best,
valiant and (...) Captains and Soldiers, sent them early next day, to try if
they could without noise, set up Ladders and get into those 4 Bulwarks,
before-shaken. These getting up, others followed, so taking the Bulwarks, and
presently other Companies standing ready in diverse places with Ladders,
recovered the top of the Walls. In every Bulwark was 140 Italians and Epirots,
who part asleep, as fearing no danger, and part laying on the ground, were
surprised and slain; other-some, awaked with the noise, leapt down out of the
Bulwarks at places next to them, some running unawares into the midst of their
Enemies. Upon the Alarm, some Captains came speedily with their Companies to
the Walls, as Eugenius who crying out to some he met, not so cowardly to flee,
and staying others, was slain with a small shot: Other Captains also in other
places laboring in vain, to stay the fleeing Soldiers. The Defendants now
gathered into the Market place, but the Citizens stood in the entrance of their
Houses, fearfully expecting their own and their Countries destruction. The
Governor of Aleppo the while, scoured the Walls round, putting all to the
sword they met; a Company of the Italians at the Bulwark Earbarus, fighting
desperately a while, but were at last overthrown and slain. After this, he came
down into the City, and seeing those in the Marketplace fight as desperate
men, in a Ring, he bent murdering-pieces upon them: Whereupon they laid down
their Weapons,, yielding to mercy. By and by all the Gates were strongly
guarded, that none should go in or out. Dandulus with the Bishop of Paphos, and
the other Nobles, and better sort of Citizens, stood on their guard in the
Town Hall: to (...) Mustapha sent word, he would take them all to mercy, if
they (without more resistance) would yield; but while Messengers ran to and
fro, the Turks breaking in, slew them every man: after which they spared none,
and slaying those in the streets, brake into the Houses, making havoc of all
things. Babes were taken from their mothers: Virgins ravished: women before
their Husbands faces abused, Temples spoiled, and all places filled with
mourning and dead bodies, for in the City was slain that day 14866 persons. Its
reported, the prey there taken amounted to 20000 millions of Ducats: 200 of
the most goodly youths were chosen to be sent a present to Selimus: 250 pieces
of Ordnance were taken, some being carried away, the rest left for defense.
Thus famous Nicosia, fell into the Turks Hands, September. 9. 1570. Mustapha with
the terror of his Name, rather than by force, brought most of the Towns under
his obedience, and by promise of good usage, brought back the Country people
(who had fled into the Mountains with all they had) to their dwellings, to till
and sow as they were wont. He sent a Sanzack to summon the City Syrene,
strongly situate and well furnished for a long siege; but Palacius the
Governor, no sooner saw the enemy, but he delivered it up to him, only to
depart thence with all his Garrison, which was easily granted.

Ere long, Mustapha leaving a strong Garrison in Nicosia, marched to besiege
Famagusta: for terrours-sake, sending to them by a Country fellow in a Basket
Dandulus's Head, sending before him diverse Horsemen, who upon their staves,
carried the Heads of many slain Nobles: so riding in triumph about the Walls:
but they of Famagusta not terrified thereby to yield, he encamped about 3 miles
off: and casting up diverse Mounts, he placed battery against the Tower
defending the Haven. Himself the while, battering the Gate leading to Amathus.
But perceiving by their desperate salleys, he was like to have much more here
to do, than at Nicosia, and Winter drawing fast on: it being reported also the
Christian Fleet was at hand, he rose with his Army further off, billeting his
Soldiers in the Villages round, for that Winter.

Haly and Piall, in doubt of the Fleets coming, then at Creet, sent out 6
Galliots to discover the Christians doings, who returning with some prisoners
taken in Creet, declared what they heard, and that the Christian Fleet was on
their way to Cyprus: Whereupon, the Bassaes set forward from before Famagusta
toward Limisso to meet them: who were coming between the Isles Caprathos and
Rhodes: but there hearing that Nicosia was lost, and that the Turks were come
to besiege Famagusta, they called a Council, to consult what best to do.
Columnus then chief Commander, and Zanius, thought it best to hold on and
relieve Famagusta, because it was like, that the Turks proud of Victory, for
desire of prey, had left their Fleet but slenderly manned: alleging also, the
Senates express decree, to give The Turks battle; but Auria thinking of the
matter as it was: said, He marvelled how the Venetian Senators, sitting at
ease in Counsel, before knowledge of their own and enemies strength, the nature
of the Country, and purpose of their foes, could determine what were fit for
martial men to do, to whose actions no certain Rule could be prescribed: and
besides, diverse difficulties and wants alleged; he said, he had express
command from the King of Spain to return to Messana before Winter: Wherefore,
when the month was out he would depart. Zanius urged Auria to proceed: saying,
So great aid was not sent from the Pope and King only for relief of Nicosia,
but to deliver the whole Island from the danger of the Turk. Diverse great
Captains were of Aurias's opinion, as Sfortia: who said, Nothing was to be done
as might rashly expose unto casualty or power of the enemy; the Fortune and
Majesty of the Christian Common weal, greatly hazarded in that Fleet: that
longer stay might bring further danger, etc.

Upon which so fowl a disagreement, the Fleet began to return back, every
Admiral now by himself leading his own Fleet: Auria after 2 days wondrous
tossing at sea, came to Caprathos: thence with much ado arriving in Creet:
whence by a Messenger, he requested leave of Columnus, presently to return
home: who answered, He would give him none, charging him to keep company with
the rest of the Fleet till it were past Zant; for if they should not pass
safely by their enemies Country, it should be imputed to his dishonor, who had
forsaken his friends, and not to them; but Auria answered, The welfare of
Sicily and Naples consisted in that Fleet's safety, and therefore he could not
stay to go with their heavy Galleasses and other ships, which must often be
towed. Yet it was deemed he sought occasion (accounting himself the better man
at sea) to withdraw from the command of Columnus. After a while thus reasoning
the matter, Auria without leave came to Messana in Sicily: the other two not
staying long after him, but with much trouble at sea, Columnus arrived in
Italy, and Zanius at Corcyra. In this idle expedition many thousands of valiant
men lost their lives of diverse diseases, from change of diet, and the weathers
unseasonablenesse in that hot Climate: Marteningus with most of his 3000
Soldiers, sent for defense of Famagusta perishing also. Barbaricus was sent to
Corcyra to discharge Zanius of his Admiralship, and send him prisoner to
Venice; Venerius Governor of the Isle being put in his room.

The Bassaes at sea, were not a little proud of the Christians Fleet's
departure; yet the seas growing rough, and no enemy appearing, they left 7
Galleys before Famagusta to hinder it from relief that way, departing
themselves: Piall with the greatest part to Constantinople, and Haly with the
rest to the Rhodes: fraughting a great Gallion and 2 tall ships, with the
richest of the spoil of Nicosia, and choice of the prisoners for a present to
Selimus; but being ready to hoyse sail, as they were carrying out of the
Gallion, some barrels of Gunpowder, which Mustapha had commanded to be landed,
a Noble Woman Captive fired the powder, which rent the Gallion with the other
two ships in pieces, blowing up all that was therein, none escaping with life
but the Master of the Gallion and 2 captives; but the Bassaes following their
resolution, Piall came to Constantinople, where such preparation was then, and
all winter making, as if Selimus (next year) purposed some greater matter,

While Venerius yet lay at Corcyra, the theevish and needy Acroceraunians,
promised to deliver to him the strong Castle of Caymera kept by 300 Turks, if
with a few Galleys and fit number of foot, he would come into the Bay of
Ambracia, offering him good Hostages for performance: who forthwith went
thither, landing a Company of Horsemen and 3000 Foot, and presently 1000 of
those Mountain-people coming to them, they took the Hill, repulsing the Turks
coming for relief of the Castle: they therein next night let themselves down
with Ropes, but were all taken or slain: a strong Christian Garrison being put
into it. Ere long, Courageous Quirinus the Vice Admiral besieged a strong
Castle in Peloponesus, by sea and Land, which the Turks had built 2 years
before to trouble the Christian passage. He took it in 5 hours, putting 500
Turks to the sword, and razing it, carried away 25 great Ordnance into Zant.

While Mustapha lay before Famagusta, Bragadine the Governor, and Balcone a
most expert Captain, beholding the Turks great Army, with-their cunning
Fortification, were much moved: Wherefore, they entreated Ragazonius Bishop of
the City to go to the Senate, in so great danger to crave their aid (joining to
him Donatus a noble Cypriot); he was at first loath, in such danger, to leave
his Flock, but was at length overcome by entreaty and tears: and loosing out of
the Haven about Sunsetting with a fair gale, passed through the Turks Fleet
laying at Anchor. Being come to Venice, he declared to the Senate (as before to
Zanius at Creet) the danger of the City, the Enemie's strength, and Defendants
weakness against such a multitude, and want of necessaries to hold out etc.
Zanius then Admiral, sent 4 tall ships (laden with Victual and Gunpowder, with
1700 choice Soldiers) from Creet to Famagusta, appointing Quirinus with 12 of
the best Galleys to conduct them thither. Zanius at his departure to Venice,
though he knew it required haste, yet left it to his discretion when and how to
perform that service, who (the seas being then full of the Turks Galleys)
stayed till Winter was well spent, and so setting forward, Jan. 17. 1571. He
kept aloof from the ships, who came directly before Famagusta, hoping, the
Turks Galleys might be drawn further into the sea in hope of booty, himself
fitly staying out of sight. The Turks upon Day-dawning, made hastily toward
them from the Harbors mouth; but Quirinus desirous to fight with them, showed
himself before the enemy came nigh the ships: who presently with all speed
retired. But Quirinus following them faster, they were glad to run 3 Galleys
aground, and get ashore, which 3 he beat to pieces with his Ordnance, sore
gauling the other 4. The Haven cleared, he brought the ships with the supply to
Famagusta, for which there was great joy. Quirinus coming forth again, and
roaming up and down at pleasure, took 2 enemies ships coming to the Camp,
richly laden; enriching his Soldiers therewith, doing great harm in diverse
places along the coast of Pamphylia: so returning to Famagusta, he persuaded
the Garrison to remember their wonted valor, that the Christian Fleet would be
with them next summer to raise the siege. So having in 20 days dispatched that
he came for he departed to Creet in 5 days.

Selimus having knowledge hereof, was so highly displeased, that he beheaded
the Governor of Chios, disgracing the Governor of the Rhodes, who should have
kept those seas: He displaced also Piall Bassa. making Partau Admiral, because
it was supposed he might have (the year before) discomfited the Christian Fleet
at Creet.

As for Philip the King of Spain his joining with the Venetians and Pope Pius
5th. (who greatly favored their cause) in perpetual League and Confederation
(as it was termed) against the common enemy; he referred it to 2 Cardinals,
and Zunica his Ambassador sent to Rome for that purpose: where also to that
end, then lay Surianus the Venetian Ambassador: to whom the Pope joined diverse
Cardinals, to compose such differences as should arise betwixt the
Commissioners for the King and the Venetians: but so soon as they were set
together in Consultation, They began to jarre about the capitulation of the
said League. The ostner they sat, the farther off: if one difficulty were by
the discretion of some appeased, at the next meeting arose 3 others; but the
chief difference was about the proportioning of the charge, the Spanish seeking
to turn the greatest part thereof on the Venetians, and they on them: and with
such earnestness, as if they had met for bettering their particular states,
rather than for the common good; for the Spaniard (the War being risen between
the Venetian and Turk, and, through the Popes indulgence, raising vast sums of
money upon his Clergy) cared not for entering into any further League with the
Venetians: but as it were in courtesy to send them a yearly aid for a
defensive lingting War: and so to keep the Turk's busied upon them farther off
from his Territories: but the Venetians were even for the same reasons moved to
shorten the War, whose Customs also were greatly impaired, and their Traffic
almost quite cut off. Thus was all the last year, and a great part of this,
spent in turbulent conferences, but uothing concluded, which troubled the
Venetians not a little, being of themselves too weak for so mighty an enemy as
Selimus; but on a sudden and unexpected, they might choose either to join in
League with the Pope and the King, or agree with Selimus: for Muhamet the chief
Bassa devised how to cross the rising of Mustapha the Competitour of his Honor,
and to help the Venetians, to whom he was much beholden. He by secret
Messengers had often put the Venetian Ambassador in hope, that if suit were made
to Selimus for peace, it would be granted, promising himself to be an
Intercessour; but finding him to give small credit to their talk, who had
before deceived them: he did not so give over the matter, but for the (...)
took opportunity to tell Selimus, that it was reported, the Venetians weary of
their long Altercation with the Spaniards, and now destitute of all hope and
aid, would happily grant him that they had before denied.

Selimus not unwilling so to hear; he proceeded to know what he would have done
therein, by the way persuading him to what he most wished himself; secretly
advertising the Ambassador, there was great hope of peace: Wherefore, the
Senate (under color of exchanging prisoners, and redeeming Merchants goods)
should send one to Constantinople, with whom he would secretly confer of what
might further the pacification. The Senate (thinking it much to concern their
State to have a way, on tolerable conditions to make peace, if the League with
the Spaniard could not be concluded) chose one Ragazonius, a man of great
dexterity and wit in any matter, and exceeding rich, and of a very good
carriage; (things thought of great moment to win the favor of that covetous
and barbarous Nation; certifying the Pope and Spaniard, and other Christian
Princes of his sending; yet of purpose concealing the secret drift of his
going: who with thorow-Instructions, was in a Galley conducted to Ragusium, and
was met by Cassan-beg Muhamet's son (by his Fathers appointment) upon the
Frontiers, safely to conduct him, and have him convoyed, till out of all
danger. Ragazonius was, by night, (...) received into Constantinople, and
brought into an obscure Inn, with a guard over him, that he should speak with
no man; but after 3 days, he was removed much better, and presented with
diverse kinds of dainty dishes. Having access to Muhamet; after his Message
delivered about prisoners and Merchants goods; He asked him, if he had nothing
from the Senate concerning a pacification? Who answered he had, but he must
(...) speak with the Ambassador, without whom he was to do nothing, The Bassa,
to terrify him, declared the exceeding strength of the Turks both by Land and
sea: yet so, as not to cut off the hope of a pacification: saying, The
Venetians had done better, if they had at first listened to him; yet, as the
case stood, it should be to their great good, by yielding up Cyprus, to gain to
themselves perpetual tranquillity: the Island it self being now not worth the
hazarding so many dangers, etc.

Ragazonius being cool, and advised, and perceiving the Bassa was not to be
contraried; so answered, as that he showed no token of fear, nor let any word
fall that might offend his ears. This was at their first meeting: Ragazonius
having leave to speak with the Ambassador (who lay at Pera under safe
keeping); in passing over, the Turks of purpose with a Fleet of Galleys
encountered each other like a sea fight: who smiling said, 'twas a pretty
childish sport for him that never saw the like, but not to them, who were
acquainted with these things in earnest, as the Turks should well know, when
ever they would prove the Venetians at sea. Coming to the Ambassador, he by
large conference, resolved with him what to do, and returning to Muhamet,
easily dispatched with him about prisoners and goods: but as to the
Capitulations of a pacification; They were at first as if they would never
agree: but after much conference, they were likely enough to have agreed. Pope
Pius, and Philip of Spain, began to imagine that Ragazonius was sent about some
(...) of Peace, what ever color it was covered with; Wherefore, doubting (...)
the Turk having made peace with the Venetians, should turn his Forces, upon one
or both of them, they speedily hastened the former delayed League, the Pope
sending Columnius to Venice; who declared to the Senate, how matters had passed
at Rome concerning the League, what harm might ensue of the same neglected, and
how much it concerned the common good, but them especially, to have it speedily
confirmed, etc.

Though many inclined thereto, yet many could not be resolved, whether it were
better to embrace peace with the Turk, or the League with the Pope and King?
and that for diverse reasons on both hands: and after so weighty a matter, had
been with great contention thoroughly debated in the Senate; the League was by
most voices, as most honorable, received, and the Turks peace rejected: a
Decree being made to that effect. Ragazonius (by secret Letters) understanding
hereof, dealt more warily with Muhamet, and more hardly to yield to his
demands: and devising many difficulties, requested that he might return to
Venice to be resolved of many things by the Senate, whereof he of himself could
not judge; and so to return again with more certain Instructions, etc. His
request obtained, he speedily got out of Constantinople, but was scarce out of
the Gates, when the report of the League was brought to Court. Which made his
way the more troublesome, and frustrated the exchange of prisoners and
Merchants goods. Ragazonius declaring to the Senate, the Turks drift, his
conference with the Bassa, and the forwardness of the peace, was by them
highly commended, and honorably rewarded.

The Commissioners at Rome the while, concluded a League, which they would have
perpetual, for invasive and defensive wars against the Turk: which the Pope and
King of Spain, and Senate confirmed by oath, May 20. 1571. The sea and
Landforces were to consist of 200 Galleys: 100 ships: 50000 Foot, 4500 Horse,
with necessaries proportionable, yearly to be ready in March, or April at
farthest, to meet at an appointed place in the East, to be employed as the
state of things required. The King of Spain to defray half the charge; the
Venetians 2 parts of the other half, and the Pope a third, which if too heavy
for him, then the Spaniard to bear 3 parts of that left by him undischarged,
and the Venetians 2. Victuals was also to be taken up at a reasonable price in
any of their Dominions, where the Forces should stay; yet the Spaniard was
first to Victual Guletta, Malta, and his own Navy out of Naples and Sicily.
Also if the Spaniard should (when there was no common War) invade Algiers,
Tripolis, or Tunis; the Venetians to aid him with 50 well appointed Galleys: he
likewise to aid them, when by the Turks invaded. But if the Roman Territory
should be invaded, then both to the utmost of their power to defend it, and the
Pope's person: and in managing the confederate war, what most of the 3 Admirals
should agree upon, to be reputed as agreed by all: That Don John of Austria,
Charles 5. his son, should command in chief all the Forces, but to display the
common Ensign: Also all places (except Tunis, Algiers and Tripolis) gained from
the Turk, to be divided among the Confederates: the Pope to decide all
controversies of the Generals: to whom the Venetians should lend 12 Galleys,
which the Pope should supply with men and Victuals, and deliver, as they were,
at the end of the War. That Maximilian, the French King, the Polonian, and
Portugal, should have a place to enter into the League, whom with other
Christian Princes, it should beseem him to stir up in so good a quarrel. None
of the Confederates to treat of peace, or enter a League without the others
consent: Every Autumn, their Ambassadors being at Rome to consult of the next
years Wars, and determine whether their Forces were to be increased or
diminished. This League was in June with great pomp and triumph, proclaimed in
Rome, Venice and Spain.

The Venetians (in the mean time) tried if they could stir up Tamas the Persian
King against The Turk; whom he exceedingly hated for the difference about their
Religion, and for manifold injuries sustained: One Alexander a Secretary of
State (escaping lately out of prison at Constantinople) being (for his several
Accomplishments) thought fittest for so great a matter: who thoroughly furnished
and instructed, came to Moncastron in Turkish Attire, a Port-town at the mouth
of the River Borysthenes, embarquing for Trapezond; but was driven by a
contrary wind to Sinope, whence he traveled to Cutai, keeping on the left
hand, because he would not fall upon the Turks Army, marching through all those
Countries, yet he fell on a part thereof, but being taken for a Turk, he through
Rocks and Forests arrived at length at Erzirum a Frontier City of the Turks.
His journey was vented at Constantinople, by a Spy: who, as a friend, haunted
the Venetian Ambassadors House at Pera: Whereupon Currours were speedily to
beset the 3 straight passes into Persia, with his favor, stature, etc. But he
fearing such a thing, leaving his Company, posted to Tauris, whom the Courrours
followed as far as they durst. At Tauris, Alexander hearing, the Court lay at
Casbin about 12 miles Journey, he came thither Aug. 14. 1571. meeting with
English Merchants of his acquaintance; by whom, he got to speak with Aider the
Kings third son, learning of them also the fashions of the Court, and how to
bear himself therein. The Persians (through the intolerable heat) doing most
business then by night. Alexander about midnight declared to Aider the cause of
his coming, and next day to his Father, delivered his Letters of credence;
declaring to him in the Senate's name how perfidiously Selimus, was about to
take away Cyprus from them: with what greediness and pride he had set upon the
Christians: and that, discharged of that war, he would in all likelihood set
upon the Persians, through an ardent and insatiable desire of Sovereignty: Then
setting forth the prowess of the Christians, and their wondrous preparation
both at sea and Land; he persuaded the King, with all his power to invade the
Turk, now wholly busied in the Wars of Cyprus: using diverse motives and
arguments. The King willingly heard him: saying, He would consider what to do;
A fair House, and a bountiful Allowance being appointed for him and his
followers: who also requested the Nobles (who feasted him often) to be Mediators
to the King therein: who had a son called Ismael, whom he kept in durance, for
making in-roads into the Turks Frontiers, to the disturbance of his League with
Solomon; he fretting and languishing for very grief of revenge upon the Turks,
wished to Alexander, that either his Father had his mind, or he the power of a
King, and that if ever he obtained the Kingdom, he would show what he then
thought. While the matter went slowlier on than the Ambassador would have had
it, news was brought to Court, of a great Victory obtained by the Christians of
the Turks at (...): Whereat Alexander solicited the King more earnestly than
before; but he then troubled with the rebellion in Media, or weary of former
Wars with the Turks, answered him, Since the Christians had made a perpetual
League among themselves, he would for 2 years (...) the event, and then, as
occasion served, resolve on peace or war. Which improvidentact, brought
afterward a too late Repentance unto the whole Persian Kingdom, all the
calamities which the Senate foretold. redounding in few years to the shaking
thereof.

Mustapha furnished with all necessaries for his siege, and Soldiers daily
repairing to him, besides great supplies brought by Haly from Constantinople,
(being thought to have 200000 men in his Army): In April. drew nearer to
Famagusta, casting up Trenches and Mounts so high against it, that the
Defendants could scarce see the points of the Turks spears or top of their
Tents; for the Bassa had 40000 Pioniers ready at his command. Famagusta
stands at the East end of the Isle, low, betwixt 2 Promontories: it is 2 miles
about, almost apiece: Almost 2 parts whereof is beaten on with the sea,
the Land-parts being defended with a ditch but 15 foot broad, a stone-wall, and
Bulwark and Parapets: Towers also stand out scarce containing 6 Ordance
a-piece. It Is Haven South-Eastward is defended by 2 great Rocks, betwixt which
the Sea comes in but about 40 paces over, but then opening wider, gives a fit
Harbor for ships (though in no great number) and was now strongly chained.
Near the Haven, is an old Castle with 4 Towers. There was one Bulwark so built
after the manner of the Fortification of our time, that it seemed almost
impregnable: yet there wanting many things, the City was thought too weak long
to hold out against so great a power; but they had therein 2500 Italians, 200
Albano's Horsemen, and 2500 Cypriots, all resolutely bent.

Mustapha planted 64 great pieces, 4 being exceeding great Basilisks: wherewith
he, without ceasing, battered the City in 5 places, chiefly the wall between
the Haven and the Gate leading to Amathus: and with great Morter-pieces, cast
up huge stones, which from on high brake down Houses, falling oft-times into
the bottom of their Cellars to their great terror. Then he assaulted the City:
the Defendants both valiantly repulsing the Turks, and furiously sallying out,
slew and wounded many, much disturbing their Fortifications, and abating their
courage: they so sent also their great shot into the thickest of them, that in
few days 30000 were lost, and The Turks Captains wondering at their valor,
began to despair of (...) the City: The Christians the while, made up their
breaches with earth, baskets, wool-sacks, etc. not sparing their
Household Stuff: their greatest want feared, was of powder, wherefore they
thought best to shoot more seldom; but the Turks still drawing nearer, and
raising Mounts higher than the walls, filled up the ditch: and making walls on
either side, of the broken stones, to defend the (...)-(...), gave a fresh
assault, not only with missive Weapons, but fighting hand to hand in the
breach: which they did daily, for 6 hours: and though they we e divided into
many parts, and fresh men still succeeded the weary, yet the Defendants
requesting for the most (...) places, thence courageously repulsed them with
(...) (...); yet the enemy by often (...) in the night also, kept the
Christians in continual suspense of an assault, and day appearing with fresh
men, desperately assailed them, almost spent for lack of (...). There grew in
the Island great plenty of wood much of the nature of the Fir Tree, yet in this
differing, that in burning, it cast such a noisome smell, as was not well to be
endured. The Turks brought a great quantity hereof to the Gate Limosina, which
fired, could not be quenched: though the Defendants cast whole Tunns of water
at once into it, but terribly burning for four days: the heat and smell so
troubled them, that ever and anon forsaking the Wall, the enemy was like to
have leave to enter.

Bragadine the Governor, ceased not going about from place to place,
encouraging the Italians from diverse motives: praising also the fidelity and
courage of the Greeks, who could never be removed, from the Venetians, or
submit to the Turks Government: persuading them with the same resolution to
defend their own City; that they saw in the Venetian Soldiers, fighting for
them, etc. Baleonius also General of the Garrison Soldiers, by being present
in every skirmish, by careful foresight, and encouraging his men, appeared to
be a worthy Commander and valiant Soldier. The Women also brought meat and
Weapons to the Defendants, also stones, beds, chests, etc. to make up the
Breaches: but Victuals beginning to wax scant, 8000 of the Vulgar were turned
forth: who safely passed through the Turks Army, to seek their living in the
Country.

Force not prevailing, the Turks undermined the City in 4 places; but the
Defendants by sundry means discovered their works, frustrating them by (...):
yet in so great a stir, all things could not be discovered; so that while they
were defending the Walls a Mine not perceived, was suddenly blown up nigh the
Haven-Tower, overthrowing much of the wall with most horrible noise: the Turks
with a horrible (...) mounting the wall, and setting up their Ensigns in the
Breach: Count Peter commanding there, being now not able to defend the same;
which Martinengus perceiving, came speedily from his own station. The fight was
there most terrible: hope of entering on the one side, desperation on the other,
encouraging their minds. In the mean time, Andrew Bragadine, with some great
Pieces out of the Castle slew a number of the Turks as they were coming to the
Breach: Baleonius hearing of the danger, came in haste with a Company of
courageous Soldiers, and cheering them up, thrust himself with the foremost
into the face of the Breach, both appointing what was to be done, and
encouraging his Soldiers, and, slaying many himself, tumbled a Turks Ensign
into the Ditch, having slain its bearer: whereat others encouraged, made a
notable Battle; the Turks retiring, leaving 4000 slain in the Town-ditch, with
14 Ensigns brought into the City; above 100 Christians were slain, among whom
were 4 Captains. Yet they in the City took small rest, for the Turks continual
great shot, on June 8. 5000 such shot being sent into the City, one of the
round Bulwarks being so shaken, that a part of it is Front was fallen down, and
another part stood leaning: the Christians seeing it was not without danger to
be defended, undermined that Bulwark, placing some barrels of Gunpowder in the
Mine; The Turks coming to assault it, they retired as if for fear after a small
resistance, to draw them the faster on: who coming to the place, the Mine being
fired, blew up the Bulwark with all that stood thereon: about 600 Turks
perished at this assault, 2 being of great note; but about 100 Christians
perished also by the hasty firing thereof, some being of great account.

The Turks enflamed with their great losses, being more enraged by the speeches
and persuasion of Mustapha (asking them what place was impregnable, for the
Turks?) began a more terrible siege than ever, and speedily making and blowing
up 3 great Mines, overthrew a great part of the Wall with the Castle, the
notable defense of the Haven: then with all their force often assailing the City
night and day; that part also on the sea being assailed by them in the Galleys
also; so that the poor Christians spent with wounds, labor, and watching, and
brought to small number, held out that tempest rather with courage than
strength; the enemies Army increasing daily in hope of the like spoil as at
Nicosia. The Captains (seeing there was not above 300 sound men left, but 7
Barrels of powder, want of all things daily increasing; and the relief from
Venice staying at Creet, because the Turks Galleys, laying before Famagusta,
nothing could safely be brought thither, began to quail in courage; which
being (ere long) perceived by the Citizens, they flocked to the Governor, with
abundance of tears, beseeching him to take compassion on them, their wives and
children, a people always so well deserving of the Venetian State; (...) open
their own weakness, and enemies increasing strength: so that they must needs
soon all perish with the sword, if the City were by force taken. Wherefore,
they besought him not to refuse any conditions, how hard soever. Bragadine
persuaded them to be of good cheer, for that he would so provide for them, that
they should (...) repent of their fidelity to the Venetian State; and calling a
general Council, after a little debate, they all agreed to yield: only
Baleonius at first dissented, as doubtful of the Turk's Faith, but afterward
yielded to the rest. So a Truce being taken to parley in, and mutual Hostages
given: for the time neither Dart or Arrow was sent from either side. After few
days, the Conditions were agreed on: The Inhabitants safely to enjoy lives,
liberty, and goods, with free exercise of the Christian Religion: the
Governor, Captains and Soldiers, to depart safely with bag and baggage; with
5 great Ordnance, and any 3 Horses they should choose, the Turks to conduct
them to Creet with Victual and shipping: which things conceived in writing and
by Oath confirmed; the Governor requested he might come to see the Bassa, and
deliver him the keys of the City. Leave granted, himself with Baleonius,
Andrew Bragadine, Theupolus Earl of Paphos, Quirinus, Martinengus, with many
other Captains came into the Camp, delivering their weapons before they entered
the Bassaes Pavilion: who at first entertained them courteously, extolling
their valor and courage: saying, He was glad to know them by face, whose
valiant minds before he knew by their most valiant deeds; but after a long
discourse, the false Bassa complained, that some of his men taken at the siege,
had been against all reason and order slain: which they utterly denying, he
started up as in a rage, urging the fact, and commanding them to be cast into
bonds, brought them forth, and in sight of the Army caused them to be slain.

Bragadine and Theupolus were often commanded to lay down their Heads: yet was
their execution deferred for a more exquisite punishment and torture; for next
day, Bragadine having his ears cut off, was brought forth to be wondered at,
and dispoiled of Jewels and Attire, he was forced to carry baskets of earth to
repair the Rampires; as he passed by, the proud Bassa insulting to have him
kiss the ground at his feet. And so, buffeted with their fists, and spurned
with their feet; he was asked, Whether he hoped Christ would come to help or
not? whose comely countenance and long beard, even in that extreme misery, added
to him a certain grace. The Christians could neithis well stay tears, nor let
them fall, fearing the Turks displeasure; but the cruel and foresworn Bassa,
caused that noble and worthy Bragadine to be set in a Chair, and his skin to be
flain off quick, in which horrible torture, he was not heard to let fall any
unbeseeming word, but calling on Gods mercy, and detesting the Turks perfidious
treachery, he breathed out his life: the Tyrant setting his Head on a spear on
high to be beheld, and hanging up his skin stuffed with chafe, at the yards
arm so to be carried about: 2 days after, Theupolus first most shamefully
entreated, was hanged in the marketplace; of the mean sort of Citizens, some
he slew, chaining some in the Galleys, and carrying away the rest into bondage:
300 Citizens and Soldiers who came forth with the Governor to see the Camp
being there slain; one Nestor Martinengus being hidden by an Eunuch of the
Bassaes, by help of a Greek Fisherman got to Leptis, and so to Venice from
Creet; where, he reported to the Duke the whole process of the War, and that in
70 days there was above 140000 great shot discharged against the City. Such
chief ones as escaped, lived afterward a banished miserable and vagrant life,
though some were credibly reported to be well maintained by the Venetian State.
The Country people and Artificers were generally spared. This was the fatal
ruin of Cyprus sometime a Kingdom, and now a Province of the Turkish Empire.
(...) Mustapha lay against Famagusta, Partau and Haly, Bassaes, about mid- May
arrived in Eubaea with 230 Galleys: whither diverse notable Pirates with galleys
resorted to them: who departing toward the Rhodes, 30 Galleys more
(adventurers) met them: then leaving some to lay before Famagusta, they June
13. in the Bay of Suda in Creet landed 12000 men. This Island now called Candia
had once 100 Cities therein, as witnesses (amongst others) Seneca: now only 3,
Candia, Canea and Retimo. It Is 520 miles in circuit, fertile, Hilly: Wherefore,
the people much delighted in hunting; It has no Navigable River nor venomous
beast, and is now famous from it is abundance of good Malmesey, and great plenty
of Cyprus-trees for shipping. The Turks ranging up and down burned and spoiled
all as they went, till Justinianus (lately come thither with 100 men) and now
joining with the people slew many, they being dispersed for prey, forcing the
rest to retire to their Galleys.

Next day landing again in great number, they burnt diverse Towns, ransacking
Setia and Retimo, and carrying away many prisoners; but loaded with booty,
dispersed, and fearing nothing, Valiant Michael slew 2000 of them, ritiring
with loss of booty and prisoners to their Galleys. Then sailing to Cythera,
Zante, and Cephalenia, besides other harms, they carried away captive 6000
Christians.

Thence coming to Suppolo (before taken from the Turks) they now recovered it:
Then coming to Dulsigno, which the Turks besieged by Land, because it is
Governor, and of Antivari (another Venetian-Town) agreed with 300 Epirots, to
stir up a Rebellion, and revolt to the Venetians: who promised them 6000
Soldiers to make head. They raising most of Epirus in Arms, one Company of the
Italians was at first sent them; but vainly expecting the promised aid, being
hardly beset, they yielded to the mercy of Achmetes Bassa Lieutenant of Greece
coming thither with 80000 Turks. They of Dulsigno hardly beset by sea and Land,
delivered the Town to Partau upon safe departure,: The Governor and Garrison
being in 4 ships conveyed to Ragusium: promise being kept with the Citizens
after the Turkish manner. They took also Buda and Antivari, which though strong
and a good Garrison in it, yet Donatus the Governor, no Soldier, through fear
yielded it to the enemy: for which cowardice, the Senate confiscated his goods,
put him out of the Senate, and exiled him. After this, the Turks going into the
Bay of Catharo, hardly besieged the strong Town (so called) by sea and Land:
planting 9 great pieces upon 2 great Bulwarks: but the Defendants by a resolute
salley, put them from their Ordnance, forcing them to their Galleys. Uluzalis
and Carracossa got leave (the while) for 10 days, with 60 Galleys to spoil the
Venetian's Islands there abouts who coming to assanlt Curzola in the Isle so
called, Contarenus the Governor, fled away by night into Rocks and safer
places, the Townsmen following, not above 20 men and 8 women being left, who
came armed to the walls; but while the women with stones, fire, and weapon,
swear beating the Turks off, with more courage than was in their sex to be
expected, a great tempest suddenly arising from the North, so tossed the
Galleys, that they were glad to give over the assault: and sailing along they
spoiled Lysna, Bracia and Lisa, small Islands upon Dalmatia's coast, carrying
away 1600 captives. They roaming up and down, took a ship bound from Messana to
Corcyra, and in (...) it found Letters to the Governor, certifying him of the
late League concluded among the Christian Princes, which they sent in post to
Selimus; Who wrote to his Admiral's, to infest any Dominions of the
Confederates. The Turks Fleet brought great fear also upon the seacoast of
Apulia and all along that side, yea upon Venice it self; so that they new
fortified and garrisoned both the City and their frontiers. For every ship or
galley looking out, was presently surprised, so that the Venetians seemed
rather to quake for fear, than (as wont) gravely to consult how to repulse the
enemy; yet they strongly fortified the bank, defending the City from the sea,
keeping 12000 men in readiness in Venice for its more assurance. All the Turks
Fleet (met together) departed from Aulona, Aug. 26, to Corcyra. Partau landing
800 Horse and 1000 Foot, doing great hurt, and burning the very Suburbs of the
City; but the Garrison Soldiers sallying out with 1000 Horse and 500 foot,
slew a great number, one being Rays, a man of great name. Thus the Turks
(having done much harm) enriched with spoil, and carrying away 15000 captives,
arrived in the Bay of Corinth, now the gulf of Lepanto. When this Fleet first
put into the Adriatic, Venerius the Venetian Admiral, laying with 50 Galleys
at Corcyra, departed thence to Messana the more commodiously, and safely to
attend the coming of Don John with the Spanish forces. Columnius meeting him
with 12 galleys, which the Duke of Florence had sent for aid, and 3 Malta
galleys.

Ere long, Quirinus and Canalis came thither with 62 Galleys, and in short time
the Galleys of Sicily: at last came Don John in the latter end of August with
the Spanish Fleet; about 24 years old, wanting no honorable parts, his mothers
blemish only excepted. The Venetian and Pope's Admiral went to meet him, all
the heaviness of his long-staying being turned into triumph and joy; with a
most assured hope of Victory. The Venetian Fleet consisted of 108 Galleys, 6
Galleasses, 2 tall Ships, and a great number of small Galliots: 12 Galleys of
the Pope being joined to them under Columnius. Don John and Auria had 81
Galleys, 3 being from the Knights of Malta. In the Fleet besides Mariners were
reckoned 10000 fighting men, old beaten-Souldiers being almost throughout that
Army intermixed: diverse coming as voluntary men; who being noble persons, had
many favorites and followers, strong, and of their own charge bravely armed;
and seeking for no pay, but honor of Victory, or to spend their lives for
defense of the Christian faith. Of these honorable and resolute men, Fernesius
Prince of Parma (whose untimely death in the Low Countries, even his honorable
Enemies lamented), Maria Prince of Urbin, and Ursinus of the Family of the
Ursini at Rome, were of greatest mark. A Council was now called, to which was
admitted only Don John (the General) Rechizenes or Requizenius the Generals
Lieutenant, or rather Directour: Venerius, Barbadicus General proveditour to
him, and one Secretary, Columna the Pope's Admiral, with Colonna his kinsman:
the chief point to resolve on (being) Whether they should adventure a battle
against so strong an enemy, or only seek to defend their own Frontiers?
Requisenius speaking first, said, The Enemies strength was before battle
necessarily to be known, wherefore delay was to be used, lest improvident care
overthrew all, highly commending the advice of Scipio Africanus, who counseled
great Commanders not to sight with the enemy, but upon some great advantage, or
forced by necessity, showing they had neither: and propounding to them the
uncertain events of things, and the enemies strength by sea and Land much
exceeding theirs, and what a heap of miseries was like to overwhelm the
Christian Commonweal, if they should miscarry in any thing; he said, Safe
advice was to be preferred before that attended with greater danger.

But the Venetians, Venerius and Barbadicus, most instantly requested the
General and the rest, so soon, as opportunity served, to commit the matter to
trial of a battle; saying, If desire of honor moved them not, should not the
spoiling of their Frontiers; the insolency of their enemies which they
increased by delay, move them? So urging battle from many Arguments: then they
began to entreat and beseech them not to suffer the Christian Commonweal to
receive loss upon loss, but to repose their only hope in the good success of
one worthy battle, and never look for the like opportunity, if they let slip
the present: After a thorow-debate, They heard the opinion of other notable
Captains in the Fleet: Whereof Cornea and Sebellio Spaniards being asked, With
most substantial reasons declared the necessity of giving battle; and that it
was not so dangerous as to be shunned or delayed: since the violent enemy must
not fight at sea (as at Land) with his huge multitude of men: which their
opinion, generally well liked of, was soon after by the General and the rest
approved, and a resolution taken to give battle; which known, every day seemed
to the rejoicing Army nothing but a delay of a most assured Victory.

Next day, the Admirals brought forth their Fleets into the open sea: Auria was
placed in the right-wing with 53 Galleys, Barbadicus with so many in the left:
in the middle stood the General with 70 Galleys, on his right hand Columnius,
on his left Venerius, betwixt the Wings and middle-Battel, was space but for 3
Galleys to row in the rear followed Requisenius, great Commander of Castile;
Fernesius followed Columnius with the Admiral Galley of Genua: and the Prince
of Urbin with the Admiral Galley of Savoy. Jordanus was betwixt the
middle-Battel and left-wing. Justinian betwixt that and the right with the
Malta Galleys. About half a mile behind, followed Bacianus Admiral of the
Neopolitane Fleet with 30 Galleys, to be at all times ready for relief of this
or that part: the 6 Galleasses like Castles, conducted by most expert Dodus
were before the Fleet about a mile, 2 before each Wing, and 2 before the
middle-Battel, with equal space, answering the whole breadth of the front of
the Fleet, almost 5 miles: serving it instead of Bulwarks.

All the Galleys kept a convenient space one from another. In the Wings, as in
the main Battle, were the Pope's, Kings, and Venetian-Galleys indifferently
intermixed, for the more mutual care of reliefs-sake. Cordonius with 8 Sicily
Galleys, and 2 Galliots was to go 10 miles before to descry what he could, and
returning to join his Galleys equally to the wings. In this sort they ere long
came to Paxo: and next day Don John finding (upon view) the Venetian Galleys to
be but weakly manned, ordered 4000 Spaniards and 1000 Italians to be put aboard
them where most need was. There was one Company under Mutius their Captain, an
unquiet and furious man, who aboard the Galley of Galergus, first fell to words
with the Captain, and after much stir to plain fight, as well Soldiers as
Captains, Mutius being Author of all the stir: Venerius hearing hereof, sent
his own Captain to appease the tumult, who in the midst of the furious
multitude, was foully entreated by Mutius and diverse that came with him shrewdly
beaten: which Venerius (of a hot nature) taking, as done in disgrace of the
Venetians, having hung up Mutius and his Ensignbearer at the Yards-arm, to the
great offense of all the Spaniards; The General also full of choler and
indignation complained, that himself was not a little wronged therein; that it
became every Commander to know what belonged to his place, and not to encroach
upon his betters: so would the conditions of the League be the better kept,
etc. threatening (if he had not a public and honorable amends) by force of
Arms to redress his wrong; and, the League being broken, to carry away with
him the Kings Galleys: Some also laying more coals upon the fire. Venerius sent
him word, He should do well to moderate his anger, and advise at leisure, etc.
so should he plainly see, never was more just or wholesome execution done on any
than on those mutinous: but if through the heat of youth, he should attempt any
more violent course than stood with the common quiet, no marvel if he afterward
repented, he being also in Arms, and ready to show himself a man. The matter
was not far only from breaking the League, but even at the point to have set
all on a broil; but Columnius with all his power labored to cure the wounded
mind of Don John, and by diverse Arguments to appease his anger, using also this
Similitude; King Philip had many Kingdoms: Now, if any Millanois had committed
any capital crime in Naples, should the Judgment thereof be of right referred
to the King himself, or to the Governor of Millane? or rather to the
Magistrate of Naples, in whose jurisdiction the fact was committed, and so of,
right there to be executed? (...) then, but that Mutius might seem justly to be
punished by Venerius, who though a Spanish Captain, had yet raised a mutiny in
the Venetian-Galley under his command; besides, the discipline of War (he said)
sometimes required a severe and exemplary kind of punishment. Wherefore
Clearchus notably and truly said, A General ought to be more feared of his
Soldiers, than the enemy, etc. concluding, he had discharged his own duty in
dealing plainly and faithfully, only he would pray to God, with merciful eye to
behold the troubled Christian Commonweal in such a most dangerous time. Thus
was the mutiny hardly appeased: yet, Don John not enduring so much as to come
into Venerius's company; all things of Counsel was done by Barbadicus, not
beneath Venerius in valor, but far beyond him in discretion: of a tall and
goodly personage, and of temperate speech, being greatly honored and beloved
of all; He also chiefly endeavored to further the atonement between the
Spaniards and Venetians; so they came from Paxo to Corcyra, thence to
Cephalenia, where, by Letters from Contarenus Governor of Zant, they heard,
that the Turks Fleet (333 sail of all sorts) lay in the gulf of Lepanto:
Whereupon, purposing to go to Petala a Haven opposite to the Rock, Corzulares,
and so to Lepanto, they (by contrary winds) put back again into another Port of
the Island Cephalenia) heard (by the way) from Creet, that Famagusta was lost,
whereat they were rather enflamed with desire of revenge; so staying at the
good Harbor of Galanga one night, they purposed next day to go to the mouth of
the gulf of Lepanto to dare the Turks to battle. Partau and Haly, upon the
approach of the Christian Fleet, consulted with their Captains, whether to give
battle, or keep still within their safe Harbor, who were of diverse opinions.
Chiroche a most Noble and ancient Captain, exhorted the Bassaes, in no case,
when no need was, upon vain glory to adventure all to the fortune of battle,
and that on diverse considerations: not to go out (he said) at the enemies
pleasure, but when they saw good themselves, when the enemy was not so well
provided; so should they without great labor or danger, attain to the full of
their own desires. Partau thought, the Christians would not at all offer him
battle, and as one indifferent, and loath to incur blame, appeared ready to
stay or set forward, as the most part should think best; but Haly of a hotter
spirit, could not endure to hear but of present battle: the pleasure of
Selimus, hope of Victory. the displeasure Piall Bassa had incurred, inducing
him to accept thereof, if offered; Caracoza also a famous Pirate, in a swift
Galliot viewing the Christian Fleet, had reported it to be much less than it
was, deceived ('it was thought) by not fully viewing it through his posting
haste, or blinded by the Island laying behind the Fleet; Whereupon, the Turks
greatly rejoiced, dreaming now only of Victory; so that Haly would needs
fight, hoping the Christians at first sight of them, would retire or flee, or
fighting at so great odds, receive a notable overthrow: which opinion was also
confirmed by the persuasion of Cassanes Barbarussa's son, Uluzales and Chais
Beg Governor of Smyrna, all of great experience, chiefly in seamatters; So
that though Partau stood wavering, and Chiroche with the Governors of Cicilia
and Euboea were against it, yet Haly's Authority or rather importunity,
prevailed, although 2 other espials returning, told the Bassaes (as it was)
that the Christian Fleet, with much more number than was supposed, were coming
with Ensigns displayed, to fight: whereat, they exceedingly troubled,
demanded, whether the foremost galleys were all Venetians or not? who answering,
they were intermixed with Spanish and others, they became exceeding pensive; yet
being well furnished and Victualled, taking in 12000 Janissaries and Spahies in
the Bay out of diverse garrisons, and 4000 other Soldiers, and that they could
not with honor shrink back, they held their former resolution; So Partau
calling together the chief Commanders and Captains, by a speech encouraged
them: concluding, they should so set forward, as if they saw the Emperor
himself encouraging them, and giving them the signal of battle, of his bounty,
and the present Victory, expecting all felicity and bliss; which comfortable
speech so encouraged the Turks, that with one voice and mind (and still
possessed with the first report of Caracoza) they seemed to desire nothing more
than battle, and thinking only of present Victory; and coming out of the gulf
with great cheerfulness, they made for the little Islands Echinades or
Corzulares about noon, betwixt Lepanto and Patras: the Christians also coming
still on, October. 7. in the afternoon, and understanding by espisals, that the
Turks Fleet was even at hand, the General commanded the common Ensign to be
displayed (the signal of battle) and a warning piece to be discharged out of
his galley, and himself in bright Armor with Cordona, and his Secretary, went
in a long boat all to the squadrons of the Fleet, cheerfully exhorting them to
follow their Leaders, and play the men, etc. To which and other such speeches,
they (before cheerful enough) gave such applause with the cry of Victory,
Victory, so often and so cheerful, that it was taken as a lucky aboadment of
the same ensuing. Likewise Auria and Barbadicus ceased not by all comfortable
speeches to encourage their followers: concluding, to make (they said) the
enemies (rejoicing for the Conquest of Cyprus) short, before they had well
tasted the pleasure thereof: and all the Captains left nothing unsaid that
might hearten their men on; or undone, that might further the Victory. The
Turks also (though it was fallen out much contrary to their expectation)
encouraged with former Victories, with a fair gale, came orderly and gallantly
on in form of a Half Moon; their fortunate Ensign: yet the Sun shining full in
their faces, so dazzled their eyes, that they could not well see to direct their
galleys to their most advantage; They had 250 galleys, 50 galliots, 20
Brigandines, and other small Vessels: the middle battle was conducted by Haly
and Partau; attended on by many of great account and place, and for experience
at sea, the chief strength of the Turkish Empire. Mahomet Bey commanded the
right wing with 56 galleys, and Uluzales Viceroy of Algiers, an old
Arch-Pirate, the left, with 95 galleys. In the rear came Dragut with 30 galleys
and other small vessels. The middle battles, and wings came directly against
each other: whose signal given, by discharging some great pieces; the Turks
coming on with a hideous cry, first lighted on the 6 galleasses: which in their
passing by, so plagued them with their broad-sides of murdering shot, that
with great loss and diverse galleys sunk, they were forced to break their order,
and fall further off: which great Carts and unserviceable Ships (as the Turks
accounted them) they supposed to have carried little or no great Ordnance on
their sides; yet were they (to the Turks great trouble) of greatest importance
for gaining of the Victory. The wind also which all that day had favored the
Turks, now was come about to the West, pleasantly carrying the smoke (in time
of fight) upon them. The fierce enemy (...) passing by these galleasses, soon
made good their disordered squadrons, and with all their force assailed the
Christian Fleet. The Instruments of War had scarce well sounded, but all shook
with confused cries and noise, flames of fire, thundering of Artillery, many
being so astonished, that on a sudden, they almost lost the use of sight and
hearing: even showers of Arrows and Darts being mixed with shot: the Masts
broken, Sail-yards struck down, Tackle rent, and all confused with horror and
fear. Haly ran upon the Admiral-galley with such violence, as if he would have
presently stemmed her; but being with like force opposed, they met so
violently, that, both their beakes fell into the sea with the feaze. In the
Admiralgalley of the Christians were 400 select men, most Captains and
Ancients, who forcing the furious enemies to shrink back, entered their galley
even to the Mainmast, who by new supply repulsed the Spaniards: clearing their
galley again, many on both sides being wounded and slain, Don John sending in
new supply, the other more lustily than before charged the Turks, who with like
hope and (...) encountered them: being thrice driven even to the Mainmast, and
by new supplies with great slaughter repulsing the Christians back again.

Venerius seeing the danger of the General, was about to have assailed the
poupe of Halyes galley, but Partau opposed himself against him with his galleys
so speedily, that showing as if he would charge a Front, set upon his side,
which at first much troubled the Christians, but afterward they notably
defended themselves. Venerius being above 77 years old, performing all the
parts of a brave youthful Commander, by entreating, threatening, and fighting in
the midst of his men, much moved their minds.

The enemy having slain many, pressing on more furiously, and fighting close
together, entered the prow of Venerius's galley, now bared of Defendants: who
had been overcome, had not Lauretanus and Malipetra speedily come to their
relief: whereby they which fiercely assailed the Venetian galleys, were now
glad to defend their own: but in process of this indifferent battle, these 2
worthy Captains, were slain with small shot, which rather enraged than
discouraged their Soldiers; so that they desperately pressed in upon the
Turks: the terror of the batrel being turned upon the Victours: 2 of their
galleys being taken after their great slaughter, and Partau in a Long boat
escaping out of the battle. Columnius also hardly assailed other Turks galleys,
and made great slaughter, taking one, and disordering the other: Lignius also
in the thickest of his enemies made a notable fight; many an enemy falling
about: Fernesius, Rueres, Ursinus, Cornea, and Justinian most courageously
fighting. Chiroche or Mahomet Bey, coming forward against the Christian's
left-wing, was (ere aware) beaten with the Ordnance from the (...), many being
slain, and diverse of his galleys sunk and torn, they standing so thick: diverse
being also burnt with pots of wildfire from the Galleasses: to avoid whose
danger, and shun the dangerous shelf which the River of Achelous (there falling
into the sea) makes, he sent a great part of his galleys under Alis to come
aloof upon the back of Barbadicus: who forthwith turning his (...), received
his first onset: and diverse galleys fast grapled together, they encountered each
other, not only with missive weapons, but with swords: 6 Turks galleys fell
upon Ciconia's galley, and 5 upon Barbadicus's yet did they most valiantly
endure that most dangerous fight. Barbadicus, whilst encouraging his men and
fighting where most danger was, was struck into the brain with an Arrow through
the left eye, being taken up for dead, yet living till 3 days after. The Turks
now as Conquerers Iustily boarded the Galley, and the Venetians as discouraged
gave way: the galley had been lost, if Nanius and Porcia had not speedily come
for relief, and not only clearing her, but diverse Turks galleys were boarded
also, some taken and great (...) made; Silvius was here grievously wounded in
his thigh and right side. Barbadicus is reported, the battle ended,
Epaminondas-like, to ask which part had got the Victory, and being told, the
Turks Fleet was most taken, the rest sunk or burnt, He with eyes lifted-up,
gave unto God immortal thanks, and, ere long joyfully departed this life.

Ciconia (as was said) hardly beset, was sore burnt with wildfire, and hurt in
the face, and was now even at the point to have been lost, but was saved by
sudden relief, who encouraged, with his weary and wounded Soldiers charged a
fresh, taking a principal Turkish Galley and Ensign. In the same wing,
Contarenus doing exceeding much harm with his great (...), Chiroche enraged,
ran so fiercely upon the side of his galley, that with his beak he had well
nigh stemmed her: and grapling fast with her, was like to board her: whom yet
the Christians repulsed, with greater slaughter than was thought possible for
so small a number, to make; the enemies, being also embrewed with their blood.
But after a long doubtful bartel, many Turks being slain or wounded; and both
parties, seeing Chiroche slain, and the enemy destitute of fresh supplies: the
galley also in danger to sink, through great shot, they reposed their trust in
(...) nearness of the Main; but turning about toward the shore, the Christians
entering the galley, and slaying or driving overboard almost all lest, made an
end of Chiroche half-dead, with fresh wounds. Diverse and doubtful was the whole
face of the battle: in one place the Vanquished lifted up, and in another, the
Victorious overthrown: All was full of terror, error, sorrow, and confusion;
yet the (...) at length began to appear much superior in strength and courage,
the Turks seeming rather to defend themselves than assail their enemies.
Bacianus in the rear, ever as need required, sent in aid. The Turks seeing the
Christian General's galley (hardly charged on the prow by Haly) almost bared of
men in the poupe, fetched a compass to board her abath: whereupon, Bacianus
coming speedily in with some galleys, stayed their course, and having
discharged many vollies of shot, and a multitude of Arrows and Darts, grapling
together, they came to the sword: where Bacianus much encouraged his men, by
words, presence and valor, and received 2 shot in his Targuet, many were slain
on both sides: the Spaniards (though with great loss repulsed, in attempting to
enter the Turks galleys) yet overcame valor by pertinacy and overthrowing and
slaying their enemies, enjoyed their galleys. After 3 hours dreadful fight
between Haly and Don John, the Christians began to faint, and were in danger to
have been overcome: but the Don upon a sign given to the 400 of his best and
select Soldiers, reserved under the Hatches against all events, they started
out, and with a terrible cry desperately assailed the enemy, almost spent with
labor and Wounds: who astonished, confounded, and with great slaughter
vanquished the Turks, possessing the galley: Haly shot into the Head, and all
bloody, was brought to Don John: who seeing him ready to die, had his Head
struck off, which on the point of a spear, himself held up aloft as a Trophey
of Victory, and to terrify the other Turks, who fast by, fought yet right
valiantly: which they beholding, and a flag of the Cross being in the top of
their General's Galley, the Christians also crying Victory through the Army,
they with might and main, made toward the Land, not much above a mile off:
whom Canalis and Quirinus, hardly pursuing, sunk and took diverse of their
Galleys: Partau's Son, by staying the rest, had time to run his Galley on
ground, and forsake her with his men, as did others also, the Galleys becoming
a prey to the Christians.

Caracoza in this hot conflict (a famous renegate Pyrate) who had long done
exceeding mischief, was slain by Buzzacharinus of Padua. Requisenius also took
the Galley of Haly's two Sons, with themselves, one being 23, the other 13
years old, and the Nephews of Selimus: who though strongly guarded with
Janissaries, fled (as exceedingly afraid) upon this discomfiture of the main
Battle. The chained Christian slaves breaking off their geives and loosing each
other, with any Weapons that came to hand, notably furthered the Victory: yet
was the Battle doubtful (betwixt Auria and Uluzales), in the right Wing the
Turks having almost two Galleys for one. Auria, (whatever the cause was) upon
signal of Battle given, shrunk farther from the rest of the Battle, but it
seems his purpose was to countervail by policy, what he wanted in strength:
it seemed most strange to the Turks: yet he fell off farther, hovering aloof,
and seeming to wait some advantageous opportunity; a galeasse of Pisa (the
while) laying before him with (...), much troubled the Enemy.

Uluzales also so extended his Wing, as if he would have compassed in Auria,
yet offered not Battle, but rather expected some advantage might be given him:
who had not lain so, long, but 12 Venetian Galleys withdrawing from Auria, and
roaming without order, fell into his danger: which he speedily enclosing,
boarded them, (...) the Defendants, and took the Galleys: many of the Knights
of St. Stephen being here most valiantly fighting, slain. Superantius, (most of
his men being slain, and himself mortally wounded, and his Galley almost taken)
blew up themselves with a great number of the Enemies (...). The Victors in the
middle Battle hearing the noise, turned thitherward, to aid Auria, but one
after another, as they had cleared themselves of the Enemy.

Justinian, Admiral of the Malta Galleys, being foremost, most terribly
encountered with three Turks Galleys: Uluzales sending in three others to help
their fellows, so Justinian hardly beset with six Galleys, having lost 50
Knights, and an Ensign, with much ado, hardly defended himself; but the Galley
given for lost, two other Malta Galleys, who were upon point, by fight, to take
three other Turks Galleys, with all speed came to relieve their Admiral (who
was yet alive, but shot with three Arrows) whereby, the Turks were repulsed,
and the Galley rescued:

Uluzales hearing of the overthrow of their main Batrel, and right Wing,
leaving the Galleys he had taken, was the first in that Wing that fled.

Cardonius, suddenly appearing at his back, laboring to stay the flight of the
hindermost Galleys, till other victorious Galleys were come in; but 15 of the
Turks Captains, enraged with such unwonted disgrace, unexpectedly turned about,
renewing the Battle, and in a trice, almost all Cardonius's men were (...): the
Galley was not taken, for that (the three Admiralls being near at hand) and
Auria coming fast on, Uluzales giving over the fight fled apace; yet carrying
away a Galley of Cyprus, and a Knights Ensign, as a witness of his valor to
Selimus. The Christians pursued them, so long as there was hope to overtake
any, though weary of almost five hours fight; but it was more than time, to
see to their weary and wounded, men; and night coming fast on, the old Pyrate
under its Covert, escaped into the Bay of Lepanto, with 30 or 40 Galleys. The
number of Turks lost, could hardly be known, many being drowned, and some slain
swimming, (though some, mercy most prevailing, took the Turks prisoners).

Guarnerius reports, 32000 to have perished; others, not past half-so many to
have been slain: the chief being Haly the General, Chiroche, Cassanes, with his
Son Malamur, Gider, Cassambeius, Governors of Islands: Provi Aga, Mustapha the
Treasurer, Caracozae, with many others; chief prisoners were Halies Sons, sent
as Presents to the Pope, the eldest dying by the way at Naples, the younger he
kept prisoner, and Mecbmet Bey Governor of Eubaea: and about 3500 taken also.
The chief escaping, were Partau Bassa, and Uluzales, afterward certainly known
to flee but with 25 Galleys and 10 Galliots, 16 Galleys were taken, 40 sunk or
burnt; of Galliots and other small Vessels were taken about 60. The Admiral
Galley taken, scarce any in the whole Ocean for beauty and richness, was
comparable unto her.

Haly's Casket, with 600 Ducats therein, and a yearly Pension of 300 Ducats
being given to the Greek that slew him, and was also Knighted by Don John, he
had also the burrel of the Turks Standard, which at his return to Venice, he
sold to a Goldsmith: the Senate redeeming it for a Duckat an ounce. It was
massive silver guilt, and engraven with letters: on one side, God does conduct
and adorn the faithful in Warlike enterprises: on the other, God has no other
God, and Mahomet is his Prophet.

Don John, Venerius, and Columnius came together, whom the Don embraced,
chiefly Venerius, calling him Father, and attributing to him most of the
Victory. Afterward, they on their knees, with hands and eyes cast up, gave
thanks to Almighty God: as did the other Captains and Masters, commending each
others valor and good service: especially theirs, who had spent their lives,
which were about 7566: the chief being John and Bernardine, Spaniards; Caraffa,
Bisballus, Virginius, and Horatius, Romans: Barbadicus, Superantius, Quirinus,
Lauretanus, Contarenus, Malipetra, two other Barbadicusses: Landus, Bonus,
another Contarenus, Paschaligus, Jerome, Venerius, all Venetian Senators,
besides others. The chief of the German Knights of Malta slain, were Spart,
Commendour of Moguntia and Franck fort: To: Commendour of Hemmendorf and Drost:
the chief wounded were Don John, Venerius the Admiral shot through the foot;
Jordanus, Savel, Molinus, and others, almost 7000: 12000 Christians were by
this Victory delivered from most miserable thraldom. Two days after, Venerius
sent Justinian with news thereof to the Senate: who, by shooting off Ordnance,
gave warning to the City of his coming: which then hung in great suspense. The
Citizens came flocking to the Adriatique Port, longing to hear the first news.
When Justinian was come nearer, they perceiving the Mariners attired like
Turks, and four Turks Ensigns hanging at the Poup, their minds were filled
with hope of good news; but being with much ado landed for the Prease,
delivering his Letters at Court, and discoursing of all the success, which was
blown abroad, the Mariners also having reported the Victory, the people as
overjoyed, ran up and down, doubling and redoubling the name of Victory: the
Senators also gave public thanks, by prayers and Hymns in every Temple: then
by ringing of Bells, Ordnance, Bonefires, etc. setting all prisoners at
liberty, and paying all debts not above 25 Crowns, out of the common Treasury,
throughout all the Venetian Seigniory: decreeing, that October. 7. the day of the
Victory, dedicated to Justina, should be ever kept Holyday; and a mass of
money was coined, with Justina's Impression, and an Inscription of the Victory.
Many also their Neighbour-Princes, sent their Ambassadors congratulatory to
Venice: no man putting on mourning-Garments, or showing heaviness, though many
had lost their friends and Kinsmen, whose lives they counted given to the
Christian Commonwealth. The like joy was made in Rome, Spain, Naples, Sicilie
and Malta, especially, when Neighbour-Embassadors came to joy them; yea, and
afterward in remoter Countries, as here in England. This is that Battle of
Lepanto, fought near the Island Curzolari, October. 7th, 1571, the like being
never fought at Sea against the Turk.

One of the Turks chief prisoners, hearing this Victory compared with the loss
of Cyprus, said, It was to Selimus, as the shaving of ones beard, which would
ere long grow again; but the loss of Cyprus to the Venetians, was as of an
Arm, which, cut off, could never be recovered.

Of the spoil taken, the Pope had 19 Galleys, 2 Galliots, 9 great Ordnance, 42
lesser Pieces, and 81 prisoners: The Venetians had 39 Galleys and an half, 4
Galliots and an half; 39 great Pieces, and an half, 5 great murdering Pieces
and an half; 86 lesser Pieces, and 1162 prisoners: The King of Spain had 58
Galleys and a half, six Galliots and a half, 128 lesser Pieces, and 1713
prisoners: the rest were bestowed on ayding Princes, or those otherwise
deserving in that service.

So soon as Selimus (then at Hadrianople) heard that his Fleet was overthrown,
and almost all sunk or taken, he was exceedingly grieved, and melancholy, and
that day would not be spoken withal. Some in all places bewailing their
Parents, Children, Husbands, Friends, or Kinsmen, lost: but Selimus's greatest
grief, was for loss of so many expert Captains, skilful Masters, and notable
Soldiers; besides, the perpetual disgrace of him and his Posterity: Wherefore,
full of wrath, he was about to put to death the multitude of Christians in his
Dominions: doubting indeed, that they weary of Turkish thraldom, would rise up
armed against him, and take part with the other Christians; but whilst the
other Bassaes (as dismayed) stood silent: Muhamet, for his former deserts in
great favor, thought good to prove if his fury might by reasonable persuasion,
be mitigated, etc. Yet knowing the danger of an open contradiction of him, he,
leaning as it were to his opinion and pleasure, by little and little, to draw
him from himself, cunningly disswadeth him by a speech from so rigorous a
resolution, by filling his head with most necessary considerations: whose grace
and Authority was such, that the Tyrants wrath was well assuaged; but by
Uluzales's coming, he was fully quieted; who after excuse of himself, and
declaring what himself had done in the Battle, presenting an Ensign of the
Knights of Malta, told him also, the Christian Fleet was so torn, that it could
not possible be made serviceable against the next year.

Selimus the while, placing Uluzales in the stead of Haly Bassa, straightly
commanded new shipping to be built night and day, and enjoined every Governor
to have a Galley or two ready by next Spring, out of his Province: many of his
great men, putting to their helping hands; new supplies of Soldiers, Ordnance
cast, and all necessaries were put into his frontier Towns, and provided. So
the Turks had reason and industry, but the Christians, (some note) wanted
discretion to use the Victory.

The three great Commanders consulted, what further course to take; but Winter
beginning to approach, and the Fleet wanting Furniture and Men, Don John, and
Columnius returned to Messana; and thence departing, the Don came to Naples,
the other to Rome, where they were with great joy and triumph received, having
resolved with Venerius, to meet next April at Corcyra: yet the Venetians
grieved with the loss of Cyprus, added to their Navy 30 Galleys, with 6000
Soldiers, winning Margarita Castle in Epirus, and recovering Suppato, which
the Turks now upon their approach forsook, Canalis also with the Galleys of
Creet, took many Vessels passing from Famagusta to Constantinople, laden with
the spoils and Captives. An inward heartburning still remaining between John and
Venerius, the Spaniards requested the Venetians for another Admiral: who were
wonderful loath therein to gratify the Spaniard; yet not forgetting what
Commodity came by Concord, and what evils of discord, they chose one
Fuscarinus, their chief Governor in Dalmatia, (who for 14 months, had notably
repressed the furious incursions of the Turks): which honorable place, with
the belonging Ceremonies, he received not at Venice, as the manner was, but at
Jadera: whence, sailing in the Admiral Galley to Corcyra, he found old
Venerius, providing for all things, as if himself should still have continued
Admiral.

Fuscarinus, preparing at Corcyra against Spring, Martinengus, who had the
Charge of the Adriatic, by the counsel of Venerius, (now returned to Venice)
landed his men, befieging Castronovum on Istria's borders: where he took the
Suburbs, and soon brought the Town to great extremity; but the Beglerbeg of
Greece, being coming with a great power, he with all speed returned to the Sea.
The Turks likewise, built a great strong Fort, to hinder the strong Town
Cataro, from any relief by Sea; for by Land it was already environed by them.

Superantius hereupon, with 20 Galleys, manned with the most choice Soldiers,
and some other Galleys which met him by the way, came by night before the Bay
of Cataro, leaving one part at Anchor before the Fort; himself, with the other,
passing further into the Bay: the Turks shooting at them from the Fort, to
small purpose in the dark, after viewing of the Fort; he battered it on that
side, as did the Galleys on the other side, and landing their men on both
sides, by plain force entered it, putting every one of that Turkish Garrison to
the sword: the Fort was five hundred paces long, not strong toward Land,
whence was no such fear: they took seventeen great Ordnance, much Armor, and
abundance of Victual, and seven Galleys under the Fort; so Superantius
returned to (...).

Fuscarinus, in 1572, (all things being ready) sent Superantius the Providetor,
to Messana with 25 Galleys, to hasten Don John's coming, and attend him; but he
there found such small preparation, as well showed the Spaniards small care for
repressing the Turks: who with grief and indignation, complaining to himself of
their unfaithfulness, bewailing his Country and the Christian Commonwealth;
for the Don had solemnly promised, all should be in readiness, but much of the
Summer was past, when scarce a few Companies, and 50 Galleys were met at
Messana.

Selimus fearing to be driven quite out of the Sea, had built and repaired 200
Galleys, charging Uluzales, to beware of the like danger, not to go out of the
Archipelago, or fight but upon advantage, or even hand.

Uluzales now Admiral, threatened revenge upon the Venetians, with fire and
sword: which much troubled them at Venice, as well acquainted with his fury;
besides, Barbarus their Ambassador, in safe custody at Constantinople,
certified them, that he told 250 Galleys, when they set forward, besides some
others to meet them: therefore to beware of encountering, but on equal strength.

It was also reported, that King Philip, careless of the other Wars, was
about to turn his forces upon Tunis, and Algiers, (as he did the year
following.)

The Venetians were even at their wits end, the Senate sitting and consulting
from Sunrising to Sunsetting, daily: commanding Fuscarinus, whether the
confederates came in or not, to set forward, and not refuse Battle with the
hovering Enemy, if he saw any good hope of Victory: calling also earnestly on
the Pope and King, to hasten their forces to encounter their Enemy, before he
should come out of his own Seas. They put also Don John often in mind of his
place, the time, and danger of the time; entreating him, if possible, to add
something to that haste, which so important a cause required: who nevertheless,
delayed from day to day, telling them, he would by and by come, etc. which was
so far from his thought, that he called back Requisenius also, whom he had sent
with 20 Galleys to Corcyra. Superantius, (two months, fittest for War,
vainly spent) with great instance, importuned him to hasten: who answered, The
Venetians requested but reason, etc; but he was advertized, that the French
King pretending the suppressing of Pirates, had a great Fleet at Rochel,
intending to invade Spain, now they were busied against the Turk, he being
commanded from the King, not to depart from Messana till he had other order:
The Venetians much doubted of this excuse; for the French King hearing hereof,
was exceedingly offended, protesting, if troubles at home would permit him, he
would gladly give them aid in that religious War: many thought, also, that had
a great power in this delay. Superantius weary, and almost out of hope of any
help in time from the Spaniard; yet would not give him occasion in so dangerous
a time to fall quite off: however, he spoke not flatteringly of the matter, but
gravely declared, he thought Heaven would sooner have fallen, than Don John,
not at the appointed time have come to Corcyra: beseeching and wishing him to
beware, he brought not the common State into some great danger, pressing him
with diverse reasons drawn from the common good and truth it self; but the Kings
pleasure was to be preferred before all reasons and dangers. Yet hearing the
resolute command of the Senate to their Admiral, he fearing, if without his
help, he should gain the Victory, he would take all the glory to himself; but
if overthrown, it would turn to his utter reproach, who had in such a time
withdrawn himself, stood a while, as perplexed, and in doubt what to do; yet at
last he sent 22 Galleys, under one Lilly, to the Venetian Admiral: with whom
went Columnius (whom Pope Gregory 13th, entertaining the same League as Pius
that was dead, kept still for his Admiral) with the Popes Fleet. August was
come, but not such aid as Fuscarinus expected; yet he (...) persuaded Columnius
and Lilly, to sail with him (...), and give the Enemy Battle, telling them,
that if they were all of like courage, they should go both to the glory of the
present Battle, and to the great honor and advancement of the whole Christian
Commonwealth: then he extenuated the power of the Enemy, from diverse grounds,
saying, his Provision was, by flying fame, made far greater than it was, or
possibly could be: wherefore they should set forward with the greater courage,
because the last years Victory, had opened the way for another: which if it
should so fall out, the Enemy could not (but in a long time) recover his
strength at Sea; so that they the while, might take the rich Islands in the
Archipelago: and if the Turks, declining Battle, should retire into Hellespont,
they might spoil with fire and sword, all their frontiers on this side the
Straits, and open a way to the Christians to do great matters. They were hardly
persuaded, nor did they consent, till 'twas decreed not to join Battle, but
with their Galleons and Galleasses in the front; so sailing to Commentitia, Don
John wrote to them, He was commanded by the King, to come and join with them,
which he promised, so soon as possible to do, being first to be provided of all
necessaries; they the while, to be careful of all things.

Columnius and Lilly hereupon doubted, whether to go or expect his coming; but
he not having written expressly of their staying, and Fuscarinus urging them on,
they went, divided into 3 Battles, consisting of 155 Galleys, 6 Galleasses, and
20 tall Ships: Superantius in the right Wing, Canalis in the left, the
Generals in the middle, Quirinus in the Rear. Two Galleasses going before
each Battle: thus they came to Zante, so to Cerigo; next day to Colubraria, or
Dragonaria, over against it: Surianus, here sent to discover the Enemie's
strength returning, declared, that the Turks Fleet, (being 160 Galleys, 60
Galliots, 4 great Ships) lay in the entrance of the Bay, called Sinus
Argolicus, about 50 miles of them: which being soon discovered to make for
Malea, the Christians made with what speed they could, toward them: the Enemy
being more in number, but inferior in strength: his Fleet being rather nimble
than strong; but the Christians more firm and forward: who fearing to be
circumvented, by the others multitude, set their Ships and Galleasses before
them; and the Turk, by how much he had the worst before, was so much the
carefuller of the reach of the Galleasses: the Christians, very much desirous
of fight, and to come to handy-blowes; but the Turks sometime made away a pace,
then stayed, if perhaps they might take the Galleys separated from the
Galleasses going more slowly: and seeing the (...) Fleet still coming on for
(...), they seemed to do the like, but turning on the right hand, kept aloof
along the Coast of Malea, and were quickly gone too far for the Christians to
follow them, especially with their heavy Ships; toward Sunsetting, the Turks
put into a (...) betwixt Cerigo and Harts-Island, about 10 miles broad, and
filling it overthwart, ((...) prows being turned) as (...) they had purposed
nothing more than to fight; but they pretended that, fearing by open flight to
dishonor Selimus: the Christians with much labor and rowing, came so near
them, that the great shot began to fly on both sides; but when they came to
dint of Sword, the Turks keeping their prows upon the Christians Galleys, by
(...) (...) back; and night approaching, discharged all their Ordnance only
with Powder, retiring in the (...) unseen, showing by lights left in their
Cock-boats, as if the whole Fleet had still stayed: neither could the
Christians (through the heaviness of their Galleasses) but softly pursue them,
who returned to Cerigo: The Turks 2 days after, staying in the Bay of
Taenarus, now Metapon, the Christians very desirous of battle, the 3d day
after, went from Cerigo, being by break of day, descryed from Land by the
Turks: Uluzales, by Warning-pieces commanding his men to go aboard and make
ready: who, coming out of the Haven in 3 Battles, (no faster than the Tide
drove them, and oftentimes staying to draw the Christians Galleys from the
Ships); Uluzales fearing much the Galleasses, commanded both Wings, (80 Galleys
apiece) to fetch a great compass, on the right and left hand, so to assail the
Christians Wings on the sides, or behind: which they perceiving, turned about
their Galleys in the Wings, their main Battle facing the Turks middle Battle.

Euscarinus, now requested and persuaded Columnius and Lilly, that not staying
for the heavy ships, they would with him assail the Enemies middle Battle,
destitute of the Wings: not doubting to overthrow their greatest strength
there, before the Wings (gone so far) could join to the Battle again, urging it
with other motives: his counsel was well liked, with a great and general
cheerfulness of the Soldiers; but Columnius and Lilly, said flatly, that
without those Vessels, (so much feared of their Enemies) they would not hazard
the fortune of a Battle. The Christian's Wings in turning about, were a little
disordered: whereupon, the Turks with 15 Galleys, were about to charge the
straggling Galleys: hereupon, Superantius went and fought courageously with
them, with four Galleys; but seeing 40 more of the Enemies making toward them,
he sent for 20 Galleys, and two Galleasses, which came presently in: 18 Galleys
being soon all reut and torn, the dismayed Turks returning in great haste;
Superantius with but one Galley shot through, returning also. The Christian
Fleet, in following the Turkish, came so nigh, that they often changed Bullets,
small and great. Uluzales, the better to frustrate the Christians endeavors,
who with great labor, drew with them their heavy Ships, sent his great Ships
to Malvasia, to be unrigged, whereby he was able at his own pleasure, to leave
or take fight; supplying also his whole Fleet with the Soul diers and
necessaries therein; so that if the Christians would needs fight, they must
forsake their Galleasses. The day declining, the Enemy in seemly order, as not
afraid, sailed to Corona: the Christians retiring to Cerigo. Don John the
while, gave the Fleet knowledge, that he was come to Corcyra, sharply blaming
the Commanders, that they stayed not for his coming; and commanding them,
forthwith to meet him at Zante, there to resolve of all matters. Columnius, was
in such haste, that he would, Fuscarinus (leaving all other Vessels at Cerigo)
should return to Don John with 100 of the best Galleys: Lilly was also of that
opinion. But Fuscarinus, more careful than the rest, whom the danger of so
doing more concerned, would not yield to that persuasion for diverse reasons;
but they (resolved, hap what would) told him flatly, if he would not yield unto
them, they would forthwith leave him, and with their Galleys return to Zante,
as the General had commanded. News being now brought, that the Turks were in
the fret of Cerigo, they all resolved to pass by the Enemy in order, as for
Battle; before, having determined to leave their Ships and Galleasses at Creet,
and then to return to Don John. The Enemy in their passing by, (...) as it
were, stood on their Guard, than resolved for Battle. Being come to Zante in 3
days, the Don was not there, but gave a command, leaving there their heavy
Ships, to come to Cephalenia, where they should not fail to meet him:
whereupon, the grieved Venetians generally muttered, that the Spaniards bearing
upon their wealth, were too proud, in respect of themselves, regarding neither
the conditions of the League, nor any other man's credit, but trod all men
underfoot, etc. yet they went to Cephalenia: whither Don John was not yet come,
but, that if they would join with his forces, they should come further back to
Corcyra: which Message much troubled the Venetians, fretting, and complaining,
as of diverse things, so that they had long ago, by many secret signs
conjectured, the Spaniards had more care to hinder and cross other men's
doings, than to do any thing of themselves; and that the Turks of late
discouraged with the fortunate proceedings of the Christians, might again
rejoice at their mishaps: yet being loath to fall off from the Spaniard, they
kept on with the rest to Corcyra, the Don laying at Spilca with 53 Galleys, and
18 Ships, in the utmost end of the Island: who at first, seemed not a little
offended, that they had not with more duty attended his coming, and they as
much complaining of his long stay, and many other grievances.

The Fleet now consisting of 200 Galleys, nine Galleasses, and 36 tall Ships:
they all agreed to set forward against the Enemy, two espialls bringing news,
that the Turk's Fleet (weak of men) was at Navarinum, they well hoped, upon the
sudden, they might easily oppress them: wherefore (not to be descried) sailing
by night, they kept aloof upon the right hand, coming with great silence to the
Strophades, and the evening following, loosed thence, that, the more to
terrify the Enemy, they might before day, fall upon him; but, it being day
long before they could come to the mouth of the Haven, the Turks from their
Watch-Towers, discovering them a far off, gave warning: whereupon, an Alarm
was raised in the Town, but the Turks not daring to trust (...) their
ill-rigged Fleet, and that weak Harbor, ran consusedly aboard, hastening
forth, as men chased, and going into the safe Harbor at Modon, about six miles
off: recovering the same, before Columnius, sent before, could overtake them.

The Christians came before the Harbor, and leaving a space as it were, for
the Enemy to come forth, dared him Battle; but after almost a days laying, and
none coming out, signs of Tempest appeared: wherefore, they put further off to
Sea: Uluzales sending out some light galleys to follow in their Rear, the
Confederates driving them headlong again into the Harbor, and retiring into
the Islands Sapientia. Next day, they removed to the Bay of Messana, to water
in the mouth of the River Pamisus, there falling into the Sea: where passing by
Corone, they were often shot at from thence; and landing to water, were
encountered by some Troops, sent by Uluzales: Many were slain on both sides; but
they prevailing, watered, so returning to the Islands Sapientia. And coming to
the mouth of the Bay, (the Turks having planted Ordnance on the little Hill
Albus and St. Bernards Rock, to keep them from entering both ways) doubted as
they lay, what to do, the entrances being but narrow, and far more dangerous
for the Ordnance; yet Fuscarinus, loath to let the Enemy escape, would fain
have had the General to enter the Bay, and in the Harbor to oppress the
Enemy: which he showed to be no matter to do, the Enemy being but weak, and not
to be by Land relieved: pressing it on by diverse motives; and saying, I my self
in person, will be the first that shall enter, and adventure the first danger,
etc.

The Spaniards heard him with ill-liking and Don John deeming both the time and
place, unfit for so great an attempt, rehearsed the Enemies strength, the
places disadvantage, the difficulty of the Battle, with the manifold and great
calamities received by the overhasty and rash attempts of their Enemies, etc.
concluding, the Christians had sufficiently prevailed, if those things fell out
well, which were warily and advisedly considered and resolved upon.

Nothing thus done, they returned into the Port of Navarinum: which Proceeding,
as it diversely moved the Spaniards and Venetians, so every one spoke in favor
of his own Nation.

Laying at Navarinum, and consulting of many things, they resolved at last to
besiege the Castle of Modon, which kept the passage into the Bay: so returning
thither, they landed 7000 of their best Soldiers, appointing the Galleasses
with some Galleys, to batter it also by Sea, and fastening two of their greatest
Galleys, side to side, boarded them over: where they placed gabions filled with
Earth and Ordnance betwixt, to have battered the Castle; but this Engine, (like
a floating Fort) proved unserviceable, being ready to sink with the weight of
the Ordnance, and other things: wherefore, and a number of Horsemen being come
into the Town, they gave over their Siege, and put to Sea. A tall Ship of
Venice, coming from Zante, with provision for the Fleet, was descryed by the
Enemy, who sent out some light Galleys to take her.

Uluzales with the rest, laying ready to come out, if the Christian Fleet
should stir to relieve her: wherefore the Christians sent Columnius to rescue
the Ship, and others also to get in betwixt the Turks Galleys and the Bay: Don
John and Uluzales laying ready for Battle, if Uluzales should come forth; But
he (afraid) by Warning-Pieces, in time called back those Galleys (already gone
out); but one Mahomet, Barbarussa's Nephew, stayed a little while with more
courage than discretion, expecting who should (...) him: whom a Marquess set
upon, with a terrible fight; but at last, flew Mahomet, with all his Turks,
carrying away the Galley.

Next day, because the hope of so great preparation should not come to nothing;
he determined to besiege the Castle of the City Navarinum: which place some
being sent to view, brought word, the Castle might in 3 days be won, which was
committed to Farnesius: who landing 2000 Italians; 500 Germans, and 1000
Spaniards, with 12 great pieces battered the Castle yet far off; but the
passages through a rough and thick forest being left free, the enemy sallying
forth, gave the Christians a hot skirmish, and the while, by a Port toward the
forest on the other side, received in a great number of Horse and Foot:
Whereupon, Farnesius went aboard again with his men; but there was not small
hope of gaining the Town by the Fleet, for the Turks received not Victuals by
Land, nor could they by sea: being troubled with a plague and famine, who
seeking for Victuals further off, the little that came, was often intercepted, by
Soldiers in the Villages, wanting no less than they in the City. And what a
death the mortality had made, the want of men in the galley; declared, for lack
whereof, many were sent away or left at Malvasia: those galleys at Modon being
scarce 100, with 40 galliots, the biggest galleys having scarce 120 men
therein, and those very meagre and faint: Wherefore, the Christians hoping for
a notable Victory upon continuing the siege; Fuscarinus persuaded the (...)
resolvedly to hold it out: for the Turks (except changed into Fishes or Birds)
could not escape out of the Bay, without a notable overthrow; but they, whether
for tediousness of the siege, or want of Victuals, or Winter's approach, or
other reasons, thought diversely thereof: At first there was a report, that the
Christians would shortly return home, because they wanted biscuit, and had
scarce Victuals left for 15 days, Winter also approaching: and having done
what they could, the enemy could never be drawn out to battle; wherefore, they
would now also regard the safety of their Fleet.

These speeches were afterward divulged, not only by common men, but by those
also of better place; yea D. John himself, began to blame others: Why he, so
lately come from Messana, should so soon want Victuals and all necessaries.
Hereat, the Venetian Commanders were exceedingly troubled and grieved; for it
seemed not credible, that they which were but a little before come from the
most fertile Country of Sicily, could so soon want Victuals; so murmuring by
diverse expressions against the Spaniards, they said, Verily, they by the infamy
of a voluntary return, showed themselves not so willing to have the Turks power
abated, as the strength of the Venetians not increased. Sometimes they fretted
at these things among themselves: and other whiles, Fuscarinus expostulated the
same with Don John and Columnius, in the presence of the greatest Councillors:
showing, not only how profitable, but how necessary perseverance was in Martial
affairs: persuading the Spaniards for many reasons, in no case to return from
the Enemy; and promising, that till the ships laden with Victuals at Tarentum,
were (being first sent for) come, himself would supply their wants out of his
own store. Don John replied, among many things in answer, That the action in
hand, no less concerned the Spaniards than the Venetians: and that he had in
his life, desired nothing more, than to stand the Commonweal in stead, etc.
neither desired any thing more, than indeed to be a most constant upholder of
the most Christian League, and that beyond expectation, even in the judgment
of the Venetians themselves: who yet, must now pardon him, if he gave place to
the necessity of the time. As for their offer of Victuals, that would not be a
help, but the destruction of both Fleet's: Wherefore, 'twere much better to
preserve the Fleet which they might use next year, than to cast it away by
famine and rage of the sea; saying, What an indignity should the Christians
sustain, if themselves should be overthrown, by that means, whereby they (...)
to have overthrown others.

Secret command being given to the Masters of the Galleys with all haste to
depart to Messana; Fuscarinus troubled as with an unexpected matter, came
aboard the General, greatly complaining of his so sudden purpose, requesting
him to stay till the 2 fastened Galleys aforesaid, with the Ordnance thereon
might be secured (with all things else) from the enemy; so, with much ado, he
stayed that night to that end, and in debating the matter to and fro, the Don
would needs have it conceived into a public writing, that the Fleet by consent
of the 3 Admirals, retutned for lack of Victuals; the Venetian Apmiral hardly
consenting. But when the Instrument should have been made, one of the Dons
Secreraries, advising him of the great dishonor to be to the King and himself,
that the Fleet coming out of fruitful Sicily, should (in a months space want
Victuals) changed his mind, only requesting Fuscarinus to credit him and
Columnius concerning that want: promising, if he met with the Victuals sent for
on the way, he would forthwith return; but the while, to proceed by common
consent to what was most needful; so returning at Corcyra, they met the ship
with Victuals: Whereupon, Fuscarinus put Don John in mind of his promise:
telling him, 'twas not unlike, but the enemy upon their departure, would come
out of the Bay for Constantinople, who might easily be overtaken and
overthrown; but he was not to be persuaded, pretending the Kings command
forthwith to return; so the expectation of great matters this year (through
jealousy of self-Honour, or Envy) came to naught.

The Don departed to Messana, Columnius to Rome, Fuscarinus with more honor
than success, to Venice, where he was with great joy received, with the good
likeing of all, giving up his charge in few years after, to receive a greater.

About this time, Amida King of Tunis, a little before driven out of his
Kingdom by the Turks (who by degrees had encroached upon him), and living in
Exile with his 2 Sons at Guletta: hearing of the great overthrow of the Turks
at Lepanto: sent Ambassadors to Don John at Sicily, humbly requesting his aid,
promising to defray all the charges of the War, and for ever to hold his
Kingdom of the King of Spain as his Vassal and Tributary: which request being
thought of no small consequence for the safety of the Christian Countries
laying over against that part of Africa; He next year in October. 1573. by the
King, his Brother's command, with 105 Galleys and 40 Ships, arrived next day
from Drepanum at Guletta, where the Malta Galleys came to him, and shortly
after, Auria with 90 more, and Columnus with 14 more. Don John understanding by
Amida and Touares the Governor, the whole state of the City and Kingdom of
Tunis; and that the Turks terrified, were about to forsake the City; He next
day landed his forces about 4 miles off from Tunis, sending 2500 Footmen before
the rest, who found the Turks and Moors fled for fear, and coming to the
Castle, 200 Moors therein said, they kept it for Amida, (...) would not suffer
the Christians to enter: all which being made known to Don John, he early next
morning set forward with his Army, finding nothing in the Castle but great
store of oil, butter, and wool.

While the Don was at Tunis, he had news, October. 13. that the fled Turks with
some Moors coming to Biserta, were kept out by the Citizens; Wherefore, they
began to burn and spoil (...): Whereupon, he sent Touares with part of the
Army, who overthrew the Turks, (...) had the City peaceably delivered to him.

Don John informed of the faithless and cruel dealing of Amida: and that in
detestation of the Christians and their Religion, he by Intelligence already
with the Turks, had procured some of their deaths: sentenced him, being yet in
the Castle of Guletta, that since he had bin the Author (long) of great
discord, and endless troubles there, depriving Muleasses his Father of his
Kingdom and sight, and so also tyrannizing over his brethren the rightful
Heirs: whereby (the Turks took occasion to possess the Kingdom) he by the King
of Spain's command should with his 2 Sons be carried into Sicily to perpetual
imprisonment: who, though he cried out for mercy was thrust into a Galley, and
transported with Wife and Children accordingly.

After which, Mahomet his elder brother and right Heir, was appointed King in
his place, by Oath promising, to be ever the King of Spain's Vassal, and to do
whatever he commanded. 40000 Moors before departing from Tunis, now supplicated
Don John, that they might return and live with their new King: which granted,
they returned every day into the City. Shotly (...), 1500 Turks, with 3000 wild
Arabians or Alarbes, sore troubled all passages about the City; who were at
last overthrown, and 150 Christian prisoners rescued. After that, the Don by
advice of his most expert Captains, left Serbellio (with 2000 Italians) and
Calazar with as many at Guletta, for building a strong Castle betwixt that and
Tunis. Thus disposing of all things, he returned into Sicily.

So fit opportunity of doing great things, by the most famous Victory of
Lepanto, being let slip, and passed over so lightly regarded, made the
Venetians now to have no other hope of welfare, but in concluding a peace with
the Turk. They thought honorably of King Philip, yet greatly blaming his
Officers, and others of great Authority about him, as men more regarding their
own private, than the good of the Christian Commonweal. Philip promised them
a greater and stronger Fleet against the next year and to be sooner in
readiness: who, for all that gave small credit thereto, because they had bin
often before deceived: Wherefore, trusting most to their own strength, they
entertained more Soldiers, placing some in their Fleet, and others in their
Garrison of Creet, Dalmatia, and their Frontiers of Epirus. The Turks also of
purpose gave it out, that they would next Spring with diverse Armies invade the
Venetian Territories, in Creet, Dalmatia and Epirus: yea, and in Italy it self,
and overwhelm them with their multitude; this (and more too) they vaunted of;
but Uluzales brought his Fleet to Constantinople so shaken and weak, that it
seemed not possible, but in long time to be again repaired, and furnished with
Soldiers and Mariners: but however it stood, the Venetians comparing their
own strength with the Enemies, were also no less discouraged with the delays
and cross dealing of the Confederates, than with all the provision of the
Enemy; many things sticking in their minds, they doubted also, lest the
Flemmings with their Confederates should so entangle the King of Spain, as that
he should not be at leisure to send any aid into the East. And in revolving
many things among themselves, one only Remedy seemed most effectual to cure
their afflicted State: to wit, to conclude a peace with the Turk; of which,
they the rather hoped, for that diverse speeches of the same had passed at
Constantinople. The Senate referred the proceeding therein to Barbarus their
Ambassador (who all these Wars had layen in safe custody at Constantinople)
willing him to make use of the French Ambassador therein, who had always bin
a perswader of peace: who it was thought, might have got an indifferent peace (
Selimus being also desirous enough thereof) had he but expected the opportunity
of time; but he in making too much haste, much hurt the cause of the Venetians:
which he most desired to have furthered. Selimus having found him, resolved
with Muhamet Bassa what he would have done, who craftily told the Ambassador,
he had often moved, yea, and so far as he might, importuned Selimus for peace,
but could never find him willing to hear thereof, till now wearied with the
solicitation of such as might do most with him, he had yielded thereto. At
first, the Bassa with fair and cunning speech, promised him the matter should
soon and easily be composed: This being only on both parties consented to, That
the Venetians should send an Ambassador for the full concluding and confirming
of the desired peace: who committing that charge to Superantius; he was no
sooner come to Constantinople, and the Confederation being dissolved, but the
Venetians were glad to endure proud looks, disdainful ears, despightful
speeches, long and insolent attendance, with many other indignities: yea, the
Bassa asked them, How they durst be so bold as to impugn great Selimus's
Fleet? Superantius answered, The Venetians had always honored the Turkish
Emperors, never taking up Arms against them, but in their own defense, a thing
lawful even for the wild Beast in the Wilderness to do.

The Bassa at first seemed to put him in hope, that the Venetians should enjoy
all their Territories in Dalmatia as formerly, whereof they had lost some part
in these Wars about Jadera, but at the shutting up (though the French
Ambassador complained that promises were not performed, and the Venetians so
fretted, that they were about to return as shamefully deluded) they concluded a
peace by the Senat's appointment, upon the Turks hard terms, Febr. 11. 1574.
The chief Capitulations whereof were: That the Venetians should give Selimus
300000 Ducats, 100000 to be presently paid, and the rest by equal portions in
the 2 years following: That the Merchants goods should be indifferently on both
sides restored: and that such places of the Venetians as the Turk's possessed,
should still remain unto them, but those the Venetians had taken from the
Turks, should be forthwith restored: The Turks being earnest for the first
payment as an honorable Fine for an offense committed; The Senate confirming
the same by a Decree, it was proclaimed at Venice, Apr. 13. following, to the
great wonder of the other Confederates: for whose better satisfaction, the Duke
(though many things grieved the Venetians) with calm and temperate speech
declared to the Pope's Nuntio and Spanish Ambassador in the Senate House the
causes thereof. The Venetians were for this, generally hardly spoken of, as if
they had betrayed the whole Christian Commonweal, or at least their
Confederates; for men, for the most part thought, that the Turks, peace would
be but feigned and deceitful, etc. Yet the Venetians, besides a present ease of
many heavy burdens, thereby enjoyed the fruits of a long, happy, wholesome, and
profitable peace.

Selimus shortly after, turned his Forces against John Vayuod of Valachia,
anciently called Dacia, having on the West Transylvania, on the North Russia,
and is divided into Transalpinia, which Mahomet the great subjected to his
Empire, and Moldavia of its River Moldavus, which far passes the other in
greatness, and much pasture: on which Mahomet only imposed a Tribute of 2000
Ducats yearly; after which, the Vayuods thereof, sometime by Hungarian,
sometime by Polonian aid, rose often in Arms, refusing Homage to the Turks.
Bagdanus a Vayuod hereof, joining in League with the Polonians, lived much in
Russia, purposing thence to take his Wife: which Selimus suspecting, chased him
into Exile; placing in his stead one John or Iwan the supposed son of Stephen,
sometime Vayuod there: who with Czarnieviche a Moldavian, having long lived
among the Turks, turned Turk; becoming a Merchant of such fame, that he became
very familiar with the Bassaes of the Court, and at length with Selimus: whose
purpose he understanding concerning Bagdanus, got by rewards the Bassaes to be
his Mediators for the Vayuod-ship of Moldavia, increasing Selimus's suspicion
of Boguanus, that he supported by the Polonians: was like enough soon to reject
his Obedience to him. Selimus nominated this John to be Vayuod, who entering
Moldavia with a great power of Horse ( Bogdanius being in Russia) suspecting
nothing, easily possessed the Country: which Bogdanus, by help of the
Polonians, vainly attempting to recover, fled into Muscovia, where he long
lived. John after some few years, repenting himself, and embracing again the
Christian Faith, (...) also too severely, those who had withstood his coming
thither; and now not favoring The Turks as he was wont, but crossing them in
many matters, became suspicious to Selimus and the Bassaes: Whereupon the
Vayuod of Transalpina, became an earnest Suitor for his Brother Peter, that as
John had by Selimus his help expulsed Bogdanus, so Peter by his help might
drive out John; and, besides malicious suggestions to increase the suspicion of
John, offered, that Peter should pay twice so much yearly Tribute as John did,
to wit, 120000 Ducats.

The Bassaes corrupted, and moved with the great. Tribute, persuaded Selimus to
send for John, and command him to give place to another of his sending, which
if he refused, to denounce to him open War.

Selimus having much emptied his Coffers in the late Wars, sent his Ambassador
to the Vayuod, who Febr. 21. delivered his Message, the sum whereof was:
Either to send him twice so much Tribute as he was wont, (another being ready
to give it for him and his posterity) or else to return with him to
Constantinople, to answer the matter: Otherwise, He was to denounce to him and
his Country all Hostility.

John dissembling his grief, had him brought to his appointed Lodging, telling
him, upon mature deliberation had with his Nobility and Council in so important
a matter, he would soon answer him: and deeply considering, that in the Turks
Faith was no assurance; and if he should grant to pay so heavy a Tribute in so
great poverty of his Kingdom, wasted with civil War, Selimus happily, so long
as any man would give more, would next year exact a greater, and in the end,
such a one as he with his Subjects could not pay, He called together his
Nobility and States, declaring to them the sum of the Ambassadors Message, and
his own considerations thereof: saying, 'twere better for them in his opinion
(for he was not to pay it) but they and their posterity, to lose their lives
with Wives and Children, than to suffer so great an Indignity: which base
servitude if he heard from them, that they listed not to endure, He would so
provide as to pay the barbarous Tyrant no tribute at all, so they were not
wanting to themselves; he being always ready to lay down his life for the
welfare of them and the Common-weile.

A secret sorrow, and unwonted silence as it were oppressed the whole Assembly:
at length, they murmured against the Turks unreasonableness: and thought, the
Vayuod had truly spoken of the intollerableness thereof: Whereupon, they
offered him upon their own charge, to meet the Enemy upon the bank of
Danubius, and in defense of life and liberty to fight it out to the last man:
He commending their fidelity, and taking of them an Oath for performance, gave
the Ambassador a short answer: saying, Himself would willingly yield Selimus
the required Tribute, did he not know the minds of his people to abhor the
same, etc. Wherefore, he should tell his Lord Selimus, That he most humbly
requested him not to take it ill, whose amity he wished, might rather be to him
an Ornament and Refuge, than a disgrace or hinderance, etc.

The Ambassador being sent away unrewarded: the Vayuod began forthwith to
raise his Army; sending to Henry Valoys, King of Poland (afterward the French
King) certifying him of the dangerous estate of Moldavia, the surest Bulwark of
the Polonian Kingdom: requesting him, That as those Kings for their own safety
had anciently protected that Country, so he would now give him aid: or, at
least, to give leave to such of his Subjects as were willing to serve for
entertainment, to come unto him: Who answered, Since his Predecessors had for
above a hundred years been in League with the Turk, he could do neither. The
Vayuod was much troubled with this answer; yet he sent to 1200 Polonian
Cossacks, Suiercevius being chief: who having long layen in hope of prey upon
the side of Borysthenes, were returning empty home, offering them great
entertainment, of which they gladly accepted without the Kings knowledge. They
are light-Horsmen laying most commonly upon the Borders of Poland toward the
Tartars, hardy and valiant men, whose best living is spoil taken from the
Enemy; for though the Turks and Tartars are most commonly in League with the
Polonians; yet do they often in great numbers suddenly break into Podolia and
Russia, part of their Kingdom, and do great harm, if they be not in time
repressed, or cut off by the said Cossacks.

Selimus being exceedingly enraged with the Vayuods answer, and the more by the
angry Ambassador, who because he was no more regarded, nor rewarded, incensed
him against him to the utmost, sent 30000 Turks and 2000 Hungarians to the
Palatine of Transalpina, who joining them with his own Forces, should take
John, and, sending him in Bonds to Constantinople, place his brother Peter in
his place.

He with an Army of about 102000 fighting men, swimming over the River
Moldavus, and little fearing or regarding the sudden coming of the Vayvod, let
his men lay disorderly and dispersed along the River side, to refresh
themselves being weary: Whereof, some Scouts certifying the Vayuod then at
dinner, He glad, forthwith sent Suiercevius with his Cossacks, and 5000 other
Light-Horsmen more certainly to descry the Enemie's doings and manner of
laying, Himself with the rest following (...) after.

Suiercevius approaching very silently, enclosed 500 of the enemie's Scouts ere
they were aware; taking them all, and straightly examining them of the state of
their Army and Camp: who for fear, confessed, the Palatine (...) securely,
resting his Army chiefly; that with greater strength he might set upon John
with his fresh Soldiers, declaring their number, and that they might easily be
overthrown.

Suiervercevius requested John with all speed to hasten his coming for a most
notable and assured Victory; Who coming without delay, commanded Suiercevius,
to give the first onset upon the Enemy (purposing himself to charge them on the
other side in three places) who, with a terrible outcry, set upon the secure
Enemies: who, dismayed with the unexpected danger, knew not which way to flee
or how to resist.

The Vayuod the while, on the other side of the Camp, came and bare down all
before him; The Enemies Horses being far from them in rich Pastures, they
unarmed were miserably slain; few or none escaping, besides the Palatine and
Peter, who with much ado getting Horses, swam over the River, and came to the
Castle of Brailovia in Valachia: The Vayuod giving to his Soldiers the great
Riches there found, and staying four days to refresh his wearied men: then
entering the Palatine's Country, he took many places, putting all in his way to
the sword, of all sexes and Ages: and burning all as he went: so that all that
part of the Country was terribly covered with smoke and fire.

John commending his men in executing all kind of cruelty, and persuading them
so still to prosecute the Victory for enriching of themselves; and hearing that
(...) Palvtins and his Brother were in Brailovia Castle; he forthwith marched
thither. The City stands upon Danubius: the Castle having a strong Garrison of
Turks as the Key of the Country. The Vayuod sent Letters by two Valachian
Captives to the Captain, to deliver to him the Palatine and Peter, his mortal
Enemies; who, never wronged by him, had invaded his Country: otherwise, he
threatened never to depart, till, to his farther hurt, he had constrained him
to yield them; whereto, he bluntly answered, by four Turks, by whom he sent
twenty great and small shot, with two Arrows; saying, Except he did raise his
siege betime, he would feed him and his followers with such Dishes as those:
whereupon they, gorged, should all dangerously surfeit and cast.

The Vayuod moved, commanded their Noses, Lips and Ears to be cut off, and
their seet to be sastened with Nails to a long piece of Timber, so to be set
up before the City with their Heads downward; showing also to the Captain that
sent them, That himself with his Guests, should be so served if they fell into
his Hands: Immediately after, he taking the City by assault; no Man, Babe, or
Mother were taken to mercy, nor any living thing spared. Much rich spoil
becoming a prey; for it was a place much frequented, and had enjoyed long
peace: which John razed to the ground, not daring to adventure upon the Castle,
being well fortified and furnished.

While he was busied in the spoil of Brailovia: news came of 15000 Turks,
coming to relieve the Castle; Who, forthwith sent Suiercevius with his
Cossacks, and other 8000 Horse against them: who suddenly coming upon them,
slew almost fourteen thousand, chasing the rest unto Teina Castle; Whereof
Suiercevius certified John, and of another great Turkish power coming, which
might easily be overthrown, if he leaving the siege, would, without delay, come
and join Forces, who went accordingly to Suiercevius: and upon conference,
besieged Teina: which City taken without much labor, he left not one alive
therein, and by the service of Suiercevius, overthrew the Turks, coming toward
Brailovia.

Selimus much troubled, and doubting to be thrust quite out of Valachia,
prepared new Forces: appointing general supplications to be made to Mahomet for
his better success; the undoubted sign of his fear.

John, now purposing for a while to break up his great Army, called to him
Czarnieviche his old Friend, to whom he with a kind speech committed part of
his Army (to wit thirteen thousand of his choice Soldiers) to lay upon the
side of Danubius: to keep the Turks from passing again over, charging him to
let him from time to time, understand with all expedition of every motion of
the Enemy: and taking his leave of him with a kiss; gave leave to most of his
Soldiers to depart, yet to be always ready upon occasion.

Czarnieviche, promising the utmost of his Faithful devoire, went toward
Danubius, most carefully there keeping the passages.

Ere long, great numbers of Turks were come, and coming down to the other side;
yet none adventured the River, because of Czarnieviche: Wheresore, the Bassa
(sent with the Army) dispatch to him some pickt-out men, to sound, if he might
be drawn over, in secret, to talk with him; sending him, besides his safe
conduct, (...) thousand Hungarian Ducats for a present: who shortly after,
secretly passing the River, had conference (...) Peter the Palatines Brother.
To whom he declaring, in how great danger the Vayuod stood; and how highly
Selimus was offended with him, cunningly from diverse Motives, persuaded him to
give the Turks passage over Danubius.

Czarnieviche overcome with his Golden Promises, withdrew his Forces further
off from the River, as if it had been for his more safety: two hundred thousand
Turks well appointed of all necessaries, passing quietly over.

Then he posted to, and certified John, that the Turks, trusting to their
multitude, had passed the River, against whom he could not make Head:
Wherefore, he should speedily go against them with what Forces he had ready,
which joined to his, might easily overthrow them. The Vayuod glad, demanded,
what strength they might be of? Not above 12000 (said he) already come over,
but are still coming, and will before thy coming be above 15000. John raising
his siege from before Teina Castle, in four days came and encamped within
three miles off the Enemy, sending Suiercevius with his Cossacks, and Jeremias
with six thousand Horse, to view their Camp, and understand (what might be) of
their designs, who lighting on about six thousand Turkish (...), after a light
skirmish, put them to flight: and taking one who felt himself wounded to death,
he told them, the Turks were not many: but the Cossacks conjecturing by so
great a number of Scouts, the untruth of that report; soon certifyed the Vayuod
thereof, wishing him in time to provide for safety, and not too much to trust
Czarnieviche, whom they had a good while suspected; but he answered only, He
knew whom he trusted; (...) that it was not now time to doubt or be afraid,
etc. So fortifying his Camp near a Lake for more convenient watring of his
Army, he set forward with all his power against the Enemy: and coming to a
Hill, whence he thought to have descried his enemies number and laying, he
could descry but four Companies of Scouts; who, withdrew also on purpose, out
of sight to the Army, which lay in a low Valley behind a Hill. John suspecting
the enemy to be at hand, divided his 30000 Horse into 30 Companies, placing
Field pieces before each of them: and placing his many rude and homely, but
most faithful Foot, by themselves. So marching on from another Hill he might
easily descry the Turks huge Army, and how Czatnieviche's treason had deceived
him: whereupon (he sending for him) he sent back word, he could not then come,
the Enemy being so nigh; but he should forthwith see him in field, as forward
as the forwardest (against the Enemy); but upon the signal of Battle given on
both sides, he first setting forward, as if to have given the onset, caused his
Ensign to be let fall, and his men with their Caps on the points of their
spears and swords to bow down: whom the Turks with spears and Lances on High
joyfully received. The rest of the Army almost discouraged, hastily retired to
the Vayuod, crying out, All was lost, all was lost; but he nothing discouraged,
willed them courageously to follow him: They in all things exceeding the Enemy
except in number: which always gave not the Victory: The Turks upon joining of
(...), thrust the revolting Moldavians shrinking back, perforce into the front,
slaying them that hung back: on whom John most furiously discharged his
Fieldpieces: most of them being (...), over whose dead bodies the Turks coming
on, were at first notably encountered, beginning to retire but indeed on purpose
to draw the Moldavians within danger of their Ordnance and Ambushes covertly
placed: which Suiercevius perceiving, with (...) ado stayed their further
pursuit. The Turks coming on again with no less fury than at first, the
Christians made with them a most cruel Battle; many falling on both sides: but,
after long fight, the (...), (...) with multitude, gave ground: and then betook
(...) to flight, most of them being (...) in a hard (...), and but 250 Cossacks
left. The Vayuod with 20000 (...), and such (...) as had joined to them after
the (...), retired, and fortified himself in the ruins of a Town, which he but
a little before razed: the Turks the same night, so besetting his Camp, with a
multitude of men, that no man could go in or out. Next day, June 11th, the
Turks shooting diverse great shot into his Camp, to small purpose, and
considering the danger of (...) him in his strength, sent to him to persuade
him without delay, to yield himself, and repose more trust in the mercy of the
Turks, than in his own broken forces, (...) being so beset, etc. Who answered,
he knew into what danger he was brought, rather by treason than the (...)
valor; yet had he a strong power of most valiant (...) (...) men, who would
sell their lives dear to the Turks; however, to avoid the further shedding of
blood, he could be content to yield on reasonable conditions, (...) the great
Commanders of the Turks would seven times (...) swear to perform them: they
willed him to set them down, which were, that the Cossacks might safely depart
with Horses and Armor: that they should send him alive, and in good safety to
Selimus, to (...) his own cause: covenanting nothing for the Moldavians, whose
injury (he said) tended to the hurt of the Emperor himself, and of him that
should be Vayuod: these (...) being seven times confirmed by Oath accordingly,
the Vayuod brought all his Army out of their Trenches, taking with heavy heart
his last leave of them, to their (...): dividing his money and Jewels among
them: and disarming himself, went only with one Polonian, like a Suppliant to
the Turk's Camp, talking four hours with the great Commanders: till at last,
Capucius Bassa, with his Scimitar, struck him a great blow acrosse the face,
and another acrosse the belly: whom yet but half dead, the Janissaries took, and
cut off his Head, which was set on a Lance for all to behold: they tearing his
body to pieces, having bound his feet to two Cammels, and happy was he that
could get any little piece thereof, or embrew his Sword in the least drop of
his blood.

The Turks forthwith set upon the Moldavians, and slew them downright:
whereupon, the Cossacks thrusting in among the thickest of the Turks, and
valiantly fighting, were all slain, except a few of the better sort,
Suiercevius being one: who were afterward, for great sums redeemed, when they
could by no means be persuaded to turn Turks.

The Turks overrunning all Moldavia, put all the Nobility, with many Country
people to the Sword: sending great numbers in Colonies, into the farthest parts
of the Turkish Empire, and placing strong Garrisons in the Towns and Castles.

Thus all Valachia, was by Selimus joined to the Turkish Empire, in 1574:
opening also thereby, a fair and easy way for his Successors to enter into
Podolia, or Russiayea, and into Poland it self.

Selimus, not a little grieved with the loss of the Kingdom of Tunis, cast in
his mind, how to recover the same, and thrust the Spaniards out of Guletta
Castle, of no small moment: which with Malta, served as two most sure Bulwarks
against the Turks and Moors adventures, by whose means, they many times came
short home: wherefore, Selimus having made great preparation, commanded Sinan,
Piall, and Uluzales, speedily to pass over with his Fleet into Africa, to
besiege Tunis, and Guletta, before which, they came with 300 Galleys, July 13.
Other Turks men of War, from Alexandria, Algiers, etc. (...) unto them. At
first, they besieged the water-Tower, wherein were 800 Soldiers, well
provided: who maintained the place, till most were slain by often assaults, the
rest retiring by Command, into the Castle: the Turks losing 3000 men in taking
of it.

Then besieging the Castle of Guletta, they from diverse Mounts, most terribly
battered it: whence the deadly shot was sent again among them not sparingly;
but after many surious assaults, and much harm done on both sides, the Turks
took the Channel of the Lake of Tunis, and to hinder the (...) relief,
assaulted them day and night without ceasing; yet some Companies sent from the
New (...), got in; after which, the besieged, sallying out, Aug. 20, repulsed
them with an exceeding slaughter; but the Bassaes without ceasing, still
bringing on fresh Soldiers, after a most terrible assault all day, about two
hours before Sunset, they took the Castle Aug. 23. scarce 200 Soldiers being
alive therein: who with the other weak people, were cut in pieces: whatever
other wealth the Turks there found, they had great store of Victuals, Armor,
Ammunition, and 400 Pieces of Ordnance. They forthwith laid siege to the new
Castle, betwixt Guletta and Tunis, not yet wholly finished, wherein Serbellio
and Salazar, lay with 4000 good Soldiers.

Serbellio answering the Bassaes first summons, Aug. 24, that he had promised
the King his Master, to give him a better account of the place; and being also
very old, could not endure the Turks yoke; but would hold it out to the last
man, which by sallies and repulses they truly persormed; But the Turks little
feeling, or regarding the loss of men, to gain the place, at length, September.
13th, after six hours furious assault with all their force, slaying most of
the Defendants, took it.

Serbellio, shot with two Bullets, would have (...) in the midst of the Turks;
but by Piall's hasty coming in, both he and Salazar were taken alive: all the
rest were put to the Sword.

The Bassa in his rage, struck Serbellio, causing his Son to be murdered in his
sight: yet the Turks lost above 30000 men, in less than three months space.
Then they marching to Tunis, easily took it, overthrowing its Fortifications,
because it should no more rebel.

Mahomet the young King, being sent with Carrera, Captain of Guletta, in bonds
to Constantinople. The Bassaes departing thence, came with 400 Sail, October.
4th, within sight of Malta: nevertheless, they turned aside, sailing directly
to Constantinople.

Shortly after, Selimns, spent with Wine and Women, died December. 9th, 1574, 51
years old, reigning eight, buried at Hadrianople; of a mean Stature, heavy
disposition, his face swollen much like a Drunkard: of least valor of the
Othoman Kings, leaving his Empire to Amurath his eldest Son, more temperate,
but not much greater in courage.

The Life of Amurath the third, Sixth Emperor of the Turks.
SElimus's Death, was, for fear of the Janissaries, concealed by the Bassaes,
till Amurath, speedily advertized thereof, arrived at Constantinople, out of
Asia, about 12 days after, taking possession of the Empire in the Seraglio,
December. 25: being about 30, or (as some) 27 years old: of a manly Stature, pale
and corpulent, his beard thin and long, not of so fierce a countenance as the
Othoman Princes, being of a peaceable disposition, loving justice; and in his
superstition very zealous: reforming the riot and excess (grown by his Fathers
ill example) by his own, and the severe punishment of notorious Drunkards; yet
he is reported to drink often, plentifully of Wormwood-Wine, much subject to the
Falling Sickness, and sore troubled with the Stone; and yielding more to the
counsel of his Mother, Wife, and Sister, than of his great Bassaes, which many
imputed to him for simplicity.

To appease the murmuring of the Janissaries, disappointed of the spoil of the
Christians and Jews, he besides the usual largess, augmented their wages; and
granted their Sons at 20 years old to be enrolled among the younger Janissaries,
and partake of their immunities: whereby he won their favors exceedingly. And,
to rid himself of all competitors, he caused his five Brethren, Mustapha,
Solomon, Abdulla, Osman, and Tzihanger, to be strangled in his sight: Osman,
and Tzihanger, to be strangled in his sight: Solyman's Mother overcome with
sorrow, struck her self to the heart with a Dagger: at which, Amurath is
reported to shed some tears, as not delighting in such cruelty, but that his
State and Government so required. At first, he established diverse wholesome
Laws, altered the Coin, and relieved the poor; and because he would not seem
to degenerate from his Progenitors, he prosecuted his Fathers Wars by the
Tartars Praecopenses, in October. 1575, entering Russia, of the Polonian Kingdom,
burning and destroying two hundred Noblemens Houses, with a multitude of Towns
and Villages, making great slaughter of the people, and carrying away great
numbers of Cattle, and prisoners bound in thongs of raw Hides; but whilst they
divided the spoil with Peter, Vayuod of Valachia, who had promised to give the
Tartars no passage that way, the Cossacks brake into their Country, requiting
them with like harm, and bringing back a number of old Captives.

At this time, the Polonians were at variance, about the Election of their King
(Henry Valois after Charles his Brothers death, stealing away from them, into
France, to take on him the Kingdom) some making choice of (...) the Emperor;
others no less inclining to the Duke of Muscovie, and some unto others.

Amurath, loath that either of those two great Princes should be strengthened
with so great a Kingdom, so near to him, in the beginning of his Reign, wrote
to the Polonians to that purpose, commending to them Stephen Bator Vayuod of
(...) for their King: and threatening, if they did otherwise, to give all their
Wealth and Goods, Wives and Children, for a prey to his Soldiers: with the
chief men of their Cities of Cracovia and Leptis: which Letters so prevailed
with them, that both Maximilian and the Muscovite being passed over, Anne of
the Jagellonian House, was chosen Queen of Poland, yet so as to marry Stephen
the said Vayuod, who, afterward elected King, worthily governed that Kingdom
all his life, and enlarging it with Territories by force of Arms gotten from
his Neighbors, especially the Muscovite; Amurath would often boast and say, he
had given the Polonians their King.

The year following 1576, great and sore shaking troubles arising in Persia,
Amurath took opportunity to invade the same to the long quiet of the Christian
Commonwealth. Old Tamas the Persian King, after above 50 years glorious Reign,
died May 11th, 1576, leaving 11 Sons.

Mahomet the eldest (of an infirmity in his eyes, surnamed Codabanda) being of
a peaceable disposition, was most delighted with a contented life. Ismael the
second Son was of a more fierce and troublesome nature: whom his Father
(outwardly seeming to mislike of his youthful pranks aforesaid, tending to the
breach of the league betwixt him and the Turk) sent to the Castle of Cahaca,
where he remained at the time of his death: Aidere the third Son, was as
ambitious as Ismahel, but not so valorous.

Tamas had by his last will appointed Ismahel to succeed him, as of all his
Sons, the fittest for so great a charge: which Mahomet seemed not much to
dislike, as contented with the honors bestowed on him by his Father. Ismahel
being sent for by the Sultans to take on him the Kingdom at Casbin, there arose
a great tumult in the City and Palace; for Aidere (who, in his Fathers sight,
when he lay drawing toward his end, had presumptuously set the Crown on his
head; for which he was reproved) now supported by Zalchan, and other mighty
favorites, had so dealt with Periaconcona his eldest Sister, and the other
Sultans Counselors of State, that the succession could not be any longer kept
from him, but by some fine deceit:

Wherefore this Lady Periaconcona of great Spirit and deep conceit, left in
trust by her Father with the Sultans; resolved with them upon a thorow-debate,
that Aidere in Royal Apparel, in the great Gallery, should attend the
acclamation of the people, and be there openly Enthronized as the very elected
King: which done, she by their advice ordered the Gates of the Palace to be
presently locked, and surely guarded with Soldiers, wholly devoted to Tamas
and Ismahel: to suffer every man to enter in at the open Wicket, save the known
Friends of Aidere, who is now in conceit a King; but perceiving the prohibition
of his best friends, and moved with the great stir of Zalcan, who discovered
the deceit; and crying upon King Aidere, threatened the Lady: the Sultans and
the rest (that waited on the feigned succession) through fear and sorrow,
withdrew closely among certain Women of the Court, hoping to find some way to
escape.

In the meantime, the cries and threatenings of Aidere's Friends so increased,
that the Counselors with the Lady's consent were enforced to take order,
that Aidere should be deprived of life: Whereupon, Sahamal, his Uncle by the
mothers-side, after long search found him hidden amongst the Women, who taking
him by the Locks, struck off his head, and among the thickest press, where
Zalchan and the rest stood crying and threatening, flung the Head all bloody,
crying aloud unto them: Behold, there your King! enjoy him at your pleasure;
Whereat, every man burned in rage and anger: and many vainly threatened most
cruel revenge: but at last, perceiving Ismahel's succession inevitable, and
Aidere's death irrevocable, every man departed scattering themselves as they
thought best for their own safety.

Shortly after, Ismahel arrived at Casbin, where he was joyfully received and
saluted King: whose power being answerable to his desires, he beheaded his
eight younger Brethren, and bereaved not only those rear him in blood and
affinity, but all the favorites of Aidere, of their lives; so that Casbin was
defiled with blood, and filled with mourning and complaints: which unexpected
cruelty, so altered the minds of his Subjects, that their hopes were turned
into new fears, and their joy into mourning; but much greater did the miseries
grow, when 'twas given out, that he would change the Religion of the Persians,
into the superstition of the Turks; for hereby, and by force of an edict by him
published, many of his Priests and Governors of his friendly and
subject-Cities, were some exiled, some imprisoned, some (as the Caliph of
Casbin) had their eyes plucked out, and not a few, sundry ways slain, yea, many
Ladies, and diverse others of Ismahel's Kinsfolks, endured sundry torments, and
strange calamities.

There went abroad withal, a general rumor; even as far as Constantinople,
that Ismahel, with a puissant Army of such as favored this new proclaimed
vanity, determined to go to Babylon, there to receive the Crown of the Empire,
from him who should be the Successor of their great Caliph, as Solomon the
Turk, and the Persian Kings had of old done.

The fear of further miseries incresing rather than otherwise, he was by the
help of the aforesaid Periaconcona (whether through poison, strangling, or
otherwise) taken out of this World November 24, 1577, to the exceeding joy of
all those Nations, having reigned one year, seven months, and six days.

The Lady forthwith persuaded the Sultans, that as they had for the good of all
Persia, contrived the death of Ismahel, so they would take on them that
Kingdom's Protection, till 'twere known, who should worthily succeed.

Emir Chan was in hope, by means of a match with a Sister of Periaconcona,
greatly enclining unto him, to be exalted to the Sovereignty: Mirize Salmas,
chief Sultan, hoped to advance, either Mahomet Codabanda, or else Hamze his
eldest Son, and by bestowing on him his Daughter in Marriage (as he did) to
increase the glory of his House: others thought they could draw Abas Mirize,
Mahomets middle Son, out of Heri, and make him King: neither wanted the
Infant Tamas his aspiring friends, whose Tutor waited for some opportunity to
settle him in the Kingdom: many others waiting secretly on every occasion, for
their preferment: howbeit, the Sultans promised the Lady all the protection
their forces could afford; and yet did every one, both in word and action,
clearly dissemble their several Imaginations.

Amurath, by these things awakened, thought hereby a fair occasion to be
ministered unto him, to take up Arms against the Persians; for it is an ancient
custom amongst the Othoman Kings, that they may not challenge their due honors
in their lifetime, nor their proud Monuments after death, unless they perform
some exploit conformable to their Majesty.

As soon as Ismahel was dead, Mirize Salmas, after many Letters to and fro, at
last assured Mahomet Codabanda, that with all quietness and security, he might
come and possess the Kingdom: advertising him also of the whole conspiracy
against his Brother, and how the fraudulent Lady (with the Sultans) had
capitally consulted against himself, and how she favoring Emir Chan, and Abas
Mirize his Son, more than became her, little regarded the rightful succession
of him.

So Mahomet, (desiring also to see (...) Mirize advanced, who was virtuous and
prudent, both in civil and warlike matters, and seemed jealous, least some
other should usurp upon his honor) wrote back again, that he was minded to
take the rightful succession upon him, and to that end, was putting himself
upon his journey: but with straight charge, that Salmas should before his
entrance into Casbin, present him with the mischievous head of (...).

Salmas, secretly performing whatever Mahomet had enjoined him, he was thereby
presently and solemnly proclaimed King: then with many Squadrons of Men at
Mahomets devotion, he met him on the way, carrying the Head of Periaconcona
upon a Lances point, with her hair dispersed, and some other uncouth sights.
From which novelties arose much civil Wars, Mahomet, by the (...) of Salmas
seeking revenge on the Sultans for his Brothers death, and they opposing with
all their power against him. Also the neighbor Nations to the Turks, and the
people of Sirvan, disliked of this new King; so that under him, the State of
Persia was more weakened, than of long time before.

Amurath had more particularly intelligence of all these things from (...) of
Van, a City of Armenia the greater: discoursing unto him also of the King being
diseased in his eyes, little esteemed of his Subjects, besotted in affection to
his Sons, the facility to overrule the chief Governors of the Georgians, and
those of Sirvan, ill-affected toward him: wishing him in any case, not to let
slip so fair an occasion, as the Othomans had never before, for overcoming
that King.

Amurath, now stirred up with these Advertisements from Ustresse, settled
himself more deeply in his former (...) to prove his great forces for subduing
the Persian King, being also then wholly in league with Christendom: and
although this War could not be moved, either against the Persians, or
Christians, without breach of Faith; yet there was no Bassa that made any
account of that defect: but after long consultation, the three Bassaes,
Mahomet, Sinan, and Mustapha, agreed, that it would be better and less danger,
to attempt War against the Persians, than against the Christians, whose
valor Mustapha having well tried, chiefly at Famagusta, preferred before the
forces of the Georgians and Persians.

Amurath, greatly urging upon what Coast to begin their journey (protesting he
would not enter into War, except he had great hope of the Victory); Some
thought it best to send the Army to Babylon, thence to Syras, the chief City of
the Country of Persia: others to send it directly to Tauris: and some (it is
reported) would have had two several Armies sent to the said places, so to
bring the Enemy to a straight. But Amurath, not daring to repose such
confidence in his forces so divided, resolved to send one only Army, for
conquering Sirvan, and the chief Cities of Media the greater, reposing also
great hope in the notable help promised him by the Tartars Praecopenses:
determining not to go in person with his Army, (a matter most strange to them,
especially to Siman); for he was troubled with the Falling Sickness, and much
feared his Son Mahomet in his absence, who was much favored of the people,
besides the suspected dangers from Christian Potentates, persuading himself
also, it would be his great honor to perform those things by his Servants:
which had been unfortunately attempted by his Predecessors in person.

Whilst they were thus consulting, and diverse made means to be sent as
General, he sent diverse Posts and light Horsemen to the Governors of Van
Babylon, and Erzirum, by often inroads to spoil the Persian Holds and do them
all harm they could: which they were not (...) to do, especially Ustreffe, both
in the Countries Tributarie, and subject to the Persian.

In these great preparations, Stephen Bator, now King of Poland, in the
beginning of his Reign, by his Ambassador, entered into a strong league and
confederation with Amurath at Constantinople, in many Capitulations, showing on
what terms that Kingdom stood, if not yet stands, with the Turks great
Empire: which League, after Stephen's death by Sigismund the 3d, renewed, has
been commodious to the Polonian Kingdom; but so bound it, that in the hardest
distresses of the Christian Commonwealth, (and most indeed concerning itself,)
it has afforded no help at all, as too plainly appeared in the Wars between
the Emperor and Turk about Hungary. But for all this League, in the great
consultation of Amurath, with his Bassaes, after the Persian War, for the
invading of Christendom, the Polonians were laid in the same balance with the
rest, and, had not'the Turk been led against the Emperor their Neighbor, they
were scarce to have looked for peace: to whom for all that they lent no great
aid in a long and most chargeable War.

But the great Bassa Mustapha, was appointed by Amurath, General of the Turks
Army into Persia; and to provide whatever he should think needful for so great
a War: with command to the Commanders of he greatest part of the Turkish
Empire Eastward, with their Soldiers of all sorts, bound by their annuities to
go to War, at Spring 1578, to repair to Erzirum, bordering upon Armenia, to
attend their (...) Command: who passing through Amasia and Sivas, in the very
beginning of Summer, arrived at Erzirum, there staying till his people, and
necessary provision was come thither: whence he departed for Sirvan; having
first mustered the Soldiers of every Nation by themselves: in which general
survey were found about 110000 men, most Horsemen: yet none stirred out of
places along the seacoasts: neither were the Provinces whence these came, left
destitute of their ordinary Garrisons,

Mustapha also brought with him 500 small pieces of Artillery with many loads
of money to pay his Soldiers, with order to take up more at Aleppo and other
places upon occasion.

From Erzirum, he in 8 days in seemly array, arrived at the consines of Chars,
resting himself in the fruitful Country thereabout, but was surprised with such
a tempest of wind and rain, as rent in sunder his Tents, and doing great harm:
whereby, many through sickness forsook the Army. From Chars, the bounder of the
two Empires; He after 3 days departed, lodging that evening under the
Mountains of Cheilder: where, hearing the Persians to be in Arms, lest he
should be assaulted unawares: he planting himself in the Plain, ordered two
Bassaes to keep two Hills on the right and leftHand: and with them three
Bassaes adventurers, with many others, both Stipendiaries and Volunteers: so
that making as it were a Wings to the Camp, they might discover every ones
coming, and yet himself lay unperceived of any.

Mahomet, as yet scarce settled in his Kingdom, resolved to stand upon the
defense of his State, and to make some show that he was reconciled to the
Sultans of Persia, and Princes of Georgia: so that almost all the great men of
account undertoke the protection of his State and Kingdom.

(...) the Chan and Governor of Reivan, was chosen General, with charge, that,
gathering together what men he could out of places near the Turks, he should by
all means stop their passage into Georgia and Media Astropatia: Whereupon,
Precepts were sent into all parts, for all Sultans, Chans, and Soldiers, to
come and attend their General. Many came, but many would not stir: for their
obstinacy in the broils begun, and suspicion of unlooked-for mischiefs: at
whose Disobedience, the King much grieved; yet Tocomac was dispatched with
above twenty thousand about this business. They were all Horsemen, well armed,
but above all courageous and resolute, and the more for the valor of their
General; so coming to the turning of Chars, they were advertised that the
Enemy was passed.

Being come within a days journey of Cheilder, they sent Scouts to bring them
certain news of the condition and number of the Turks Army: who, discovering
the Turkish Host aloft, persuaded themselves, that was all the Battle which
they saw upon the Hills: whereof, with all speed, they returned news to
Tocomac sostly following his Scouts afar off: Whereupon, boldly holding on his
way, and discovering their Tents upon the Hills, he was confirmed in the Scouts
relation, setting forward the more confidently to assail them: but Beyran and
Dervis perceiving from the Hills the Persians coming in the Plain, confiding
in their General's Battle, speedily ran to meet them: so in those Plains was
joined a most bloody Battle, seven Turkish Zanzacks being slain a very great
number of Soldiers, without any apparent loss to the Persians.

But Mustapha, who stayed waiting till the fight was at the hottest, now seeing
his men could not longer endure the Enemies fury, ran with grievous cries and
exclamations, upon his adversaries, so renewing a most terrible battle.

The Persians, with incredible signs of valor, for that little time of day
light that was left, continued their slaughters, and, at last, through the
night's darkness, withdrew with as little loss as possibly they might: neither
durst Mustapha any longer pursue them.

The Persians certified their King of their success, the Turk's number, with
their further purpose to annoy them.

The Turks presented to Mustapha (who had sent away Posts to Amurath) five
thousand Persian Heads, and three thousand Persians alive. He greatly rejoicing
at this Victory, to make it seem greater, had the heads of those three thousand
alive, cut off, ordering a Bulwark to be framed of those Heads in those fields,
for a most horrible spectacle: on the day of which barbarous work, Messengers
came from Manucchiar (a younger Brother, but great Prince of Georgians) telling
Mustapha, that their Master, with his good leave, was coming to salute him, and
offer himself as his devoted servant.

Mustapha redoubling his joy, commanded all the Cap ains with all Warlike pomp,
to meet Manucchiar, and accompany him to his Presence: which they did, saluting
him again with like triumph, before Mustapha's Pavilion.

Manucchiar beholding against his will, the strange and uncouth pile of heads;
yet doing his reverence to the Bassa, and placing himself next to his side,
after presenting him with his Country gifts, told him, that for his esteem of
the Turkish valor, he was always devoted to the Othomans, and as he had often
desired to spend life and goods in their service; so now allured by the same of
his victorious Army, and through a fantasy to learn the hard precepts of
Military Art under such a General, he offered him all service; consecrating his
life to his commands, etc. beseeching him to accept of him in Amuraths name,
whose obedient vassal he vowed to remain for ever. Mustapha graciously
receiving all this discourse, showing him again the pile of Heads, with his
Battles, Armor, etc. told him, all those Forces were Gods gift, who always
favored the just Counsels of the Othomans: so that, they Lord it over all the
world, to the astonishment of all therein: That had he chosen the better part,
though it had bin better if he had yielded himself before; and that he did very
friendly accept of his desire to be his fellow in those Warlike affairs,
promising him all good entertainment and safety; So, apparelling him in cloth
of gold, he gave him a Battel-Axe and Target, wrought with Gold and Ammel:
never going from his Pavilion without a Train of his slaves after him.

Mustapha gave order, that next morning the Camp should remove; and as they
were preparing, there arose a most terrible tempest of Wind, Rain, Thunder and
Lightning for 4 days together: Whereby, out of the dead Carcasses and Heads,
issued a most horrible stink, so by it and with other annoyances, diverse
diseases arose among the Turks: but the weather breaking up, he set forward
toward Teflis, staying that day in the Plains through the fowlness of the
way, refreshing his sick and wounded at the Lake Chielder Giol; next day he
came to Archichelec Castle, taken from the Georgians by Solomon: Where,
surveying his Army, he wanted 40000 of his Soldiers: thence the Army removing,
lodged at night near Peruana Giol, or the Lake of slaves, coming next day to
Triala, where are yet to be seen the ruins of a great City and Temples, some
being yet maintained by Christians, the Relics of those Forces that passed
those Seas and Mountains into the Holy Land; Next day, the Turks ascending the
High and craggy Mountain standing upon Teflis, whence descending next day, they
seized on a Castle, called by them Giurgi Chala: then lodging in certain
Plains, the day after they came to the River running by Teflis: but in these 4
days march, many Turks straggling for Victuals and Provender, were cut off by
the Georgian Captains: who, with a number of Soldiers secretly followed the
Army, and lay in Ambush upon such places as the Victuallers were to pass through.

Mustapha coming to Teflis, found the Castle empty: Daut Chan Lord thereof,
having betook himself to the fields. Mustapha for its convenient situation,
repaired and fortified it, planting therein 100 pieces of Ordnance, appointing
Mahomet Bassa Governor of Teflis, with 6000 Soldiers, so departing for
Sirvan: at which time 1000 persons of Soria, that had brought a 1000 loads of
Rent-corn to the Camp from Aleppo, with 500 others of Omps (anciently Hus
Jobbs) City and other places of Soria, returning Homewards, were all slain by
Alessandro and 2 other Georgian Lords, except a few escaping with Nassardin
their Captain.

While Mustapha lay in the Plains after his descent from the Mountains of
Teflis, the Ambassadors of Alessandro the Great, came and told him, their Lord,
if he pleased, was ready to come to do him reverence, and to promise that
devotion he had always born to the Othoman Emperors. He gladly and cheerfully
sent them back to will him to come, and that his Friendship should be to him
most dear and acceptable; Ordering all his Commanders to receive him with all
possible signs of joy: who coming, and presenting the General with rich gifts,
offered him his obedience, with the most lively speeches: calling Amurath his
Lord, seeming to take it ill, that he passed not through his Territory: where
he should have had plenty of all things: yet hoping, that in his return, he
would take it in his way, where he should be ready to bestow all upon the
service of his Lord: and although he could not for many urgencies go with him
into Sirvan; yet he would always have himin mind, and pray to the Creator for
his most happy success. Mustapha courteously receiving all, and re-bestowing on
him gifts, promised in his return to pass through his Country: so dismissing
the Georgian Duke with like Honor as at first; and in 12 days after he
departing from (...), came unto the confines of Sirvan, resting on this side
the River Canac one day, at which time the Citizens of (...) came to offer
themselves as subjects to the Turks: the General gladly promising them his
assured protection. The Turks over-wearied with travel, but far more afflicted
with Hunger; whilst they were enquiring among themselves, who could conduct
them where they might supply their wants, some Persians were taken: who being
straightly examined, after much resistance told them, that not far off, over
Marshes, where Canac discharges it self into Araxis, were many fields full of
Rice and Corn in the Blade; and a little further, some fat Herds of Cattle.
Though Mustapha much doubted the subtilties of his Enemy; yet to gratify and
make his men more willing to follow him into Sirvan, suffered all that would to
go for Viotuals: about 10000 servile Persons with Beasts went to fetch away
this provision; but Toconac having gathered together the remainder of his Army,
devised how they might in some measure revenge their loss, and impeach the
Turks entrance into Sirvan, but (...) strength, they stayed in Ambush, till
some part of the Turks Army should for relief descend into those fields:
sending out diverse men, who, as if they had by chance lighted upon the Turks
Camp, revealed unto them as a great secret, what a good prey was hard by them,
and within 3 days, the said ten thousand Forragers at the wished place, were
surprised by the Persians and all slain, save a few, who by hasty flight saved
themselves. Mustapha hearing the noise of this hot skirmish, hasted with all
speed to have succored them, and though he came not timely enough for their
relief, yet fitly to revenge their death upon the Persians, staying too long
about the spoil. The place of the booty was almost enclosed with Araxis and
Canac: whereinto Mustapha entering in battel-array, the Persians in those
difficulties began every man to betake himself to his own private conceit and
fortune. Tocomac Emirchan, and other great ones first turned their backs, and
by help of their courageous Horses, got over Canac, but others attempting the
like, their Horses not of such courage, and out of breath, many of them were
drowned, which others perceiving, ran in rage and fury upon their Enemies, and
were there all slain. The Turks in this conflict losing not above 3000 men
besides the Forragers; though Tocomac, that his loss might seem the more
tolerable, reported (a greater slaughter) to the King. The Persian Captains
full of sorrow, with license of Tocomac (who himself went to Reiuan) departed
to their several Governments, expecting the Kings further pleasure from Casbin.

Mustapha straightly proclaiming, that every man should be ready against next day
to pass over the River Canac into Sirvan; all his people arose in a tumult,
injuriously to his face reproving his folly and inhumanity, as utterly to (...)
himself and confound the whole Army: praying him to surcease, unless he would
cast them all away; but he resolutely answered them, that he would persist,
concluding, that the desire of his Lord, was not in any sort to be frustrated,
for his making too great account of his own life.

For all the sundry murmurings and whisperings upon this speech; Mustapha next
morning first waded over the River himself, the Bassaes with their slaves
following him, (the rest doing the like) and so continued until night; whereby,
above half the Army could not then get over.

This passage being tumultuous and disorderly, above 8000 carried away with the
violence of the River, were drowned, with the great outcry of the Host: also
many Beasts (on whose backs diverse hoped to have passed dry over) were over
whelmed therein: That night being spent with great complaints and cursings, by
those yet on this side, whose fears were increased by example of their
fellows: some (...) sedition was likely to ensue; but that the gravel of the
bottom of the River being removed by the hooves of the Cattle of them which
followed, Mustapha was driven to a place where there happened to be also a
Foord; which gathered in a heap, made as it were a shelf, so that the rest of
the Army, Carriages and Artillery passed over, not one man perishing; so
resting that day and the next, till the Army was mustered and put in order,
next day they encamped in Barren Champaines without Corn or Cattle: neither
could they learn where were any Villages, whereby they were forced to give
their Horses and Mule, leaves and stalks of withered trees, etc. And the men
for Hunger-sake, eat the Relics which they picked out of corrupted and
loathsome Victuals, neither saw they any end of these miseries, yet was there
now no looking back. Mustapha before all the rest setting forward, who had not
long marched, but store of sundry plants were discovered, and soon after, A
large Plain and green Country, by the sight whereof every one was refreshed:
hasting into those Champaines abounding with all kind of Corn and Fruits. Here
every man satisfying his Appetite; Mustapha at last arrived at Eres, the chief
City in that Coast of Sirvan, which a number of her Inhabitants had forsaken,
following their Governor Samir Chan, who with other Governors of Sirvan
withdrew into the Mountains, attending the Events of those great motions, but
they found no rich prey therein, the people having carried away the best things
they had. Mustapha here staying 22 days, erected a fortress with 200 small
pieces of Ordnance, appointing Cartas Bassa with 5000 Soldiers to keep it,
commanding also Osman Bassa with 10000 to possess Sumachia, with the Title of
Vizier of Sirvan, charging him to clear the passages to Derbent, and advertise
the (...) of his arrival there, whom he supposed by that time to be come into
those quarters. Osman was friendly entertained by those of Sumachia, he
suffering no outrage to be done upon them: whereupon, they of Derbent offered
him their City, beseeching him to defend them from the Persians: to whom,
though they long were subject, yet better agreed with the Turks in their
superstition.

Mustapha, having thus subjected Sirvan and put all things in order, importuned
by the Janissaries and Graecians, and through the season of the year, departed
from Eres homeward toward Alexander the Great his Country, sending some before
him to make a Bridge over Canac, which he passing over, gave Sahanial notice of
his Arrival, who came yielding himself the Turks Vassal, and being pompously
entertained and rewarded, returned into his Mountain of (...). Mustapha setting
forward by night for the fair weather-sake, by error of his Guides, fell into
difficult passages, being forced to stay waiting for daylight, which showed
them that they were entered into the Countries of Alexander: Wherefore, he
proclaimed, no man on pain of death to molest any of his Subjects; Next day,
traveling on, Ambassadors came to him from Alexander with abundance of
Victuals and relief, excusing that he came not himself through the infirmity of
his body: wherewith he satisfied, caused the Messengers to guide him to Teflis,
so that in 3 days they conducted his Army thither without any annoyance, being
well rewarded for their pains: who, come to Teflis, found the Garrison there so
pinched with Famine, that they were glad to eat Cats, Dogs, sheep skins, etc.
For they durst not go out of the Castle for the Enemy; neither if they had, had
it any thing availed, but by Mustapha's coming they were relieved with all
plenty. After 2 days he removed thence, destroying all in his way with fire
and sword in the Champains subject to Teflis, only the Sepulchers of Sinions
Progenitors (Lord of that Country) were left untouched. Next day, they
traveled over rough Mountains full of difficulties, and the more for the great
snows there fallen, whereby many men and beasts perished: In which 2 days
distress, the Soldiers without regard of the Enemies Country, wherein they
were, lodged some here, some there, where was some thick Bush or Cottage, or
quiet Valley to shelter in: Whereupon, some Georgian Lords joining themselves
together, expecting to perform some notable exploit, and observing that Nosaine
Bey had withdrawn with his Regiment under Mountains from the storms of wind,
they assayling him, slew his men, taking Loads of Money and Apparel, with all
his Horses, and what ever they could find, himself scarce escaping into the
Tents of Begran Bassa. Next morning the Turks removing, came to the Castle
Chiurchale, and sending abroad many slaves for viotuall, conducted by them of
the Castle, were all cut in pieces by the Georgians. Hence the Turks departing
over diverse rough places, were fain oftentimes to rest; at last, coming to the
Confines of Deddesmit, of her called The Widows Country, into which they must
needs pass through a Narrow Strait between Mountains, where, Araxis greatly
winding it self in the Valleys, but one man could pass through at once, between
this and a thick Hilly-Wood: they lodging on the Bank of the River, removed
next morning, traveling over steep Mountains and rough Forests, hard Ice and
Snow, and hanging Rocks, so that many Beasts tumbling down into the River,
there perished through these and other miseries: They marched the 2 next days,
at last, arriving in the Territories under (...), or Golden Castle Deddesmits
Palace, where they had all manner of relief, for all the miseries of their six
days travel from Chyurchala: which, had it bin a fair way, might have been
performed in one.

The Widow with Alexanders her eldest son came unto Mustapha's Pavillion,
offering him Presents, and promising all obedience; whom he courteonsly
receiving, declared, what Honorable entertainment he had given to (...) her
younger son there present, and then dissembling his displeasure against
Alexander, whom he thought was one that spoiled the Sorian's; in their return
embracing him, prayed her to be content to leave him also, there with him:
saying, he would send both her sons to Amurath, with Letters of Credence for
their yieldded obedience, and that for their good deserts, they might of him be
Honorably rewarded and entertained. The Lady, (though inwardly sore troubled)
yet seemed courteously to yield to what necessity constrained her; so leaving
them behind her, she returned heavy to her Castle.

After 2 days refreshment, he departed toward Chars, arriving at last at
Erzirum to the great joy of the Army, which he there presently discharged,
dispatching Posts from thence, with Letters to his Great Lord of all things
that had passed, exceedingly magnifying his own exploits; propounding also unto
him what he thought convenient to be attempted next year, for strengthening the
places Conquered, and preparing way for new enterprises, and sending to him the
Widows 2 sons, certified him of their submission, and his good entertainment in
their Country; declaring withal his opinion, that Manucchiar was fitter for
Government, and readier to do him service then Alexander. Amurath greatly
commended Mustapha, pleasing himself that of these beginnings might grow mighty
Conquests, whereby he should surpass the glory of his Predecessors.

Not long after, Mustapha departed from Eres: the Tartars arrived upon the
Confines of Sirvan, attending the command of the Turks, to the number of 30000,
conducted by Abdilcherai, a young man of great valor, comeliness and fame,
according to the promise of (...) Chan Osman hearing of their approach, invited
them into Sirvan, to further these beginnings of Amurath. Abd lcherai entering
the Iron Gates of Derbent (called by the Turks Demircapi, that is, the Gates of
(...)) passed thence into Sirvan, giving Osman advertisement thereof. Ares Chan
late Governor of Sumachia, resolved, upon the departure of Mustapha, with the
Governors of Eres and Sechi, to return again to their forsaken Country, and
prove if he could revenge the injury done him by the Turks: so having put to
the sword some of Osmans Victuallers that were gone straggling out of the City,
he encamped a little from Sumachia, and surprised some Messengers sent from
Abdilcherai, to certify Osman of his arrival, and know his pleasure, who,
after much torture disclosed their Letters: which Ares reading, and considering
the great number of the Tartars that were come, he presently raised his Camp,
retiring toward Canac, thence to certify the King of the Novelties, and there
to attend his answer. The Tartar coming to Sumachia, the Bassa appointed him to
pass over Canac into Genge, the Country of Emanguli Chan, to enrich its self
with its spoil; who with posting Journeys came to Canac, and most furiously
assaulring Ares, discomsited all his Host, sending Ares alive to Sumashia,
where Osman hanged him by the neck out of a lodging in the State-House, where
he not long before had sat as Governor. Abdilcherai swimming over the River,
found Emanguli Chan with his Wife and Family, and a great part of the Nobility
of Genge hunting the Wild Boar; putting him to flight, taking his wife, all the
Ladies, many slaves, and slew many that were come to see the sport.

Then going to Genge, he took it, whose barbarous Soldiers left no manner of
inhumane cruelty unattempted, so loaded with spoils, and weary with slaughter,
they returned merrily toward Sirvan. And at the higher side of Eres in low
Champains environed with Hills, they pitched their Tents without fear, to sleep
and rest their weary bodies.

The Persian King having gathered new Forces, dispatched Namze Mirize his
eldest son with 12000 Soldiers to see what hurt was done in Sirvan, and
attempt revenge; but especially to punish them of Sethi, and other Cities, who
had so voluntarily yielded to the Obedience and Religion of the Turks: He
departing from Casbin with his Mother Begum, would needs follow her beloved
son, who was on his way under the guidance and Government of Mirize Salmas, and
was certified from Ares Chan of the arrival of Abdilcherai with his great
number of Tartars, being thereby at first almost out of comfort: yet out of
desire of glory and revenge, he hastened and came to Eres, long before his
Father thought he could have so done. Caitas Bassa was gone out spoiling the
Country, carrying away whatever he met withal, and committing such insolences
as hungry Soldiers use to do, but was suddenly assailed by the Prince; and
after a fierce and bloody Battle (wherein the Turks, though few yet showed many
effects of Valor) he was slain with all his Soldiers, leaving all to the
pleasure of the Victor. Whereupon, the Prince sent the 200 pieces of Ordnance
left in the Fort by Mustapha to Casbin to his Father; and now encouraged,
leaving his Mother at Eres, went on toward Sumachia, but descending the Hills
he discovered the Tartars Camp. Whereupon, he greatly doubted whether to
adventure on so mighty an Enemy, or content himself with the Victory already
gotten: but thinking it too great a shame to return into Persia, he defended
the Hill, perceiving the Army was all laid down to rest, and their Horses all
unsaddled; Whereupon, he pricking forward. most terribly assaulted the Tartars:
and slaying their first and second Watch, though with some loss, put some to
slight, killing others, and taking diverse of them Captives; Abdill Cherai being
one, who was sent alive to the King.

After this, the Prince encompassed Sumachia, wherein Osman Bassa sat as
Governor to the reproach of Persia: to whom he sent word, If he would yield,
he should depart with life and goods; otherwise he should be constrained to
surrender the City and his life withal. Osman knowing nothing of the Tartars
overthrow, but hoping of their return, gave him a courteous answer, that he was
ready to yield, but entreated him to stay but three days, to put all things in
readiness for his free departure. The Prince glad, expected of the Turk the
performance thereof: but Osman, the Tartars not appearing, resolved secretly to
flee, doubting, if he should longer stay to be betrayed by the Citizens:
Wherefore, before the 3 days end, he by the help of a dark night, and the
cover of High and rough Crags, silently withdrew out of Sumachia, carrying away
all his substance and safely arriving at Derbent: Next morning the Inhabitants
opened the Gates to the Prince; Who seeing their infidelity, first, by
entertaining Osman, and now helping him to escape without giving him knowledge
thereof, with great cruelty did punish them, razing their Houses with the Walls
of the City. The strength of Derbent, Winters approach and his long Journey
home, persuaded him to lay aside his enterprise for that City, and to return to
Casbin; Yet first repairing to Eres and Sechi; he spared neither Sex, Age, nor
condition. Which done, he with his said Mother and Victorious Army, somewhat
diminished, returned to Casbin.

Abdill Cherai was kept safe at the Kings Palace at Casbin, but with very
easy Imprisonment: which was daily so enlarged, that he seemed rather as a
Companion of those of the Court then a prisoner; Whereby, insinuating into the
love of Queen Begum, he spent his time in courting of her, and she in all
secret entertainment of him: yet was it a rife report in Court and City, that
the shameless Lady had participated her bed and self with the Tartarian
prisoner. Howbeit, the King and Prince knew nothing of it, but the King
perceiving the young Gentleman to be generally commended, valiant, courreous
and comely, also nobly born; for he said, he was the Brother of Tartar Chan,
was persuaded, it would stand with the great good of his State, of a Captive to
give him his Daughter in marriage: whereby, he hoped the Tartarian
Praecopenses, would thenceforth both refuse to favor Amurath, and in favor of
Persia turn their Arms against him; which his purpose so displeased the
Sultan's of Casbin, that they sought by all means possible to avert the King
from so strange a policy: but he, fully resolved, and upon the point to
conclude the Marriage; the Sultan's entering the Palace with their followers,
ran the Tartar through the body, and cutting off his Privities, flapped them
about his mouth. Its reported, the Queen was also then murdered by them:
However it was, the Lady after that day never saw the Sun, Upon these murders
sprung up much civil dissension to the singular benefit of Amurath. All which
disorders, the King by bridling of his own affections, and the motions of his
Son well appeased, procured at last a perfect Unity.

Osman Bassa being in Derbent, devised with all care possible to assure Sirvan,
now again almost lost, under Amurath's Government. Wherefore, he thought good
to enter into friendship with old Sahamall the Georgian Lord; These two
mutually practicing many Tokens of good will, and in short time Osman took to
Wife a Daughter of the said Sahamall: yet he soon began to suspect that
Sahamall for all the fair show of Friendship he made, might receive some secret
order from the Persian King to betray him, and free the City from the Turks:
and so reduce all that Province, in which he was fully confirmed by the
speeches of his Wife, who frankly told him, that her Father being secretly
reconciled to the Persian King, Letters went between them of great matters, and
particularly of the affairs of Sirvan. The Bassa kept this in store, to his own
safety and the destruction of Sahamall: and inviting him, according to the
custom, to a Feast, he enjoined certain Companies of his Soldiers, that as
soon as Sahamall was entered into his Court, even in his very dismounting, to
fall upon him, cut off his head, and put all his retinue to the sword: which
being done accordingly, he forthwith sent 2000 Horsemen to spoil and sack all
his Country, to the great marvel both of far and near. The Persian King took
this most grievously, foreseeing, that the recovery of that Province would
prove very difficult, and fearing it would still remain as it does in the Turks
possession: This was the end of the Turks attempts against the Persians in
Sirvan, this year 1578, wherein one way or other they lost above 70000 men.

Amurath advertised from Mustapha, who, for the advancing of his own credit,
had described these successes to be far greater than they were, began to devise
touching the next years attempts: and upon his better consideration, ceased
further to think of sending Forces again into Sirvan for the recovery of the
lost places there, because Tartar Chan, had faithfully assured both him and
Osman to overrun that Province anew, and do great matters: which for all that,
fell out to be but windy words.

So Amurath devised for sending his Army to Tauris, to erect a Fortress there,
which, being also strongly Garrisoned should never be again subdued: And,
hereby to keep under all those Countries between Tauris and Erzirum, which
important conceit was much increased by others: who almost thought it was very
easy for so great an Host, both to perform that service, and pass
whithersoever he would desire; yet, having with more indifferent judgment,
compared his own Forces with his Enemie's: to wit, the Georgians on one side,
of whom he had yet no great assurance, and the Persians on the other: He found
many difficulties and dangers in that tedious Journey; which at first, he saw
not. Whereupon he concluded: first, to make sure his own borders, and
afterward, by little and little to enter into the Enemie's Country: still
fortifying in convenient places as he went; Hereof, he wrote to Mustapha,
charging him against next spring to provide all things necessary for building
certain Forts between Erzirium and Georgia, to secure those ways, and bring
those people first under Obedience: Whereupon, Mustapha presently directed
precepts to diverse places, for taking up 20000 cunning Pyoneers, etc. and
writing to all the Countries, whence he raised his Army the last year, that a
greater number of Soldiers should be ready against next spring, which he
caused to be spread as far as (...): commanding also the Taxes and Tenths to be
collected, and using the Chambers of Aleppo and other places, for what money he
thought necessary.

Alexander and Manucchiar the while, in doubtful hope at Constantinople, were
examined and exhorted to embrace the Mohammedan Religion. Manucchiar easily
yielded, but Alexander would by no means consent, though he knew he should be
deprived of his Estate, and protesting his Obedience at all times to Amurath,
and his love to his Brother, requested only but as a private man to go and live
in his own Country, there to be buried among his Ancestors: which request the
Turk referring to Manucchiars discretion, he consented thereto.

Manucchiar was circumcised and called Mustapha, with the Title of Bassa of
Altan Cala, and of all his Mother and Brother's Countries, so they both
returned home.

Now in the Persian Court were many consultations for repressing the Turks
Invasions: Imanguli Chan, doubting to lose his Government of Genge, by reason
of the late sacking of his City, and spoil of his Country, offered to the King
on pain of his Head to defend Sirvan against Osman's further Fortifications or
Conquests: Whereupon, the Government of Genge, and guarding of Sirvan, was
committed unto him; and diverse other Governors and Captains, that were nearest
commanded to assist him, if either the Tartars or Turks with any great power
should enter therein,

But how to protect the Georgian Country was thought a matter of greater
importance, because most thought some great Turkish power would be sent thither
to assure the Conquest begun, and to succor the Fortress of Teflis, which must
else fall again into the Georgians hands.

Simon a famous Georgian, once a prisoner with Ismahel at Cahata, and by him
seduced from the Christian Faith, for defense whereof he had chosen to live,
deprived of liberty and estate; thinking it now a fit time to obtain from the
King long desired help to recover his Dominion, usurped by Daut his younger
Brother, who for obtaining thereof of Tamas, had renounced his Religion,
offered the King his faithful service for defense of that part of Georgia,
wherein Teflis stood against the Turks, reproving his younger Brother by way of
disgrace of cowardice. The Persian King with great content consented to his
request, naming him Chan of all that Kingdom, which he possessed whilst he was
a Christian, and sent with him Aliculi Chan with five thousand Horsemen, and
certain Ordnance taken at Eres.

Simon coming to Georgia, was joyfully received, pressing about three thousand
Soldiers of his own and his Neighbors, excusing his becoming a Persian, as
no preferring Mahometanism before Christianity, but thereby to be delivered
from long imprisonment, and to maintain his estate.

The Spring approaching, all the Turks Forces in 1579. met at Erzirum, with all
necessaries for the intended War, ith this Army equal with the first.
Mustapha in twelve days (...) to Chars; and, since they were to fortify that
City with Walls and Ditches, and that with all speed, many of the Spaoglani,
yea, and of the Janissaries also must needs be set to work: whereupon, they
tumultuously and bitterly protested to the General, that their stipends were
not bestowed on them to employ them in such servile works, but only with their
Weapons to exercise that force for which they were esteemed worthy of that
honor, but he using most haughty terms, and all means of Authority and
Terror, they wrought as much as he desired: so in 23 days all was finished
and the Water brought round it; whilst they were busy in this work, amongst
many inconveniences the Soldiers endured a most sudden cold, by reason of
great abundance of snow falling August 25.

Mustapha resolved to send succor to Teflis, but how to relieve it he was
doubtful; yet to preserve his credit with Amurath, he sent Nassan Bassa, of
Damasco, Mahamet the Vizier his Son of great valor with between eighteen and
twenty thousand Soldiers, with one Resvan Captain of certain Adventurers, who
freely offered themselves, assigning also to him forty thousand Ducats, and
many loades of Corn with other necessaries.

Nassan, resolving to put these succors into Teflis, or to lose all, came to
the Strait of Tomanis, where the over grown Woods on one side, and deep Valleys
and craggy Rocks on the other, would astonish a constant Beholder.

Simon and Aliculi Chan with eight thousand Soldiers, understanding by their
espials of his coming with this aid, had scattered themselves all along the
said Strait; but Nassan to avoid that danger, entered with his Army into the
Wood, to discover what might be plotted against him, and was hardly charged by
the Enemy and constrained to fight with a 1000 windings and turnings, with
great slaughter of his men, who in the skirmish were driven so far that down
they fell, and were presently slain.

Nassan having with much ado passed this Strait, burning with desire of
revenge, would needs stay near those Straits, as if to refresh his (...) Army;
appointing Resvan with some Bands of Soldiers to lay in ambush attentive to
every stir of the enemy.

Simon and Aliculi Chan, on the third day, imagining this their stay was for
fear, gave a fresh onset upon the Flank of Nassan's squadrons, who giving
Resvan a sign speedily compassed in his Enemies, taking some alive, cutting in
pieces others, and put the rest to flight. Aliculi rashly charging upon the
face of Nassan, was taken. Next day the 11th. after his departure from Chars,
he arrived at Teflis, where he found some besieged Turks dead, some sick; for,
through Famine, they devoured even the very skins of Horses, sheep, and dogs,
whom Nassan comforted with gifts and good words, exhorting them to constancy in
the service of their King, whose honor was never more then there to be
respected: and because the Soldiers did all mislike Mahomet Bassa whom
Mustapha had left Governor of that Fort, he put Amet Bassa in his place; and
so having filled up the Garrison and set all things in order, he returned, and
being come to the Strait of Tomanis, was advertised by Scouts, that it was so
strongly possessed by the Enemy as not to be passed through.

Nassan perplexed, and doubtful which way to turn himself, Aliculi Chan, to
purchase his liberty, which he covenanted for before hand, offered to show him
a safe and short cut; whereby he might without danger pass with his Army: so
bending on the right hand, he guided him through strange and uncouth places,
not meeting so much as one Enemy; but when the Persian Duke put the Turk in
mind of his promised liberty, he with deep and fained sighs protested, he was
sorry he could not perform what he had promised, since it lay not in his power
to free any man taken in battle by the Soldiers of his Sovereign; yet gave him
his Faith to use all the most earnest means he could with Mustapha to procure
his liberty.

Simon imagined, that the Turks had taken this new way, but being certified by
his spies, that it was so indeed, he, enflamed with rage for their great
fortune, fell upon the rear, which he wholly destroyed, leading away all the
People, Horses, and all the Treasure of Mahomet and Nassan Bassaes; As for
Aliculi, he was sent away in the Front, and so not to be rescued.

Nassan came from Teflis to Chars in 8 days, presenting Aliculi to Mustapha,
and recounting unto him whatsoever had happened in that expedition. Allouli was
sent prisoner by Mustapha to Erzirum Castle: and ere long himself returned to
the said Erzirum with his Army sore weakened and discontented, which he
presently discharged.

About the time that these things were doing, Amurath to make a safer and
easier passage for his Forces into Georgia, sent Uluzales with a great Fleet to
Mengrelia (of old, Colchis) who fortifying in the River Fassa, laid such a
beginning, that it is now one of the Turks Beglerbegships. Though those
Fortifications were soon after his departure for the present demolished by the
Mengrelians: and here ended the stirs of this Year, 1579.

Of all these successes, Mustapha sent advertisement to Amurath, and because he
had the year before persuaded him that Georgia and its people were brought
under his Obedience, that he should not marvel at so many losses and Battles;
declared unto him, that all these troubles were not raised by the homebred
Georgians, but by Aliculi and Simon sent out of Persia. Amurath reading all
that Mustapha had written with great delight, sent to Nassan a Battel-Axe all
gilt and full of Stones: A Target of Gold and Pearl, and a rich Garment of
Cloth of Gold in reward of his good service; and ordered Aliculi to be kept
where he was, in diligent and safe custody.

The Persian Kings care for Turkish Invasions, which much troubled him, was
doubled with domestical fears. Mirik Salmas his chief Vizier still filling his
Head with jealousy, that Abas Miriz his son, Governor of Iteri, was about, in
these troubles, to proclaim himself King of Persia, to the great Ignominy of
his Father, and prejudice of Emerhanze his eldest Brother, to whom Salmas had
married a Daughter of his; who, the better to persuade the King to commit Abaz
to prison, or bereave him of all Authority, discovered unto him, how little
Abaz had respected him in diverse occasions, not having sent forth one man in
these late Wars: but forbad those of his Jurisdiction to come to Casbin, when
summoned to have passed with Emer Namke into Sirvan; they answered, Abaz their
Lord, who enjoined them not to stir, was not only called King of Iteri, but had
given out he meant to claim the succession in the whole Kingdom. The King,
carried away with leight belief of these complaints, made more effectual by
means of diverse great Ladies, and other usual devices continually, thought to
repress the boldness of his disobedient Son; yet not forgetting to prepare
against the Turks, as might stay their passage to Tauris, if they purposed so
to do.

But Mustapha laying at Erzirum, many grievous complaints were made of him to
Amurath, whereby he took from him his General-ship, calling him to Court to
give account of his actions: who sending such a strong power to succor Teflis,
Amurath conjectured the affairs of Georgia not to be so secure as he had
informed him, whose Soldiers also in an uproar accused him of improvidence and
prodigality: because now this second year he had with so much ado, gathered
such a number of Soldiers together, to the vast charge of their Lord, and yet
performed nothing worthy the glory of Amurath, or answerable to so great a
charge.

The Emperor for the great favors he bare unto him, his ancient Tutour, would
never have construed these complaints so hardly, as to have deprived him of his
place, if the inveterate envy of Sinan Bassa had not ministered force to these
hard accusations.: for he was a most ancient enemy to Mustapha, and in all
things thought himself his match both in courage and years; yea, and did not
stick to think himself his better to: for in the enterprise of Glamen in
Arabia, he did that which Mustapha neither durst, nor knew how to put in
execution: for which, ever after one envying at another glory both in word and
deed, opposed each other upon occasion. At last Sinan taking this occasion of
so many complaints against Mustapha, caused a great number to supplicate
Amurath, which himself did most malignantly exaggerate against him, accusing
him, that this second year he had most manifestly showed, he went not to the
Wars as a worthy General, desirous of noble enterprises, but as one that would
make Merchandise of blood, his Soldiers, Pages, Corn, and Money, etc. These
and the like complaints, with the hard opinion conceived against him by
Amurath, occasioned his resolution. Besides, he deemed it not so much for his
honor, still to employ one man as to show that he had choice of Subjects,
worthy of so great a Charge: Wherefore, he sent the chief of his Gentlemen
Porters with fifteen others, to bring him with his Chancellor and Treasurer to
the Court, to give account of money received; and of their whole Office; he
delivered three Letters to this Messenger, which he should warily show: One was
so written, that Mustapha, in receiving it, might by them be strangled: In the
second, was their warrant to do what they were commanded: The third contained,
that Mustapha should forthwith send his Chancellor and Treasurer to the Court
by them.

Mustapha, by diverse means, especially guilt, suspecting his life was by those
Messengers sought after: When the Captain-Porter came to the Camp, put him off
with delays, and would not be spoken withal: but when he would endure no
longer delay, he was admitted to his presence, having a Circle appointed him,
out of which, he and his Companions might not stir: the Bassa being guarded
round about: Whereupon, the Porter plucked forth the third Letter about the
sending of his Chancellor and Treasurer, which the Bassa found many excuses to
delay: but being hardly pressed, he delivered them both: agreeing with the
Messenger to have their lives spared, who at Constantinople were clapped into
the Tower Jadicula, to have been severely examined of all the Bassaes doings:
but Mustapha coming at length to Constantinople, April. 9. through the potent
mediation of diverse great Ladies, and other friends was again at length
received into Amuraths favor without any further proceeding: his Chancellor
and Treasurer being afterward also enlarged.

While Mustapha lay at Erzirum, Muhamet the Vizier was slain at Constantinople;
after whom, shortly after died also Achmet Bassa, who succeeded in his place;
the death of Muhamet, is worthy to be registered as a mirror for all that
administer Justice in so great a place: he had for some leight causes, deprived
a Soldier of Constantinople of his yearly pension, bestowing it upon another,
so that the other poor soul remained in misery; who not guilty to himself of
any fault worthy of so great punishment, determined to bereave him of life, who
had bereft him of living: which because he could not fitly do, by reason of the
Guard of slaves that keep the Person of the Vissier, he taking upon him the
Habit of those Religious, called Dervis^ars, and after their manner with a kind
of folly and lightness of mind, to present himself every morning in the Divano
before the Vissier, by his appointment with others, to say his prayers, and in
singing praises to their Prophet, to entreat God for his salvation, and so to
ask his Alms: At last, the crafty Hypocrite, with a very sharp Dagger in one of
his sleeves, being admitted into the Divano, according to his Custom, where
Muhamet set in his House to give public audience, sat right against him, as
he was wont, pouring out those vain devotions; which finished, while the
Vissier reaches him his wonted Alms, he once or twice stabd him in the breast:
the standers by astonished, ran in; but lo, the hoary Vissier, lay breathing
forth his last gasp. The murderer being bound fast, the Emperor suspecting,
that some other great Bassa desiring that high Dignity had provoked him to do
this, would needs understand what had moved him so treacherously to kill his
Vissier; who answered, he did it to free the City from the tyranny of him, by
whom he was undeservedly deprived of his Pension: when he could get no other
answer, he delivered him to the Vissiers slaves, who with most exquisite
torments, put him to death.

Achmet Bassa, succeeding him, and shortly after dying, Mustapha being the
third Bassa in order, should have succeeded in his room; but he could by no
means, find so much grace in Amuraths sight, as to have it under seal, though
all State-matters were brought to him as chief Vizier; but the Seal was sent to
Sinan, now General for the Persian Watres, which not a little discontented
Mustapha, fearing some other strange Accident, soon to befall him.

Sinan, being nominated General against the Persians, and full power given him
in 1580, determined to build a Fort at Tomanis, to assure the passage thither
from Chars, and by all means, to induce the Persian King to send Ambassadors
for peace, with conditions acceptable to Amurath. Of these changes and
alterations, the Persian King being advertised, and being persuaded by
Leventogli, the Georgian, and Miriz Salmas, he dispatched Maxut Chan, or
Maxudes his Ambassador, to demand peace of Amurath; and by Letters to him, to
labor for pacifying all those troubles. Maxut in any case to conclude a peace,
so Amurath would be content with Chars and Teflis. He coming to Erzirium, was
thence conducted toward Amasia; but at Sivas, he found Sinan there, collecting
his Army, for execution of his designs. Of this Embassador's coming, news was
in Post joyfully sent to the Court, Maxut informing Sinan, of all he had to
treat with Amurath, on behalf of the King, declaring unto him, that since both
Nations were conjoined under the Law of Mahomet, though there seemed some small
difference, not worth those troubles, it were very inconvenient for them to
seek the utter destruction (...) of another: wherefore, he was in good hope to
obtain of Amurath this desired peace, if he had no other cause, for which he
was agrieved, as in truth he had not: wherefore, he besought him safely to
conduct him to Amurath, that, if it were possible, those bloody Wars might
end.

Sinan, thinking the very fame of his valor to have wrought this demand of
peace, granted him a safe Convoy, writing to Amurath, what he thought was fit
to be demanded, and what great matters might now be obtained; but he advised
the Ambassador, not to go without resolution, to yield to Amurath all that
Country which he had before conquered, for he knew his mind very well.

Maxut hereupon, doubted whether to proceed on his Journey, or return back into
Persia; but hoping to receive more reasonable conditions from Amurath himself,
he gave Sinan large words, and so departing from Sirvas, arrived at
Constantinople Aug. 4th. The Persian King the while, stirred up with a report
of the Turks preparations, commanded all his Chans and Governors, to meet him
and the Prince, with all their forces at Tauris, and after many consultations
there, he resolved to send Soldiers toward Teflis, whither succors must
needs be sent by the Turks, determining also to go himself to Carrach with his
Army, a place commodiously situated between Tauris and Sirvan, and there to
expect Sinan's remove, who, he doubted, to surmount Mustapha, would attempt
some great enterprise; but into Georgia, he sent such as had best experience of
those Countries, and were nearest unto him, with whom he sent Tocomach also;
and others, whose service he had before used, that they joining their forces
with Sinan, if the Enemy should bend to Tauris, they should follow him, that so
they might join together with him, and so encounter the Enemy: the forces that
these lead, were 10000 men, which with them of Georgia, made 13000, who
arriving at Genge, gave Simon knowledge of their coming, and that in his
behalf, they were ready to do great matters.

The Persian Ambassador, was honorably received at Constantinople, and
honorably entertained by the great Bassaes, but chiefly by Mustapha, who, two
days after, suddenly died, surfeiting of immoderate eating of Muskmillions,
and drinking of Zurbet, a pleasant drink, made of water and Sugar; but most,
thought he poisoned himself, as (...) new complaints of the (...) against him,
for suppressing Embassages in (...) (...), sent from the Persian King: (...)
his death, it was commonly reported, that if he had longer lived, he should
have been undoubtedly strangled; and i deed, his (...) of (...) was (...) (...)
into the Kings Treasure, only a sma l portion left to his Nephews, a most
certain token of Amurath s indignation.

Maxut, (...) audience, Aug. 7th, with (...) lively reasons, and (...) (...)
(...) the Turk to (...) (...) the War began, as (...) to the will and
pleasure of their Prophet Mahomet: as also to the Peace (...) and largely
concluded between Tamas and Soliman, not to have been broken, but upon some
great injury (...), which the Persians (...) never offered, but had declared by
an (...) sent by Sultan (...), that they had (...) wished him all happiness;
and though there was some (...), that Ismahel in his short Reign, would go to
Babylon, etc. yet he had received due punishment for that you (...) part and
abuse of his liberty, after long and straight imprisonment; but their present
King did above all others, embrace amity with him; and therefore did most
earnestly desire him to emper his anger, conceived against him so much his
friend, and of the same Religion.

Amurath, only (...) order, that he should communicate whatsoever he had to
say with his Vizier, who required all those Cities and Countries which the Turk
had (...) that time, conquered: or, whereon his Generals Horse (...) trod, to
be yielded again unto him, which the (...) had no warrant to do: whereupon, he
(...) to be evil (...), as suspected for a Spy, wherewith he was too plainly
charged by he Visier's Speech. And perceiving himself strained to grant these
demands, and receiving also some threatenings, he gave the Vizier good hope he
should persuade his King to yield up so much as Amurath did demand: hereupon,
he was in friendly manner, sent from Constantinople to Chars, where Sinan was
Commissioned speedily and faithfully to have the Ambassador conducted to Van,
thence into Persia, wheresoever he did desire. But Sinan the General, who from
Erzirum, was now come to Chars, dispatched thence the Ambassador, much
discontented that no other conclusion for peace could be wrought.

Maxut, arriving at Court, reported to the King, all that had happened in this
his Embassage, who for the present, was well satisfied with what he had done,
giving him in reward, the name of Chamberlain of Tauris: of which great Office,
he took small pleasure, for that Emir Chan, his ancient Enemy, was chief
Governor of that City: wherefore, leaving a Deputy to execute his Office,
himself withdrew to Cassanggith, a place of his own, till the King should
otherwise dispose of him; but Emir Chan certified the King, that Maxut had in
contempt of his rewards, abandoned Tauris, substituting a most base person, to
represent his Majesty, and manage his Treasure; and that he had no doubt,
withdrawn himself into the Confines of Turkey, either to yield himself to them,
or have intelligence with them, and was likely enough to be guilty to himself
of his great error, in promising so large conditions to the Turk, whereby as a
Traitor to his own King, he had obtained such a safe Convoy: wherefore it were
good to try his inclination, etc. whereupon, the suspicious King, commanded
Emir secretly to apprehend him, and bring him to Court; and if he could not by
other means then by torture, to wrest from him the truth of all: glad was Emir
hereof, but Maxut having some inckling, when 15 tall Fellows were sent to him
from Emir, in the Kings name, to summon him to Court, he in show, courteously
entertained them with great Cheer; but when sleep had overcome them, by reason
of excess, he had them straightly bound, and with long Cords, hanged down into
a deep Well, which he secretly covered: then withal his most precious things,
he fled with all his Family in the Evening, and was next day friendly
entertained by the Turkish Bassa at Salmas, so also at Van, whence he was sent
to Sinan, honorably accompanied, who very glad, sent him with all diligence to
Amurath.

Sinan, after eight days stay at Chars, went to Tomanis, there to build a
Fort, but he could not perform it for the immoderate Rain, which for eight
days space, continually fell, besides, he greatly feared, least the Enemy,
taking the opportunity of the rain, and building, suddenly should assault his
Army, and greatly endammage it; wherefore he removed thence, to carry succors
to Teflis, but as soon as he was past the straight, (...), Capta n of the
Janissaries of Damasco and Homar a Sanzack secretly hearing that a (...) out of
the way was good store of Corn and Cattle, with 2000 Soldiers went to (...) in
that (...). Now Simon and the Persians had divided their Soldiers into all
places, where there was any thing to allure the Turks to scatter from the Camp,
who suddenly fell upon these (...) Turks, being (...); so that of that 2000,
all were slain, except Ta-logli, who escaped.

Sinan coming to (...) in two (...), in reproach of Mustapha, who falsely had
informed Amurath, that Teflis was as great and (...), as Damasco called a
Council of his chief Captains, ordering every man to depose upon Oath, the
(...), touching the greatness thereof, then dividing the Treasure and suckers
brought amongst the Soldiers of the Fortress, he cheared (...) with good
words, and great promises, and (...) they greatly complained against their
Bassa, he caused a (...) to be framed against him, and (...) he had converted
pay to his own use, he condemned him to restitution, and placed Guisuf Beg a
Georgian, in his room, who for the ancient enmity between him and Simon, had
most welcomly yielded himself to the Turks.

Sinan departing thence, and passing the straight of Toman's, Mustafzad Bassa
declared unto him, that not far off, was great store of Corn and Cattle, and
none but a few Georgians to keep the same.

Sinan was well affected to this Mustafzad, but remembering what had happened to
Talzogli and Homar, he ordered 10000 Horsemen, and their Servants under
Mustafzad, to go forth, who being come to the desired place, and having almost
charged all their Horses and Mules, the hidden Persians suddenly issuing out,
with great slaughter put them to flight, pursued them with such fury, that they
slew 7000 of them, carrying away many prisoners, and the laden Beasts.
Mustafzad first fled, and first brought this unhappy news to Sinan, which
being forthwith confirmed by others that escaped, he dispatched away the Bassa
of Caramania, with a great power and charge to set upon the Enemy, following
him himself with his whole Camp; but the Persians had speedily withdrawn
themselves into their strong places, and disposing of their prey, were
returning to wait for some fresh occasion; but descrying the Turks whole Army,
upon the rising of the Hill, they retired again into the strength of the
Mountains; yet the Turks overtook some few of them, slaying about 50 or 60,
whose Heads they carried upon the points of their Spears, in sign of Triumph,
and took prisoners about 70 more.

Sinan having passed these dangerous places of Georgia, arrived at Triala,
where it was told him, that the Persian King in person, was coming from Tauris,
with an exceeding Army, to bid him battle: whereupon, he made Proclamation,
that every man should be ready for the voyage to Tauris, to go to meet with the
King; and the while, as is reported, he dispatched Posts to the said King, then
at Caracach, entreating him to send another Ambassador to Amurath for peace,
thinking thereby, as some guess, to remove the King from that his resolution,
if he had any such: then he descended into the plains of Cheilder, where
mustering his Army, he gave out, that before he would set forward, he would try
the readiness and nimbleness of his Soldiers, as if they were presently to
join battle; so next morning, ranging his whole Army in order of Battle, and
then sending out some few to show themselves upon the Hills, as if they had
been Enemies coming upon them, he caused such a medley of all things to be
made, as if it had been the turmoyl of a Battle indeed, then he sounded a
retreat; and setting his Army in order again, made the like show the second and
third time, which the Soldiers performed, but with great scorn and derision
deeming it rather Childrens play, then any commendation to him: neither did he
set forward toward Tauris, but loytered eight days in those plains; where
arrived from Persia, an Ambassador from the King, propounding diverse things to
Sinan, such as Maxut had done; but the conclusion was, that the King would be
content to relinquish Chars and Teflis, and so remain in amity with Amurath,
desiring Sinan to conclude a peace, if it might be.

Sinan promised to deal with Amurath, so the King would send another Ambassador
to Constantinople: upon which conclusion, he returned into Persia: after this,
when the rumor of the Kings coming, was found to be false, Sinan, instead of
going to Tauris, returned to Chars, where he stayed a whole month, the whole
Army marvelling, and murmuring to see themselves brought forth to their Kings
great charge, and disturbance of his Kingdom, not for any honorable (...).

Winter being come on, he came to Erzirum, presently dismissing every man: but
remained himself in the same City; whence by speedy Posts, he informed Amurath
of all that was by Mustapha misreported, and of all his own actions: also that
the enterprise of Persia was very hard, (...), and difficult; and that which
needed another manner of preparation, then had been as yet appointed for it:
sending several Messengers to solicit them for his return to Constantinople,
telling him, it was not possible to signify by writing, what he purposed
verbally to report to him for the better accomplishing thereof; but Sinan
abhorred this War, having his mind bent wholly against the Christians in
Europe, at last he solicited the matter so much, and so earnestly, that Amurath
was persuaded to send for him, as soon as ever he was certified of the Arrival
of the new Ambassador from Persia, who at length, came to Sinan, who gave
present inrelligence to Amurath, beseeching him again, to suffer him to come to
Constantinople, which he then granted. At his first coming to Amurath's
presence, the conditions were (...) down for reducing the capitulations of
peace with Persia, to a good end: after which, Ebraim Chan, Ambassador (being
now come) had audience: who with much glorious speech, labored to persuade
Amurath, that his King had a most ardent desire to be reconciled unto him, and
to join his forces with his, against the Enemies of Mahometisme, etc.

Amurath only answered, (...) should treat of all matters concerning the
peace, with his Vizier.

Amurath circumcising his eldest son Mahomet the nabout 16 years old, at
Constantinople, many Christian Princes were invited to the solemnity, who sent
thither their Ambassadors with great gifts and presents; beside the Ambassador
of Persia, and those of the Kings of Morocho, and Fez: this Circumcision was
for 40 days and 40 nights, with all triumph and joy solemnized in the great
Marketplace, where all the Ambassadors had their Scaffolds furnished according
to their degrees: only the Persian, whose Scaffold was several; but he not
regarded as the rest, rejoiced not at these Feasts and Tryumphs; for, besides
sundry storms done to the Persian Nation, as by hanging up Pictures of
Persians, made of Laths and sticks; and then burning them, and scornfully
abusing them. Amurath, for the great displeasure conceived for the harm done to
Osman, and the Turks in Sirvan, and for his disdain against Ebraim Chan, who
yielded no more to any conditions of peace, which he expected, then Maxut had
done before, commanded his Scaffold to be cast down, and himself and followers,
to be shut up close prisoners in the House of Mahomet Bassa, where, though a
thousand of his followers dyed of the Plague: yet he was there enforced to
tarry it out, till afterward he was ordered to be carried a prisoner to
Erzirum; to end these Solemnities, Mahomet was circumcised in his Fathers
Chamber by Mechmet, an inferior Bassa, sometime Soliman's Barber.

Whilst Sinan sat as great Vizier there, the Garrisons in Chars and Teflis,
kept in by the Enemy, were thought to be driven to great wants: wherefore Sinan
counseled Amurath, to send a new Garrison to Van, for safety of the Country
thereabouts; and then by some valiant Captain, to send Suckers to Teflis:
Amurath willed him, to think of some fit man, who propounded diverse, but none
pleased him; for he was resolved to bestow this charge upon Mahomet Bassa,
Nephew to Mustapha; and for his sake, hated of (...).

Him he sent to Erzirum, as Bassa of that Province, and as Genesis of the Army for
Teflis; commanding Hassal Bassa of Caraemit, Musta. the Georgian, all the
Sanzacks, the Curdy, and Soldiers of Erzirum, to follow (...) their General to
Teflis: whereupon, there assembled about 25000 Men, with all necessaries for
relief of that Garrison: he commanded also the Bassaes of Aleppo and Maaras, to
repair to Van with all their Soldiers, and there to abide till Winter, which
they did, not molested by any Enemy.

Mahamet departing from Erzirum, in the end of August, came in eight days to
Chars, thence to Archelech, where he found (...), otherwise Manucchiar, with
all his Soldiers, whom he joyfully honored with gifts, admonishing him to
continue in his obedience, and conduct him with his Army the shortest and
safest way to Teflis.

Mustapha resolved him, that the easiest, shortest, and, in his Opin on the
safest way was (...) his own Country; so (...) greatly pleased, resting wholly
upon his good airection, and having passed Mustapha his Country, abounding
with all sustenance they came to a friendly Castle, called Gory from whence
they discovered a great Army of (...), mingled with Persians, who were (...)
like Georgians, that the reaty of peace might not be disturbed, and their King
accounted unjust of his word: these seeing the Turk's Army and themselves also
to be discryed, sent them proud words of defiance; and so to offer them Battle,
the (...) was grieved herewith, but pursuing only to bring his Succors safe
to (...), he studied by all means, to shun the Battle: the great rain which
fell that evening, served him for a reasonable excuse of delay; but next day,
the Sun (...) bright, both Armies marched in sight of each other, till some
hours before night: at which time, the Turks arrived near a River, separating
both Armies.

Mahamet consulting with Mustapha, he advised him to stay on this side the
River, till next morning, lest the Enemy should annoy the (...), disordered in
passing the River; but he having a strong conceit, that there was some compact
between Mustapha and the Persians, and therefore he had persuaded him to come
that way, and not by Tomanis, commanded with all speed, his Soldiers to pass
the River, that before (...), he might encamp on the other side, in some good
place, to the derision of his Enemies: his Lieutenant first ventured over, and
after him the Carriages of Money and Corn, and then the whole Army, with such
speed, that some were drowned rather, being trodden down by the Beasts, than
either by the depth or (...) of the River: as soon as they were passed over,
the Georgians, in great have and fury assailed them, while they were yet out of
order, whereby the Turks, though they made some good resistance, yet the banks
of the River, were soon stained in many places, with Turkish blood, without any
apparent loss to the Enemies: a number of Sanzacks of the Curdi and
Mesopotanians fell; which the rest perceiving fled, and at last, the whole
Army, whom the Georgians pressed so soar in flight, that many took the River,
hardly escaping with their lives: the loss of the Kings money and Corn taken,
was greater then their shame and confusion, every man saving only so much for
himself, as he could secretly hide, or convey by the help of the swift Horses
of some trusty slave.

The Turks next morning, gathering themselves together, cursed the Heavens,
their King and adverse fortune: some also threatening Mustapha, as though all
this mischief happened through his treachery; yet when they found that they had
still so much money and other things left, as would comfort the afflicted
Soldiers besieged in the Fort, they journied so speedily toward Teflis: that
next day in the Evening, they arrived there; but when they of the Fort, saw
their long expected friends in such a bad condition, they were astonished, and
wonderfully grieved, confusedly protesting to Mahomet, they would abandon the
place, if necessary provision were not forthwith made for them; but he,
mitigating them with large promises, called a Council in the morning, of his
chief men into the Castle, where he made an Oration unto them, that since such
sad disasters had befallen them, who would needs pass over the River, and join
battle with their Enemies, he advised them every one, to put his hand into his
private purse, and with their own money to succor the necessity of those men,
as regarding the honor of their King, so said he, shall we make our flight
less blameworthy, justify our actions more honestly, and which is of
greatest importance, better to pacify the wrath of Amurath, which he might
most justly conceive against us, saying, I my self am most ready to disburst
4000 Ducats toward it, if you all shall please to follow me accordingly:
hereupon, one whi pered many a curse and shame upon the King, upon Mahomet;
yea, and upon God himself: another denied to disburst any thing, another
determined to steal away; some saying one thing, some another; but in the end,
30000 Ducats were collected amongst them, and word sent to Levent Ogli, at
Zaghen, to lend thither necessary Victuals, for the better continuance of the
defense of the Fort.

Mahomet stayed but two days in Teflis, where changing some Soldiers, and
appointing Homar Bassa the Governor, instead of Giusuf, before his departure,
they consulted which way to keep, and in the end, resolved upon the way of
Tomanis; whereupon, they were all ordered to pass the River, the Curdi first
went over, and had pitched their Tents on the further side, when the General
sent them word to return, because he would go back the same way he came: the
Sanzacks in a rage, answered, these mutabilities were rather Childrens play,
then manly resolution, and that they were not minded to change their Journey;
so setting forward, they arrived at Chars, long before Mahomet, who was much
grieved at this their disobedience. Mahomet arriving at Altun Chala, the chief
Castle of Mustapha, in desire of revenge of those losses, which he thought he
had received by his treachery, or as some thought, thereby to make Amurath
believe, that all those mischiefs had happened through all his malicious devices,
and not through their cowardice, devised a plot, how to take him suddenly away,
as guilty of so foul a Treason: he called a Counsel into his own Pavillion, as
if he had received some command from Court, with whom sat the Bassa of (...),
some Sanzacks belonging to Erzirum, the chief Gentleman Usher, and his own
Lieutenant, having taken of them an Oath for secrecy of his deceit. Mustapha
was also called, who having heard some privy (...) of such a matter, yet
thought he might not deny to go to the Counsel, least he might seem guilty of
the fault, whereof perhaps not without cause he was suspected, wherefore
choosing out 50 of his most faithful and resolute Soldiers, commanding them to
follow him to the Generals Pavillion, and there to stay attentive, and at his
first call, to rush into the Pavillion, and rather then any wrong should be
done him, to show their valor against any Turk whatsoever: these 50 taking
some others also of their trusty friends followed Mustapha accordingly, who
entering into the place of Counsel, desired of Mahomet, to know his pleasure,
who caused the counterfit Command to be read, Mustapha giving an attentive
ear; but when the rest began to sit down (...) to the Turks manner, who use
always to stand up, till any Command from the Emperor be fully read, the
Georgian took his leave, promising to be ever ready to perform whatsoever the
King should command; and so being about to depart, the great Usher, plucking
him by the sleeve, would have forced him to have sit down: indeed that the
Lieutenant, with those of Mahamets chief band that stood about him, might cut
off his head. Mustapha crying out, with his Sword (having wrought the Role from
his pate with his left hand) at one blow, cleft the (...) head down to his very
stomach, to the great astonishment of all there present: then (...) at the head
of he (...) of Charemit, it being defended with the roles of the Turbant, the
stroke slipped down by his care, which it carried quite away with a piece of the
(...), and a piece of the flesh of his cheek: eagerly assailing Mahomet
himself, whom, risen up in the (...), he wounded with five mortal wounds,
which yet were afterward cunningly healed, when they had brought him even to
deaths door, upon the rushing in of the Georgians, and the fear that Mustapha
had struck into the Turks, every man speedily departed toward Chars, whither
also was brought the two wounded Bassaes, and the rest that were ill handled,
and greatly scared.

Of all this treachery, Mustapha sent present word to Amurath, as much grieved
at the false suspicion conceived (...) him, and so wrought, that (...) sent him
both Cloth of Gold, and a Battle-Axe, all guilt. Mahamet on the other side,
wrote at large of all his misfortunes, and aggravated to the King both the
treachery of Mustapha, and the slender security of those ways and Countries.
When Amurath understood of these calamities and losses, and the apparent danger
of the Fort of Teflis, then like to be abandoned, he in a rage rated
exceedingly the Bassaes of his Court, reproving their lewd Counsel, and
recounting his losses from time to time, as if through their defaults;
especially of Sinan, who like an improvident fool, he said, would needs leave
his Army, and like a King sit idle at Constantinople, etc. who when Mustapha
was General, most vainly boasted with the like power, to fetch the Persian King
out of Casbin, in bonds to Amurath, but had indeed performed nothing worth
remembrance. Sinan peremptorily answered, that seeing he would needs make
choice of Mahamet Bassa, an unfit man to convey this year's Succors to Teflis,
he was to blame none but himself. As for his coming to Constantinople, it was
long before thought most needful, both that the matter of peace might come to
some good pass, and if not then he had to talk with him, how to compass his
Enemies overthrow, which yet he had no fit time to declare, but was now ready
to reveal, if it were his pleasure.

Amurath was wonderfully grieved with so arrogant a reproof from a slave of his
own, yet he disembled his coffeehouse against him, commanding him to
disclose those his devices: who propounded (...), not to proceed in this War,
as they had done with (...), to hold the Enemies Countries; their Treasures
(...) not able to maintain so many and great Garrisons. (...), for Amurath to
go in person himself, and so aganst so mighty a King, by opposing the person of
a King the Persians would easily come to an agreement; or if ot, he might then
proceed in his Wars, and obtain (...) glorious Conquest: the effeminate King
now concived an envious affection against him, and a further (...) fostered by
great Ladies, especially his Mother, (...) Sinan had counseled him to go in
person, only (...) means for the Prince his Son, to make him (...).

Sinan and the Prince, carrying great (...) toward each other: wherefore,
depriving him ofall charge, he presently banished him to Demotica of (...),
whence he, by most humble supplication, obtained terward to be removed to
Marmara.

Siaus Bassa, who married Amurath's (...), being preferred to the Visiership, a
personable and (...) Hungarian, but the greatest seller of Justice (...)
preferments, yet a great friend to peace with the Chrians, which Sinan had
always maligned.

The Persian Captains the while, (...) spoils, and Enemies Ensigns, were with
great joy reived in Persia, which was redoubled, when the (...) betwixt Mahomet
and Mustapha was reported, wereby every one thought the next years dangerous
attents of the Turks into Persia, which were feared, migl be hindered:
whereupon, the Persian King determid to march toward Heri, against Abas Meriz,
hisonne then with him in disgrace, being earnestly solicid thereto by his elder
Son, especially by Salmas his Vizier; so committing his defense of that side
of his Kingdom to Emer Chan, Governor of Tauris, Himself with his Army,
arrived at length at Salvar: which principal City, he taking by force, beheaded
the Governor thereof, though he alleged a thousand excuses, and objected as
many accusations against seditious Salmas; and having put to death some great
ones, accused by the Vizier, as confederates in his Sons rebellion, he
arrived at last at the City of Heri, very strong by situation, a good Wall, and
deep Channels of water, conveyed into it by Tamerlain: there was also therein
many valiant Captains, Enemies to Miriz Salmas.

The King approaching the City, left in himself many troubled passions,
grieving to think he should beget so graceless a Son, and to remember the
blood of his Subjects, spilt upon so strange an occasion; yet being more and
more solicited by Salmas, he attempted to understand the mind of his Son, and
if possible, to get him into his hands; but Abas in the mean time, wrote diverse
Letters to his Father and Brother, beseeching them to make known unto him, the
occasion of this their stir, for if desire of rule had moved them to seek his
deprivation, he was always ready to spend and be spent in their service,
acknowledging his Father to be his good Father and King; but if they were
induced hereto for revenging some trespasses committed by him against the Crown
of Persia, he was most ready to submit to any amends, and yield up all, the
more fully to satisfy their minds: with twice and thrice reading over, were
these affectionate Letters considered, and at last, both Father and Brother
determined to attempt the reducing the young man's mind to some good pass;
whereupon, they wrote back (...) him, that his causing himself to be called
King of Persia, and the not sending them so much as one Captain to aid them
against the Turks, had only induced them hereunto.

Abas, glad when he understood his accusations, wrote back unto them, if they
would faithfully promise safely to receive his Ambassadors, he would send them
so clear information, touching those accusations, that they should clearly
perceive he had always desired and labored the contrary, and would open to
them such matter as in respect of other men, might cause their coming to prove
profitable to all Persia: which request, they solemnly promised to perform,
being very desirous to know what those strange novelties should be; whereupon,
Abas sent unto them two of his chief Counselors with full instructions, who
after many speeches, swore by the Creator of all things, by the head of Hali,
and by the Religion of Mahomet, that such perverse thoughts never entered into
Abas Miriz, alleging many manifest proofs, that when the King was advanced to
the Kingdom, and in his battles against the Turks, his Son had always caused
devout prayers to be made for his prosperity, and never desiring to hear but of
his happy success, they brought with them abundance of precepts and loyal
Letters from Abas to the Governors his Subjects, for Government of the State,
never naming himself King of Persia, but only your King and Governor of Heri,
they prayed the King also, if there should be found any shadow of such a
suspicion in his Son, upon a diligent process framed against them, to take
from him his Estate and liberty, offering themselves as his Hostages; but if
Abas should be found free from these accusations, then (...) the Earth, they
besought him to take information upon what mind his Counselor had advised him
to undertake so dangerous a voyage, etc.

And as for Abas his forbidding the Governors to go to Wars against the
Turks, that was only in respect of an invasion, justly feared in those
quarters, by the Tartarian Gesselbas, who by diverse inroads, had already done
great harms thereabouts: all which, was by writing signified unto the Vizier
himself, which he maliciously concealed to try if he could bring to pass that
Abas, and the King might be taken away in those troubles, whom Emer Hamsey
succeeding, himself might remain the superintendant of his Son in Law, etc.
which they imputed not to the Prince, altogether ignorant of such a purpose,
but only to the ambition of the wicked Traitor Miriz Salmas: the King by
nature credulous, made great construction of these grave Speeches, and could
not choose but harken unto their so earnest and upright requests: wherefore,
calling unto him, all the chief Officers of all the Cities of Heri, he demanded
of them, how they esteemed of Amas, and in what degree he desired to be
esteemed of them: who all answered, they held him, and he desired to be taken
for, their Lord and Lieutenant to the King of Casben, bringing forth diverse
papers, wherein he entitled himself only. Your King of Heri; and demanding of
them, whether those Tartars had attempted any such Wars, they largely
informed him they had, to the great damage of all those Territories, though he
might justly now have put Salmas to death, as the Author of so great troubles
and bloodshed: yet, for better information sake, he first of all in great
secrecy, examined the Prince why he had advised this Journey against his
guilty Bro: Abas, who answered, only from the credit he always gave to his
Father in Law Miriz Salmas, as to a chief Counselor, etc. touching whom, the
King diligently inquiring both of Courtiers and Army-men, found him guilty of
all that the Ambassadors of Heri had accused him; for which so foul a Treason
the false VIZIER by the Kings command, had his Head struck off; so the 2
Brethren being reconciled, and the Son to the Father, after Abas had again
promised Obedience, which he most dutifully performed; the King returned
toward Casbin, where, by reason of the Turks unexpected motion, he had bin
long looked for.

Amurath, through the rough speeches of Sinan was more and more settled in his
purpose for continuance of the Persian War; Wherefore, he resolved at last to
make choice of Ferat Bassa, for his general; fierce in courage; tough in
opinion, hardy in Counsel, but especially devoted to the King: Who, calling him
apart, encouraged him to take the charge upon him, with a firm resolution to
perform all things answerable thereunto, with the Opinion he had of his valor.
Ferat promised to do his utmost, to execute whatever should be offered him,
either by occasion, or his real command. Amurath at first only intended to
employ him in assuring the passage to Teflis, and so into all Georgia, and to
have destroyed Mustaffa his Country, who had put his whole Army into confusion:
but hearing of the troubles between the Persian King and his Son, he commanded
Ferat to erect a Fort at Reivan belonging to Tochmac, and to assure the passage
from Chars thither, so should they be revenged of many harms received by him,
and lay open the way to Tauris, he willed Ferat to dissemble his ill Opinion of
Mustaffa, and if possible to make use of him for convoying succors to Teflis,
whereby all Georgia would be won without any more Fortresses: and next year
they might attempt the enterprise for Tauris; In the beginning of the year,
1583. all Cities that used to appear at these Wars, were commanded upon
Summons, to be ready to execute their new General's Injunctions: all which sent
their Captains and Soldiers accordingly. So Ferat coming to Erzirum viewed all
his Army and provision; thence arriving at Chars, conducted by Maxut-chan, he
set forwards Reivan but 3 days before he came thither, he erected a Fortress
of some ruins of an old Castle, leaving in it 400 Soldiers with a Zanzack and
some Ordnance: Between Reivan and Tauris 8 or 9 days journey distant. are
Stannasivan, Chiulfal, Maraut and Sosian, having goodly Gardens and Greens: but
in the way are many craggy Mountains and sundry hard passages. Here Ferat
consulted with his chief Captains where to build the Fort, who advised him to
fortify the Houses and Gardens of Tochomac, which he did; and enclosed the
Gardens with strong Walls and deep Ditches, whereinto he conveyed water from a
certain River. This Fortress was finished in 15 days, being 750 yards about.
Tochomac, exceedingly grieved, so suddenly to lose his Country and dwelling,
sought at least in some part to be revenged of so great an injury: Wherefore,
he wrote to King Emerchan, and Simon gathering Soldiers out of the Villages,
but he could receive no help: the King being so far against his son; the
Georgian being bufied by hindering the relief of Teflis; and Emer-chan either
would not, or could not stir from Tauris, having as some supposed secret
intelligence with Ferat, not to disturb him in this work. So Tochomac not able
of himself to do much: yet by privy Ambushes, killed sometimes a 100, sometimes
150 Turks, and sometimes more, and dispatched Horsemen in haste to the King at
Chorazan, amplifying by Letters, the cowardice of Emer-chan, with some causes
of suspicion, that he had some Intelligence with Ferat: who, having built this
new Fort, and furnished it with all necessaries, appointed Sinan Bassa, son of
a Runagate Genuan with 8000 Soldiers to keep the same; and so departing, he
arrived in 10 days at Chars: where, he had not long stayed, but news was
brought, that Mustapha, to whom Amurath had sent 30000 Ducats by 2 Capigi, and
2 Chiaus, for him to convey to Teflis, was revolted from the Turkish Obedience:
having left that Fortress in manifold danger to yield. Ferat, exceedingly
troubled to know the certainty, called for all the Messengers of this
misfortune: who certainly informing him, that Mustapha with the Capigi and
Chiaus, being upon their way with the Treasure, guarded with 500 of his
Soldiers, met with his Cousin Simon, who persuaded him to return to his
ancient Religion, which to the great peril of his soul he had abandoned, and
to shake off Amuraths service, which would yield him but some infamous
Captivity, and in the end some fraudulent death. So that Mustapha had beheaded
Amuraths Messengers? and dividing the Treasure with Simon, had vowed a
perpetual Confederacy, laying in wait for succors brought to Teflis.

Ferat, in a fury swear, that he would not return to Erzirum, till he had put
all Mustapha's Country to fire and sword: yet first he thought it (...) to
relieve Teflis; Wherefore, he assigned to Hassan Bassa 40000 Ducats with other
provision, appointing him 15000 of his most choice Soldiers to conduct the
same: who went and came from Teflis in 10 days, losing but some few men in his
many skirmishes with the Georgians. After this, he sent Resvan Bassa with 6000
Soldiers to spoil the (...) of the Rebel Mustapha; who overrun all his
Territories, burnt his Towns, and committed most uncouth outrages, which
extended to the very Trees, and carried away much corn and Cattle, and so came
to Ardacan to the General; but Winter approaching, they retired to Erzirum,
whence all the Soldiers were licensed to depart, and a memorial sent to
Amurath of all actions: especially, of Hassans good service, for which he again
Honored him with cloth of Gold, a Battel-Axe, and guilt Target.

About this time, Amurath in revenge of an outrage by the Cossacks against the
Turks, whereof he had then news, stayed 4 Podolovians: a Pelonian in his
return home, sent by his King to buy certain Horses in Anatolia, with the Great
Turks leave and pass; all his men 34 in number being slain, except one boy who
escaped into a Wood, himself being beheaded: the 24 goodly Horses, he bestowed
some into his own Stable, the rest among the Bassaes, who pointed at them with
fingers in derision of the Polonian King. November. 29 of this year died Itama
Chadum the mother of Amurath, who lays buried by her Husband Selimus, and his
5 Sons strangled by Amurath.

Ferat from Erzirum summoned the Soldiers of all the accustomed Cities against
next Spring, 1584. collecting more Pioneers and Engineers then ever had bin in
these Wars before: and gave it out that he would do great matters at Nasivan:
whereat, the Persians cast many things in their heads, but especially the King,
who began to fear they would this year pass to Tauris, or at least to Nasivan,
and build new Fortresses to the great danger of the Persian Empire; Wherefore,
retaining his Forces brought from Heri, and commanding as many more as he could
to follow him to Tauris; his coming thither with so great an Army, made the
world expect great matters would be done by him against the Turks: so that
Ferat advertised Amurath, that his desire was to go to Nasivan and build
Fortresses there, but the Persian King being come to Tauris with a huge Army,
and resolved to encounter him, he thought it his duty not so to do without his
express command. Amurath wrote back he should not go to Nasivan, but assure the
passage to Tomanis and Lori: that so the Fort of Teflis might next year be
relieved by some small Band.

Ferat kept this secret to himself, increasing the rumor of his going to
Nasivan more and more, that so deluding the Persians, he might with less danger
build the Forts intended for assuring those passages: upon which resolution he
removed with his Army from Erzirum toward Chars, where he stayed ten days, to
take a new survey of his Soldiers and provision. So setting forward toward
Lori, he sent Hafsan before him with 5000 Light-Horsmen to scour the Country,
and learn what he could of the Enemie's purposes and the state of Georgia:
which Hassan did, even to Tamanis, without meeting with any more then certain
Robbers upon the Highway, whom he slew, setting their Heads on the tops of
their Lances, and so returned, recounting all that had happened in his
excursion, Ferat encamping at Lori, which sometime belonged to Simon, seized
upon the High Castle, there enclosed with very deep Ditches and a thick Wall,
almost a mile about: which he repairing, placed thereon Ali Bassa of Greece
with 7000 Soldiers, and 200 small pieces of Ordnance, and so departed toward
Tomanis: commanding Ali at some fit time to fortify the Castle Saitan about
ten miles off, with a convenient Garrison and Artillery. The General made 4
days work of going from Lori to Tomanis, being ordinarily but one, to take the
spoil of those rich Fields of Corn, Cattle, and Fruit. At Tomanis was a Castle
of Simons, but now by him abandoned: after many discourses where to erect their
Fortress, they concluded not to fortify in that Castle, as being too far from
the Strait, but to fortify upon the very mouth of the Strait. So marching
forward at the very entrance of the narrow-passage, they found the ruins of
another steep Castle, so compassed round with a thick Wood, that their Ordnance
could not avail them, to whom the defense thereof should be committed:
Wherefore, Ferat commanded every man to lay his hand to cut down that Wood, the
receptacle of a 1000 dangerous Treacheries which was done in a very short
space: the plot of the old Castle was encompassed with a Wall of 17000 yards:
in the midst whereof was erected strong Lodgings and Chambers, and 200 pieces
of Ordnance distributed upon the Walls.

Then Ferat sent Resvan and the Bassa Charaemit with 20000 choice Soldiers
with succors to Teflis: who, in one day arriving at the Fort with their
supplies, substituted one Bagli in the Governors room. Whilst Resvan lay at
Teflis, Daut-chan Simon's Brother, who, at the coming of Mustapha had fled out
of Teflis, came with all his Family, offering himself a Subject and Vassal to
Amurath, whom Resvan entertained with great promises and large assurances.

Simon, (...) news that Ferat had sent Resvan with a far less number to Teflis
then indeed he had, without delay, with but 4000, partly of his own, and partly
of Manucchiars subjects went against him; but the while, Ferat fearing the
worst, had dispatched away 2 Bassaes with 10000 Soldiers, at all adventures to
make Resvan the stronger.

Simon found Resvan encamped with 6000 at the foot of a Hill, the rest of his
Army laying behind it. And charging upon him, those behind the Hill were ready
also to receive him, who now repented himself of his rash assault, but since he
could not but increase his grief by flight, he with the strange and unusual
valor of so few Christians, joined a most cruel battle with that great Army:
yet the Turks with a huge number of swords and spears so prevailed upon them,
that they were brought to a great extremity, yea, Simon himself having his
Horse slain, fell to the ground and was very nigh bein graken prisoner with his
Lieutenant, and many others: but, while the battle was even at the greatest
heat, Resvan discovering the 2 Bassaes with the 10000 sent by Ferat, thought
them, as did his Army, to be Persians: whereby, being surprised with fear, they
became now very doubtful of the Victory; so that the battle was also
intermitted, and the Georgians, especially Simon, had the opportunity to
escape, leaving behind them most sure signs of their valor among the Turks:
but when Resvan discovered the Bassaes, to be his friends, he fretted
exceedingly at Simons escape; yet he went to Tomanis in great triumph, drawing
Simons Standards on the ground, and carrying many of the Georgians Heads upon
Lances, to the great Joy of Ferat: to whom he delivered all the prisoners
taken, and Daut-chan, who of a Christian was first become a Persian, and now
disploding their superstition, had yielded to the Turks vanity, and made
himself a slave to Amurath.

Every man fearing Winters approach, the General determined to draw into
places of more safety: So appointing Hassan Bassa of Tomanis with 8000 select
Soldiers, he resolved not to return to Chars or Erzirum till first passing
into Manucchiers Country, he had most cruelly revenged those notable injuries
received from him; and arriving at Triala in 3 days, such a death and scarcity
of all things arose, chiefly of Victuals; that 5 Bushels and a half of Wheat
was sold for 500 Ducats.

While Ferat was raising his Tents to go on toward the Country of Manucchier,
Veis Bassa of Aleppo told him, 'twas not good now to spend time in wandering
about those Countries, both for the season of the year, now full of Snows,
Frosts and Tempests: the want and scarcity of all necessaries, and the
Georgians, who by a common uniting, and perhaps aided by the Persians, might
notably mischief the Army. Ferat was so offended herewith, that he bitterly
reproved Veis: telling him, He well perceived he was brought up among Villages,
and of a Villain, upon some superfluity of grace or foolish importunity,
advanced to be a Bassa: Wherefore, he should not have presumed even to think it
lawful for him so impudently and malepartly to advertise him but rather to
have held his peace, and hearkened to the command of his Superiors, etc. So he
passed to Archelech, burning and destroying the Country before him, though it
was confederate with the Turks, but those of Archelech had for fear abandoned
the Cityand withdrawn into the Mountains.

Ferat staying here 4 days among the rocky Brags, and in a barren soil for man
and beast: the Soldiers for those 4 days space endured patiently unspeakable
miseries, but a huge snow falling, so greatly increased their griefs, that all
the Janissaries and Spaoglans of Constantinople arose in a tumult, and in
despightful and contemptuous manner, very haughtily and resolutely asked him,
Where was his due pity, which he a rustical and unreasonable Captain, ought to
bear toward the Vassals of his Sovereign: twitting him with his fat harlots,
delicate Viands, Sugars, spices and Conserves, Meat and precious Wines mixed
with pleasant Water provided for him by Doyters, and also brought him from far,
whilst others lived in misery: saying, It would be no longer endured, etc.
Wherefore, he should return toward Erzirum, or they should be forced to do
that which would breed him more displeasure then any man alive; He in a great
agony calling a Council, They concluded, to send their strong Sumpter Horses to
Ardachan, and the rest to follow him into Manucchers Country only to take the
spoil and booty thereof, to refresh his afflicted Soldiers: This they readily
obeyed because he promised them a speedy voyage, and desired the sacking of
Altonchara, and other of Manucchiers Territories: So holding on his way with
great Famine and scarcity, he came to Clissa belonging to Manucchier; whose
Inhabitants with Wives and Children, and all their best stuff were fled into
remote and safe places in the adjacent fields of Corn, Cattle, and Fruit: he
refreshed his whole Army, determining to erect a Fort in that place, and
commanded Resvan, to set up an Ensign on the top of the Tower with
Proclamation: That he would in Amuraths name, there erect and fortify a Fort
as he had in other places. Resvan, with the Bassa of Caramania, set up an
Ensign or two; which being (...); those Janissaries and Spaoglans thinking
themselves too much abused, ran up in a rage to take down the Ensigns: and
taking them in their hands, rapt Resvan once or twice on the pate, sharply
rebuking him with a 1000 injurious and despightfull words, and returning to
Ferat, now come thither to continue the action, with despightful and
disdainful gestures, with many shameful terms, they protested unto him, They
were not come to the Wars to exercise the occupations of Masons and Dawbers,
etc. Wherefore, if he loved his Head, he should resolve to leave the new
Buildings and Designments, and to have due care of their common desires and
necessities: One more bold then the rest, did not stick to assault him, and
threaten to wreak his fury upon him, which happily had bin done, had not the
Bassa of Caramania, with his own Horse conducted him to his Pavillion; yet they
still pursued him, and sharply accused him for his stay: then, after many
reproachful speeches, expressly told him, if next morning he removed not out of
those quarters, he should without fail lose his life for it. Yet Ferat
disdaining to yield to them, and seeking by all means to stay long enough to
build a Fort that would so much offend Manucchier, answered them, He accounted
not of their threatening of him, of his life, which he always offered to lay
down for any security of his King; but if they cared not to serve him in this
new-building, they might go: but he was resolved to obey his Lord in whatsoever
he commanded, for whose Honor, they all ought to think their lives very well
bestowed. Upon this answer were diverse railings, and cursings against the King,
the General, and them all: every man betaking themselves to their Weapons;
wrathful whisperings and grumblings in every corner; a great fear of some
dangerous event, but greater suspicion of the Generals life; every man had
withdrawn to the guarding of those things he most esteemed; and in a trice all
the Pavillions fell down to the ground, all the coards thereof being cut in
funder by the wrathful Soldiers: by whom also all the Cattle for the General
and Bassaes ordinary use, were seized on and guarded with all diligence: and
turning afresh upon Ferat, now in a maze and deadly fear, they threatened him,
if he did not forthwith remove toward Erzirum, those Valleys should without
fail become the Sepulchers of the Bassaes, etc. The General being loath to
gratify them with any liberality, was forced to his great shame to obey them,
whom with right usage he might have made Obedient: Wherefore, removing, he
arrived at Medachan with the great trouble of his Soldiers, for he would make
but one days journey of 2 days ordinary work, the rather to grieve them: but
he received the just reward of his wilfulness; for that day, the Charriots
wherein his Women rode, with the Eunuchs, their keepers, were conveyed away:
some say by the Georgians, who lay in wait: Others, by the Janissaries, the more
to dishonor their General. Who, was far more reproached at Constantinople
with these news then in the Army: but he must perforce, now discontented as he
was, keep on his way toward Erzirum. In Ardican, surveying his Army; he gave
them leave to depart, and arrived himself at Erzirum; hated of his Soldiers,
envied by his Captains, derided for the loss of his Women, and in disgrace with
every man: and no less was Amurath discontented with him also in that he did
nothing worth the speaking of, in the revenge of the injury done by Manucchier,
and yet so mightily discontented his Soldiers, and had suffered Aliculi-(...)
to escape, about whose flight '(...) thought, he must needs have some
Intelligence: for when he diverted his journey from Nasivan to the Straits of
Georgia, he took Aliculi out of prison, to use him as his Guide in those
dangerous ways: carrying him under a guard, and entreating him well, at last,
being come to the aforesaid Castle of (...): some say, Ferat to perform his
promise for his good direction, gave him his liberty: Others, that Ferat for
money gave him opportunity to escape; but others more probably, that he started
away into Persia in the night by his own vigilance, and the sleepiness of his
Keepers. Ferat by commanding Ali Bassa, left at Lori to fortify Saitan-chas,
or the Castle of the Devil, which he diligently performed, leaving 50 pieces of
Ordnance and a 1000 Soldiers under a Zanzack therein, caused all the ways
from Rivan to Chars, and from thence to Teflis to be made safe; no small piece
of good service.

In the mean time, the Persian King laying at Tauris, and hearing that the
Turks had changed their purpose from Nasivan to Georgia, licensed his Soldiers
to depart, and applied himself to more private revenges: for he required of
Emer-chan, why he had not endeavored to hinder the Turks Fabric at Reivan? and
why he went not out with other Soldiers, and namely those of Turkoma, as he
had promised, to revenge what he could, so great an injury. Emer alleged
sundry excuses for himself, but none sufficient to clear him of the Crimes
objected: Wherefore, the King adjudging him, to have his Eyes burnt out with a
hot Iron, and to be dispoyled of all his goods and shut up in close prison, in
a few months space he miserably died thereof; yet a famous Soldier: who being
in great esteem with the Turkoman Nation, he absolutely denied their defenses
for the Crown of Persia, and the more, when they heard the King had bestowed
Emers place upon Aliculi, who being an ancient Enemy to some of their Captains,
though he was very deserving, would in no case endure he should be so exalted.
Hereby the Persian forces became more weakened and divided.

For all the League between Amurath and the Christian Emperor, the Turks made
often incursions into the upper part of Hungary, burning the Villages and
carrying the people captive, but in their return were often cut off by the
Emperors Soldiers, which report much moved the Turk, but understanding that
his men had cauflesly made those inroads, he was appeased, and in the beginning
of this Year, 1584, renewed the League between him and the Emperor for 8
years more.

Ferat advertised Amurath of all that happened in his late Expedition, defiring
him to command what he would have taken in hand the next Spring; but many
others also informed him, and that in an odious sort of the particulars, of all
such actions as had not altogether so honorably bin performed by him that year,
and with his falling out with Vies Bassa, a man well regarded of Amurath
himself; with the disorder of his whole Camp for want of discretion. Amurath
also ever since the last departure of Ferat from Erzirum, had thoughts the next
year to attempt the enterprise of Tauris, to stir up through the world a famous
report; bethinking himself of Osman Bassa, to whom he might commit so great a
trust, who, having remained at Sumachia in Sirvan, since the first year of this
War, had without any help of the Tartars, brought that large Country into a
reasonable Obedience, and at so far a distance maintained his Army without any
expenses to his King; having levied a good while his Soldiers stipends upon
that Region: still exercising a kind of Sovereignty over it, of all which he
had from time to time sent intelligence to the Court: Where, by help of other
favorers which he had about the King, he had a wondrous good Opinion of him:
wherefore, he had dispatched some Chapigi and Chiaous to call this famous
Warrior unto him: yet some, and those not of the meanest sort, went about to
hinder his coming to Court; and also these important designs; for (...) the
chief Vizier greatly feared, lest Osman, whose course it was to sit next him in
the Order of the greatest (...), should persuade the King to what he listed,
and so perhaps take from him the chiefest Office, whereby so great wealth was
to be gained; wherefore, in consideration of many gifts bestowed on him by
Mahomet the Cuman Tartar King; he having many times excused him to Amurath, of
diverse accusations laid to his charge by Osman for not aiding him in subduing
of Sirvan, according to his promise and duty; and having so far proceeded in
countenancing this Tartarian, that there was confirmed between Amurath and him
a mutual (...) and confederation; he imagined to find him ready by all means
to hinder Osman his coming to Court, if he were but made acquainted with the
matter: so he secretly wrote to the Tartar, who lay encamped upon the Fens of
(...), that Osman was to come to Court: wherefore, it were good for him to call
to mind, how much he had (...) by Letters to turn all Amuraths displeasure
against him. And, if he could do so much by Letters, as, if he had not excused
him, the King had executed his wrathful displeasure against him: he should
then imagine what Osman could do when he came in person to Amurath, etc. These
and perhaps worse Letters, caused the Tartar to send 12000 Soldiers: who,
changing their Weapons and Apparel, should lie in wait for Osman in the
Borders between Colehis and Iberia, by which way he was to come, and so
assaulting him to bereave him of his life: hoping such an outrage could or
would be rather imputed to the Tartar Nomades, Melgrellians, etc. or to any
body then to himself.

Amuraths Messengers coming to Osman, he presently set forward toward
Constantinople: having first taken a very good Order in Derbent and Sumachia,
and an assured establishment of all places which Mustapha had subdued in
Sirvan, and himself maintained; he chose out also 4000 tried Soldiers, through
whose Valor he doubted not, but to pass through the treacheries of the
Albanians: and the (...) squadrons of the Tartarians and Mengrellians.

Thus coasting along, even at his first entrance unto the shoares of the
Euxine-sea; he was by the said twelve thousand Tartars, apparrelled like
Thieves, suddenly assailed, who stood so fast and firm, turning the bold
countenances of his resolute Soldiers against them (who, at first as their
manner is, used great force) that they began at last to quail; Whereupon, Osman
courageously forcing upon them, very soon, and with a very small loss put them
to flight, killing a number of them: and taking many, by whom he was informed
of their Kings treachery; whereof, Osman (...) a perfect process to be made,
with the dispositions of the prisoners, which he sent the shortest way he could
to Amurath; declaring all that had passed, enflaming him to revenge so
dangerous an injury: Who, took order that Uluzales his Admiral, with some
Galleys should fetch Osman, and carry with him Island a Brother of the Tartar
Kings; commanding Osman, to the terror of others, to put the treacherous King
to death and put his Brother in his room.

This Mahomet was one of those mighty Princes, who led a most violent
troublesome life, as Tributaries and Vassals, under the Othomans power; whose
younger Brother Island became a Suitor to The Turk at Constantinople, to be
placed in his Brothers Kingdom, who was for his ill Government hated of his
Subjects: which his suit was so crossed by the Kings Ambassadors, who spared
for no cost, that the ambitious youth was sent to Iconium, and clapped fast up in
prison: where, apparrelled like a Hermit, he led his life altogether
conformable to his misery: but whilst he thus lived separated from all worldly
cogitations, he was now in post-haste sent for to Constantinople to the end
aforesaid.

Now, in the mean time, Osman had cunningly got into his hand, this
Tartar-King, reported to be betrayed by his own Counselors, corrupted by
Gold; whom, with his two Sons, Amurath caused to be presently strangled with
a Bow-string, and Island to be saluted King, yet as Vassal to Amurath.

This was thought justly to have happened to this Tartar-King: who, not long
before, supported by Amurath, had most unnaturally (...) his most aged Father.

Osman, embarquing himself at a Port of Caffa, arrived at Constantinople:
where, he was received with great pomp, and singular signification of love; but
with most express kinds of Joy was he received by Amurath himself. When he had
declared unto him the particularity of matters that happened in his long and
important Voyage, and his Conquests in Sirvan; afterward he conferred with
Osman about the enterprise of Tauris, and in the end, would needs know of him
what issue he could promise him of this his desire; and how by his advise, the
Forces should be employed and disposed for subduing that City, which was so
famous, and so great an honor to the Persian Kingdom? Who answered, that since
the matters of Georgia were now well settled, and Sirvan under his Obedience
established, there was no cause why he should longer fore-slow so famous an
enterprise; but by erecting a Fort in that proud City, to bring a terror upon
all Persia, and raise a glorious Renown of so mighty a Conquest among the
Nations of Europe: thinking either the same Army, or a very little greater, so
it were of the best Soldiers, would suffice to do it, by reason of one of the
Letters which Sciaous wrote to the Tartar; and by the (...) of Mahomets mother,
jealous of his near alliance with her Husband, as prejudicial to her Son.

Amurath had in the open Divano deprived him of his (...), and hardly pardoning
his life, at the intercession of his Wife, his Sister, had banished him; so
that he lived about Chalcedon, in a close Palace he had there built for his
own pleasure, appointing Osman to be chief Vizier and General of his Army,
against the Persians: Truth it is, that from a private Soldier, though well
born, he by degrees grew up to the highest Honor of that so great an Empire.
Great was Osmans joy, and great his desire to be worthy of so Honorable a
favor; Wherefore, since the greatness of the Enterprise required a greater
Army, it was needful also for him the sooner to send out his advertisements
into the Provinces, and by his own example to stir up others even in Winter to
pass over to Seutari, and in the Territories of Angori, Amasia, and Sivas, to
drive out time, till his Soldiers were all gathered together. And that it
might not fall out by this great speed, that the Enemy misdoubting his purpose
for Tauris, should provide the greater Army, he had it given out, that he must
go for Nasivan: notwithstanding, the Persians being very jealous of the City of
Tauris, ceased not diligently to enquire about it, and sent diverse Messengers
to Osman, as if he had meant to feel his mind touching a peace; but indeed only
to sound his designments: which, for all that, he could not, with all his
cunning, discover, but still remained doubtful; the fame still running for
Nasivan.

In the beginning of this year, Amurath sent Ameanechias to Stephen King of
Poland, to excuse the death of (...), as if it had happened not by his command,
but by the insolency of some Soldiers, bringing with him 2 base fellows as
authors of that outrage, for the king to take revenge upon; who were indeed no
such men, but rather, as was thought, condemned for some other fact worthy of
death; for whom the Chiaus proudly and threatningly required present
restitution of all goods which the Cossacks had taken from the Turks: and their
Captain to be delivered also unto him to be carried to Amurath: which he so
hardly urged, that all the goods were forthwith restored, which he almost
triumphantly presented unto Amurath: who disporting himself with his Mutes this
Summer, was almost dead. They are lusty fellows, deprived of speech who ye by
signs, can aptly express both their own and others meaning: who for their
secrecy, are the Ministers of the Turkish Tyrant's most horrible commands; and
therefore greatly regar ed by them. With these, mounted upon fair, but heavy
Horses, was Amurath upon a ready Hoar, sporting himself, riding about one and
another, and striking now the Horse, now the man, at his pleasure, and was
taken suddenly by a fit of the Falling sickness, and falling from his Horse,
was taken up for dead; whom the Janissaries, supposing to have been dead, fell
to spoiling of the Christians and Jews; and had not their Aga hanged up one of
them, taken in the manner, and others in Janissaries habit, to the terror of the
(...) they had proceeded to further outrages: yet Amurath soon recovering to
appease the rumor of his death upon their Sabbath, which is Friday, rode to the
Temple of Sophia from his Palace, his countenance yet all pale and discolored.

This year also happened such a chance as had like to raise new Wars betwixt
the Turks and Venetians. The Widow of Rimadan Bassa, Governor of Tripolis in
Barbary, with her Son Hamili, and a great number of slaves, being about to
depart from thence to Constantinople, rigged up a fair Galley, (...) to be
worth 800000 (...), joining two others for her more safety, and sailing by
Corfu, she was by tempest, driven into the Adriatic Gulf: at which time, one
Emus, a Venetian (...) had charge to keep that Sea against Pirates, and all
other Enemies, who without delay, set upon the Turks, and took them all,
exercising most barbarous cruelty; for, having slain 250 men, and Ramadans
Son in her lap, he caused the Women, being first ravished, to be cast
overboard, being about 40.

Emus his Brother was most earnestly entreated by a beautiful Virgin, to spare
her Honor; and the rather, because she said she was a Christian taken in
Cyprus, about 12 years before: since which time, she had lived in most
miserable Captivity; and being now fallen into the hands of a noble Venetian,
was in good hope to be set at liberty inviolated, which she most humbly (...)
him for the love of God to do, and not imbrew his hands with her guiltless
blood: but the cruel and unbridled youth, after he had abused her, cast her
with the rest into the Sea. Its thought that Emus suffered this so great an
outrage to be done, that none should be left alive to betray the great booty or
villainy committed, which yet was revealed by a Turk, who saved by a Surgion of
(...) that knew him, (...) declared it at Canstantinople, whereat the Turks
were so enraged, that, in every corner of the City; they threatened unto the
Venetians, most cruel revenge; yea, they could scarce hold their hands from
Mowro (...), the Bilo, or Governor of their Merchants, or forbear to (...) in
his face as he went in the street, who hearing, that Amurath in his rage, was
about to send one of his great Gentlemen, whom they call Zansi the Turks usual
Ambassadors found means, that another of less Authority was sent to the
Senate to Venice about it, and to require the offender to be punished, and the
Gallie slaves and goods to be restored; so should their mutual League continue
firm, otherwise he should be constrained by force, to revenge the wrongs done
to his Subjects: the Senators, after diligent examination of the matter,
answered, that the Widow with her Family, was honorably entertained at Zant,
an Island of theirs, and had courteous Presents; but coming to Sefalenia,
another of their Islands, her people running on Land, spared neither Man nor
Beast, the Providitor making after them, found them in Arms within the Gulf,
whom they neither saluted, nor struck any Top-sail, to show that the command of
that Sea belonged to the Venetians, which by the League they ought to have
done; for which outrages and contempt, he took so sharp a revenge; yet they
promised in that case, to do what (...) them in reason and Justice: wherewith
Amurath seemed to be well contented; but indeed, loath to entangle himself with
Wars against that mighty State at Sea, because of his Wars against the
Persians: yet shortly after, Emus was worthily beheaded, and the Galleys with
all the goods and slaves restored.

This great Woman had therein, four hundred Christian slaves, which were set at
liberty; for whom the Venetians restored as many Turks.

Ramadan Bassa himself, having Wars with a King of the Moors, went out
against him with all his forces, wherein was certain Companies of Janissaries,
sent from Constantinople. Ramadan entering the great and sandy Deserts of that
Country was unprovided both of Victuals and skilful Guides; so that at
length, he could neither go forward, nor without loss of his men, return; yet
he got home, but with the loss of some men, and the manifest danger of his
whole Army; for which his imprudence, the Janissaries in a rage, fell upon him,
and slew him. Let no man marvel, that Amurath winked at their insolency; for
those martial men are now not as in former times; grown proud and insolent, by
living in continual pay, doing whatsoever seems them best, though never so
foul or unreasonable.

Not many years before, the Janissaries in Cyprus flew Achmetes Bassa the
Governor, pretending he had defrauded them of their pay, and intolerably
exacted upon the Country. Amurath highly offended at their killing their
General, whom they never before complained of, for his own Majesty's sake, and
the repressing of the like insolences in others, sent a new Governor into
Cyprus, with such a number of Soldiers, as might seize upon the chief
offenders; who dissembling his Commission by certain trusty men, gave it out
amongst the Janissaries, that Amurath was so far from being angry for the death
of Achmetes, that he thought him to be worthily slain; this was to put the
Janissaries in security: hereupon, they cheerfully, and with all due reverence,
received their new Governor; but shortly after, by an unexpected guil, they
compassed in all the new-come Soldiers, and slew them every one, seizing also
upon the Galleys that brought them: by which second outrage, though Amurath saw
his Majesty contemned, yet was he content to pass it over, being loath to add
domestical troubles to the great Wars he had with the Persian.

To end this matter with the opinion of Rustan Bassa, concerning these
masterful men. Whilst (...) the Emperor's Ambassador, lay in the Turks Camp,
when Solomon went in person into Asia, to countenance Selimus against Bajazet,
upon a light quarrel, (though heavily taken between his followers) and some
Janissaries, washing themselves at the Sea side: the Ambassador, for quieting
thereof, was glad to use the help of Rustan, who understanding the matter by a
Messenger sent on purpose, advised him to cut off all occasion of contention,
with those most naughty fellows, asking him further, If he knew not that it was
now the time of War, in which time they so reigned, that Solomon himself was
not able to rule them, but stood in fear of them.

But let us return again unto the Wars of Persia: According to the Commands
gone out through all the Cities of the Empire, the Soldiers began to flock
together, and all that were (...) to be established in their former places, or
sought to be now promoted, repaired to Osman, as unto a King, presenting him
with very large gifts, whereby he collected a huge heap of Treasure; and so
entertaining them with courtesy, and promising rewards and honor to such as
would follow him, he levied a wonderful number of men and moneys; and
notwithstanding the great dearth that commonly reigned in those quarters, yet
to Erzirum, he must; where he was greatly expected of his huge Army, where he
arrived about the latter end of July, in 1585, and there viewing his whole
Army, with all its necessary provision, he labored to hasten his departure:
there was met together at Erzirum, a greater number than ever before; for every
man (...) his own private business, and upon sure hopes of new rewards and
unwonted honors, followed the fame of their new Vizier and General: only
those of Egypt and Damasco, were now busied with more private quarrels at home,
which I will rehearse as briefly as I can.

Amurath had sent Hassan Bassa the Eunuch, from his charge in the Queens Court
at her instance, as Bassa to Caire in Egypt: which great office, besides the
honor, is beneficial to them that are advanced thereunto; the Riches and
multitudes of people therein, being so great. Hassan, being exceeding covetous,
sought by all manner of means, to oppress the whole Nation, and by all
importunities, to wring and extort from them rewards and bribes, whereby he was
so odious and intolerable to the people, that they in great number, and many
times, began to go to Constantinople, with humble Petitions to request the King
to take from them so cruel and unjust a Governor; so that the general talk in
Court, was of the villainies and mischiefs reported of the covetous Eunuch. At
last, Amurath for shame, sent him certain Messages, sundry times, to return
home; but he, loath to leave so fit an occasion to enrich himself, still
delayed his return, by many fained excuses: which when Amurath understood, he
determined by punishing him to satisfy in some part, the discontented minds of
his oppressed Subjects. There was then amongst the chief Bassaes, one Ebrain,
or Ibrahim, a young Sclavonian, about 32 years old, judicious and well
conditioned, on whom Amurath had determined to bestow his Daughter to Wife:
wherefore, now minded to remove the Eunuch from his Office, and willing
withal, to enrich his said Son in Law, resolved to send him as Sovereign
Judge into Egypt, charging him to remember how wickedly his Predecessor had
dealt before him: at the rumor of whose coming, and of his great Authority, as
the Egyptians were joyful, so the Eunuch was sorrowful, as persuaded, that this
change could not but engender some strange Issue against him: whereupon, he
resolved not to stay the coming of the new Governor; but departing with great
care, for fear of meeting Ebrain, he traveled toward Constantinople, hoping
to appease the Kings wrath, or at least by bribes, and the Queens intercession,
to find him (...) favorable then he should Ebraim, who withou doubt, would
have bereft him both of goods and life.

Amurath advertized from Ebraim, of his sudden flight out of Egypt; and
withal, that he kept not the high way to Constantinople, feared, lest when he
came to Soria, he should flee to the Persian King, and so work him double and
treble damage, as one that had gathered a huge Treasure, and had long lived in
the Court: whereupon, he dispatched the Master of his Horse, with 40 Chapigi,
charging them, if they met him, to bring him to Court, using all the assistance
of his people that might be requisite, delivering unto him, very effectual and
large Letters to that end; who departing, without any extraordinary inquiring,
found the Eunuch encamped in the plains of Soria, near the City Aman, once
called Apania; who hearing of his coming, gave order to his Guard of slaves,
not to suffer any to enter into his Tent, but only the Imbrahor himself, who,
as soon as he had discovered his Tents, hastened toward the same, and would
have entered the Eunuchs Tent, with all his followers; but the armed slaves
opposing them, permitted only the Imbrahor to enter, who read unto the Eunuch,
the Kings Command to bring him to Court, most instantly moving him, without
further resistance, quietly to go with him, who warily answered; behold,
without the Kings call, or your conduct, I come of my self, well assured to
find favor and grace in the sight of my Lord, whose upright and mild nature,
the treacheries of my false accusers cannot abuse to the prejudice of me an
innocent; so they went all to Constantinople, the Eunuch still standing upon
his Guard: who, the mean time, had certified the Sultan Ladies, by Letters of
his coming; but chiefly, beseeching the Queen to appease the Kings wrath, that
happily might be conceived against him. When Amurath heard he was come to
Scutari, he caused all his Treasure and private substance, to be taken from
him, and himself to be clapped up in the Jadicula, where he many days fearing
some deadly blow, at length received from the Queen, that he should be of good
cheer, for that his Wealth had saved his life, and she hoped also to procure
his liberty also; so she earnestly petitioning her Husband, that since he had
bereft her Eunuch of all his goods, he would yet deliver him out of prison, and
restore him to her again; the Eunuch was enlarged accordingly.

But Ebrain now arrived in Egypt had soon by far more sinister devices, then
the Eunuch, scraped together, a huge heap of riches; wherefore he was called
home to Court, to accomplish the intended Marriage, receiving also in charge,
to make his Journey through the people of Dru^in, to confirm the loyal in
their obedience, and payment of their ancient duties; but quite to destroy the
stubborn and disobedient. Ebrain, packing up all his Riches, raised good store
of Soldiers in that Province, taking with him 13 Sanzacks, that used to sit as
assistants under the Bassa (...) Caire. So coming to Gaza, and (...) the
Sanzack thereof with him, he went to Jerusalem, and causing that Sanzack also
to follow him he took with him the Sanzacks of Zafetto, Lezium, and Naplos
(...) old Samaria; (...) that before he joined with the band (...) Damasco, he
had 18 Sanzacks with their Squadrons: he had also his own (...) Court very
populous, and 200 Janissaries, which he brought with him at (...) from Court in
all almost 20000 Horsemen: Vies, Bassa of Damasco, met him as far as Jerusalem,
with about 2000; and, by the way of Sidon, came the Aga with his Janissaries,
transported into the main, in (...) Galleys sent to fetch Ebrain.

These Drusians against whom the preparations was made, are supposed to be by
descent Frenchmen: the relics of those who, in times past, did fight he
Christian Battles in Jury; but being (...) low by the Plague, and fury of the
Barbarians mingled with the circumcised Nation, and so lost their Religion and
Command together: yet hating the Turkish Superstirion, and the Jews
Circumcision, they follow a new Prophet of their own, called Isman; for the
right Grecians are uncircumcised, not (...) Wine as the Turks, and making it
lawful to marry their own (...); who notwithstanding all the attempts of the
Turk, especially Selimus the second, they would never admit any Turkish
Governor within their Country: they inhabit all the Country within the
confines of Joppa, above (...) and Palestine, and within the Rivers of Orontes
and Jordan, (...) it self even to the plain of Damasco, near the Hills that
encompass it on the Coast of Mount Libanus. They were once much esteemed for
their Conquest; but now (...) at variance, through covetousness, one sought the
(...) of (...) her: they were at this time, governed by 5 Emirs, or Princes,
Ebneman or Manogli; Serafadin Mahomet, Ebne Mansor, Ebne Freck Ali, Ebne
Carfus, who have diverse Deputies, called their Macademi (...) Agents: Manoglies
(...), lay under the jurisdictions of (...), (...), (...) and Sidon, residing
for the most part on a Hill in the Town (...); mighty in Men and Armor, and
always a deadly Enemy to the Turk, since his Father was murdered (...) the
treachery of Mustapha, then Bassa of Damasco. Freck, Carsus, and Mansor, were
always friends; but at the com ng of Ebrain, more straightly confederate: (...)
and Manogli ever opposing (...), whereby they (...) their (...) to defend
themselves against the Turks. The three (...) above named, to turn all the
intended mischief upon Serafadin and Manogli, met Ebrain at Jerusalem with
store of Money loads of Silks, with Clothes and other things of exceeding
(...), with (...) 2000 another 3000 men; whose coming, Ebrain took in very good
part, courteously receiving their presents, and by the offers of their
fidelity, and their grievous accusations against the other two, conceived great
hope of his intended enterprise, who encamped in the Champain of Bocca, whither
came people all thereabouts with Presents to the Bassa, to whom he likewise
yielded such small favors, as his covetous nature could afford: who presently
sent to Serafadin and Manogli, inviting them to come in to acknowledge their
obedience, otherwise they might be sure to be soon deprived of Estate and life:
Serafadin poor and weak, packing up diverse the like Presents as aforesaid, and
attended on with diverse of his Subjects, arrived at Ebrains Pavil ion, whose
Presents were readily received, and himself attentively (...): who said in
effect, he had always been a devo ed Vassal to Amurath, etc. and being now
assured of his favor, by his courteous offers in his Letters he proffered him
whatsoever lay in his (...) power to perform: Ebrain made no answer, only
asked him, why he lived in continual discord with the three Emirs, then in the
Pavillion, Who answered, it was not long of him, who never took up Arms, but in
his just defense against their injuries, who being more mighty then he, (...)
continually to oppress him: hereat the (...) arose, and with grim looks,
falsely charged him to have been ever the author of those brawls; adding, that
at that time, no strange Vessel (...), for fear of him, arrive at Sidon, Tyrus,
or Berito, nor any Merchant or Merchandise, pass over the plains, but that
those Countries (...) generally (...) both by Sea and Land, to the great
hindrance of the Sultans Customs. He would have gladly replied; but by Ebrain,
was with many injurious words, committed to the Custody of the 200 Janissaries,
who bringing him into a rotten Tent, he was every night put in the Stocks fast
chained, and continually guarded by them: in the mean time, Manogli wrote back
to Ebrain, excusing his not coming first, because of his three Enemies there
present with him, and from the ancient Oath that he took, when he was but a
Child, to keep himself always out of the hands of a Turk, when he saw his own
Father so villainously betrayed by the murdering Sword of Mustapha: saying
also, He had always so carried himself toward his Lord, that he was not his
Debtor one Asper, in the managing of his Customs; whereas Ebner Mansor, though
he would make a show of fidelity, yet did he detain from the King 200000
Ducats of his Customs; so he hoped he would pardon him in that his seeming
disobedience, assuring him, that all whatsoever he had, was his. Ebrain
perceiving the resolution of Manogli, resolved either by force or slight, to
get him into his hands; or at least, to draw from him so many Harquebusses,
great gifts, and Tributes, as possibly he could: wherefore turning himself
toward his Country, he burnt and destroyed 24 of his Towns; and so on the top
of a large Hill, he encamped himself; but whilst the Army was thus marching
forward, Veis Bassa with his Son, the Sanzack of Jerusalem, with a good
number of Soldiers, in manner of a reare-ward, being busy in raising their
Tents, were (...) assaulted and discomfited by the Drusians of Manogli's
faction, putting to the Sword 500 persons, leading away (...) Horses and
Carriages, and possessing their Pavillions Wealth and Armor; and scarce gave
leave to the Father (...) escape, or to the Son, who fleeing to Jerusalem,
returned not again to Ebrain; but Veis still followed the Army, with those that
he had left. Ebrain stayed 24 days upon the Hill, attending nothing else but
to try all his advices upon Manogli. Wherefore he dispatched one Gomeda Ebne,
Mansors Agent, to tell him, that since he would not adventure himself into the
hand of his friend, he should send him all the Harquebusses he had; (...) it
was the Sultans pleasure, that his people that went not to his Wars, should
not be furnished with so great store of Weapons. Manogli, with great grief,
beheld the Agent of his deadly Enemy: yet in regard of him that sent him, he
forbore any injury or reproach, telling him, All his people and Weapons were
dispersed; he could not tell what Harquebusses to send him: wherefore Ali,
Bassa of Aleppo, offered the General to go to him, to some better purpose: who
used many reasons to persuade Manogli to come and yield his obedience, swearing
no harm should be done to him, and promising him great favors, but he could
never win him so to do: yet with much ado, he prevailed so with the Drusian,
that he gave him 320 Harquebusses, 20 (...) of Andarine Silks, and fifty
thousand Ducats for a gift; and to reconcile the Bassa unto him, sending also
his own Mother, who excused her Son in respect of his Enemies, who sat there
so near him, and in regard of his former Oath, beseeching him to accept of the
gifts, and a mind most ready to serve and obey the King, and to (...) him,
whose excuses were just and reasonable: the Turk replied, though she had found
so foul a fault in Mustapha; yet she ought not to fear any such act at his
hands, who stood upon his honor and the word of a Soldier, and so, by Oath,
protesting all (...) toward him, he in token thereof, cast a white vail about
her neck, and another on himself; and a third he gave into her hands, willing
her to report the Oath to her Son, and carry him that vail, and bring him with
her, protesting to entreat him but as a friend and Brother; but she neither
could, nor would go about to alter her Sons purpose; but returned Ebrain an
answer not greatly pleasing. After which, he sought more then before, to get
him into his hands, or at least to draw from him more Presents and Weapons,
sending again the crafty Gomeda, to exhort him upon faith given, to come unto
him; but he could obtain nothing of the Drusian but good words, only yet at
last Manogli was contented to send another Present to Ebrain, on condition that
he should cause him to depart out of those quarters, and himself not to come to
him with any further request: so he gave him 50000 Ducats more, 480
Harquebusses, 1000 Goats, 150 Cammels, as many Buffs, 1000 Oxen, and 200
Weathers: Gomeda came to Ebrain with this rich Present, declaring his promise
not to molest the Drusian any more: who sharply reproving him, threatened to
make him know what it was to take upon him so dangerous a liberty; and, in
despite of them both, would needs have Gomeda return to the Drusian with the
same Message; but Manogli was so moved at the very sight of Gomeda, that he was
about to dispatch him with a dart, had not more dangerous effects stayed his
fury; yet he gave him reproachful words, and deadly threats: notwithstanding,
Gomeda so wrought with him, that he sent four burdens more of Harquebusses, 10
Swords, and 10 guilt Daggers, some silver Belts, 10 Packs of Silk, and some few
pence, causing him to protest never to be persuaded to come again to him; for
if he did, he threatened to kill him, hap what would. Ebrain with exceeding joy,
received this Present, rose with his Army, and being conducted by (...) Frec,
burnt Andera, and in two days burnt and destroyed nine other of Manoglies
Towns with fire and sword: After all this, he sent diverse Messengers to
Manogli, to try if he would yet come; but nothing could move him, his constancy
being rather increased, to avoid a most certain death: now the Bassa un
erstanding by a spy that the Captain of Andera with 350 Soldiers, was gone up
a Hill, for more security; he sent Ebne Frec to tell him, that since his Lord
would not come unto him, he should: which if he would do, he would in despite
of Manogli, make him a Sanzack of some of those places. The (...) and unheedy
Macademo, with his followers, went with him, causing his men to stay in a
Valley two or three miles off; but Ebrain would not so much as see him, though
in respect both of his nimble person and fierce looks, he was worthy to be
beheld, commanding him to be kept apart from Serafadin; and in the mean time,
trained his 350 followers, by means of Ebne Frec, into a Vineyard, suddenly
setting upon them, and killing them every one: Then he commanded the Macademo,
to be brought before him, and flaid quick; who stourly upbraided Ebrain of his
promise and Oath; and while they stripped him, amongst other speeches, he (...)
one, though not seemly, yet very reproachful unto Ebrain; and to the
Executioners he said, It was their fortune indeed, that with such needless
deformity, they were now able to take his life, whereas none once durst, Man to
Man, to have drawn one drop of blood from him, no, nor to have endured his
countenance: But they should proceed to fulfill the cruel Command of their
Vizier; for, in the end, there would also light upon them the just reward of so
villainous a fact: So 3 great slashes were made on his back, where they began
to flea him: he the while, blaspheming their Religion, cursing their King, and
false Prophet also; but the Soldiers made other like gashes upon his breast
and stomach, and drawing the skin downward, before it was brought to his navel,
he was with the extremity of pain dead; after this, he caused Serafadins 150
followers to be cruelly (...), and most miserably wasting his Country; and the
while, sent Post to Sidon, where his Galleys lay, that (...) 4000 Soldiers,
they should sack all those Countries along the Seacoast, even as far as
Caesaria, sparing neither Age, Sex, nor condition, which was done, 3000 souls
(...) away Captives, and much rich Merchandise, and the whole Country of
Serafadin and Manogli, laid utterly wast. But Ebrain thinking what he had
hitherto done, would be little or nothing accounted of, unless he in some sort,
provided for quieting those people under Turkish obedience, nominated Ebne
Carfus, the richest and most obedient of the three Emirs, to be Bassa of all
those Regions; yet not without a bribe of 100000 Ducats: wherefore he
apparelled him in Cloth of Gold, gave him a (...) Mace, a Sword all guilt, and
the Kings Commission to whom he swear faith and obedience, and so he returned
to Damasco, staying 12 days, and by shameful shifts, extorting money from
diverse persons: at last, he turned toward Gazir, and Barento, places under
Ebne Mansur's Government, finding his Galleys in the Haven of Barento, as he
had commanded, Ebrain had pitched his one Tent only upon a Hill near the Sea:
under which base Tent, himself only shrouding, he called Ebne Mansur,
pleasantly telling him, 'Twas now time to pay the 160000 Ducats which he owed
his Lord for the Custom of Tripoli and Bareuto; for he was now to return to
Constantinople, which he knew not how to do, (...) that was discharged: he
answered, Ere long, his Maccademoes would come with his money, and then without
delay make payment: which Ebrain knowing to be but an excuse, determined o
thrust the debtor into his Galleys, for lack of the debt; but for fear of some
insurrection, he being in his own Territories, and greatly beloved of Frec and
Carsus, he thought it better outwardly to show him all good countenance, and
secretly and (...) to take him prisoner; so he told him, that since he was next
day to make a Road into Manoglies Country, he prayed him to be his guide; for
which end, when he should send for him at midnight, that he would come to him
very secretly, because he would depart without any stir, only with 500 men.
The Drusian believing the matter, and withal, in hope thereby to find some way
to escape his hands, went to his Tent, when called; who presently charging him
with many abominable and foul terms, sent him into his Galleys with a Chain
about his neck, and Arms, and took the spoil of all his Country, a prey of
Money; Clothes of Silk and Gold, as was mavelous to behold: which being
conveyed into his Galleys, he sailed to Tripoli, where he found Serafadin in
the Custody of Veis and Ali; and staying there a few days, committed sundry
villainous robberies: he pursued Serafadin into the Galleys, with all his
Wealth, and so departed to Constantinople, where entering the Channel with 24
Galleys, he was received by a great number of his friends and favorites, and
saluted with an honorable peal of Ordnance out of the Seraglio, Minadoi, who
saw the presents which the ravenous Bassa gave the Turkish King, reports the
sum thereof to have been a million of Gold, besides the yearly Revenue of
Caire, amounting to 600000 Ducats, 60 most beautiful and rich garnished Horses
of the Arabian Race, a live Elephant, (...) a Beast like a Cammel, and a
Panther, two great dead Crocodiles, a Chair of Massey gold, richly set with
precious stones, a rich Casket, many packs of most fine Clothes, woollen and
silks; other Clothes, with Gold and Silver fringe, and the Barbarian cutwork,
most fine (...) of Alexandria, and all the Harquebusses, besides sundry rich
presents he gave to the great Ladies, reported to be worth 200000 Sultinues.

But it shall not be altogether impertinent, to declare what passed between the
aforesaid Zanzack of Jerusalem, and the Arabians of Palestine a little before
the coming of (...) into those quarters. In the (...) of Sodom, and in the
(...) not only (...) the Lake Asphaltites and Damasco, but also in the Plains
of (...), Samaria, and diverse other Towns; there do haunt and live certain
Arabian Captains, who overrun at pleasure all the Countries round about, even
as far as Rama and Joppa, committing grievous outrages against the
Inhabitants, and upon their goods and wealth, as also on strangers and
travelers: yea, they dare to assault the fenced Cities, they are good Horsemen
without Armor, their Horses very swift, themselves bold and (...) Thieves:
who, having Intelligence that the strong Zanzacks of Jerusalem, would join with
all the (...) thereabouts, and with his Father Veis, to work their destruction
by sundry Invasions upon him, even to the Gates of Jerusalem: They provoked him
to come out into the fields, compacting with a Subbassi of (...), their friend,
to animate the Zanzack thereunto, by promising him good success; Whereupon, the
ambitious young man, having armed a hundred of his Vassals, and raised all the
Horsemen under his Government, in number 600 made a road toward Jericho,
sending before defiance unto the Arabians: who, coming with their Arrows and
Indian Canes, overwhelmed his Harquebusiers; and the (...) being yet at the
hottest, the Traitorous Subbassi fled toward Bethlehem, leaving the Soldiers
of Jerusalem in the Arabians hands, (...) most of them, and the Zanzack scarce
saving himself by flight: who, informed of the Subbassi his fraud, fained that
he would try his Forces against them: Whereby the Subbassi came armed unto him,
suspecting no mischief; but being come, the Zanzack took him, and presently
caused him to be flayed quick.

But Osman having gathered together too huge an Army, (...) (...) should want
victual for so great a multitude, neither so fearing the Persian forces; drew
out about 4000 Persons, such as he thought least able to endure travel, who
according to every ones ability redeeming the ordinary perils of the Wars,
returned home. So Osman had about 180000 men in his Army, with whom he departed
from Erzirum in Aug. 1585 toward Tauris, yet continuing the speech for
Nasivan; but he had scarce marched two days, but diverse Soldiers of Greece
and Constantinople upbraided him of great improvidence: and telling him, They
had already that day wanted their allowance of Corn for their Horses: so that,
if in the beginning of so long a journey, they began to feel such want, they
could not tell why he meant to lead so great a Company so far as Nasivan, nor
by what cunning he had presumed to sustain so great an Army. Osman quietly
heard them, causing the Barley desired, to be delivered among them, and
severely punishing the Officers for allowance of Corn, who began to make
Merchandise of the common provision. So proceeding on his journey, he arrived
upon the Calderan Plains, where he took a general view of his Army, wanting a
number, who by reason of sickness were forced to stay behind: from hence he
went not toward Nasivan, but directly to Tauris: which, the a foresaid
Soldiers hearing, fell into a great rage reviling Osman with most insolent
speech, to his face, calling him Villain and (...), as not brooking his Lies
and Deceit. But if he had changed his Opinion upon good advice, for the
enterprise of Tauris; why did he dismiss so many Soldiers? Did he think by
suffering others to redeem their Liberties, to increase his Riches, to set
their lives to sale, and make them (...) to the Persians? At these arrogant
speeches, the General was exceedingly troubled; seeing his good meaning to
advance the Majesty of his King so ill taken by his best Soldiers, and upon
good advice he sorbare (...) and punishment; but sending for many Captains and
chief (...) a (...) those seditious, he persuaded them that the former speech
for Nasivan was not raised by him, nor was he minded then to go to Tauris: but
all he had done was (...) fulfill the command of the Sultan, who had charged
him so to do, to lessen the Persians preparations: neither need they to fear
that the Soldiers dismissed might weaken the Army, for they themselves were
not only sufficient to pierce into Tauris, but to daunt their Enemies even with
their Looks: and those that were discharged, had but purged the Host of all
cowardice. By this mild answer, the Soldiers were sufficiently pacified; but
much better, when he had bestowed amongst them all a small quantity of moneys:
for now they became so willing and courageous, that they durst venture to the
(...) parts of all the Persian Kingdom. The General went toward Coy, in the
midst between Tauris and the Marshan Mere, where he refreshed his Army with all
things: then he passed to Maraut plentiful of all necessaries: thence toward
Saffion a fruitful place, whence he began to discover Tauris. Great was the joy
of the Soldiers; and those of Greece and Constantinople, did highly commend
the advice, in giving out the rumor of Nasivan for Tauris, as the only means
whereby they were in quiet come so far, so that every man without fear proudly
plotted to themselves, all insolent and outrageous actions that use to proceed
from those barbarous Victors, especially the Vanguard, who descended down
toward pleasant Gardens full of all sorts of Trees, Springs, and Fruits; and,
satisfying their Appetites, they withdrew to a little River, near a Bridge,
called the Bridge of salt Water, at pleasure attending the coming of the Army.

But the Persian Prince Emir Hamsey, having closely couched himself with 10000
good Soldiers suddenly set upon them, with such speed, courage, and fury, that
in a manner without resistance, he dispersed them, killing about 7000, and with
many Prisoners, Horses, Slaves, sundry Ensigns and Drums, he withdrew back
toward his blind Father, who lay encamped about 12 miles from Tauris with
about 50000 Soldiers. Aliculi had but 4000 left in Tauris, for the Persian
King could not leavy above 64000 men: for the Turkomans, because of the death
of Emir-chan, would not be brought to defend that City, whereof Aliculi their
Capital Enemy was Governor, and from Isheilam and Meri, there came not one
Soldier: so that the Persian King had (...) stomach to meet the Turks in plain
Battle, but sought by all politic means to weaken and annoy his strong Enemy.

Osman, dispatching Sinan Bassa, and the Bassa of Charaemit, with 14000
Soldiers to pursue the Victorious Prince, they used such expedition that they
overtook him in the way toward his Fathers Camp: who, seeing he could not
avoid Battle, without a shameful and dangerous flight, joined with them a most
bloody Conflict for 2 hours, till the darkness of the night enforced both
sides to retire; the Turks losing, as was commonly reported 6000 men, so that
hitherto they lost above 10000 Soldiers, and yet had scarce discovered or seen
the City, they so greedily longed after. Next morning, the Turks encamped
within 2 miles of Tauris, but whilst they were setting up their Tents, Aliculi
issuing out with all his Garrison, and Citizens fit to bear Arms, with many
cunning turnings and windings, so charged the Vanguard now renewed, that he
(...) them to retire even to the main Battle; they being disordered, and almost
3000 (...) in a very small time. Aliculi spying the Ordnance, withdrew himself
without (...) into the City, but in the shutting in of the evening, he sallied
out again, and swif ly running along that side of the Army toward Tauris, he
slew the Bassa of Maras, and did great hurt: which done, he fled to the Kings
Camp, not being able to hold the City, yet the Taurisions that remained
therein, gathered together to the Gates, to make a bloody entrance for the
Turks: And upon the break of day, a great multitude of the servile and rascal
Turks, without order from their Captains, with Corstets, Spears and Swords went
to that Wealthy City, thinking to have sacked it; but, contrary to their
expectation they were forced at the Gates to join a hard and mortal Battle: so
that the Valleys entrance, and ground thereabouts was bathed with blood, and as
it were covered with Weapons and dead (...): yet, at last, the Persians was
constrained to yield entrance, a multitude out of the Camp flowing in upon
them, who retiring into the City astonished and amazed, fortified themselves in
their Houses under ground, and in the corners and windings of the streets,
whence they did the Turks great harm: who at last were too mighty for them, and
wrought many grievous mischiefs in that woeful City; and so a great number of
this rascal people returned to the Camp with manifest tokens of the oppressed
City; wherein, the women and impotent souls stood embracing and straining their
doors and posts, and kissing their native soil with prayers, mournings, and
complaints: bewailing their present misery, and yet fearing worse to come.
Osman, acquainted with these calamities, proclaimed, that (...) should be so
hardy as to molest the Taurisians; going about the City himself, and thoroughly
viewing its situation, and wherein he might safely encamp, and more securely
erect a Castle or Fort. The buildings in Tauris, which is seared at the foot of
the hill Orontes, after the manner of the East, are of burnt-clay rather low
then high. It carries the name for all things, and was the Persian Kings place
of residence, till Tamas removed his seat farther into his Kingdom to (...):
yet though it has bin sundry times (...) by the inroads and fury of the Turk
it was still in great estimation and renown. Osman (...) his Tents to be pitched
on the south side thereof, where was a spacious Garden, replenished with sundry
(...) of Trees and sweet smelling plants, and many Brooks derived from a pretty
River, which divided the Garden from the City: for the delicacy thereof, it was
called the 8 Paradise; and was in times (...) the standing House of their
Kings: but after their remove to Casbin, became the Habitation of the Governor
of Tauris. Here Osman would build his Castle, giving the Model himself, and
commanding all those pleasant Greens, to be environed with walls and Trenches,
to convey the water from the said River, which whole work was finished in 36
days: store of Artillery mounted on the Walls, and diverse Baths, Lodgings, and
such other Houses built within: the first day of which building, Osman sickned
of a Fever with a bloody Flux. Five days after the Castle was (...), news
was brought to the Camp, that 8 Janissaries and diverse Spaoglans were seen
strangled in a Bath within the City: whereupon, the Janissaries and others came
to the General, telling him, That although, according to his pleasure, every
man had used modesty toward the Taurisians, yet themselves had strangled in a
Bath 8 Janissaries and certain Spaoglans: which injury and insolency, in their
judgment was not to be suffered. Osman was so moved, that commanding the City
to be sacked, he left it wholly to the (...) of his Soldiers: Whereupon, every
place was filled with (...), ravishment, rapine, and murder: Men-Children, most
horribly defiled; younglings snatched out of their Parents arms: Houses burnt
and destroyed; Riches and Money carried away, and all things ruinated. Thrice
were these mischiefs committed, one exceeding another. This woe sore troubled
the Persian King, but the Prince much more, who resolved to attempt any thing
to requite so great a wrong, and commanded 500 Horsemen to present themselves
even to the very sight of their Enemies Tents, and as it were to dare them
Battle: the Turks imagining that the Persians were in great number come to
affail the Army, the sick General ordered Cicala Bassa, and the Bassa of
Careamit, with near 40000 of those of Greece their own Forces, and servile
people to go to encounter the Enemy: the 5000 Persians with a cunning kind of
skirmishing drew the Turks forward above 8 miles, where, the Persian Prince
with about 20000 of his Army courageously (...) upon them, with the cruellest
Battle that ever was written of: who, having done great harm, it was thought,
as content, they would have (...) retired, which the Turks to prevent, hardly
pressed upon them hoping to put them to flight, and give them a deadly
overthrow; but the Persians having endured their charge, began a most deadly
Battle afresh, wherein the Bassa of Careamit being wholly discomfited, fled
back to the Camp with most manifest Tokens of the unhappy issue: yet Sicala
valiantly and cunningly still (...) their fury, laboring by all means to
encourage his men and restore the Battle: but at last was forced also to flee,
coming to the Camp without any Ensign, having left behind him 8000 of his
Soldiers dead upon the ground: The Prince herewith encouraged, speedily sent
to Osman, (whom he thought had been in health) that if he would sight he was
(...) how he pleased to accept of Battle, and make him know, both that Amurath
had most unjustly raised this War, and also that it had bin good for himself
not to have taken the same in hand.

Osman (...) this offer sent out 60000 men, the Bassa of Careamit, and Sicala
leading the main Battle: the Bassa of Natolia the left-Wing, and the Bassa of
Caramania the right-Wing. The Prince lay about 10 miles off from Osman's Camp:
who had of Persians, Hircanians, Parthians, and Meropatians, in all 40000,
himself being in the midst of them. The Turks feared, lest the Persians
fetching a great compass should set upon their Tents and Riches: wherefore,
retiring what they might, as if they had given place, they had well-nigh
brought them even within the mark of their Artillery, which the Persians
perceiving, hardly began to assail their main body: into the midst whereof, the
Prince entering, dispatched every man that came in his way, and singling out the
Bassa of Careamit, who sustained Osman's place, smote off his head and gave it
one of his followers to carry upon the (...) of his Lance, which brought a
great terror upon the Turks, and exceedingly (...) the Persians: who
intermingled themselves more and more amongst them, made of them a most
confused and general slaughter, there dying also the Bassa of Trabszonda, and 6
Zanzacks with 20000 Turks more as was commonly reported: the Bassa of Caramania
being also taken with diverse other common Soldiers: but night coming on, and
the Persians come somewhat too nigh to the Turkish Artillery, they withdrew
themselves back to the King, Camp.

The Fortress of Tauris being fully finished; the Soldiers of Greece and
Constantinople wearied to see their fellows thus (...), and having laid up the
prey and booty gotten in Tauris, Winter also coming fast on, by (...) trusty
friends about Osman, who was in despair of life, represented (...) him the
(...) of their return: and after many reverend (...) (...) unto him, that if he
would needs (...), dallying out time in those dangerous places where no need
was, they should be forced to forsake him. Osman promised to satisfy their
request by departing the next morning. So he made Giaffor the Eunuch Bassa of
Tripolis, a crafty and cruel man Governor of the new-built Fortress: whom, to
encourage to undertake that charge, he gave him for 3 whole years the Office
and Revenues of the Bassa of Careamit (...) slain, Honoring him also with the
Title of Bassa of the (...); so that after his 3 years Office of Careamit, he
was to sit amongst the Sovereign seats of the Bassaes of the Porta. The Bassa
hereupon dispatching his Lieutenant for Careamit, (...) a 100 of his own
followers, settled himself in the said Fort with 12000 Soldiers, furnished with
all necessaries till the next Spring: so the General departed the same morning
being the 87th. day after his departure from Erzirum, came to Sancazan, 7 miles
from Tauris. The Tauris being now ready confusedly to encamp; There was heard
the neighing of Horses, and noise of Drums and Trumpets: which when the whole
Camp understood, they ran disorderly to rescue on that side where those noises
were heard: but whilst the Turks intentively expected the Enemies coming on
that side the Prince with 28000 Horsemen was ready upon them on the other side;
and with a safe Convoy, had taken 18000 Camels and Mules well laden with Booty
and Victual: which he sending away with 6000 Soldiers, Himself, (...) 22000
Persians entered into the Turks Army, who, now on that side also had made a Head
against him. In a moment the Tents and Pavillions were turned upside-down, and
replenished with dead Carcasses, and blood, and so general a slaughter made,
that the Turks themselves marvelled at, and do to this day with great
admiration recount, the Valor of the Persians: but they doubting, lest the
enemy should have entered the Lodgings of the sick Vizier, now at the last
(...), He that commanded in his Name, ordered the Artillery to be forthwith
unbarred and discharged, which in that medly, overthrew both friends and foes,
and did perhaps most harm to the Turks: For the Prince with his followers at
the noise thereof, speedily retired; so that the Turks left behind, were more
annoyed then the Persians: the Turks made show, as if they would gladly have
overtaken them, but night coming on, they feared to proceed any further. In
this Battle were slain 20000 Turks, (...) any notable loss of the Persians.
Osman, the General also here at Sancazan, died through the violence of an ague,
and a flux of blood, which was kept secret from the whole Army, because the
Charriots wherein he lay were still kept close. And in his name Cicala Bassa for
so he had appointed, gave out commands to the Army; yet 3 young men, who had
the charge of Osmans Jewels and Treasure, fleeing to the Persians with the best
thereof, and the fairest of his Horses, disclosed to them the death of the
General, who were thereby encouraged to attempt the utter overthrow of the
Turkish remnant: whereupon, the Prince with 14000 followed the Turks, who were
removed to a certain River of salt water, not far from Sancazan, where he
pitched a few Tents about 4 or 5 miles distant from the Turks camp (the said
brook running betwixt the 2 Armies) Now the Prince purposed to assail the Turks
in the morning, while they were loading their Carriages; which his design was
revealed to the Turks by one of his Spies, which they caught: wherefore, they
neither rose so early as their manner was, nor loaded their stuff, till they
were all ready to receive their Enemies: yet, the Persian considering, they
should find no other good opportunity to annoy them before next Spring,
resolved to venture the assault; and, observing the Enemies Artillery to be on
the right side, they began to enter on the left: but the Turks presently so
turned their Artillery against them, that it was to their great loss and
danger, yet were they so nimble to shroud themselves under the Enemies Army,
that being now come very near them, they must needs join Battle: they had
purposed, as soon as they saw the Turks begin to stir, to retire; so to draw
them on into a filthy and deep Marsh, which being then dry, was not doubted,
but only by those that were well acquainted therewith, or born thereabouts:
which policy Maxut and Dant-chan perceiving, gave notice thereof to Cicala. Who
caused a great compassing-wing to be made, and to charge the Persians home,
which they did so, that their forefront opened with very large corners upon
the Prince; who, by and by perceiving that his purpose was discovered, without
stay, began to retire, which could not so readily be done, but that 3000
Persians were over-trodden and (...) in the mire with very little loss to the
Turks. This only Battle of 5, that were fought in those Quarters, being least
hurtful to the Turks.

The Prince returned to his Fathers Camp, recounting unto him the whole action
and the Enemies departure. The Turk came to Salmas, where Osman's death was
published, thence they went to Van, where, surveying their Army, they missed
about 85000 persons or more: at Van they were all dismissed, whence Sicala gave
notice to Amurath of all that had happened. First was published Osman's death
at Constantinople, with many signs of great sorrow, also the bloody and mortal
actions that were performed in that Expedition: the whole City seemed much
discomforted, and in many places were much secret railings on the King, many
curses of these wars, and of those manifold mischiefs; after which, was
dispersed the great fame of the (...) at Tauris, with all the loss that had
happened to the City, and an Edict published, that through all the Cities of
the Empire, they should make solemn Feasts and other Tokens of joy, which was
done accordingly: Word was also sent to the Ambassadors of diverse Countries to
do the like, but they all answered, It was never the custom of Ambassadors so
to do, but when the King in Person returned from such Victories.

In the mean time, they consulted at Van to send succors to Teflis, Daut-chan,
to deserve some reward, offering himself; to whom Cicala delivered 30000
Ecchines to be conveyed to the Fort, which he performed, and without trouble
relieved the Soldiers, for which good service Amurath made him Bassa of Maras.
Maxut also, that guided the Turkish Army to Reivan and also to Tauris, was by
Amurath made Bassa of Aleppo, a great and rich Office. The Zanzack of Aman, a
City of Soria, present in all this Expedition for Tauris, reports in a Letter
to Ali Bassa of Aleppo, that the Turks were forced to give their Camels Biscuit
and Rice: which failing, they gave them their Pack-saddles, to eat: then Wood
beaten to powder, and at last the very earth; which dearth, endured till they
arrived at Van: and while the Fortress was building at Tauris; they gave their
Horses their (...) in very dry powder, whereby there followed a grievous
mortality of Beasts, and Men: the (...) became so great, that every man was
fain to carry a piece of a strong Onion under his Nose.

The late-built Fort in Tauris, exceedingly grieved the Persians, but
especially the King and the Prince, reckoning it too great a shame to let it
alone, and not well knowing how to demolish it, as destitute of Artillery, and
also of sufficient strength: yet pricked on with the desire of glory and
necessity; they determined even in Winter to gather new Forces, and with
Trenches to approach the (...), and try if they could advance a Counter-mure as
high as their Walls: but to hire any Soldiers either from (...), or Gheilan,
Abass and Amet-chan denied them: and the Turkomans for the death of Emer-chan,
and the succession of Aliculi, were grown very contumacious: so that, neither
they nor the Governors could tell which way to turn. At last, for the common
safety, the King sent kind Letters to the Heads of those Nations, and chiefly
to Mahomet-chan, and to Califf the Sultan, declaring the perils of his State,
and Liberty of the whole Kingdom, with his confidence in their valor:
Wherefore, forgetting what was past, as not done in shame or scorn of their
Nation, but for love to the Kingdom, that they would demand what satisfaction
they desired: and that he would be ready to agree to any just request; They
readily answered, They would come unto him to execute whatever he should
command, for the common Necessity or Honor of his State. Now, they had
concluded amongst themselves, to suffer none to fit in Emir's room but young
Tamas the Kings third son, in the end, to cause him to be accepted for King of
Casbin in despite of the King and the Prince being bent to revenge the death
of one only Emer chan. So 10000 Turkomans, under the conduct of Mahomet, and
Calife, went to the King, offering themselves with all readiness. The credulous
King, not suspecting any rebellious plot, was greatly comforted at their
coming: and although by some Sultans that had felt some inkling of this
conspiracy, he was advised not to commit any matter of importance to their
trust; yet did he think it long till he had offered them satisfaction:
promising them, whatever Captain they desired in the room of Emer-chan, if
'twere possible, they should have him? Mahomet dissemblingly answered, Their
chief desire was to do him pleasure and service, not doubting but he would
appoint them an acceptable Chieftain. The King frankly declared, that to give
them a pawn of his good Will, He had chose young Tamas his son to succeed in
Emers room: which voluntary and unexpected grant of the King Mahomet hearing,
became more jocund then he was wont, and seemed ready for whatsoever the King
would command him; yielding also in the others Name large promises of Fidelity
and Obedience, so the thing promised might be performed. The King against the
advice of the wisest Sultans, and the Prince, secretly gave Tamas into the
hands of Mahomet as chief of all the Turkomans: who, in a color with his
followers lustily began with Trenches and Rampires to approach the Fort,
neither was there any great time spent therein: so that there wanted but little
more labor, to begin the desired assault; but the Traitor Mahomet-Chan with
the Turkomans, and the child Tamas, unexpectedly and suddenly departed in the
night silently removing from the besieged walls, and went on toward Casbin,
terming Tamas the King of Persia, and abusing and mocking the old King and
Prince. By which so sudden and dangerous a Rebellion, they and all good men
exceedingly grieved in the huge waves of contrary thoughts; whether to Abandon
that important siege, or to suffer so pernicious a Rebellion to go forward. The
Prince at last resolved, to suppress that Rebellion as most dangerous to the
State; and so with twelve thousand Soldiers, and a part of the Kings guard, he
followed after them, overtaking them at (...), a dayes-journey on this side
Casbin, and joining Battle with them; wherein, many being sorry for what they
had done, would not draw their swords against the Prince; many also fled for
fear, so that (he easily obtaining a Victory) Mahomet-chan was taken, and by
the Princes command, presently beheaded: so was also Calife and diverse other
Captains: and young Tamas he sent to the Castle of Cahaza; 5000 of these
Turkomans that fled, went and yielded themselves to Solomon, Bassa of Babylon:
and his rightful succession, who afterward repenting, sought to return into
their kings favour', but in vain; so, that they did at once lose their Country,
Liberty, Honor, and the favor both of friends and foes. The Prince, after
this Victory, went to Casbin, laboring to gather the dispersed Turkomans,
chiefly those that would not bear Arms in so unjust an action; intending
afterward to attend the Conquest of the Fort of Tauris. Thus ended this
dangerous rebellion, the chief cause that Tauris was not recovered out of the
Turks hands, to the great weakening of the Persian Kingdom.

Now Giaffor, Governor of the Castle, fearing, left the Prince would with a
greater Army return to the Siege, and waxing weaker and weaker, many of his men
secretly fleeing from him, besides those that dyed with sickness, and others
slain in adventuring abroad too bold for Victuals, signified to Cicala at Van;
that if the Prince should return again, he should be forced to yield the Fort:
Wherefore, as he tendered the Honor of his Sultan, he should be careful to
send him succor: adding, it was now most easy to be done, because there was
none but a few Forces in those Quarters, which lay with the King twelve miles
off from Tauris. (...) with three thousand Harquebusiers, and good store of
munition, set forward toward Tauris: whereof the King being advertised, sent
out spies to learn which way they held, meaning to set upon them, but they,
near Salmas, were apprehended by the forerunners of Cicala, and through
torture revealed at last, that their King was on his way toward Santazan:
Whereat, Cicala was greatly astonished, both for the danger of his Forces and
Munition; as also for that by any loss which his Troops should sustain, the
City of Van, the best Frontier-Town in all those Countries must needs be in
hazard, he having left in it but a very few Soldiers: Whereupon, he withdrew
himself back to Van. But the preparations of the Prince were so long and
troublesome, that the Turks new General had time enough to go with a strong
Army into those Quarters, and preserved all that which the only Expedition and
celerity of the Persians, might have put in great hazard. In the mean time,
Amurath, was much troubled in his choice of a new General. Osman, having by
will left Cina Cicala to be his Successor, a man of approved valor, and the
danger he had run through, with his great favors in the Court, not a little
inclined the King to his Election; but he heard of a public rumor, that the
Soldiers could not endure to be commanded by so young a Captain; and, that
some should say, they would not obey him. Ferat Bassa also now very ambitiously
sought again this Honor, having lately performed some good service to the
Kings good likeing; so because he was in good time to provide for his affairs,
he chose Ferat Bassa, granting him Authority to manage at his pleasure such
affairs of the Empire as concerned his Journey: Whereupon, Precepts were sent
out to all Bassaes and Governors of Cities, that all their Soldiers with
their Taxes, Tents, Artificers, and all their necessary provision upon the
first warning to be sent them the next Spring in Soria. Besides all the Revenue
of that Country for the yearly pay of Soldiers in Reivan, Erzirum, Lori,
(...), Teflis and Chars, with the revenue of Tripoli, amounting to 600000
Ducats; there was taken up of private Merchants of Aleppo only 60000
Cecchines, to be re-paid with the first money received from the Kings
Custom-Houses, a matter that moved an extraordinary grudging among the people:
who, besides so many grievances laid upon them, should also lend their money
without hope of restitution; yea, and every man did much wonder, how they were
so ill advised, to make known to Christian Princes what want of money they had.
The Ceneral also had 400 pieces of Ordnance: and did so work, that Maxut chan
was granted to be the Guide of his Army, as he had bin of Osman's: and that
Cicala, Bassa of Van, scarce his good friend, was sent out of his way as Bassa
to Babylon. So all things being in readiness, he departed from Constantinople
in April, 1586. coming to Sivas somewhat later then he should, partly through
the plague, which then raged in Constantinople, and partly by other occasions
at Sivas; He stayed so long for the coming together of his Army, and in
mustring men, and indeed by the exceeding dearth at Erzirum, that it was the
latter end of July before he departed thence; which dearth was also so great in
Aleppo, that a Venice Bushel of Wheat was sold for 12 Cecchines.

Ferat ready to depart from Sivas, was advertised from Giaffa from Tauris, that
the Persian Prince was hourly expected with a great Army, greatly doubting, if
he did foreslow to send succors, and give the Prince time to assault the
Castle, how he could hold the same; whereupon, Ferat so hasted his journey, that
about the beginning of August he was at Erzirum, and hearing more and more of
the Princes coming, hasted to Van: whence, collecting all his soldiers, and
surveying his Army anew, he departed, and being come into the large Champains
to prove their readiness, he marshalled them, as if he should forthwith (...)
Battle, and so marched on. Ferat always feared some sudden assault of the
Persians; which the constant report of the Princes coming to Tauris much
increased; yet he reposed much confidence in the conspiracy, now plotted
against the Princes life, with the privity of Aliculi, the Protector of Heri,
who under color of assisting the Prince, had concluded with himself, and
promised Abas, having given notice thereof also to Ferat, to rid Prince Hamsey
of his life; or, at least, in the variable chances of Battle, at some time or
other, to make him fall into Ferats hands, and so settle his Lord Abas in his
Estate: hereupon, Ferat more confidently disposed his designments, and somewhat
less feared the great preparations of Persia: which preparations in truth,
were by most wicked devices and conspiracies, turned from the end whereto the
Prince had appointed them: and since Rebellion and Discord have for the utter
undoing of the glory of Persia, always favored the Turks Army, its no marvel,
that our Writers cannot choose but write of the undoubted Victories of the
Turks, and the bare shadows of the Persian exploits, which yet many Christians
vainly believe, because they most earnestly desire them to be true, although
they do see the contrary manifest.

The Persian Prince, about the latter end of July, arrived at Tauris with most
of his Army, where he, contrary to all men's opinion, stayed not; the cause is
uncertain; but hearing that Zinel Bassa of Salmas, who of a Persian, became a
Turk, and had done great harm, encamped before the City, he with 12000
Soldiers, road to Salmas, and gave him the assault, who with the Soldiers,
fled presently, and fell before the Persians, so that Zinell himself, with a
few others, had much ado to escape, leaving his City unto the angry Enemy, who
sacked and spoiled it, exercising all such cruelties, as partly the desire of
Soldiers use to do, and partly such as the Turks showed unto them, in sacking
of Tauris the last year: the like spoils did they in all those Quarters, and
perhaps had returned to Tauris, but that some spies advertized them, that the
Bassa of Reivan, with 1500 Harquebusiers, had committed the like outrages
thereabouts, wherewith he greatly moved immediately marched toward Rievan, and
incountred the Bassa, not far from the City, who discovering the Enemy afar
off, disorderly retired into his Fort with such speed, that he left most of his
Soldiers to the Prince's fury, who slew them all, and did what harm possibly
he could all thereabouts.

At the same time, Manogli the valiant Drusian, in revenge of the injuries done
him and his people, by Ebrain Bassa, and to recompense himself of all those
bribes and presents, which he wrung from him, had wasted and sacked all the
Territory of Ebner Mansor, and of his other Enemies, who had yielded their
obedience to the Turks without let, doing exceeding harm, by sudden inroads,
even very near unto Balbeck and Tripolis; so that Amurath was glad to dispatch
away Ali Bassa, with the (...) of Bassa of Damasco, to muster fresh Soldiers,
and attend the utter subversion of Manogli; but coming thither, he found all
quiet again: so that his presence was for a peacemaking amongst them rather
then for prosecuting any further War; which, for want of money, and exceeding
scarcity of Victuals, was then most necessary for the Turks to be avoided.

Now the Persian Prince, retired toward his Fathers Camp, where the rest of his
Army was arrived, being about 40000, of whom he dispatched away 8000 Soldiers
of Heri, under the conduct of traitorous Aliculi, and part also of the
Turkomans, under Emanguli Chan, with special charge, that they should, in
places of most advantage, meet the Enemy, and do him what mischief they could,
thinking hereby to weaken his forces, and so at their arrival at Tauris, with
all his power utterly to destroy them. Both these Captains made show of all
affection to accomplish his Command; but Aliculi, after their departure,
alleged many forced reasons, why they should surcease from meeting the Turks;
and Emanguli, as yet ignorant of the treachery of Aliculi, was mis-lead by him
also: by which negligence, Ferat took leisure, without any hindrance at all, to
arrive at Tauris, and put succors into the Fort: at which time, the Prince had
got knowledge of the treachery of Aliculi, and of the designs contrived by many
Sultans, for betraying him alive into the hands of Ferat; so that he quite
abandoned this noble Enterprise, as not daring to trust himself to perform his
determined Battles, and employed all his study for the safeguard of his own
person, who pursued Aliculi and his accomplices, as Rebels and Traitors; and Abas
Mirize of Heri was discovered for a contriver of his Brother's death, whereby
the common mischiefs were increased more then ever, and yielded greater hopes
to the Turks, then they ever had in all these Wars.

Ferat having thus relieved the Fort, returned toward Erzirum, having first
erected a Fort at Curchive-Tauris, near to Tauris, and two others at Coy and
Cum, leaving in them all convenient Garrisons, with all things necessary: he
sent also succors to Teflis, which they had long expected, and now most (...)
received; but the Persian Prince having hunred Aliculi out of the Quarters of
Tauris, thought he was now delivered from the great fear of his life: wherefore
he journied in haste toward Genge, where having collected a good number of
Soldiers, he determined to remove to intercept the Succors, that were to be
brought to Teflis. He had always found Emanguli to be both faithful and wise,
putting confidence in him for performing any enterprise, and communicated unto
him all his (...): wherefore he joined with him, and lodging in his City, he
stayed there to set in order, and dispose of his aforesaid designment; which
when he was even at the farthest to put in execution, and least of all feared
any treachery, he was suddenly in the night, as he slept upon a Paller, struck
by an Eunuch of his that attended on him; and so the most bright luster that
ever shined in Persia, was extinguished: some think that his (...) Abas of
Heri, had now by money and gifts, induced the Eunuch thereunto; others deemed
it not to be done without his Fathers privity, as most desirous to prefer Abas
Miriz to the Kingdom: diverse others do diversely reason of the matter, wherefore
we leave the certainty thereof with the further process of the Persian State,
to the further discovery of time.

For all the League betwixt the Emperor Rodolph the second, and Amurath; many
sharp skirmishes, often fell out betwixt the Christians and Turks upon their
frontiers, especially in Hungary, Croatia and Stiria. And in December 1586, the
Turks making an inroad into the borders of Croatia, received a notable
overthrow by the Christians, though much fewer: where, amongst others, the
Bassa of Bosna, (with his Brother, reported to have been the Sons of Muhamet
the great Vizier by Amuraths Sister) was slain, whose head with certain
prisoners, was sent to Vienna, to (...), arch Duke of Austria: the Emperors
Brother. Amurath, diverse years after, did no great matter worth remembrance,
contented, it seems, with what he had already got from the Persians; and
holding his League in some reasonable sort with the Christians: yet many a
bloody broil, tending at last even to the breach of the League, passed betwixt
them, which we will briefly set down.

In February 1587, the Christians provoked by the Turks outrages, surprised the
Castle of Coppan in Hungary, not far from the Lake of Babylon, then frozen;
in which there was three Sanzacks, and about 1000 Turks, of whom 190 of the
better sort, with 70 Women, besides some of the meaner sort, fell into their
hands, the rest saving themselves by flight, or creeping into corners, 100
serviceable Horses were taken also, and a booty reckoned worth 40000 Ducats.
Alis Sanzack of Coppan was taken, and afterward presented to the Emperor:
another was smoothered in a vault, standing in his defense: the third escaped
by flight; but was the same year taken, with diverse others. For Aug. the 8th
following, four Turkish Commanders in Hungary the Bassa of Ziget the Sanzacks
of Mohas, and Quinque Ecclesiae, and the new Sanzack of Coppan, with 5000
Soldiers, brake into the Christian Borders, distroying 17 Villages about
Limbath, and carrying away all the Country people, with the (...) therefe;
wherefore George Serinus, Son to that most valiant Serinus slain at Ziget,
Governor of Chanina, speedily raised such forces as he could out of his
Territory, and calling unto his Aid, the Count Nadasty, the Lord Bathian, and
some others that had the chargeof those frontiers, took the strait passages,
whereby the Turks must needs return amongst the Marshes, who being in the break
of day hardly charged by them about a mile from Chanina, were at length put to
flight with such a slaughter, that many yielded up their Scimitars, crying for
mercy; others fled back into the Woods, and many running into the Marshes
perished, or stuck fast in the deep mud, crying for mercy and help of their
Enemies: the Sanzack of Quinque Ecclesiae, Son to Haly Bassa, slain in the
Battle of Lepanto, was taken: the Sanzack of Mohas stuck fast with his Horse in
the Marsh: and being shot through the head, dyed: the Bassa of Ziget, with the
new Sanzack of Coppan, seeing all lost, fled away betimes; but he of Coppan,
was next night after, taken with others wandering in the Woods: the Bassa of
Ziget, with great hunger and grief, came on foot seven days after to Bresansa;
1300 Turks were taken, of whom many died of wounds; about 2000 were slain, and
perished in the Marshes and Woods, above 1500 Horses being take, all the Prey
with their Captives, was again recovered: there was but 1500 Foot, and 500
Horse that performed this service; eleven being slain, but most of them
wounded: 400 heads of the slain Turks, were carried for a show to Canisia with
500 prisoners: the Christians and Country people hunting after the Turks, fled
into the Woods, found a great number; diverse also seeing no means to escape,
came forth and yielded themselves.

Amurath hereupon, commanded Ali Bassa of Buda, to be strangled, for that he
had broken the League, in not restraining the insolency of his Sanzacks, and
placed (...) Bassa in his stead, whom he had now again by the request of his
Wife, received into favor. About this time also, Sigismund the King of Swedens
Son, chosen King of Poland, even in the beginning of his Reign, wrote to
Amurath, to renew the League which his Predecessors had before made with the
Turkish Sultans: unto which his Request and Letters, Amurath, not long after,
returned answer, that he took it well that he had sent his Ambassador, with
Letters to his Court, who had requested in his name, that no invasion should be
made in his behalf, into the borders of the Kingdom of Poland, or any harm
there done between that time, and the confirmation of the League: wherefore as
it beseemed him, that nothing be on his part done, either much or little,
against the League: so should it be on his part, most inviolately, observed: to
which end, his Letters were directed to Isban Gerai, the Tartar Prince,
straightly commanding him not to make or suffer any incursion to be made, into
the Borders of Poland, telling Sigismund, that it was on his part requisite not
to forget often to intimate to his Court, such occurrents and news, as should
happen in those parts, which should be unto him a sign of his sincere love and
friendship.

Sigismund, according to his promise, being crowned at Cracovia, sent
Dzioursius his Ambassador to Amurath, for confirming of the League; which he so
firmly kept, that he could never by the entreaty of the Emperor or others, be
drawn into the fellowship of that long War, which he and a few other Princes,
his confederates, hardly maintained against Amurath, while he lived; and also
against Mahomet his Son: the year following 1588, Ferat took the City of
Genge, being for fear quite forsaken by the Inhabitants; who yet upon his faith
given for their safety, returned again, yielding to pay the Turks 5000 Ducats,
yearly tribute; but going further into the Enemie's Country, and having part
of his Army cut off by the way, he was by his Soldiers ill-intreated, wounded,
and forced to retire.

Cicala also passing over Euphrates, had bloody skirmishes with the Persians,
sometime having the better, sometime the worse, till Amurath himself, as weary
as his people, of that long and chargeable War, and the Persian King,
inclining also to the peace, by Sinan Bassas persuading, was entreated to
hearken thereunto, both for new troubles then arising in other places; as also
for the great Famine and Plague then in Constantinople.

Sinan also wisely told him, he could not confirm his new Conquests in Persia,
without peace: wherefore, Ambassadors passing to and fro, a peace was at length
concluded on betwixt these two Mahometans: the Turks still to keep Tauris,
Genge, Sirvan, and Chars, with all the profits thereof, to maintain his
Garrisons and Timariots there: whereof, although it was thought, new stirs
would soon arise, yet the League was on both sides for 10 years space, orderly
confirmed; for the more assurance of which, one of the Persian King's Sons or
Nephews, was given in Hostage to Amurath, as he required.

Shortly after, there was a great sedition, at Constantinople by the
Court-Souldiers, who, returning out of Persia, insolently demanded their pay:
wherefore Amurath (...) to inhaunce the value of the Coin, and a new kind of
Subsidy, imposed upon all without exception, who standing upon their old
Liberties, refused to pay it, chiesly the Soldiers of the Court: wherefore the
Aga of the Janissaries, was commanded to appease them, and persuade them to pay,
and was in danger to be slain in the attempt: yet for prevailing no more with
them, he was thrust out of his Office, and another placed in his room, that
should have married Amuraths Daughter, whom for all that they would not accept
of, but threw stones at him, and threatened to kill him. Next night, a great
fire arose in the City: to quench which, the Janissaries were commanded to help,
which they both refused to do, and kept back others that brought water, to that
end; and with the other Court Soldiers, did what they might, to make it burn
faster: the fire consumed seven Temples, 25 great Inns, 1500 Houses, with many
Shops and Warehouses. Commandment was given to a Beglerbegge of Greece and
Passi a Jew, the first Authors of this new Imposition, either to gather the
said Tribute, or by some other means, to content the Soldiers; but the
Priests publicly persuaded the people from paying of this new Tribute, or any
other such like: whereupon, the Temples were shut up by the Priests Prayers,
for the Sultans health intermitted, the Bassaes Houses assaulted, and all the
City in a new hurliburly; so that Amurath was glad to pay the Soldiers out of
his own Treasury, to revoke his Mandates for the new Tribute, and to deliver
the Beglerbegge and the Jew, to the will of the Janissaries, who drew them up
and down at Horses Tails, then cut off their Heads, tossing them from one to
another, like Tennice-Balls.

About the latter end of September, Sinan Bassa of Buda, by the help of other
Sanzacks, raising 11000 Soldiers to spoil all the upper part of Hungary,
summoned the Castle of Putnock, October the 6th; but they being better
provided, and more resolute then he supposed, he departed thence; and passing
the River Sachayo, came to Sizo, a small Town, which after soar battery, he
took burning it to the ground: Russel the while, General in that part of
Hungary, came upon him, and after hard fight, put him to the worst, having
slain about 2500 Turks, besides 300 drowned in the said River.

Shortly after, the Christians breaking into the Turks Frontiers, took the
Castles of Blavensten Gestes, with some other small Forts thereabouts. Sinan
having against the League, and without Amurath's Command, so unfortunately
attempted War, was in 1589, sent for with great displeasure to
Constantinople, and Ferat Bassa of Bosna placed in his room at Buda.

Amurath, not ignorant of the ill success of the invincible Armado (as it was
termed) of Philip of Spain, set forth to invade England in 1588, and of the
purpose of Queen Elizabeth, to trouble his rich Trade, especially into the
West Indies; and for relief of Don Antonio, by him driven out of Portugal;
wrote unto her about this time, confirming those and such like matters, as had
been moved by her Agent, telling her, that since he had for many years past,
made Wars in Persia, with a full intent utterly to subdue the Kingdom of that
accursed Persian Heretic, and now was upon point of satisfying of his desire,
that once done, provision should be made for all things she had desired of him,
who by her Orator, had requested him, at the first of the next Spring, to send
out his imperial Fleet against the King of Spain, exhorting her in the mean
time, to be always vigilant; and according to the conventions betwixt them, to
be favorable to his friends, and an enemy to his foes; and to give notice to
his Court, of all new Wars which she should hear of, concerning the said
King, for behoof of her self and him. So commending her Ambassador, for his
good and faithful service there done, who having left Bardon his Deputy, was
returning toward England, that he, or some other principal Ambassador, should
without delay, be sent to his Court, to continue the Office of Legation. Yet
for all these fair shows, it may seem by the state of the Turkish affairs at
those times, and what has since ensued, that Amurath, glad of the (...) of
those two great Princes, and not well yet assured of his Conquest in Persia,
had no great mind to invade Spain, as too far off, and not to be so easily
managed at Sea, as the Wars he shortly after waged against Rodolph the
Emperor by Land.

About this time also, the Cossacks making an in road upon the Turks and
Tartars, surprised (...), a PortTown, where they spoiled many rich Warehouses
of Turkish Merchants; and rifling some Ships in Harbor, burnt the rest, with
great booty returning to their lurking places: wherewith the Tartars provoked,
and set on by the Turks, forty thousand of them brake into Podolia, and the
Provinces near Poland, burning the Country before them, slaying the poor
people without mercy; and besides spoil, carried away many thousands Captive:
yet most of them, the Polonian rescued with the notable slaughter of his Enemy
in his return: whereupon, it was thought, open Wars would have broke out
betwixt the Turk and King Sigismund, had not he by his Ambassadors, and the
Queen of Englands mediation, appeased the angry Turk, and renewed his League.

Amurath, now at peace with the World, and sitting idle at home, was persuaded
by his Bassaes, to take some new War in hand; for that great Empires, they
said, could not without the continual use of Arms, long stand, as appeared by
the Roman State: which whilst it was at Wars with Carthage, or their great
Captains, occupied in Arms against Neighbour-Princes, still remained
triumphant; but giving it self to ease and pleasure, and the Martiall-men not
employed as they were wont, it soon, by civil discord, fell; and the Mistress
of the World becam it self a prey, even to the basest Nations: which old (...)
foreseeing, cried out in the Senate, that the Soldiers were to be still busied
in Arms far from home; for in so doing, the glory of the State should
increase: whereto, Amurath's Progenitors, having respect, propounded not peace
as the end of their Wars, as do other weak Princes; but as invincible
Conquerors, still made one Victory the beginning of another, etc. which, and
the like reasons, they alleged not so much, for love of their Prince, or zeal
to the State, as their own particular profit, especially the two old Bassaes,
Sinan and Ferat, the envious competitors of each others honor: these
persuasions well pleased Amurath, who though he were no Soldier himself, yet
was he desirous of new Conquests; and to increase his name, accounting it no
less honor by his Servants, to perform great things, then it was to his
Ancestors to do that they did in person; but Amurath could not at first, tell
what to resolve upon, for the great Bassaes, concerning the intended War,
were of eight sundry Opinions: The first was, that the Wars against the
Persians should be renewed: The second, for the invading the King of Morocco
and Fez: The third, for War against the King of Spain: The fourth, for the
besieging again of Malta: The fifth, to set upon the Venetians: The sixth, for
invading some part of Italy: The seventh, for the King of Poland: The eighth,
for War upon the Emperor and Kingdom of Hungary: with all which aforesaid
Princes, (except the Spaniard) though the Turk were then in League, yet was
that never made question of; but only which might best stand with the profit
of his State, for him to set upon: his barbarous Law, allowing him that liberty
in such cases, to break all faith and promise, especially with Christians.
Sundry reasons were alleged by the Bassaes, for every one of these Opinions,
too large here to relate particularly.

But the Reasons for the eighth Opinion of making War upon the Christian
Emperor, whom the Turks call King of Vienna, were, for that Uschocci were
grown so insolent, as to make prize of the Turks, both by Sea and Land; so
that, for both the harms they did, and for the honor of the Othoman Empire,
they were no longer to be suffered; for hereby, especially the Merchants great
hindrance, and the Sultans great loss, had removed their Mart from Narenta, in
the Turks Dominion to Spalato, a Town of the Venetians; and yet were not so
secure, though there were peace betwixt the Emperor and Venetians: because
these unruly men troubled all, both by Sea and Land, with their robberies,
driving away Cattle, burning Villages, and taking away babes out of their
Mothers Arms; so that it was no doubt, but if occasion should serve, they would
attempt to surprise with all their power, the Turks strong Holds upon the
Frontiers; nor was it unknown, how little the Emperor esteemed the Turk, when
he warred with the Persian paying Tribute too late, at his pleasure: neither
was this War to be deemed difficult or doubtful, because they might attempt
it by Croatia, Hungary, and Austria, Countries abounding with all necessaries,
they being also to travel almost all the way in the Turks own Territories;
besides the chief fortresses of Hungary, with many other strong places they
already held, whither their Armies in all cases, might retire, or repair their
losses out of the same. They said, the Roman Empire desired peace more then
War, that the Princes were very careful to heap up, and preserve their
Treasures; and the Germans having had no Wars a long time, were now less fit
for Arms, and worse to be commanded; always distrusting the Hungarians,
Italians and Spaniards, whom they rather hated then loved, being divided also
amongst themselves, chiefly about Religion: neither were foreign Princes to be
feared, to give the Emperor aid: the Polonian and Transilvanian, lived (...)
in peace with the Turk, and therefore would by no means, turn the heat of this
War into the rown bosoms, etc. And though the King of Spain might afford the
House of Austria great aid, yet he was now too much busied elsewhere, and the
Bishop of Rome could not be ready in all places to serve his turn: the Italian
Princes would not spend themselves, to pleasure another man; and the Venetians
would not rashly stir up the Turks against themselves, but rather at ease
expect the effect of the War.

All those Opinions of the great Bassaes concerning the War, proceeded not so
much from any sound advice, as commonly (...) do; but rather from a certain
barbarous insolency and contempt of others.

Amurath stood long in doubt in such diversities of Opinions, what to resolve
upon; but contenting himself with what he had already done in Persia, having as
he boasted, by his Servants there performed more than his Predecessors could do
in person: wherefore he resolved to turn his forces against the Christian
Emperor; for first, it grieved him to see the honor of the House of Austria,
and that he durst make head against him; besides, it would be far less
difficult, to make War upon a Country so near him, then upon Persia, where
his Armies were still to be led through his own Countries, whence they were to
be at all times plentifully relieved.

Sinan confirming him also in this Opinion, who having vainly persuaded him to
War against the Venetians, now furthered this, hoping thereby, to recover his
credit, impaired by the little he did in (...); as also by the discord betwixt
him and Ferat, (commonly called the black Serpent:) as also to increase his
Wealth, who was shortly after made General by Amurath for those Wars; but
above all, Hassan, Bassa of Bosna, furthered this matter, in hope to gain great
Riches with the greatest honors of the Field, as he was vainly persuaded by
his bold Prophets: wherefore he daily certified Amurath, of the burnings,
spoylings, and robbings of the Uschocci, and other the Archdukes Subjects,
upon his Frontiers; inciting him to begin his War in Croatia, and continue
the same, either against the Emperor, or Venetians, or that way to break into
Italy, as had sometimes before been done: by which his importunity, he got
leave to begin those stirs, in the Frontiers of the Empire; yet unto this
leave, was this condition annexed, that he should not seem to do it, by
Amurath's Command, but of himself, under color to restrain the Uschocci, who
both by Land (...) Sea, as he pretended, spoiled both the Christians and Turks,
whom the Princes of Austria had small care to chasten: neither was it any great
matter for Hassan so to do, for disturbing of the peace: the Turks Leagues with
their Neighbors, being seldom so, but that their Soldiers in Garrisons, and
adventurers by Sea might, to keep themselves doing, upon a Military insolency,
as they term it, now and then make incursions for booty by Sea and Land; so
that the Venetians, wronged at Sea by their Ambassadors, complained at
Constantinople, of injuries done them by Turkish Pirates, (...) to have them
called home, and justice done upon them.

The Emperor also, seeing many things, both this year, one thousand five
hundred ninety one, and the next, attempted by Hassan in Croatia, and the other
Turks in Hungary, by his Ambassador then laying at Constantinople, complained
of these outrages, desiring to know, whether they were done by Amuraths consent
and knowledge, if not then, that order may be taken for restraining thereof,
which was accordingly done for a while.

Amurath making show, as if the League of eight years, should not on his part,
be in any wise infringed: at which time, the Persian King's son dyed in the
Turks Court, where he lay in Hostage, whose dead body, Amurath honorably sent
home to his Father with an Apology of a suspicion of some, that (...) should be
the cause of his untimely death, still urging withal, the confirmation of the
League, which by the death of the Prince, had like enough been broken: whereof,
Amurath was the more desirous, because persuaded to make Wars with the
Emperor, he hoped thereby, to add the Relics of Hungary to his Empire, with
a good part of the Territories of the House of Austria, and so open a way into
the heart of Germany: wherefore he raised a strong Army, putting a great Fleet
of Galleys into the Achipelago, for the safety of his Islands there: So the
Bassa of Bosna in 1592, entered Croatia with 50000 Men, burning, destroying, and
sparing nothing that came in his way; and also besieged Wihitz, the Metropolis
of that Country, strongly situated, as encompassed about with the River Una,
which he (...) soar battered, and twice assaulted, was by the distressed
Defendants, yielded on Composition, that the Germans in Garrison, might depart
with Bagg and (...); and that such Citizens as would, might still remain there,
without hurt in body or goods: the Bassa faithfully and safely conveyed the
400 Soldiers into their own Territory; but exercised afterward all Turkish
Tyranny upon the Citizens: the Emperor, upon this unexpected invasion, sent
the Lord Petzen to pray aid of the German Princes, against the common Enemy,
who largely promised their help first: Ernestus Arch Duke of Austria his
Brother, with five thousand Soldiers came to Gr^ys, the chief City of Stiria,
to whom more, daily repaired out of Carinthia: the Turks Army the while, daily
increasing, enclosed six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse of the
Christians, who had taken the Woods, Mountains, and strait-passages; and so
that few of them escaped with life: amongst whom, many valiant Captains and
expert Soldiers, were slain: the Bassa, to make his Victory more famous,
lading six Wagons with the Heads of the slain: the Turks thus raging in
Croatia, brought a fear upon all Hungary, and diverse Provinces of the Empire:
whereupon, the Emperor assembling the States of Silesia and Moldavia, declared
unto them the eminent danger, persuading them to join their forces with the
rest, for repulsing the Enemy.

After long delay, Ernest the Archduke, August the tenth, came to the Emperor
his Brother, with the Ambassador of Hungary; and the seventh day after, were
called together: the Ambassadors of the Kingdoms and Provinces of the Empire,
thoroughly debating, How the Turks were to be resisted, and, from whence forces,
money, etc, were to be raised; for now longer delay did seem dangerous; and the
rather, for that the Beglerbegge of Greece, with 60000 select Soldiers, was
ere long expected; for preventing of which so great and manifest dangers, they
sat daily at Prague; yea, even from morning to night: for the Hungarians
(especially the Lord Nadasty) instantly urged to have succors sent into
Hungary; for if the Turk should get into his hands, the rest of the Towns and
Castles there, 'twas to be feared, lest he should soon after endanger all
Germany; whose strength the Turk less feared, than the relics of Hungary:
others were as careful of Croatia and Stiria, as more proper to themselves, the
Enemy now there raging: the Hungarians with the other distressed, crying to the
Emperor for help and he also calling upon the Princes of the Empire; diverse
Assemblies were had in diverse places, and Ambassadors sent to the Emperor from
almost all the German Princes; all was full of consultation, but help came in
slowly: yet that which was, was sent into Croatia, to defend the Fortresses
against the furious Enemy.

September the 18th, the Turks on a sudden, by night, assaulted Toccay Castle
in upper Hungary, hoping to surprise it, but finding it a more difficult matter
then they imagined, they departed, attempting the lesser Comara, which standing
in a Marsh-ground, was easily defended: then also the Bassa of Buda, entered the
Christians Frontiers; but upon viewing the strong Holds thereof, finding
nothing for his purpose, he returned without doing any thing.

September. 26. Hassan encamping betwixt the Rivers of Kulp and (...), by night
passed over part of his Army into Turopolis; with fire and sword, spoiling all
that fertile Island, the Lord of Bonny laboring in vain to defend the same.

About the end of this month, the Bassa of Ziget, the Sanzacks of Mohas,
Koppan, and Quinque Ecclesiae, and others, encamped with a strong Army betwixt
Ziget and Rodesto: soon after which, the Emperor had news that Kainsia. a
City of Stiria, was hardly besieged; and that the Turks in coming thither, had
taken many Captives, whom they had sent to be sold at Constantinople, and that
their Army were about one hundred and sixty thousand; but since the Christian
Army, increasing also, was now grown to sixty thousand Men, he hoped well, that
their Enemies rage would be stayed: about which time, Ernest, appoin ed
General with the Marquess, son to Ferdinand, the Archduke his Lieutenant,
came to the Army.

About the beginning of October, the Emperor had sad news, of 7000 men slain,
whom he had sent into Croatia, men the conduct of Bean, and 2 others, to
hinder the Turks proceeding, encamping between Wyhitz and Carolstat: and,
having September. the 12th, discovered from a mountain some Turkish Companies,
come thither to view the Army of the Christians; sent out 50 Horsemen to
discover where the Turks Army lay, with its attempts: who, finding no more
Turks then those before-seen from the Mountains, returned with such
Intelligence; whereupon, the Christians as secure in their Tents, kept but
negligent Watch. But a hundred thousand Turks suddenly brake into their
Trenches; where, those Footmen for 4 hours maintained a notable fight, many
being slain on both sides: but the Christians, beset and oppressed with
multitude, were slain almost all: yet the Captains speedily fled for which
their cowardice and negligence, they were afterward beheaded. Such as fell
alive into the Enemies hands were cut in pieces. The Enemy also had the spoil
of the Tents: wherein, besides abundance of other things found, 60000 Dollars
lately brought from Luitz for the Soldiers pay. The Turks in ostentation,
laded 14 Wagons with the Heads of the slain, which they sent to diverse of
their places thereabouts, yet the Christians flew of their Enemies above 12000.

The night following, the Turks in the dead of the night surprised the Castle
of St. George; putting to the sword all therein, of any Age or Sex, except
150, whom they carried Captive: so firing the Castle, departed. At which time,
some Turks were seen about Sifeg, who led away Captive above 600 Christians:
and 300 Wagons, loaded with all kind of provisions, for relief of the
Garrisons in Croatia, were all intercepted by the Turks and carried away. The
Emperor hereupon gave notice by writing to the Princes and States of the
Empire; What incursions the Turks had lately made into Croatia, the Frontiers
of Hungary and other places near them, and that the Beglerbeg of Greece, with
the Bassaes of Bosna, Buda, and Temesware, without regard of the League had, by
taking diverse strong places, extended their bounds above 40 German miles,
slaying, and carrying away the Inhabitants, and were grown to that height, that
except they were represfed, they would soon set foot into Germany it self, etc.
which to hinder, he required their general help: requesting them at length to
open their Coffers, and send out their Forces against the common Enemy: which
request, with so great a danger, moved not only them, but others, farther off,
liberally to contribute thereunto.

The Turks hearing of these great preparations, besides the Christian Army
already in Field, and that they had made a strong bridge over Dravus, which
they had fortified also for the safe transporting of their Army; forthwith
furnished the places they had gotten with strong garrisons, and so withdrew
into their own Territories: and the rather, because the plague so raged in
Constantinople, that there dyed a 1000 a day, which had also infected the
Turkish Army; which the Christians fearing, forthwith slew every Turk they took.

The Turks, in the beginning of 1593, began also their wonted incursions into
the Christians Frontiers: The Garrison of Petrinia, a strong Fort lately built
by the Turks on the River Kulp, for the further invasion of Croatia, made daily
excursions, spoiling and burning the Town and Castle of Beck Vochobinam in the
Island Turopolis, and after a great slaughter, carried away 400 prisoners: and,
in Hungary, the Turks Garrisons to supply their wants, made diverse inroades and
did exceeding harm: of whom 600 passing over the frozen Lake, were all drowned
therein. In another place 3000 of them near Nutiusa, dividing themselves in
twain, one part showed themselves in sight of the Townsmen, the other laying
in Ambush, the Townsmen hereupon sallyed out, and causing them to retire,
followed them till they were past the place, where the other Turks lay: who ran
with all speed, and wanted not much to surprise the Town; for there was scarce
a hundred Germans lelf in Garrison, who had hardly time to draw up the bridges,
which done, they with the Ordnance forced them to retire.

About the same time also they of Petrinia, suddenly saliying out took the Town
of Martenize, which they spoiled, killing about seven hundred setting it on
fire, and so returning, having lost not past a hundred and fifty men. Ere long,
the said Garrison took another Castle three miles from the River Kulp:
Whereinto, the Christians round about, had for fear conveyed all their Wealth,
with great store of Victual, and slaying six hundred men in the Castle,
returned with a very rich booty, yet with the loss of five hundred Turks slain
in that enterprise; So also did the other Turkish Garrisons, rage in all other
parts of Hungary: About Sasobia in upper- Hungary, they carried away about
three hundred Captives, and in the nether, they took the strong Castle of
Hedwigg upon the Lake of Balaton, which they spoiled and burnt; as also the
Castle of Isna; but attempting the lesser Comara, they were valiantly repulsed.
They fortified also Stock Castle, which they lately took as a refuge for their
Adventurours, all which declared their desire to begin that bloody War, which
presently ensued: and it was the more suspected, because Crocowitts the
Emperor's Ambassador was shut up close in his House at Constantinople, not to
speak with any man, nor write or send to the Emperor; Wherefore, he began to
raise new Forces: the Hungarians and Bohemians also, seeing these miseries that
(...) them, and the Enemies strength daily increasing, agreed to maintain some
horse and foot upon their own charges for repressing these incursions: now
though the Emperor well knew that these outrages could not be done without
Amuraths knowledge and liking, as before informed thereof by his Ambassador;
yet he wrote Letters unto him, the effect whereof, were, to show himself
willing to have the League on his behalf kept, and also to make a further proof
of Amuraths resolution for peace or war; desiring him, that since the
Honorable Present which was then ready, should be brought unto him at the
time, which should be agreed on betwixt his Ambassador and himself, etc.

In the mean time, He should do well that his Soldiers made no Hostile
Incursions into his Territories: as he had severely commanded his Subjects to
keep the peace upon his Frontiers. He wrote also at the same time, to the same
purpose to Sinan Bassa: telling him, It should well beseem his uprightness, and
good will which he had at other times proved for the high Place and Authority
which he held, and which he rejoiced again to be restored unto him; to give
those things such easy passage before Amurath, that he might acknowledge his
kindness and favor, and have occasion to show himself thankful therefore:
saying, he assuredly hoped so to prevail with his Emperor, that all places and
things as were wrongfully taken away, might be restored: and the Fort of
Petrinia razed, and the Bassa of Bosna, with whosoever else guilty of the
breach of the League, to be according to their deserts punished and displaced.
Sinan returned answer to those Letters: That, whereas the Emperor laid the
fault of so long deserring the wonted presents upon the insolency of the Turks
Garrisons in Bosna, and breach of the public Peace, Those Letters being by him
read before Amurath; He in great choler burst out against his Son the Beglerbeg
of Buda, who had written to Amurath that the Presents would certainly come,
etc. and for all that, the Presents were not yet come, but the Bassa of Bosna,
had sent word to Court that the Emperor would not send them, and all his
doings to be but mere deceit: Wherefore, Amurath (said he) has removed my son
from his place in Buda, and rewarded the Bassa of Bosna with Honorable
Garments: and taxing the Emperor with his Soldiers continual excursions into
the Turks Territories: Whereas, their Soldiers were kept in as with a bridle.
He told him, that his Majesty was to resolve upon 2 points: Whether he were
minded to keep friendship with them as beseemed, and to send the 2 last years
Presents, or not? And whether he would set at liberty their captive Zanzacks,
or not, for whom such Christian saptives as he should desire, should be
enlarged? Which, if he should refuse to do, within two months next, he should
assure himself, That he, who was to go himself in person in this War; putting
his confidence in the Highest, with the Army of the right believing Turks would
come into those parts, and not fail there to encounter him, requesting a speedy
answer of those Letters.

Yet for all these fair offers of peace, Sinan sought only to draw the 2 years
presents from the Emperor, amounting to a great sum; and nevertheles purposed
to prosecute the intended War, whereof the Emperor was not ignorant, being
thereof, as was said before, by his Ambassador advertised. At Summer Hassan
Bassa of Bosna, ceased not for the increase of his credit, to work what
mischief he could against the christians bordring uponhim, who mortally hated
the Governor, or, as some call him, the Abbot of Siseg; a strong Castle upon
the borders of that part of Croatia, where Culp falls into Savus, and was
indeed the very Bulwark of that Country: the cause of which hatred is thus
reported. Tthe year before, the Bassa had sent a Messenger to this Abbot, to
require him to deliver the Castle unto him, whom the Abbot honorably
entertaining for certain days, learned of him, with what power, in what place,
and with what Engines he determined to besiege the Castle? The mean while,
'twas discovered, that his Steward had long before plotted with the Turk to
betray the Castle, receiving of him a yearly Pension: Whereupon, the Abbot
caused both Messenger and Steward to be bound hand and foot, and cast out at a
window into the River Saw. The Bassa, his Messenger not returning, sent another
to the Abbot, grievously threatening him, if he did not send him again: who
answered, He had dismissed him some days before, marvelling he was not yet
returned, yet was he resolved to yield the Monastery to the Bassa, against
whose Forces he saw himself unable to hold it: requesting only, that he would
please to send some men of Account; because it would be no small dishonor to
him to deliver it up to common Soldiers. The Bassa glad, sent forthwith
certain men of great Account: So 3 days after, some turkish troops came to the
Monastery, and the Gates being open, the Noblemen with about five hundred
others entered: but presently, Portculisses was let fall, and Murdering-pieces,
secretly placed in the Court, discharged, whereby the Turks were rent in
pieces, their Heads, Arms, and Legs flying in the Air, and presently the
Soldiers starting out of their (...)-places, soon dispatched those that had
escaped the Artillery: the Turks shut out, hearing the cry and noise of them
within, fled. The Bassa hearing of this slaughter and deceit, swore in great
rage by his Mahomet, to raze this Monastery down to the ground, and to pluck
the Abbots skin over his Ears: the which by threatening Letters he gave him to
understand. And in the beginning of June with 30000 Horse and Foot, he besieged
the Fortress of Trenschiin: which he by battery and assaults taking, sacked the
Town, slew most of the Inhabitants (except about 800 of the younger sort, which
he carried away Captives): and removing thence by a Bridge which he made,
passed the River; and the 12th. of June, came before the Castle of Siseg, and
after a vain summons, next day planted his Ordnance, so thundering against the
walls, that in the fall of the new Tower, two Christian Cannoniers perished:
This furious battery he maintained ten days without intermission so that it
seemed not possible the Monastery long to be defended if not with speed
relieved; the Bishop of Zagrabia and Eggenberg General of the Emperors Forces
there, craved Aid and Counsel herein of Lord Aversberg Governor of Charolstat;
who raised a good number of Horse and Foot of his own, calling also the
bordering Horsemen of Carnia and Carania; who, June 17. met all, not far from
Justaunitz, there tarrying that night: next day passing over the River Savus,
they joined with the Emperor's Forces: marching the 19th day to Sceline,
expecting the coming of Count Serinus, The 20th. day, Herdelius with his
Hussars, and the Lord Graswien, came into the Camp with many of those
Light-Horsmen, which the Hungarians call Hufchocehi. The 21 day they lodged at
Gradium, still expecting Serinus his coming; who, busied, could not come; next
day, a Soldier came from the besieged, teling the Captains, except they
hastened that day to relieve them, the Castle would be lost, for it was made
saultable, and would that night be assaulted; and the Defendants doubting how
they should maintain the place, began before his departure to think of
composition: whereupon, the Captains forthwith consulted what course to take.
Aversberg was of opinion, it was best to go and give the Enemy battle; so was
also the Lord Rederen; the rest were of a contrary mind, because the strength
of the Christians were too weak: and therefore they thought it better to retire
in time, etc. whereat, Avarsberg at first much moved, afterward plainly set
before them, a necessity of the cause with lively reasons: chearing up the
fearful Croatians, and notably persuading them all in general to put their
whole trust in God; to whom it was as easy to give Victory by a few as by many.
With these and other words he so prevailed, that they all resolved to go
against the enemy and to do what they could to relieve their Friends: so the
whole Army not above 4000, hasted on with great speed, and being come within a
Mile of the Enemies Camp, put themselves in order of Battle: Whereupon, the
Turks brought all their Horsemen over Kulp by a Bridge which they made, and came
on in order to join Battle with the Christians: the Croatians and Hussars in
the Vanguard, gave the first charge; but having for a good (...) made a good
sight, they, discouraged with the Enemies multitude, were about to flee: but
Aversbeg the General coming on, both restored the (...), and so charge the
Turks main Battle, that the Bassa first retired, then fled, after whom all the
rest followed: the Christians keeping their array, pursued them with great
speed, and coming to their Bridge before them, took that passage; the Turks
seeing their miserable slaughter, and no way to escape, ran some into the River
Odera, some into Culp, and were most drowned, the rest were all slain: the
Christians resolved to take no prisoners.

The Turks at the siege hearing of this overthrow, set fire on their powder and
provision, and in great fear fled: Whose tents the Christians took with 9 great
Ordnance, and good store of great shot, with the Bassaes Pavillion, and much
other rich spoil, which was all carried into the Monastery. Most Writers agree,
that 18000 Turks were (...) and drowned: Hassan himself being one found near
the Bridge, and known by his sumptuous Apparel; and near unto him Mahomet beg,
and Achmet beg. In other places, was also found the dead bodies of Saffer beg
the Bassaes (...), with 4 other Begs, and the Bassaes chief Counselor and
Master of his Household; but, above all, the death of Sinan-beg, Amuraths
Sisters only Son, sent to learn the feats of War under Hassan, was most
lamented.

The Christian Army (...) thrice about the Monastery, every time falling all on
their knees, giving hearty thanks to God for this miraculous Victory, and
afterward made all show of joy possible. Siseg thus delivered, the Christians,
with all speed laid siege to the strong Fort of Petrinea, most (...) battering
it for 5 days: but hearing that the Beglerbeg of Greece or Romania, was
coming with a great power to relieve the Fort, they raised the siege, every
man returning to his wonted charge. The mean while, a Post coming from
Constantinople, brought the first news of the overthrow to Buda: Wherefore, the
Bassa called him, diligently examining him of the truth thereof; who told him,
that upon the way as he came, he (...) with diverse Horsemen; who escaped from
the slaughter: who told him the Bassa was slain, and his Army destroyed; the
Bassa replied, He was happy in his death; for if he had escaped, he should for
his indiscretion have undoubtedly suffered some more shameful death at Court.

News of the Victory being brought to Prague; the Emperor commanded public
prayers with Thanksgiving to be made in all Temples: sending a Letter to
Amurath, to know how he understood those insolent proceedings; chiefly the late
Expedition of the Bassa of Bosna, and his Accomplices contrary to their League:
He sent also the Lord Popelius with the yearly Tribute, yet with this charge,
that being come to Comaro, in the borders of Hungary, he should stay till the
return of the said Messenger; who, if he brought tidings of peace, then to
proceed on to the Turks Court, otherwise to return with his Present, as he did;
for Amurath enraged at the loss at Siseg, and pricked forward with the tears
and prayers of his Sister, to revenge her sons death, he proclaimed open War
against the Emperor, Aug. 7th. both at Constantinople and Buda: the managing
whereof, he committed to Sinan Bassa, the old Enemy of the Christians. Who,
departing from Constantinople with 40000 men, 5600 being Janissaries, being
brought by Amurath, and the great Courtiers a mile on his way, with charge from
him by the assistance of the Bassaes and other his Commanders in that part of
his Empire, to revenge his Nephews death, and the dishonor received at Siseg.
His denounciation of war against the Emperor, was proud, cruel, and
blasphemous; threatening, to besiege his chief Cities, to burn, destroy, and
kill; and with the most exquisite torments they could devise, to torture to
death, and slay such Christian Captains as should fall into their hands: or to
keep them as Dogs, Captives in perpetual misery; to impale upon stakes their
fairest Sons and Daughters, and to kill like dogs the women great with child,
and the children in their bellies; for he was now fully resolved, to bring him
that ruled but in a small Country into subjection, and to keep from him his
Kingdom. As also to oppress, root up, and destroy the Keys and See of Rome with
its golden Scepter; and he would prove how their crucified Jesus would help
them, as theirs persuaded them, Trust in him still, said he, and see how he
has helped his Messengers, which have put confidence in him; for we neither
believe, nor can endure to hear, that he can help who is dead so long ago,
which could not help himself, nor deliver his own Country and Inheritance from
our power, over which we have so long reigned?

Sinan, kept on his way toward Buda: but the Beglerbeg of Greece, with a far
greater power marched toward Croatia, both to relieve their distressed Forts,
and again to besiege the Castle of Siseg: which, he compassing about, overthrew
the walls, giving no rest to the Defendants: which Breaches they valiantly
defended; and notably repaired; the very Women bringing Tables, Stools, and
whatsoever came to hand, to keep the Enemies out. A great number being slain,
at length, September. the 3d. the Turks entered by main force, putting all the
Soldiers to the sword, 200 being Germans, some of whom they cut in pieces, and
threw the rest into the River Kulp: the religious man there found, they (...)
quick, and cutting him in small pieces, burnt them to ashes: so taking all the
spoil, and leaving a strong Garrison there, they passed over Savus burning the
Country, and carrying away about a thousand into captivity. These Invasions
caused the Emperor to crave aid, both of the States of the Empire, and other
Princes farther off, by some easily granted, but not so speedily performed.

About this time, Peter Lehussar, who commanded the Horsemen, whom the
Hungarians call Hussars, Captain of Pappa, by the appointment of the Governor
of Rab, took at advantage the Turks Treasurers in Hungary, who commanded 5000
Turks: as he was mustering, and paying some of his Countries, slaying him with
diverse of his men, and putting the rest to flight; and so with the spoil and a
few prisoners returned with the dead Treasurer.

Sinan being come to Buda with his Army, resolved to begin with the siege of
Vesprivium: so, compassing the City round, he continually thundered against this
City with his Battery; the Christians perceiving the City was not long to be
holden against so great a power, placed diverse barrels of gunpowder in Mines
they had made under the walls and bulwarks, with trains to take fire at a
certain time; then they departed secretly out of the City in the dead of the
night; yet were they by the Turks descried, and most of them slain. Samaria the
Governor, having a while defended himself, was taken alive, together with
Hors-kirk a German Captain. The Turks strivingly entered the City, October 26.
as greedy of prey; but the powder taking fire, blew up the very Foundations,
slaying a number of Turks, and also wonderously defacing the City.

The Bassa removing to Palotta, summoned the Castle: but receiving no pleasing
answer, he besieged it with all his power; which, at first, Ornan the Captain
cheerfully received, but being afterward discouraged: though the Castle was
yet but little shaken, but one man slain, and the Soldiers ready to spend
their lives in defense, he offered to yield the Castle to the Bassa, so they
might safely depart with bag and baggage, who granted his request: but they
being come forth, and ready to depart, the faithless Turk slew them all, except
the Captain and 2 others; after which without much labor, he took in all the
Country thereabouts, near the Lake Balaton.

Now at last, about the middle of October. the Christians mustered their Army, of
above 18000 of good and expert Soldiers: With which, passing over Danubius, at
the first encounter with the Turks, they slew a great number, rescuing a number
of Captives: about the end of which Month, Count Hardeth Governor of Rab, and
General in that part, came from Camara, and besieged Alba regalis, which he
soon made saultable with his Artilery, but in the assault was notably repulsed
by the Turks so perceiving, no good could be done without a long siege for
which he was not then provided; after consultation, had, he raised his siege
November. the second, removing that day but half a mile: but being about to
remove next day, news was brought that the Enemies power was almost in sight;
the Bassa of Buda by the command of Sinan was come forth with 13 Zanzacks,
twenty thousand Soldiers, 30 Fieldpieces, and 500 Wagons laden with
Victuals, and other provision to relieve the City: Whereupon, the Count,
assisted by Serinus, and other valiant and experienced Captains, with great
speed put his Army in order, and courageously set forward; the Bassa seeing
them marching toward him, took the upper ground, thence discharging his
Fieldpieces upon them which mounted too high, did little or no harm at all. The
Christians for all that, calling on the name of the Almighty, mounted the Hill,
and by plain force constrained the Turks to fly; about 5000 of whom were foot,
(...) being Janissaries, who making often stands, wounded many, yet were almost
all slain, with many others: among whom, were 3 great Zanzacks, 7 Chiaus, with
many others of the valiantest Captains of the Turks Borderers.

The Turks, lost in this Battle, were deemed to be at least 8000, few prisoners
were saved; Whereupon, Sinan swear by Mahomet never to spare any Christian: All
their Wagons and Artillery became a prey, many Ensigns being found, and
Weapons of great value. The Count with great joy brought back his Army to Alba
Regalis, encamping near the Bulwark Stopaseh: where the (...) most feared the
assault. Palfi, Nudasty, and others, earnestly persuaded the Count, not to
depart before he had won the City; but he considering the hard time of the
year, the Cities strength, which was full of Soldiers, by reason of them that
fled in thither, with the want of things necessary for a longer siege: and
fearing at last of being forced to leave it, called a Council, resolving to
raise his siege, afterward imputed to him for more then an oversight. So,
firing the Suburbs, he departed toward Rab, Novem. 5th. Ere long, the Lord
Teuffingbath, the Lieutenant in the upper- Hungary removed from Casovia with
14000 suldiers, and laid siege to Sabatzka, out of which Castle the Turks did
usually much harm. Teuffingbath battering it in three places, made it
Saultable, taking it by force, November. 19th. and put to the sword all the Turks
therein, about 250. leaving a strong Garrison of his own, whereby the Country
thereabouts was in great quiet. Thence the General removed with all speed to
Fileck, a strong City of upper- Hungary: and planting his battery terribly
without ceasing, thundered against the walls and gates: the Zanzack-Governour
thereof, got out by night with a few to acquaint his neighbor Zanzacks with
the Christians coming, and their number also: to consult how the City might be
relieved. The Bassa of Tenesware, with 4 other Zanzacks, undertook the matter;
Whereupon, the Bassa sent for 800 Janissaries, left by Sinan at Buda, and
Albaregalis, who flatly (...) to go: saying, They would not be led as beasts to
the slaughter, as were their fellows at Albaregalis; yet they forced the
Armenians brought thither, to go. But from Buda. Alba, and Scamboth, were sent
only 1500 common Soldiers: for all that, the Bassa with the Zanzacks being
firm in their resolutions, raised an Army of 18000, with many Fieldpieces, and
by night came within two Miles of Fileck: but the Gene rall with Stephen
Bathor, and others with 7000 choice Soldiers went out against them: and
November. the 21, assailing their Tents, put them all to flight, fiercely
pursuing them with a terrible (...). In the fight and flight were slain 6000,
but few or none taken. The Bassa with the Zanzack of Fileck, with many other
great ones were found slain. This Victory gained with little or no loss,
yielded to the Christians a rich prey, all which they carried into the Camp,
more straightly besieging the City then before; on which day the Lord Palfy and
Lasla came to the Camp with 6000, and forthwith they sent to the besieged, That
if they would forthwith yield, they should depart with life and goods: though
the Turks had lately broken their faith at Palotta; otherwise, they denounced
unto them all extremities: yet the Turks refused to yield. Whereupon, the
battery began more terribly then before, so that though the City was most
strongly fortified, yet in 3 days a fair breach was made, whereby they entered
without any notable loss Nov. 24. ransacked the City, and burnt a great part
thereof: On which day, they took the utmost Castle, wherein was the Zanzacks
Palace. It stands upon a very High Hill, strengthened by Art and Nature; and
had in it a strong and valiant Garrison; who, lustily bestowing their shot,
slew a great number: yet the Christians having for 2 days and 2 nights most
furiously shaken the walls, entered by plain force, November. 26. and put to the
sword all the Soldiers, except those that had retired into a more inward
Castle, who being 800, with Wives and Children without hope of relief, and the
Canon bent against them, set out a white Ensign, and upon Parley it was agreed,
they should depart with life, and what goods eevery one could carry: whereupon,
the Castle was yielded the 28 day, and the Turks safely conveyed to the place
desired. Here they found great booty with much warlike provision, but of
Victuals (...) store. The General with the Captains fell on their knees in the
Castle, and with Hearts and Hands lifted up, thanked God for the recovery of
that strong City; but chiefly, for delivery of so many Christians out of
Thraldom: for it is reported, there were above 800 Villages subject to the
jurisdiction of Fileck; the Christians forthwith repairing and (...) every
place, left a sufficient Garrison in the City and Castles departing with about
20000 toward Sodoch 6 miles off: but upon the way, the General heard that the
Turks for fear had abandoned the Castles of Diswin and Somosk: Who, sending out
some Companies to take in those places, they found them indeed forsaken, but
yet many Ordnance and other warlike provision there left. About the end of
November, the General marched toward Sethchine a strong Town in the Diocese
of Agria; but the Turks having sent their wives, children, and the best of
their substance to Hatwan and Buda; hearing of the approach of this Army, fired
the Town and fled: the Christians entering, saved a great part of the Town from
the fire, so leaving there a fit Garrison he hasted to Blavenstine, which the
Turks fetting on fire, fled. The Christians next day, December. 4th. found a great
part yet unburnt, leaving a strong garrison: so marching to Sallek, they took
it being forsaken by the Enemies, putting into it a strong garrison. The
General was very desirous to have prosecuted so happy a course of victory; but
through the foulness of the winter-weather, he could not travel with his great
Artillery: and his Army in that wasted country began to feel want, so that many
had withdrawn unto their Habitations. Then also the Lord Palpey finding Dregel
and Palanka forsaken, furnished both places with Garrisons: other strong places
were also this Month recovered, and as much Territory gained by the Christians,
as was thought to equalize the lower Austria. This joyful news of Victories
and Recovery made great Rejoicing at Vienna and Prague: Wherefore, public
prayers with thanksgiving were made in both places, with many tokens of triumph
both there and in other places. But the dead bodies of the Turks slain at Alba,
not being buried, so noisome a smell rose thereabouts, that none could abide to
come near the place, to the great trouble of the Inhabitants round about. At
length, 350 Turks out of Buda and Alba meeting, to have buried those Carcasses,
a Captain of the Hussars lighting on them, left most of them there dead,
carrying away the rest prisoners. The Bassa of Buda, causing the Zanzack of
Palotta to be strangled, upon suspicion of Intelligence with the Christians:
another coming with 600 Turks to possess his place, was by the way by Peter
Lehushar with the Soldiers of 2 Garrisons slain, with most of his followers,
35 being taken with the Zanzacks (...) furniture. Also the Turks of Petrinia,
Siseg, Castrowitz, and other places: about 3000 passing over Savus, December. 19.
began to spoil those Frontiers; but by the Lord Graswin, and the Borderers, 500
of them were slain, diverse of good account taken, and almost all the rest
drowned in the River: toward the end of which Month, great numbers of
Soldiers being taken up in Saxony and other places, were sent to Prague and
Vienna: and in Hungary the Christians increased with new supplies. In Austria
also was a new Army raised, and 22 great pieces sent down Danubius to Comara,
and preparation every where made against the next year.

Amurath, going out of Constantinople, Jan. the 11th, 1594, to muster the Army
prepared against the Christians a Tempest of Wind and Rain, suddenly overthrew
his Tents and Charriots; yea, his Horses and Men had much ado to withstand it:
whereat, he, as with an ominous prodigy, exceedingly troubled, returned with
his Army into the City, and oppressed with melancholy, cast himself upon his
Bed: where falling asleep, he dreamed, he saw an exceeding tall man, standing
with one foot upon the Tower of the City, and the other over the strait in
Asia, who stretching out his Arms, held the Sun in one, and the Moon in
another: whom, whilst he wondered at, the Man with his foot struck the Tower,
which falling down, overthrew the great Temple and Palace: he awaked, as he
thought, with the noise; and much troubled, sent for all his (...), and
Interpreters, to know the meaning of so strange a dream; who answered him, that
since he had not with all his force, impugned the Christians, their Prophet
Mahomet threatened thereby, to overthrow the Religion and Empire of the Turks:
which vain Interpretation, so moved the superstitious Tyrant, that he swear
from thenceforth, not to give over War, till he had done what he would with all
his forces, to subdue the Christians: which Dream, Interpretation, and solemn
Vow, was read in the Temples of Transylvania, with many exhortations to the
people by prayer, and all good means to avert so threatened thraldom. Of the
rich spoil taken from the Turks, in the Victory near Abba regalis, the Captains
sent a Present for the Emperor, and the Archduke his Brother, by the Lords
Gall and Brun, which they presented unto them Jan. 11th, at Vienna, in a
pompous order; and being rewarded by the Emperor, with Chains of Gold, and
other gifts, returned unto the Camp; and though it was now deep Winter, yet
many sharp skirmishes daily passed upon the Borders betwixt the Turks and
Christians: The 15th of this month, 2000 Turks were making an inroad about
Fileck; but Lord Teuffenbach laying in wait for them, slew and took 1500 of
them. Matthias the Archduke, Governor of Stiria, Carinthia, and the Countries
thereabout ( Ernest his Brother, being lately by Philip of Spain, made
Governor of the low Countries) was now also made General of the Christian
Army, who, to further the new War, departed February the 26, from Vienna to
Rab; the forces newly raised in Germany and Hungary, daily following him, and
by the persuasion of Teuffenbach, sent Count Schlike with an hundred Horse to
Fileck, for the more safety of that place, and the Country so lately gained.

About this time, a Turk taken and brought into the Camp, confessed, among
other things, that in Novigrad, a strong Town, but three miles from Buda, was
left but about eight hundred Soldiers, who were in great fear to be besieged:
wherefore the Turks, had brought thither much provision. Whereupon, the
Christians removing, came betwixt Dregel and Novigrad, understanding of the
people, that the report was true: so forthwith, they sent for some Ordnance to
Dregel, and March the 8th, very early, the whole Army came with the Ordnance
before Novigrad; and before night, they had planted certain great Pieces on a
high Hill, whence they might see into the Castle: against which, the Master of
the Ordnance, discharged three of the greatest about Sunsetting, that the
Turks might know, they wanted nothing for the siege: That night also, they cast
up a great Mount in the Valley, whence they sent six great shot into the
Castle; but early in the morning, they began to batter the Castle, discharging
300 great Shot (that day) against it, but to small purpose; for it stood on a
most strong Rock, with high and thick Walls, and a deep encompassing Ditch,
hewn out of the Rock, and was so fortified with Timber-Pallisadoes, that there
was no access to the Walls: yet the General commanded some Companies to
assault the breach, such as it was; who firing certain dry Faggots, burnt the
Pallisado in diverse places; and so opening a way to the Walls, slew diverse
Turks upon the Rampires, who but faintly defending themselves, yet slew diverse
of them, beating them down with stones, Fireworks, etc: This night the assault
ceased, till four in the morning.

Shortly after, came the Archduke with 1000 Horse, renewing the Battery,
whereby the chief Cannonier, a renegate German being slain^, the Turks dismayed
presently set forth three white Ensigns for parley; but the Christians
continuing their battery, the Turks pitifully crying out, desired to send two
Captains to fall to some Composition: so the Battery ceasing, those Captains
brought nine of the best Turks to the Archduke, declaring by their
Interpreter, that, considering the Christians forces, and seeing no relief from
the Bassa of Buda, as he had promised, they were content to yield the Castle,
so, they might safely depart with bag and baggage; but Palfi in the person of
the Archduke, (who would not be known) answered, that since they yielded not
at the first Summons, but had held out to the loss of many of his men's lives,
and great charge, they were unworthy of any favor, yet he would of clemency
receive them, if without condition they would yield to mercy: which, being told
to the Sanzack, he said, he would still stand on his defense; whereupon, a
fresh assault being about to begin, it was at last agreed, the Turks safely to
depart with their Apparel and Scimitars only: upon which agreement, only two
of the Turks were sent back into the Castle, they delayed 4 hours, as doubtful
what to do; but Palfi being earnest for an answer, and the Christians being
ready for assault, they yielded, four hundred and fifty coming forth, the
Sanzack Governor being one, with his Wife and Daughter, and another Sanzack
sent to aid him; and one Chiaus lately come from Court. Instead of their
gallant Horses, they had base Jades to ride upon: Men and Women being searched,
that they carried away no more than their Clothes; any thing else, fell to the
Soldiers share.

Novograd (serving as it were for a Bulwark to Pesth and Buda) now opened a way
to the Turk's further harms, Lord Rebei, a Hungarian, was made Governor, with
a strong Garrison, and some Troops of Hussars.

The Sanzack coming to Buda, was laid in prison by the Bassa: who, though he
alleged, the Town could not be possibly held with so small a Garrison, against
such a power, imputing the fault (if any) to them of Buda, for not sending
timely relief; and appealing to Amurath, yet was he by his Command, hanged by
night on a Tree nigh the Gate, and then cut in pieces.

The Emperor the while, sent Ambassadors to the great Duke of Muscovie, the
King of Poland, and Transilvanian Prince, to prove their affection toward
these Wars, and what aid he might obtain: Warkutch coming to Mosco, found the
Tartarian, Turkish, Persian, Polonian, and Danish Ambassadors there: the Tartar
and Turk, could have no audience, being with reproachful words, rejected as
miscreants: Warkutch was honorably entertained, and, after their manner, was
daily and largely allowed Wine, Meade, Aquavitae, flesh, fish, and fowl of
sundry sorts. At length, having audience, the great Duke answered, he would
give the Emperor, during that War, 500000 Ducats, and allow him yearly
400000, requesting him not to make peace with the Turks; and promising him also
aid of forces, if he needed: the Persian also feasting the Emperors
Ambassador, had great conference with him about the Christians Wars with the
Turks, promising the continuation of his Masters Wars with the Turk; so the
Emperor would promise to have no League with him, that so he might not turn
all his Forces into Persia.

Warkutch, after four months stay in Muscovia, returned to the Emperor: Then
also Dr. Wacker, returned out of Poland with joyful news, that the Polanders
with 28000, had stopped the passage of 100000 Tartars, sent for by the Turk;
and, if he needed, to be aided by the Cossacks: but the King being in Sweden,
he was by the States, referred to a further answer of his other requests, at
his return. At this time, Serinus having assembled 10000 men, departed from
Canisia, to besiege Bresenza Castle; but the Turks had conveyed away their best
substance, firing the Castle, and departing March 23: into which, the Earl put
a Garrison; so also did he to Sigesta, forsaken by the Turks, and then besieged
Babostcha: which Castle, (though strongly situated in a Marsh, was for fear,
abandoned by the Turks: by all which, the Bassa of Ziget, not a little doubted
to have been even then besieged.

Amurath, to vex the Emperor every way, would send his Fleet into the
Adriatic, to besiege Zegna, a City of his situate in the Bay of Quernero:
wherefore, he sent a Chiaus, to request the Venetians, that his Fleet might
pass along that Sea, and use their Ports and Harbors upon occasion: which,
(the Venetians fearing the Turk's treachery) would in no case grant; yet they
most honorably used the Ambassador, and so sent him away.

Lord Teuffenbach, Lieutenant in upper Hungary, with 20000 Soldiers, April
16th, laid siege to Hatwan, six miles from Buda, it having a triple (...), and
exceeding strong Bulwarks: wherefore the Christians blockt it up. Hereupon,
they of the Town, by secret Messengers, certified the Bassa of Buda, how it
was; praying his aid: who with 10000 in readiness, and five Sanzacks, with 5000
more, came April 30, and encamped on the side of the River Sagywa, in sight of
the Christian Army; but not daring to pass the River, he retired to pass over
at Jasperin, or Jasbrin, where the River had a Bridge, and not far off, a good
Foord, thinking to come upon their backs, and the more safely to relieve the
besieged; but Teuffenbach, forthwith passing the River with much difficulty,
overtook him, next day about one in the afternoon, and with his Ordnance
disordered his Rear, and coming on courageously, (...) a most cruel fight,
which the Turks long endured with wondrous resolution; but now, destitute of
their wonted multitude, and hardly laid to, they fled: whom 6000 men fiercely
pursuing, had the killing of them almost to Buda. The Christians took all their
Ordnance, 17 Ensigns; and Jasperin Castle for fear was abandoned, wherein was
store of Victuals, and much Warlike Provision.

Teuffenbach certified the Archduke of this notable Victory, as soon as he
returned to the siege of Hatwan, as that there were 2500 Turks slain, and as
many wounded, of whom many perished, and those not a few, of great name and
place, 8 Sanzacks being redeemed, and some Chiaus sent from Court, with the
Bassa's Guard of 800 (...) Soldiers, of whom few escaped with life: that the
Germans and Hungarians had agreed it should be counted a dishonor, to spare
any enemies, so that they took but 16 common Soldiers, that the Bassa of Buda,
besides other 3 wounds, was grievously wounded in the side: that the Christians
lost about 100, and about 600 grievously wounded, many being then dead: neither
was the loss small they received in their Horses and Armor.

The Turks in Zabola Fort, now discouraged, forsook the same, which for
strength and bigness, was comparable with Tocay or Erlawan. While valiant
Teuffenbach thus lay at the siege of Hatwan, the Archduke, encouraged with his
good success at Novigrad, came with 44000 men before Strigonium, (once the
Metropolis of Hungary); and, May 6th, encamped nigh the Castle in a Meadow,
whence both City and Castle were plainly to be seen: they of the Castle, and
three Galleys in the River, discharging some Ordnance on them, without any
great harm; but the Christian Fleet coming a little before night, and beginning
to answer them again, the Enemy lay still that night. The mean while, a Turkish
youth taken in a Garden, and brought and examined, confessed there was but 400
Janissaries in the City, a supply being daily expected from Buda.

The Christians, bringing their Trenches by break of day, to a Hill opposite to
the Castle, placed their battery, and began to batter the City: on which day,
May 7th, 22 Turks Heads were presented to the Archduke, and 4 alive, newly
sent out to view the Camp. About night, Balls of Wildfire being shot in, one
set fire on St. Adelberts Tower, first the Temple, then much of the Town
falling on fire, the Sanzacks House, Horses and Armor, with much Powder, being
burnt, and exceeding hurt done in the City: next day, they had made a breach in
the Castle-Wall; but a high and broad sandy Rampire adjoining, could scarce be
battered: yet the Germans gave a fierce assault to the breach; but not being
able to get over the (...), retired with loss.

The day after, they began the battery again, with 18 great Pieces: in which
morning, the Rascians in the old City, acquainted the General, if he would
assault the bigger City at a place they appointed, they the while, (...) let
the Christians, by some little Posterns (...) the old City, so they nor theirs
might have no violence: which agreed to, they assaulted it May the 11th, and
took the old City, all the Rascians having (...), but the Turks (...), except
such as recovered the new Town. Two German Companies, six hundred Hungarians,
three hundred Rascians, and other Townsmen kept the same, who burnt the
Suburbs, yet the new Town, and the Castle was still (...).

Wherefore the Christians, placing their Battery, began again to batter the
Castle: which being made saultable, they courageously assailed the breach, but
were glad to retire, 130 of their Fellows being slain.

The Turks had fortified St. Nicholas Hill, somewhat subjecting the Castle,
which the Christians gaining May 17th, put all the live Turks to the Sword, and
turning the Ordnance, thence also battered the Castle.

May 22, a little before Sunsetting, some Ensigns of Foot were drawn out to
assault the lower Town: which they attempting in the dead of the night, were
notably encountered by the Turks sallying forth upon them, who yet forcing them
to retire, proceeded, and with much ado, got over the outmost Wall; but
unexpectedly, finding a deep and broad countermure, they stood as dismayed; and
disorderly retiring in the darkness of the night, many perished in the deep
mud: In this assault, were 1000 wounded and slain; and though they twice or
thrice renewed it, they were still with loss repulsed. Many Turks were slain
also; yea, the Governor himself, hurt with a great (...), sent to Buda with
many wounded men, brought news of the assaults, and state of the besieged.

The Camp had news the while, that Sinan Bassa coming toward Hungary, with a
great Army, and by Boats conveying part thereof, was set upon by the Rascians,
(poor oppressed Christians dwelling on both sides of Danubius, but now
encouraged by the Emperors success) who after diverse skirmishes, had taken 13
Vessels: wherein, besides Victuals and Ordnance, they found 2400 weight of
powder, 44700 of Lead, 46454 bundels of Match, 1200 great shot, Harquebusse
shot 48500, with much other Warlike Provision: whereupon, Sinan altered his
purpose for Cassovia.

June 4th, about 500 Turks conducted up the River, by two Sanzacks, landed near
Gakara, on the farther side, over against Strigonium: where a while refreshing
themselves, and a few left, the more to assure the place, all the rest arrived
at Strigonium, the old Garrison being now soar weakened: the Turks herewith
encouraged, four days after, suddenly sallying forth, entered a Fort of the
Christians, but were repulsed, with the loss of 26 men, and two Ensigns.

The Christians often assaulted this City, but were so received, that in five
assaults, they lost five thousand men; among whom, were diverse Commanders of
good account: 23 Cannoniers, were also slain, and ten great Pieces of Ordnance
made unserviceable.

This Garrison consisted most of Janissaries: whose notable valor in holding
out, was much commended by their friends and enemies. About the same time, some
Turks lighting on a Germane Troop, slew about 50, putting the rest to flight:
which raising an Alarm, many ran, with some small Fieldpieces, to rescue them:
whereupon, the Turks fleeing, the Christians eagerly pursuing them, were
assailed by other Turks sallying out of a Fort fast by, and forced to retire,
leaving their Fieldpieces, which the Turks cloyed, breaking their Carriages.
About which time, Teuffenbach requested aid of the ArchDuke, against Hatwan;
for that his forces were one way or other so weakened, that he had scarce 600
sound men; who spared him but 1200 Foot, because of too much weakening his own
Army.

Amurath, seeking by all means revenge, besides his own great power now about
to come with Sinan, had procured 70000 Tartars from the grand Cham to be sent
into Hungary to join with his Army, who breaking into Podolia, Walachia, and
Moldavia, collected a huge number of Oxen and Kine, that they might be both
assured of Victuals, and the saflier travel through a part of Polonia; but
being come to those borders, they found Samoschi the Chancellor, and the
Cossacks in Arms: wherefore placing those Cattle round about them like a
Trench, they marched on; but the Polanders with their Ordnance, so terrified
the Cattle, that they turning upon the Tartars, and overthrowing all in their
way, did exceeding harm: the Polonians following them, and hardly charging the
confused Army, armed only with Bows and Arrows, after a small fight, put
them to flight, gaining an exceeding rich Prey.

The Polonians lost about 1800: of the Tartars, were slain 30000; the rest;
retiring into Polodia, passed the River Nester by the way of Transylvania; and,
doing exceeding harm, came to Temesware, and so further into Hungary, being
conducted to the Army by 700 Turkish Horsemen.

But June 14th, the Christians between 8 and 9 in the morning, furiously
assaulted Strigonium in three places, which they notably maintained, till
almost 3 in the afternoon: yet were they glad (at last) with loss to retire.
The Archduke from a high place beholding the assault, had one of his Footmen
slain fast by him, with a small shot: many Turks were also slain, three being
Sanzacks. Next night, there arose a most horrible Tempest of wind and rain, so
that the Archdukes Tent was overthrown; and others, blown down or rent, were
carried in the Air, from place to place. About which time, Lord (...) in sight
of the Castle, cast up a notable Fort (in the very place where Solomon lay,
when he besieged this City) whereby the Enemy was embarred to convey any thing
up the River for relief of the City) to hinder which, the Enemy in vain sallyed
out.

The Christians took also another Fort, in an Island on the other side of the
River, which the Turks lately took from them, cloying the Ordnance: which they
again repairing, furnished it with a Garrison and other Ordnance. Then was the
Castle and lower Town, in five places, from the new Fort, old Town and Island,
so continually battered, that one would have thought all should have been
beaten down. June 17th, a Cannonier so dismounted a great Piece in the Castle,
that the Piece with the Turkish Cannonier, fell down into the Ditch: on which
day, a Mason that fled out of the Castle, reported, that many Turks had been
slain, and but an hour before, 40 were slain in one Chamber: The Turks now
resolving, when they were at the last cast, desperately to sally out, and to
return with Victory, or shift every one for himself, which seemed not wholly
feigned; for about midnight, 1000 Turks sallying out upon the new Fort, were
notably repulsed, and forced to retire, 50 being slain, and many more wounded
and taken; and toward evening, eight Turks being taken, confessed, that six
days before, they saw seven Boats of wounded and dead men, sent down the River
to Buda: so that it might be easily gathered, how bloody a siege this was to
the Turks; for those were bodies of account: those of the common Soldiers
slain, being thrown into the River.

The Turks much troubled with the new-built Fort, on the bank of Danubius, sent
to the Admiral of the Turk's Galleys, below in the River, to come up with his
Galleys, as high as the Fort, and at least to seem as if he would assault it:
at which time, the besieged would sallie out, and assail it indeed on the other
side.

The Admiral did accordingly, discharging some great Pieces at the Fort, but
was so welcomed, that he was glad with his Galleys rent to fall down out of
danger; but the while, they of the Town so desperately assaulted the Fort on
the other side, that some on the top of the Rampires for two hours, most
cruelly fought, many being slain and wounded, and the rest forced to retire.

The Christians intentively laying at the siege; understood that a supply of
men and Victuals, was shortly to be put into Strigonium: wherefore they sent
out Companies, that the one Party lying fitly upon the River, the other by
Land, might intercept the same: both which places, being before possessed by
the Enemy, they suddenly assailed them there, slaying some, and putting the
rest to flight: who for all that, in their retreat, brake the Turks Bridge
(made of Boats) under the Castle over Danubius, some Boats being carried away
with the stream, and 30 falling into their hands; but five perishing, who fell
into the River, by too much haste out of a little Boat.

Now fame had brought news, that Sinan Bassa was coming to relieve Strigonium:
of whose power, were diverse reports; but most doubting the worst, and weary of
the long siege, with its calamities, still added something to make the danger
of stay seem greater.

The besieged were in great wants, the intercepted Letters of the Sanzack to
the Bassa of Buda, declaring their hard Estate, and craving his promised help;
or else the City could not be defended for lack of Victuals, above three
days: which Letters being read in the Camp, great preparations were made for
continuing the siege, and withstanding the Enemy, hourly expected: The Ordnance
never ceasing on either side, many were slain on both sides, many being
Cannoniers.

But the fame of Sinans coming daily increasing, and the Camp possessed with a
general fear, the General consulted with Count Hardeck, Lord Palfi, Lord
(...), and Eraun, Governor of Comara, what were best to do? who all agreed,
betimes to raise the siege, and remove into some more safe place: which
resolution, next day June 26, they made known to the other great ones in the
Army, who, wondrously discontented, chiefly the Germans, both by word and
writing, protested against it, as most dishonorable, and made without their
knowledge and liking: to whom (...), President of the Council of War,
declared, the Enemy was even at hand, with a very great Army, which increased
daily, etc. besides, it was known how that in the assaults they had lost many
of their best Soldiers, besides others that died, and that the place of
encamping, was subject to many dangers: wherefore the Archduke was resolved in
time, to raise his siege, etc. But the German Princes and Commanders, urged
still their Protestation, requiring the General to excuse them before God and
the World, if they yielding to his Command, did what they would not have
otherwise done, causing their said Protestation, to be solemnly conceived in
writing, which they sealed to, and subscribed, to wit, the Dukes of Saxony and
Brunswick, and nine others.

The Archduke first sent away the Ordnance, and raising the siege June 28,
passed over Danubius, with the whole Army, not far from Kokara, doubtfully
expecting what course Sinan would take: before their departure, they fired the
old Town, rasing St. Nicholas Tower, which they once purposed to keep; the
besieged Turks were much gladded.

Yet Teuffenbach lay still before Hatwan, laboring by all means, to take from
the besieged their water, and with Earth and Faggots, to fill up the Ditches,
which he having now brought to some good perfection, they wrote to the Bassa of
Buda, except they were in three days relieved, they should be forced to yield:
he speedily assembling all his forces, hoped to come upon the Christians ere
they were aware, but Teuffenbach having notice, went with 5000 choice Horsemen,
to meet him: coming on him unexpected, he slew 5000 Turks, put the Bassa to
flight, obtaining an exceeding rich prey.

And now having with continual battery, laid the breaches of Hatwan fair open;
he was in the assault, so notably repulsed by the Turks, that he retired with
the loss of his best and resolutest Soldiers: which put him out of hope of
taking it by force; for he had scarce sound men enough left to furnish his
Garrisons, to defend his Frontiers: the Hungarians being almost all shrunk
home, and scarce 2000 Germans left: he had also often (but in vain) craved
supplies of the Archduke: wherefore he was glad to abandon two strong Forts he
had built, and leave the Town now brought to extremity.

While Strigonium and Hatwan were besieged, the Rascians, to rid themselves of
Turkish thraldom, assembled to the number of 15000 between Buda and Belgrade,
under a General of their own: wherefore the Bassa of Temeswar for fear of a
surprise, went with fourteen thousand, to fortify and victual Lippa; but in
his return, the Rascians fought twice with him in one day, with the loss of
most of his Army. After which, they took Beczkeber, a strong Town, in a Marsh,
four miles from Buda, slaying all Turks found therein; and after that Ottadt
Castle, so serving those Turks also. Then they besieged Beche Castle, upon the
River Tibiscus or Teise, the adjoining Town presently yielding, but they in the
Castle standing a while on their Guard, offered at last to yield on conditions;
but the Rascians knowing the (...) thereabouts, had conveyed thither most of
their Wealth, and that it was but weakly manned, would needs have it delivered
up to their pleasure. The mean while, the Bassa of Temeswar and his Son, in
great haste came with 11000 Turks, to relieve the Castle: upon whom the
Rascians turning, overthrew him, and so pursued the Victory, that scarce one
thousand escaped: the Bassa with three Sanzacks, being slain, his Son
escaping: they took eighteen great Pieces, and ere long, two other strong
places: after which, they sent to (...) for aid; (...) chiefly, for Cannoniers,
professing themselves the Turks utter Enemies: the Rascians also about
Temeswar, sent word, that they would come and join with those of the Camp; and
they who dwelt between Danubius and Tibiscus, sent to the Lord Teuffenbach,
offering to send him ten or twelve thousand men, so he would take them and
their Country, into the Emperors protection, which he granted and assured by
writing. They sent also to the Archduke himself, desiring a General from him,
promising all obedience: their Messengers soon returning with an answer,
thought most convenient for their present State.

The Emperor after the ancient manner, in so common and eminent danger, called
a general Assembly of the Princes and States of the Empire at Ratisbone, about
the end of February, which for urgent causes, was put off till March, April,
and May: at which time, the Emperor and the rest, being solemnly assembled in
the Bishops Palace, began to fit June 2d: Unto whom so assembled, after the
Emperor had by Philip, Count Palatine of Rhene, given great thanks for their
so ready appearance, and briefly declared the cause of their Assembly, he
himself, after some complaint of the Turkish insidelity, declared unto them,
how Amurath had violated his League made with him in 1591, for eight years, and
making, as it were, a summary relation of what had happened, even from the
beginning of that violation; yet for as much as there was need of a continual
supply, for maintenance of a perpetual War; and that it was even then
presently to be descryed, that the Turk in his quarrel, which he always
deemed just against the CHRISTIANS; and in revenge of those overthrowes, would
adventure his whole strength he had, by consent of the Princes Electors,
appointed that present Diet, as for the aforesaid causes, so for the general
peace of the Empire, the pacification of the low Countries, the reforming of
Justice, and amendment of Coin; but above all, to make it known, how much it
concerned to have the Turks pride, timely abated, and at length, some effectual
defense for Hungary, it being the strongest Bulwark of that part of
Christendom; and whereas his hereditary Provinces were not sufficient to
maintain so chargeable a War, he requested the Electors Princes and States,
not to grudge to help with whatever should be needful against so puissant and
dangerous an Enemy: So he caused all his demands to be read and delivered unto
them; for answering whereof, they desired time, which granted after many long
consultations, they answered with one consent, It was hard, by reason of the
late dearth, and other like occasions, for them to grant such aid as the
Emperor in writing required; yet beholding the great danger wherein the
Christian Commonwealth then stood, they had of their own free will, and mere
compassion, granted besides their usual contribution, such relief for six
years, as they thought sufficient to maintain a defensive War, both for the
present and future.

Of all these things, was not Sinan ignorant: who, even upon the Christians
departure from Strigonium, was come with an Army of Turks, (the Tartars also
joining unto him, reckoned in all above 150000 fighting men) between Buda and
Alba Regalis, to the great terror, not only of Hungary and the Provinces
thereabouts, but of all Germany.

The Christians being departed from Strigonium, before Sinans coming, he
resolved to go and besiege Jaurinum, or Rab, a strong City; yet to make all
sure before him, he would take in Dotis by the way, about five Hungarian miles
short of Rab.

The Christian Army in marching toward Comara, might see the places on the other
side of the River covered with The Turks multitudes, who marching dispersedly,
showed more than they were: So both Armies in sight of each other kept on, the
Christians to Comara, encamping under the very walls; yet so, as well to descry
each other afar off: the Turks toward Dotis. Where Sinan encamped, July 21:
and next night began furiously to (...) the Castle; the Christian Army not
daring at such odds to relieve the distressed: so, while the Bassa tyreth the
besieged with continual battery and Alarnms: They of the Town despairing of
their own strength, 3 days after yielded the sore battered and undermined Town,
on condition for Soldiers and Townsmen, with Wives and Children safely to
depart: but at their departure many Wives and Children were stayed, and Lord
Baxi, the Governor fowly entreated. Presently after, Sinan had St. Martins
Castle yielded to him by the Captain without much ado.

The forsaken Villages round about, were (the while) burnt, and the Country
laid waste: yea, some Turkish forerunners passing the River Tabnitz, ran as
far as Altenburg, but 5 miles from Vienna, burning and slaying as they went, or
carrying away the people captive; yet 400 of these Roamers were cut off by
Nadasti. Palfi also, and Brun Governor of Comara, set upon the Turks Rear,
slaying a great number of those that had charge of the Victuals, taking 120,
150 Camels, men, and 300 Mules; laden with Rice and Meal, which they carried
away.

Sinan coming toward Rab, encamped within a mile thereof. It is populous, and
was accounted the strongest Bulwark of Vienna, being from it about 12 German
miles standing on the south side of Danubius, whence the River makes a most
fertile Isle, called Schut, in whose Eastpoint stands strong Comara. Count
Hardeck had the keeping thereof with 1200 choice Soldiers, to whom were lately
joined some Italian Companies, who with the Citizens made up 5000 men. July 31.
( Matthias about Sunsetting, (...) out of Rab into Schut Island) Sinan came
and beset it round; so speedily casting up Trenches, Mounts, and placing
whatever was necessary for so great a siege, that it was thought most strange.
Aug. 2. he furiously battered the City, bringing his Trenches within Musket
shot of the walls: at which time, 4000 Tartarian Horse swam over Danubius,
between Rab and Comara, 6000 Turks following them, who, suddenly surprising a
Fort next the River, discharged five great pieces found therein upon the
Christian Camp, who terrified with the sudden accident, hardly charged them,
and slew many, chiefly those that were dispersed for booty, forcing the rest to
take the River, wherein most of them perished.

About 5 days after, the Tartars swam over again, and burning a Village in the
Island, slew some Christians in their Tents, but they were easily overthrown by
Horsemen, and many slain: the rest forsaking Weapons and Horses, ran into the
River: whom, the Christians hardly pursuing, slew about 2000 therein. Sinan the
while, thundered with 60 great pieces against the City without ceasing, but as
yet had made no breach for entrance: but the towers, and high Houses were hurt,
and the Camp, by random-shot fleeing over the Town. The Janissaries in a great
rain, furiously and with a horrible cry assaulred an outer Bulwark, which the
Christians forsaking for fear, had retired into the City, so that the
Janissaries had there set up 3 Ensigns; but, the Christians ashamed, forthwith
sallied out again, and courageously charging them, (...) many and recovered the
(...). Sinan was now (...) up a great Mount: which whilst he daily surveyed, he
fell sick, appointing a Bassa in his siead to oversee the work; who, walking to
and fro (...) the work, was slain with a shot out of the Town, Aug. 15. Some
Turks early getting over the River in (...), (...) a Fort, which the Soldiers
presently forsook: which John de Medices perceiving, came with his Italians,
and, driving the Turks out of the Fort, slew diverse, forcing the rest into the
River, where they were all drowned. At which time 5000 Tartars in another
place, passing into the Island, were by (...) and his Hussars without much
resistance put to flight, slaying many, the rest hoping to get over the River,
but other Turks meeting them in the River: would have beaten them back and
stayed their flight, but the Tartars opposing them, made a most cruel fight; so
that of the 5000 Tartars, few returned to their fellows.

Now began great scarcity in the Turks Camp, so that the Soldiers eating
unripe fruit, etc. had the Bloudy-flux, and many Diseases which did wondrously
consume the Army. Besides, many were slain from the City, one being Sinan's Son
in law, upon whose death, he is said to have fallen sick for grief, but soon
recovered again.

The Tartars, passing into the Island, Aug. 19. 3000 were there slain,: some
Turkish Companies, having also (...) passed over, assailed the Christians Camp,
and other Tartars got over not far from Comara, hoping at length to perform
some great matter; but finding the Turks, overthrown before their coming, and
the Christians ready for them, they were (...) and 2000 slain: in which
conflict, 3 Zanzacks, and many of great account, perished.

Shortly after, the Christians sallying out of Rab, slew many Turks, retiring
with small loss. Many now persuaded the Bassa to raise his siege, and to remove
to some other more wholesome and plentisull place; but he would not hearken to
any (...). In the mean time, Maximilian the Emperor's Brother took
Cragstowitz, a (...) upon (...) Borders of Croatia, and put all the Turks to
the sword. Then he besieged the exceeding strong Fortress of Petrinia, by whose
and his Soldiers industry, they so terrified the Turks with continual battery
and Mines, that firing the Fort, they fled away by night, shifting for
themselves: whereupon, they of Sifeg firing the Castle, left it to the
Christians. So did they of Gara; by which success all Croatia was for that time
freed of a great trouble and danger.

Aug. 28. 20000 Christians, passing the River by a Bridge, and joining with
them of the Town, fallied out upon the Turks Camp. The Hungarians in the front
at first onset beating the Turks out of two Bulwarks, and cloyed their
Ordnance, but they returning with more power, forced the Christians to retire
and recovered their Bulwarks, many were slain on bo h sides. Thouhause and
Geitzhofler Hardeck's Lieutenant, came in boats with 1500 Foot to help their
fellows, but landing too late, they were by the Turks forced with such speed to
retire, that many not able to recover the boats were drowned: Geitzhofler
himself perishing, and Thonhause deadly wounded: yet the Christians assembling
under the very walls, gave them a second assault: the Foot being foremost were
easily repulsed by the Turkish Horse; but Lord Rinsberg coming in (who at
first onset was slain), the Turks were forced to their trenches, except a few
divided ones: who being found hid in Vineyards, were all flain. Lord Palfi was
much wounded in his thigh: 400 Christians were slain, and about 2000 Turks.
These conflicts endured from 7 in the morning till noon: the Christians then
retiring and returning, carried away, besides other spoils, 17 Turks Ensigns,
daily skirmishes passing. Septem. 9. 10000 Turks getting over into Schut
Island, suddenly set upon the Christians (sleeping in security) slaying 2000,
and after a small fight, put the rest to flight: so, that Matthias himself with
the other great ones had much ado to escape. The, (...) the while, took their
Tents, Ordnance, Ammunition, and all the money lately brought for the Soldiers
pay, with 1000 Wagons, and 200 boats laden with provision, and 10 Galleys,
containing 120 piece of Ordnance, the loss being valued at 500000 Ducats: And
though the Turks lost 2500 men, yet by this Victory they roamed far and near
unresisted, and burnt some Villages not far from Vienna, so that for many miles
the Towns were for fear forsaken: some people being slain, some carried
captive, and some with what they had, getting farther off into more safe
places: and shortly after, the Tartars passing Danubius, sacked and burned
Weisenburg, with certain Towns thereabouts; but adventuring to go further, they
were with loss forced to return.

Cicala Bassa, the Turkish Admiral, the mean time landing his men in diverse
places of Italy, did exceeding harm, chiefly in Calabria, where surprising
Rhegium, (...) rifled and burnt it; but sailing thence. (...) in sight of
Messana of Sicily landed some men: who, adventuring too far, were by the people
put to flight, so they returning to Rhegium utterly razed what they before
(...). The while, even in sight of the Garrison of (...), they took a ship
coming out of the East, and 3 others from Apulia: afterward they changing a
few shot with some Eastern galleys to no great purpose, sailed along the
Calabrian coast, often landing men; who, skirmishing with the Calabrians, had
sometime the better, sometime the worse, being again received (...) their
Galleys. The Messanians gave speedy knowledge hereof to the Viceroy (then at
Palermo for his pleasure) requesting his present aid; but he dallying off time,
they of themselves raised 500 Horse to be led by Ph. Cicala, the Renegate
Admirals Brother, storing the City with all necessaries for a Siege: certifying
the Spanish King of all, and of the Viceroy's negligence, requesting speedy aid
against these Turkish terrors. The Neopolitans put to sea 30 Galleys, to whom
the Pope, Duke of Florence, the Genowayes, and Knights of Malta, joining
theirs, there was about 80 Galleys under Auria's conduct. The Venetians also,
though in League with the Turks, for more safety, set forth about 100 Ships and
Galleys under Foscarin their Admiral; which Fleets sailing up and down, freed
Italy, Sicily, Dalmatia, etc. of a great fear.

(...), having encouraged his Soldiers with great hope and large promises,
assaulted Rab, September. 23. the Sun (...) scarce up, furiously maintaining it
till night; but through the Defendants valor, the Turks with loss retired: yet
was the assault renewed next day, and that most desperate for two days, 12000
Turks being slain, the rest retiring into their Trenches, Few days after, the
Turks by a Mine, blew up a Bulwark of the Town, whereby the Ditch was there
somewhat filled, the Turks with all their power next day striving to enter, but
were still notably repulsed with loss; yet ceased not the Enemy his (...) and
assaults, till he had gained two Bulwarks, whence he might by the fallen
rubbish have access to the Town, to the great terror of the Defendants:
Whereupon, Count Hardeck (who, corrupted by the Turk, had often said, The Town
could not possibly long be defended) now took occasion to consult with the
other Captains (diverse being already framed to his purpose) what to do for
yielding up the Town: and after a little consultation for fashion-sake,
resolved to send to Sinan sor a truce for a while, for coming to some
reasonable composition; yet, to excuse his doings, he conceived a public
Instrument in writing in his, and his Captains names: that since 'twas
impossible longer to defend the town against such an enemy without new supplies
instead of the (...), which they had often in vain requested, they were
necessitated to compound with the Enemy, which they subscribed and sealed. So a
Truce being granted, and Pledges mutually given it was agreed: That the whole
Garrison, should with bag and baggage, and (...) displayed, with a safe convoy
be brought to Altenburg; which though by Oath confirmed, yet, when the Count
had, September 29. delivered up the City, and all were come forth, himself and
a few friends, were conveyed to the appointed place, but the rest were spoiled
of all they had, and hardly escaping with life, came to Hochstrate, and next
day to Altenburg.

Rab, even when it was given up was Victualled for a year, and sufficiently
furnished with all necessaries for defense. Sinan glad of this Victory, gave
his Master speedy knowledge thereof, of whom he was highly commended, and
afterward bountifully rewarded; for Amurath now hoped to devour Austria with
the adjacent Provinces. Sinan, (...) delay repaired and fortified the City,
enlarging the Ditches, and filling the Cathedral with (...); Whereon, he
planted store of great Ordnance, speedily dispatching all things: and, the
while sent the Tartars to summon Pappa: which Castle, and small Town, the
Christians next night setting on fire, fled.

The (...) leaving 4000 Janissaries, and 2000 Horse in Garrison, departed from
Rab to Comara, a strong town, about 4 Miles from it (which is enclosed on the
East, North, and South, with the two arms of Danubius) all (...) ways, (...),
with his well appointed Fleet, hardly besieged the Town, giving diverse
assaults, while, the Beglerbeg of Greece by continual Battery and Mines, shook
the walls and bulwarks by land, but the Christians with no less courage
defended themselves, than they (...) by the Turks assailed. Matthias the
Archduke the while, collecting again a good Army, resolved to go and raise the
siege from this City of such concernment to the Emperor; so he came and
encamped October. 28. at N tria, about 5 Miles off. The Tartars were a little
before departed purposing to return home: yea, the Turks weary of the siege,
and wanting Victuals, began to shrink away: Wheresore, the Bassa upon the
Christians approach forsook the City after three weeks hard besieging it, and,
by a bridge of boats, passed over Danubius to Dotis: where, next day he brake
up his Army. The Archduke coming to Comara diligently repaired the Breaches,
filled up the Mines, made new Bulwarks and Rampires in diverse places, leaving
Lord Brun the Governor still; who, in defense thereof was grievously wounded
in his right knee: to whom Sinan in the late siege, sending 5 Turks under
color of a parley, but indeed to try, if he were any way to be won to yield
the City; he having heard them out, had 4 of their Heads struck off and set
upon pikes upon a Bulwark; but the 5th. he sent back to tell the Bassa, He was
much deceived, if in him he thought to find a Count Hardeck; he wishing rather
to die the Emperor's faithful servant in the blood of the Turks, than to
betray his charge. Count Hardeck generally suspected to have betrayed Rab to
Sinan, was sent for to Vienna, and by the Emperor committed to prison; and,
being accused of sundry things (as that at first, he suffered the Enemy to do
many things, which afterward turned to great danger): That he caused some
Cannoniers to discharge some great pieces with powder only: and seeing one
piece especially to do much harm, he caused it to be removed: hat he should often
say, The Turks should be but one Town the richer if he won it, etc. The
heaviest thing was the Testimony of one, who being taken young, and serving in
Sinan's Chamber, now was fled from the Turks: declaring to Matthias, in time of
the Siege, he, but 3 days before, by his Master's command, had delivered 2
baggs full of Ducats to 2 Christians, one having a notable scar in his face,
and afterward known to have bin a servant to the Count. Upon this and the like
proof, he, after many hearings in open Court, where were 47 Nobles and great
Capt. was condemned of Treason, and adjudged to be hanged, and to hang 3 days
on the gallows, and all his estate to be confiscate: which rigor, the Emperor
mitigated, by having his right hand (given to him in pawn of his Faith) and his
Head struck off upon a Scaffold at Vienna, and so buried. So, June 10th.
following, in the high street, after the sentence read, and he commending
himself to Gods mercy on his knees, with eyes covered, and his right hand
covered with black both Head and Hand were so suddenly struck off, that it
could scarce be judged which was first done; so being conveyed away in his
Coach covered with black, he was buried among his Ancestors.

The Tartars departing from Sinan's Camp, purposed to have gone home through
upper- Hungary, and by the borders of Transylvania and Moldavia: 2 parties of
whom being utterly defeated, and cut off by Palfi, the rest finding the
passages hardly beset by the Prince of Transylvania, and Vayuod of Valachia,
returned the same way they came: and rifling and burning some Towns and
Villages about Tockai, passed the River, and wintring in places about Rab,
lived on the spoil as far as Meinersdorf. The Tartars at their first coming,
by order from Amurath, stayed on the Borders of Transylvania, either to have
surprised that Country, or to have thrust out Sigismund Bator, the young
Prince, or sent him in bonds to Constantinople; for it was reported, that he
weary of his heavy Tribute (having bin diverse times enhaunsed) intended to
revolt from the Turk, and enter a confederacy with the Emperor; which change,
some of the chief of Transylvania, sought by all means to hinder: and
acquainting Amurath hereof, and conspiring with the Tartars, undertook the
aforesaid matter: wherefore, they cunningly persuaded the Prince, that Samosche
the Polonian Chancellor lay on his own borders, expecting his coming to
consult with him of important matters, counterfeiting Letters to that effect,
from the Chancellor to the Prince, so that he suspecting no Treason, put
himself upon his way; but he was advised by some suspicious friends not to go
any further, whose coming was not attended by the Polonians, but the Tartars
his Enemies, who lay in wait for him at Hust.

The Prince astonished, retiring to the strong Fort of Rehwere, staying 14 days,
as for fear of the Tartars only; and the while, gave notice to the Nobles and
Governors his Friends, of the eminent danger, who repaired to him in Arms: But
the Traitors persuaded Bornemissa the Princes General, that to fight with the
Tartars was of no small danger: Wherefore, he should only show himself near
them, as not unprovided for them: So, the Army was brought so nigh the Tartars,
that they might hear the noise of their Drumms and Trumpets; Whereby, the
Tartars as by a Watchword, perceiving themselves discovered, removed, and
breaking another way through Transylvania, and so into Hungaria, rifled and
burnt 500 Villages, slew all males above 12 years old, carrying away the rest
to the Turks Camp, then at Rab. The Traitors the mean time, conspired to set up
Bator the Princes kinsman; and with Amuraths favor, to prefer him to the
Government Wherefore Sigismund doubting, wholly to trust his own Subjects,
wrote to the Rascians and other Confederates praying their aid, which he
receiving, appointed an assembly of all his States at Clasehburg; every one to
appear personally upon a great pain, none absenting but Cardinal Bator, and
Stephen his Brother: who as guilty, were fled into Poland.

All thus met, the Prince, commanded the Gates to be shut, watch to be
diligently kept, and none on pain of death to speak of imagined Treason:
politiquely also publishing in writing, that the Germans had got a notable
Victory over the Turks, commanding Bon-fires and other signs of Joy to be
made; he prepared also a Banquet, whereto, he with others the chief
Conspirators were invited: who, being at dinner, he apprehended 14, committing
them to prison, executing 5 in the Marketplace n xt morning; He, who had
undertook to have slain the Prince, after 3 or 4 light cuts in the neck, being
drawn in pieces with 4 Horses, the other 4 were beheaded, and left there as a
Spectacle: the rest being afterward executed: and Balthazor his Kinsman, that
should have been exalted, strangled. Then, by a public Edict, he gave leave to
all his Subjects, of their own charge to take up Arms against the Turks, and
whatsoever they could take from them to have it to themselves: whereby, the
Transilvanians encouraged, armed themselves to the number of 40000. who, being
sworn to hold together against the Turks, came first to Danubius, where they
lighted on some Turks ships, laden with provision for the Camp, Merchandise of
all sorts, and much Treasure, of whom they took 7, but the 8th. the Admiral
escaped: they took an exceeding rich booty, slew many, carrying back seven
Turkish Ensigns to the Prince. This prosperous beginning caused great joy in
Transylvania. Sinan is reported to say, If this provision had come to him in
safety: he could more easily (with that Treasure) have bought Vienna than he
had Rab.

After this Victory, the Prince besieged Temesware; but hearing of the Tartars
coming toward Transylvania, upon their return, he gave off, to look to his
own Country. Ere long, about December 22. a tumult of the Janissaries at
Constantinople grew to such a height, that a Bassa was slain, with other great
Ones, and a son of Amurath's sore wounded and with much ado saved. Upon conceit
whereof, Amurath fell into a grievousfit of the falling sickness, vexed 3
days and 3 nights therewith; so that the City was filled with heaviness and
fear, and the Courtiers even ready to think of a new Lord. This tumult many
supposed was the cause of Amurath's death, shortly ensuing: whose grief and
malady daily increased by ill news, still brought him, chiefly out of
Transylvania: where the Prince waiting on every occasion cut the Turks short in
every place, and took also this Month many of their strong holds. He had then
in field 3 Armies: one under Ferens, in the Country Lugaz, nigh Temesware:
another under Horat on the other side Danubius, to intercept the Turks coming to
Buda, the 3d. under Cornoyse nigh Giula; to whom came 1500 Horse out of upper
Hungary.

Sigismund thus revolted from the Turk, thought best betimes to enter a
confederacy with those of Valachia and Moldavia (who shortly after also, cast
off the servile yoke) but chiefly with the Emperor; Wherefore, he sent his
Ambassadors, who arrived at Prague, Jan. 12. with 20 Wagons and 150 Horse,
where they were most honorably received and entertained; and having audience,
after much grave consultation, the Confederacy was fully concluded,

1. That they should mutually proceed in their Wars begun, and not enter any
League with the Turk, without the liking of each other: and that in all
conclusions of peace made by the Emperor, Transylvania, Valachia, and
Moldavia, should be comprised; nor the Prince to enter any League with the
Turk, without the consent of the Hungarian Nobility also. 2. Transylvania, with
all parts thereof possessed by the Prince in Hungary, to remain to (...) and
his Heirs male, in absolute Authority; yet to acknowledge the Emperors for
their lawful Sovereigns, etc. But for lack of Heirs male, Transylvania to
descend to the Emperors, the Kings of Hungary: but then should they keep
inviolate the ancient Laws, Privileges and Customs of that Country, and
always appoint a Transilvanian Noble, to be Vayuod of the same. 3. The
Emperor to acknowledge the Transilvanian an absolute Prince; and by Charter
confirm to him the Title of, Most Excellent. 4. The Emperor to procure a
Daughter of his Uncle Charles, late Archduke for a Wife to the Prince, for
affinity sake. 5. The Prince to be by him procured one of the Order of the
Golden-Fleece. 6. That the Prince should not be forsaken by the Emperor,
however things fell out, but if more need should be to have greater help: which
(...) was to be reciprocal, according to the necessity of either part. 7. The
Roman Empire to undertake the protection of the Prince and his Territories, and
to create him and his successors Princes of the Empire, yet to have no voice
or place among them. 8. Whatsoever places of strength should be taken by both
their Forces, when the Emperor should send a full Army, should be his
Majesty's; but what the Prince should by his own Forces gain, should remain
his: yet what places the Prince did recover, which belonged to Hungary, before
it was taken by the Turk, he should (...) to the Emperor, as soon as he had of
him reasonable recompense. 9. The Emperor to give the Prince sufficient aid
for fortifying places thought needful: and the Prince not to spare his own
Coffers or (...) to the same end. 10. That if it should chance that the Prince
or his Successors, having spent themselves, should not be able longer to
defend their State and Country, but should by the Enemy be forced to forsake
it: the Emperor within a month to assign some place in his Dominions, where
they might honorably live: and the like regard to be had of such other
principal men, as should adventure life and living, in defense of the
Christian Commonweal.

Which Articles solemnly confirmed, the Ambassadors were with all bounty sent
back; the Prince the while, laboring by all means to draw to him, Michael
Vayuod of Valachia, and Aaron of Moldavia, both the Turks Tributaries, so that
they shortly after joined hands with him for recovery of their lost liberty:
which revolt so much concerned the common good, that the safeguard of Austria,
the remnants of Hungary, with some good part of Germany, is not causelessly
(...) to have rested therein. The revolt of the Noble Vayuod of Valachia, of no
less worth than the Prince, was after this manner. But first, let us see how he
obtained of the Turk this preferment. Alexander the late Vayuod, a Moldavian
(proud above measure of so great preferment, as of his Nobility, and Fortune
fawning upon him) intolerably oppressed his people, and, in further favor of
the Turks, brought into that too much exhausted Country, such a company of
them, as that they oppressed the Christians with new exactions, and more than
tyrannical injuries: breaking into their Houses, dispoyling them of goods, and
also taking Tyth of their Children, a thing never before seen; they ravished
also their Wives and Daughters even in sight of Husbands and Parents, with
diverse outrageous villainies, not with modesty to be rehearsed. His Subjects
being hereby out of hope of recovering their ancient liberty, and not knowing
which way to turn; there was at Crailowa a City in the confines of Valachia
(where the Governor is with a strong Garrison always resiant) (...) (that is,
with the Valachians, Christians) (...), son to Peter, Alexanders Predecessor;
who, as he was for his birth, comeliness and tallness, well known to the (...);
so for his zeal toward Christianity, love to his Country, kindness, (...),
upright-dealing, constancy and bounty, heroic mind, wisdom, foresight,
pleasingspeech without affectation, no less gracious and dear: whose Fame
caused Alexander to command him secretly to be apprehended, and so taken out of
the way: whereof he understanding, fled into Hungary, and thence went to
Constantinople in 1591, to (...) for the Vayuodship; About which time, the
chief and gravest of the Valachians, laying at Amuraths feet, most grievously
complaining of the manifold and intolerable injuries they had, and were like to
sustain from Alexander and his Courtiers: the Turks Garrisons and Merchants
with many tears, declaring his most foul facts, and highly commending Jon
Michael for his Virtues, as the true Heir; humbly requested Amurath, either to
appoint him Vayuod, or to assign some other place for them to dwell in; wishing
any where to live, rather then under so merciless a man; neither did Michaels
Uncle by the mother, a very rich Greek, spare for any cost.

So Michael was with great solemnity created Vayuod of Valachia; and that
oppressed Country by little and little (though not altogether without most
sharp and violent remedies) well relieved: at the beginning of whose
Sovereignty, Alexander, guilty of his evil and shameful Government, secretly
fled; but some years after, going with his Wife to Constantinople, and there
attempting ill means to obtain the Palatinate of Moldavia, for which he was
accused by the Palatines Agent; he was by Amuraths command strangled in his own
House, in 1597. about 6 years after his departure from Valachia.

Michael thus made Vayuod, ere long, Cornelius de No^a, sent from Pope Clement
to the great Duke of Muscovy in his return, informed Sigismund of Transylvania
and Aaron of Moldavia, of the great consent of diverse Christian Princes to
maintain War against the Turk, persuading them with many reasons in that
Christian quarrel, to join to them their Forces, raised near Danubius and
Nester: but for diverse important businesses, he could not come unto Michael;
whom yet, Sigismund his Neighbor desirously sought to draw into the fellowship
of that War, even for the same reasons a^mos^, wherewith he had been himself
moved; and, in brief, he said, It was a wise man's part, not without most
manifest and weighty reasons to promise himself better fortune or more
assurance than had his Predecessors, but warned by their harms, betimes to
provide for his own safety: whereby, he so prevailed with the Vayuod; that
although he would not for the weightiness of the matter at first yield: yet
promised with his Friends and Nobles to consider thereof; The Prince laying
down, How a sufficient number of Soldiers might always be raised: pay
provided, and aid still sent him as need should be, from the Emperor or
himself: Also, that the Palatine of Moldavia would be ready to combine, that so
with united Forces, they might upon Danubius and Nester's Banks easily repress
the Incursions of the Turks and Tartars. The Emperor the while, the easier
proceeding in his Wars on the other side of Hungary. Whilst this plot was laying
(not wholly unsuspected by the Turks), Sinan coming, had as aforesaid taken
Rab: whereat the Vayuod began more deeply to consider of his estate; and
grieving to see his Subjects, to be so daily more and more oppressed by the
insolent Turks, he (as he had promised) called an assembly of all his States to
consult what were best to be dene for remedy of such evils; and preventing of
greater, not causlesly to be feared. Where they all agreed, rather to join with
the Christian Princes, than longer to endure the Turkish yoke: Whereupon, the
Vayuod taking 2000 Hungarian Garrison-Souldiers, secretly laid upon his
Frontiers for that end; and calling on the Name of Christ Jesus, in one day
slew about 2000 Janissaries, who without his leave had seated themselves in
Valachia, with all other insolent Turks, and traitorous Jews, he could come by
in the open Country. And to drive them out of their strong Holds also, he,
within 14 days after, set upon Dziurdzowa a great Turkish Town upon the Bank
of Danubius, which he burnt, all but the Castle; and, having made great
slaughter, he returned to his chief Seat Bucaresta, loaded with spoil. But ere
long, he perceived the Turks in revenge thereof to seek his life, though he
seemed only enforced thereto, through the Turks insolence; for the same Month,
a Turkish Emir or Lord, descended of the Family of their false Prophet, and
then Cadilescher, with 200 choice Soldiers, 50 of Amuraths Chamber, and many
Zanzii and Spahi, suddenly came to Bucaresta, under color of refreshing
themselves after long travel: where they committed all kind of outrages, and
demanded of Michael then at his Palace without the City, without any defense,
1000 Florens for a Present, with provision for his followers: and the Emir
hearing he was almost alone, went on foot out of the City with 1000 Soldiers,
as if in courtesy to have seen the Vayuod: who got him away betimes into the
Camp of his Hungarians fast by: the Turk deceived of his hope, sent (...) to
know of him, Why, in time of peace he entertained so many Hungarian Soldiers?
Who cunningly answered, They were first entertained, to take Peter the Son of
Alexander, sometime Palatine of Moldavia: who, though he were apprehended and
hanged on a Hook at Constantinople, yet they were still there to be billeted,
till their pay could be provided. The Turk commanded him forthwith to discharge
them, promising next day to lend him a Tunn of Gold to pay them: Which feigned
promise he seemed thankfully to take, yet commanded them to stand ready to
intercept the Turks, if, by him distressed, they should flee. He the while,
with his Courtiers and Soldiers secretly assembled, came, and unexpectedly
encompassed the Turks Innes where they lay, and firing them in 5 places,
notably forced them with fire and sword: yet the Turks for a while valiantly
defended (...), and sought by force to escape through the midst of their
Eenmies: yea, many tearing off their burning clothes, fought stark naked; but
most that could, fled to the Emirs Palace, there with him to die or live; but
the Vayuod with two great pieces, opening a way for his Soldiers unto them:
the Emir now in despair, threw out of a Window a great Chest of Gold and
Jewels, and precious Stones, to appease his wrath, humbly requesting but to
have his life spared, promising a large ransom for himself, and those few yet
alive with him: Howbeit, Michael commanded all those his enemies, now in his
power to be slain, they having a wondrous rich spoil, though much more was lost
in the fire: and so, giving God thanks, rested a while in quiet. Yet in less
than a Month, he sent Kirall his Lieutenant with an Army to Phloch, a great
unwalled Town on the further side of Danubius: Whence, the Turks often passing
over that frozen River, had done great harm in Valachia: which he suddenly
surprising, sacked it, and slew all the Inhabitants that were not sled. And
shortly after, he marching over the Frozen-River, to surprise Hersowa a walled
City, was greatly encountered by the Turks upon the Ice: who having slain many,
and put the rest to flight, he went and took that rich City, which he rifled
and burnt to the ground, except the Castle which was valiantly defended, and so
returned over the River to refresh his Soldiers, weary with labor and
extremity of Winter-weather; and within 6 days after, having on the other side
of the River overthrown the Turks Garrisons, he took Sibistra, a great City of
Macedonia, the Seat of a Zanzack, and inhabited with rich Merchants, which he
ransacked, and, slaying most of the Inhabitants, burnt it down, to the grief
and terror of the Turks. But Amurath, vexed with the Stone, and attainted with
the Falling Sickness, and tormented with the Janissaries insolency, and revolt
of the 3 said Countries, departed this life, Jan. 28. 1595. being 51 or 52
years old, reigning 19: At his death, arose a most sudden and terrible tempest
at Constantinople, his dead body being with great pomp buried in a Moschie
which he before built.

The Life of Mahomet the third, seventh Emperor of the Turks.
Amurath's death was, with wondrous secrecy, concealed, both for fear of the
Janissaries, and also because the people distrusting the fierce nature of (...)
the eldest Son, were better affected to Amurath the younger, more mild and
courteous. Ten days after, came Mahomet in Post from Amasia to Constantinople;
where, by the great Bassaes and other mighty Favorites, he was saluted
Emperor; which done, he invited all his Brethren to a Feast in the Court;
whereto they, ignorant of their Father's death, cheerfully came, and were all
by his command strangled: and the same day (as is reported) he caused ten of
his Fathers Wives and Concubines, by whom Issue was to be feared, to be drowned
in the Sea.

The Janissaries and other Court-souldiers, not before acquainted with Amurath's
death, nor of the choice of Mahomet without their privity, and offended to be
disappointed of the spoils, which they reckoned due to them in the Vacancy,
rose in a rage, and made such spoil in the Imperial City, as greater could not
well have bin, had no Emperor been chosen: and were even ready to have (...)
the Court, and to have violated Mahomets person, in revenge of his cruelty on
his Brethren and Fathers Wives, (which they easily excuse by the name of
State Policy.)

Mahomet called to him, some of the chief of these seditious, seeking by fair
persuasions and large promises to win them to him, thereby to appease the rest,
but to little or no purpose, till the Bassaes themselves with their followers,
with many fair persuasions and grievous threats. and firm promise of a general
pardon, with much ado appeased the (...); yet kept all the streets with strong
watch and ward.

A new Tent was now commanded by Mahomet to be set up before the Temple of
Sophia, in which on the right hand was placed his Fathers dead body, and on the
left the bodies of his 19 strangled Brethren, as a Spectacle for the people:
who all ere long were with their Father buried with great solemnity; and
Mahomet about 29 years old, was proclaimed great Emperor of The Turks, and L.
of all, from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof. Then, in his
Palace, he made to his great men a royal Feast; but, while they were in their
mirth, all the City was in an uproar; so, that 'twas thought, scarce one would
have escaped alive from the Banquet, had not the chief Bassa, by gravity,
wisdom, and labor, timely appeased them, and caused all the Ordnance to be
brought into the streets and discharged among them.

In the mean time, diverse fortunate inroades and skirmishes were made by the
late Confederate Princes in the Turks Frontiers. The City Weitze was in the
beginning of Aug. 1595. again recovered, and the Christians about Scuthia
(being about 4000) carried out of the Turks Frontiers an exceeding rich prey,
with diverse notable captives; so did also the Christians of Vivaria: when also
the Garrison-souldiers of Altenburg inroading about Rab, encountered 4000 Turks,
slaying 200, and taking certain prisoners: And Sinan Bassa, returning toward
Constantinople with much Treasure, scraped together in the Warrers in Hungary,
was stripped of all by the Valachians not far from Belgrade, himself hardly
escaping with a few.

Those Valachians, with the Transilvanians, under the conduct of Gestius
Ferens, (...) further on the Turks took from them diverse Towns and Castles, and
meeting with 12000 Tartars, slew many, and put the rest to flight. The Turk
being highly offended with the insolency of the Valachians, sent one Bogdanus a
Valachian (of the Palatines House) with a great power, to expulse Michael, and
take his place as his Tributary: who came into Valachia, yet thought best to
expect the coming of the Tartars, left in Hungary by Sinan; but the Valachians
and Transilvanians (...) them, slew 8000 of them, putting the rest to flight,
and so returned, unto whom presently after Sigismund sent 14000 more to aid
them.

Bogdanus, hearing of the Tartars overthrow, and of this new supply, kept
himself still within his (...). Ere long, Han the Crim Tartar, with a great
power of Horse entered Moldavia, by fire and sword, to reduce it to the Turks
Obedience; but Aaron the Vayuod, aided by his Neighbor Michael, so belayed
him, that in 3 (...) having slain 12000 Tartars, he forced the rest to retire
out of his Country: and presently after took Bendar, and diverse other strong
Holds of the Turks near Danubius, furnishing them with his own Garrisons; also
the Inhabitants of the rich Country Bograga willingly submitted unto him, as
weary of the Turkish (...). He likewise, aided by the Cossacks, overthrew
Janicula (the Son of Bogdanus once Vayuod of Moldavia, sent by Mahomet with a
great power to recover that Country), at Scarpetra (a Mile from Danubius) in
plain battle; slaying 8000 Turks, putting him to flight, and taking the whole
spoil: and marching presently to Nester Alba, he much frightened the Turks; then
burning the Suburbs, he retired.

Sinan Bassa brought Krecowitz the Emperors Ambassador aforesaid with him when
he came into Hungary: who, having suffered many indignities upon the way, and
at Belgrade, there died: 5 of whose servants he kept in strait prison, as
guilty of their Master's death, to avert the infamy thereof from himself; but
upon the coming thither of a new Treasurer from Court, he caused those five to
be brought before him, charging them with his death: saying, They should answer
it before God and their Emperor; and that his end of bringing him with him,
was only to use his help in concluding a peace, and so to have set him and his
at liberty: but, he being dead, he would send them to the Emperor to be
examined, and to tell him, he was sent from the Great Sultan (who was not but
by God to be withstood) to besiege Vienna: which he could easier have taken
last year, than he had done Rab; Wherefore, he had best seek for peace, before
so great a power had taken the field; sending them with the Treasurer to the
Bassa of Buda his Son for further Instructions: Who, being brought before him,
as also the late Embassadour's Secretary; after he had said something of the
hard dealing with them, he declared, He always disliked the same, and often
entreated his Father for their liberty, which he put them in hope shortly to
have: one of them the while, to go to the Emperors Court, and speak with one
of his Secretaries, whom he had advised to bethink of peace: writing to him
afterward, on what conditions he thought peace might be obtained, viz. If all
strong Holds taken by the Emperors Forces in these wars, with their
Territories should be restored, and Siseg surrendered, If the Emperor should
leave the Transilvanians, Moldavians, and Valachians, to the Sultan to be
chastized as Rebels: and, If he would send the Turk ( at once) his tribute for
the years past, and so yearly afterward: so could he be content by his Fathers
mediation to further the treaty of Peace.

This, the Secretary wrote; sending it by the young Lord Perling; yet on
condition, That, if Perling returned not with answer in 25 days, all the rest
should lose their heads.

A subtle and deceitful device of the Father and the Son, only to see what
confidence the Christians had, and to break the Confederacy between the
Emperout and the Transilvanians, etc. and that other Princes hearing of a
rumor of peace, might defer to send their promised aid. For Transylvania,
Moldavia, and Valachia, brought 1000000 Ducats yearly into the Sultans
Treasury: and these were also the fittest to intercept all manner of provision,
brought either to, or from, Constantinople by land.

Sinan, for all this motion, diligently prepared for war at Belgrade, making
three Bridges over Danubius in diverse places, for transporting his Army,
sending for the Garrisons round about, and others billetted in the Country.

Perling came within the limited time, with an answer to the Letters: That it
was always the Emperor's mind, and his endeavor for a firm Peace, between
him and the Sultan on reasonable conditions, etc. That he had sent his double
tribute, which lay long at Komara, till Amuraths mind were known, etc. But,
whereas Sinan and his son were of opinion, that the Emperor was brought so
low, that, he must be glad to accept of most hard, and dishonor able
conditions of peace propounded by them, they much deceived themselves: for by
the power of God, they should shortly by experience know the contrary, etc. Yet
forgetting all injuries, he was more inclined to an honorable peace, than to
protract the war, with the unspeakable harm of the subjects on both sides; But
Sinan must above all things know, All strong Holds taken by the Turks in this
war, must be restored, beginning at Whitz in Croatia, even to the last subject
carried into captivity: and that the Transilvanians, Moldavians, and Valachians
(many Ages united as inseparable members to Hungary, and by the late
treacherous practice of certain rebellious, separated from it) were henceforth
to be left under the protection and Government of the Emperor, and never more
to be impugned by the Turks: which things being done, and order taken, that the
injury and disgrace done to his Ambassador (which all Princes cried shame of)
might he punished: and that his servants in durance might be freed: then some
good form of peace, and bounding of Territories, might perhaps be agreed on;
else, all talk of peace was but vain, etc.

This Answer, the Captives at Buda, were to give by word or writing to the
Bassa; and, earnestly to request him, both for their own and fellows Liberty
at Constantinople; however, to comfort themselves, that they should have
Allowance sufficient for things necessary, as the Emperor had granted to
Perling, whom he might have justly detained, being no lawful prisoner, but for
his Oaths-sake: No man's name was set to this Answer.

The Emperor most careful of the Relics of Hungary, laying as it were in
the Lions mouth, prayed Aid as far as Spain and Italy, especially of the King
of Poland, as his near Alliance and Neighbor: He, and the States of Hungary,
sending their Ambassadors thither, when he, through the daily Incursions of
the Turks and Tartars into the adjoining Countries, had called a Parliament in
Febr. at Cracovia: whereof, Mahomet fearing, sent 2 of his chief Chiaus,
Ambassadors to the King and States, to crave aid in his Wars in Hungary:
promising the King (if he refused not) Coin sufficient to pay his Soldiers,
and to be always ready to requite him the like upon occaon. These Ambassadors,
obtaining safe conduct of Michael of Valachia through his Country, were by him
honorably entertained, and brought into a fair Lodging, discoursing with him
of many matters: but the Vayuods followers, grieved at such honor done to their
mortal Enemies, (...) into the room with their Weapons, and slew them both:
and setting upon their followers, cut them all in (...) Mahomet hereupon
wondrously enraged, threatened all evils, both to the Moldavians and Valachians:
forthwith sending other Ambassadors, who arrived safely at Poland.

The Tartars being overthrown and many strong Holds taken from the Turks by the
Transilvanians etc. Mahomet called home Sinan to confer with him (as was
thought) of some great matters, sending Ferat Bassa in his place; who, coming
to Belgrade in April, took the charge upon him: at whose first coming, in the
night, all the cords of the Tents were cut in sunder, and his Tent let fall
about his ears: Some supposing it was disgracefully done by Cicala, before
wronged by him; Others thought, by the Janissaries, who wished rather to be led
by Mahomet himself. At his coming, the Famine, last year begun, was now
exceeding great in most places of Hungary possessed by the Turks: so, that the
Tartar-women roasted their own children, and ate them: there was also a
terrible plague, great numbers of Turks and Tartars dying daily; so that, of
85000 Tartars, scarce 8000 remained through the sword, (...), and famine. Great
were the harms the Turks daily received from the three revolted Countries.
Michael of Valachia entering their Frontiers, surprised Chimele with the Castle,
wherein were 14 Fieldpieces, 2, having the Arms of the Emperor Ferdinand, and
the other 2 the Arms of Huniades: which he sent a Present to Sigismund of
Transylvania. Then he took Orosige, a famous Port-town, the abode of the Turks
Purveyor; finding therein Butter, Cheese, Honey, and other provision enough for
8000 men for a whole year: He took also from them Kilec and Galempe, with the
strong Castle of St. George; called Grigio, and then besieged Laganoc.

At first of the Spring, came Matthias from the Nobles of Hungary, assembled at
Presburg to Vienna, and so to the Emperor at Prague, who made him General of
lower Hungary: and Maximilian his Brother, General of upper. Maximilians Lievt.
was Lo. Teuffenbach. Matthias's was Count Mansfelt, sent for out of Flanders;
Joh. de Medices, he made a Master of the Ordnance, with charge to fortify
Komara: which he so did, that it was thought not inferior to Rab in strength;
all which time, the Emperor soliciting the Christian Princes, for repressing
of the common Enemy, out of his Hereditary Provinces, and from other Princes.
He had this Spring, raised a right puissant Army, to the number of 15900 Horse,
and 50500 Foot: which notable Army raised from the power of diverse Christian
Princes, and conducted by worthy Chieftains, had much better success this
Summer, than had the like Army the year before. Charles, Count Mansfelt, son of
Peter Ernest the old Count, from his youth brought up in Arms, was, by the King
of Spain, sent with 2000 Horse, and 6000 Foot out of the Low Countries, most of
whom being Walloons. He departed from Bruxelles in Febr. and, taking leave of
his Father at Luxenburg, came (through Germany) in March to Prague, where he
was by the Emperor and Archduke most honorably entertained, and shortly
aster with great solemnity created a Prince of the Empire. His following Forces
were by the way stayed, partly (through the unwonted rising of rivers), partly,
by some German Princes jealousy: who denied them passage, till the Emperors
Letters had opened the way; yet, the Princes in their passage stood on their
guard.

Fame now increasing the wondrous preparations of Turks and Christians; the
Turks exceeding, carefully looked to the fortifying of their Frontier-towns,
chiefly Strigonium and Rab, as did the Christians to Komara and Altenburg. Many
hot skirmishes passed the while between them, especially in Transylvania and
Valachia, the Turks being still worsted, to the great discontent of their
Emperor. Near Temesware the Bassa of Buda was overthrown by Ferentz and the
Transilvanians. Asid Ferat entering Valachia with a great Army, was by Lo.
Nadasti and the Valachians, aided by Transilvanians, discomfited and
overthrown. Nadasti sending 8000 Turks heads to Alba Julia to Sigismund, and
some Ensigns: one most richly garnished, being thought worth 30000 Dollars:
which the Prince restoring to Nadasti, offered him great possessions in
Transylvania, if he would have seated himself there. All this Spring, the Turks
boasted and threatened, they would shortly work Wonders by Sea and Land: and,
for the more credit, Rays a notable Pyrate, was sent with 12 Galleys, who did
much harm upon the coasts of Italy; reporting, where he landed, that this was
but the beginning of a greater War, a wondrous Fleet being to follow: which
raised a great fear in diverse places; yet, no such Fleet appeared: for the Turk
much troubled with the revolt of Transylvania; etc. and the then raging
mortality among his Soldiers and Horses, could not look into the Sea, his
hands being sull enough with the troubles of Hungary.

Sigismund, upon some just causes, suspecting Aaron of Moldavia to have
Intelligence with the Polanders, and also with Cardinal Bator, and other his
mortal Enemies: and secretly, to have bin about to make his peace with Mahomet;
which increasing suspicion, being about this time confirmed by Letters
intercepted, the Prince had Aaron apprehended, and with his Wife and Son to be
sent as prisoners to Prague, placing by consent of the Nobility one Roswan in
his room, a wise and discreet Moldavian, and who had bin always to him
faithful; but against the secret practices of the Polonians, he protested
openly by Letters to the Emperor, to redress those so great injuries himself
by the sword. In the mean time, came 3 (...) from the Turk to the Prince,
persuading him, to put himself again into his protection, and give him passage
(as formerly) into Hungary: promising, all injuries for ever to be forgiven and
forgotten: and that he should have Transylvania, Valachia, and Moldavia as his
free Inheritance, paying no tribute, and so be accounted as the Turks most
loving Friend and Vassal. What he answered hereto was unknown; but by his
after-doings it might easily be gathered, he harkened not to those deceitful
charms.

These Ambassadors scarce gone, a secret Messenger came with Letters from the
chief of the Christians in Bulgaria: that if the Prince did with any good
success prosecute his wars, they would be ready to join with him against the
cruel Tyrant; and to shut up all passages that way into Valachia, Moldavia,
and Hungary. The mean while, Giezian, an old Janizary, and bold-spoken fellow,
came to Mahomet at Constantinople, and openly set upon him with this speech;
How long, most mighty Emperor, (...) thou suffer thy self to be seduced and
blinded by thy great Bassaes and Commanders, to thy own great danger, and hurt
of thy Subjects? See thou not how fraudulently and cunningly, they (moved
with their own covetousness and ambition) have dealt with Thee and thy Father?
chiefly, in that thou have broken thy League, and taken up Arms against the
Christian Emperor. At length, open thine eyes, etc. Sinan, who must be
honored above others, has not by strong hand won Rab, but bought it with thy
money, thereby casting thee into infinite troubles. Oh, Rab, Rab, etc. As if
thereby all Christendom should soon be subdued. But thou art much deceived: thy
Barns, Storehouses, as are Transylvania, etc. are by this War shut up; so that
down Danubius Westward, or by the Euxine Eastward, thou can look for no
provision; whence then will thou maintain thy self, Court, this populous City,
and the Country hereabouts? All manner of Victuals, are at such a price now in
Hungary, that the common soldiers cannot buy them: not men only, but even the
beasts starve for (...), etc. This calamity of thy people thou see daily, and
yet wilt not with sound judgment lift up thine eyes, to see whence these harms
come, etc.

Mahomet much moved, commanded him to be committed to ward, and by fair means
examined, by whose suggestion, or why he so boldly uttered this rude speech to
his Sovereign, and what he further intended; but the other Janissaries rose
presently in a tumult, and took him out of prison, solemnly taking Oath to
defend him even with their own blood: whereat the Turk was glad to wink.

Most of the promised aid being now come to Vienna, Count Mansfelt Lievt.
General under the Archduke, called a Council of War, to consult Whether
presently to lay siege to some Town, or expect to give the Enemy battle in
field. That being resolved on which was thought most expedient; he removed to
Altenburg, mustering his Army, and, departing with a few to Walkenburg, a
Village by Danubius, he chose a place to encamp in: so returning, he by
Proclamation straightly commanded, that against an hour every man should be ready
to set forward against the Enemy; but diverse Soldiers especially the Germans,
began (after their manner) to cry out for their pay, ere they would (...); so
that the Count proclaimed the second time, they should rise, promising their
pay within 8 days; but they refusing, sent 6 of the best sort of those
mutinous, in all their names, to demand their pay, whom he commanded to be all
hanged: but 3 reasonably excusing themselves, he let them go, and causing
the other 3 to cast lots, hanged 2 of them: which so terrified the rest, that
upon a sign given, they arose and followed the Count with the rest of the Army:
they being come to Walkenburg, the Count with other Nobles, wrought in digging
and casting up Trenches, till they sweatt again; by whose example the whole
Army moved, night and day, had soon cast up a huge Trench, from Danubius to the
Marshes, for 80000 men to encamp in. The Count was still careful by his
espials, to understand where the Enemy lay and what they did; ready to hear
all, but to believe what seemed most like truth, keeping his purposes secret
(wherein late Generals had much erred), and commonly his resolutions were
shadowed with some other matter: security he much abhorred, and although he
heard by diverse, the Enemy was but of strength small, disorderly encamped, and
greatly distressed for want of Victuals; yet he little credited it, knowing,
such reports to have been often given out by the Turks to lull the Christians in
security.

The Army strongly entrenched, and the Trenches planted with Ordnance; he, with
some Troops would often appear before Rab, and sometimes before Dotis, viewing
the places, as if he purposed to besiege one of them: causing also the ground
to be marked out for the most convenient encamping, and casting up of Mounts:
Wherefore, the Turks of Strigonium and other places, sent part of their
warlique provision, as of their Garrisons, some to Rab, and some to Dotis.

The Count now came and sat down before Dotis, demanding the same, and began to
cast up Trenches and raise Mounts, commanding every man to set his hand in some
measure to further those works: and, to encourage others, would often carry a
Faggot, or some other thing before him on his Horse to raise the Mount: yet,
some Hungarian Gentlemen, deeming such labor to be base, refused to do any
thing: Whereupon, the Count straightly charged one of them by his example, to
carry a Faggot to the Mount, which he refusing, the Count laid his own Faggot
before him, upon his Horse, charging him to carry it to the appointed place:
the Hungarian, when he thought he was out of the Count's sight, in scorn threw
it down: which, the Count (having an eye after him) perceiving, commanded him
presently (all armed) to be hanged upon the next tree: which severity, then and
afterward made others more diligently to do what they were commanded. About
this time, 3 Turks being taken, the Count straightly examined them of all
matters; but the first, neither by fair or foul means would answer to any
thing: wherefore, the Count had him cut in small pieces in sight of the other
two: who, terrified, confessed to many things asked; and, that the Sultan
determined to turn his greatest Forces that Summer, into Transylvania, (...)
and upper- Hungary. (...) (although so belaid) yet, suddenly, June 30, command
was given, that every man (upon a sign) to be ready to follow his Leaders: yet
none knew whither they were to remove, but some chief Commanders.

Next night, being dark and foul, the Count rose with his Army, and next day,
July 1. came to Strigonium: they of the City not hearing of his coming, before
they saw him under their walls: Wherefore, the Turks in the Suburbs, and those
in the Fort under Thomas-hill, firing the Houses, and defacing the Fort what
they could in that sudden fear, fled into the Lower-town. Next day, the Count
took those forsaken places, manning them with (...): making a Bridge with boats
over Danubius, casting up Mounts, and doing many other things; in 3 days he
repairing St. Thomas Fort, placed 4 great pieces, and battered the Lower-town,
and straitning the besieged in other places, more than they had bin the year
before. The Bassa of Buda, knowing their wants of men and munition, attempted
thrice (as he did many times after) to have (by the River) put supplies into
the City, but was still forced with loss to return. The Lower-town, called
(...), or the Water-town, was soon so battered, that scarce any building was
whole: and a Counter-scarfe, made last year, beaten down. Certain Walloons were
sent hither to view the Ditches, after whom, some Hungarian Heidons followed,
without any command: who courageously set some Ensigns on the top of another
Counter-scarf; but the Turks coming on close together, forced them with loss
to retire: diverse walloons were also slain, with some others of good place, to
the (...) his great grief, not a little offended with that disordered service;
yet, the battery ceased not, and the Christians slew many Turks on the walls
with Musket Shot, receiving little hurt again, being in their Trenches, and the
Turks shooting but sparingly; yet, with what they spent, they had slain four
Christian-Cannoniers, and one Walloon-Captain.

About the midst of July, the Count thinking the Water-Town to be made
saultable; sent some Companies to assault it, who, passing the Counter-scarf,
found the Ditch full of mud, and but newly cut broader, being thought scarce
passeable without a Bridge: behind which was a huge Wall, with strong Bulwarks,
and within that another new Ditch, on whose brink was a thick and huge parapet;
yet, some Walloons ventured to pass all this, but through the Defendants
valor, the small number of the assailants, with the places disadvantage, they
retired with the loss of many. The Christians had taken a little Island before
the City, kept by some of Palfi's Heidons: but the Turks from Buda there
landing three thousand Soldiers, slew the Heidons, and recovered the Island,
furnishing it with a Garrison and all necessaries, so departing.

About 3 days after, the Christians the second time assaulted the Water-town,
the chief Leaders being (...), Greis, and Zinne, who, being pardoned for the
stain with Count Hardeck at Rab, most courageously, with the rest, now
assaulted the Breach; but were notably repulsed, retiring with the loss of 150
men: Zinne himself being slain with Ruger a Captain, and some of the Count his
Guards. Greis was wounded in the Head, and the younger Lord Schuendi, with other
Captains, grievously hurt.

Next day, 600 Mountain people came supplicating the Count, not to give over
the siege, till he had won the City; promising in their names who sent them, to
repair (of their own cost) all harms: yea, though he should lay the City even
with the ground: the harms they daily received from the Garrison being so
great.

Then also was the Count advertised by his espials (of whom he maintained many)
that Mahomet had written to the Bassa of Buda, carefully to provide that his
beloved Strigonium took no harm, and not to spare for men or money to relieve
it in time: and do nothing therein without the advice of old Alis Beg, a long
time Governor thereof; and that nothing might be wanting, he had sent
Alexander, Aga of the Janissaries, (whom he could ill spare) whose Counsel and
help he might also use; for he had rather lose some other Kingdom, than that
City: wherefore, he should, upon the price of his head, beware, it were neither
won, nor yielded on composition: which severe Command, the Bassa sent to
Strigonium, with most grievous threats from himself, if they (terrified with
any thing) should not hold it out to the last man, swearing to empail those on
stakes, who should consent to a yielding.

Alis hereupon, to deter the Soldiers from a thought of yielding, diligently
enquired, if any of them had at any time made any motion of yielding, or
murmured against their Commanders, in any service, and whom he found so to have
done, he presently executed: and then went into the lower Town, to see that
nothing were wanting or amiss, where most danger was; but when he would have
returned, the Janissaries stayed him, saying, Seeing he was so courageous, and
their Governor, he should there stay and take such part as they did, were it
better or worse.

Now the Bassaes of Buda and Temeswar, with diverse Sanzacks, were assembling
their forces, for relief of Strigonium: whereupon, the Transilvanian, made
show, as if he would besiege Temeswar; so that that Bassa was glad to return,
for defense of his own charge: they also of Stiria, Carinthia, and Croatia,
with Serinus's Troops, so stopped all passages, that 12000 Turks coming from
Zigeth and thereabouts, could not join (...) the rest for the Citie's relief.

The Count having made a notable Fort upon St. Thomas Hill, placed therein 5
great Culverins, greatly hurting the upper-Town, by a furious Battery; so that
none also could go betwixt the upper and lower Towns, but he was endangered by
those, or Musketeers, who, defended by them, lay waiting to that end, on the
side of the Hill, in Caves and bushes; but Gokara Town and Fort, on the other
side of Danubius, besieged by Palfi, was most shaken by the great Ordnance:
wherefore the Count increased the battery, continuing it till the
Counter-scarfe was beaten down, and fair breaches made in the wall. The
Moravians, July 21, assaulted it in five places, whom Palfi seconded with his
Hungarians, some being appointed, to bring with them things to fire the Town;
so that in time of the aslaut, the Town was all on a light fire. The Turks
having notably resisted, now being overpressed and the fire so increasing, that
it caught hold of the lower Town on the other side of the River, the rest were
all slain by the Christians. The fire being quenched, they repaired the
breaches, and left therein a strong Garrison. A night or two after, 200 Turkish
Horse being descryed fast by, an Alarm was raised in the Camp, as if all their
Army had been at hand; yet it was afterward known, they were only Scouts sent
out to view how the Christians lay encamped.

A young Country Fellow, being, the latter end of this month, secretly sent
out of the City, was taken by Palfi, and sent to the Count, who friendly
demanded of him, Whence he came, Whither going, and whereabouts? who answered,
he was sent by the Governor with Letters to the Bassa of Buda, which he
presently delivered unto him: the purport whereof were, that if the Bassa did
not within 6 or 7 days, aid and relieve him, he should be forced (through want
of necessaries) to abandon the City, or yield it up: so the Count causing them
to be closed up again, gave the youth a few Crowns, commanding him to carry
them to the Bassa, and bring him his answer, promising to reward him
bountifully.

The Bassa returned answer, he would be with him at the time appointed, willing
him the while, to be mindful of his wonted valor, telling him all
circumstances, how he would relieve him: whereupon, the Count provided for
welcoming of the Bassa. Also within a day after, a Turkish Cannonier fearing
the City would be lost, (...) forth into the Camp: who, besides declaring the
Cities state and wants of the besieged, did good service during the siege. The
Turks had often sallied out, to their great loss; yet they adventured out
again on the 29 day of this month, 80 being left behind them, slaying but five
Christians. The Turks in great wants, at length, news was brought into the
Camp, that the Bassa was coming with 20000 men: who came Aug. 2d, encamping
within 4 miles of the Christians: some Turkish Horse seeking after booty, out
of the Pastures, even under their noses, carried away some few Horses; some
German and Hungarian Troops issuing out, had a hot skirmish with them; but the
Turk retiring, as if overcharged, had at length drawn them, where diverse Troops
of Turks lay in ambush, who hardly charged them. The Hungarians acquainted with
such dangerous skirmishes, fled, the Germans a while valiantly encountering
them, but oppressed with multitude, at last fled: about 100 being in all lost,
and much wounded. The Turks now encouraged, came all on, next day, resolved, by
force to open a way into the City. The Count had strongly belayed all ways
thereinto; yet the Enemy coming on between St. Thomas and St. Georges Hills,
nigh the Suburbs (called the Rascian City) put themselves in order of Battle,
as did the Christians, letting them come, even to (...) Trenches. Palfi (the
while) with his Hungarian Horsemen, fetching a compass on one side of the
Hill, and Lord Swartzenburgh on the other, the Turks could not without much
danger retire. The Signal given, the Turks having discharged seventeen
Fieldpieces, without any great harm, came on with a most hideous cry, and at
first onset darkened the Sky with with their Arrows; but the German and
Walloon Horse, lent their shot as thick as hail amongst them again; and the men
at Arms taught the Turks to their cost, how unfit their half-naked light
Horsemen were in a set battle to meet with them: in a trice, but with great
slaughter, the battle was brought to the Sword: The noises of Warlike
Instruments, neighing of Horses, crying of the wounded, and groans of the
dying, making deaf the eats of the hearers, etc. The Battle had scarce endured
half an hour, but many thousands of Turks lay dead on the ground, the rest
fleeing, and leaving behind them their Ordnance, and whatever they brought for
relief of the besieged: whom so fleeing, Palfi and Swartzenburgh so received
them, that of those who came that way, few escaped. The Bassa, who stood on the
Hill, fled also himself: the Bassa of Natolia, with about 100 Turks more, got
into Strigonium: some say 14000 Turks were (...) in this Battle; and some,
fewer. Many were also taken, some being of great name and place: also 27
Ensigns, with a multitude of Beasts laden with money, shot, powder, and other
provision for relief of the besieged. In heat of the Battle, the besieged
sallying out, entered a Fort on the River side, but were presently forced with
loss to retire. After this, the Count sent some Companies, with 500 Wagons to
the Enemie's Camp, (...) far off in the Mountains, who found it forsaken, but
well stored with all kind of provision, which they brought away, with 600 rich
Tents. The Bassaes Tent, taken by a Horse Colonel, was given by him to the
Count, with the (...) and Money there found, all which he divided among the
Soldiers, according to their (...): they found also, some Heads of Christians,
with the dead body of Lord Blandestine, slain the (...) (...): which were
honorably buried in the Christian Camp. The rest of the Turks hiding in the
Mountains and Woods, by night shifted for themselves.

The Bassa came to Buda but with 20 Horse, every man there (...) his lost
friends. The Hungarian Heidons best (...) with the Country, for certain days
brought into the Camp, such prisoners as they took, or the Heads of those Turks
they slew. The Count certified the Archduke at Vienna, speedily of this
notable Victory, who rewarded the Messenger, with a Chain worth 500 Ducats,
causing Thanksgiving to be sung, first at Augustine Friars, then in all Temples
of the City.

The Count also sent to the Emperor, by his Nephew, two chief prisoners, with
4 Horsemens Guidons, cunningly made of Horse hairs, such as use to be carried
before the greatest Turkish Commanders, and 14 other Ensigns, with 14 most
goodly Turkish Horses for a Present. Next day after this Battle, the Count sent
Lord Palfi with an Interpreter, to the City, to demand it: who declared the
danger they were in, their expected help to be quite overthrown, new relief
could not but in long time be sent them: wherefore they were best bethink
themselves betime, lest perhaps when they would yield the City, it would not be
accepted, promising to entreat with the General, that they might safely depart,
and be conveyed to places convenient: The Turks answered, they had layen 5
weeks at the siege, and must lay 5 weeks longer; and whereas some few friends
had lately failed to relieve them, yet 100000 more were to come: who if they
could not perform what they came for, yet would they not leave the City, till
ready to be drawn out by the heels, and then also take 3 days to resolve. The
Christians had sore beaten both the Towns, maintaining their battery with
greater fury than ever before; and the besieged, had nothing now to live on,
but a little Wheat and Barley, with some (...): to whom Lord Palfi, by the
Count's Command, Aug. 9th, sent two Gentlemen to the (...), to do a Message
from him to the Governor: who being very aged, and courteous, came with the
Aga to the Walls, to hear what they had to say: one of whom briefly said, that
his Lord Palfi, knowing him to be both valiant and wise, and who had ever
courteously used those fallen into his hands, had compassion of his obstinacy:
wherefore, he advised and exhorted him, if he would save him and his from most
eminent and undoubted death, and utter confusion, without delay to deliver up
the City. To whom Alis answered He should tell Lord Palfi, he could not
pleasure him with the least stone in that City: that he had one foot already in
grave, and would with honor, carry his gray hairs thereinto; yet had he an
undoubted hope, that his most dread Sovereign, and his Lord Sinan would not
forsake him; and if they should write, they could not relieve him, yet would he
at leisure consider, whether 'twere fit for him to deliver up that City, since,
on its defense, depended all his honor and credit, etc. All this while, the
Aga spoke not one word, but declared by silent sighing, and grinding his teeth,
his indignation and grief.

In the mid way between Strigonium and Buda, is the small Island, viz. where
many rich Clothiers dwelt: this the Heidons spoiling, in their return took 24
Wagons laden with Corn, going to Buda, with 28 prisoners, bringing all to the
Camp. The lower Town made saultable, the Christians assaulted it Aug. 13. in
three places at once. The Bavarians, who gave the first charge, being notably
repulsed, began to faint; but seconded by them of Retinaw and Suevia, they
plucked down a great Palisado, filled the Ditches, removed all in their way, and
fought so long with the Turks, that the Marquess of Burgaw coming with six
fresh Companies, they so prevailed, that they all entered the Town: The Marquess
himself cheering them up in this dangerous fight. There was a miserable cry
throughout the City; for the Christains slew all in their way, not sparing
Women great with Child, nor Children hanging at their Mothers breasts; yet some
more attended the spoil, especially the Hungarians, to whom, the very hinges of
Doors and Windows were good booty: whereby many escaped into the Castle and
upper Town, with the Bassa, and Alis the Governor: within not many hours,
diverse fires brake out in the lower Town: which at last, was found to have been
caused by the deceitful Turks, who had left Gunpowder, which by burning
Matches, should at a certain time set all on fire; by which most horrible
fires, scarce quenched in a day or two, many goodly Buildings, and things were
consumed.

But Count Mansfelt, saw not this so joyful a Victory; for he fell sick of a
Fever a few days (...), through drinking too much cold drink in his heat,
with immoderate (...) in the late Battle; and so falling into a great flux, was
by counsel of his Physicians, removed to Komara, having sent for the Archduke,
to come into the Camp, and for Blankmier into Bavaria, to supply his room; but
his Disease increasing, the Physicians now despaired of his health: yet he
almost every hour, enquired how the Army did, and whether the City were yet
taken, and (...) hope there was to take it; but being told a little before
death, that the lower Town was won, he (...) rejoiced; and, next day, Aug. 14.
toward night, departed this life, to the exceeding grief of the whole Army.
All the time of (...) siege, he would scarce lay down upon his bed for two or
three nights together: that little he did eat, was most standing or walking,
yea sometimes on Horseback. His bowels were solemnly buried at Komara; but his
body was carried to Luxenburgh, to be honorably enterred among his Ancestors.
About which time, the great Duke of Muscovy, sent two Ambassadors with Letters
and Presents to the Emperor; who coming to Prague, Aug. 16th, with 250 Horse,
were honorably entertained, and having audience, first delivered the Letters
of Credence from their Duke.

It was not commonly known, what particulars they were sent about; but its
said, one thing was to request the Emperor, to send an Ambassador to the
Persian, to draw him into league with them against the Turk, who should pass
through Muscovia into Persia.

The great Duke's Presents were 150000 Florens of gold, great store of most
rich Furs, and perfumes, deemed of an exceeding value, two white Faulcons, and
three live Leopards. Iwanowitze the Ambassador, of himself, presented rich
Turkey, Persian, and Babylonian Hangings and Carpets, Timbers of Sables: with
other Furs, no less precious, as many as eight Porters could scarce carry.
These Ambassadors, December. 27. returned with the Emperor's answer.

But at Strigonium, the Christians now from the lower Town bent their battery
upon the higher: where, Aug. 14th, old Alis, while he was walking to and fro,
to see (...) most danger was, had his Arm struck off, of which, he presently
died: being of great gravity, about 80 years old: much about which time, the
Aga of the Janissaries. being before mortally wounded, died also. The Soldiers
made choice of the Bassa of Natolia for their Governor, who heavily undertook
the forlorn charge. The Christians, not ignorant of the deaths of these two,
well hoped, that the rest would the more readily hearken to some good
Composition: wherefore, they sent to demand, if they would yield, while there
was some mercy left; yet their answer was, They would hold it out to the last
man, both in respect of the straight charge of the Bassa of Buda, and counting
the City holy, as won by Solomon: whom the Turks yet have in a devout
remembrance.

Next day, came the Archduke into the Camp: who after well viewing it, and the
manner of siege; he called into his Tent, the Marquess of Burgaw, John de
Medices the Florentine, and Palfi the Hungarian, to consult with them what
further to do. Shortly after, he commanded an assault to be given in two places
at once, which the Walloons and Germans courageously performed; but such was
the valor of the Defendents, that they were glad at last, with loss to
retire: about which time, the Duke of Mantua, with three Counts, his Brethren,
came to the siege. And now the Turks b began to draw together again, near Buda,
for relief of Strigonium: whereupon, the archDuke sent forth 8000 chosen
Soldiers, who setting upon the Turks, before Sunrising, made great slaughter,
and took some prisoners; of whom the Sanzack of Copan was one: of which
overthrow the besieged Turks hearing, began now to faint. Wherefore, the Bassa
and Captains, overcome with difficulties, and outcry of the fearful people,
resolved to come to a parley; so a Flag of Truce set up, and a parley granted,
9 Turks attended the Archdukes coming in the lower Town. Who required with
safe convoy, and bag and baggage to depart: which he would in no case grant.

At length with much entreaty, they obtained, to depart as the Christians did
at Rab, with Scimitars by their sides, and what goods they could bear, (...)
Ships appointed to carry them to Buda: So Hostages being on both sides given,
next day, September 2d, they came forth, more than either prisoners taken, had
confessed, or the Christians thought; 30. Ships not sufficing to carr, them,
many tarried in the City till next day; and then the Bassa with the sick and
wounded, sailed to Buda.

Strigonium had 52 years groaned under Turkish thraldom, which the Christians
forthwith repaired, and new fortified; and about the middle of this month,
18000 being (...) to besiege Vicegrade, a strong Castle between Strigonium and
Buda, they took it: whereat those of Buda were so terrified, that the Bassa, to
flay the flight of many of the better sort, commanded the Gates to be shut upon
them. This good success, caused great rejoicing in most parts of Christendom.
All this while, the Transilvanian Prince did the Turks exceeding harm, so that
they began to dread his name. The same day that Count Mansfelt died, Sigismund
with great solemnity, married Maria Christina, Charles the Archduke his
Daughter, at Alba Julia: whereupon, 30000 Turks or more, thought to have come
as unwelcome Guests thereunto; but the vigilant Prince, setting his pleasures
for a while apart, and unexpectedly coming upon them, in a great Battle, flew
most of them, and as a triumphant victor, carried away the whole spoil: About
the same time, the Transilvanians also besieging Fagiat, not far from Temeswar,
they of the Town came to parley, covenanting to depart with Bag and Baggage;
but in their coming out, hearing the Bassa of Temeswar, with two Sanzacks, were
coming to their relief, those in the Town began to delay, and those gone out to
return: the Transilvanians much moved, by force entering the Town, slew them
all. Then turning upon the Bassa, who with 10000 Turks, and some Fieldpieces,
was coming, they had a cruel Battle, most of the Turks falling, with small
loss of the other: who so eagerly pursued the Victory, that the Bassa with
500, with much ado escaped: the two Sanzacks, with diverse of good place, being
sent prisoners to the Prince.

About the end of August, they besieged Lippa of Hungary, not far from
Temeswar: which, the Turks not able longer to hold, fled into the Castle, where
after three days, they (...) and yielded, on condition of safe departure, with
what goods they could carry. About which time, the Bassa of Bosna, with 10000
Turks and Tartars, attempting to recover Babostica, a Frontier Town; the
Stirians and other Christians thereabouts, conducted by Herbersein, and two
other Lords that looked to those Frontiers, fought them, and overthrew them nigh
Babostica.

Mahomet not a little grieved at these successes, and exceedingly offended with
Ferat (being persuaded by envious Sinan, that all or most of this was through
his negligence) sent for him home, sending Sinan in his place. Ferat was
forewarned by the Sultan's Mother, of his displeasure, and advised not to come
in sight, till his peace was made: who yet, doubting not to answer whatever
Sinan should charge him with, came to Court: where Mahomet, soon after
commanded him to be (...) and his goods worth 500000 Ducats confiscated.

Sinan now about 83 years old, yet as his Motto was, breathed nothing but
(blood and War); who promised Mahomet, upon peril of his head, to reduce
Transylvania, Valachia and Moldavia, to their former thraldom: and after a
month spent, in making a Bridge of Boats over (...), passed over with a right
puissant Army into (...); but they of the said three Countries, had so shut up
the passages, that he could not but with much danger, have far entered, being
ready also, even at his first entrance, to give him battle: so that there began
a most cruel Battle, with much bloodshed on both sides: thrice did the
Transilvanians retire; but still relieved with supplies, came on fresh again,
charging the Turks as hardly as they had been charged. Thus doubtfully was the
Battle maintained from morning till night, till the Turks being quite
disordered and broken, were glad to flee: many thousands of common Turks were
slain, and diverse of great account among the Turks: Haider Bassa (much
regarded) being found dead on the place: It was fought September. 11th.

Sinan himself, making too much (...) over the Bridge, fell into the deep mud;
yet was with much ado, drawn out by them of his Guard, and saved to further
mischief; yet for certain days it was commonly reported, he was drowned, most
of his own, not certainly knowing, what was become of him: the Christians had
all the spoil, and their Ordnance, all their Tents, abundance of Victual, and
Warlike provision, with many Ensigns: one being green, which they counted
sacred to their Prophet Mahomet: whereto, in greatest distress they flee, as to
their last refuge.

The old Bassa full of grief, posted to Court, thinking it better to make the
best of that which was naught, than to have it made worse by the envious report
of others; and to fill the Sultan with desire of revenge, which himself most
longed after: who so used the matter, (...) the loss was easily passed over,
as received by any occasion, rather than his default. In the mean time, he
caused 112 Christian Captives, to be brought from Belgrade in chains to
Constantinople; and so being led through the chief streets, to the content of
the Citizens, to be brought to the Court Gate, for Mahomet to look upon, and
the Courtiers to deride: whence, after many grievous indignities, they were
conveyed to most loathsome Prisons, to be fed with the bread of tribulation.

About which time, the Bassa of Bosna, with almost 20000 Turks, inroaded into
Croatia, where, by the Christians under Lord Eckenberg, and Leucowitz, they
were almost all slain; and following the chase into their Frontiers, burnt 15
Villages, and took the Castle Varvivar: whose Forces increasing also, by the
coming of Lord Herbersteine, and other Troops out of Carinthia, and
thereabouts, they returned, September. 13th, to besiege Petrinia, or Petrowina,
courageously assailing it at their first coming; but after two hours hard
fight, finding more resistance and difficulty, than they before supposed, and
having no great Ordnance, they gave over, and with such loss as they had,
returned toward Siseg; but that night, a fugitive Horseman, came to the Camp,
saying, that Rustan the Governor, was dead of a wound in the last assault; and
that the Turks hereby discouraged, and with the late overthrow in Croatia,
would upon the first sight of them, abandon the Town: whereupon, they presently
set forward toward Petrinia, finding it abandoned accordingly: So the
Christians entering, found some pillage, but more Powder and Shot, and presently
sending some Troops to pursue them, took diverse, bringing back Rustan's
Lieutenant into the Town: the recovery of Petrinia, procured great quiet to all
that side of the Country.

Sigismund knowing with what an Enemy he had to do, and of the secret practice
of the Polonians, for withdrawing of Moldavia from him, sought by all means to
make himself as strong as he could.

The Zaculians or Siculi, formerly a free people, but now tributary to the
Turks, bordering on the North-East of Transylvania, seeing the good success of
their Neighbour-revolted Countries, offered the Prince, of their own charge, to
maintain 40000 men in field, during his Wars with the Turk, and every House
to pay him a dollar yearly, with a certain measure of Wheat, Oats, and Barley:
that if he should have a Son to succeed him, every Householder to give him a fat
Ox: only craving to live as his subjects, yet to be governed by their own
ancient Laws and Customs: whereof he accepting, it was forthwith proclaimed in
their Camp, and all sworn to perform the agreements: and pressing 15000 more,
to add to the 25000 then in field, they with those 40000 came to the Prince,
who found himself now to be 80000 strong, to welcome the Bassa withal: who had
raised 70000 choice Soldiers, (amongst whom were many whole bands of
Janissaries) who being joined to his other relics, he thought himself strong
enough to subdue the Prince: to whom also came Hassan Bassa, and Bogdanus the
expulsed Vayuod, with many others of great name.

Sinan, by an exceeding chargeable Bridge, made of Boats, passed danubius, at a
Town called Zorza, or St. George in Valachia, a great way beneath where Trajan
once built his famous Bridge of stone: thence he marched to Tergovista, then in
the Turks power, whose Monastery he turned into a Castle, fortifying it with
deep Trenches, strong Bulwarks and Ordnance, purposing to make it the Seat of
his War, till he had reduced those revolted Countries.

The Prince set forward to meet him, and to give battle; but encamping in
Valachia, a great Eagle is reported to descend from a Rock, called the Kings
Rock, and hovering over the Army, flew about, and lighted on the Princes Tent:
which taken, he commanded her to be kept as a good presage; So October. 15th,
being come with in half a days march of Tergovista, he heard by two
Christians, escaped from the Turks, that two days before, the Turks hearing of
his coming, were so terrified, that Sinan could scarce stay the Janissaries from
flight, and when he had done all, some Companies went quite away; but indeed,
Sinan as fearful as his Army, upon the Princes approach, fled, leaving behind
him all his Tents, and Warlike Provision, carrying away only things of most
value. Tergovista and the Castle, he committed to Hassan and Bogdanus, with
4000 choice Soldiers, promising in few days, if need were, to relieve them,
so fleeing to Bucaresta, whence, he presently wrote to Hassan, willing him, if
he could to defend it; but if he thought it not possible so to do, then in time
to forsake it; but these Letters being intercepted, never came to his hands.
Ere long, the Prince entered the forsaken Camp, where he found what they had
left, and forthwith, summoned both City and Castle: which yet were denied him;
but next day, Hassan, considering the Princes power, and doubting of relief
from Sinan, whom he (not without cause) suspected not to love him, was about to
yield, on some reasonable Composition; but the Garrison (most Janissaries) would
in no case give consent: whereupon, the Prince, after some few hours furious
battery, took City and Castle by assault, putting them all to the Sword, except
Hassan, as taken with his own hand, and two other Sanzacks: Bogdanus the
Renegate being slain. There was a rich prey, and store of all Warlike
provision. Hassan grievously complained, that Sinan had maliciously exposed him
to so manifest danger, for the grudge he bare his Father Muhamet; yet he craved
good usage of the Prince, offering for his Ransom, ten hundred thousand
Hungarian Ducats.

While the Prince lay at Tergovista, came thither four thousand Turks, sent to
spoil and seek for prey, thinking Sinan had been there still, who were all
slain, and 60000 head of Cattle recovered, which they had taken out of Valachia
and Moldavia, to have been sent to Constantinople; for those two Countries so
abound with Corn and Cattle, that they plentifully serve Constantinople with
Corn and flesh; and at least 150 Ships, laden yearly thither, with other
Victuals: of all which, the Turks were now deprived.

The Prince strongly garrisoning Tergovista, set forward to Bucaresta; but
Sinan was fled thence also to Zorza: the Prince had in Bucaresta, some
Fieldpieces, and good store of Shot and Powder, left there by Sinan: and
staying there a while, for manning of the place, he so speedily set forward
toward Zorza, that he overtook a great number of Turks, slaying them all, so
that the fields were in many places covered with dead bodies: yet the fearful
Bassa, was about six hours or more, before him, come to his Bridge over
Danubius: over the hithermost part whereof, about a mile long, was Sinan with
most of his Army, got into an Island, in the midst of the River, wherein he had
at his coming over, encamped; but the Prince being come, he with all speed, got
over the other part of the Bridge, to the further side of the River, with what
men he could, breaking and (...) the Bridge on that side, whereby many of his
men not yet come over, were cut off, the Prince forcing many into the River,
where they perished: others, fleeing into the Island, were pursued, and either
slain, or, seeking to get over by the other part of the Bridge broken down, and
the hither end now cut off by the Christians, were with the Bridge carried away
by the Rivers violence.

Other Christians the while, took the Bridge that leads to Zorza Castle,
which, encompassed with an Arm of Danubius, and not very great, was kept by 700
choice Soldiers: which the Prince besieging, and the Soldiers resolved to
hold it out to the last man, after soar battery, took it by force, and put all
to the Sword he could lay hands on: about 100 Turks desperately leaping from
the top of the Castle into the River, were all drowned, or slain with small
shot, 250 Christians being here lost, and many wounded; but between the 18th
and 31 of October, above 26 Turks and Tartars perished. They took herein 39
great Pieces; and Warlike provision, enough for a whole Kingdom; 4000 Captive
Valachians, beside Women and Children, being also delivered: with whom the
Prince returned in triumph to Tergovista, thence to Alba Julia: where, as at
(...) Cities throughout his Dominions, he caused public prayers, with
Thanksgiving to be made for so great a Victory: as did Michael the Vayuod of
Valachia, who in all these Wars, was not inferior to Sigismund. It was, by some
of the better sort of Turks taken, reported, that Sinan should often say, (...)
young Prince had bereft him of all the honor he had, with great Travel, got in
all the course of his life; and though he had escaped his hands, yet he feared
he would be the cause of losing his life, with goods and honor.

After the overthrow of this great Bassa, the Transilvanian Prince his name,
became dreadful to the Turks, and famous (...) all Christendom. Whom, the mean
(...) tars were worsted, with the Ioss of 3000 men. The (...) and Sidriack,
finding, that without his leave he could not pass, sent to the Polonian,
excusing what was past, as done without their consent: telling him, They came
not to fight with him, as having express command from Mahomet, not to disturb
the League betwixt him and the Polonians; but quietly to pass into Moldavia,
and there to place Sidriack his Tributary, instead of usurping Stephen, craving
his leave to pass. He answered, He was come thither by the Kings command, to
defend those Countries from wrongful invasion, and that he would keep inviolate
the conditions of the ancient League; yet so, as that Poland took no harm
thereby, but might quietly live by the Turk (...) his good neighbor;
protesting, the League was not by him, but by them infringed, to whom he could
not give passage. Yet, at last, Articles were agreed on, to the reasonable
content of the Tartar and Chancellor, as also of the Turkish Sultan, though not
of Sidriack, disappointed of his Vayuodship: so the Tartar returned with his
multitude. But far was it from Zomoschi's thought (though the common opinion
was so) to do the Transilvanian Prince any good, by keeping out the Tartars:
who envying at his glory, had with the Cardinal and his Brother, the Princes
Uncles, conspired, what they could, his utter ruin (wishing rather those
Countries subjected to the Turk than to see them so at liberty governed by the
Prince); and presently after the departure of the Tartars, he passing the River
Nijester into Moldavia, when the Prince was going against Sinan, seized the
Castle of Chotjim, which he garrisoned: thence marching to Zorona the
Metropolis, had it yielded unto him, and had soon almost all the Country
delivered unto him: Stephen fleeing from place to place, before him from whom
he least feared any such thing.

The Chancellor presently placed one Jeremiah Vayuod in Stephen's room, to
hold it of the Polonian King; yet, he sent to (...), requesting him, not to
take it ill, that he had entered Moldavia, placing a Vayuod there, but, in
Mahomet's Name, to confirm his deeds: promising, this new Vayuod should pay him
the Tribute behind: and for future, a far greater, than had Moldavia before.
But the haughty Bassa, not fearing to be driven out of those Countries by the
Prince, answered, It was not the Sultans mind, that the Polonians should invade
Moldavia; for, besides his ability, without them, to reduce those Countries, he
had given it to the Tartar, in reward of his good service already done; whose
Subjects would ere long, be ready to possess it: yet Zamoschi defended the new
Vayuod; but, if Sinan had not been ( as he was presently after) overthrown and
driven quite out, the Chancellor had not now holden Moldavia: who, pretended
also, that Moldavia did of ancient right, belong to the Kingdom of Poland;
which the Transilvanians took to be but open wrong: by which supposed Title,
the King and States of Poland inferred the Invasion: and, placing a Vayuod of
Moldavia to his discretion, who, labored also by forced reasons, to show them
the power of the Prince, to be so inferior unto the Turks, that it was to be
feared he should at length be thrust out of all: and so it should happen, that
the Polonians should have an untrusty and trouble some Neighbor, etc.
persuading himself, to find such favor with the Turkish Emperor, that he
should be well contented with his Invasion, which proved a great trouble of the
Prince, and benefit to the Turk; The new Vayuod not long after, opening a way
for the Tartars to enter (...), by the way of the Ciculi, of Alba-Julia, and of
Valachia.

Sigismund, after the flight of Sinan, sent some Companies of Horse and Foot to
Stephen the late Vayuod, to try if he could drive out the Polonians again, and
recover his former Dignity: with which aid, and others, he bloodily fought with
them: but being overcome and taken, he was a while kept (as the Prince feared)
to be delivered to the Turk; and (as is said) was afterward by them (...) put
to death.

This foul dealing of the Polonian, much grieved many Christians, as tending to
a general hurt: Wherefore, the Emperor thought to (...) the Polonian King by
his Ambassadors, to desist from such invasion of the Transilvanian Prince, as
nothing standing with his Honor; and that some good reconciliation might be
made between the Prince and his Uncles, the authors of all these troubles. Pope
Clement the 8th. also sent a Messenger with like Instructions, and large
Letters to the King, pathetically persuading him, not so to prosecute his wars
against the Prince, but to turn his thoughts, to a more peaceable and
Christian-like course, especially with him, with whom he was so nigh linked in
marriage (for they married 2 Sisters); he also wrote (...) (...) like effect to
Cardinal Bator; and, after many Admonitions, cited him to Rome. Which Letters
dated from Rome, November. 8. were delivered in December: the Pope sharply
reproving the Cardinal and Chancellor, as Authors and Contrivers of all these
mischiefs. The Tartar Cham also about this time, sent his Ambassador to the
King of Poland, for confirmation of such Articles, as he had before agreed on
with the Chancellor, whose Letters did declare the ground and purpose of his
intended Expedition into Moldavia with the collusion of the Chancellor, with
the Turks and Tartars, against the Transilvanian Prince: saying, When the
Chancellor had promised, He would take order that the Cossacks on the further
side of Nijester should be utterly rooted out, that they should not hereafter
do any harm in the Sultans Territories: and that the Presents usually sent him
since the time of Solomon, should no more be detained, nor any harms done in
any part of his Dominions: he also consented that Jeremiah should hold the
Vayuodship of Valachia. Unto which agreement, if his Majesty should consent,
then he should always find brotherly friendship with him and all his Captains
and Murzis; Otherwise, he did not perform the Oath and Covenants made. The
Ambassador delivering a speech to the King, to the same effect with the
Letters, gave him a Horse and an Arrow for a Present, and was brought to a
Lodging there to expect his answer. At length, it was given in sealed Letters:
which he taking much against his will, requested the King, to send an
Ambassador to the Cham; and by word, to tell him what to answer to his Lord;
but other answer he could get none; and, so rewarded with a (...) furred with
Sables, was dismissed without the Present requested by the Cham, or any
Ambassador.

Thus, the Transilvanian Prince, received more harm from the Polonians, than
from the Turk and (...); for, by taking away of Moldavia, they weakened his
strength, and opened a way for the (...) into his Country; yet, the Chancellor
in his large Letters to the Pope, alleged much for excuse of themselves: with
which, however the Pope was contented, yet it nothing pleased the Emperor, and
much less the Prince.

In the beginning of November. Leucovits Governor of Carolstat, the second time
surprised Wihitz in the Frontiers of Croatia: but not being able to take the
Castle, took the spoil of the City, and setting it on fire, departed.
Maximilian also attempted Zolnoc; and the Christians, at Strigonium and
Plindenburg, did with continual inroads (...) the Turks at Buda all the latter
end of this year, and the beginning of the next: and the Turks in Braila in
Valachia, fearing, after the flight of (...) to be besieged by Michael, forsook
the City, passing over the River Danubius in such haste, that 300 perished.

Sinan, was ere long sent for to Constantinople, but the old Fox knowing the
fierce nature of the Sultan, and warned by Ferat, (...) delay, till he was the
third time sent for. The mean while, he so wrought by his mighty friends in
Court, and rich rewards, that he was honorably received at Court as the
chiefest Bassa; and being offered to be discharged of the wars, as one above 80
years old, he said, He was born and brought up among Soldiers, and so wished
among them to die, as not long after he did, thought to be of-conceit of this
his ill success.

Mahomet, exceedingly grieved at the loss of so many Cities and strong Holds
this year: and daily understanding of the slaughter of his people, and wasting
of his Frontiers, greatly prepared against next Spring, giving out, that he
would in person come into Hungary with such a power, as never had any of his
Predecessors. Yet, by the (...) and famine, which then raged extremely in most
parts of his Empire; and by other great Occurrents of that time, by that time
the Spring came, he scarce knew which way to turn: for, besides these troubles
of the West, the warlike Georgians in the East, moved with these good successes
of the Christians, had taken up Arms against him; and the Persian King lately
dying, had left his son, a man of greater spirit, than was like to endure the
Turks former manifold injuries: Whereof, the Bassa of Tauris informed Mahomet,
wishing him betimes to provide for such storms.

The Transilvanian Prince, now thought it not unfit for his Affairs, to go in
person to the Emperor, to declare the wrong done him by the Polonian, and to
confer with him about the managing of the Wars. So, setting forward in Jan.
1596. he arrived at Prague, Febr. the 4th. where he was most honorably
entertained; but, he presently sickned of an Ague, which grievously vexed him
for 3 weeks.

In the latter end of February, he went to the Cathedral; where after devotion
done, he was welcomed by the Dean, with a most Eloquent Oration: setting forth
his praises, and animating him unto the like (...) against the Enemy of all
Christianity: who answered in Latin so Eloquently and readily, that the
Hearers marvelled, protesting in his speech: That as he and his Subjects, had
not (hitherto) spared life or goods; so, would they adventure all (hereafter)
for the Christian Commonweal; hoping, that the Emperor and other Princes would
not be wanting to him with their Forces upon occasion, or the Clergy with their
prayers: whereby, he doubted not (through Gods power) to obtain more notable
Victories, than he had yet, against the enemies of God.

In the mean time, the Ciculi offended at their Liberties being somewhat
infringed in the Assembly of States, holden in Transylvania in December last,
rose up in Arms in diverse places, a thing like enough to have wrought the
Prince much trouble, and supposed not to be done without the Cardinal his
privity: but, by the wisdom and courage of those he had entrusted in his
absence, diverse Ringleaders were apprehended, and diversely executed: and 300
Accomplices for Terrour-sake, had their Noses and Ears cut off; so, the Country
was again quieted. About which time also, Mahomet sending a new Bassa to
Temeswar; the old Bassa had in 75 Wagons trussed up abundance of wealth, which
he had there gotten, to have been with himself by a strong Convoy conducted to
Belgrade: whereof, the Hungarian Heidons at Lippa and Jenna hearing, lay in
wait for him, and, in a sharp conflict, overthrew the Convoy, slaying the
Bassa, whose Head they sent to the Princess at Alba Julia: and taking the spoil
of the Carriages, a wonderful wealth; for, in one Wagon. 20000 Hungarian
Ducats were reported to be found.

Also, in the Princes absence, 10000 Rascians came and offered their service to
the Princess; Whereof, she speedily certifying her Husband, he hasted to
dispatch with the Emperor; and having promise from him and the Pope, of some
aid to be sent him, departed from Prague to Vienna, where he arrived, March the
11th. in a Princely Chariot with six most beautiful Horses, the Emperor's
gift: he was met by the Nobility, and by the Popes Nephew; who presented him
with 3 goodly serviceable Horses richly furnished; whom he taking into his
Chariot, entered the City, where, he was honorably and joyfully received; and,
being brought to the Palace, the Students of that University acted before him
the History of (...), staying there 3 days, and purposing to have visited his
Mother in law at Greicz: in (...), he had news, that the Turks and Tartars, by
instigation of Stephen his Uncle, were about to break into Transylvania;
Wherefore, he speedily kept on his way from the Presburg, arriving in
Transylvania, in the beginning of Apr. to the great joy of his Subjects in
general.

Many hot skirmishes the while, passed betwixt the Turks and Christians in
their Frontiers. And now the plague and famine (...) to assuage in the Turks
Dominions: wherefore, Mahomet caused the (...) of his wars against the Emperor
and Prince, to be 3 days together proclaimed in Constantinople; and a great
Army to be raised: with which, he gave out, he would come in person into
Hungary; then also it was reported, he had already sent his Tents, and other
provision to Hadrianople: for the name of the Transilvanian was most odious in
the Turks Court.

Of all these things was not the Emperor ignorant, by sundry means: Wherefore,
he speedily and carefully endeavored, that the Enemy at his coming, might not
find him unprovided. He also prayed aid of other Neighbor Princes, chiefly of
the Polonian, whom, he had diverse times sought to draw into the Confederation;
So, he sent to him a Bishop and a Lord, his Ambassadors; as did the Pope,
Cardinal Cajetane, and the Electours, theirs: unto whom, he gave good words,
but would in no case break his League with the Turks or afford them any aid;
though Cajetane, with many reasons showed him, What small (...) there was in
the Turks Leagues, and how dangerous it might be to his State; if the Turk,
making peace with the Emperor, should turn his Force upon him, which it was
like enough he would: besides the immortal blemish, by dissevering himself, to
hold friendship with the Infidels. But most imputed this, not so much to the
King, as to others: especially to (...) the Chancellor, by whom that State was
swayed; who was openly reported, to have secret Intelligence with the Turk and
Tartar.

All this while, Palfi Governor of (...), vexed the Turks, even to the gates
of Buda, as did other Captains in other places of their Frontiers in Hungary.
There were 2 great Villages nigh Buda, most inhabited by Christians: who,
having given Oath of Obedience to the Turk, lived a miserable life, for payment
of an excessive yearly Tribute. These, by secret (...) requested Palfi, to
carry them with their substance into some other place, to live among
Christians, as he had lately done for them of old Buda: Wherefore, he willed
them against an appointed time, to put all things in readiness: So, with wives
and children, and their trash, (...) up in (...) Wagons, drawn with 14 and 16
Oxen a piece, about midnight, they removing, were by them of Strigonium, sent
for them, brought safely thither; they were about 755 Families, many being rich
men, bringing with them much coin, with an exceeding number of Cattle: Palfi
assigned them some fields, between Strigonium and Vivaria.

Shortly after, 600 of the Garrison of Lippa, adventuring too far for booty in
the Turks Territories, were discovered, and so beset by Turks and Tartars,
billetted about Temeswar, that they had no way to escape: so, being on every
side hardly charged by them, they (as men resolved before to die) although
scarce one to twenty, fought most desperately, and were all slain, except some
few, which by great fortune escaped, leaving to the Enemy, a right bloody
Victory, yet hereby was the Garrison of Lippa much weakened: Whereupon, the
Enemy forthwith prepared to besiege the Town: which, Barbelus the Governor
foreseeing, sent in post to Sigismund, requesting him speedily, to send him 4
or 5000 good Soldiers: to whom the Prince without delay sent 8000.

Shortly after whose arrival, 40000. Turks and Tartars came, and enclosed Lippa
on every side, doing very little for certain days. The besieged the while,
doing them all harm they could with their plentiful great shot; but, news
being brought that the Transilvanian, was coming with a great power, hereupon
they presently retired to about 2 miles from Lippa: where, certainly
understanding the report, was not, nor could be true, they returned, more
straightly besieging it than before, and battered the Town with 17 pieces; then
giving thereunto diverse desperate assaults, but were still with great slaughter
repulsed; for, the Christians with murdering pieces out of the Towers and
bulwarks, flanking each other, made great spoil of them. In the heat of one
assault, the Governor, as of mere desperation, set open one of the gates,
having within, placed 16 pieces at the very entrance, charged with murdering
shot; whereupon, the Enemy came thronging exceeding thick, and were suddenly
cut down as with a Sith, and so the third and fourth time, before they could
clear themselves, their rent limbs most miserably flying in the air: yet was
the siege continued, and by often assaults very (...) maintained. But whilst
the Bassa of Temeswar lay at this siege, they that were left in Temeswar, lived
in great security. In the mean time, the Governor of Lugaz, sent out 6000
Soldiers, now in the Bassaes absence, to seek after booty; who, coming to
Temeswar, speedily rifled the Suburbs, slew all the Turks they lighted on, and
freed 1000 captives; so, setting the Suburbs on fire, they departed: which fire
grew so great, that it was plainly seen into the Camp at Lippa, showing, as if
the whole City had been on fire: which so daunted the besiegers, that they most
disorderly fled, leaving all that they had behind them: the Transilvanians, who
were even then coming thither, pursuing them, slew diverse, and took some
prisoners. At which time, some Hungarian Heidons that served the Prince (who
was now come into the confines of Hungary) getting over (...), took Plenia, a
small Turkish Town, which they ransacked and burnt, and slaying above 3000
Turks thereaabout, returned with a rich prey.

Not long before the Christians had surprised Clissa, a strong Frontier-town in
Dalmatia; the Bassa of Bosna, laid hard siege thereto: for relief whereof,
Lewcowitz, Governor of Stiria and other Provinces thereabouts, and him of
Zeng, embarked 4000 Soldiers (in 42. ships) well appointed, so setting
forward: and lighton a Venetian Galley, bound for the Turks Camp with warlike
provision, they took and rifled her. The Governor landing his men at Siret,
marched that night part of his way, and all next day lay close: at night,
setting forward again, they came to the Enemies Camp before day; where,
assailing the secure Turks in their Trenches, they as amazed, fled sundry
ways, every man in so sudden a fear shifting for himself, leaving all behind
them: the Christians falling presently to the spoil, and not by hasty pursuit
possessing themselves of an assured Victory; the Turks from the Hills,
discovering (at day-dawning) their small number and disorder, came down, and
enclosed them on every side, (...) them downright: Lewcowitz, with the
Governor of Zeng, and some others getting into Clissa; where, after 2 days
stay, and doubting of safety, they secretly by night issued forth with 600 men,
hoping to recover their Fleet; but the suspicious Turks had so beset the
passages, that of all them, Leucowitz, hardly with 3 others escaped.

The Enemy, now more straightly besieged the Town than before: Whereupon, the
besieged now despairing of relief, yielded the Town upon departure with bag and
baggage. About which time, Palfi hearing of an Assembly of some Turks
Adventurers at (...) Castle, betwixt Buda and Alba-regalis, set forward from
Strigonium, May 22. with the greatest strength he could, coming thither about
3 in the afternoon: where, after 3 hours dangerous and most desperate assault,
he, with much difficulty prevailed, putting man, woman, and child to the sword,
50 being Janissaries, but that day come thither. The Bassa of Buda often resorted
to this beautiful and pleasantly situated Castle; for his pleasure;
wherefore, Palsi much desired to take it without spoiling; but, the fire
already raised, burnt down all the goodly Buildings, and left no more Victuals
or other provision, than what the Christians had saved for themselves.

Lippa, being by a great chance (...) before the Prince his coming; he
besieged Temeswar: but 40000 Turks and Tartars came to raise the siege of that
famous City: Wherefore, the Prince rose and went to meet them, and had a
terrible battle, and doubtful for a while; yet, seeming rather to incline to
the Enemy: who at length disordered with the Artillery, and the Transilvanians
charging them afresh, gave ground, and so fled; 5000 Turks and Tartars being
slain, and 1500 Christians: the Prince himself, being for a time reported
(though falsely) to be (...).

After this, he returned to the siege, leaving nothing unattempted, that he
could devise to win the City; but, news was brought him, that Giaffer Bassa and
the Tartars, were coming with a great Army to relieve it: Whereupon,
considering the power of the Enemy, and his promised aid not yet ready; he,
with great grief retired with his Army to Lippa, expecting supplies, both of
his own and friends: and was there advertised, that the Bassa of Natolia,
Mahomet's (...), was at Belgrade, with 14000 Horse and 4000 Janissaries, to join
with the Bassa of Buda, to relieve Temeswar, in all about 60000: and that
Mahomet himself was coming after with a far greater power; Wherefore, leaving
a strong Garrison at Lippa, he returned to Alba- Julia, there assembling his
States, for repressing so puissant an Enemy.

Mahomet (although the Tartar at first said, he would not send so much as an
Ass thereunto) had by great gifts and his own respect with the Tartar, made
him now ready with a strong Army, upon the Frontiers of Moldavia, to meet him
in Hungary: to whom, that Vayuod sent Presents, with what Victuals he could
possibly provide: Mahomet also, entreated with the Polonian King for his
passage, as also to confirm the ancient League, which he knew the Emperor and
other Princes sought (by all means) to withdraw him from. He also sent an
Ambassador to Michael Vayuod of Valachia, both by show of great dangers, to
deterr him from the Confederacy with the Transilvanian: and by glorious
promises to allure him to submit to his protection, and in taking of fidelity,
to deliver to him, what 2 Frontier Towns he should require: Who answered, He
was not yet weary of Friendship with the Prince, neither were those Towns in
his power to give, as belonging to him; to whom he would write, and stay the
Ambassador till he had an answer.

The Emperor had, with what care he could, provided, that his Army might be
ready at first of the Spring; but, although his own Forces were in some good
time ready, yet was a good part of Summer past, before the aid from other
Princes met together: at length, when some convenient number were assembled at
Vienna: they were by Lord Swartzenburg brought into the field, and encamped in
those very Trenches that were cast up last year by count Mansfelt, there to
expect the coming down of their Warlike provision by the River: as also, the
rest of the daily expected Forces. From Altenburg they marched to (...), thence
to Vacia or Woczen, July 24. Upon whose approach, the Turks forsook the Town,
and with their Ordnance, Cattle, and best Goods, fled to Pesth, burying the
biggest Ordnance by the way: which yet was found out. And though the Turks had
fired both Town and Castle; yet, the Christians, left therein, by the help of
2000 Foot and some Horse sent thither, preserved a great part of both: The
whole Army coming and encamping in the open field, braved the Turks, even to
the Gates of Pesth; insomuch, that they of Pesth and Buda, sent their Wives and
Children with their chief substance down the River, to places farther off, and
that so disorderly, that many for haste thrust one another into the River, and
so perished.

Ferdiuand the Emperor's Uncle, Count of Tirol, being dead, the Emperor
preferred Matthias his Brother to that Government, not inferior to some
Kingdoms, appointing Maximilian the younger Brother General, who came into the
Camp, Aug. 4th. being by Swartzenburg his Lievt. and Palfi, received with great
triumph.

The Christians being now 60000 strong, and, having fortified and garrisoned
Vacia, resolved to besiege Hatwan, a strong Town in upper Hungary, whither they
came August the 15. and so speedily, that they were seen by the Turks, before
heard of; so that at first they sallyed out upon them, as some come to seek for
booty; skirmishing a while, till they saw the whole Battle coming.

The Christians encamping themselves, battered the Counterscarf in 3 places.
Besides the strong Garrison, was also a broad Ditch, with a broad
Counter-scarf, and strong Pallisadoes. The Turks sallying out, brake into the
Christians Trenches, doing greater harm, and were likely to do more, had not
the Horsemen in time, come and forced them to retire. Greis a notable Captain
was here slain, being forsaken of his own men: who, for their cowardice were
openly disarmed, and turned out of the Camp: One morning, as the Christians
were at their devotions in their Trenches, a Turkish Priest from a high Tower,
most bitterly railing on, and cursing. and (...) them, a Cannonier much moved,
shot at the Tower, which he struck down, together, with the railing and
blaspheming Priest.

The Christians having at length, made the Town Saultable, the Turks offered to
yield it, upon the same conditions that they of Strigonium had, but they
received no answer: yea, command was given, none on pain of death to have any
parley with them. Shortly after, they, about 5 in the afternoon assaulted the
Town in 4 places, and after 3 hours hard fight, took it, with the (...) and
lamenting of the women and children, and other fearful ones. Four hours
Execution was done upon all that came to hand: Women great with child, and young
children at their Mother's breasts, were slain; and the Walloons ripped the
children out of their mothers wombs, making thongs and points of the skins of
men and women, whom they had slain quick: which cruelty, (when they were
reproved afterward for it) they excused: pretending, they taught the Turks
hereafter, not so wickedly to blaspheme against Christ, or with such wonted
cruelty to torment the Christians for fear of the like. In this fury, about
4000 Turks perished, and but three hundred Christians; Here was a very rich
prey, besides what the fire devoured. One Terski (with his Company) first
entered the Town, after whom followed Rusworme, who, in their entrance, were
thought to have slain with their own hand eight or ten Turks apiece.

Mahomet the while, sending Cicala before him, arrived at length from Belgrade
at Buda, with about 200000 men, and 300 Fieldpieces; whence, sending 40000
presently to Temeswar, he stayed there himself with the rest.

The Christians at Hatwan, doubting lest he should suddenly come upon them, as
yet unprovided, departed thence, encamping not far fram Vacia, from whence, the
Christian Garrison (next day, after the Turks coming to Buda) had fled for
fear, firing the Town, and following the Camp. His coming also, caused those
of Vienna, to labor day and night to fortify, and provide all things, as if
for a present siege; But, Mahomet not provided for such an undertaking, and not
ignorant of Solyman's disgrace, had, at his coming into Hungary, cast his eyes
upon the City Agria, not far from Hatwan, purposing by taking thereof, and
strongly garrisoning it, to hinder the uniting of the Emperors Forces with the
Transilvanians, by the way of upper Hungary: Wherefore, the Archduke sent
thither valiant Terski, with a notable Company of Italians and Germans, and
1000 other Harquebusiers. September. 21. Mahomet with 4 Bassaes ( Sinan being now
dead) and an Army of 150000, encamped between Danubius and Tibiscus, and with
wondrous speed, casting up 5 great Mounts, so furiously battered the walls,
that the Christians were glad night and day, to stand in Arms for defense of
the City; and, though the walls were long, and in many places so weak as not to
be defended, but by a greater garrison: yet, for 6 days they defended the
whole City against the Enemies fury, doing them great harm: But, the danger
greatly increasing they set it on fire, having first convayed all their best
substance, with themselves, into the Castle, fair and strong; Whereupon, the
Turks brake so suddenly into the City, as if they would have entered the Castle
with them, but in that attempt they were repulsed, and many slain. There was a
strong Bulwark adjoining to the Castle: which, the Turks having sore shaken
with their Ordnance, thundering without ceasing, in 2 days assaulted it 12
times, but with wonderful loss; but, as men the more enraged, they came on with
greater fury than before: and at last took it, putting all to the Sword, except
such as betimes got into the Castle. Which Bulwark, the Christians next day
again recovered, slaying a great number of Turks, with the loss of some 30
men, and as many wounded.

The besieged now diverse times, craved aid of Maximilian, telling him, they
could not long hold out for want of shot and Powder, if not timely relieved
(which the Enemy knew), yet they resolved to hold it out to the last man;
though Mahomet had often willed them to yield it up, promising safe departure
with life and goods, otherwise threatening greater extremities than was showed
at Hatwan: whereto they never answered him; for Terski had forbad all parley,
setting up Gallows in the Marketplace, and threatening to hang whoever should
once motion a yielding of the City.

The Archduke, having stayed somewhat too long at (...), expecting more aid,
began now to set forward, as if he indeed purposed to relieve his friends so
hardly beset at Agria; but through the foulness of the weather, hindering the
passage of his Ordnance (to omit other things) he marched scarce 12 miles in 14
days: whereby the Enemy, now hearing of their coming, turned all his
endeavors from battery, to fill up the Ditch of the old Castle: to hasten
which, Mahomet himself rode up and done, encouraging his men in that desperate
work; but whilst they were busied therein, the Christians sallying out, made
great slaughter of them, (...) so chased Ibraim Bassa, with those about him,
that in flight, he lost his Tulipant, and was very nigh taking; yet the work by
the restless labor of such a multitude, was so perfected, that the Turks
October. 10th, gave the Castle four desperate assaults, being still with great
slaughter repulsed; but the fifth time, by a greater fury, they entered, putting
about 800 which were therein, to the sword: 400 of whose heads, a Captain sent
to Mahomet in the Camp; where at, he is said to have taken great pleasure: The
new Castle now only remaining, although the Turk's battery was very terrible
against it; yet their greatest hope, was in 14 secret Mines, which were now
almost ready to be blown up: whereupon, the besieged (hearing of no relief)
resolved, without consent of their chief Commanders, to yield, rising up as one
man, in a mutiny against Niari and Terski, who first greatly dissuaded them
from such cowardice, minding them of their Oath; then requested them on their
knees, to hold out a while, in hope of speedy relief; yea, Terski, with hands
cast up, entreated them, if they would needs yield, first to kill him, that he
might not see so great a dishonor. In the mean time, 250 common Soldiers
(many being Italians) escaped out into the Camp, diverse of whom, turned Turks:
which so added to the former fear, that forthwith, coming to a parley, they
agreed, with Swords by their sides, and bag and baggage, safely to depart.

Mahomet gave them his faith, with mutual Hostages for performance; so October.
13th, about 2000 coming forth, they were not gone far, but were cut in pieces
by the Turks and Tartars: some being flain quick, and others otherwise
dismembered: the Turks upbraidingly saying, Faith was not to be kept with them,
that had dealt so cruelly at Hatwan.

Some of (...) chief Turks, complained to the Sultans of this perfidiousness,
who is (...) to have executed some of the chief Authors, and to proclaim, that
if the Turks or Tartars, had taken any of them, to set them at liberty.

Whilst Mahomet besieged Agria, the Bassa of Bosna, with some other Sanzacks,
besieged (...) with a (...) Army: and so furiously battered it for 7 days,
that it (...) thought impossible, to hold it out two days longer; (...)
Herbenstein and (...), with all their power, coming toward Petrinia, retired
toward Siseg, there in haste to pass over the River Kulp: whom the Turks
supposing to have fled, put 6000 Horse over the River, to pursue them: on whom,
the Christians turning, slew many, and drove the rest into the River, where
most of them perished: so next day, they by a Bridge, passed over at Siseg; and
being come near to Petrinia, were encountered by 8000 Turks, whom they putting
to flight, understood by some prisoners taken, that the Bassa, the day before,
was risen and gone: which they at first believed not; but coming thither, found
it so.

Maximilian came to Cassovia, October. 17th, four days after the loss of Agria:
whither the Transilvanian Prince was come with 18000 Horse and Foot, and forty
Fieldpieces to aid him. Next day, they setting forward, joined with
Teuffenbach and Palsi, all whose united forces, consisted now of 32000 Horse,
and 28000 Foot, having 120 Fieldpieces, and 2000 Wagons, wherewith they
enclosed their Army every night; so they orderly marched toward Agria, all
seeming very desirous to give the Turks battle, and by the way, came to a fair
Heath, where they were to pass over a River: which passage, Giaffar Bassa, had
taken with 20000 Turks and Tartars, purposing by enlarging it, to have made way
for the whole Army over on the other side, as commodious for many things,
especially for plenty of water for themselves, and to have kept the Christians
from it; but next day, October. 23, they skirmishing with him, especially at the
passage, slew 300 of his men at the first encounter, who seeing the whole Army
coming on, fled to the Sultan, losing two Ensigns, and two Fieldpieces, but
not many Men, through timely flight, and the nights approach.

The Christians finding the place where the Bassa lay, not so commodious for
them as they supposed, (chiefly for lack of Wood, and hearing of the Sultan's
approach, retired over the River, again to their former place, enclosing
themselves with their Wagons. Next day, October. 24, toward night, Mahomet
appeared with all his Army, sending 3000 Tartars to pass the River, of whom
the Christians slew many with great shot, and put the rest to flight.

In the morning, Mahomet with his Army, ranged in order of Battle, came in
sight, sending again, part of his Forces over the River; with whom the
Christians skirmished from morning till night, the main Bodies all this while,
standing falt on both sides of the River. But at length, both sides being well
wearied, nd many slain, the Turks retired again over the River: and next day,
(both sides resolving to give Battle) October. 26, Mahomet drew down with his
Army toward the River, nigh which place, were the ruins of an old Temple,
wherein he placed Janissaries, and 24 Field pieces, sending 20000 choice
Soldiers over the River: whom the Christians, with part of their Army, so
fiercely charged, that they soon overthrew them: as also, some Companies of
Tartars, came over in another place, and following the chase, put to flight
also them on the further side of the River, flaying a great number; and by the
coming on of the rest of the Army, took from them 190 great Pieces, which so
affrighted the Turks Camp, that Mahomet with Ibraim Bassa, fled toward Agria,
shedding some tears as he went, and wiping his eyes with a piece of Mahomets
Garment, which for reverence, he carried about him.

Night drawing on, the General was about to found a retreat for that day; but
the Prince, Palfi, and the rest; persuaded him in so great a fear of the Enemy,
to prosecute the Victory; and the rather, because the Turks began to repair
their disordered Battles: wherefore the Christians charged the Front of the
Turks restored Battle, (in number 40000) with such violence, that they soon
(...) most of them, putting the rest to flight; and also, charging their main
body, forced them with great slaughter, into their own Camp. Now a general
Command was given, None on pain of death, to forsake his place in seeking after
spoil, till the Victory was assured; but they breaking together with the Turks
into their Tents, slew a great number, and seeing great store of rich spoil,
left the pursuit, falling to the spoil, till they came to the very Tent of the
Sultan, where they lighted on a strong and resolute Squadron, who discharged
store of Ordnance, among the thickest of them, renting in sunder a great
number, and then coming on resolutely themselves: and the while, Cicala with
his untouched Horsemen, brake in also upon them, so that (as terrified) they
fled amain, especially the Hungarians and Germans, most busied in the spoil:
neither could they by threats or entreaty, be persuaded to show any token of
true valor; and whilst they fled thus headlong, they also overran their own
Footmen. Thus, through the greediness of some disordered men, the most notable
Victory that ever the Christian; were like to have had over the Turks, was let
slip.

Many Gentlemen and Commanders, in seeking to stay their flight, were slain;
and though the Turks pursued them scarce half a mile, yet the Christians fled
all over the Country, no man pursuing them. Maximilian, seeing all desperate,
fled to Cassovia: the Transilvanian retiring the most orderly toward Tocai,
having lost not above 200, no one being of fame: all which loss, he imputed to
the Hungarian's covetousness, and the German Horse their cowardice: Lord
Berstain fled also, as did Palfi; and in fine, all the rest: yet the night
following, the Turks themselves, for fear of the Christian's return, with their
best things, fled toward Agria; and it was afterward known, that the Turks
Ordnance, Tents and Baggage, stood 3 days in their Trenches, not at all, or but
slenderly guarded; so that they might easily have been taken had the Christians
made head again; yea, Mahomet is said, often to have confessed the danger and
fear, himself and Army were then in, if the Christians had pursued the Victory,
and not so basely run after the spoil. Wherefore he would never afterward
adventure his Person to the like peril in the Field. In this Battle of
Karesta, and at the siege of Agria, were lost about 20000 Christians, and 60000
Turks. Mahomet after this Victory, fortifying, and garrisoning Agria with 10000
Soldiers, returned to Belgrade.

The Bassa of Buda, persuaded that the Christians could not this year recover
their strength to any purpose, besieged Vacia November. 4th, with all his power;
but finding greater resistance than he had imagined, and hearing that the
dispersed Christians in upper Hungary, were making head to come for its relief,
he returned to Buda, more afraid than hurt; for those dispersed relics, had
cast away their Arms in the late flight, and so could have done him small harm,
had he continued the siege.

Mahomet, dividing his Army into two parts at Belgrade, billited the one
thereabouts, to be ready for all events, returning with the other to
Constantinople; but Januschi, the Transilvanian Princes Lieutenant, and the
Vayuod of Valachia, getting over Danubius with a great power, and secretly
favored by the people, lay in ambush for him, and still following his Rear,
cut off 7000 of his men, before he could be rid of them, arriving at length, at
Constantinople.

Maximilian, arriving at Vienna with a small retinue, in the latter end of
November, found there, the Vicount of Burgan, Swartzenburg, and some other of
his Commanders, most of the rest, chiefly the Italians, being slain. The small
remainder of this year, was spent in often skirmishes and inroads into each
others Frontiers.

Rodolph the Emperor, for all the late discomfiture, chose again his Brother
Maximilian, General for his next years Wars, whereto the Pope, by his Legate,
promised to send 10000 Italians, under the Duke of Mantua, of his own charge,
as did the German Princes their wonted aid, with some others: who all slowly
meeting together nigh Possonium and Altenburg, departed in July and August, to
Pappa: which after 8 days hard siege, they took retiring to Altenburg, where
mustering the Army, they in the beginning of September, appeared before Rab,
where Lord Berstein approaching too nigh, was slain with a shot: yet they there
stayed till they heard of Mahomet Bassa's coming with a great Army; and then
September. 24, they passed over Danubins, into Schut (...), where they encamped.
And 8 days after, Dotis Castle standing on the other side of the River, was by
the Bassa before their faces, besieged and taken: the whole Christian Army, not
daring to relieve their friends, but marched to Vacia: where, hearing of the
Turks coming against them from Pesth, they fired the Castle, and so retired
along the North side of the River, till they came over against Vicegrade:
where, by the good direction of Lord Basta Lieutenant General of the Army, they
so strongly encamped, that the Turks, after many brave attempts, to force them
in their Trenches, were glad with some loss to depart.

The Transilvanian Prince, also besieging Temeswar by his Chancellor, in
October, was by the (...) valor, and the weather's unseasonableness, forced to
raise his siege, and depart. Also Michael of Valachia, now wearied with the
Turks often invasions, and almost utter desolation of his Country, many
thousands being carried captive, and most of his strong Ho'ds razed, to give
his Subjects a breathing time, submitted again to the Turk, receiving of a
Chiaus, sent on purpose, an Ensign, in token thereof, and of Mahomet's favor:
of which, the more to assure him, he shortly after, received more kind Letters
from him, than ever before, with (...) of the Vaynodship, by his solemn Oath,
to him and his Son Peter, (about 13 years old) during their lives, without
disturbance, and to pay but half the old yearly Tribute: he received also, a
goodly Horse, most richly furnish d, with a fair Scimitar, and Horsemans Mace,
in sign of the Martial Power committed to him: nevertheless, Michael not
daring too far to trust the Turk, having had former experience, still kept
strong Garrisons upon his Frontiers, with other wonted Forces, excusing it as
done, for fear of the Tartars, telling also Mahomet, when he requested him to
go with the Turks General, this year into Hungary, he might not in any case so
do, for fear of the Tartars most horrible incursions, requesting, that his
reasonable excuse to be in good part accepted: yet he well knew, that they were
expressly charged by the Sultan, to do no harm in Moldavia, or Valachia, as they
went into Hungary. Thus passed this year, without any other great thing done,
than what is declared.

Sigismund, who was confederated but with his poor oppressed Neighbors, the
Valachians and Moldavians, did so much against the Turk, that if all should be
particularly set down, it would not only be tedious, but perhaps seem
incredible: besides which calamities of War, the great Sultan, found no small
wants, both in his Coffers, and other necessary supplies, for maintenance of
his Wars, chiefly in Hungary, and that by the revolt of those three aforesaid
Countries. But their wholesome confederation being now broken, the Transilvanian
Prince Sigismund now left as it were all alone; and fearing least his Country
should with himself fall into the Turks, Polonians, or some other his Enemies
hands, resigned Transylvania unto the Emperor and his Heirs for ever; and so
leaving his Wife there, himself went into Silesia, to take possession of two
Dukedoms: which, with the yearly Pension of fifty thousand Joachims, or the
Revenues of the Bishopwrick of (...), he, in lieu thereof, received of the
EMPEROR: whereupon, Transylvania was by the general consent of those States,
in the beginning of one thousand five hundred ninety eight, delivered up to the
three Emperors Commissioners; and an Oath of obedience taken of them all,
although both the Commissioners and Emperor would have persuaded the Prince,
either not at all, or not so suddenly to have forsaken his Country, who was the
natural Prince thereof, and exceedingly beloved of his Subjects.

These Commissioners likewise in June following, took the like Oath of Michael,
and his people in Valachia, they loathing the Turkish Sovereignty. They also
then agreed with the Tartars Ambassadors, who offered (...) peace, and aid for
forty thousand Ducats yearly, and as many Sheepskin-Gowns, their usual
Apparel.

All this while continued the Diet begun at Ratisbone, in December last:
Matthias being there his Brother's Deputy, who demanded more aid against the
Turk, than against the PRINCES and STATES of the Empire offered; where at last,
a large proportion was agreed upon, for defraying the charges of those Wars,
to be paid in three years next; and so the Assembly was dissolved: but as they
returned home, RAB, one of the strongest Fortresles of Christendom, was by Lord
Swartzenburg again recovered, to the great grief of the storming TURKS, and joy
of the Christians, after this manner.

The Lord SWARTZENBURG, then laying at Komara, doubting of some attempt of the
TURKS at Rab, against him, kept continual Watch and Ward, all that Winter
time, with a strong Garrison: the Spring approaching, it happened March 22th,
about night, the Gates being shut, two Italians were heard nigh the Walls,
earnestly requesting to be let in, for fear of the Enemies pursuit: which being
told the Governor by a Gentinel, he doubting it to be some subtilty of the
Enemy, bad them there to tarry till morning; and then being let in, they
prostrating themselves before the Governor, pitifully requested him, to
comfort them with his charitable relief, that they might return into their own
Country: answering to him, demanding of them, that they were Italians, and had
even then escaped out of the Turks hands at Rab: and though they showed by
their gesture, not to know any news; yet he would needs know of them, when,
and how they were taken by the Turks, and how they escaped out of that cruel
servitude: so the younger told him, that when the Christians were overthrown by
the Turks, under Agria, they having by flight escaped the greatest danger; and
traveling toward Vienna, were (by a hundred Turks come out of Rab) taken and
committed to the Chain, where they had almost two years, with great patience,
served: telling him also, they had been three months before, carefully
devising how to recover their lost liberty, which now seemed to make some offer
of it self unto them; for, since the departure of the Emperors Army from the
Town, they lay as men not much regarded; so one day, as they were carrying
munition from the Palace of Giaffar, for the Soldiers, they secretly conveyed
three Pieces of Coard, by night to let themselves down from the Wall, burying
the Coard in the ground; but night come, and they roaming in the dark, and
still finding one let or other, they were forced to defer it till the night
following: when as they fastening the Coard above, slid down one after another:
the younger, though he could not swim, being by the assistance of the elder,
conducted over the broad and deep Ditch; and so, in the great darkness of the
night, they were come by chance to Komara, thinking to have gone to Vienna.

The Governor now demanded further, how Rab, was governed and guarded: they
told him, Very ill, and with small care, especially since the departure of the
Emperors Camp, and that four of the Gates being filled up with Earth, if broken
open, would fall into the Ditch, and further them that would attempt to enter
with diverse others particulars. Whereupon, he requested Lord Palfi, in all
haste and secrecy, with 1600 Foot, and what Horse he could make, to come unto
him, who presently setting forward by night, March 26, before day, with 1400
Foot, and 120 Horse, arrived at Komara: where they entering, the Gates were
again fast shut, and so kept for fear of the Enemies Spies; so Swartzenburg and
Palfi fully discoursing of the intended enterprise, and resolving thereon, they
found they had 2600 Foot, and 300 Horse, all courageous men: who staying two
days, and many of them, confessing, and receiving the Sacrament, now doubted
not to encounter a far greater number of Turks than themselves. And the more to
incite them, Palfi delivered to them, a notable Speech, (yet not telling them
whither they were to go) at the end whereof, they all cried aloud, They were
most ready to do any of their Commands, and follow them any whither; and so
having well refreshed themselves, about the 11th hour, March 27, they in good
order set forward toward Rab: and least the Enemy should have warning of what
was intended, Palfi ordered Stroine his Mayor, to follow softly after him, with
1700 Horse and Foot; so upon the break of day, they drew toward Rab, lying in
close ambush, about 7 miles short of the Town; and night being come, in two
hours march, they drew near Rab, where they stayed about five hours, sending
before them a French Engineer, with 13 others, (rewarded with 1500 Ducats)
having with them four Petards: where they found the Drawbridge down because
the Turks then secure, hourly expected some Wagons, with Provision from Alba
Regalis, whereby they coming to the Gate unperceived, and fastening their
forcible Engines thereunto, gave fire to the same; and being not gone far, were
descryed, and asked by a Sentinel, What they were; but was presently answered
by the Petards, which in a trice, tore in sunder the Gate, with some of the
Wall, and adjacent Fortifications. The Watch now gave the Alarm, and the
Christians thrusting in, took the Gate, no Turk yet coming to hinder their
entrance: 200 Turks first appeared with their hideous cry, Alla, Alla, but were
overcharged by 300 already entered. The Bassa also came on with above one
thousand following him, with the greatest Turkish courage and fury: where,
after two hours most terrible fight, the Bassa being slain, the Turks a little
retired, whereby one thousand Christians more entered; but Giaffar Bassa coming
with above one thousand tall Soldiers, all the Inhabitants also running after
him with great force, they constrained the Christians to retire to the Gate:
who there with incredible courage, sustaining the greatest fury of the Enemy;
and this Bassa also encountered by Lord Swartzenburg, being at length slain
also, most of the Turks retired into the City: about 300 crept underneath a
Bulwark, where were some Barrels of Gunpowder, which they firing, blew up with
themselves 300 Christians that were above upon the Bulwark, who else, were not
supposed to have lost in that Victory, above two hundred men.

The Turks discomfited, fled in every place before the Christians, they most
horribly slaughtering them: the Turkish Women all this while, casting down from
on high, Stones, Timber, etc. upon the heads of the Christians: the bloody
execution, in one secret place or another, continued all that day until night:
who ransacking also every corner, were by their wealth greatly enriched; but
they found exceeding store of rich Furniture, at the Palace of Giaffor: also
Letters, in Characters of Gold, from the Bassa of Buda to this Bassa: with many
things written from the Sultan unto him, with great store of Coin, which all
fell to the Soldiers share: 60 Pieces of Ordnance were there recovered,
sometimes the Emperors; and 24 others brought from Buda, with great store of
Ammunition and small Pieces, and Meal enough to serve four thousand Men for a
year and a half; but of Wine, only four Vessels. In Giaffars Palace, was also
found great store of Armor and Weapons, abundance of Cloth and Apparel, all
given to the Soldiers.

Rab was thus taken, March 29, 1598, about six thousand Turks or more being
slain, and scarce six hundred Christians. The Heads of the two Bassaes being
sent for a Present, to the Emperor at Prague, with all particulars of the
whole action. For all this, did not Mahomet cease to make greater provision
than before, for his Wars in Hungary, ordering Ibrain Bassa, his Brother in
Law, and General, with all convenient speed, to take the Field: which yet fell
out otherwise; for a great dissension arose betwixt the Janissaries, the best
footmen; and the Spahi, the best Horsemen of the Turkish Empire: the one
whereof, standing upon their strength, and the other upon their honor, do often
in setting forwards toward the Wars, fall at odds, as now they did: insomuch,
that the General, to appease this tumult, was glad to put to death some
insolent Janissaries, refusing to set forward as their Aga commanded them; but
he thinking to have executed some others of them also, was by them and their
adherents, put in such fear of his life, that to avoid the danger, he was glad
to lay all the blame upon his Lieutenant: who was therefore delivered to their
fury, who presently slew him, with some others of the Bassa's followers. So
Ibrahim reviewing his Army at Sophia, there stayed, expecting order from the
Sultan, whether to begin his Wars in Hungary or Transylvania, which could not
well be before the beginning of July; such scarcity of Victual then arising in
the Camp.

To supply which, Mahomet not a little cared; but this caused, that a great
number of Janissaries coming from Hadrianople, and hearing that the General
would not yet set forward, and not knowing the cause, were about to have
returned back again: whereupon, Command was presently sent from Court to
Ibrahim, without longer stay, to march toward Hungary. In which long delay,
the Christians had good leisure to prepare new forces; and doubting, that (
August now at hand) the Enemy would not turn his forces into lower Hungary,
they thought best to provide for the safety of the upper: where Basta, a man of
great experience and valor, was made Lieutenant General for that Country, to
the great content of the Soldiery.

(...) the while, remaining in lower Hungary at Rab, with eight thousand good
Soldiers: and Matthias: at Vienna, for the dispatch of (...), because the
upper Hungary, began now to feel the incursions of the Turks and Tartars:
besides, he was afterward to return to the Emperor, expecting a Turkish
(...), sent by the way of Polonia for Prague, to (...) with him of peace.

No Turkish Army being then in field, in lower Hungary: Palfi set forward to
attempt Buda; and October. 16th, began to batter it, to the great feat and
discomfiture of the besieged, he having first taken the Fort of St. Gerard.
wherefore, all that dwelt in the City, most earnestly befought the Bassa, in
time to hearken to some reasonable Composition, that every man might, at
leastwith life, depart: yet the Bassa would not hearken, putting them still in
hope of present relief; howbeit, the battery still continuing, and they not
able longer to endure the force of the Imperials, not any relief coming, at
last abandoned the City, 2000 Janissaries being slain, and but 300 Christians,
and 800 hurt, the rest of the Turks retiring into the Castle.

Palfi possessed of the City, laid siege to the Castle, which though in some
places shaken by the Cannon, yet were the Defendants ready to make it good; so
that Palfi giving chereto a general assault, was forced to retire, they within,
the while, repairing with great labor the breaches and gauls; so that Palfi
thought it better, by undermining, to shake the Rock whereon the Castle stood,
than to give a new assault: which purpose, was by a Countermine disappointed.
Yet the Christians still hoped by another Mine, as yet unperceived, to obtain
their desire: and the more, because the Defendants now were silent and quiet,
as if they had been consulting about yielding up the Castle; for the
Christians, by possessing a strong Abbey and Fortress fast by, and breaking
down all Bridges over the River, had deprived the besieged of all relief,
either by Land or Water: but the time of the year beginning to grow tedious and
sharp, the Christians resolved to give another general assault, and at the same
instant, to blow up the Mine, but they were again repulsed, with the loss of
200 men.

Then also some Turks sallied forth, and courageously encountered the
Christians, but they were almost all cut in pieces: the Mine also being blown
up, did little or no harm; so that they were about to rise. Yet willing to give
a fresh attempt by the Mine, they began again to work therein, and in hope to
parley with the Defendants; but the Mine having taken no effect, the Soldiers
could hardly be drawn on, through the deep and muddy ditches, to give a new
assault; in fine, seeing no hope, and hearing also of a great Army of Turks,
for relief of the besieged, they departed with a great booty toward
Strigonium, having burnt the Suburbs: and shortly after, there was order, that
the disbanded forces should be dispersed into Garrisons, and the Country
thereabouts; that they might be ready with the first of the Spring, to be
employed, as there should be occasion.

But the Transilvanian Prince (the while) repenting of his exchange made with
the Emperor, in disguised Apparel, posted to Glausenburg, in Transylvania:
where being joyfully received, and taking a new Oath of his Subjects, certified
Maximilian, (appointed Governor of Transylvania, and on his way as far as
Cassovia) of the causes of his return, persuading him rather to turn his Forces
for recovery of Agria, than to come any farther for Transylvania, whereof (to
his Subjects great content) he was again repossessed, as did also his Wife:
wishing him to consider, what hurt and dishonor he should do to the Emperor,
himself, Empire, and whole Christian Common Weal, if in so dangerous a time he
should attempt any thing against her Husband, to him by her so nearly allied.

Now the Turks (...) Army, lay under the Walls of Veradinum, in upper Hungary,
where Basta not having strength enough to go against so mighty an Enemy, or
relieve the besieged City, not having a sufficient Carrison, he acquainted
Maximilian therewith. In the mean time, the besieged notably defended
themselves, and by brave sallies, did the Enemy great harm, expecting, that
Basta, Sigismund, or Maximilian with divided or united Forces, would send them
relief, whom they certified October. 19th, that the Turks with all their Force
and fury, had as yet little prevailed, being so repulsed, etc. that they well
hoped to protract time, till they might be by them relieved; yet not doubting,
but the Turks would do what they might to subdue them.

The Transilvanian Prince taking the Field to relieve them, was let by the
Tartars, stirred up by the Turks to that purpose: yet he sent some Companies of
brave Soldiers to Basta: who hearing that of 2000 good Soldiers in the City
at the first, there were scarce 700 left alive, used a notable (...) to delude
the Enemy; for, coming bravely on, as if he would have presently joined
battle; whilst the Turks were wholly busied in putting themselves in order to
that end, he, by a way least suspected, thrust into the City 800 men, and so
presently retired to his Trenches: who, returning without battle, deceived by
this fineness. The Turks shortly after, through continual foulness of the
weather, raised the siege, now not without great (...) and danger to be
maintained, leaving also behind them many Tents, with some Ordnance, as not
able to convey them by water to Buda: also, greatly fearing to be encountered by
Basta's Forces, even then receiving new supplies from the Emperor.

In the mean time, Matthias, Swartzenburg, and others, with 12000 men, and the
Soldiers of Rab, Strigonium, and Komara, and the Hungarian Horsemen, overran
the Country, even to the Gates of Buda, hoping also to have met with 8000
Turks, coming toward Pesth, with Victuals for Buda Castle.

Mahomet the mean while, sent Cicala, his Admiral, with a great Fleet to Sea:
who coming upon the coast of Sicily, requested that Viceroy, to send him
aboard his Mother Lucretia, who dwelt in Messana, he much desiring to see and
Honor her, promising so quietly to depart: he considering, how the (...) for
the like courtesy before denied, had done great harm all along the seacoast:
on condition of sending her back in safety, sent her to him honorably
accompanied: whom, Cicala her son receiving with great joy and triumph; and
keeping her with him one day, with all honor, sent her back accordingly, and so
peaceably returned, without doing any harm to any part of Christendom. In the
mean time, Michael of Valachia with good forces, resolved, to give an attempt
upon Nicopolis in Bulgaria, causing a bridge to be made over Danubius for his
passage; but, the Bassaes of Silistra and Badova, coming with all their power,
as the bridge was laid over upon boats, attempted to break the same.

Michael hasting thither, enforced the Bassaes to forsake the Exploit begun;
there being for a while a hard conflict, till the Turks being greatly
slaughtered, were glad, by a dispersed flight to save their lives: So the
Vayuod passing the (...), came to Nicopolis: where they of the City without
resistance, yielded themselves into his power; who, sacking and firing the
City, carried away a great Spoil, with many Bulgarians, choosing out the best
and strongest to serve in his Wars: and appointing the rest to inhabit, and
manure the waste places of Valachia.

The report of this overthrow and sacking, brought a general fear on the
Turks, even in Constantinople; Wherefore, Mahomet commanded his chief Bassaes,
with a great power, taken up in haste, to stop his further proceedings, himself
horribly threatening him: Who, now encouraged, and knowing the Turks manuers,
little regarded the same.

Mahomet oppressed with melancholy, at the raging plague in Constantinople, the
bloody Wars in Hungary, his ill success at Veradium, and the great harm done at
Nicopolis; yet ceased not, what he could, to provide for so many evils:
Ordering Taut Bassa with all speed, to march toward Valachia: Who put himself
upon the way with 600 Janissaries toward Hadrianople: there to expect the rest
of the Army at Spring; that so, being united with the Forces of Mehemet (who
besieged Veradium the last year) he might appear more terrible to his Enemies.
The Emperor also was then much discontented, that his men had failed of the
Castle of Buda, the Walloons blaming the chief Commanders: who (when they
valiantly offered to do their utmost to win it) chose rather, by the Spade and
Mattock, than the Sword, to perform the same. But Michael, to the Turks greater
terror and hurt, made new inroads upon them: so that he entered 10 Miles into
their Territory; against whom Mehemet coming, he retired, carrying away the
spoil of the wasted Country.

They of Buda the while, fearing some sudden assault, and suffering great want,
expected long to be relieved with necessaries; yet they heard, that Mahomet had
given it out at Constantinople, that he was raising a great power of his best
Soldiers: having sent for all his Old men of War, such as had served in the
Wars of Persia. The Turks the while, providing to relieve distressed Buda, some
resolute Hungarians, understanding that a Bassa was coming thither with 3000
Soldiers to increase the Garrison, lay close in Ambush: where, the Turks
securely and disorderly passing by, were overthrown and put to flight, losing
many Horses, much Money and Jewels; many Captains being taken, and the Bassa
hardly escaping into the City. But shortly after, 400 Christians scouring the
Country about Buda, and returning loaded with prey, were assaulted by the
Turks, and forced to forsake it, and fight for their lives: yet they notably
repulsed the Turk, slaying diverse of them, and recovering their booty,
returned: and in upper- Hungary, a great power of Turks and Tartars, having
done great harm, came before Cassovia: making show, as if they would presently
besiege the City; so that many Inhabitants, fled forthwith into the Mountains:
yet by the persuasion of Basta, 2000 expert Soldiers stayed there (...) him,
expecting what the Turks would do; who demanded of them a great sum of money as
contribution, threatening otherwise the utter destruction thereof: which was
stoutly rejected by Basta, and they with the loss of many lives, forced to get
them further from the walls: Wherefore, they for fear by night arose, departing
by another way than they came, doing great harm as they went. The free Haiducks
of Valachia also living most upon prey, by Bridges, passing over Danubius,
overthrew the Bassa of Natolia's great power, with a great slaughter, and loss
of his Brother: then overrunning the Country, they did exceeding harm, and
took the Bassa's son prisoner.

Thus passed the Winter with many light skirmishes, and incursions in diverse
parts of Hungary. Maximilian (the mean while) coming from Prague to Vienna;
found in his Camp but 24000 Foot, and 10000 Horse ready against next Spring
(diverse German Princes, sending this year 1599. no aid at all, by reason of
troubles with the Spaniards in the lower side of Germany) which made him the
more to dread the Enemies coming; but about this time, the great Duke of
Muscovy, requested leave of the Polonian, for 40000 Horse to pass through his
Country, to aid the Emperor against the Turk; which he would in no case grant,
as dangerous to his State: Wherefore, the Muscovite offended, sent other
Ambassadors to the Emperor by Sea: who, in an English ship in Nicolas Port,
sailed about Sweden, Norway, and Denmark; and, after long trouble, arrived at
Stoad; and from thence traveling by Land to Hamborough, Lubeck and
Maidenborough, came to the Emperor then at Plissena, for the plague was hot at
Prague. Who, having delivered their Presents and Letters of Credence, had
audience, and were most honorably used; yet the Polonian, suffered the Turks
Ambassador, calling himself Gabriel a Jew, to pass through his Country to the
Emperor, to entreat of peace; which Gabriel coming to Prague, and having no
Letters of Credence to show (for he said, They were taken from him upon the way
by the Polonian Cossacks, and some of his retinue slain) was taken for a Spy,
and sent to Vienna: where, at first he was well used in an Inn, but the night
following, the Martial clapped him fast in prison, with as many Irons as he could
bear: and all his followers, with gyves on their legs, were compelled to work
daily in the Townditch.

About this time, Sigismund of Transilvanian, gave a most manifest token of an
unconstant Nature, to the great wonder of the World; for, he having again taken
upon him the Government: and withal, requested himself and the Transilvanians,
to be discharged of their Oath of Loyalty to the Emperor; and Veradinum, with
the adjacent Country to be restored unto him: and, the Emperor pausing
thereupon: did now (doubting of his ability to keep that Country) in the
beginning of 1599. by his Ambassadors, request the Emperor to have the first
Agreements again renewed: and a Principality in Moravia added to the 2 Dukedoms
in Silesia, with 50000 Ducats yearly out of the Imperial Chamber, and a
general pardon for all the Transilvanians, that, following him, had lately
revolted from the Emperor, and their ancient liberties confirmed: All which
Conditions being obtained, they returned from Prague, Apr. 19. But, Sigismund
in the mean time, consulting with some of the Polonian Nobility, far differing
from the former Agreement; and sending for a Turks Chiaus: and for his cousin
the proud Cardinal out of Borussia, met them in a Village toward Polonia,
accompanied with some of his chiefest States: and there, in the presence of the
Polonians and the Chiaus, resigned all Right and Title in Transylvania to the
Cardinal, commanding the States to swear Obedience and Fidelity unto him; who
shortly after, with the Polonian Ambassador, sent a special Favorite to
Constantinople, to desire safe conduct for his Ambassadors thither: who were
both courteously received in the Turks Court; and, as with a special favor,
rewarded with right sumptuous Garments: and charged, that the Cardinal should
within 3 months, send thither a solemn Ambassador, with the accustomed
Tribute. Thus Transylvania (one of the strongest Fortresses of that side of
Christendom) became again Triburary to the Turk.

The Turks of Buda, not able longer to endure the great Famine, had most
earnestly requested relief from their Friends in Hungary: Who, coming near to
Buda, could not put into it such provision as they had brought the Imperials
about a League off, diligently attending every motion of the Enemy; whence,
Swartzenburg, secretly approachiug by night to one of the gates, thought with a
Petard to have broken it open: but the gate, being within strongly fortified,
he was forced to depart, being also discovered from the wall.

Shortly after, the Bassa issuing out with 600 Horse to meet with Victuals
coming thither, fell into an Ambush of the Haiducks, who putting him to flight,
took him prisoner, his Horse falling under him, whom his Soldiers seeking to
rescue, they increased their former overthrow, with the loss of most of those
left: the Bassa's son, and Aga of the Janissaries, losing their lives. The Bassa
being brought to the Camp, was with great threats forced to reveal the state of
his City, with other Turkish designs: Whereupon, the Haiducks returned towarks
Buda, (...) by all means, to stop the coming of Victuals thither, hoping at
length to gain the City; but news was brought them, that the Bassa of Bosna,
with 3 Zanzacks were coming with 10000 men to oppress them: who, went to meet
them, and, in a place of good advantage, upon their first appearance, with
great courage charging them, brake their Arrays, and slew most of them, with
the Bassa himself: yet, had not Palsi in time, sent in some (...) Companies, it
was doubted the Haiducks had been worsted, about 300 being already slain:
Nevertheless the Tartars held on their way, purposing, by overrunning the
Country, to have withdrawn the Imperialls from the City; but, Swartzenburg, his
Regiment only going against them, so overthrew them, that, part being slain,
and part driven into Danubius, most of them there perished.

Basta at that time, lay at Cassovia with 18000 men, doubting, lest the Turk:
Army, which he heard was at hand, should come and besiege it. In the mean time,
Ibraim Bassa, came to Solnoch with 50000 men, 10000 being Janissaries; yet,
hearing that Basta waited his coming at Cassovia, he retired back to Belgrade,
a place of more security, expecting a great Fleet to bring Victuals for the
Army, and also for relief of Buda, Alba regalis, etc. with diverse battering
pieces, and other less pieces upon Carriages, with other Instruments of War,
all guarded with 5000 Turks up Danubius: Whereupon, Palsi dispatched a
convenient power of good and valiant Soldiers, to cut off this Convoy; who,
suddenly assayling them, and coming to handy blows, cut them in pieces and
rifled the ships, most whereof were there sunk, and took a booty, deemed to be
worth a million of Gold; and 100000 Dollars, there found, were all divided
among the Soldiers. This being known at Buda and other Cities, greatly
terrified them; yea, Ibraim's Army grew much discontented, as disappointed of
Victuals and pay: besides, the Imperials, ransacked and destroyed the Villages,
and Castles thereabouts without mercy, though the poor Inhabitants offered them
large contribution. Hereupon also, Swartzenburg, determined with all his Forces
to come again to the siege of Buda, sending for some great Ordnance to Vienna:
Col. Rodoler of St. Andrews, in upper- Hungary, also upon this overthrow,
showed himself with 500 Horse, and 600 Foot before Agria: yet, leaving most of
his Forces a little way off in Ambush. The Bassa hereupon sallying out, began a
hot skirmish, but those in Ambush started out, and courageously assayling the
Turks, put them to flight, pursuing them even to the gates of the City, and,
had there bin more Footmen, 'twas thought, that the dismayed and confounded
Turks, had abandoned the place. Nevertheless, the Christians with small loss
retired, having slain a great number: and carrying away 100 prisoners, with 500
Horse and much Cattle. The free Haiducks also receiving new supplies, had done
great harm in the Country about Buda without opposition: Wherefore, the poor
Christians, which yet dwelt there, ose up against the Turks, promising
Obedience to the Emperor: and, that they might be no more molested by the
Imperials, offered to do their utmost themselves to hinder the Turks passage by
Land and Water. These Haiducks, also brake down all Bridges, which the Turks
had made between Buda and Alba-regalis, for the commodious bringing of
Victuals, and munition to each other: and Palfi and Nadasti, hearing that the
Tartars in 3 companies, had overrun much of the Country, and were retiring
toward Buda with great booty, went out and forced them to fight, who, better
inured to filch, lost all their lives, with what they had stolen. Then, with
their Forces, they took 2 of the Turks Castles, with much rich spoil, which
they sacked and burnt, with the great Town of Zolna, breaking down the bridge
upon the river Trava.

The Turks at Buda, now having no Governor, and also pinched with great want,
doubting some sudden attempt, retired into the Castle, leaving the City to the
Imperials, then ready to have besieged it: but the Avantguard of the Turks
great Army, being come to Moattesh, where Sartes Bassa was also looked for;
and, there being a report, that the Turks having relieved Buda, would besiege
Canisia, or Strigonium; they as in doubt, went no farther. So, some Commanders
with their Soldiers, were sent to fortify some passages, whereby the Enemy
was to pass; the rest retiring, for that he began to approach; they knew also
what desire Ibraim had, to recover Strigonium. The Imperials the while,
encamping near (...) and Zolnock cut off 500 Turks going toward Buda, to
vctual it, taking a Chiaus prisoner, who was sent from Ibraim to Agria, to put
them in hope of speedy relief.

Then also, they approaching the (...) of Zolnock with certain Petards, being
discovered by the watch, were ensorced to retire, 40 being left slain, and many
more carried away wounded: in revenge whereof, the rest destroyed the Villages,
intercepting much Munition and Victuals going to Buda and Agria.

Ibraim Bassa, in the beginning of September, came to Buda, with an Army of
130000; Whence, in his Masters Name, he gave the Emperor to understand, That,
to save the further effusion of innocent blood, and not for any distrust of his
own strength, he could be content to hearken to some reasonable Conditions of
peace: whereunto, both these Princes, having well wearied themselves, and
exhausted their Treasures, seemed not now unwilling: and the rather, because
the old Sultanness, who (through the greatest weakness of her Sons Government,
did bear most (...)) seemed, in what she might to further the same; Wherefore,
about the end of this month, a parley was agreed on, in an Island of Danubius
beneath Strigonium. Swartzenburg, Nadasti; Palfi, and the Bishop of Vacia,
being for the Emperor; and the Bassa of Buda, with the Lievr. Genesis of the
Tartars, and some others for the Sultan. The Turks at first, demanded Rab,
Strigonium, with all other Towns and Castles taken from them in 5 years before,
with a yearly Tribute to be paid at Constantinople; the Emperor also to have
his Ambassador Leiger, always attending upon the Turks Court; for which they
would deliver the City of Agria only: All which Demands, being by the
Emperor's Commissioners rejected, they offered to leave unto the Emperor Rab
and Agria, only for Strigonium; exchanging as it were, Strigonium for Agria:
which, when it could not be obtaied, the Treaty was broken off, and the wars
again continued.

But in the mean time, Michael of Valachia, certainly informed, his life to be
sought after in the Turks Court, by the ambitious Cardinal Bator, his envious
Neighbor, by command from the Emperor, with an Army of 60000 men, entered
Transylvania, most horribly burning the Country, and killing the people as he
went: Where, while the Cardinal was making head against him, he had the City
Corona, or Brasso, with the strong Castle of Focaras yielded unto him: whence,
marching toward Alba- Julia, with all his Army October. 26, before divided into
3 parts, he came into the Plains near (...); where assured, that his
Lieutenant (corrupted by Ibraim) had promised to kill him, with his own hands
presently cut his throat. By and by after, came unto him the Popes-Nuntio, sent
from the Cardinal, with another Ambassador: telling him, the Ambassador had
Commission from the Emperor to will him, forthwith to desist from Arms, and
depart out of Transylvania: Which seeming to the Vayuod almost impossible, he
desired to see that Commission: the Nuntio answered, He had left it with the
Cardinal himself: But I (said the Vayuod) have one here present of another
Purport: which I purpose fully to execute: yet, was he for that day entreated
by the Nuncio, to stay his Army; and in the mean time, the Vayuod would know of
the Nuntio, Why the Cardinal so troubled the Country, by intruding himself, to
the great prejudice of them, to whom it more justly belonged; not attending to
the Government of the Church, better beseeming his calling: but he had no
answer. So October. 28. these Messengers were sent back to the Cardinal, who
presently returned them with rue Instructions to the Vayuod (then busy with
his young Son in setting his men in Array): who answered them only, He was
resolved to come to the trial of a battle with him; so the 2 Armies (encamped
near each other) the same day joined a most cruel battle, for 5 hours space
with desperate obstinacy fought: till the Cardinals men, at length overcome,
were utterly overthrown, 30000 of them being Turks and Tartars sent from
Ibraim. The Vayuod now Master of the field sent out some Troops to pursue the
Cardinal diverse ways: himself with the rest, came to his Camp quite forsaken,
45 pieces of Ordnance, great store of Coin and Wealth, a great number of Tents
and Horses, becoming to him a prey.

Then marching to Alba-Julia, he was joyfully received of his Friends; for,
there were diverse who still favored the Emperor. After that, the Vayuod sent
his Lievt. to Claudiopolis, which willingly yielded, with many other places in
diverse parts: so that shortly after, all Transylvania swore Obedience unto the
Emperor, most of the Nobles being slain, and put to death by the Vayuod; among
whom were 5, who, corrupted by the Cardinal, had undertaken to kill him.
November. 14. After diverse reports of the Cardinals escape, his Head was
presented to the Vayuod: which, being for a while set up in Alba- Julia, was
afterward sent for a Present to the Emperor, and the Archduke: his body
being honorably buried in a Monastery there, in the same Tomb he made for his
Brother, beheaded by his Cousin Sigismund. His Treasure also fell into the
Vayuods hands, said to be 3 millions of Gold. Transylvania, being thus again
restored to the Christian Empire; the Cardinal not having possessed his
Princely Honors full 8 months: Sigismund, who almost all this while, had
stayed in Borussia; hearing news of the Cardinals overthrow, secretly got him
into Polonia, to seek new Fortunes. Swartzenburg, then uniting his Forces in
lower- Hungary, with those of Stiria: took in above 200 Villages for the
Emperor; but thinking to surprise Capisuar-Castle; and, approaching the Gates
by night, with a Petard (not taking the expected effect) he was discovered,
repulsed, and forced to retire with the loss of above a 100, and diverse
wounded, all of good account: who, in revenge, sent out diverse, Troops, which
scouring as far as Zigeth, burnt it, and returned with a great booty.

Ibraim Bassa, much troubled with this overthrow, sent news: hereof in Post to
Constantinople, which brought a fear upon the whole City; so that the Sultan
gave him Commission, to come to some honorable Peace with the Emperor, and to
bring it with him, who was shortly to return to Constantinople; his Army,
besides the cold season, greatly wanting bread, and many of his best Soldiers
dying of the plague, besides abundance of their cattle also: so, that the
Soldiers fell to robbing one another, and at length into mutiny: wherein
diverse being slain, most of the rest, by diverse ways returned home, not well
trusting each other: So, that nothing more was now done with the Turks great
preparation; neither for relief of those evils, did Ibraim bring at his return,
any conclusion of peace unto his Lord.

Besides these troubles, Cusahin or Cassan, the Son of a Sultaness, brought up
in the Seraglio, and having served in the Wars of Persia and Hungary, and at
length made Bassa of Caramania, a man of great spirit; upon the report of the
ill success in Hungary, and the desire he saw in the Persians, to recover their
lost Fortress; and grieved also with some particular wrongs to himself,
resolved to take up Arms, laying before his Soldiers the Deformities of the
present State: and Gallantly persuading them, What an easy thing it were to
chase Mahomet out of Asia. And so, having won to him 3000 Harquebusiers, and
5000 Horsemen, he took the field. News whereof coming in post to Court, 4
Zanzacks nearest unto him, were commissioned for suppressing that Rebellion,
but even then arising: who, going against Cusahin with 10000 Horse and Foot, he
went to meet them, overthrowing them with a great slaughter, taking their
baggage, with 6 pieces of Ordnance: Then he seized upon all the Castles
thereabouts, giving whatever he found therein to his Soldiers: who also much
enriched themselves with the spoil of the Jews: never resting, till he had
made almost all Caramania his own. After which, he besieging Cogna, a City in
the confines of Natolia, it was yielded unto him; He also openly proclaimed,
that for reformation of the disordered State, he would ere long go to besiege
Constantinople; Wherefore, those that would follow him, should be well
entreated by him, threatni ng to the rest most cruel destruction. Mahomet,
then disporting himself at his Gardens of pleasure in the Country; hearing
hereof, hasted with all speed to Constantinople, dispatching Mehemet Bassa,
Sinan's Son, with all the Forces he could make, to go against him: who passing
into Asia, yet, fearing to come to a Battle with him, who was desperate, and
favored of his own Soldiers, so wrought by large promises, that Cusahin's
foot were ready to forsake him: Whereupon, he fled into Arabia with his
Horsemen, and those of Sinan the Georgian; purposing at Spring by help of the
Arabians and Persians, to appear with greater Forces. Mehemet following him,
came to Aleppo, there to Winter, and to expect the Rebels return.

This dangerous Rebellion, with the troubles of Transylvania and Valachia,
caused the Sultan to be readier to incline to peace; whereto the Emperor was
not hasty to hearken, but on honorable conditions, as knowing the Turks end in
requiring the same: His Janissaries also, and other men of War, in this his so
weak Government, being hardly to be commanded: threatening in their discontent,
to depose both his chief Officers and Himself, and to banish the Sultaness his
mother: saying, She had bewitched him, that she her self might rule.

But Casahin grown strong, was come into the field and even ready to give the
Bassa battle; who thought it best again to prove, if his followers might by
fair means be drawn from him: and so coming nigh him, proclaimed a general
pardon to all, who should forthwith forsake the Rebel, and return home, which
thing was the ruin of Cusahin; for, most of them enriched with great booties,
upon this free pardon, returned unto their own Countries, to live of their
ill-gotten goods, leaving Cusahin with some few others: so that in few days he
was taken, and brought to Constantinople, where he was with most exquisite
torments tortured to death.

The Emperor with the beginning of the next year, 1600, called A diet of the
Princes of the Empire, to consider with him, of such helps as were to be given
against next Spring; who all promised, to send their Soldiers with their pay,
and sufficient contribution to maintain that defensive War. Pope Clement also
this Year of Jubilie, sent such aid of men and money as he had promised.

At first of the Spring, the Turks began to stir: who, although Ibraim Bassa,
was then in some speech with the Emperor about a peace, yet, ceased they not
with their scattering Companies, to do what harm they could upon the Emperor's
Frontiers: the cause, why he the more speedily called on his Friends for aid.
He also made Duke Mercury (who had drawn a great number of Horse and Foot out
of France) his General: sending Ferrent Gonzaga (whom he had sent for to
Mantua) Governor in upper- Hungary. So, the Soldiers daily resorting into
Austria, were thence sent to repress the Turks incursions, as they did: for
8000 Turks, going suddenly to surprise Pappa, were by that Garrison overthrown.
And, while Ferdinand the Archduke, was assembling his people in Croatia, for
defense of that Country; 6000 Turks entering as far as Baccari, burning the
Villages as they went, and taking many prisoners with much cattle: were in
their return set upon by Serinus; in strait and troublesome passages, where
they least feared any such thing, being overthrown, and put to flight, and all
the booty recovered. Then also an Imperial Colonel, inroading about
Alba-regalis, with 1500 Horse, slew 600 Turks and Tartars, and took diverse of
their Captains: 6000 other Tartars also, now returning homewards out of
Hungary, were so set upon by the Cossacks, near the Black-sea, that many being
slain, the rest ran into the Sea, leaving all their prey to their Enemies.

In the heat of these broils, Lord Palfi died in his Castle of Biberpurg, March
23. to the great grief of many, chiefly the Hungarians his Countrymen: the
Emperor appointing Lord Swartzenburg, Governor of Strigonium in his stead;
the fame still running, that Ibraim would come thither with a great Army, if
the peace went not forward; which was less and less hoped for, by reason of his
proud demands.

But, while these and such like troubles, passed in diverse parts of Hungary,
1200 French and Walloons, in Garrison at Pappa, mutined for want of pay;
Wherefore, the chief Commanders thought good to have them removed; but they
knowing themselves too strong for the rest of the Garrison; first, resolved to
thrust their own Captains out of the Town, then laying hands on Marotti, the
payMaster, and other Hungarian and Dutch Commanders and Soldiers, disarmed
them, casting Marotti, the Captains, and some of the better sort of Soldiers
into Irons: exacting of the rest (in number about 1000) 1000 Ducats, else
threatening to deliver them up to the Turks: and, though Marotti offered 1800
Ducats for his own liberty, they spoiled him and the rest of all: furnishing
the Turks their prisoners, with their Apparel and Weapons, and sending them
away to Alba regalis: and afterward rifled every man's House, compacting also
with the Turks of Alba regalis and Buda, for the pay, which they said, the
Emperor owed them, to deliver them the Town: and promised, if Swartzenburg
came (as he was to come) with money to the Town, to deliver him and it into
their hands: or, for more surety, they might intercept him at the passage
Zesnegkh, whereby he must come; and, for their more credit, they sent an Ensign
to them to Albaregalis, who for all that did not altogether believe them: yet,
they sent them 2 Chiaus as Hostages, for whom they sent 2 other of the better
sort of them: concluding, that June 25. at furthest, the money should be paid,
and the Town delivered. June 10th. Swartzenburg, with 2000 Horse and Foot came
within 2 miles of Pappa, sending 24 Horsemen, to dissuade them from yielding the
Town to the Turks, telling them, they should shortly have their pay: who sent
them back shamefully derided; so that Swartzenburg retired again to Rab, till
some greater strength were come unto him. Immediately after, Dr. Petzen,
Counselor for the Wars, was by Matthias conducted to Pappa, with 400 Horse,
to see, if by his discretion, he could dissuade them from their purpose: whom
they both refused to hear, though he spoke most kindly, and also threatened to
shoot him, if he did not forthwith depart. Shortly after, 20 Hungarians,
imprisoned in a Cellar, brake out, and came to Rab: telling them, the French
and Walloons were at variance, about the yielding up Pappa; So that they in the
Castle and Town, shot at each other, and that they had already received (...)
Ducats, with some Victuals, and were shortly to receive the rest of the money
from the Turks, and so to deliver up the Town; Wherefore, Swartzenburg, Jun.
22. sent Lo. Sharpsenstein, a French Col. with 3000 Soldiers, some Petards,
and many scaling-Ladders toward Pappa, whom they suffered peaceably to enter,
June 24. encouraging them to come on, calling them Countrymen and Brethren, and
shaking them by the hands: telling them, They desired but assurance of their
pay; but, having received in so many as they thought good, they shut the rest
out, cutting these all in pieces: and then in derision, called upon the High.
Dutch to come on. Likewise, 300 of these Rebels, had then laid themselves in
Ambush, by a Mill without the Town, and were charged by the Walloons and
Haiducks, discovering them: yet (for the shot from the Town) they could do no
good upon them; but retired, having lost 300 men the Lievt. General, and the
chief Engineer being 2 of them.

About 3 days after, 3 of these Rebels, being by chance taken, and brought to
Rab, were not only apparrelled, but trimmed like Turks; their fellows also,
imitating the Turks fashions in Apparel, and manner of service; yet would they
not yield the Town to the Turks, before they had the full sum agreed on, the
Bassa of Bosna being commanded in haste to provide it, and receive the Town;
but they received into the Town a Turkish Ensign, with some Wagons of Victuals,
so strongly convoyed, that the Imperialls durst not meddle therewith: in which
Wagons, they sent in bonds, 600 Hungarians and Dutch, Men, Women and Children,
to Alba Regalis, whereof they were glad, hoping to find more favor at the
Turks hands, than they had with these renegate Christians.

Shortly after, they sent Messengers to the Governor of Alba, to know his full
resolution, who conducted by Turks of great account, were by the way taken by
the free Haiducks, with 100 Turks more. Marotti the while, by Letters, secretly
advertised Swartzenburg of a place, whereby he might easily enter; and the
rather, for that the Rebels were at variance: who July 12th, came to Pappa with
9000 Horse and Foot, but disappointed of entrance, yet hardly belayed the Town:
on whom, the mutiniers sallying out, valiantly encountered them, but were still,
without any notable loss, beaten back again. In one of their sallies, a
Captain was taken, who was slain quick, and his Head and Skin set upon a Pike,
for his fellows to behold. But Swartzenburg, more and more prevailing, they
sent secretly to the Turks for aid: whereof, he hearing, sent for three
Regiments more, to come to him, whereby he, well strengthened, and approacling
nearer, took the Mill, whereby the Rebels thought the more easily to have
received aid from the Turks, who were let to relieve them, by the rising of
the water, that had spoiled all the Provision at the Bridge of Esseg, and also
hindered their march.

The Imperials at last, came even to the Town-ditches with their Trenches,
having let out the water: where some Townsmen escaping out, declared, that the
mutinous within, labored day and night to fortify the Town, but were much
let by continual assaults: also, that now they had no Victuals left, but a
little Salt, and sixty Horse, of which they had begun to eat, etc.

July 29, they desperately sallied out upon the Trenches of a Dutch Captain,
slaying many of his Soldiers being drunk, and driving out the rest: whereupon,
Lord Swartzenburg hastening thither to the rescue, was, with a Musket: shot,
struck in the Head, and slain, which the Rebeis knowing of, Dela Mota, their
General, gave the salliers 1000 Dollars in reward. His dead body was honorably
interred at Rab. The like salley they made next day, slaying 130 Imperials, and
taking some; and in their retiring, cried aloud, that when they lacked meat,
rather than yield, they would eat Christians, of whom, Marotti should be the
first.

The Government of the Army, was now committed to the Lord Redern, both valiant
and learned, who though very sickly, came to the Camp Aug. 8th, where hearing
that the Rebels, brought to great extremity, purposed by night to flee, kept a
more vigilant and strong Watch: next night, about two hours before day, they
began to issue out, and were suffered to go out as unperceived; but Nadasti,
the Earl of Thurne, and Count Solmes, were presently sent after them, who in
three places, overtaking them, near the great Wood Packem, slew most of them,
Dela Mota being slain by Solmes, because he would not yield; and his Head
presented to the General.

The Hussars found out 200 Walloons in the Wood, who, though they made strong
resistance a while, yet at last, were forced to yield. The Hussars also, upon
another passage, light upon 200 more of them, who because they were more
desperate than the rest, the General sent (...) Horse more upon them; so that
they were almost all slain; diverse also were slain in coming forth, and in
Marshes about the Town: La Motta's Lieutenant, and other chief Commanders, were
by Lo Redern, delivered to the Provost Martial, dividing the rest at the
Soldiers Request, into diverse parts of the Army, to be executed: from whom
they could there scarce hold their hands. But being brought to Rab, and leave
given to do what they would with them, they impaled some, brake some upon the
Wheel, cutting off some of their skins as it were into thongs, so pouring into
the wounds Vinegar, Salt, and Pepper: of some they cut off their privities,
some they roasted, putting some upon the Tenalia: on some they dropped molten
pitch, then burnt them to death with Gunpowder, hanging others on Iron-hooks:
some they set in the ground up to the Chin, bowling at their Heads with Iron
Bullets: the (...) nothing but deriding them in all these torments: the
wretches the while, confessing the hainousness of their offense, and craving
for death as a favor: Whilst some were tortured, others were brought to see
the same misery, to be by them endured.

One Peter Orsy, caused one of these mutiniers to be sowed up in a Mare's
Belly, with his Head hanging out, and so to be roasted, in which torment, he
lived 3 hours: then was the loathsome body so roasted, given to others starving
upon the Wheel to eat.

At this time also, many a hot and bloody skirmish, passed betwixt the
Christians and Turks in one place or other of Hungary. Amongst the rest, (one
Horbath (...) Lieutenant, with 150 men, and Thussi, going to seek for booty)
Thussi hearing the Turks were abroad, to surprise certain Haiducks, stayed fast
in a secret place, Horbath going on another way: now the Bassa of Sigeth by
chance met with Horbath, overthrowing him, and slaying most of his men, Horbath
hardly escaping: But Thussi hearing this skirmish, and hasting thither, found
the Bassa in the Field on foot, viewing the slain: upon whom he came so
suddenly and forcibly, that the Bassa had much ado, disorderly to take Horse,
and without much resistance, to (...): whom the Hungarians fiercely pursuing,
slew many Turks, and the Bassa himself, whose Head, Horbath sent to Serinus,
who by Thussi himself, sent it to Matthias. This Bassa, (about 36 years old,
was for his strength, valor, and experience, of a common Soldier, made a
Bassa: whose Head being shown to the Bassa of Buda, a prisoner at Vienna, and
he demanded whether he knew it or not, sighing, answered, he knew it well to be
the Bassa of Sigeth his Head, a braver man than whom, the Sultan had not in all
his Empire, earnestly desiring to know, how he was slain; and ere long, a great
party out of Strigonium and other places, having taken a great booty from the
Turks, at a Fair at Gombar; and thinking to pass Danubius, in hope of a
greater, 700 of them being passed over, were by the new Bassa of Sigeth, with
5000 Turks overthrown; yet was the Bassa himself, with two (...), and 500 Turks
slain, and but 50 Christians left dead upon the place: the rest disorderly
retiring to their Boats, being most drowned. The free Haiducks, also surprising
and firing Jula, the Turks fleeing into the Castle, for haste, thrust so many
from the Bridge, into the Castle-ditch, that one might have gone dry-foot over
upon the bodies of the drowned. They took there also 600 prisoners, with much
booty, delivering 200 Christian Captives; and though they were hardly pursued
by other Turks, yet they safely retired with their booty.

But Cardinal Bator, being overthrown and slain, and Transylvania reduced to
the Emperor's obedience, the Vayuod of Valachia, forthwith certified him, of
all his proceedings and success: also of his purpose to invade (...); for it
was commonly reported and believed, that Sigismund aided by Turks, Tartars,
(...) and Moldavians, would now attempt some greater matter, for recovery of
Transylvania; for diverse of his Spics also being taken, (besides his Letters
found about them to the Nobility and States, persuading them to revolt from the
Vayuod unto him, who meant shortly, to come with a great Army to repulse him)
confessed, that Sigismund had been in Transylvania disguised, to confer with
diverse friends about it. The Emperor honorably receiving the Vayuods
Ambassadors, confirmed unto him the Government of Transylvania, sending him
also diverse Presents; yet forbidding him to invade Moldavia, for fear of
raising a new and dangerous War against the Polonians also: wherefore, the
Vayuods stayed his intended expedition; yet he sent some good forces to the
Frontiers of Moldavia, for fear of Sigismund, whom he heard even then to lay
upon the same. After a few months, Husraim Aga, with five other eminent Turks,
came to Cronsta, where the Vayuod then lay, as Ambassadors from Mahomet, with a
great Retinue: whom, he with 4000 brave Horsemen, went half a mile to meet the
Foot, standing on both sides of the street, from the Gate of the City whereby
they were to enter, even to the Vayuods Lodging, where stood his Guard in red
and white silk. So meeting, they both alighted, saluting each other: the
Ambassador presently embracing the Vayuod, ungirt his Scimitar, and in the
Sultans name, put another about him, most richly garnished with Gold and
precious Stones.

He also presented him with a fair Plume of black Hearnes feathers, mixed with
some white, which he would not put upon his Head in the Field, though he most
earnestly requested him, causing it to be carried before him; also with two
very fair red (...): likewise, he gave him two exceeding fair Horses, richly
furnished, with four others, and a most fair Faulcon.

The Vayuod had 10 very fair spare-Horses led before him, at whose entrance,
all the great Ordnance was discharged, with great vollies of small shot: so the
Ambassador riding on his left hand, being brought to his Lodging, six of his
chief followers were presented with six rich Robes of Cloth of gold: the
Ambassador, giving 100 of the Vayuod's followers, each of them a good Suit in
requital: with whom also, was the Polonian Ambassador: who, ('it was (...)) did
what they could to draw him with Transylvania and Valachia, from the Emperor
to the Turk; but (...) seldom or never spoke with them, but he (...), either
before or after, with the Emperors Commissioners, about their requests,
protesting, not to yield to any thing without his good liking: whereof Mahomet
advertized, gave the Vayuod to understand, that he was in some speech with the
Emperor, touching peace, which if it took effect, all should be well: if not,
it should be good for him, timely to consider of his estate, and submit to him
who was able to defend him, rather than to adventure himself, with all he had,
to most certain destruction, promising, for his loyalty only, to give him
Transylvania, Valachia and Moldavia, for ever; and to furnish him at his need
with Men and money; and offering to make him a great Commander in Hungary, and
the Bassa of Temeswar, to be (...) ready to assist him against the Emperor,
with 50000 Horse and Foot, reserving to himself, whatever he should more win
from him. All (...) large offers, the Vayuod declaring to the Commissioners,
still protested never to start from the (...): yet he hereby took occasion to
request Transylvania of the Emperor, to him and his Son in Inheritance for
ever, with such Frontier-Towns, as formerly (...) thereunto: also, that all
dignities and preferments formerly granted to Sigismund, might be bestowed on
himself, and for his service done, to have money to pay his Soldiers; and that
what he should win from the Turks, might be his and his Sons; and that the
Emperor and Princes should assure him, to ransom him, if taken; but if he were
driven out by the Turks, then to have some fit place in upper Hungary, to live
in, with 100000 Dollars yearly: for all which he (the Emperor) to do so much
this year against the Turk, as had not been done in 100 years before: vaunting,
that if he had had the employment of the money which was spent in this War,
he would not have doubted to have brought all from the (...) to Buda, Alba
Regalis, and Zolnock under the Emperor's obedience.

Sigismund the while, supported by the Polonians, and aided by the Turks,
Tartars, and Moldavians, was ready to enter (...); yea, the forerunning
Tartars, had already carried away some booty out of the Frontiers thereof:
wherefore, the Vayuod in great haste assembled his Forces out of all places,
the Country people and resolute free Haiducks, in great number, resorting unto
him.

So April 24, he removed to Cronstat, with 8000 (...), and 200 pieces of
Ordnance: and all his Forces (almost 50000 Horse and Foot) being assembled at
Nessen, he speedily passed the rough and high Mountains into Moldavia; yet his
Soldiers by the way, were glad sometimes to eat leaves of Trees, the Enemy
having carried away whatsoever sustenance he could. Of whose speedy coming, and
great strengrh, Sigismund and Jeremiah of Moldavia, hearing, retired into the
Frontiers of (...), to gather more strength, and so to meet him; for Jeremiah
had not yet received the promised Forces from the Turks.

(...), his Enemies thus fled, with fire and sword, entering Moldavia, took-in
most part thereof, the fearful people yielding to him as he went; and the
rather, because Jeremiah their Vayuod, had laid upon every man a Duckat a
months Tribute; for which, they (...) hated one of the trusty Servants of the
Commissioners in Transylvania, who might report unto them all his proceedings,
stayed not long in Moldavia, but made toward Sigismund and Jeremiah; and May
18th, found them by Othune Castle, nigh the River Nester, being 30000 strong,
where a most cruel battle, from about 10 in the morning, was with great courage
and obstinacy, maintained till the Evening: when as at last, the Valachian his
Enemies fled, 8000 being slain, besides many drowned in the River: the
Valachian losing but two thousand.

Sigismund and Jeremiah, though some said they were slain, and some drowned,
yet they both escaped by flight.

Michael after this, caused all Moldavia to swear obedience to the Emperor
himself, and Son, to the great offense of the Polonians, especially of the
great Chancellor, an old enemy to the House of Austria: whereof ensued greater
troubles than before, to the further effusion of Christian blood.

Now the Vayuod, notwithstanding this great Victory, considering, he could
hardly keep Moldavia, against the power of the Turk: as also, against the
Polonians, (as desirous to restore Jeremiah into Moldavia, as Sigismund into
Transylvania) of himself, by Ambassadors, offered the Sovereignty of those
three Countries to the Emperor, on condition, that he should be perpetual
Governor thereof under him.

The Emperor also heard, that Mahomet had sent unto him a Chiaus, commanding
him to restore Transylvania to Sigismund (to whom, by the King of Poland's
mediation, he had been reconciled; else, threatening with fire and sword, to
destroy Valachia, and deprive him of Transylvania and his life together:
Wherefore he yielded to all that his Ambassadors requested; conditioning, he
should be bound to serve with his people against the Turk, as need should be;
and that in Transylvania, should be always near him resident, the Emperors
superintendent over the whole Country: which was Dr. Petzen, sent thither with
6000 Soldiers, and much money to pay the Vayuods Soldiers; and so to take of
them an Oath, thenceforth to be his Majesty's faithful Servants. The
superintendent, the Vayuod received with great honor; yet being returned into
Transylvania, ere long, without regard of him, he began to oppress the people
with new exactions, and in a sort, to tyrannize over them: using great severity
against diverse Nobles also, chiefly those whom he knew had taken part with the
Cardinal, or lately with Sigismund, or any way to have favored his quarrel,
which was contrary to his promise; no more to imbrue his hands in the blood of
those Nobility, without the knowledge or consent of the Emperor, or his
superintendent: which yet if he had not done, he could not have kept those
disdainful ones under obedience. Nevertheless, the Transilvanians taking these
things in ill part, rose all up in Arms against him; so that he finding himself
to weak for them, retired with all that would follow him, into the Mountains:
whence he presently sent for aid to Lord Basta, for subduing and reducing them:
who by Letters from Matthias, commanded so to do, with about 6000 Horse and
Foot, and 8 Fieldpieces, removed from Cassovia September. 4th, where by the way,
came to him, Ambassadors from the Confederate Transilvanians, requesting also
his aid, pretending themselves, to be the Emperors most loyal Subjects, but
not under the Government of such a Tyrant as was the Vayuod, exaggerating many
his most cruel actions, etc. Basta sent back the Ambassadors, comforting them
to expect his arrival in Transylvania; yet convenanting with all, that they
should first conceive in writing the Oath of their fidelity to the Emperor.

Now might many and important considerations, trouble the mind of Basta, in so
doubtful a case, whom to give aid unto, but he laid hand upon the helm of good
meaning and spread the Sails of such discretion as taught him, that in matters
of War, a General might depart from the instructions of his Prince, not
concerning the end, but the means leading thereunto, especially, when the
present occasion suffered not so much delay, as to expect counsel from far; so
he resolved to join to the confederates, most (in his judgment) concerning his
Imperial Majesty, as being the utmost scope of his so great cost and charge,
to keep Transylvania at his devotion: wherefore, arriving at Torda September.
14th, he joined unto them (to the great wonder of the Vayuod) who being in all,
about 18000 strong, and twelve Field pieces, he determined not to give leisure
to the Vayuod, to call to him for more help, having with him about 20000 Foot,
12000 Horse, and 27 Fieldpieces: amongst whom, were diverse Siculi, in hope of
their ancient liberty, with a mixture of Cossacks, Valachians, Rascians, and
Servians, people of prey, whom Basta knew to be far inferior in courage to his
18000: wherefore he set forward the sixteenth day, and in two days march, came
in sight of the Vayuod: who seeing some great Troops, he sent to view the
Enemy, to be repulsed, firing Mirislo, a Village fast by, out of which, they
had drawn certain small Pieces into the Camp.

Mirislo is two Leagues on this side Alba Julia, upon the high way, stretching
from the side of the River Maracz to the foot of a Hill: along which, the River
running unequally, and by the rising of the Hill, makes the ground in some
places half a mile broad, and more; and in some, shut up narrow, as there where
the Village stands, and where the Vayuod advantagiously lay behind a great
trench drawn from the River to the Mountain.

On this side, where, from (...), the plain enlarges more and more, Basta
encamping close to the Village, opposed against the Enemie's coming, three
great Corpse du guard, two toward the Hill, and one toward the River, under
the charge of the Major of the Field, with the Artillery: who there entrenched
himself, both sides still drawing nearer and nearer: Toward the Evening,
September the 17th, came one with Letters from the Vayuod to Basta, containing,
He desired to know whether his arrival in the Conspirator's Camp, were by the
Emperor's consent or Command, or not; and how it happened, he would do so,
considering the diverse chances of War, and c. Who answered, To morrow he would
show him his Authority (alluding to the Imperial Standard) and as for the
fortune and danger, he referred that to the will of the Almighty, the just
Judge of all controversies; but the mean while, he exhorted him to leave that
Province he had so ill governed, unto the Emperor, promising him free passage
into Valachia, and giving him time till the next morning, to consider thereof:
after which, every one might do for himself what he could. The Vayuod
disdaining this answer, with many threatening and disgraceful words, presently
caused the Battle to be proclaimed against next day, by sound of Drum and
Trumpet.

Basta assuring his Camp, and not only sending, but going himself to see how
the Enemy lay, and finding no reasonable means for him there to attempt any
exploit by, thought it best to make a retreat, of about an Italian mile,
according to the commodiousness of the place, which his purpose was much
disliked by the confederate Captains: to whom it seemed more safe to assault
the Enemy in his Trenches, than to retire before the face of an Enemy so strong
and adventurous, and c. but Basta, promised therein to show them a more cunning
kind of fight, than they yet knew, and the assurance which himself and the
Almaines in the Rear, would give in the retreat; so that they should not lose
one man, much less, to fall into any disorder, his purpose being only to give
the Enemy the plain, to show himself openly in; so the morning following, the
three Corpse Duguard, were called back, and the baggage sent away: whom the
Transilvanians and Hungarians followed, the Almaines enclosing the Ordnance in
the Rear.

The Vayuod hereupon sent a great Troop to view them, and skirmish with them,
which were so kept off by Musketeers in the Rear, that they could not come to
do any harm, though they were all the way charged by them, to the great content
of Basta: who when he saw the Ordnance on Carriages, to come out of the
Village, he marched softly, to give the Enemy hope to overtake him, having
before thought of a convenient place for his men, with room enough, upon
advantage to stay: and when he might (about half a mile off) see the Enemy
march in order of Battle, he began to march toward him: and having placed his
men in a fit station and order, according to the situation of the place, and
order of the Enemy, and the manner of his proceeding set down, he put on his
Helmet, and cheerfully said, he trusted, then to show the Vayuod, that his
Trunchion could do more than his Scimitar: So himself setting forward betwixt
the Squadron of the Almaine Foot, and the Wing of Musketeers, in the
afternoon, he marched fair and softly toward the Enemy: who without moving,
expected the discharge of their Artillery, whereunto the nearer the Enemy came,
the less harm it did him.

The Wing of Musketeers, went directly to charge the Artillery; and the
Squadron toward the Foot of the Hill, where Basta desired forcibly to charge,
presently came in a Front, just upon the sign given; and so with his Almaine
Foot, and the Rutters on the right hand, enclosed in behind most part of the
Enemies Foot: at which instant, the Rutters on the left hand also, so
courageously charged upon the three thousand Lances, that better could not
have been desired.

The Lances retiring without hurt, and the first Volley discharged, forced the
Infantry, and so disordered the rest: whereupon, the Wings charging, there
presently ensued a great slaughter and overthrow: the Enemy losing one hundred
thousand, and Basta but forty, and as many hurt; and greater had the slaughter
been, if the Village and nights approach had not covered many of them that
fled, and stayed the pursuit of the Victors; yet was there afterward found in
all (as was by the Peasants reported) twenty thousand slain in this Battle.

Basta recovered many Ensigns, and much Armor before sent by the Emperor to
the Vayuod, with all his Tents and Baggage: sending out presently many Troops
of Horse every way, with Proclamation to spare the lives of such Siculi, as
should lay down Arms: many of whom, were sent prisoners to diverse places,
especially to Fogaras: the Vayuod himself, with some Cossacks, escaping by
flight.

On the morrow, Basta sent away Count Caurioli, to inform the Emperor of all
particulars, who seemed to be pleased; yet neither rewarded the Count, nor
commended Basta in what he had done, although he had in writing, approved of
his resolution and motion.

Basta ordered the Chiaki, or chief man of the rebellious Transilvanians, to
send out one thousand Horse to pursue the Vayuod; who instead thereof, joining
with other consorts, fell to ransacking of Alba Julia, pretending, there was
the Vayuods. Wealth; yet sparing neither MERCHANT nor CITIZEN: which seemed to
Basta, a great wrong, to see the innocent punished, and the guilty to escape;
and though he made what he could thitherwards, and stayed one day not far off
to have given some redress unto the spoil, yet he lost his labor, be ause
many of the chiefest sort had a hand therein, with whom he thought it more
wisdom then to dissemble, than to use any severity, without hope of doing good:
So resolving in haste to march toward Fogaras, whither he heard the Vayuod was
come with new forces, he in six days came to Cibinium, where he had certain
news, that the Chancellor of Poland and Sigismund, were with a strong Army
upon the Frontiers of Moldavia; having sent before them Moses the Siculian,
with eight thousand of his Siculi: wherefore he thought good now to stay where
he was, to provide for all events, as need should be, resolving to send the
Chiaki, and one Pithi, to parley with Moses, who made a show of no great
moment, of his good will toward the Confederates: in the mean time, came two
Messengers from the Vayuod, offering, that he should do whatsoever were in the
Emperor's behalf, to be imposed upon him: To whom it was propounded, first,
that he should forever resign all claim in Transylvania: then, he with his
Army, to swear fidelity to the Emperor: also, that he should forthwith go
with his Army unto the Frontiers of Moldavia, to stay the Polonians from
further entrance; and to give his Wife and little Son in Hostage, for
performance of these things.

One Techelli, was sent to receive the Oath and Hostages; for whose keeping,
the Castle of Alba Julia was appointed.

This agreement being made, Basta kept on toward Fogaras, which he found
already possessed by the Chiaki, thence to Corona. After which, the Vayuod
distrusting the Articles, went into Valachia, but not into Moldavia; not so
much discomfited with the Forces of the Polouians, as for his distrust of
Moses the Siculian, who in the Battle, might appear his Enemy behind him.

Now, whether it were for distrust of his own followers, or only for fear of
Treason plotted by the Polonians, who with so small Forces, were come to fight:
he of his own accord, fled into the Mountains, without any great loss, having
left his Baggage behind him, which was assailed, and taken by the Haiducks, and
such other sharkers: although afterward in diverse skirmishes with the Turks,
(who, to cause him the rather to turn his back on the Polonians, had scoured up
and down the Country) he lost many: in the end, giving Moldavia for lost, he
was now out of hope, how to be able to hold only Valachia his old Government:
Even he, which but lately commanded above one hundred thousand Soldiers in
field; he who was able in despite of any, to command Valachia and Moldavia;
and perhaps, the other Countries near him also, as having received the Command
of (...); he that made Constantinople to tremble, and found no Empire equal to
his designs; to him, I say, now, while Basta encamped in Field, a Messenger
came from the Chancellor of Poland, to declare, that he had no order from the
King, to trouble Transylvania, yet he would advise the Transilvanians, to make
choice of a Prince of their own Nation, and such a one as the Turk should like
of; otherwise, they should but seek their own and Neighbors destruction. But
the Transilvanians in general, answered, (thanking him for his good will) that
in all their consultations they would have a principal regard of their own
welfare, together with the common: after which answer, he forthwith placed one
Simon, (Brother to Jeremiah) Vayuod of Valachia, instead of Michael, by him
driven out; and leaving a fit number of Soldiers with him, returned toward
POLONIA: unto which Election, the Turks craftily gave place, wisely for a time,
comporting the injury: and the old Chancellor as crafty as they, secretly
purposing by occasion of these troubles, to prefer his Son at length, to the
Principality of Transylvania; and thereunto also, to join MOLDAVIA and
VALACHIA, had therein, of purpose, placed this Simon, a Man of no valor, and
of a small apprehension, whom he might at his pleasure again displace.

Basta the Polonians being retired, consulted with the Chiaki, and other chief
Men of that Province, for calling together the States and people, to choose
some men, as they thought meetest to be sent to the Emperor, to know his
pleasure for the Government of that Province; but in the mean time, certain
malcontents, with one voice cried out, that Sigismund was entered into the
Confines of Transylvania, one while, toward Valachia; another while, by the
way of Moldavia; unto whom, great strength resorted: with other such like
devises, to have made Basta suddenly to depart, or at least, to have troubled
the Assembly called, and the consultation also; but Basta moved not out of his
quarter, but lay very privately, to declare thereby, the confidence he had in
the thankfulness of the Nobility, as by him delivered from oppression: as also
to make them know, that the GOVERNMENT was not to be settled in the sole power
of a Tyrant, but in the fidelity of the Subjects, protected under a most
Father-like Government, not ambitiously sought after, but voluntarily offered;
and for the common good, by the Emperor accepted. He well knew also, that
Castaldo (in the year one thousand five hundred fifty one) sent into
Transylvania with eight thousand Almaines, went privately to Alba Julia, where
Queen ISABEL had for her defense, assembled a Diet of all the States: and there
by well handling the matter, got to Ferdinand the Emperor that Kingdom, which
he could not by fear of his Forces have gained: for which Writers attribute to
him the name of Great Wisdom; howbeit, the year after, he was forced to abandon
his Conquest, but yet not through his default.

The Diet being assembled, diverse broils were there raised by the
Malcontents: some crying out. That the Almaines might be paid, discharged
and (...) for their pains, offering to do them the like pleasure as they should
have occasion. Others most unreasonably cried, to have them all put to the
sword: Others, That they were by no means to endure the Government of
Maximilian the Arch Duke, but would needs have a Prince of their own Country,
approved of by the Turk. Yet Basta not dismayed (when the Chiaki and other
chief men came (as their manner was) every other day to visit him): told them
plainly. He well perceived their drift, and yet doubted not either of their
Oath of Obedience given, or of the fresh remembrance of the great benefit they
had from him so lately received; and, in case they should little esteem of
those things, yet they should know he was not to be feared with words: but
fully resolved not to stir a foot thence with his Forces, but rather to lose
his life; which, for all that, he would sell as dear as he could, They
courteously answered him, He should not give (...) to any speeches of the light
vulgar, but to content himself, that the Nobility, had not done any (...)
thing. So after much dispute, were appointed 3 persons, according to the 3
estates, to go and request the Emperor Maximilian, for their Governor with
special request also, that he would not overcharge with foreign Soldiers that
Province already sore (...) especially having in itself people sufficient, and
more nimble to encounter with Turks than the slow Almaines, and they also of a
double charge.

Basta thought it not good to call again any such Assembly; seeing plainly the
mind of the people was, to resolve to remain for ever free, if they should have
come to a second consultation: yea, in that very Diet, the Chiaki was declared
Governor in behalf of the people, with authority in many things, of himself to
determine, without any assembly of the other States: which they said, They did
only, till they by the Emperor were provided of a (...). Howbeit, Basta
perceived more than a Tribunitiall power, to be now joined by the people to the
Emperor's Commissioners: knowing that this Chiaki was in great hope to have
bin proclaimed Prince of the Confederates, if they had not bin presently
relieved against the Vayuod, having noted in him his great ambition, in
marching from (...) toward the Vayuod.

Next day, came all the Council of that Province, with the Deputies (appointed
to have gone to the Emperor) and the people, to Basta's House, requesting him
to send his Germans out of the Country, and after so many troubles, to give it
a little leave to (...): himself might stay at Alba Julia, till the Deputies
might go to his Majesty with their requests. Basta, not a little troubled with
such an Imperious request, now saw himself deceived in the ground of all this
action, by trusting too much to his own too small Forces in so populous a
Province: contenting himself only with their Oath, without any other Hostages.
Besides, of the 6000 that he brought with him thither, 3500 of Silesia, now
brought to 2000, could not be persuaded longer to stay without their pay
beforehand, the pay of their Country being already spent: and the rest drawn
out of the Garrisons of upper- Hungary, or there pressed, were at a certain
time to return. Yet, for not grieving of the Country, he requested of them some
strong place, wherein his men in Garrison, might live upon their own Wages:
which, when he could not obtain, and considering it might happen unto those
few, which would stay with him, as it did to the 8000 Almaines of Castaldo,
driven out of that Country, under color of some insolency committed (though
about 20 (...), had bin the chief doers thereof) he resolved of all these
things to give notice to the Court, and so to march softly to the confines: and
to save his 8 pieces of Ordnance, and Munition in (...) Vivar-Castle, a good
way within the confines, which with Kniver-Castle, the General of the Vayuods
Horse, delivered to one of the Emperor's Commissioners: who there provided for
Basta his familiar Favorite, although the Transilvanians had sought with great
promises, to have had the said strong Castles in their own power. But, the
matter was so well handled afterward by Basta, (...), and the other Emperor's
great Favorites, that in a Diet of the Transilvaniaus, he was with a convenient
guard, again received as the Emperors Lievt. till further order were by him
taken. The Chiaki and his Accomplices, faintly consenting thereunto.

Neither had Basta any longer assurance of that his Government, than the fickle
people would afford him, with which his weak State, among more enemies than
friends, we will a while leave him.

In the mean time (the Treaty betwixt the Emperor and the Turk being
frustrated) Ibraim Bassa, having made great preparation all last Winter; now at
length in the latter end of Aug. began to set forward with his Army from
Belgrade, supposed to be about 200000 men: and sitting down before Babotsca, a
strong Fortress in lower- Hungary, furiously battered it, purposing next day to
assault it; but, the Captain of the Castle, considering the weakness of his
Garrison, and the walls to be already sore shaken, delivered up the place upon
reasonable composition. Thence, the Bassa marched to Canisia, in the Frontiers
of Stiria, a Town supposed by most to be impregnable; for, it was situated in
a very deep Marsh, and strongly garrisoned with Hungarians and Almaines.
Ibrahim especially longed for this place, both to free the Turks Frontiers,
from the often incursions of the Soldiers therein: and hereby also to open a
more free and safe passage for the Turks into Austria; So encamping on the side
of the Marsh, which encompassed the Isle, whereon the Town stood, he began with
Faggots and Earth to fill up the Marsh, so to pass over his Army; the besieged
not ceasing with great shot to disturb them, etc. Who yet proceeding in their
work, had brought it almost close to the Island: where, being about to land,
they were by the Garrison-souldiers encountering them, forced to retire with the
loss of a number of men, and 2 of their best Captains; but, preparing against
next day with a greater force to have assaulted the Isle, they saw the
Imperial Army now at their backs, and doing them great harm with their
Artillery; diverse Bands also sometime sallying out of the Camp, discharged
great Vollies of shot, even into their Trenches: also from the Town, they
received no small hurt.

The Imperial Army, were about 42000 Horse and Foot: men of diverse Nations,
under the leading of Duke Mercury; with whom, were also Nadasti, and diverse
other famous Captains, come for the relief of (...), a place of so great
importance. But, Ibrahim understanding by his espials, the smalness of their
number, went out and joined battle with them, with great slaughter on both
sides: which doubtful fight (yet in all men's judgment most enclinable unto
the Christians) was by the coming on of the night, broken off, The Christians
retiring into their Trenches, the Turks stood all night in the field, with
their Weapons in their hands: who, presuming on their multitude, and next day
daring the Christians to battle; their Captains being at variance, could by no
means be persuaded to go out against them. So, that the Tartarian General
taking courage, made an inroad into the Country: and meeting with 200 Wagons
laden with Victuals, for the Christian Army, slew the Convoy, and carried them
away; whereby such want arose among them, that they were glad by night to
dislodge and retire, which for all that, being by the Turks perceived, they
presently following them, cut off above 3000, with some Ordnance, and most of
the Baggage: the rest (the while) retiring farther off into more safe places.

The Turks now returning to the siege, the Garrison (a few days after)
despairing of timely relief, mutined, refusing any longer to defend the Town,
hardly laid to: and the rather, because diverse Hungarians were fled out of the
Town; having (as was thought) revealed to the Bassa the state of the besieged:
yet, Paradiser the Governor, and some other Captains, did what they might (as
they said afterward) to have persuaded the contrary. Whereupon, they covenanted
with the Bassa, with bag and baggage to depart, and to be safely convoyed over
the River Mur; (...) October. 22. the Town was cowardly delivered. After the
Agreement made for yielding up the Town, the Bassa sent Paradiser a very rich
Gown of cloth of Gold; which although he refused, yet was it afterward laid to
his charge, as a presumption of some treacherous collusion betwixt them: for it
was thought, he might have kept the Town much longer. Ibrahim, now fortified
the Town more strongly than before, putting into it 4000 Foot; and 500 Horse,
all old Soldiers: and, then forraged the Country round about Canisia, burning
all as he went, the poor Inhabitants fleeing still as fast as they could. But,
having thus with the spoil well pleased his Soldiers, he desirous to have the
Country timely re-peopled, stayed their outrage, upon a great pain: by open
proclamations, in every place set up, inviting the Christians without fear to
return into the Country; where, submitting to the Sultans Obeisance, they
should safely dwell, and no Tribute to be exacted of them for 3 years
following, that they might the better recover themselves: Whereupon, many not
knowing where to bestow themselves, returned to their ancient dwellings. But
since Count Serinus was the man he most feared, after his departure, to trouble
his new Conquest, and seek revenge) who, in this general calamity of Stiria
his Country, had 20 Villages of his own quite burnt, and the people most slain
or taken; the Bassa having many times sought, to persuade him to yield
Obedience to the Turk, and now in hope, after so great loss to bring him in,
before he were come to utter ruin) wrote unto him again to that purpose: which
Letters being (as the rest) answered with silence; and Ibrahim, having disposed
of all things at Canisia, and thereabouts, returned with his Army to Belgrade,
to Winter there; having first certified the Sultan of all his proceedings and
success; vaunting, next Spring to besiege Vienna also, if he should so command.

Mahomet not a little pleased, caused great triumphs for 4 days at
Constantinople; sending a rich Robe of cloth of Gold, with a Leading-staffe set
with Pearls and precious Stones unto the Bassa at Belgrade. The loss of
Canisia, much troubled all that side of Christendom, chiefly those of the
Austrian Territories: all men blaming the discord of the Captains, who retired
without doing any good; but above all, detesting the cowardice of Paradiser:
who, if he had done the utmost of his devoir, perhaps, the cold and
unseasonable Winter-weather, though no other relief had been, might have forced
the Turks to raise the siege: Wherefore, he was by the Emperor's command
imprisoned at Vienna, where his cause being often examined, he was the year
following condemned of Felony and Cowardice: and October. 15. had first his hand
at 4 stro^ks struck off, and after that his head; so also was his Ensign bearer
executed, and after them his Lievt. with the Mayor of the Town; who both bound
to a stake, had first their heads cut out, then their heads chopped off.

Now the Rebellion raised in Caramania by Cusahin, was not with his death
wholly (...): also Orsa a great City, still held out against (...) Bassa. Then,
also a Companion of (...), called the (...), seeing how hardly Cusahin and his
followers had been handled, called unto him all such as loved their Liberty;
unto which sweet name, so many soon came about him, as out of them he framed a
dreadful Army: against whom, (...) Bassa going with all his power, they so
courageously joined battle with him, that he received a notable overthrow; so
that he was glad to retire, and send out Commissions for raising of greater
Forces.

Mahomet the while, whether for fear of this new Rebellion, or understanding of
the Ambassadors, sent from the Persian to the Christian Princes (he suspecting
that King might break his League with him) sent an Ambassador into Persia:
demanding of the King (for the more assurance of the League) one of his Sons to
be sent to him in Hostage; upon which so proud a demand, the Persian King
commanded the Ambassador to be forthwith slain: but his fury by his
Counselors, being somewhat appeased, he was contented, he should, in
contempt, be put to the Bastinado only, and so, grievously threatened, sent back
to his Master; who, now in doubt of some further matter from that angry King,
garrisoned strongly all his strong Holds confining upon the Persian.

The Emperor much troubled with the loss of Canisia, and in doubt of worse to
come (though Ibrahim did afresh treat with him of peace) with great instancy
requested aid of the Pope, and other Princes of Italy, in 1601. So the Pope at
first of the Spring, sent him 8000 Soldiers in pay, under his Nephew, (...).
King Philip also ordered Count Fuentes to send into Croatia certain Bands of
the Duchess: who, by his direction were conducted to Millain: the Duke of
Florence, likewise sent him 2000 Soldiers, under de Monte: with whom also went
John de (...), whom Ferdinand the Archduke requested to be Master of his Camp.
Thither came also the Duke of Mantua, both with Horse and Foot, being made by
the Archduke, his Lieutenant General. The Emperor sent also another good Army
into Hungary under the leading of Matthias, and the Duke Mercury his
Lieutenant Genesis He made also a third Army, which strengthened with the Forces
of Don Ferrant Gonzaga joined with Basta, for recovery of Transylvania; out of
which he had bin of late driven.

In the mean time, many hot skirmishes passed in Hungary, betwixt the
Christians and Turks. But, the time being come for taking the field: Ibrahim
Bassa being before dead at Belgrade, and Hassan a Vizier Bassa appointed
General in his place; yet delaying his coming, and the Parley for peace laid
aside (as never intended by the Turks but to dally off time to their own
advantage) Duke Mercury came with his Army from Comara (where he lay expecting
the event of the parley) and laid siege to Alba regalis, one of the chiefest and
strongest Cities of Hungary: which he for certain days continually battered,
as if he had purposed to have taken it by assault: but being informed by a
Fugitive, that the broad Lake on the other side of the City, was not so deep,
but it might be passed over (against the opinion of the Turks Captives, and
Inhabitants, whom he had examined); and that the Turks thinking themselves on
that side safe, had turned almost all their care and Forces unto that side of
the City which he had battered; He appointed Lord Rusworme, to prove if those
Zigeth-Suburbs were not to be surprised, which being taken, the City could not
long hold out. For undertaking of which enterprise he was by the captive Turks
and Country people much discouraged: who nevertheless, sent certain of his men
to try the Lake, who brought word, that it was undoubtedly, though with much
difficulty, to be passed: Whereupon, he with 1000 select Soldiers, with every
one a good Faggot on his back, beside his Arms, to fill up the deepest of the
Marsh, by night entered it, wherein he had not gone far, but he found it much
deeper and more troublesome than his Spies had reported; but carried with an
invincible courage (these adventurous men going still up in Water and mud unto
the waste where 'twas shallowest; where also, if one missed but a step, he was
over head and ears and in danger of drowning, if he were not by his fellows
presently holden); They at length got over but with the loss of six or seven
men, a little before day: Whereof the Duke being advertised by a sign, with
greater stir than at any time before, assailed that side of the City where he
lay: and in the mean time, (...) with Ladders provided, sealed the Walls on
the other side, and almost unperceived recovered the top thereof, and so being
got into the Suburbs, with a terrible cry assailed the Turks, who, not well
knowing which way to turn, without great resistance, fled into the City, the
Christians following them with a great slaughter: in which so great confusion,
the Duke took the rest of the Suburbs: the Turks there also for fear,
forsaking them, and retiring with all haste into the City. The Christians,
besides other rich prey here, took 14 great pieces, with good store of shot and
powder.

The Duke now again summoned the City, whereunto the Turks gave no answer, but
by their pieces: whereat the Duke much displeased, sent them word, he would
send them other manner of Messengers to morrow, and by Gods help sup with them
in the City, though unwelcome.

So next day, having made two fair Breaches into the City, he with great
slaughter of the Enemy entered the same, though the Turks cast down upon the
Christians, Darts, Wildfire, etc.

But, seeing they must needs now give place, they fled amain into their Houses,
there to defend themselves, or die: many whereof, they had so undermined, that
they could easily overthrow them, and as many as should come within danger of
them: so that the Temple-pallace, with many other sumptuous buildings, were
left all rent and torn; yet the Bassa, upon promise of life, yielded himself,
and was sent to the Camp, the rest of the Soldiers being all or most of them
put to the Sword. The Walloons breaking by heaps into the richest Houses, both
took what themselves lighted on, and stripped the Germans of what they had
gotten: yea, they opened the Tombs of the Hungarian Kings, to spoil the dead of
such things as were, for honours-fake, long before enterred with them: showing
themselves therein more barbarous than the Turks. The Bassa of Buda (then
laying a prisoner at Vieuna, hearing of the taking of this City, fasted with
his 2 servants a whole day, prostrate on his face, and praying to his Prophet
Mahomet) who had (as he said) all this year been angry with the Turks.

Now Hassan the Turkish General, was coming to relieve Alba-regalis: and
though he heard by the way, that the City was won; yet, taking with him the
Bassa of Buda, with the other Commanders thereabouts: and, having formed an
Army of about 60000, but most raw Soldiers, he held on his way thitherwards,
both to give some content to his angry Lord; and hoping to overthow the
Christian Army, or at least to regain the City, as yet unrepaired. But the Duke
had presently repaired the Breaches, and put therein a strong Garrison of
expert Soldiers: and being himself about 20000 strong, set forward to meet the
Bassa, beginning a hot and bloody skirmish with him; yet, the Bassa next day
sent away part of his Army, to prove, if the City might be recovered: himself
(the mean while) offering the Christians battle, so to busy them. But, the
Duke informed of the baseness of the Bassa's Soldiers (although he were in
number far above him) went out and encountered him: and, at the first onset
disordering his foremost Squadrons, sorced the Turks to retire with the loss of
6000 men: among whom were, the Bassa of Buda, 6 Zanzacks, and diverse others of
good place and note. The Duke also took from them diverse Ordnance, and had not
a great squadron of Tartars appeared at his back, he had undoubtedly overthrown
all the Bassa's Army; but, now contenting himself with the Victory already
gotten, he retired orderly into his Trenches, having not lost above 300 men.
Whilst both Armies thus lay, supplies repairing unto them, and expecting a day
of general battle; the Janissaries still murmuring, that it was now no time of
the year to keep the field, enforced the Bassa to retire to Buda, and disband
his Army: in which retreat, many were by the Christians cut off in the Rear,
and many taken, 50 being of the French mutineers of Pappa: whom Matthias, at
the instance of Duke Mercury, pardoned. They also, who were sent to attempt
Alba-regalis, were so welcomed with shot, and charged with often sallies; that,
despairing to prevail, they returned to the Bassa that sent them.

About the time that the Duke began to besiege Albaregalis, Ferdinand the
Archduke, now 30000 strong, by the advice of the Duke of Mantua his Lievt.
Genesis resolved to besiege Canisia: the recovery whereof, much concerned even
Italy it self; Whereupon, he came and encamped before it, September. 10. And
although the Turks in Garrison (not past a 1000) with their often and gallant
sallies much troubled the Christians, and that other bands of the Turks came
many times out of the strong Holds thereabouts to skirmish with them, and to
see if they could put any more Soldiers into the Town; yet, both in the one
place and the other, The Turks were to their cost still repulsed and put to
flight, losing also some small Castles and Forts.

The Christians found means to dry the Marsh a little, that environed the Town,
and to fill it up on one side, and to come so near the Town, that having
planted 3 tire of Artillery against it, they began furiously to batter it. Yea,
at length they approached so nigh, that they came with their Trenches even
close to the Town-ditch, persuading the Turks now, whilst they might, upon good
conditions to yield, and so save their Lives. But, they braving the Christians,
said, They would keep the place for the Sultan, in despite of all their
Forces: Whereupon, it was resolved to give a general assault.

In the mean time, the news of the winning of AlbaRegalis, caused great Joy and
Triumph in the Camp; the Christians also by fit men persuaded the Soldiers in
Canisia to yield, and not cast themselves into such danger, as had their
fellows at Alba-regalis, etc. Whereunto, they (among whom the Renegate
Walloons were chief) contemptuously answered, They little feared such weak
Assailants, scornfully commanding the Messengers to depart, and oft-times
discharging their great Ordnance, as had the Christians in triumph the day
before.

Now, though the Walls were sore shaken, and the Breaches almost laid open: yet
was the assault for a while delayed, till Bridges might be made to be laid over
the Ditch; but all things now ready, and the Florentines with some other
Italians (according to Lot) coming forward, the Bridge was found both too
short and weak for them to get over by; so that sinking under them, both
Soldiers and Commanders (as (...)) were in great danger: Where, by and by the
Enemies flanking murdering-pieces, and their Musketeers afront, they were
forced to retire, 300 being slain. Yet, were not the Christian-Commanders at
all discouraged, but began to provide against the violence of the
Winter-weather, as also to hinder any Victuals from being brought to the Town.
And although already, Horse, flesh was dainty Cheer with the Defendants, yet,
they being again required to yield, instead of answering them one word, shook
their Swords afar off at them. But for all the Commanders resolution to
continue the siege, (...) being a little before dead, the Italians began first
a few secretly to withdraw, but afterward by great numbers to depart,
alleging, want of pay, and (...).

But the rest, hearing that the Turks were risen from before Alba-regalis, and
the rest of their Army disbanded: also, being informed of the weakness and
wants of the besieged, began afresh to make new Engines for approaching the
Walls, without danger of the Enemies flanking-Ordnance: at which time also,
November. 4th. Rusworm came to them from Duke Mercury with 8000 Soldiers,
whereby they were the more encouraged to proceed. Neither failed the Turks the
while, to trouble them by often sallies, attempting especially to have fired
their Tents, but they were still with loss beaten back into the Town. But
whilst the Turks, as it were with desperate hope thus defend the place: lo, in
the latter end of November, the raging North Wind, accompanied with a deep
Snow, overthrew most of the Tents and Pavillions of the Christians, burying as
it were their whole Army in Snow and Ice: so, that in Ferdinands Camp, were
1500 men, with 300 Horses, starved and frozen to death. But those that came
with Rusworm being wearied with the siege of Alba-regalis, and as it were spent
with dirty travel, had not brought with them their Tents, etc. were enforced
to lay abroad: with whose miseries, though their General was much grieved, yet
he with them right patiently endured. Hereupon, the Commanders thought it
better to rise in time, than longer to expose their Army, to most certain
destruction either of the Enemy or Cold; which was done with such haste and
confused tumult, that they left behind them their great Ordnance, with Tents
and Baggage; a common voice running, they were well if they could but save
themselves: so that the Soldiers, in fear to be pursued, fled; but accompanied
with such Winds, Snow, and extreme cold, that many of them fell down frozen,
and never rose more, not being to (...) help from others, every man having
enough to do to look to himself; so that upon the way, lay 500 dead of cold,
besides 400 left sick in the Trenches: who; were thought afterward to have bin
put to the Sword by them of Canisia.

But Michael the Vayuod of Valachia, not knowing well which way to turn
himself, thought it best now at last to submit to the Emperor, if so at
leastwise he might recover his Government in (...); so Jan. 23. he arrived at
(...), with 35 followers and 6 Coaches, where he was honorably received, and
his cost at the Emperors charge defrayed: unto whom, he excusing his severity
used in Transylvania, as enforced thereto by their stubbornness, etc. his
excuse was admitted, and he with all kindness used. Now (...), then laying in
Transylvania as aforesaid, he without fear one night (the Watch being set) went
to bed: where he had not layen long, but certain Transilvanian Lords (the
Chiaki being chief) came with their followers, and surprising the Watch, entered
the Palace, and breaking into his Chamber, took him out of his bed; and next
morning going forth, about 12 miles off, met with Sigismund their late Prince,
secretly by them called in, with whom they coming to Clausenberg, there
delivered unto him Basta, whom he commanded to be cast into Irons: and going to
the Palace, gave like order for apprehending and safe keeping, other of the
Nobility, who had taken part with Basta, in behalf of the Emperor; for one
part of the Transilvanians now stood for him, another part for Istuan Bator,
pretending the Sovereignty belonged to him: but the third and far greatest part
for Sigismund, who, now by means of the (...) King, reconciled to the Turk, was
joyfully received in the chief Cities of Transylvania, who, for the better
assuring of his (...), wrote to the Emperor what had happened, requesting him
to be content: that he was (...) of his love and favor, promising for ever to
keep good amity with him: telling Basta also ( whom at the intercession of some
great friends he had enlarged) that, he must forthwith depart his Principality,
as also to cease from (...) his people, now voluntarily returned to his
Obedience. The Emperor, upon the first advertisement hereof, took order with
Michael (who was troubled for his Wife and Son left as Hostages with Basta, but
now fallen into the hands of his mortal Enemies): that returning speedily into
Valachia (where the people generally disliked the simple Vayuod, set over them
by the Polonian Chancellor), and collecting what power he could, he should
join with Basta, to whom he had sent many Horse and Foot, for expulsing of
(...), and reducing Transylvania under his Obedience. Michael, assembling
accordingly about 10000 expert Soldiers, went and found Basta in the field,
with about 20000 Foot; and 8000 Horse, and so entered into Transylvania with
united Forces: where the Vayuod in disdain, wasted all as he went with fire and
sword, not without the great discontent of Basta. But Sigismund, to hinder
their further proceeding, came from (...) with his Army to meet them; yet he
would not come to trial of a battle with them, which they offered: but,
fortified himself in his Trenches, expecting the coming of the Tartars from
the Chancellor of Poland, as also 6000 Turks from the Bassa of Belgrade:
where, hearing that the passage of the Tartars, was stayed by (...) Gonzaga,
and that the Turks would come no further than Giula, without their pay
beforehand: finding himself too weak, he rose, purposing to have taken certain
Straits whereby the Enemy must pass, so by advantage to have helped his
weakness. But, Basta and the Vayuod followed him with such speed, that they
overtook him before he could get thither, so hardly pressing him, that he must
needs turn about and fight, or suffer his men to be slain like beasts: wherein,
though he, nor his failed to do their utmost, yet such was the Valor of the
other, that in a great fight disordering his Foot, they put them to flight, and
cut them all in pieces: Whereupon, the Prince fled betime with his Horsemen to
the uttermost Confines of Transylvania, having lost 10000 Soldiers. Hereupon,
Claudiopolis with diverse other Cities and Towns, returned again to the
Emperors Obeisance.

The Vayuod, to satisfy his long hatred against the Transilvanians, utterly
wasted all places whereby he passed, which Basta not liking, requested him to
use his Victory with more modesty, especially toward such places as voluntarily
returned to the Emperor's Obeisance; who answered, He would do what he thought
good, without his appointment or the Emperor's either, chiefly in that, which
he had now twice Conquered: wherefore, Basta might command them, that were to
be commanded by him; for, he acknowledged no Sovereignty of Basta, or the
Emperor over hims: Unto which presumptuous speech Basta replied not; but from
that time, better observing his proceedings, perceived he had Intelligence with
the Turks: that by chasing the Imperials out of Transylvania, he might hold it
to himself, as Tributary to the Sultan, best able to defend him. The truth
whereof, he certainly understood by Letters of his to that purpose, intercepted
by his Soldiers: Whereupon, he became very pensive for the great power of the
Vayuod in those Countries, and also for the great strength he had even then
present about him: So, consulting with certain of his chief Commanders, what
were best to be done in so dangerous a case, A Walloon Captain offered to go
into the Vayuods Camp, and in his own Tent to kill him as a Traitor: so he
going with some 60 men, boldly stepped into his Tent, willing him to yield
himself the Emperors prisoner: who being about to lay his hand upon his
Scimitar, the Walloon with an Holberd, thrust him into the breast: at which
instant, another with a Sword, at one blow, cleft his Head down to his
shoulders. Presently, upon his death, a great tumult was raised in his Camp;
but Basta forthwith, appearing with all his Soldiers, and producing the
treasonable Letters, all was again appeased; but especially, for that his
soldiers now saw themselves without a Head, and too weak also for the
Imperials there present in Arms.

In the Vayuods Tent, were also other Letters found, so plainly declaring the
same treason, that the Walachians, who were at first wonde rously moved,
hearing them read, said, he was worthily slain; and had they known any such
traitorous purpose by him, they would themselves have taken of him deserved
punishment.

Basta offered his Soldiers, either to depart wither they would; or, taking an
Oath of obedience to the Emperor, to enter into his pay. His dead body was
laid out a whole day for the Soldiers to gaze upon, and afterward buried.

Basta, now, what by force, what by agreement, soon took in most of that
Country: nevertheless, for all that he had done for the assurance thereof unto
the Emperor, (being so much, as most men thought, sufficient) even in the
winding up of this year 1601, the Transilvanians understanding, that Sigismund,
with a great Army of Polonians, Turks and Tartars, was coming against the
Imperialls, most part of them took up Arms in his behalf, saying, Their first
Oath voluntarily given to him as their natural Prince, was more to be
respected, than any other afterward, by force extorted from them by a foreign
Prince; So that Basta withdrew himself; with his followers unto a strong Town,
in a corner of Transylvania: whence, with all speed, he sent to the Emperor
for greater aid. After whose departure, Sigismund entering without resistance,
was of the people in general, joyfully received, and all the honor done unto
him, that was by them possible.

In the mean time, the Bassa of Agria going out with 10000 Turks, in hope to
have surprised Toccay, in upper Hungary, was encountered by Gonzaga the
Lieutenant, there overthrown, and with great slaughter, chased to the Gates of
Agria.

The Scrivano also in Caramania, and Natolia, came now again this year, with a
greater power into the field, to meet with Mahomet Bassa, who with 50000 good
Soldiers, was ready to encounter him, a great part of whose Army, the Scrivano
cut asunder in a great fight, and becoming Master of the Field, forraged all
the adjoining Countries, almost to Aleppo, still calling the people to liberty,
and proclaiming himself the true defendor of the Mohammedan faith, and of the
liberty of those combined Countries; so that the great Turk must now send
another great Army to aid the Bassa, with whom the Scrivano joining Battle, and
overcharged with multitude, was at first put to the worst; but having repaired
his disordered Battle, he with a great slaughter, disordered also the Bassa's
Army: so contenting himself with what he had already done, he retired with his
Army, into the strength of the Mountains, to live that winter upon the spoil of
the adjoining Countries. Besides all which troubles, the Plague also this year,
soar raged, both in Constantinople, and many places of the Turkish Empire: when
also the Janissaries at Constantinople, having received some disgrace, by some
of the Sultans favorites, caused their Aga, well accompanied, to enter into
the Seraglio, to require their heads: whom Mahomet, caused for his presumption,
to be cut in pieces, in the midst of the Spahi, yet not without the great
slaughter of the Spahi themselves, slain by the Janissaries. The other
Janissaries also now ready to revenge the death of their Captain, were by Cicala
Bassa, bellowing among them a great sum of money, again appeased: which their
insolency, Mahomet imputing to their drinking of Wine, contrary to their Law,
by the persuasion of the Musti, commanded all that had any Wine in their Houses
in Constantinople, or Pera, upon pain of death, to bring it forth, and stave
it, except the English, French, and Venetian Ambassadors: so that some report,
Wine ran down the Channel in Constantinople, as if it had been water, after a
great shower.

Sigismund, now again possessed of Transylvania could not yet well assure
himself to keep it; for Basta still strengthened with new supplies from the
Emperor, was already entered into Transylvania, in 1602: the Polonians busied
in their Wars of Swethland; and the Turks with their other greater affairs,
not sending Sigismund their promised aid. Wherefore, he dealt with Basta for a
cessation of Arms, till Ambassadors might be sent to the Emperor, to entreat
for some good atonement: who so handled the matter with the Emperor, that
Sigismund was content, to the behoof of his Majesty, to resign unto Basta, all
places as he yet held in Transylvania, upon much like conditions, he had about
three years before made with him; and so in and for all, to submit to his
Majesty: whereupon, Zachel, Moses, the Princes Lieutenant, not able to endure,
or hear that the Province should again fall into the hands of the Germans, went
upon a sudden to assail Basta. But he an old and xpert Commander, perceiving
even his first moving, with great speed put his Army in order, joining Battle
with him, and with the loss of some 500 men, overthrew Moses, with his
Transilvanians, Turks, and Tartars, slaying above 3000, and putting the rest to
flight; but Sigismund hearing what his Lieutenant had done, went into the Camp
to Basta, excusing himself as done without his privity, and against his will:
offering to perform, whatever was by him to be performed, according to the
agreement: and presently calling forth his Garrisons out of all strong places,
yet by him holden, he surrendered them to Basta, and so put himself on his way
toward the Emperor: after whose departure, all that Province without more
ado, yielded to Basta, as to the Emperor's Lieutenant, who calling an
Assembly of all the Nobility, took of them an Oath for their obedience and
Loyalty to the Emperor.

But the mean while, the Valachians not able longer to endure the great
insolency of the Turks, (who after the death of Michael, had made one Jeremiah
Vayuod there) took up Arms: and proclaiming one Radoll, (the Emperors
favorite) Vayuod, chased Jeremiah quite out of the Country: who fleeing to
Simon, Palatine of Moldavia, by his and the Turks help, drove out Radoll again:
who now being with Basta with about 10000 Valachians, earnestly requested him,
to help him for the recovery of Valachia: who, considering how much it
concerned the quiet of Transylvania, to have so near a Province a Friend, gave
him a great Regiment of approved Soldiers: with whom, at his entrance into
Valachia, the Moldavian meeting with a great power of his own and Turks, there
was fought a most bloody Battle, Radoll carrying away the Victory: two Turks
Bassaes being slain, with a great number of others: after which, Radoll
recovered his Government.

Shortly after, with the same aid, cutting in pieces a great power of Tartars,
coming to aid the Moldavians.

In Hungary the mean while, passed many a hot skirmish; for the Garrisons of
Buda and other places, attempting to surprise Alba Regalis, were with great
slaughter, enforced to retire.

Then also, Count (...) suddenly setting upon 200 Turkish Wagons going to
Canisia, with Ammunition and Victuals, slew and put to flight the Convoy, and
carried away the laden Wagons. And shortly after, the free (...) of (...),
going in a great party toward Buda for booty, returning homeward with sixty
prisoners, and hearing that Ali, Governor of Pesth, was coming but with a
small retinue down the River, to Belgrade, there to meet the (...) Bassa, they
slew all the prisoners; and with two small Boats, lay in wait for him, who
coming down accordingly, they slew 14 of his 30 followers: himself also being
shot in two places, was taken, with a great booty: whom they brought to Comara,
presenting him shortly after, to Matthias at Vienna, who certainly informing
him, that Hassan Bassa, was coming with a great Army, to besiege Alba Regalis,
presently sent thither, Count Isolan the Governor, who with much ado, getting
into the City, the Turks having already taken all passages, and being a good
Engineer, caused all in the City, to labor on the Rampires; so that it was
soon so fortified, that it seemed almost impregnable. Ali was sometime the
great Turks Butler; but after the taking of Agria, made Bassa of Buda, being
after 3 months, by the envy and ambition of some displaced, and made Governor
of (...): who offered for his ransom to the Haiducks, 300000 Sultanines, and
had with him when taken, 70000 Ducats, Hassan Bassa (by the Command of Sultan
Mahomet) coming to Buda, by the way of Belgrade, with 150000 men from thence,
came and encamped before Alba Regalis, Aug. 12th, where having well entrenched
himself, and planted his Battery, he most terribly and furiously battered the
same; and because the Moorish and deep Ditches, much let his men from coming
to the assault, he had them filled up by the number of his Pioniers, and so
assaulted the Counterscarfe, which Isolan had made before the City: which
assault, though it cost him much blood, yet the great number of the Turks
prevailing; the Christians were forced to retire into the City; but they soon
sallying out, slew most of (...) Turks in the Counterscarfe, and forced the
other out again: whereupon, multitudes of Turks came running thither, and
without regard of their lives, desperately still pressing on, fell twice as
many as before: so that the Christians weary, and overwhelmed with their shot,
not without great loss, abandoned the place: with which skirmishes, and diverse
others, he Defendants were greatly diminished, to keep a weak City (as yet
showing the ruins of the late siege) against so puissant an Enemy: yet valiant
Isolan the Italian, not discouraged, wrote to Matthias, how things stood in the
City, requesting speedy relief, or else it would be endangered: many Soldiers
being already slain, and diverse Hungarians daily fleeing to the Turks; howbeit,
promising to do his utmost. Whereupon, the Archduke, ordered Lord Russworm, to
go to Comara, and with such forces as were come thither, to go and try, if by
any means they might put into Alba Regalis, some fresh Soldiers: who
accordingly, took the Field without delay, with 12000 men; but whilst by
discord betwixt him and the other Colonels, about the manner of relieving it,
the matter was too long delayed, the Bassa Aug. 28. continued a general assault
all that day, and next night, with some part of the day following, without
ceasing: so that the Defendants much weakened, and they that were left, so
wearied or wounded, as that they could make no longer resistance, and the Count
himself being carried away, dangerously shot in the thigh, there was a sign of
parley given to the Enemy, which being granted, some of the chief Commanders
going to the Governor, put him in mind of the weakness of the place, the
Enemies force, and want of Defendants, persuading him (they not being relieved)
by diverse reasons, to yield the City: wherewith he moved, came to a parley with
the Bassa, who was right glad thereof: wherein it was soon agreed, that the
COUNT should yield up the Town to the Bassa, with all Warlike Ammunition
therein: himself, with his Garrison, with Bag, Baggage, and Arms, safely to be
convoyed half way to Rab.

Upon the first bruit of this composition, whilst the Merchants were seeking
for Wagons, to carry their Merchandise, and the Soldiers for Horses, to carry
their Baggage: the scarceness thereof, bred a confusion and stir among the
people; so whilst some were quarrelling about these things, and others were
opening the Gates to be gone; others were as busy in robbing and pilfering the
Baggages of their Captains and Companions: which encouraged the rest of the
Soldiers to fall to pillage all also: which the Soldiers keeping the
breaches, seeing, left their charge, and thrust themselves in among these
pilferers, as if they themselves had been Victors, and not vanquished.

The Tartars at the foot of the breach, pressing now on, without any great
resistance, entered the same, and in a trice, thirty thousand of them surprised
the Christians at once, loaded with prey, fear, and despair: after whom, the
Turks entered also to partake of the spoil: who besides their own booty,
quarrelled with the Tartars for some part of theirs; but when there was no more
pillage to be had, the perfidious wretches fell to massacring the Christians,
so that all the City flowed with blood, till, by the coming in of the Bassa,
the slaughter was stayed: whereby Count Isolan, with some other Captains and
Soldiers were saved: three thousand Soldiers were slain; besides, not a few
Citizens: Isalan and the other Captains being led prisoners to Constantinople.
Howbeir, he plainly showed, they were unjustly detained, as taken contrary to
the public Faith, to them before given, and out of the actions of War.
Whereto it was answered, that the Town, when he was taken, was yet still in his
power: that if he would by yielding, challenge his liberty, according to the
Articles, he ought then to have delivered it, and not suffered it to have been
taken by force, and c. that every Town which (during the Treaty) is (...) force
taken, follows the course of the latter condition, (to wit) Death or
Captivity, and not of the former, to wit, Liberty; for a man is not to expect
of his mortal Enemy any other courtesy, than what necessity caused him to
promise, which he may for his own good again violate, and c. With such quirks,
the Count deluded, say what he could, was carried away prisoner. So the Bassa
causing the breaches to be repaired, and the City to be well furnished, and
leaving therein 6000 Soldiers, overran all the Country, as far as
Strigonium, and so retired to Buda: where, as he was making a Bridge, betwixt
Buda and Pesth, and about to have gone to the Siege of Strigonium, a Command
came, that he should speedily return to Constantinople, for that Mahomet was
for his valor, now minded to employ him in his Wars, against his Rebels in
Natolia. Whereupon, the Bassa gave leave to all that had any charge, to return
to their places of Government, appointing some others, with 30000 Soldiers, to
go with Zachiel Moises into (...): who was come (...) Hassan, offering with
this aid, and the help of others in Transylvania, to chase (...) with his
Germans out from thence, and reduce it again unto the devotion of the Othoman
Emperors.

So the Bassa hasted with the rest, toward Constantinople, which he was
thought the more willingly to do, because the Sultan had put him in good hope
to marry one of his Aunts, a Woman of great Wealth and Honor, if by the
winning of Alba Regalis, he should make himself worthy thereof.

But ere long, the Imperials assembled at Comara, to the number of about 30000,
with twelve Nassadies, and two Galleys, some by water, some by Land, went down
to Strigonium, where they were all embarked in twenty other Ships, and
conducted by Rusworme and others, to Buda: whose coming was so sudden and
unlooked for, that the Turks had no time to take any more help or provision
into the City.

The Turks had lately built a Bridge upon Boats over (...), for passage and
carriage of things from Buda to Pesth: which Bridge, the Imperials thinking
necessary, first to break, the more easily to besiege the one or other City, by
a strange device, built a Ship, which by force of the stream, carried down, and
resting upon the Bridge, should break the same: which Ship, the Turks seeing
coming, with the rest of the (...), ran by heaps to the Bridge, for defense
thereof: in the mean time, Count Sultze on the Land side, with a Petard, blew
up one of the Gates of the lower City, and so entering, and killing whom he
lighted on, came upon the backs of the Turks at the Bridge, slaying some,
driving others into the River, the rest fleeing into the City, where both
Soldiers and Citizens, (the Christians following them) for fear, took a speedy
resuge into the upper City, much stronger than the lower: the Bridge being then
also broken upon the River; and because they of Pesth, might with their
Ordnance, much annoy them in besieging the upper City and Castle of Buda, they
began with it first: So Russworme with his Fleet, making a great show, as if he
would have entered on the Rivers side, had drawn most of the Garrison unto that
side of the City; and the while, Sultze, and another Governor, suddenly scaled
the Walls on the Land side, and gained them: whereupon, began a great outcry,
the Turks especially, now feeling the Christians Weapons, before they knew they
were gotten into the City.

In this so great amazement, some fled into Towers, others hid themselves in
Cellars, and the most secret corners, out of which they were drawn and slain.

They also in the strong places of the City, seeing the Ordnance bent upon
them, offered to yield, so they might with Wives, Children, and life depart,
promising for that favor, to persuade them of Buda, to yield also. Whereupon,
Nadasti, with some other Captains, were (...) with some of these Citizens, to
Buda: who coming thither with Wives and Children, most earnestly requested them
to yield, as not to expect any further help; and that by their obstinacy, they
should cause the death of them, their friends, Wives, and Children: unto whom
also, Nadasti promised, that they should all, except a few Commanders, in
safety depart: howbeit, they would not hearken.

In Pesth, the Christians found great store of Wealth, with one thousand
serviceable Horses, and much Warlike provision. This done, they returned to
besiege the upper City and Castle of Buda, undermining and battering the same;
and had planted some of their Ordnance so high, that they could, at pleasure,
shoot into the streets: they thundered also at the same time, with other
batteries, in diverse places of the Walls, both of Castle and City; and hearing,
that the Turks Garrisons were coming for their relief, they sent out their
Horse, and some Foot, against them: who gave them a great overthrow, and so
returned unto the siege: where, while the Christians lay in hope, and had
October. 12th, planted certain notable Pieces near the Walls, purposing next day
with all their power, to assault the City, Hassan hearing (as he was going
toward Constantinople) of what had happened, returned, and unlooked for, came and
sat down before Pesth, with but about five and twenty thousand men, yet most
of them expert Soldiers: diverse brave attempts being in both places made, both
on the one side and the other.

The besieged in Pesth, one day, under the Conduct of their brave Captains,
sallied out, and coming with the Turks to the Sword, disordered, and forced
them to flee, pursuing them even to their Trenches, whence a great Squadron
issuing out, constrained the Imperials to retire.

Count Martinengo, doing what he might, to have stayed the disordered (...),
being with many others slain: wherewith the rest discouraged, made toward the
City. Whereupon, the Garrison sent out some Companies to relieve them, whereby
the Turks were even to their Trenches, again repulsed.

Shortly after, RUSSWORM having with continual battery, made a considerable
breach in the CASTLE, with certain Foot-Companies, courageously assailed it:
where the TURKS having in best sort they could, repaired it, and on both sides
thereof, placed Murthering-Pieces, with store of Fireworks, so overwhelmed the
first assailants with that deadly fire, and so rent them with their murdering
shot, that they were forthwith cut off; yet they who were to second them,
nothing discouraged, but seeking desperately to have entered, were in like sort
welcomed: So that now one thousand of them being lost, they caused a retreat to
be sounded.

But Hassan had not long layen before (...), but great wants (through his so
sudden return) began to arise in his Camp, the Soldiers being glad to eat
their dead Horses, a pound scarcely to be gotten for two Hungarian Ducats, and
a bushel of Oats for five: which wants increasing, and many Soldiers stealing
away, he had much ado to persuade them to stay eight days longer: which
expired, and nothing effectually done, he fearing some sudden mischief to be
done by the hungry and discontented Soldiers, November the second, in the
night rose with his Army, in haste retiring toward Belgrade, leaving behind
him 300 dead Horses: after whose departure, Nadasti and some other Commanders,
presently went down to Adona (a fair Town, upon the bank of Danubius, about
four Hungarian miles from Buda, and serving as it were a Storehouse for that
Garrison) with five thousand men, and certain Ordnance: which Town, Nadasti (by
his Hussars sent before) summoning, they at first, refused to yield; but being
with the sight of a far greater power discouraged, they yielded the Town upon
safe departure, with bag and baggage, being conducted as far as Feldwar:
which Castle, was also at first summons, by the persuasion of them of Adom,
delivered unto them: which done, the free Haiducks the same night, surprised
Pax Castle: whence, the Christians marching on, took in also the City of (...).

In the mean time, they in the Camp at Buda, were advertized, that the Bassa of
(...), with others, had assembled thirty thousand men to raise the siege:
Wherefore the Christians, leaving their Tents in their Trenches, gathered
together in the water-Town: whereupon, the Turks presently sallying out, took
both the Trenches and Tents, with no small slaughter of their keepers; so
holding them for two hours space, till they were by strong hand beaten out,
and forced to retire, with some loss. Nadasti also making a Road toward Alba
Regalis, in their return, within a mile of Buda, lighted upon a thousand Turks,
slaying most of them, taking one hundred and sixty, with a number of Horses,
and much rich booty.

They also at the siege, having by fury of the Cannon, beaten down a strong
Tower next to Danubius, were a little before night about to have entered; but
such a Tempest of wind and rain, suddenly arose, that they were enforced for
that time to give over the assault: which storm ended, two hundred Turks to
keep the Christians otherwise busied, sallyed out, charging upon the Stirian
Horsemen, who presently relieved by the men at Arms, made them speedily retire
with the loss of one hundred and sixty men; but taking heart again, next day
November. 11th, they sallied out again: where, though a great number were slain;
yet came they forth the third day also, and were by Count Thurn, with great
loss, beat back into the City; but in the pursuit, they were by some
Janissaries (laying close) dangerously ganled; the Count being hurt in his left
Arm, and some Captains slain: the Turks by these sallies, though worsted, yet
gained time somewhat well to repair their breaches.

Shortly after, the Imperials certainly informed, that a multitude of Tartars
were coming as far as Temeswar, to relieve Buda, thought best (chiefly winter
being come) betimes to raise their siege, and be gone: which they did November.
16th, yet they furnished Pesth with all necessaries, and almost 10000
Soldiers. As for Adom, it had a Garrison of Hungarians, with their wages
offered to be paid before hand: which they refused, alleging that for the
great danger of this place, above others, they could not safely take their Oath
to defend it: yet offering to do what beseemed valiant Soldiers, that all
should see, no ill should happen thereunto, through their default.

The Imperials departed, the Turks forthwith came down into the lower City, by
often thundering with their Ordnance, and other signs of triumph, declaring
their joy; but whilst in their jollity, they shot to them of Pesth, they from
them, so received the like, that the Turks requested them, to spare their Shot
and Powder, and quietly to live by them, till next Spring; yet for all this
their joy at Buda, Victuals was become so scarce, that they feared, if the
Christians had layen longer at the siege, they should have been forced for very
want to yield the City: whose friends, with a great Convoy, bringing what
provision they could, for their relief: they of Comara and Strigonium, meeting
with the Turks betwixt Alba Regalis, and Buda, overthrew the Convoy, and
carried away all the Victuals.

But nothing troubled Mahomet, like the Wars he had in Asia against the
Rebel, the Scrivano: who, encouraged with the last years success, and still
growing stronger and stronger, through the allurements of liberty, hope of
prey, or good entertainment, had this year overrun much of the Turk's
Dominions in Asia, putting all to fire and sword, and ransacking diverse walled
and fenced Cities, as he went; for the Janissaries of Aleppo and Damasco, with
many of their partakers, who might much have hindered his proceedings, were
together by the ears among themselves; but the Scrivano, in the midst of these
desired fortunes, fell sick and died: howbeit, the rebellion soon grew to be
far greater, and more dangerous than before; for a younger Brother of his,
stepped up in his place, fiercely prosecuting the undertaken Wars: against
whom, Hassan Bassa, being sent with a great Army, and joining battle with him,
was by him in a great and bloody fight overthrown and slain, with his whole
Army, except such as by speedy flight escaped.

So the Sultan was forced to call Mahomet Bassa out of Hungary, to serve
against this new Rebel: who the mean while, made havoc of all as he went,
receiving the tribute of those Countries, and others also further off, having
exacted only of Ancyra, and the Country thereabouts, 300000 Ducats; so
heaping up great Treasures of his Enemies, for maintenance of his Wars. Yet
before Mahomet had called the Bassa out of Hungary, he had provided that the
Tartar Han with a great power, should even against that time, come into that
Country: which rough and needy people, for pay or prey, always ready to serve
the Othoman Emperors, by plain force, brake through Valachia, though not
without great loss, (being fought with by the Valachians, and free Haiducks a
whole day) and came into Hungary in the latter end of December: the Han with
forty thousand to Quinque Ecclesia; and his two Sons, with twenty thousand
into Possega, where they spoiled both Turks and Christians, pretending all that
frontier Country to be given to them by the Sultan, in reward of their
service. But ere long, they forced the Christians thereabouts, to victual
Canisia for the Turks; and so breaking into Stiria, not far from Caramant, they
carried away above two thousand Captives; then surprising Keschemet, they slew
most of the Inhabitants of that great Town, carrying away the rest prisoners.
Others of them also, inroading to Sharvar, and burning down twenty Villages,
carried away thence about 1000 into captivity.

At their first coming, they also relieved them of Buda, Nadasti with his
Hussars, not being able now, longer to keep them from Victuals: by them also,
the Turks encouraged, took and burnt certain places of the Christians nigh
Buda, slaying all they found therein.

Against these Tartars, for all this, the Christians, beside their ordinary
Garrisons, began in Winter to oppose some of their other forces: the Palatine
of (...), sending ten Troops of Horse, for defense of Stiria; and Collonitz
raising 400 Horse, 1000 Hussars, and 3000 free Haiducks, for repressing of
them: the Duke of Brunswick also, sending 1000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, for the
same service.

January with a sharp Frost, began the next year 1603, whereby the (...) in
many places, seemed rather wholly turned into ice, than frozen: Danubius also,
(for all his swift course) being so hard frozen, that men and carts might
safely pass thereupon: which so cold a season did rather increase the hot
desires of the greedy Turks. Wherefore, out of their Garrisons, they raised
18000 men, to have forraged and overrun the Christians with their Territories,
confining upon them: Quermanie, and places thereabouts, being assigned, first
to feel their force: whereupon, Collonitz with all speed, put into the Suburbs
of Quermanie, one thousand Reisters, and two thousand Lansquenets; and in the
Boroughs, added to the Regiment of Count Reingrave, six Companies of Cossacks,
4000 Haiducks, 400 Carabins, French and Walloons, 200 Horse of his own
Regiment, himself commanding over all these Troops; and withal, (...) all the
Inhabitants thereabouts, to take up Arms, and with strong Barricadoes, to
strengthen the ways, and stop up the passages into their Country: which they
cheerfully performed, with Weapons in one (...), and Spades and Shovels in the
other: wherefore, the Turks changed their former design for the invading of
Quermany, (where the Christians had for five weeks expected them) marching
along by Roquesbourg, with purpose to load themselves with spoil of the
Country; but Collonitz, collecting his forces, frustrated their new design, by
favor of the River, which strengthened him against their incursions, and was
well to be defended; so, that the Turks, whose intent was not to fight, again
retired, contenting themselves to gather a Convoy of Victuals to put into
Canisia: which then extremely wanted: so they came to Babotz, thence to march
to Canisia; of which their purpose, Collonitz, by his espials advertised, upon
a brave resolution, on March 24, with his Troops, marched toward little
Comara, about two Leagues from Canisia, and lay close in Ambush in the Woods
near two Marshes, over which the Turks had made two Bridges to pass the
Artillery and Wagons upon, who were nigh 20000 strong, and Collonitz but two
thousand-two hundred Horse, and six thousand Foot. But, 40 of the 200 surprised
Wagons, going to Buda with Victuals, being by them of Strigonium and Comara,
sent to Pesth: the Turks of Buda) hearing of that medley, and knowing it was
for their bread, posted to succor their Troops, and arrived at the very time
that the Victors led along, by Danubius, the Wagons before gained, furiously
charging them: so, that the Christians daunted with the unexpected peril (the
Turks being 1500 (...) in number than they) without more ado quite (...) the
Wagons, accounting themselves happy enough, if they might but save themselves:
and the Turks contented to have recovered their Victuals, pursued them not, but
returned home along the Bank of the River; but two thousand of the Garrison of
Pesth, seizing on a Forest, whereby the Turks must pass at unawares, hardly
charged them afront and behind: so that the Turks enclosed, without any great
resistance, fled, leaving their Wagons, and casting away their Arms, a number
being left dead on the place, some taken prisoners, and the rest chased even to
the gates of their City.

So, the Victors of Pesth returning (...), by their Ordnance gave many
Testimonies of their Victory:

But see again the change of Fortune; (...) was then also (as it is often)
(...) hard frozen, that men and Carts might safely pass it: in which so hard
season, the Turks in Buda, having once upon the frozen River (...) the
Christians in Pesth, and Jan. 22. in like bravery coming out the second time,
were by them of Pesth put to flight, and by 200 of the most forward and valiant
hardly pursued; upon whom, not only they which fled, but other Turks out of
Buda in great number returning, chased them back again even to the Bridge of
Pesth: which now drawn up for fear of so many Turks, as were ready to have
entered at the heels of the fleeing Soldiers, they were even in fight of their
friends every man slain, the Turks with little harm returning. Few days after,
one Lethner a Captain in Pesth more grieved than the rest with this loss, some
being his Friends and Companions also, hearing that some of the chief Turks of
Buda, and a great train of Gentlewomen, were, for their pleasure, next day to
go to the hot Baths near Buda, with 60 Musketeers, by night passed over the
River, and not far from the Baths, lay in close Ambush; so these Turks casting
no peril, came accordingly, merrily bathing and solaceing themselves; but, in
the midst of their delights, these resolute men came suddenly upon them,
slaying all the men, sparing none but one Boy and the Gentlewomen, who, in the
time of conflict, ran naked as they were, into the City: which exploit done,
the Captain returned laden with rich booty, and merrily sporting at the naked
Gentlewomen, at whose fearful cry, they of Buda sent out certain Soldiers
after them, but they were safely before got home.

By continuance of this frost, Victuals could not be sent down the River to
Pesth, so that the Soldiers there accounted Dogs and Cats good meat: the Turks
still roaming about to (...) them from Victuals. Of which necessities, they of
Buda were partakers also, yet every (...) in field to seek relief: and that
they might deceive those of Pesth, and assure themselves of Victuals, they gave
out, and made show as if they would besiege the Fort of Adom: under which
color, they received into Buda 50 Wagons laden with Victuals and Munition;
and, encouraged herewith, they gave knowledge thereof to their Neighbors of
Pesth by 1000 great shot sent over the River unto them; yet for the dispense of
their powder and shot, they gained not so much as the life of one Soldier, nor
one stone out of their Walls. Shortly after, the Budans thought suddenly to
have surprised Palotta (a small Castle) by night, but being timely discovered,
they were forced to retire with the loss of 120 men: to whom Horwad Capt. of
the Castle (by a Peasant sworn to do the errand) sent a small pot of Salt, and
a bottle of Wine, willing them to season the Venison they took in the late
Hunting, and quenching their thirst, to cheer them up after their late Conquest.

These Enemies more provoked by this jest, discharged a shower of thundering
great shot, (...) small bullets upon the Garrison of Pesth; but their Cannons
being ill levelled, overshot the Town, carrying more fear than hurt; yea, and
while they were thus thundering, fire, by negligence of the Cannoniers fell
into a barrel of their powder, which taking hold of another, and running along,
(...) if it had been by a train, overthrew a long piece of the Wall of Buda, by
whose fall, many Soldiers near it were overwhelmed. The noise and force was so
terrible, that (the Turks being retired from this Breach) the Governor of
Pesth resolved to assault the place: Whereupon, with 1000 Almaines, and 300
Hungarians, he forthwith (in hope) marched toward the Breach: but by the way,
they met with a Company of Turks, who gave an alarm to those of the upper-Town,
who manned their walls, and with great speed repaired the Breach. Now those
Turks whom (...) met withal, were all slain, except some few, whom (...)
carried prisoners to Pesth, to be by them instructed of the (...) affairs.

About (...) time, Radol Vayuod of Valachia, hearing that the Turks in Garrison
at Silistria, were gone abroad to seek for Booty and Victnals, passed forthwith
over the River upon the Ice to surprise the Town, whose men for desire of
Riches, and for fear of the Soldiers return, so (...) the Town; that the
Turks, dismayed, and deeming the Christians (through the (...) of the
enterprise) to be more than they were: after a small resistance, left a way
open for them, who thrusting into the Town, took the (...) spoil thereof, great
and rich, and so set it on fire, returning before the Turks could gather
together to hinder their retreat. The Vayuod sent to Basta (then in
Transylvania against the Turks) 13 Turkish Ensigns for his part of the Booty.

But Collonitz, having laid 3 days in Ambush without discovery of any Enemy;
March 6, 3 espials fell into his (...), whom the Turks had sent forth before,
who would not discover any thing, hurtful to their friends; so that at last
the (...), moved, commanded one of their Heads to be struck off to terrify the
other 2: who, dismayed with this Spectacle, and well beaten to tell the Truth,
confessed (...) were Spies sent by the Enemy to view the Country, and see if
the Christians had any Forces there: which if not, and they reporting it, then
within 2 days after, the Convoy was to pass that way, to be put into Canisia,
setting forth from Babotz 2 hours before day: and that which more confirmed the
matter, was, that within 2 hours after their taking, the Haiducks which lay
hidden without the chief Ambuscado, discovered a Cornet with 5 Turks Ensigns,
marching from Canisia to meet (...) Convoy: Whereupon, they acquainted
Collonitz therewith; who put his Horsemen in good Order to enclose the Turks
betwixt the Marsh and Wood: who holding on their way, the Christian Carabines,
charged them in the head of their Companies, disordering them: the Hungarians
sell upon their flanks, which they opened, and the Horsemen on their backs. The
small resistance these poor enclosed men made, deserved not the name of a
fight, being of 600, not 4 left, but they were all slain, without killing one
of their Enemies. Their Horsemen who followed them, seeing them surprised,
shamefully fled, but the Carabins with their Horses pursuing amain after them,
slew a number of them that were worst mounted, pursuing the rest even to the
gates of Canisia. Those of the Town discharging their Ordnance, and many
Vollies of small shot against the Christians, both to stay their pursuit, and
to give warning to those who were bringing the relief to the Christians that
were in the field.

But during this fight, three very well mounted Turks, adventured to pass by
the Christian Troops, and to give those which were bringing the Convoy, warning
of the overthrow, and to return to Babotz: which brave attempt Fortune
favoring, the Turks (on the way) upon this advertisement retired accordingly:
Whereupon, the Christians made toward Babotz almost sixteen miles off, with a
resolution to carry the place, using such diligence in their march, that about
nine at night they there arrived: and, to daunt their Enemies what they might,
they presently sounded their Trumpets, struck up Drumms, removed their
Artillery, rusled with their Arms, and kept a stir themselves, to make the
noise of a great Army; but the Turks twice so many in number, and within a
strong place, prepared for fight, if they should assail them: who, often
repeating the name of Jesus, advanced and made ready for fight.

The Turks from the Castle, delivered 1000 Cannonshot upon the Christian
Troops: their Mu^qu^ts still playing from the Curtain of their Walls, yet the
resolute Footmen, passing athwart these flaming showers, marched along the
Counterscarp of the Ditch toward the gate, to have broken it open.

The Turks the same time were come forth of the Town, but at the very instant
that they charged the front of the Christian Foot, they were so encountered,
that having lost some men, they were glad again to retire into the Town: whom
the Christians, upon the Town-ditch so plied with small shot upon their Walls,
and in their Holds, as that they durst not show themselves or look out: and if
the Christians had had Instruments to have opened the Gates or Walls, the Town
had (...) been won; but, at last, they having bin 4 hours in fight before it,
doing and receiving harm, and finding no means to enter, were forced to leave
it, burning in their retreat certain Villages of the Enemies: which done, they
retired to little Comara; for the (...) began now on every side, by heaps to
flock together to swallow them up, and even pressed upon their retreat, But
Collonitz being with his Soldiers safely entered into Comara, caused the Heads
of the principal slain Enemies, to be set upon the pikes of the Pallisadoes,
and on a great Pine tree before the gate, whose Branches were first lopt: an
action learned from the cruelty of the Turks. This done, they departed from
this Castle, as (...) spent with Famine than travel and weariness: for in that
short expected design, they had taken no provision of Victuals with them: their
Horses also languished, the Country being alike cruel to both. The Soldiers
had for 3 days eaten nothing but Crabs and Acorns which they found in the
Woods: so that being come to this Castle, they (...) abundance of Victuals,
every one requesting to return unto their Garrisons, being scarce able to bear
their Arms; but (...) from little Comara, they heard, the Turks had shut up the
ways whereby they were to pass home: (...) Collonitz, was so far from being
(...), that, whereas it was reported, that the Turks marched near to a (...) of
the Christians, to make head upon a (...), he (...) toward the same place on
the sudden to encounter the Enemy, who thought to have surprised him by
cowardice: and the Soldiers though weakened with hunger, and apprehending the
danger, gave out, and yet upon a good courage were content to follow their
General any whither, resting on his great resolution, and their own (...) to
go further; but they being come to the Castle, there was no body to be seen:
yet did those hungry men stay one day in Ambush, expecting the coming of the
Turks, who appeared not, giving them time safely to retire every man unto his
own Garrison.

But, at such time as Hassan Bassa departed from Constantinople, to go to the
Conquest of Alba-regalis, Mahomet caused to be presented unto him a Sword and a
Crown; this in reward of his valor, if he returned with Victory, the other in
revenge of his cowardice, if he failed thereof: promising him indeed his Sister
in marriage, among other Trophies of his Victory, and threatening him with death
amongst the griefs of his dishonor; but, he taking the City and returning to
Constantinople, was magnificently received of his Prince, courteously saluted
of all the Nobility, and with the greatest reverence honored of the people.
His Lord had also caused them to be most (...) (...) for the solemnizing of the
marriage, and contentment of the Bassa; but, the solemnization it self, being
now every day by all men expected, 25000 Janissaries, Spahi, and other
Court-Souldiers, suddenly and unexpectedly presented themselves in Arms before
the Divano, or Tribunal, holden for the chief administration of Justice in the
Turks Palace the first 4 days of every week: and, setting Guards at the
Court-gates, demanded audience; for certain Spahi, and Janissaries, whom they
had chosen to deliver, in their names, their grievances to the Bassaes: being
entered into the Divano, at the first, demanded to have Hassan Bassa delivered
unto them: who afraid of his Head, passed wan and pale through this mutinous
multitude, to go to the Sultan, protesting his own Innocence, and calling on
his Prophet, to discover unto them the truth of all things; but they, after a
1000 injuries and reproaches heaped on him, demanded of him: Whence it was,
that whilst he with a great power was busied in Hungary, there was ( the while)
no good order taken for repressing the Rebels in Asia; who ( by sufferance)
now were come within three or four days journey of Constantinople, with
Ensigns displayed: Whereto, he in fear answered, Even his Enemies could
witness, that he had done his duty, while in Asia, and now of late in Hungary;
But, seeing himself ready to die, he yet requested, That his guiltless death,
might be profitable to the State in general: and, in discharging of his
conscience to declare unto them the causes of this contempt, and neglect, for
the suppressing of this Asian (...); saying, It proceeded only from the ill
Government of the Sultans Mother, and from the carelessness of the CapiAga.
They hearing him (though with much (...)) so well to excuse himself, gave him
leave to go to (...) Sultan, to request him that they might speak with him, and
to deal with him, that they might have the heads of those, who had bin the
cause of this dishonorable service, or had cowardly behaved themselves in
Asia; threatening him, if he performed not his charge he should feel the heavy
effects of their just fury, and heavy charge; but he must now so do, or else
die.

So, he coming to the Sultan almost as fearful as himself, he, partly cut of
Justice, partly from Prudence, in such an extraordinary case, persuaded him to
give way to their request: who thus persuaded, as also to appear in his (...),
unto his discontented Subjects, One part of their desire (necessity so
requiring) presented himself in his Imperial Seat unto them, accompanied with
the Mufci, and a few other Doctors of their Law; who, by Mahomct commanded to
sit down, and the Bassaes standing up: the chief of the seditious stepping
forth, (...) leave to speak for himself and the rest; which granted, he boldly
said, That they, his obedient slaves, full of grief and discontent, to see a
great part of his Empire endangered, desired to know of him, Why his Greatness
did not employ the means God had given him, for remedy thereof? That they
supposed the Rebels courses in Asia, were unknown unto him, since they were so
hardy as to come without resistance, so near to his Imperial City: That they
desired to know if he had known all this: and, whether he would take upon
himself the care of his great Monarchy, or no? which through the negligence and
ill Government of some put in trust, was like a great and well proportioned
Body, but of little or no strength: Or else, that he could be content that all
should be dismembered, and every man take what he could lay hand of, as the
Rebels did.

However, Mahomet was moved with so insolent a Speech; yet being (...) with
such a furious and armed multitude, whom he had no means to withstand, (...)
wisely dissembled his choler, and with the best and calmest words he could
devise, sought to appease them, imputing the disorder and ill success of his
affairs to the unfaithfulness of his Ministers, and the concealing of the
Truth thereof from him; and saying, That he had resolved before, to reform
these matters, and to take from them all occasion of discontent, or of any
Speech not beseeming them, whose Obedience and loyal respect to him their
Sovereign, should have been an example to all the rest of his Subjects.
Hereupon, they fiercely demanded of Hassan: Why, he gave not his Majesty an
account of the Rebels proceeding in Asia? Who answered, He had never failed of
his Duty therein, but that the Capi-Aga always said, It was not needful to
trouble their Sovereign therewith, having committed these matters to others,
etc. And further, That the cause of all these Disorders proceeded from his
Mother, the Capi-Aga and a few others, to whom he had commended the managing of
those affairs. The mutiniers now more moved, furiously said, They were
assembled to demand the Heads of such offenders: being resolved to take
another course, if he should refuse to grant it them, meaning to make a new
Emperor. Howbeit, Mahomet answered, It was no reason, neither would he for
their humors put those whom they demanded, innocently to death; but willed
them to be contented, till they might by order of justice be tried: and then he
would give them even his own Son, if he were found culpable. But they replied,
He had not executed his Brethren by justice, but for preservation of the State;
and that those whom they demanded were so guilty that they deserved not an
orderly trial, etc. As for the Empress, his mother they were content she
should be confined farther off, and no more to meddle with State-matters.

So Mahomet (through the violent resolution of these most insolent men) caused
the Capi-Aga, and such others as they required, to be brought forth: Who
presented themselves as already half-dead, whom Mahomet did what he might to
have saved; but, the mutiniers clamor to have them dispatched, could not be
appeased, till they saw their Heads struck off from their shoulders. Mahomet
inwardly grieved, commanded the Executioner to serve some other of the chief
Bassaes (whom he knew to be much beloved of the Janissaries, and whom he could
willingly have bin rid off) as he had the Capi-Aga and the rest; but then their
murmuring and mutiny was as it were re-doubled, so that Mahomet was for fear
forced by giving way to appease them: The old Empress for all that was not then
confined.

Mahomet himself but a few days before had beheaded Capion, one of his great
Bassaes, either for desire of his wealth, or for envy of his Honor and Valor,
yet the former seemed to many the more probable; for, immediately after his
death, he seized upon all his Riches, except 400000 Ducats, which Calil Bassa
his Father detained for himself: which his purloyning, Mahomet having
discovered, demanded of him one day, if it were true, that he had retained
those Ducats: which Fact, Calil through fear and covetousness denied and
forswore: Whereupon, thinking by lying to have saved his life, he was for the
truth put to death, having his Head forthwith struck off; the greedy Tyrant
(for the Bassaes blood served but for a show) seizing, rifling, and carrying
away all his wealth, and changing the Dowry and succession of his Wife and
Children, into Bonds, Prisons, and Slaveries.

Mahomet another Bassa, perceiving the like danger to hang over his own Head,
resolved to flee to the Rebels in Asia: but this his purpose discovered by
certain Spics, and he with a chief follower of Capin Bassa taken by the
Janissaries, were both by them cut in pieces. In the mean time, the Rebels in
Asia prosecuted their Rebellion with all diligence, every man joining unto the
first Forces, which were in good estate and rich with the spoils that they had
taken. They, resolutely besieging Angore, a great and strong Town, the Citizens
afraid, offered them a great sum to redeem themselves and City; and, so at
last upon the payment of 200000 Ducats, they presently departed. Shortly
after, Mahomet's new Captains (whom he had put in place of them whom he
executed for the appeafing of the Court-souldiers) arrived there also, who
would needs make it Treason, and put the Citizens to death for giving the
Rebels the said money (though 'twere done for preservation of their lives) and
sack their City; Whereupon, arose a great and cruel fight betwixt these
Soldiers and Citizens, both the Subjects of one Prince, and all of one
Superstition; but the one side armed with pride and (...), and the other with
necessity and despair. At last, the Citizens having slain a great number of the
Soldiers, chased the rest out of the City; which ill encounter of these new
Captains, increased the Rebels courage; So that 40000 under one of the Tartar
Han his Brethren, besieged Burze, a great and rich City; the Armory, and Place
where all the Customs and Taxes of (...) were kept: which, after certain days
siege, and great resistance made; they by force took, (...) the Inhabitants,
and sacked the City. By which exploit, their (...) and reputation increasing
with their booty and courage, Mahomet, dismayed, resolved by fair means to
appease them: for this good Fortune had drawn the Government of Babylon on
their side; also, the great Shaugh or Sophy of Persia, thrusting himself into
these (...), had now taken Corbery, a strong Town upon the Turks borders, and
was preparing for new Conquests: So, Mahomet (at length) but not without his
great dishonor, came to some good agreement with his (...) Subjects, granting
unto them all their demands disarming them by yielding, and not by Valor: and
giving unto Zellaly one of their Chieftains, the Bassaship of Bosna, to content
his ambition, and to bind him thereby to his service.

Mahomets other men of War, seeing this dishonorable (...), and preferment of
the Rebels, instead of punishments, which they should have justly endured,
began to (...) into great murmuring and discontent against their great Sultan;
(such Honors of Right belonging to his most faithful and loyal servants):
yea, they resolved to thrust him out of his Imperial State, and set up his
eldest son Mahomet in his (...).

These are the ordinary effects of injustice and cowardice, the overthrow of
Princes. These Mutineers joined to (...) discontents, Mahomets Sloth,
Effeminateness, and insufficiency, and cowardice. They drew also into this
plot, the Sultanness, Mahomets chief Wife, who blinded with Ambition, cast both
her self and son the young Prince into most desperate danger.

This important project resolved on, (...) of these men (according to the
Turkish manner) (...) with an Astrologer touching the success of the Prince,
who, erecting a Figure of his Nativity; consulting with his Spirits, and
considering the (...) Bodies, gave judgment for his good and (...); and so
dispatched an Eunuch toward the Sultarness with Letters, that she should be of
good courage; and, in (...) hope, (...) her Son within few days should have
the (...) (...) set on his Head, and the (...) Scepter (...) into his (...):
His Art (he said) (...) the same and Spirits, with whom he had conference,
(...) him thereof; but, it chanced that these Letters were intercepted and
(...) to Mahomet: Whereupon it happened, that he which took upon him to
foretell a long life, and Empire to fall to another man, (...) (...) (...) the
(...) of his own life, being himself by the Sultans command, with the young
Prince, the Eunuch, and 50 others of the (...) and consenters thereunto,
strangled, and the Sultanness drowned; yet some report, this Prince was
strangled upon suspicion, of conspiring with the (...) Rebels against his
Father, which after his death being (...) not to be so, the Bassa who caused
the suspicion was (...).

Tartar Han, coming with a great Army (...) Hungary, demanded of the King of
Polonia, Tribute and passage through his Country; but the King denied both, and
roughly answered his threats. Wherefore, the (...) Tartar (for fear of being
(...)) in his passage by the Polonians (as the Tartars had often been) turned
with his Army toward Valachia; Whereupon, Radoll hearing, that, besides the
(...) of his Country, they purposed to set up another Vayuod in his stead,
marched to his Borders with the greatest power he could make, to attend their
coming, and (...) them from entering: and, taking all the advantages of the
Strait-passages, in the 2 first encounters, notably repulsed the fierce Enemy
with this little Army, slaying about 3000 of them: but their Avant-guard still
coming on, they at the third encounter, so long maintained the fight, that
after a cruel fight, the strong Enemy prevailed, and entering Valachia, brought
in with it, Ruin, Death and Destruction; and, being come to Qninque Ecclesiae
in Hungary, to join with Hassan Bassa (now after his marriarge) returned with a
great Army thither; he mustering the Tartars, found them to be 40000 strong:
who, instead of assaulting any strong Walls, fell upon Cottages, ransacking and
pillaging the Inhabitants, both in the Turkish and Christian Territories:
constraining the Christian people contrary to their conscience to swear to
serve the Turk; they also forced them to furnish them with Warlique Provision
and Munition, which they put into Canisia: but a while after the defeat of that
Garrison, they likewise overran part of Stiria with their Families, spoiling
it of men, cattle, and goods, and carried away 2000 for slaves, whom they sold
unto the Turk for great profit. Thence they went into Shavary, slaying the
Christians, rifling their Villages, then burning them, carrying away 1000
Captives: which outrages afterward, thrust the Valiant Collonitz into the
field against these barbarous people: who, a few days before, with much
trouble, and by his Wisdom, appeased the French light-Horsmen in the Villages
about Roquesburg, mutining for their pay: so that they swear again to the
Emperor, joining themselves to his Army, being 10000 good men.

In the mean time, the greedy Tartars ransacked and burned 25 Villages about
Veradin, carrying away many men and cattle: Others of them also, then invading
Count Serinus's Island as far as Rackenspurge; made great spoil, as had their
fellows elsewhere, and, beside other booty, carried away 2000 Captives:
Whereupon, the Count and Collonitz, courageously opposing against them, for a
while stayed their Incursions; so that now 35000, turning their course into
Slavonia, carrying away a great number of prisoners and booties: and, meeting
by the way with 600 Christian Soldiers, they slew them every man: at length,
some of their roaming Troops chanced to fall into the danger of the Count, who
hovered aloof off, for fear of their multitude, a part whereof now falling into
his Hands, were all cut in pieces, and a number of Captives set at liberty
thereby. Hereupon, the Tartars still in doubt to meet with the Christian
Troops, who slew all of them they lighted on, kept closer together, and so did
a great deal the less hurt, than when they roamed up and down at pleasure.

The Garrison Soldiers of Canisia, consulting how to be revenged for the late
Defeat at the same time; there was a Fugitive Christian in the Town, who seemed
desirous to turn Turk: of whom the Turks made much reckoning, for that he
seemed to know much of the Christians designs, and the means how to cross them:
who, promised to bring them into the midst of the Christians Camp, and deliver
it into their hands; but, he seeing the Turks much busied with carrying of
Victuals into the Castle, brought into the Town after the overthrow of their
fellows, knowing where the Ammunition lay, by a Train, laid fire thereunto;
and, amidst the stir, by a loop in the Wall got away, and came to Collonitz,
who lay near in Ambush, expecting the opportunity upon the success of so
dangerous an adventure, whereto he was privy. All the place felt the fury of
this dreadful blast, all was shaken and turned upside down: yea, the fire
burst out of the Castle and burnt most of the Town also: the terror hereof,
made many Turks to leap over the walls in hope so to save their lives: but
meeting with the Soldiers of Collouitz, they were all either taken or slain.
But now, when occasion served for the re-gaining of Canisia, those French and
Walloons, whom Collonitz had before appeased, who were most of his strength,
for want of pay (as they pretended) turned their backs, and were by no entreaty
or persuasions to be moved, withdrawing from the rest of the Army to their
discouragement: so that Collonitz, was to his great coffeehouse, forced to
retire, without any thing more doing.

Whilst this exploit was in hand, The Turks and Tartars made a cruel spoil
about Rab, even almost to the gates thereof, carrying away a great number of
men and beasts: at last, Nadasti his Hussars coming that way, by speed
overtook them near Alba regalis slaying a great number, and forcing the rest to
leave much of their prey behind them: with which recovered booty, they
returning to Rab, the Inhabitants and Country people with tears standing in
their eyes, requested to have their own goods again; but yet they were fain to
redeem them for present money.

Collonitz so shamefully forsaken by his own Soldiers, and a great number of
Turks and Tartars coming to relieve and repair the lore-shaken Town, full of
grief and indignation returned toward Comara; but upon the way of his return,
meeting with 2000 Turks, he after some small resistance, cut them all in
pieces: their Ensigns were all taken, and many prisoners: the chief of whom
with the Ensigns, he sent as a Present to the Emperor to Prague. And though it
was reported, what hurt the Turks and Tartars united, had done in Slavonia,
carrying away 8000 prisoners, and slaying or consuming by fire many more, and
that being come to Quinque-Ecclesiae with a great booty, they (...) received
command, and were resolved to besiege Comara: yet he, no whit dismayed,
fortified Comara, and taking from thence 4 Culverins, resolved to take from the
Turks the Castles of Loqua and Boulonnevar: whose Garrisons greatly annoyed the
Christian Territories, and hindered his designs. They are situated upon a
great Marsh, which separateth Hungary from Rascia, and strong enough to be
detended against a small Army.

Being come within sight of Loqua Castle, well manned and furnished with all
necessaries, and the Army lodged, he summoned the besieged to yield, with
promises of courtesy, if they would in time accept thereof: who swore, that
they would live and die within those Walls: whereupon, Collonitz first
assaulted a Mill, which served the Castle instead of a Bulwark, seeming hard to
be taken; yet his men so bravely assaulted it, that they became Masters of the
place, and therein lodged; but finding it dangerous to keep, and to stand them
in small stead, they fired it, and planted four Culverins before the Castle;
but the while, the Turks courageously sallied out upon them; for they hoped
shortly to be relieved by their great Army. They fiercely charging the
Haiducks, slew 30 of them, retiring without loss, and forthwith discharging so
many shot and Arrows, that the Christians well knew not, how to defend the
danger; so that always to approach the place, being stopped, they devised how
to fire the Castle, whose Fireworks were to small purpose, the fire being by
the Turks quenched, so soon as kindled. This done, they devised to set fire on
the Timber, which joined the Palisado to the Castle, but the fire burned but
slowly, to do any great harm: (...), they resolved by plain force, to assault
and scale it; so the Haiducks, carrying thick wooden planks before them,
instead of Targets, gained the Palisado, placed upon the Ditch, from whence
they so plied the besieged, with small shot, that they drove them from their
Curtains, not daring any more to appear on the Walls. Immediately after, two
Companies of Haiducks, courageously mounted a Tower of the Castle upon 10
Ladders; but the Turks valiantly repulsed them, and by force, drew in the two
Ensign-bearers, from off the Ladders, whose Heads they cut off, and cast them
down to those who were coming up, placing the two gained Ensigns, in the midst
of their own.

Hereupon, the Christians, not a little dismayed, kept close at the foot of the
Wall, as afraid any further to force the place.

But Collonitz, immediately drawing out of every (...) of Count Reingrave, some
of the best and most (...) Soldiers, to renew the assault, they forthwith,
cheerfully began to mount the Ladders: whereupon, the Haiducks, partly through
shame, partly to partake of the spoil, did what they might to win the place; so
that the Turks, not able longer to withstand them, were constrained to yield to
the fury of their Enemies: who slew almost all in the Castle, both Rascians and
Turks, taking the rest prisoners; yet it cost much Christian blood also. Among
others, there was an Hungarian Renegate there taken, whom they beheaded, not
being at leisure, to empail him.

But during this spoil, the fire which they had cast upon the Pallisado, now
increasing with the wind, (...) degrees having burnt the Pallisado, got hold
of the (...) also: which the Soldiers (loaded with prey) not regarding, the
fire utterly consumed the Castle, with whatever had escaped their hands.

The Turks at Boulowenar (but a League off) (...) these flames, consulted what
course were best for them to take, and at last, resolved to flee: So putting
all their goods into certain Boats upon the Lake, departed, persuading
themselves, that the Christians coming, and finding nothing, would not long
there stay, hiding themselves (the mean while) in the Marsh; but they coming
thither, wondered to see men so cowardly, and sought out every corner
thereabouts, to finds out whither they were fled: at last, they found certain
Boats, which the Turks had sunk in the Channel, nigh the Castle-Gate, whereby
they thought that they were fled by water, and perhaps not far off: which Boats
being drawn up, and having Oars, etc. Collonitz commanded some of the most
resolute Haiducks, to follow after the Turks; who, accustomed to such exploits,
went aboard, and had not gone past two Leagues upon the Lake, but they
discovered a party of them, hid in a little Island: who, dismayed, yet forced
to stand on their Guard, thought to have hindered the Haiducks from landing, by
somelittle Faulconshot; but they (all fear of danger set apart) landed in the
Isle, whom the Turks courageously receiving, an exceeding great fight (for so
small a number) was fought; but at last, the chief of the Turks, and their
Governor being slain, the rest parlyed, yielding Wives, Children, and all that
they had, as a prey to the Victors: next day, the Christians putting four
hundred Haiducks, and two hundred Hussars into Boulowenar Castle, with their
prisoners and rich booty, returned toward Comara, where they arrived in safety.
The Emperor had thirteen Ensigns, besides the places won, which being nigh
Canisia, much bridled the incursions of that Garrison.

But in Transylvania, Moses being overthrown by Basta, betook himself to
Solomose, a strong Castle of his own, in fear attending the final (...) of his
affairs.

Basta, the while, subdued the rest of the Country, repressed the Rebels, etc.
and put MOSES in despair of safety: wherefore, offering to yield his Castle to
the TURKS, he thrust himself, with Wife and Family, and all his substance into
TEMESWAR, whom the BASSA, in show, most courteously received; and the rather,
for that he hoped to make a prey of his Wealth.

Ere long, he had persuaded the Captain of GIVASCAR, a strong Frontier Castle,
to deliver it to the Turks, without the Soldiers privity: who, yet getting
knowledge thereof, besought their Captain not to draw such an infamy on himself
and them, by so foul a fact; but afterward, finding him resolved so to do,
they suddenly laid hands on him, and struck off his Head, and held the place.

Moses still plotting to trouble the State of Transylvania, sent many Spies
with Letters of credence to the chief men of that Country, assuring them of
sufficient aid from the Turk, if they would, as he termed it, but take up Arms
for their liberty.

Basta the mean while, made choice of 6000 of his best Soldiers, and went to
besiege Moyses's Castle, of Solomose: whom, at his arrival, the Turks there in
Garrison derided; for why? they thought, the Castle being seated on a steep
high hill, and well fortified with Walls, and a broad and deep Ditch, and not
subject to battery, could not but with much labor, danger, and time, be
gained; and indeed, the Christians at first, stood as men dismayed, at the foot
of (...) Hill of the Castle; yet more discouraged with the impregnableness of
the place, than with the valor of the Defendants; but in seeking, they
discovered a little steep Hill, over against the Castle, from whence it was to
be battered; but to bring the Cannon thither with Horses, was impossible for
the steep roughness of the ascent, with broken and hanging Rocks, overgrown
with Trees and Bushes: yet these resolved men, by force of hand, drew their
Cannon up to the top of the Hill; and planting it, began to batter the Castle:
then they, day and night, put all things in such order, as if they would even
by plain force, have carried the place; but the Turks being not many in number,
and seeing themselves to have to do with men of invincible courage, craved a
parley, and agreed, with their Arms and lives only, to depart: a great
Conquest got with small charge.

This strong place so gained, led the whole Province to the Emperor's
obedience: so that Basta, assembling all the chief men of Transylvania,
declared unto them the justice of his cause, the right of the Emperor, with
the malice and treachery of the Turks and Rebels: how they might live in
assurance with the one, and become miserable with the other, with sundry other
admonitions: who answered, beseeching him, that their Country might be
relieved from the crowd and cruelty of the men of War, and delivered from the
intolerable burdens of Tributes, etc. in recompense whereof, they would pay
him 15000 Hungarian Ducats yearly, to pay his Soldiers, and furnish him with
all necessary provisions: which offer, being by Basta accepted, and the people
hereby contented, they were kept in their allegiance and loyalty to the
Emperor. But, in the mean time, Moses the Rebel, having by the Vizier Bassa's
appointment, received 10000 Tartars in his aid, and a great number of Turks,
entered Transylvania, protesting there to die, or be revenged of Basta, making
choice of a most fit time, for the performance thereof; for Basta, upon the
trust he now had of the Transilvanian's allegiance, being with a small power,
come from Claudionopolis, and then laying at Wiscebourg, upon the confines of
Hungary, the Transilvanians believed, that (through the necessity of his
presence in Hungary) he should stay there for that year, as the Emperor's
General^: whereupon, many, both of the Nobility and others, before by Moses
prepared, and now by his presence encouraged, joined themselves unto him
against the Imperials.

Moses first forced a Castle, about three Leagues from Wiscebourg, and slew
all the Garrison: which exploit, encouraging him, and full of hope in the
absence of Basta, he, as Master of the Field, forraged, robbed, and spoiled,
besieging Wiscebourg a small Town, neither by art or nature strong; howbeit, it
held out three weeks siege, and having a breach made in the Walls, endured two
Assaults.

After which, the besieged, out of hope to be relieved by the weak forces of
Basta, yielded to him the Town, upon saving their lives and goods, and so
departed to (...). Albeit, the Haiducks failed not to follow these Wars in
Transylvania, and were ever taking some prey from the Enemy, the chiefest
means, whereby they live: not a little also, easing thereby the Country, by
repressing the excursions and pillages of the Turks: where, among other
prisoners, they lighted upon a Chiaus come from Constantinople, going toward
Moses from the Sultan Mahomet: who examined, confessed that Moses was in
great grace with his Lord and Master, of which he was sent to assure him: as
also of all the needful assistance of his Prince, if he should bring
Transylvania under his subjection, as he had promised and sworn: whereby he
should not only gain credit, but be made Lieutenant Genesis of the Sultan's Army
there: he said also, that Mahomet had on foot an Army of 150000 men, to conquer
Pesth and Strigonium; which had already made toward Hungary, had it not been
for some Rebellion, whom for all that, he would soon chastise, and turn his
whole Forces upon the Emperor.

Moses finding much Ordnance in Wiscebourg, resolved to besiege Basta in
Sosinnar, whither Basta came with his small forces. But he, better acquainted
with Martial affairs, than Moses; thought best, first to take order for
strengthening of the place, and then to provide as he could, for the safety of
himself and his: wherefore he advertising the Governor of Cassova, of his
necessity, he presently commanded six Companies of Horsemen, to thrust into
Sosinnar, for the better defense thereof: who, either fearing, or favoring the
Rebels Army, without any attempt at all given, returned to Cassova, much
provoking the Country by the way, by their pilfering and outrages; but now
craving pardon of their Governor, who was about with the rest of his power to
cut them in pieces, they offered him six principal Authors of their
disloyalty who were forthwith executed, and their quarters hanged upon Gibbets,
by the high way side; but Basta (the while) was without succor, and the place
wherein he lay in danger of taking: howbeit, the TRANSILVANIANS thereabouts,
resolved to relieve him, both for fear of the TURKS bondage, and of the tyranny
of MOSES; one of whose Secretaries, with Letters of Credence, threatened all
the Country, with all kind of miseries, if they helped not, with all their
power, to force and win the place.

Amongst others, RADOL of VALACHIA, raised immediately eight thousand men,
which he presently sent to the relief of Basta.

Moses hearing hereof, and also, that Basta having well fortified the place,
was departed, assuring his men, there left, to relieve them; and that he was
gathering together his Army, of himself raised his Siege, and departed: whom
the TURKS forthwith forlook, being called back by the Bassa of Temeswar, to
repress the Haiducks, who in the absence of most of the Garrison, had
desperately assailed those Suburbs, slaying all they found there, and rifling
and burning them; and so returned to VERADIN: yet not so contented, were every
day abroad, seeking after new booty: which caused the Bassa to call the TURKS
home into their Garrisons.

Moses notwithstanding, was yet Master of the Field, Basta not daring to
oppose him, the Succors from Valachia, being not yet come, which he daily
expected; yet there were many hot skirmishes betwixt the straggling Soldiers on
both sides, as they met seeking after booty.

Moses therefore, laid siege to Claudionopolis, a great, but weak City, and
for that cause, not very well manned. Howbeit, the Soldiers and Inhabitants,
standing upon their defense, Moses was constrained to batter it, and in very
short time, had made a very fair breach, ready now to have given the assault:
whereupon, the besieged gave up the City, the Citizens having life, goods,
liberty, and Religion saved, and to stay there still; and the Soldiers with
Arms and Baggage, to be safely brought over the Mountains, into some place of
surety. The Rebel much encouraged, resolved to make this the Seat of his
Principality.

The Turks and Tartars, allured with the smell of riches, repaired thither on
every side; so that Moyses's Army, hope and fortune, increased, sending to
Temeswar, for his Wife and Family, to come to him to Claudionople, with a
Convoy of four hundred Turks: who being come thither, and about to have led the
Wife and Family out of the City, were not suffered by the Janissaries so to do,
telling him, The Sultan had found so many disloyalties, treacheries and
treasons, in the Hungarians, Transilvanians, and Valachians, that, doubting of
the fidelity of Moses, he was resolved to keep this gage for more assurance;
and that they should receive nothing from him but favor, so long as he
received from Moses, the effects of his loyalty; but he should never hope to
enjoy them, but in Temeswar, or some such like place, assured for his service.

Moses astonished, was much moved against the Sultan, complaining in his soul,
that having ruinated his faith, honor, and the welfare of his Country, to
assure him of his fidelity, he yet doubted of his constancy, etc.

In the mean time, the Valachian-Succours were upon the borders of
Transylvania, under the Conduct of Marsa, the Vayuods Lieutenant; and Basta was
gathering together his forces, hourly expecting 2000 Horsemen out of Silefia:
wherefore, Moses marched with 30000 men, to cut off the Valachians, before
they could come far into Transylvania, or join with Basta, learning the place
where they were to enter, their numbers, and the way they were to hold; so the
Valachians (being but 8000, and the Turks and Tartarian Horsemen being at their
backs) must needs fight or die. Necessity indeed, gave courage to the weaker
side; yet the greater number at length prevailed, so that, after a great fight,
wherein a great number of Turks and Tartars were slain: the Valachians left
their dead Companions, with Tents and Baggage, and fled, yet often making
stands.

The Rebels now fearing no harm, divided the spoil, filling the Heavens with
the noise of Trumpets, in token of Victory: which disorder, the Valachians
perceiving, turned head, and serring close together, courageously thrust
themselves into the midst of these Victors: which so dismayed and troubled
them, that, surprised in disorder, with their hands full of spoils, they could
not recover themselves: some stood as men amazed, others ran away, others stood
on their defense, but all were alike slain; so that, at last, most of them were
cut in pieces, and the rest put to flight, Moses himself being slain. Of which
Victory, the Vayuod certified Basta, sending him 25 of the Enemies Ensigns; and
writing, that the dead Body of Moses was found among the midst of the dead,
slain even at the first charge, wherein his Guard was overthrown. And because
some had given out, he was not dead, nor present at that Battle, his Head was
set up at Ca^rolstad, upon a Lance, for all men to behold. But another Rebel,
called Albert Nage, by and by starts up, who with 6000 Transilvanians, Turks,
Tartars, Cossacks, and Moldavians, made head toward Lippa: against whom, Basta
speedily sent 3000 Haiducks, well acquainted with the Country; for the Rebels
chiefly sought, by taking the advantages of places, to delay time, and gain
purchase: whom the Haiducks surprising near to Ferre-Castle, where they meant
to have charged them, they, suddenly overtaken, and supposing them to have been
more than they were, made small resistance; but by flight, shifted every man
for himself, most of them being slain, and their Chieftain, with much ado,
saved, to be at another time justly executed.

Basta, being again become Master of the Field, very soon after reduced all
Transylvania, under the Emperors obeisance, to whom he, with the Vaynod, sent
100 Ensigns, with some other rich spoils of the Rebels, for a Present: all
which, the Master of the Ceremonies, in great Pomp led, together with Moyses's
Horse, exceeding richly furnished; to whom, the Emperor, in reward, sent a
Chain of Gold, by Count Fustenberg.

Basta, now resolved to besiege Temeswar, marched toward Lippa, there to meet
with the Vayuod's Forces. His Army consisted of 20000 men, well furnished; and
having 25 Pieces of Ordnance, of the enterprise, every man had good hope; but
his Soldiers at the siege, (...) excessively feeding upon Fruit, whereof,
there was that year, great store (though he most straightly commanded, none to
be eaten, or brought into the Camp) so many died of the Bloody Flux, that he
was glad to be gone. Count Solmes, the while, laying at Carolstad, set forth
with 400 Soldiers of his Garrison, to surprise Wiscenburg, without any great
resistance, becoming Masters thereof; but the Citizens, over-grieved with their
insolent outrages, opened their Gates to the Rebels of Transylvania, even then
fled from the overthrow: who full of revenge, and too strong for them, so
slaughtered them in the streets, (they also of the Town from above helping
them) that the Count had but sixty left alive, who with himself, were thrust
into a strong and loathsome prison.

Now upon the bruit of the coming of the Turks great Army into Hungary, there
came together an Army of 25000 Foot, and 10000 Horse, well appointed: of which
gallant Army, Lord Russworme was for this year, made General, who therewith,
marched in sight of Strigonium, to assure it of relief, if the Enemy (as news
then went) should chance to besiege them. Laying there three weeks, waiting for
the rest of the forces, he the while disposed of all things needful, for
keeping of Strigonium, putting into St. Andrews Fort, near unto it, 3000
Lansquenets for its relief: then he removed toward Posth, encamping within a
League thereof, hoping that the preservation thereof, if the Enemy should
befiege it, might in time, be a cause to win Buda.

The Turks Army being 100000 men, few days after, came and encamped in sight
of the Christian Army, on the other side of Danubius. In the mean time, certain
Soldiers of Pesth, fled by stealth, to the TURKS in BUDA, craving of them
Victuals: whom (though they were almost in as great want) they bountiously
relieved: the Bassa of BUDA, (to corrupt their followers) entertaining these
Fugitives, with double pay: who gave him a thousand thanks, greatly (...) his
bounty, and from the Walls inviting their Companions, to do as they had done;
yet although they from the BASSA'S mouth, (...) them plenty of Victuals, good
entertainment, and four months pay more: none of them hearkened to their
allurements, but rather offered of themselves to be sworn again to their
allegiance to the Emperor, and to die in the place, rather then forsake it;
yet was the want of Victuals then in Pesth great: but ere long, May 15th, a
great Ship laden with Wine and Victuals, arrived there: whose passage, the
Turks attending in the Isle, to have intercepted, they of Pesth sallying out,
killed many of them, forcing the rest to quit the place; and shortly after, a
number of other Ships, laden with provision and necessaries, arriving there,
filled it with as great plenty, as there had been want: which being conducted
thither, by 500 Harquebusiers of Strigonium, the Turks of Buda durst not, or
could not stay it.

At the same time, a Turkish Captain fleeing from Alba Regalis to Rab, showed
the Christians, how they might come to the Suburbs thereof, and spoil the same;
yea, and happily surprise the Town, offering himself also to be the Guide: to
whom, the Christians then giving credit, the two Garrisons of Rab and
Strigonium, surprised the Suburbs of Alba Regalis, slaying all that resisted,
rifling them, firing them, and so, laden with spoil, returned in safety. Then
also Lord Nadasti, Col. Mesbourg and Count Thur, with their Hungarians,
Almaines, and Hussars, on the other side of Danubins, to brave the Enemy,
marched over the plain, with a Convoy of Victuals for Pesth, at midday, with
Trumpers gallantly sounding, the Turks from the Walls of Buda, beholding the
same; but not daring to adventure upon it.

The Haiducks, left at the Castle of Adom, (commodious for impeaching the
bringing of Victuals to Buda, and for relief of Pesth) now upon the bruit of
the coming of the Turks great Army, trussed up their baggage, fired the Castle,
and retired to Strigonium: where the Governor examining them why they fled,
and what Enemies chased them thence: whereof, they rendering no reason, but
their imaginary fear, he imprisoned them, there to remain, till order were
taken by the General, for their further punishment.

Mahomet, amidst all his delights, was in the midst of the insolences of his
tumultuous Janissaries at home, and abroad, in Wars against the rebellious in
Asia, and the Christians in Europe: wherefore he resolved (if possible) first
to appease the troubles with his subjects in Asia, (though the punishing of
Rebellion is more needful in a Prince to maintain his State, than is War
against a stranger, for conquering of a new Country.) Howbeit, the Sequel
showed, Falsehood and treachery was the ground of the whole business on both
sides.

Mahomet, spared no kind of cunning, to deceive these crafty men, offering
them, with his pardon, great preferments and honors, so they would lay down
Arms, and no more take them up, but in his service; but they well knew, the
promises of faithless Princes, cost them nothing but words; so that they not
only refused, to yield him their obedience as he desired, but even to have
peace with him upon any conditions. Hereupon, he thought best, to offer the
Christians that which the other had refused, hoping that peace with the one,
should be the ruin of the other; and to ease him of a care, how to give an
honest and honorable way thereunto, the French Ambassador Ledger, was then
entreating with the great Bassaes, for the deliverance of Count Isolan: whom
Mahomet thought a fit man, to deal with the Emperor, concerning a Treaty of
peace to be had: whereupon, he set him at liberty, with charge, that he should
discreetly and faithfully deal with the Emperor about it: which if he should
effect to Mahomets content, then to remain free, otherwise to return into his
former captivity; for whom the French Ambassador became a pledge.

Achmet Bassa, also wrote to Collonitz, for the negotiation of this peace,
telling him, if they were not resolved to surrender Strigonium, before they
began to treat of any other matter, he need not trouble himself, to give any
answer to those Letters: saying also, if they should continue to pay the
Tribute for the time to come, and discharge the Arrerages for the time past, it
should be commodious for the Turks, and honorable for the Imperials: besides
he said, peace should be entreated of with the great Cham of Tartary who was
commanded by the Turkish Emperor, upon just and reasonable conditions, to
entertain the same, and never more, but in peaceable manner, to come into
Hungary.

Collonitz forthwith, sent these Letters to the Emperor, requesting him to
consider what answer he would have given. The Emperor commanded him to embrace
the occasion, and to try, whether the Turks desire were agreeable to their
words or not: Collonitz hereupon, with some of the best Commanders in the Army,
entered into a Treaty of peace with the Turks: whose demands tended so much to
the hurt and dishonor of the Emperor, that they even at first, shut up the
way to all further conference; for after their proud manner, they unreasonably
demanded to have Transylvania, Strigonium, and Pesth, restored to them; for
which, they offered to deliver Agria and Canisia, pibble for Pearls; so that
they departed on both sides, as they came: also, while this Treaty was in hand,
the Turks gathered together, great store of Men and Ammunition at Belgrade, to
convoy much Victuals to put into Buda: whereof Collonitz hearing, ceased
further to treat, and betook himself to his Arms, to do what they might, for
the hindering their purpose for Buda, where there was now such want, that the
Turks having eaten all their Horses, and rifled the Governors House for
Victuals, resolved to abandon the City, if not relieved within few days. The
Christians embarked their Footmen upon the River, under Alimeine, Governor of
Strigonium, and Sultze, Governor of Pesth. Whilst Collonitz with the
Horsemen, scoured along the Banks of the River, and Aug. 22, near to Mohatsch,
fell upon the head of the Turk's Army, led by Murat Bassa, six thousand in
number, two thousand being Janissaries, who laying encamped upon an even plain,
he forthwith charged them: where after many notable charges, the Turks retired
toward the Body of their Army in great have: whom Collonitz followed with like
heat, as he had charged them; but ill followed by his friends, who sought after
the spoil, instead of pursuing their Enemies; so that the Turks perceiving the
fewness of the pursuers, turned about, and even right hardly charged them: who
were now glad themselves to retire; yet so, as without any great loss
received: Howbeit, the Turks came on so fast and courageously, that they had
defeated the Christians, had not the Haiducks out of their Boats, resolutely
come to their relief: whereupon, the Turks again retired, whom the Christians
furiously charged, and pursued even to their great Camp, and so returned with
the glory of the Field, and spoil of their Enemies: Murat Bassa's red Cornet
being taken, with two Fieldpieces, seven hundred Turks being slain, and 120
taken, Saxar Beg being one: who upon examination, confessed, that Hassan the
day before, came into the Camp, dining with the great Cham; after which, he
discoursing with him, among other great matters, of his return into his
Country, was much against the same, till they had victualled Buda: whereunto,
he was (he said) in honor and duty, bound to give his assistance, the loss of
this good place, being of so great importance to the great Sultan: otherwise
his aid had bin unto him, rather hurtful than profitable, etc. He also assured
them, that the Bassa purposed to new fortify three frontier Castles, and so to
go to the Siege of Pesth, which done, to besiege Strigonium: which yet he
doubted to win this year, winter approaching, and a great part of his forces
being far off, that the Tartars were far from the Camp, where the Bassa of
Asia, leading the reconciled Rebels of Asia, and him of Caramania, 6000
Janissaries were in few days expected: which Confession, though not altogether
true; yet time showed, it carried some show of probability: few Christians, in
Comparison of the Turks, were slain. It was noted, that the Soldiers of Col.
Sultze refused to pursue the Enemy, whether fearing some ambush, or disdaining
to follow Genesis Collonitz; the reasons, perhaps, why Sultze stayed them from the
pursuit.

Collonitz most bravely behaved himself in this Conflict, sometime forcing the
charge, and again staying his men in their retreat; so that often lost among his
Enemies, and again returning, he escaped death as it were by a miracle, and
from being taken by chance; and doubtless, had the rest, after his example,
prosecuted their good fortune, the Enemy had been quite overthrown, and
themselves been both victorious and rich; for besides the spoils by them
gotten, they might have carried away a whole years pay, due to the Garrison of
Buda, which the fearful Turks had left in their Camp, (which upon the recovery
of their courage, they recovered) with much more. Russworm, (the Christian Army
being assembled, about September. 4th) sent forth two most trusty and expert
Soldiers, to understand of the Turks affairs and designs, who, in Turkish
Habit, were in their Army 8 days unsuspected; and returning back, declared to
the General, that the Turks Army was very great, but not such as that which
last year besieged Pesth: that they lay encamped at large, which made them seem
the greater, being well provided of Ordnance: that Hassan commanded as General,
having brought with him 12000 Janissaries, besides his Horsemen, and reconciled
Rebels in Asia daily looked for: that the great Tartar Han, was to Hassan's
great discontent, already returned homewards with Christian booty and
prisoners, to appease a Rebellion raised by his Nephew; who, by his Uncle,
given in Hostage to Mahomet, had found means to escape from Constantinople;
hoping now in his Uncle's absence from Tartary, to place himself in his Throne;
and, that the Tartars being denied boats by the Turks, to pass Danubius with
many opprobrious Speeches for his departure, Asa Conard, had made a floating
Bridge of great (...), whereby he passed over his Foot, his (...) (...) over.
Who boasted as he went, that he had trodden underfoot all the requests of
Hassan Bassa.

Besides, they had seen six great Vessels upon the River, ten lesser following
them, manned with 3000 well armed men, 300 being Janissaries, to conduct the
Munition, and the Victuals that was to follow up the River, if the Christians
should attempt any thing against the same.

Lastly, that the Turks Army, by reason of many great lets, could not this year
be great: Wherefore, the Turks Captains came unwillingly to these Wars,
accounting it a happiness, if they might in this Expedition but take Pesth.
Hereupon, the Christians were so encouraged, as if they had bin to fight with
men already discouraged.

The Hussars of Strigonium the while, going forth, met with 400 Turkish
Forragers, who at first made a most gallant fight together; but, the skillful
and courageous Husfars, at length brake the Turks ranks, a 120 laying dead on
the ground, most of the rest being taken, with 130 good and serviceable Horses.
Sultz also marching from the Camp with 300 men, discovered a 100 of those brave
Horsemen, lately come out of Asia with Zellaly the Rebel: who, were with 300
Janissaries, upon a bravery, come over Danubius, to view the Christian Camp.
Sultze, to draw these on, sent forth 50 Horse, as it were to discover the
Country thereabouts: who meeting with the Turks, as if by chance, were by them
forthwith charged; (...), (...) coming suddenly on, and hotly charging them,
they, thinking the Christians to be more than they were, having left some fifty
dead on the place, as men dismayed, fled; in which flight, such as were not
slain, were drowned (...) the River.

Rusworm wisely doubting, lest Hassan should lodge his Army between Vicegrade
and Buda: and so Victual Buda at pleasure, made a strong Fort of an old Temple
betwixt these two, lodging therein a Regiment of (...), building another at the
Head thereof in the Isle of Vicegrade; and so, that these 2 Forts might one
(...) the other: the Fort in the Ifle also, kept the passage upon (...) open,
for bringing necessaries to the Christian Camp; 4000 well armed Italians being
put therein: then he made a Bridge of boats, extending from the Camp to the
Isle, for relief of the Fort; and thence passed over the River to Vacia, a
small Town needful to be kept.

Ere long, the Bassa sent 10000 Horse and Foot to take the first of these
Forts, which they supposed to be but weak: who were so received by the
Lansquenet's Harquebusses, that the whole Fort seemed to be on fire: Whereupon,
the Turks dismayed, and having lost some men, and more hurt, sounded a retreat,
and returned. Then the Turks made a Bridge over (...), hoping thereby to pass
over, and annoy the Christians on the other side, whom Rusworm let alone without
interruption; but informed by his Espials (of the very time when they were
about to pass over) he laid 4000 (...), and 2000 Reisters in Ambush behind,
great store of (...) and Reeds growing upon the Banks (...) (...), having with
them 4 Culverings ready charged: Collonitz with his Regiment laying behind
their Prince (...), with some French Gentlemen, who followed him into those
Wars to see service. In the Head, there was also Lord (...) a French man, with
his few, but valourous private followers; upon the flanks lay 4 Carabin Troops
of French (...) and (...). The Turks passing over, were of purpose charged by
some few Christian Forrainers, whom the Turks pressing still on, hoped to
overtake and cut in pieces. The Footmen, the while, having perceived ten
thousand Turks to be come over, making toward them, the (...) upon the Bank
first discharged upon them, slaying some few: yet the Turks passing on, slew
about 24 of them, marching directly toward the Christians: but, in passing by,
they were suddenly and hardly assailed by the Lansquenets and Reisters: also,
the Horsemen now come in, (...) somewhat disordered them before they were well
aware. The scattered Walloons also, now rallied, on another side furiously
charged their Enemies: the Culverins not ceasing to open the Turks flanks, with
the loss of a number of them: likewise Collonitz charging them afront, caused
them to give ground; the Carabins the while, charging upon their flanks, and
the Walloons behind: who thus beset, and out of hope to be relieved, fled amain
to have recovered the Bridge, 2000 in fight and flight being (...), 5000 driven
into the River and drowned, and the rest taken prisoners: one Bassa of great
(...) was slain, with many other Commanders of great note, and 1500 Janissaries:
4 Fieldpieces, 30 Ensigns, 2 Coronets, brave Horses, much fair Armor rich
Apparel, and good Scimitars, being also taken. This, much abated the courage
and hope of the other Turks, and increased the same in the Christians for this
years good success.

About this time, Mahomet putting a Fleet to Sea against the King of Fez, was
assured, that the same, with Tempest sore beaten, to avoid shipwreck, was
returned to the Fort from whence it loosed, and that with sickness and great
losses. The like or worse hap also then befell another Fleet which he set out
into the Euxine Sea, to defend those (...) from being spoiled by the Asian
Rebels, which did there great harm; for, though Sellaly was by the Strait of
Dardanelli (of old Hellespont) come with 12000 good Soldiers ont of Asia into
Hungary, to do his Lord service; yet the chief Rebel, both now, and diverse
years after maintained a most cruel and dangerous War, to the great hinderance
of the Sultans Affairs: and the Rebel seeming as if he would have submitted
himself, and come into Europe as did Zellaly, had some Galleys sent him, for
transporting him and his Soldiers in: who possessed thereof, slew all those
therein, keeping the Galleys; So, that the Rebels were now up in greater
number, and did more harm than ever, being the more encouraged by the example
of Hassan Bassa (not him the General in Hungary) who sent against these
Rebels, had for a time kept them under; but, now by Mahomet displaced, and
another sent to succeed him: he, discontented, so incensed his Soldiers
against him, that when he came, most of them were ready to turn their Weapons
upon him. At length, falling together by the ears about the old General and
the new: a number were slain, all of the richer sort spoiled, and the Sultans
service neglected; but, the new General at last prevailing. Hassan with his
partakers were glad to flee: yet afterward, collecting the dispersed
Soldiers, and joining with the Rebels, held still a good Army on foot, doing
what harm he could. The Persian King also, taking advantage by all these
troubles, besieged Tauris, kept with a most strong Garrison of Turks, using the
battering Cannon therein, long scorned by the Persians, as not beseeming
valiant men; wherewith, as with skillful Cannoniers, the Portugalls furnished
him; whereby he soon again recovered this great City from the Turks. Mahomet
thus on every side beset with troubles, and in mind much perplexed, and struck
as it were with a remorse of conscience, and a firm belief, that God did thus
chastise and punish him for his offenses; considering, that his Ancestors were
never so troubled, commanded public prayers to be continually said, in all
Mosquies throughout his Dominions, giving himself wholly also unto such
Exercises, and works of Charity; sending withal, two of his chiefest Priests
bare-headed and footed on Pilgrimage to Mecha (where their Prophet's chief
Temple is, and wherein they believe to be most speedily heard) to pray to him
for their Prince his health and prosperity.

At the same time, Amurat Raise, an old Pirate, and the Turks Admiral, for the
West part of the Mediterranean; in his roaming, lighted on a great Flemish
ship, which he forthwith beset with his Galleys: the calmnesse of the weather
favoring him. The Flemmings after a great fight made, slaying a number of
Turks, and sore renting diverse Galleys, yet losing many men, not able longer to
fight; and being boarded, by as many Turks as could well stand upon the
Hatches, and their Galleys hanging round about her, laid all their powder left,
on a heap, and fired it, whereby the Turks were blown up, themselves and ship
tore in pieces, with diverse Galleys, grapled unto her, and exceeding harm done
to the other Galleys near her.

Raise astonished at so great and desperate a resolution, hasted to shore to
repair, and so to put to Sea again: where he had not long layen, but he met
with the Duke of Florence's Galleys (accounted the best in the World) and after
many a Cannon on both sides discharged, with the Turks apparent loss, when they
should have come to grapling, and fight hand to hand, which the Florentines
most desired, Raise suddenly fled: whom, they following amain, sunk some
Galleys, and took others full of Riches; So, that this renowned Pirate, for a
great while after, was little feared upon that Coast.

But, many a hot skirmish passed betwixt the 2 Armies in Hungary; the Turks
receiving the most hurt and loss. A Troop of Christians going to seek Booty,
fell upon a like Troop of the Turks: where, after a sharp encounter on both
sides: the Turks at length fled, leaving a number dead on the place; losing 2
Ensigns, with 130 serviceable Horses: the Christians pursuing them hard, drove
a number more into Danubius, wherein they perished, taking many more prisoners,
above 80 being Italian Renegates, who as Enemies to God, were in a Court
Martial condemned and hanged, saving the Captain who was beheaded. Shortly
after, the Bassa came in the beginning of October and encamped nigh Buda, both
for preservation of the place, and safety of his Army; for it was known, that
in these conflicts, the Turks had lost a number of their best Soldiers,
chiefly Janissaries; so, that the Bassa armed 6000 of his best Soldiers with
Muskets and s^imitars in the rooms and pay of the dead Janissaries: the rest of
his Army being, mostly, bare and feeble raw Soldiers: Besides, instead of
their wonted threats and bravery, the Soldiers in all places sighed, and
bewailed the loss of their Brethren and Friends: also, the Christian Army being
thought to be much greater and stronger than it was, had so feared the Turks,
that they resolved, Buda once Victualled, to return home, all their other
designs for this year set apart.

The Turks being now encamped nigh Buda, the Christians left Pesth as out of
danger; and encamped betwixt the Fort in the Isle of Vicegrade and Vacia,
staying there 4 days; and, then by a Bridge made upon Danubius, they passed
the River, and came and encamped before the Fort of St. Andrew (kept by the
Lansquenets) in the face of the Enemy. The field was plain and open, not to
hinder the joining of a set battle: the encouraged Christians being come
thither, to seek it in so fit a place, which the Turks sought as much to shun.
Nevertheless, for very shame, they put forth 5000 men into the field, 5 days
after: which Battalion came marching near the Christians upon confidence of
10000 Horse and Foot, which lay as close as possible a little out of the way;
whom the Christians not thinking of, sent forth 1200 against these 5000, to
skirmish with them, till the whole Army were put in order, even for a general
Battle that day, whereunto, the whole Christian Army was fully inclined: with
great chearfulnes marching on foot, thinking those 5000 Turks to have bin the
head of the Avaunt-guard, sent to draw them out to skirmish, till the coming
on of the rest of their Forces: Howbeit, their design was only to train them
out into their Ambushes: whereof they gave sufficient Testimony, because, after
3 hours skirmish, with loss on both sides, the Turks Army appeared not, and the
5000 Turks by little and little retired: who, it was not like, would have given
ground to 1200, if they had not had some secret meaning therein: which, caused
the Christian Carabins not to be too earnest in their pursuit, and more closely
to serve together, the better to endure the shock if they should charge them.
The Turks seeing their purpose discovered, on a sudden made a stand, came on,
and hardly charged the foremost Carabins: who, as men half surprised, were not
able so valiantly to receive the charge of so great a number, but some few were
overthrown and slain, with some Hungarians among them, yet they valiantly
repulsed them, slaying a good number. The prease in this conflict was great on
both sides: but, new supplies still coming in, the Turks at last retited; 300
being left slain, and 100 Christians.

Now upon the retreat, every man conceived a general battle next day; the
brags of the Turks occasioning the Christians so to think; for they seldom or
never refused battle offered them by the Christians (accounting that an eternal
Infamy) both for their confidence commonly had in their multitude, and for
their opinion of men's inevitable predestination to life or death; being
persuaded also, that no men's souls go more readily to Heaven, than of such as
die in battle against the Christians; yet at this time, showed, that a strong
apprehension of fear is able to prevail against all customs, persuasions, and
accidents: for, the Turks came not forth according to promise; they having
(besides almost all their Janissaries and valiant'st Soldiers) lost also all
their Erasbles desperate Soldiers, fighting on Hors-back only; with a little
piece of Tapestry on their Horses-backs: by whose readiness, they do long in
one sort maintain their fight: carrying Darts made of fair Canes, and strongly
armed, with Sables or broad Curtelasses; the loss of these men, who stood the
Turks in great stead, in receiving the Enemies charges, much discouraged them:
Howbeit, they in some part returned the like losses to the Christians; for,
while the Turks lodged in the Isle of Vicegrade, Collonitz so annoyed them with
8 great Fieldpieces, that they were about to forsake the place: which, the
more to force them to do, he embarked himself with 600 Haiducks, landing by
night near them with great silence, thinking to have surprised them; but, by
the days coming on, the Turks were aware thereof, issuing out of their
Trenches, and with all their Force charging him, who made Head against them,
though he had not men enough to withstand the least part of his Enemies: upon
which his so great resolution, the Turks stood a great while in doubt to charge
them: the Fieldpieces which Collonitz had brought with him, served him to good
purpose; the fight endured 2 hours: at length, the Christians oppressed with
number, rather than vanquished, left their pieces, disorderly retiring to their
Boats: the Turks slaying 400 Haiducks in eager pursuit, the rest with much ado
recovering their Boats, hardly defending their General from the Enemies fury:
yet, were the most forward and courageous Turks in that fight slain also, as
was known by some prisoners afterward taken.

To prevent the like attempt, the Turks cast up great Trenches in the Isle
along the Bank of the River, kept by some of their best Soldiers, till the
dis-lodgement of the Camp to lay before Buda.

The Turks before this, had built a (...) of Boats at Lamascin to pass into
Stiria, where they did great harm; to strengthen which, they built 2 strong
Forts at the (...) ends thereof: this Bridge Trantmestorfe, Governor of
Stiria, undertaking to break with his Troops, and aid brought by Serinus, right
furiously assailed one of these Forts, before they therein were well aware of
his coming: causing the greatest noise possible to be made with Warlique
Instruments, as if it had bin some great Army.

The Turks, terrified without much resistance quitted the place, fleeing over
the Bridge to the other Fort, which the Christians presently, with 3 Cannons
out of the Conquered Fort, battered: and a Breach being made, and scaling
Ladders set up, they on every side assaulted the Fort, which the Turks for 5
hours valiantly endured, many being on both sides slain; at last, the Turks
with much flaughter overcome, the Fort was taken; most Turks therein being
slain, the rest taken, and then were both the Forts razed, the Bridge broken,
the Boats, whereof it was made, all burnt: and some Ordnance therein found,
broken and cast into the River. At which time Lugaze, a place of great
importance for the Emperor, and very near the Turks, was by the Transilvanians
delivered to Basta; whence he sending Scouts toward Belgrade, they brought in
certain prisoners: Who said, That, Hassan Bassa had writ to (...) Bassa of
Temeswar, That the present state of things so requiring, he should only attend
the preservation of this Town; and, that himself having re victualled Buda,
purposed for this year to return, hoping of peace to be ere long concluded
betwixt the Sultan and Emperor.

The Christians desirous in what they might, to hinder Buda's re-victualling,
October 17. after shooting of three Warning pieces, took the field, and so
stood ready ranged to give or accept of Battle: before whom Count Reingrave was
sent with his Regiment to discover the (...) of the Enemy, and receive his
first charge, if occasion required: whose Scouts, about noon discovered a
Turkish Troop, whom the Scouts supposing to have bin the forerunners of the
Turks Army, and by them almost surprised, by a hasty retreat, put the whole
Army in an alarm, which came bravely on, in hope to have tried the matter by
true labor, and to have made that day for ever famous by their Victory: but
the Turks, resolved only upon safeguard of themselves and Victualling of Buda,
kept themselves within their Tents and Trenches: So, the Christians most of the
day in vain expecting their coming, returned into their Camp.

The same day, a Spy was taken, thought to be a Turk, yet one of their own men:
who better informed them of the Turks resolucion for the shunning of battle,
both for the losses received, and for diverse other unlucky accidents, which
made them misdoubt some ill successes in the end of this Expedition; yet, the
Christians not much trusting to these reports, still kept their Army in
readiness. Howbeit, the time passed but in light skirmishes, and vain Alarms
betwixt the 2 Armies: till at length, Buda being by the River stored with
Victuals, Hassan Bassa, with much silence by night rose with his Army, retiring
toward Belgrade.

Next day, the Enemies sudden departure being perceived, the Christian General
consulted with his great Commanders, What were best to be done in so unexpected
an Occurrent? Some thought it best to pursue them, others dissuading it, and
others propounding some other notable (...): at last it was resolved, Not to
hazard any Troops in pursuing their Enemies, hardly to be overtaken, but to
attempt some one of their strong Holds, Hatwan being thought the most necessary
place; being so seated, as that, besides the great harm it did to the
Christians thereabouts, it much hindered both Advertisements and Victuals to be
brought to Pesthe Whereupon, they forthwith razing St. Andrews and Vicegrade
Forts, with all their power set (...) toward Hatwan, beyond Danubius toward the
North, about 8 Leagues from Buda: which, Maximilian taking in 1594. for the
irrepairable losses the Christians had received from this Garrison, caused it
to be then dismantled, and made unserviceable for the Wars; after which, for
all that, the Turks had new fortified it with Walls, made of Wood and Faggots,
with earth rammed in betwixt them, stronger, and better able to endure the
Cannon than Walls of stone: in which sort, the Turks use most commonly to
fortify such places as they mean to defend. At the Christians first coming
unto it, Sultz with 300 Lansquenets, and Grasold with part of his Italian
Regiment, were sent before to begin to make the approaches: which they did, by
forcing of a Watermill, not past a Musket shot from the Town; the Turks the
while, sallying out, had with them a sharp Combat hand to hand, many losing
their lives: Grasold himself being slain with a small shot, to the great hurt of
the whole Army (specially of the Italians): yet at last the Turks were forced
confusedly to retire into the Town, losing a number also. The Christians
proceeded in making their approaches, and placing their Gabions to recover
their Cannon; wherein the Turks greatly hurt them with great and small shot,
chiefly with murdering pieces charged with nails. Yet, by the coming in of
the Army, the approaches next day were brought on, and the battery planted. so
near, that the Turks could not without most manifest danger and loss, any more
sally out: While the diligent Christians took from the besieged their Water,
the Cannon furiously battered the Walls. The Turk, discouraged, and out of hope
of relief, thought it best by (...), while their strength was whole, to prevent
the danger of a Breach and Assault, sent 2 of their chief men to treat; at
first, Demanding to depart safely with bag and baggage but it was answered,
They should only with life and liberty (...) gone, with some few hundreds of
their worst Horses to carry them whither they meant to retire, and to deliver
into the Christians hands, all Renegates in the Town; the General threatening
the like misery asat the former siege, if they should expect the dreadful
event of a general assault; So, that they accepted of these hard conditions:
and, full of sorrow and heaviness, departed with their Families November 29,
being safely conducted to Solnock.

The Christians entering the Town, found great store of Victuals, Munition,
Corn, and other necessaries, and the shops stored with weapons, shot and
powder, with 24 pieces of Ordnance ready mounted; but, without resolution, all
these are but of small force, and with which they are able to do much. The
place thus furnished, well considered, seemed almost impossible to be forced,
especially Winter being come on, which might have brought many intolerable
storms and difficulties upon the besiegers: So, that every man with eyes cast
up, gave God the praise, for taking away the Turks courages in so great
advantages, and increasing the Christians in no less difficulties. The
Christian General put into it 1000 Lansquenets, and 500 Hungarian Horse and
Foot, then he retired toward Pesth, which he relieved with Victuals, there
billeting that (...). The Troops of (...) Geisberg and Rover, to preserve it
also against the devices and practices of those of Buda, for regaining thereof.
Lord Rusworm breaking up his Army near Strigonium, sent sixty four brave
Ensigns, all that he this year gained from the Turks, with great triumph to
Vienna, for a Present to Matthias, who greatly thanked both the General and
Soldiers, and bountifully rewarded them that brought them: they of Vienna
also, highly commending Rusworm, and not a little rejoicing to see those
braving Ensigns now in their power.

The Army being broken up, a number of Soldiers, especially of Colonel
Altmein's Regiment coming for Booty, most cruelly rifled and spoiled the
Villages and Inhabitants, both Christians and Turks: who, by the Emperors
command were charged at Widhof, and 230 of them brought in prisoners to Vienna,
34 of whom, were for Example hanged, and the rest cashiered.

Count Reingrave's Regiment, were put into the Villages of Chiante and Ternavy:
where, besides the troubles they had with the Neighboring Turks, the very
Country-Inhabitants, oft-times, and that for little or no occasion, right
furiously charged them as their mortal Enemies; so that these valiant men still
forced to buy their bread with the price of their blood, used the Christians as
they did the Turks; but, in these small and often fights, some good number of
men on one side or other were every day slain: Wherefore, these Soldiers
resolved to go seek their living elsewhere, and the rather, for that Captain
Clinchamp's Troop, the best in the Regiment, was one night furiously assailed,
and almost surprised by the Peasants: Wherefore, they departed into Austria
without Victuals, Apparel, or Money, their pay due for 17 months being kept
from them, a cruelty full of covetousness, and a covetousness full of cruelty;
but, great was the Wisdom of Angustus, upholding of his State, who laid up the
public Revenue apart by it self, to defray the public charge, and his own
private for his private uses.

These poor Soldiers, craved leave of the Bishop of Bresburg to pass by his
Suburbs without doing any harm, which he granting, they passed accordingly:
Wherefore, the Bishop furnished them with Boats to pass over the River;
dividing Hungary from Austria; but 1500 of the Peasants of Austria assembled
together, and cast up a Fort upon the Bank with three Faulcons, to keep them
from coming over: for a while, courteously requested passage of them,
promising all good behavior in passing quietly through their Country: who (...)
(...), (...) the danger of their lives, if they should attempt the passage:
Whereupon, these provoked Martial men, turning the head of their baggages
toward the Fort as if they would have there passed, while the Peasants stood
gazing upon them, Camgaillard with his Troop, swam over a little higher up,
unperceived: Chinchampe with his, following also: they were much troubled with
flakes of Ice, the Rivers deepness, steepness of the Banks, and many
difficulties: yet being got over, they suddenly and furiously charged these
Peasants, 300 of them being soon slain upon the place, as many hurt, the rest
put to flight: which done, the rest of the Troops passed the River: 7 weeks
were they in Austria, and longer had stayed; but that, upon complaint and
request of the people, they receiving 9 months pay for 17, had leave to depart:
a great oversight, to disband at once so many men, as not their like among all
the Emperor's Garrison; for, when necessity called for them again, the
Emperor could raise but 3 Troops of all that strong Regiment (they being
sundrywayes dispersed) one whereof Camgaillard had, the second Marades a
Spaniard, the third, John Paul an Italian: who, all had before done good
service in Reingraves Regiment.

This year 1603 ended with diverse conflicts, favoring the Christians: 300
Haiducks seeking for booty, met with a very rich Company of. Turks: the
Governor of Mohatz being one all whom they cut in pieces, who, most cruelly
had before spoiled them of their Parents Lands and Goods. They took also the
Governor of Capan with his Son, and 24 other rich Turks: 170 Horses for
service, and 8 fat Oxen, which drew forth others to seek for the like: Of whom,
certain Troops met the Governor of Batzwar, come out against them with his
Garrison; in which hot fight, at first, the Turks seemed to have the better,
but at last, the Christians cut them in pieces: diverse prisoners being (...), 3
Ensigns, and many rich spoils; after which, the Vayuod of Moldavia sent news,
that the Tartars having with all cruelty wasted that Country, the Inhabitants,
desperate, generally joined in Arms with him to try their last Fortune, and
fighting with the Tartars, slew a number upon the place, put the rest to
flight, and chased them out of the Country. So, notably revenging their former
losses.

Neither were the Turks in this cold time of the year idle. The Bassa Beged,
hearing that Basta lay with his Troops dispersed about Lippa in great security,
by reason of the extremity of the time, acquainted 3 other Turkish Commanders
with the matter: who, with 5000 men set all forward, hoping suddenly to have
surprised him: but he had his Spies still abroad: who, advising him of their
purpose and coming, he collected his Forces, and set forward to meet them,
and, in a place of disadvantage, suddenly charged them round, fearing no such
thing; so that, as dismayed, after some small resistance, they fled: above 1100
Turks being slain, the rest perishing in the river (...), a few only with the
Bassa, by speed, escaping: 20 Captains were taken, a few other prisoners, but a
great and rich prey. Much about this time, Barbell a chief Rebel in
Transylvania, acknowledging his fault, came to (...), to swear his Allegiance;
whereby, a great many others submitted also: but Barbell (...) after, suddenly
died, The other Rebels not moved, chose one (...) Gabor (a most renowned
Captain for their Chieftain) who proud hereof, presently sent a Herald to
(...), Willing him to deliver to him all Transylvania as to him lately chosen
Prince, or else to denounce to him most cruel War, hoping without any aid of
the Turk, to drive him out, being well assured of the Transilvanians. Basta
smiling, vouchsafed him (...) other answer, but the showing him his open hand.

Gabor bare himself the higher for marrying Moyses's Widow gaining thereby
great Riches, and much credit among the common (...); but, the fourth day after
he was married, he dyed: yet, Basta put into the strong places Garrisons of his
most faithful Germans, sending Crausenich to the (...), to request 1000 Horse,
and 4000 Foot, without which speedy supply, he thought it unpossible to
preserve and keep that Province, troubled with so great Factions, and so
earnestly sought after by the Turks: for want whereof, he would acquit himself
for the loss thereof: and lay it upon the negligence of those, who might and
ought to have sent the same.

But, the Bassa with his weak Army being returned out of Hungary, and himself
returned toward Constantinople; Zellaly the Asian Rebel, who had done notable
service all the time of that Bassaes abode in Hungary, withdrew himself with
3000 Horse into his promised Government of Bosna, to possess the same,
encamping in a large Meadow in sight of Bagnale, the chief City of that
Province.

Zeffer Bassa, not yet discharged of his Government, seeing him thus encroach;
as if he would by force intrude himself, speedily assembling his men of War,
went against Zellay, with purpose quickly to cut his small number in pieces; but
he, having lost the best part of his Forces in Hungary, resolved to attempt
that by policy, which by force he could not effect; Wherefore, he began to
encamp himself, as if he meant there to lay: and presently after making great
fires by night in his Tents, as if to beguile the Enemy, he suddenly departed;
Whereupon, the Bassa with his Soldiers hearing thereof, hasted to take the
pillage of the same, esteeming of Zellaly but as of a base Coward; but, while
the Soldiers were charging themselves with the spoil, which the Bassa gave
unto them, Zellaly, the same night, surprised them being asleep: Some began to
make head; but, through the general fear, and being disordered, they were
quickly with the rest, forced, overthrown, and slain: 6000 of the Turks being
found dead on the place: the Bassa himself escaping by flight, with such as
could get out of the Camp to follow him. Zellaly marching in haste- to all the
chief places, caused all those Inhabitants, with most of the Country people,
to swear to him their faithful obedience: collecting, in so doing, great
Wealth, and many brave Horses, all which, he put into Balnaluc, a strong Town,
whereinto he in triumph entered, with a Crown of Laurel on his Head, his
Soldiers singing praises, and the Ordnance continually shooting off, for two
days together; giving out withal, among all his joyful Feasts and triumphs,
that he resolved to take part with the Emperor, if the great Courtiers should
seek to cross his desires, or formalize this manner of obtaining his
Government.

Mahomet, in doubt of this man, sent for him by diverse Messengers, to
Constantinople, to receive the rewards of his good service and valor in
Hungary: the greatness whereof, he said, he understood by Hassan Bassa, so that
it was his desire and pleasure, to grace him in Court with his own hands, for
the greater Testimony of his love, and esteem of him; but he, craftily doubting
these fair words were but baits, to draw him into his power, etc. civilly
answered, He most humbly thanked the Sultan, etc. but he desired no greater
reward for his services done, more than the Government his Majesty promised
him, whereof he was now possessed, resolving to keep it for his service, which
he could not think, but to be to his good liking.

But with this sly answer, Mahomet must, as yet, content himself, lest if he
should have sought by force, to remove him, he might have raised a more
dangerous Rebellion in Europe, than was in Asia.

The business of peace the last year begun, was even with the beginning of this
year 1604, continued, so that Commissioners on both sides, were appointed to
confer, and conclude about the same: Col. Althem being one, who with the other
Commissioners, and some other Captains, landed in the Island betwixt Buda and
Pesth: the Turks of Buda, coming forthwith thither also, with all outward
shows of their most earnest desire, for concluding a peace; but the Christians
assured, that necessity, and not a desire of quietness, had drawn them to seek
for it, showed themselves very backward herein, knowing they did it but to
overtake them, etc. Jan. 5th, the Bassa of Buda, had appointed, with the other
Commissioners, to come into the Isle; but at length, Letters came from him to
Althem, excusing his not coming, requesting them to come over to Buda the more
commodiously to confer, and conclude Althem, deeming every action, tending to
the hinderance of the common good, to be but in show, honorable, and indeed,
hurtful, sent before, the Gentleman of his Stable, his Cook, with the Turk sent
from the Bassa, who were assailed with such a cruel Tempest upon the River,
that the Boat was sunk, and the men drowned, an ill presage of peace to be
made. But the Tempest being appeased, Althem and (...), passed over the River
to Buda: at whose coming, the Turks (in show, gave 1000 Testimonies of their
joy. The Germans fed largely of the good Cheer, and filled themselves with
(...) of Wine given them; and they also using the Turks kindly, as if their
Brethren, etc. Amidst which, a Truce for 12 days, was demanded, to consider of
the Turks Proposition of peace: during which time, every man should freely come
and go, whither they would: which agreed on, the Bassa, in presence of the
Commissioners; dispatched a Courrour toward the Sultan, to advertise him of
this his proceeding, according to his Command: that they might believe, the
Sultan and his Captains were desirous of peace. Then the Bassa presented to
Althem, two Cases of Arms of all fashions, very rich and artificial, carried by
a Mule, with very sumptuous Furniture for a Horse, as a Present from his Master
to the Emperor; and for Matthias, he presented, a Purple-Velvet rich Robe, so
cunningly wrought with the needle, that every man wondered thereat, when Althem
presented it with other Turkish Presents to the Archduke: He presented also to
Althem himself, a very fair and rich Robe, and all the Commissioners had Robes
of less value; yet very rich and sumptuous. The Commissioners returned back to
Pesth: yet these fair Presents, were indeed but like those of Hector and Ajax,
tending rather to War, than Peace.

At this time died Lord Nadasti, of a natural death; (about 54 years old)
another ill presage of the bad success of this Treaty: who was the first
Christian Chieftain, that made head against the Turks, when Amurath invaded
Hungary: who being by their sudden coming in, almost surprised; yet performed,
great and worthy exploits and service against them: he being dead, the Country
of Hungaries good fortune died also: even at the giving up the Ghost, he yet
breathed Wars against those Enemies of the Christian Faith: his death being
much lamented of many, chiefly of his own Tenants, whom he had always preserved
in safety and peace; the Turks not daring to assail them, nor enter their
Territory: in which, never was Turk buried, through his wisdom and valor, no
more than were the Barbarians, upon the banks of the River Eurotas. He was
another Epaminondas, who made his Town both free from their Enemies invasions,
and also dreadful to their Forces, while he lived. The Turks rejoicing, came
now into his rich and plentiful Country, to take its spoil; but they were no
sooner entered therein, but valiant Collonitz, a new Nadasti, holding that for
his own, which his honored Fellow in Arms had left, encountered, and so
overthrew them, that, for a good while after, they durst not attempt the like.

But about the time of his Death, the valiant Vayuod of Valachia, collecting
his Troops, and other small forces, (whereof the Turks little accounted, and
therefore without order, ransacked his Country) on a sudden, cut many in
pieces, and took a number more, chasing the rest with such fear, out of his
Country, that for a great while, they delighted not to look thereinto.

The Bassa of Buda, now, sent diverse Currours to the Turkish Captains and
Governors, especially to him of Agria, to abstain from their ordinary
incursions into the Christians Territories, and from all other acts of
hostility, till by him otherwise commanded: which little respite, greatly
contented the poor people, with Wars almost exhausted and spent. During this
Truce, both Turks as well as Christian Soldiers, ran to the places of
encamping, and, mingled together, delved and searched to find such things as
the Armies rising in haste, had happily left there buried, without any injury to
each other by word or deed: in which mad labor, they spent many days.

They of Pesth, also went into the victualling-Houses of the Turks at Buda, and
walked up and down the Town at pleasure. So did the Turks of Buda, at Pesth;
but while these mutual and unwonted courtesies thus passed (...) them, and
most men's minds were filled with expectation of a sudden peace, Sultan Mahomet
died: which news, being brought by a Currour, in the evening, to Buda, the
Bassa sent a Captain to Geisberg at (...), to assure him thereof, and of his
young Son Achmat his succession in his Empire: by which Messenger, he also
wrote to Althem, to certify him, both of Mahomet's death, the succession of
his Son, and also that he was by him commanded to continne the negotiation of
the peace, and if he could, to conclude the same: which Letters, although they
were too friendly from an Enemy, to have any good meaning for peace; yet did
they (...) assure the Colonel of the Sultan's Death, and Succession of his
Son Achmat.

Mahomet, departed this life, about the end of Jan. 1604, about 44 years old,
reigning 8. He was of no great spirit, yet exceeding proud: wherefore, he was
both the less beloved and feared of his Subjects: the Janissaries and other
Soldiers, not only rebelling, but (...) in their rages, about to depose him.
He was wholly given to sensuality and pleasure, the marks whereof, were, a
Foul, swollen, and overgrown body, whose idleness, pleasure, and excess, were no
small means for shortning his days: which he ended with obloquie, unregarded
of his Subjects, and of few or none lamented. He had 4 Sons, 3 Daughters,
married to 3 of the great Bassaes. Mahomet his eldest Son he had strangled
(as aforesaid) in his own sight, but finding him afterward guiltless, he
buried him in his own Sepulcher: his second Sonnedied very young: Achmat was
the third Son. The fourth, being kept in the Seraglio, with such a strait
Guard, that his name was not to be searned by one, who laying above 3 months
at Constantinople, most curiously enquired after the same. He was reported to
have been murdered; yet he was a good while after that, alive; but looking
every day to be strangled by his Brothers Command.

Mahomets dead Body, lies buried in a fair Chapel of white Marble, nigh the
Temple of Sophia, built by himself for that only purpose, about 50 foot
square, with four high small round Towers, about which, are certain small round
Galleries of Stone, from which, the Turkish Priests, etc. use to call the
people, daily to public devotion; for they use no Bells themselves, nor will
they (...) the Christians to use any.

The Turks bury none within their Temples, or CityWalls, but the Emperors,
with Wives and Children about them, and some few other of their great Bassaes;
and those in Chapels built on purpose, with their adjoining stately
Almshouses, not much inferior to those of the great Sultans. All other Turks
are buried in the Fields, some in Tombs of Marble: the rest, with stones laid
upon them, or two great stones at head and foot, most being white Marble,
brought from the Isle Marmora.

They bury none, where another has been buried, accounting it great impiety,
to dig up another man's bones: whereby all the best ground about the City, is
covered with an infinite number of such great Stones. Neither Christian or
Turk, may enter into any Turkish Temple or Chapel, (...) he must put off his
shoes. But let us now (...) the course of our History.

The Life of Achmat the first, Eighth Emperor of the Turks.
AChmat, to take from the Court-Souldiers, all occasions of coffeehouse, by
the Counsel of the great Bassaes, before he took on him the Government,
distributed two millions and a half of money among them: the Spahi and
Silictars Horsemen, having ten Crowns a man, with five aspers a day more pay;
and the Janissaries 30 Crowns a man, and one asper a day more; they of his
Court, tasting of his bounty also. Then (all men contented) he in a most
stately Chariot, was in great Majesty, carried through all the chief Streets of
Constantinople, the people gazing and acclaiming; some wishing, that he (but
young, about 15 years old) might, as another Solomon, begin his Reign with the
Conquest of Malta, as he had of the Rhodes: others, that with glorious
Conquests, he might be like Mahomet the great, whom he was reported much to
resemble; So he, with all solemnities openly crowned, every man wishing him, a
long and happy Reign: in whose Authority and Name, there were many good Orders,
for relief of his oppressed Subjects, during his Fathers loose Reign: He
removed also, his most proud and rich Grandmother, from all Command in the
State, setting the Persian Ambassador (close shut up by his Father) at liberty,
sending with him, the Bassa of Aleppo, to entreat of peace, with the Shaugh of
Persia, who was reported, to recover Tauris, and then preparing for new
Conquests; for which motion of peace, some condemned his patience, as not
beseeming the Othoman Emperors, etc. others praising his (...) dom therein, in
seeking by fair means, in the beginning of his Reign, to disarm his Enemies;
in his settled Estate, to oppress them.

The Bassa of Buda also, wrote to the Governor of Strigonium, to repair to
some fit place, for concluding of peace: whereupon, he (...) other
Commissioners, Febr. the 4th, came to Collonitz his Camp: whence, being bravely
conducted to the Ships, ready to carry them to Pesth, in their passage, both
the Turks of Buda, and Christians of Pesth, strove to excel in the thundering of
the great Artillery.

The Commissioners were met at Pesth, with many of the better sort of Turks
sent from the Bassa of Buda, in his name, to greet them: who, with many
honors, again received them; and next day, sent a number of Christians to
Buda, to invite some of the chief Turks to a Banquet at Pesth, 600 of whom,
willingly coming, the Feast was most magnificently prepared, ten Pavilions
being set up for their entertainment, a little off from Pesth: in the first,
were three stately Tables: (...) the first whereof, on the right hand, sat the
Commissioners, the two Bassaes, one Mufti or Archpriest, with his (...), a
long furred Gown, under which, was a Robe of exceeding rich silk: on the left
hand, were Turkish Lords, and other great ones: at all other Tables, were set a
Christian and a Turk, till they were all placed: the Turks (after their
superstitious manner, would not sit down before Sunsetting, and then, with
abundance of Ceremonies, in imitation of their Mufti, sat down, merrily
reposing till nine at night, and then returned to Buda; Instruments of Music,
Trumpets and Drums on every side sounding about them. And yet was all this fair
show, nothing but deep dissimulation, and treachery; for a little before their
departure, they of Pesth were advertised, that the Turks of Buda, were come out
to surprise Pesth, hoping, that during this Feast, the Christians had (...) the
Walls unfurnished; but they, as well providing for defense of the Town, as for
the Feast abroad: the Turks were glad to return disappointed of their purpose.

Next day, the Commissioners complained to the Bassa, and other Turks
Commissioners, of this so treacherous dealing: who excused themselves, as
ignorant thereof, disavowing the action, for want of success, which otherwise,
they would have maintained to the utmost; an ordinary course among the great.

Nevertheless, the Turks, next day, requested the Christian Commissioners, to
come likewise to Buda; but they excusing themselves, returned to Strigonium, as
loath to adventure themselves into their power; yet they left Geisberg, to
continue the negotiation with the Bassa, if he should find him thereunto
disposed, and c.

Count ISOLAN being set at liberty by MAHOMET, upon the condition aforesaid,
declared to the EMPEROR, that the SULTAN offered to deliver Buda, Alba
Regalis, and Canisia, in exchange of TRANSYLVANIA, and VALACHIA, whereto he
laid claim, promising to give such reasonable assurance of a most firm peace,
as the EMPEROR should demand.

The Bassa of Buda also, among other fair Remonstrances, had offered the
Commissioners of Canisia and Agria, for Pesth, Hatwan, and Vacia; with
remission of all Tributes and payments, due for Hungary: all which, though much
unreasonable, were but windy words to delay time, and snares to entangle the
CHRISTIANS, with vain hope of their so much wished, and expected peace, till
they might fortify their Towns with all things needful; for Achmat now
succeeding Mahomet, they aggravated the conditions of the peace, propounding
them very far from reason: and sent from Constantinople, in post to the Bassa
of Buda, forbidding him, on pain of his Head, any longer to continue the
Treaty, but forthwith, to renew the War; and yet, during this negotiation of
peace, often sought for by the Turks, many a solemn (...), had passed from
Sultan, Mahomet, and the (...) Bassa, for their faithful dealing therein, as,
By the God of Heaven and Earth, By the Books of Moses, By David's (...), and By
the Holy Evangelists: Oaths much used in their greatest Solemnities, and
strongest assurances of their promises.

The Treaty for peace thus broken off, some bruited, that Achmat, under the
Conduct of the Vizier his Governor, was in person, about to come into Hungary,
with a most huge Army: others reported, he was let so to do, by reason of
the Persian Wars; so that he would only send a great Bassa, with the
remainder of his great Forces into Hungary, being sworn, never to return to
Constantinople, till he had brought Transylvania, Valachia, with the remainder
of Hungary, under Turkish obeisance, together with Austria, chiefly Vienna: to
which ends, Achmat had rigorously in all places, leavied great sums of money:
others also said, that only preparations for so great an Army, should be made
this year, to do much with all the next; and not return out of Hungary, till
(...) had conquered all the rest of it, in whose rent relics, the fortune of
the Othomans had stayed; So that all Handy-crafts men, were employed day and
night, to prepare all things and Instruments, for so great exploits: to wit,
for the service of the Vizier in Hungary, and of Cicala Bassa, in Persia,
having presumptuously promised, (...) to ruinate the Persian Estate: which
Eastern Wars, much troubled the Turks; news still coming of Persian
Conquests, upon their Territories; and that the Persian had lately taken
Babylon, with all the Country thereabout; and that (...) other Towns and
Cities, now yielded to the Persian, as weary of the Turk's servitude; and yet
the Turks had given it out, that the Persian King was, nigh to Babylon, wholly
overthrown, and himself taken; so that the Turk's forces should now all join to
the utter ruin of the Christians in HUNGARY: also, that the BEGLERBEG of
Greece, had raised a great power to join with the Vizier Bassa, that nothing
might be left unconquered in Hungary, causing a great number of Vessels, (...)
with Powder, and Warlike Provision, to be brought out of Egypt to Belgrade, to
ruinate the Christians: all which reports, were to cover their mishaps, and
terrify their Enemies, knowing that a false bruit believed, works often times
the effect of a thing done.

Some at Constantinople, now persuaded the Great Sultan, that he might at one
and the same time, vanquish the Persian, by Cicala, and conquer the remainder
of Hungary, with Transylvania and Valachia, by (...) Vizier: it being (they
said) both honorable, and (...), for a Prince to bestow both men and money, to
gain Men, Honor, and Empire: So that things, which with great charge, might be
done all at once, were more profitable then, though with less charge, done at
(...) times; and indeed, men stood in great fear of this young Achmat: who in
his behavior and actions, much resembled Mahomet the 2d, and, like a young
Alexander occupied himself in all Exercises of War, hating idleness, and c. So
that it was greatly to be feared, that he would have brought Christendom under
his obeisance. He soon put to death, diverse of his chief Nobles, and domestic
Servants, with one Bassa also, who was Governor of Pesth, when it was won.

But let us return into Hungary, taking Transylvania in our way: which sometime
renowned and plentiful Province, was by civil discord and Rebellion, against
the Emperor not by (...) invasion, so wasted and spoiled by the Soldiers on
all sides, that many Inhabitants, for want of food, fell down dead in the
streets, and fields: miserable wretches, always sowing, but never reaping;
laboring, but not profiting; so that at length, the fields lay untilled, the
Pastures unstored and neglected, and all (...) unmanured, and quite out of
course; so that the poor Peasants, having eaten up all the Dogs, Cats, Mice,
and (...), they could get, ate dead Horses, and other hunger-starved Carrion;
they report also, one man eat another. And that at Hermanstat, a Woman having
six Children, they ate each other, till all six (...) devoured; and that two
men did eat their own Mother; yea, malefactors hanged, were by the hungry
people, cut down and devoured: people generally living only on roots of Weeds,
green Herbs, and leaves of Trees: whereupon, all parties agreed, a general
Assembly of the States, to be holden at Dewa, where they accorded, that all
Hostility set a part, the Gentlemen of Transylvania, having by Rebellion,
forfeited life and Land, should be pardoned their lives, with 3 parts of their
Lands, and that for ready money, they might redeem of the (...), the 4th part
also; but the movables of such as died in those troubles, and already
confiscated, should so remain; and they to pay their dismes, or tenth of their
Wine and Fruits to the Emperor; and that no exercise of Religion to be
permitted them, but the Romish only; and that Constat and Clausenberg, within
three weeks, to pay the one twenty thousand Dollars, the other eight thousand,
and their MAGISTRATES, to deliver up the Keys of the Towns, with all power,
into the hands of the EMPEROR'S Lieutenant; and the Gentlemen hereof, that
would not be accounted as Rebels, to take Letters of pardon of the GENERAL:
which pacification, gave some little breathing-time, to this poor distressed
Country: whose people (in hope) began to give themselves to their wonted
labors; but alas, all in vain; for the Soldiers enured to prey, made havoc
of all things: the causes whereof, were the Nobility and Gentlemen, who (as
they took it) oppressed by the GERMANS, and being rather necessitated, than
upon any desire, to yield to the said pacification, still underhand incited
the Soldiers, and in what they could, troubled the GERMAN'S Government, whom
they accounted but as strangers: which doings, BASTA perceiving, apprehended
three of the greatest Gentlemen, suspected to be the Authors of these
troubles, and mured them fast up betwixt two strong Walls in an old Monastery:
whose friends coming to visit them, and finding them starved to death, were
much abashed, as were their accomplices, when they heard thereof.

Now the TURKS having provided ALBA REGALIS, AGRIA, and BUDA, of necessaries,
and put into Agria in four Wagons, the pay due to their Garrisons, began to
scoff and jest at the CHRISTIANS credulity, that they had any purpose to
conclude on any thing not agreeing with their profit, how far soever
differing from their honor or faith; so that they renewed their wonted
incursions and pillages, in more cruel manner than ever: the Hussars, on the
other side, requiting them with the like, being as well contented as the Turks
with these doings.

Now eighty Turks going forth for booty, met with these Hussars, who being too
weak, fled, some being taken and brought to the General, who upon examination,
confessed, that the Turks much marvelled at the simplicity and folly of the
Christians, to believe that they were (...) of peace, and not to have
discovered their so manifest (...) (...) the contrary, etc. and that young
Achmat was always against this Treaty, whatever show (by (...) of the Persian
Victory) he made to the contrary, aiming (...) no other mark, but the ruin of
Christendom. The (...) of Pappa and Vesprinium, first began the broils (...)
this (...), who, conjoyning, met with a number of (...), driving Cattle toward
Alba Regalis, carrying away (with the Cattle) them prisoners, and one night, 20
Christians prisoners in Buda, cutting the throats of their keepers, oppressed
with Wine and sleep, escaped to Pesth.

In the mean time, Zeffer Bassa, supported with the Sultan's Authority, and
desirous to be revenged, with a great Army, suddenly entered Bosna, overthrowing
Zellaly, fearing no such matter; and, chasing him quite out of the Province,
recovered that Government again. But short was his joy thereof; for within few
days after, he died.

The Court-Bassaes, loath now to lose such a Soldier as Zellaly, (who, as
distressed, was shifting for himself) or by hard (...), to deterr the other
Asian Rebels from coming in; yet unwilling to trust him with so great a
Government as Bosna, made him Governor of Temeswar; and Begedes Bassa, before
Governor there, to succeed Zeffer Bassa.

But the States of Hungary, appointing a general Meeting at Possonium, wherein
Matthias was to sit as President, to (...) of means to maintain this years
Wars: as the Archduke was about to enter the City among his Soldiers, a
sudden fire arose, which consumed most part thereof: which evil presage, and
woeful Spectacle, turned all men from his (...) (...), to the (...) of the
raging fire: Besides which, and the harms then done by the Turks in other parts
of Hungary, holden by the Christians; Col. Althem's Regiment, had so spoiled
the Country where it lay, that the people in general, grievously (...) to the
Emperor, he caused the Authors of these g eat outrages, to be brought
prisoners to Vienna, where (...) were beheaded, and some hanged: and son e
other Captains and Lievtenants, derying the fact, and others justifying what
they had done, as of extreme necessity, were for further trial, sent prisoners
to Prague: amongst whom, was Genderot Althem's Ancient, who had lately slain
Neudercy, a Gentleman, and his fellow in Arms; for which, he was committed into
a very high and strong Tower within the Castle, till his Trial: who through
guilt of conscience, and horror of that criminal place, (one of his Lacquies
finding means to bring him a long Cord) by straining himself out at a little
Window, whereby (...) thought, almost impossible for any man to get out, got
safely down, and by two good Horses ready for him, escaped: his Keepers, drunk
over night, being found in the morning, yet sleeping. Of the other Officers,
some were beheaded, and some hanged: the rest, at the intercession of great
men, were pardoned; yet so, that they should pay their fines, and serve the
Emperor three months, of their own charge: a few common Soldiers, for terror
sake, had two fingers of their right hands, cut off, and then set up by the way
side, nailed to Gibbets.

Likewise, Col. Meysberg's Regiment, mutininging for pay, encamped at Sneche,
about a League from Vienna, threatening to destroy the Country, and kill the
chief men, if they were not paid: whose Captains, entereated them, and promised
them pay, but to no purpose; yea, the Colonel himself in the midst of them,
with most earnest prayers, and hands cast up, minded them of their duty and
danger; but they, carried headlong with their fury, presently chose another
Chieftain, under whom, they resolved, to rifle the Suburbs of Vienna, thereby
to pay themselves; and so drawing near the City, the Governors thereof moved,
resolved by plain force, to repress and (...) them: many of whom, (for all
(...)) were, even against their wills, carried away in this mutinous action, as
with the violence of a heady River.

Now besides the Town-Captains, with their Companies, and other sent-supply,
diverse Burgesses were enforced to enter into this action also: two of whom
being counted very honest religious men, labored by lively reasons, and the
word of God, to prove, that they might not enter into (...); against their
Christian Brethren: forced with extremities to forget their duty; but Law or
Reason, cannot be heard among the clattering of Arms; so these two men, forced
to go, and much grieved in Conscience (...), resolved rather to die themselves,
than to (...) their hands with the blood of the innocent (as they accounted
them:) whereupon, one of them, often calling upon the name of Jesus, thrust
himself through with his Sword; the other, throwing himself into the River, and
perishing also. At last, the mutiners being even ready to be charged, and that
with a stronger power, laid down Arms, craving pardon of the ArchDuke, who
took them to mercy; yet with condition of returning to their Garrisons, and
delivering up the ringleaders to be punished, as they were afterward. The
Turks (the while) were ready to take advantage of the Christians dangerous
discord.

Zellaly, having plotted the surprisall of Lippa, came by night from Temeswar
to Lippa, with the greatest power he could make, (...) up scaling-Ladders; and
at the same time, laboring to force the Gates, and that with a most terrible
outcry, being once discovered, thereby to dismay the Christians, who coming
(as awaked) to the Walls, so repulsed the Turks, that they retired, losing a
number of their men. on whom the Christians sallying out, slew many in their
disordered retreat, and took many more prisoners; yea, Zellaly himself was glad
he had recovered the Walls of Temeswar: Some Turks taken, said, the Army this
year to come into Hungary, was like to be very great, part thereof being come
into Belgrade, expecting there the coming of the Tartars: and that by reason
of the Wars with Persia, the Sultan had commanded all able to bear Arms both
in (...), and that part of Hungary, subject to him, and in adjoining places,
(...) be ready to join with his Army in Hungary: and that the Persian had
overthrown (...), taken his Son, slain almost all his Troops, and confederated
with Caracase, chief Rebel in Asia: whose great number of valiant men, were
resolutely set for the troubling of the Sultans estate. About this time, the
Governor of Cassovia, going forth with many of his Garrisons, to appease the
Soldiers in the Country mutinying for their pay, showing them the danger, and
persuading them by the ill success of such actions to return to their duties:
and they contrarily urging payment, or leave to depart, as not able longer to
continue; in his few days absence, certain Turks (...) in Cassovia, brake their
Irons, and slew their keepers, in hope to escape: but being discovered and
surprised, and by torture examined, how they thought to have escaped, the Walls
being still kept with Sentinels; they confessed, They intended that night to
fire the City in diverse places, and then to have flain the Sentinels, and so to
escape: Whereupon, some few were executed, and the rest more straightly
imprisoned, and looked to than before. But at the same time, a Soldier of the
Garrison of (...) in the Citadel there, by neglect or mishap, (...) fire into
the powder for the Castle's store, blew up the Citadel, Towers, Houses, Walls
and made this place like another Rome, burnt by Nero; so that, had any
Christian Forces bin near, they might easily have won the same, both for the
small resistance in so great astonishment, as destruction thereof.

Now also, 200 Turks of Buda, sent to fetch in forage a little from Pesth; the
Christians there sallied out, and charged them in this action: who, right
valiantly defended themselves a while, but at length, oppressed with number,
they were most slain, and the rest taken: so, that the Bassa of Buda, in his
rage, threatened to do unto the Christians what harm he could. But men warned
are halfarmed.

There were the like or worse Calamities in Transylvania, extreme want of all
things, sore raging in both Countries: so that, hardly has any misery been
seen or read of, which was not in those 2 Countries to be found, and of many
felt: wherefore, Basta had by diligence lately (as was declared) brought
Transylvania into some good terms as was thought; yet it proved far otherwise:
for the Nobility, detesting the Germans and their Government, rejected the
decrees of the late Assembly, for concluding of peace; so that, assisted by the
Turks, they had took some strong places in the Province, appointing a place to
meet at, where the Turks and they might confer of the means to effect their
designs: Basta, hearing secretly hereof, sent many Haidusks to lay in wait for
them on the way: by which skillful men in the passages of the Country, the
Turks and Transilvanians were altogether surprised and slain: after which,
these and other Soldiers, destitute of pay, furiously fell upon the Province,
as if they had bin mortal Enemies, seizing upon all men's goods in common, for
that which some few kept from them, massacring all in their way: chiefly, the
poor weak innocent people; who, called and cried upon the Almighty for remedy
of these evils, and for revenge of so great and cruel wrongs. No man could
travel, without danger to be spoiled by Thieves: for the Haiducks, living by
prey and roaming up and down, spared neither Turks nor Christians: so that
they, hearing the Zecclers were bringing many Wagons laden with Victuals, and
many Cattle to Claudianople, though they were of the same party, lay in wait
for them: against whom they seeking to defend themselves, were cruelly
massacred, and Wagons with the Beeves, and other cattle carryediaway. But
hunger forces men to all extremities. The Famine now was such, that the people
lived mostly by Roots of Herbs and Weeds, etc. whereof great mortality ensued:
which caused Horwat, Captain of these Haiducks, being reproved for their
outrages, and charged to take order that no more such were done, to answer, It
was not possible to keep Soldiers in any order amidst the extremities of
Famine; for that, The Belly was an inexorable Usurer, etc.

Amidst these troubles, two Turkish Spies of Buda were taken, who had observed
all the Christians proceedings: also all their designs, preparations, and
levies for this years-Wars; one of whom was empailed, the other straightly
imprisoned, till more matter might be drawn from him. The Bassa of Buda,
hearing that the Christians would forthwith take the Field in Hungary; to
hinder their forwardness, and gain time, till the Turks great Army (then
preparing) might be brought down into Hungary, wrote in most friendly manner to
the Governor of Strigonium, for the Treaty and concluding of a peace with the
Christians: whereof, he with the rest of the Turks, seemed to be very desirous:
telling him, If their Army, then before Belgrade, did once arrive at Buda and
march in field, they could not cause it to return without doing something,
considering the great harms they had received from the Christians during the
Truce, which they had many ways violated: which evil dealings, he said, had
greatly incensed them against their Christian-captives, causing their
Souldidiers to snew great rigor against their slaves: wherefore. he attended
his answer. Yet, during the time of all those fair shows of peace; the Turks,
out of their Garrisons, by night surprised the Castle of Simnin, slew part of
the Christian Soldiers carried away the rest prisoners, and burnt the place,
manifesting by fowl deeds, the ill meaning of fair words: but passing over many
small skirmishes in Hungary and Transylvania, let us look over into Asia.
Cicala Bassa the old Renegate, was sent General into Asia against the Rebels
with a mighty Army, where was made a great and terrible fight. Howbeit, at
length, the Bassa, after a great number on both sides slain, being fled, fled
with his Army wholly disordered, with much ado to save himself; But he, more
ashamed than discouraged, repaired his Army, joining thereto great and mighty
supplies, and so came to revenge his dishonor, and utterly to suppress the
Rebels: who now too weak, wisely betime retired, praying aid of the Persian
King, who sent them his Son, with a great, good, and valiant Army.

The two Armies were now in number equal, but the Rebels of the two, more
resolute and careful of themselves: so that the battle was with great
outcries and fury begun on both sides: at first, The Turks seemed somewhat to
prevail, till the Persian Kings Son with some of his bravest Troops, charging
them in the Rear, and some Rebels with like fury on their flanks, their whole
Army was so disordered, that Cicala doing what he could to restore the Battle,
and nothing prevailing, was glad to flee, 30000 Turks being slain, and 1000
Rebels.

The Persian King after this discomfiture, took in the Country of Sirvan,
whither Cicala (had he prevailed against the Rebels) should have marched, to
have stayed the Persian's Victories: who now won also Arusta, a very great and
strong Town near to Tygris, where it runs into Euphrates, with all the
adjoining places and Countries; and has since recovered from the Turks,
whatever they in Solyman's time took from his Predecessors, except 2 or 3
places.

Young Achmat, had not many months reigned, but he fell sick of the small pox:
whose gross body was so tormented therewith for 14 days, that he often fainting,
'twas thought he would have died: yea, diverse great Bassaes spoke concerning
his younger Brother to be taken out of the Seraglio, to succeed him; which no
doubt had cost him his life after Achmat's recovery, but that he was the only
Othoman Heir left, if his Brother should fail; who now recovered, to show it to
the doubting Janissaries and others, in great State rode up and down through
most of the chief streets of the City; the people rejoicing to see him, and
with most joyful acclamations, wishing him a long and happy Reign: who
forthwith, gave himself to his youthful immoderate pleasures of the Field, and
other such violent exercises: Whereupon, 2 of his Bassaes careful of his
health upon the new recovery of his late sickness, were so bold as to reprove
him for such his immoderate and violent exercises (the day not being long
enough for them) by effectual reasons dissuading him; but he was so far from
hearkening, that therewith enraged, he thrust them both out of their places:
and having glutted himself with his pleasures, began to cast his eyes upon his
more necessary State-affaires: especially on his Wars with the
Christian-Emperour and Persian King:

Hassan Bassa was then at Belgrade, whose longing desire Achmat quickly
satisfied, by sending unto him both a Commission for the continuance of his
Generalship, and also a Generals Ensign, with a Hungarian Mace of pure Gold,
in token of his extraordinary favor toward him: who, to show his contentment,
caused all the great Ordnance of the place to be ost-times discharged, and the
Trumpets and Drumms to be most joyfully sounded.

News came the while to (...), that the Persian King was in field with above
100000 good Soldiers, and that Baggages Bassa, a Rebel in Asia, had
confederated himself with him: Whereupon Achmat, though he had ordered Hassan
to besiege Teradium, a strong City in upper, Hungary, now in haste commanded
the same Vizier, with all the power he could make, to return to Constantinople;
to consult and resolve upon the most necessary War; and of the readiest means
to continue it: who being come thither, the Grand Seignior came to his House;
whither the Council being assembled, it was resolved, at one and the same time
to make War with equal Forces, both upon the Emperor in Hungary, and the
Persian King: no power on Earth, being in their proud conceit, able to
withstand theirs.

So, Hassan Bassa was continued in his charge, and Cicala Bassa the Renegate,
to command the Army to be sent the Persian: an ordinary Policy of the Othomans,
not to commit the charge of their Armies against the Christians unto Renegates:
lest, they touched with remorse, might betray the same, or otherwise deal
unfaithfully.

But, Cicula acquainted with the difficulty and danger of the Persian War,
began to excuse himself, till, upon promise to furnish him with a sufficient
Army, and all things also necessary, with a large and most honorable
entertainment for himself; and all the Persian prisoners being also given unto
him, he accepted thereof, being in his ambitious mind most desirous of that
charge: so, he cheerfully prepared for this so great Expedition, expecting but
the coming of his Son, who, at the Venetians request was gone with a Fleet, to
scour the Levant Seas of Pirates, then exceedingly troubling their Traffic.

Amidst which designs, the Tartar Cham, bound for his pay to serve the Turk
against the Christians, excused himself by his Ambassador, that he could not
come in person this year into Hungary, as being necessarily busied with his own
most urgent affairs: yet promising to send his Son with a good power.

Now, there are diverse causes, why, so a great a Prince, not much in danger to
the Turk being separated from him by the Euxine-Sea, should be so ready at the
Turks call: First, their descent from one beginning, by often marriages
confirmed. Secondly, their likeness of manners and conditions. Thirdly, the
Turkish Empire, for want of Heirs-male, is assured, and as it were entailed, to
the Tartar-Cham, Fourthly, and chiefly, for the yearly Pension and great Pay,
which he, a bare Prince, receives from the Turk; his rude and needy people,
being ready to follow him in hope of spoil. But, his excuse accepted of, Hassan
made great preparation for his good success, gave Achmat great hope, and was
proclaimed Lievt. General of all the Sultans Forces against the Christians,
every man affording a thousand wishes for his health and welfare: chiefly, the
Mohammedan Priests assured him of their help, so he would do his utmost against
the Christians; for, the Turks account him the best and most zealous man, which
can do them most harm. So Hassan set forward with his Army toward Hungary,

The Emperor now, sought by all means how to resist these great preparations
and designs: dispatching his Brother Maximilian to the Pope with express charge
in his name, to yield him all submission, to move him, to relieve his woeful
and distressed affairs: who arriving at Venice, was honorably entertained by
the State; thence traveling toward Rome with a great Retinue; he was met by a
great number of Nobles and their followers, sent from the Pope, and so brought
into the Vatican Palace, the oftener and easier to have access to the Pope, then
sick of the (...), Next day, coming into his presence, after usual reverence
done, he (all the Cardinals being present) first, put him in mind of the
manifest danger which hung over the Christians in general from the Turk,
chiefly over Italy, so nigh unto him, who had a great gap opened to enter, by
Canisia, the Key of Stiria: then, he requested him in the Emperor's behalf, to
stretch forth his helping-Hand against this his mortal Enemy, etc. hoping he
should find the like assistance in this his second need, that he had before
received: the precious Balm of his devout Charity, being of greater Virtue than
to serve but for one time, etc. Which, he besought him to apply upon the
present Wound, since without his help, he was more like to perish than to live.
The Pope answered, His former actions spoke enough for him in this, so that he
need not use further words: who albeit, these evils had so far prevailed in
Hungary, had for his part still done what he might for redeeming thereof: and
now by the advice of his Council, present, had appointed 150000 Crowns toward
those Wars maintenance this year; hoping to do more afterward against the
Turks, Whom God, he said, suffered to prevail upon the Christians, not for any
goodness in them, but to chastise the wickedness of the Christians themselves.

The 150000 Crowns, was by a decree of the Pope and Cardinal levied, and
paid, of the Tenths of the Clergy throughout all Italy. So Maximilian
magnificently entertained, and by the Pope rewarded with 4000 Crowns, returned
unto the Emperor; whom the Turks were not behind in augmenting their Forces,
to invade him: and now the Tartars, coming in great number, and, denied
passage by the Polonians, entered into Valashia, which they all over rifled and
spoiled at pleasure: such people as could escape, fleeing into Towns, leaving
their goods to their merciless rage: Radol the Vayuod, fled to Constat to
Basta, where considering his present danger, and still to expect the like, as
often as the Tartars were thus to come into Hungary, he took a new Oath of
Allegiance to the Emperor, to die and live in his service; who before, had
proudly rejected the acknowledgement of his duty, and remedy of his harms: upon
which submission, Basta took him and his Country into his protection.

In the mean time, 2 Traitors were brought to Claudianople, who very craftily
surprising a strong Castle of a great Lady a Widow, and sacking the same, the
Haiducks surprised them by the way, and (as too weak for them) cut most of them
in pieces, and took the rest: the Traitors being most cruelly put to death to
terrify others.

The Haiducks having no Houses, Fields or Trade, but Arms, and now enraged for
want of their pay, if their right-Hands spoiled the Turks, their left robbed
the Christians, taking from the Turks of Agria much Cattle, and rifling diverse
Christian-Villages in one day: and meeting with a 100 or 120 Wagons, going
with Victuals toward Alba-Julia, conducted by the Zecclers (...) their drivers,
and carried away the Wagons; And the Turks of Temeswar, having bin toward
Lippa, meeting with them, were charged by them for their Booty: but, being
twice as many in number as the Haiducks, they slew most of them, and took the
rest prisoners.

In the mean time, the Christians gave some ear to the Turks old practice of
soliciting a peace, to discover in policy the Commodities and Inconveniences
of the peace by them but in show offered, though with many protestations: for,
in the very time of the parley, they fortified their strong Holds with men and
Victuals: especially Buda, whereinto, by a Convoy, they put in of all sorts of
provision enough for a whole year.

Besides, it was known by some Turkish prisoners, that all was but feigned, to
put the Christians in security: for the Bassa of Buda, had no Commission to
conclude any peace in the Visier's absence; whom the Sultan had charged, not to
make any peace without the delivery of Strigonium, the only cause why they
desired peace: which if the Emperor would not yield, then to take it by force,
and so refuse all other Treaty: Wherefore, the Emperor, wholly resolved for
War, sent Count Zultze to Vienna, appointing Basta his Lievtenant-Gen. in
Hungary, advising them carefully to look to their charge, and not to trust too
much to the Turks glozing speeches.

Now the Haiducks, who ceased not still to look abroad, in roaming toward
Belgrade, lighted upon (...) Castle, wherein 800 Turks Soldiers, and other
their people, abode with most of their substance; who, thrusting each other
forward, at length carried that strong place; slew most of the Turks, before
secure, and with the rest prisoners, and a great rich Booty, returned to Lippa.
The Garrison of (...) likewise, took and spoiled the Castle and Borrough of
Lambac, setting it on fire, the flame whereof being a Signal to (...) Troops
passing that way, they cut the Turks in pieces, and recovered the Booty. About
which time, some of the Garrison of Petrinia, corrupted, conspiring with the
Turks to deliver to them that strong Castle, by a Mine they were making under a
Stable, nigh the Storehouse of powder, by firing the same, to have given them
entrance, who lay close in a Wood near the place; certain offenders being then
prisoners in the Stable, perceiving their purpose, and fearing to be burnt or
blown up, discovered the same: who, being by the Governor apprehended, and
convicted of such a Treason, were exemplarily executed.

The Turks not ceasing with great earnestness, to solicit for peace; The
Emperor once again, appointed certain great persons to attend their
propositions: Casar Gallen Sheriff of Strigonium at Italian, much experienced
in State-matters, being one, whom the Governor of Strigonium had sent before
to Pesth, for concluding of peace by some good means. The Turks demands were,
That the Emperor should, for the future, pay to the Sultan and his Successors
the whole wonted tribute, without demanding thereof: That the Emperor should
always have his Embassador-Lieger at the Sultans Court, with presents, there
to solicit the continuation of his love and friendship; that he should deliver
all Towns and Castles, taken from the Turks, during this War, with Transylvania
and Valachia; which granted, they promised to send to the Sultan, to entreat
him to surrender Canisia, but not Agria, except constrained by force of Arms.
The Emperor's Commissioners answered, That the Emperor, having by so many
perfidious dealings, proved the (...) of Sultan-Achmat's Predecessors, in
violating their strong League, by surprising many places in Hungary: and, also
taking many in (...), between the Rivers Kulpe and Unna; which places, he had
often by as just right, remanded, as they were unjustly usurped before these
Wars: All which Demands (though deemed just and reasonable by the Turks
themselves) were rejected by the Sultans: What assurance could he conceive of
his fidelity? Yet, if he might hope so much of another Faith, as he was
assured of his own just meaning, he could be well content to embrace the peace,
so he might have Canisia and Agria delivered unto him: which if the Turk would
needs hold, that he likewise, might with peace hold the places he had won in
that Wat. And as for Transylvania, he could not deliver that, without betraying
of his right, and the welfare thereof: which, he obtained both by Covenants
between him and the Son of the last Duke, John, as by voluntary releasement of
Sigismund (...), the last Prince thereof, to him: for defense of which his
Rights, he had spent many men and great sums of (...): and, for Valachia, he
could be content to yield some part of his right unto that Province, so the
Turk should cease to demand of him any yearly tribute: or that he would, as of
ordinary duty, send his Ambassadors with yearly Presents to the Grand
Seigniour: since every Prince ought to be at liberty therein. At which answer,
the Turks laughing and sporting, still pressing the Commissioners, to yield to
their unreasonable demands; else threatening to acquaint the Sultan therewith,
who by force should take that from them, which they refused to grant by fair
means: so the Treaty was for that time broken off; yet the Governor of
Strigonium, left Casar Galen to entertain it, in such small hope as was left:
who afterward, seeing it was desperate; and feasting some of the chief Turks
of Buda, who in that merriment, promised to live as Friends with those of
Pesth, and other nigh places, retired to Strigonium.

Yet shortly after, Jagenreuter, Governor of (...) (though Galen had also
assured him of a speedy furnishing of the Town with all necessaries for its
defense) dismayed with the bruit of Hassan Bassa's coming with his great Army,
to begin with the Conquest of Pesth, September. 5, (having trussed up his
Baggage) forsook the Town; 5 Companies of Foot, and of Horse following him,
leaving the Town, Victuals, Munition, and his Honor for a prey to his Enemies;
yet before his departure, he undermined the chief Buildings, laying Gunpowder
under them, whereby they were soon after overthrown, and most of the Town burnt.

But, being gone not past half a League, he met 400 Haiducks well armed sent
for the relief of Pesth, with a number of Boats, with necessaries of all sorts:
which Haiducks meeting with these Cowards on the way, returned with them to
Strigonium, leaving their Vessels and Munition to their Enemies, who presently
after seized upon them. Next day, the Turks wondering to see so great a fire in
Pesth more and more increasing, adventured over the River, and drew near the
Town, which they finding abandoned, diligently quenched the fire, repaired the
ruins, and became Masters thereof.

(...) the Coward, with his fearful Troops coming to Strigonium, was examined
by the Governor of the Causes of his flight: who alleging no other, but the
great report of Hassan's coming to besiege the Town, was imprisoned, and
reserved forjust punishment.

The Bassa of Buda, by Letters excused himself to the Governor of Pesth for the
taking of Pesth, the Treaty being not yet quite broken off: saying, He took it
as a place upon a vain fear forsaken, and set on fire, etc. and offered to deal
with him for exchange of prisoners, one for another: and for the peace he was
very desirous it might be fully concluded, before Hassan-Bassa's arrival in
Hungary: who once come, there would be no time, amidst the noise of so many
Weapons and Warriors to talk of peace. For all that, the Vizier was already
entered Hungary with a huge Army coming toward Sexart; to view which, the
Governor of Pallantwar, going with 100 Horsemen, ere he was aware, met with 500
Turks, sent also to discover the Country, who charging and (...) him with
multitude, was himself taken, most of his men slain, and some few hardly
escaping by flight; but Count Serinus, setting upon 300 Turks nigh Zigeth with
courage, though scarce half so many in number, overthrew and cut them in
pieces, ere well aware of him.

The Turks out of hope of regaining Strigonium by any Capitulations of peace,
resolved to do their utmost to take it by force: often protesting, if they
should so gain it, never more to have peace with the Christians: at which vain
threats and speeches, the resolved Christians could not but with scorn smile;
Unto this siege, the Turks in hope of spoil, came flocking from all places.

They encamped near Charles his Hill, taking up with their Tents half a League
round about: and at first, bravely advanced their Half Moon Ensigns, the Arms
of their then increasing Empire; whom the besieged herein imitated, and further
provoked them with abundance of thundering shot: yet, the Turks coming
resolutely on, began to make their approaches: upon whom, the Christians
courageously sallying (...) to disturb them: and so, after certain hours hot
skirmish, without much hurt, retired, leaving their Enemies a good Testimony of
their valor. Howbeit, The (...) entrenched and encamped before St. (...) Fort,
where they placed their Cannon to batter the same; but, Basta having, near to
Strigonium, cast up a great Fort, and well furnished, greatly annoyed the Turks
with its Ordnance, forcing them to remove further off: his Army (the while)
laying upon the River betwixt the Isle of Strigonium, and the old Rascian Town,
to hinder the Enemy from entering into either.

Count Sultze the Governor, having mustered his men, and by sundry speeches,
motives, and cautions of trusting to the Turks fair promises, etc: encouraging
his Soldiers, most earnestly besought them to follow him in his Honorable
purpose, for preservation of Strigonium, or there ending of his days: As a
Testimony of his earnest desire to further which service, he had, he said
commandded them to have certain months pay beforehand; which they had
accodingly.

Sept. 24. The Turks came to assault and batter St. (...). Fort; upon whom 500
Horse and 2000 Foot sallying out, made them, after a sharp conflict, with some
loss on both sides, to retire and forsake the Mount whereon they were:
encamped: but pursuing them too far, they fell into a great Turkish Ambush.
where was fought a bloody fight: till valor being oppressed by number, the
(...); retired, 700 Turks being slain, and about 100 of them: Count Casimir of
Holenloth being one, for whose body they notably fought; not much unlike the
Trojans and Greeks, for the Body of Patroclus in Homer. Howbeit, the whole
Turkish Army coming on, the Christians were glad to leave the dead body in
their power; who, in (...), cut off his Nose and Ears, and then his Head; but
a few days after, this disfigured body was delivered to (...): Christians for
a (...) of good account, about that time taken: At which time, the Turks seemed
very desirous of peace; earnestly requesting Frederick the slain Count's
Brother, not to be a hinderer thereof; yet, it was but one of their old
practices, depending on unreasonable conditions: whereof, the yielding up of
Strigonium, was one of the chiefest. But the (...) of Hatwan, doubting lest the
Turks, leaving the siege of Strigonium, should come and besiege them; September,
19. abandoned the place with bag and baggage, and the best Ordnance, leaving
the rest, the Town, and much provision, to the Enemy, not hoping such a thing.

Count (...) Governor of Lippa (among others) was about to go toward
Strigonium with some Troops to (...) his General for preservation of the
place; but the while Bethlem Gabor of Transylvania, aided by Beckheres Bassa,
with 4000 Turks entered the Province; Wherefore, the Count resolved to go and
encounter him at his very first entrance. This old Rebel, knowing Basta was
gone thence with his best Troops, came on in great security, and so was
surprised by Tambier before he was aware, and put to flight, and that in no
long fight; above 1000 of them being slain, and 1000 serviceable Horses taken,
Bethlem and his Bassa fleeing with the rest, saved themselves by swimming
amidst many chances and dangers of their lives. The Bassa of Temeswar, sent
forth his Lieutenant with a good number, to relieve the vanquished Turks: who,
by the way, hearing of their general overthrow, and his Enemies strength,
retired homeward as fast as they could; but, being discovered and hotly
pursued, they were almost at the gates of Temeswar cut in pieces by the
Victors, without any resistance made, beseeming men of their sort; the (...).
being slain also. After which, the Count turning toward Jula, lighted on
certain Turkish Companies loaded with booty, whom he pursuing, even to the
Towngates, they were shut against them, for fear of the Christians entting with
them, so that they were all by the Christians slain, even in sight of their
Companions: after which Massacre, they burning the Suburbs, departed loaded
with spoil. The Count arriving at Lippa, September. 25. thence advertised Basta
of these his exploits, causing 10 Turkish Ensigns, stained with their blood, to
be presented unto him.

But the Vizier Bassa, perceiving by the Christians Valor, how little he
prevailed in the siege of Strigonium, like enough to tend to his dishonor,
made a motion to the besieged for a treaty of peace: whereunto the Imperials
(though out of hope) easily yielded, lest they might be thought obstinate; and
so Althem, Ferdinand, (...) and Frederick of Hohenlo, Count of Rhene, met the
Turks Commissioners nigh the Rascian Town; but, the Turks still urging the
yielding up of Strigonium, and the Imperials refusing the same, the Treaty was
broken off, and the siege more cruelly continued than before. (...) there were
in the Turks Army some Companies of Cossacks, for pay indifferent to serve any
Prince whatsoever: who being 700, had agreed, Sept. 28. by night to come over
to the Christians; but some untrusty among them, giving knowledge to the Vizier
of their purpose, he apprehended and slew the Footmen: (...) Horsemen, making
way over the bellies of such as would have stayed them, escaped, some to
Komara, others to Dotis; 60 of them hardly pursued, adventured over Danubius,
and all naked came to Collonitz, who courteously entertained and clothed them:
and within 3 days, 300 more of those Horsemen came to him also: who, in good
order, marching to the head of the Camp, were sworn to the Emperor's service,
in token of Loyalty discharging their Pistols thrice, whom Collonitz divided
among his Troops, as having former experience of the courage and good service
of such. By which Fugi ives they learned, that the Janissaries mutinying against
Hassan, would have forced him to have left the siege, pretending the manifest
danger of their lives, with little or no hope to prevail: they having the
besieged on the head of them, assuredly resolved; and the Christian Army at
their backs, of known valor and experience: the place they said, being also
impregnable, being always to be relieved, for that it commanded over the
Danubie: wherefore, when for honouts sake, they had once or twice assaulted St.
Thomas Fort, they resolved to be gone; and September. 29. in the night, a most
dreadful fiery, red impression, like a Rainbow, was seen, which beginning at
Gockara, and rising higher over Strigonium, vanished away over Thomas Fort:
which sight, troubled both Christians and Turks, as the often presagers of ruin,
to whom they appear. In the mean time, Basta came with 7000 brave Horsemen,
showing himself in order of Battle; so, as it were, braving the Turks, even to
their own Trenches, where discharging their Pistolls thrice, they returned as
victorious, always keeping themselves in order; yet the Turks, for the
present, moved not. But October. 3d, they came forth, and gave a second assault
to St. Thomas Fort, with the utmost of their power: howbeit, it endured not
long; for the Turks fought, rather to discharge their duty, and for some just
cause to raise their siege, than for any hope to carry the place: So they,
after a little more than half an hour, gave over, losing 500 of their best
Soldiers.

Of 6000 Haiducks in Strigonium, all but 500 through fear and treason, forsook
the place: whereat, and at the Bassa's resolution for forcing it, the Germans
promised their dismayed Captains, to supply the defect of the others treachery
by their own valor: offering to be sworn again, and to die all, rather than to
yield it up, or leave it to their Enemies: So a Decree, by general consent was
made, that whosoever should once mention a yielding the Town, should be hanged
on a Gibbet.

The Turks October. 5th, assaulted St. Thomas Fort the third time, doing what
they could; but they were so received, that they with great loss retired:
after which disgrace, they undermined the Wall in many places, filling them
with Gunpowder; but the Christians not only by Counter-mines frustrated their
endeavor, but carried away the Powder also. Wherefore, the Turks moved for a
parley of peace: whereof, the Christians disliked not; but the Commissioners
being met in a small Island beneath the Town, the Turks offered Agria for
Strigonium, or if the Christians would needs keep Strigonium still, then to
deliver to them Fileck, Setschin, Pallanka, and Novigrade: which demands being
unreasonable, nothing was concluded.

Now the Bassa, and some other Commanders, stood stiffly for the taking of
Strigonium; but the Janissaries were as earnest to be gone, as impossible to
prevail: whereat the Bassa enraged, yet before his departure, Oct ob. 10th, he
six times greatly assaulted the Fort; but the Defendants encouraged by their
valiant Commanders, the Turks were so repulsed, that they were glad still, with
(...) loss to retire: their often retreats being as hurtful to them, as their
assaults, by the deadly Bullets out of the Fort; so that the Bassa rose with
his Army, retiring near a Castle about a League off: whence, next day, the
better to cover their dishonor, and hinder the Christians from pursuit, they
showed themselves with a good number before the Rascian Town, skirmishing with
the Haiducks; neither party receiving any great hurt or loss.

They of Strigonium the while, knowing the Enemy had removed his Cannon, etc.
into Buda, discharged all their (...) Ordnance, in token of joy: whereof, the
other (...) Holds of the Christians, were partakers, as (...) from some part of
the fear brought upon them by that siege, which beginning September. 18th, was
given over October. 13th, the Janissaries threatening to slay their General, if he
had any longer there stayed.

Basta now following the Turk's Army, with his (...), slew many, and took some
prisoners: then returning to their Camp, found it full of Bullets, with some
great Pieces, which the Turks had not time to remove to Buda. Some of the Turks
Commanders, were now desirous still to hold the Field, in hope of spoil; but
they which dwelt further off, chiefly those come out of Asia, much desired to
be discharged, their Horses being almost dead, and themselves weary of the
service.

Two Turkish fugitives, bravely mounted, came to Basta, presenting him with a
rich Ring, and a most fair Turkish Ensign; and telling him, that most of the
Turks Army, lay encamped near Pesth; and the young Cham, about 20 years old, to
be come thither with a great power of Tartars: wherewith the Turks encouraged,
determined to spoil the Country; and shortly after, the plain Country of
upper Hungary, about (...), Setschin, and (...), was all spoiled and burnt; but
Sigefride Collonitz, so daunted these Forragers, with his Hungarian Horsemen,
that they departed, carrying away with them, their prisoners and spoils, and
leaving 3000 good Soldiers, for repairing and keeping of Pesth; but October. 24,
Hassan Bassa, wrote to Althem, for a Treaty of peace, for the (...) of the
distressed people, solemnly protesting to keep it, if once concluded, and yet
(the while) with fire and Sword, spoiled all by the way, as he departed.

But in TRANSYLVANIA, Lord BELGIOSA, Basta's Lieutenant there, thinking after
the overthrow of BETHLIN Habor, to have gone to aid him his General, then
laying in the plains of Strigonium; behold a second unexpected (...) (...), far
worse than the first, to wit, Lord ISTIVAN, or BOTSCAY; or, in scorn called
POTSCAY, from the long delays he had endured in the Emperors Court ( Potscay
in the Bohemian Language, signifying stay or tarry) who with great Troops
under Turkish protection, stiling himself Prince of Transylvania, miserably
burnt and spoiled the same: wherefore Belgiosa, with 1000 Horse, marched
toward Veradin, and coming to the Village Ador, he sent to the Governor of
Veradin, minding him of his Duty, and craving his aid: who, with six Companies
of Foot out of Romosa, four out of Veradin, with a Regiment of Silesian Horse,
and the Haiducks of Count Tambier, came to Ador, with all Warlike provision.

Belgiosa, now marching against Botscay, he attended his coming; for he knew
Tambiers Haiducks, to favor him more than Belgiosa: who accordingly, at first
joining of (...), turned to his part; whereby Belgiosa, with his small number,
having done their utmost, were almost all (...) in pieces, and there buried in
the field of (...) loyalty, and embrued with the blood of their Enemies. Diverse
good Captains were slain: Petsie, Governor of Veradin, and Pallas Lipa,
grievously wounded, were taken: also Petfie's Lieutenant, retiring with some
Troops into a strong place, so valiantly defended themselves, that Botscay
promised them, upon Oath, if they would yield, safely to depart; yet
afterward, were by this faithless Rebel, cruelly slain: the Silesian Horsemen
were also there buried among their Enemies: Belgiosa strangely escaped, and
fled to Veradin.

Botscay sent a great part of the Ensigns gained, to the Vizier Bassa, with
many praises for supporting of him, and vaunting much of his Victory, let him
know, he had slain above 6000 of his Enemies.

Botscay, by this Victory, and his humble submission, obtained of the Sultan,
thenceforth to be styled Prince of Transylvania, charging him to do his utmost,
for the subduing the rest thereof, promising him plentifully to supply him with
men and money, and speedily to send him 3000 (...). This Battle indeed, was
fought from break of day, till 11 at noon; yet its not certain, whether so many
were slain or not; for diverse were said to be slain, who were hid in a Wood
thereby: others, by other means, escaping also. (...) had two Monks with him,
whom the Soldiers in despite, cut in pieces, carrying him fast bound to
Derritza, there to be cured of his dangerous wounds; but Lipa was by Botscay,
afterward proclaimed his Lieutenant General, as being desirous to take upon
him, the defense of the reformed Religion: who forthwith proclaimed, that all
who desired liberty of Conscience, and to live free from Romish Superstitions,
should repair to him, who was ready to allow every man, five Dollars a month
pay: whereupon, he had in short time, 10000 Haiducks following him, besides a
number of other rascal people: yea, almost all the Gentlemen repairing unto
him, swear to each other, that as they would take up Arms against the Emperor,
so they would not submit to the Turk; but only stand upon defense of their
Religion and liberty of Conscience.

Botscay, now beset all the passages of the Country, commanding the Cities,
still as he went, to yield unto him; but hearing that Belgiosa was gone to
Cassovia, where his Wife lay, whither being come, he was rejected by the
Citizens, turning his Wife out of the City unto him, he came and took Cassovia,
without resistance, most of the Citizens inclining unto him: where he,
forthwith changed its Religion, and civil Government, slaying some of the
Romish Religion, thrusting the rest out of the City, with all the Churchmen;
and taking the Bishop and Emperors Treasurer prisoners: laying in wait by all
means, to take Belgiosa, with a purpose to have used him most hardly.

The Vizier Bassa, to grace that little he had done this year in Hungary,
borrowed of Botscay, the rest of the Ensigns, with Petsie, and the other Noble
Captives, and confidently, afterward, had them presented to Sultan Achmat, as
taken by himself: in recompense whereof, he left three thousand Turks and
Tartars with Botscay, to aid him.

Basta having set all things in order, at Strigonium, marched with 14000 men
toward Cassovia, with purpose to suppress the rebellion in upper Hungary, ere
it should spread further; yet the Rebels being very much increased, had took in
most of the strong places there, the people almost generally favoring their
quarrel, carrying the face of Religion, with suppressing of the Germane
Government; and hearing that Belgiosa was fled into (...) Castle, they demanded
him of Turson the Captain, to be deservedly punished: promising to do Turson no
harm, so he would take part with them: which if he should refuse, yet safely to
conduct him whither he would, out of his Castle, so he would forthwith resolve;
but otherwise, they threatened to spoil his Country, kill his people, raise his
Castle, and make himself an example: howbeit, he refused to deliver Belgiosa,
or accept of any of their offers: Wherefore, they laboriously repairing the
broken way betwixt Cassovia and the Castle, brought thence great Ordnance, and
straightly besieged it: whom Turson with his thundering shot, so welcomed, that
receiving great harm, they, with the greatest part of their Army, resolved to
go to Presburg, to reform it, and some other places by the way, being
persuaded, that this Captain so shut up, would at length, yield of himself.

But while they lay at this siege, some of them went to spoil a religious House
there by; but they returned almost empty-handed: the Priests having for fear of
them, carried with them all their best substance into the Castle: also upon the
report of their coming to Presburg, almost all the Priests and Jesuits there,
and thereabouts, fled with their substance to VIENNA, where they scarce thought
themselves safe, till six hundred men as a supply, were put into that strong
City.

Basta coming, and encamping about three miles from Filek, followed the Rebels
toward Budnock, who upon his coming, retired from besieging diverse strong
places; who also leaving Budnoc Castle, gathered together in great number, near
Ramosambat, intending to fight with Basta: who by a Herald, courteously
advised them, to change their minds, and return to their former allegiance;
but finding them obstinate, he marched forward, forcibly charging certain
Companies of them, who kept the passage of Filek: they at first, valiantly
defended it, till oppressed with number, and four hundred being slain, they
were worsted and fled. Nemet their Captain, being (among others) taken in
flight, whom Basta hanging up by the heels, a while, with the Ensigns (he took)
set up about him, had him taken down, and beheaded: 50 of Basta his men, were
slain also, many more hurt; among whom was Collonitz, being hurt in his
shoulder and foot.

Basta marching on, met with other Companies of Haiducks, with whom he had many
a hot skirmish, for three days together; so that burning many of his
Carriages, Tents, etc. He was very careful how to get out of their hands; yet
he courageously, both endured their fierce and increasing assaults; and also
November. 28. charged them again in order of Battle, who (...) a thick mist,
being not able to perceive their Enemies attempts, and how to turn themselves,
were (as dismayed) easily put to flight, whom Basta fiercely pursuing, in less
than three hours, one thousand five hundred of them were slain, with a few of
Basta's men also, Frederick, Earl of Solmes, being one; and the Count of
Erback, wounded.

Hereupon, the Rebels at the siege of Zipse Castle, forthwith retired to
Leusta; but Basta going, and recovering St. Andrews, and gartisoning it,
somewhat daunted and repressed the Haiducks in those quarters; and through the
unseasonable time of the year, wrote to reclaim the Cassovians to their
allegiance, offering pardon for all past, (...) they would acknowledge their
fault, and admit of an Imperial Garrison: So also he wrote to those of Eperia,
hoping by gaining those strong Towns, safely to winter in them with his Army;
but the Cassovians, having 6000 in Garrison, and not fearing then to be
besieged, Botscay being also reported 40000 strong, utterly refused Basta's
motion: wherefore, he came nearer to the City, seeking rather by fair means,
to persuade them, than by force, to constrain them; but they, obstinate, and
with their Ordnance troubling his Camp, sending Count Hohenloh, and Rotvitz,
before to Eperia, to command them to receive in the Emperors Soldiers, and
relieve them what they could, December. 5th, himself followed, with the rest of
his Army; and after much talk with the chief of the City, it was unexpectedly
agreed, that Basta assuring them of the free exercise of their Religion, the
good behavior of his Soldiers, and to defend them from the injury of their
Enemies, they should open their Gates to, and relieve the Imperials, and
continue their allegiance as before; a thing most welcome to the almost dead and
starved Soldiers: Leusta, Barbeld, and Zebena, following the Example of
Eperia. Thither with great danger, (...) Sigefride Collonitz, of great
Authority in those parts, to confer with Basta, about appe sing these troubles:
who, by Letters to the States, and Nobility of Hungary, in vain persuaded them
to lay down Arms, and return to the Emperors obedience. For remedy of great
wants in the Imperial Camp, 30 Wagons loaded with money and Cloth, had been
sent from Vienna, under the Conduct of Count Solmes, and others: to whom
Tanhusar joined 1500 Hussars, for fear of the Haiducks; but the Convoy being
come into a thick Wood, about two miles from Filek, (...) Hussars set upon the
Wagoners, and made great slaughter of those that were about to resist them; so
that Solmes, had much ado to get away: so they drove away the Wagons to
Botscay's Camp, Tanhusar, with such Hussars (as had no hand in so foul a
treachery) pursuing them; but recovered only 10 Wagons of Cloth, which the
Traitors had left, whose Horses they had put into the Wagons, with the money
(reported 130000 Florens) to make the more haste.

Botscay, having received so great and unexpected sum, divided it among his
Soldiers, for their further encouragement. This news at first filled the
Emperors Soldiers, with grief, and disdain against the Hussars; but
afterward with wrath, against their own Commanders, as deeming it a devised
report to deceive them; So that they were ready all to mutiny and forsake the
service to the utter peril of their Captains, and of the whole Province:
wherefore Basta, strove by fair words and promises, to appease them: which not
serving, he with some thousands of Ducats, and Wagons of Cloth taken up at
Leusta, and other Towns, wisely contented them, the old Soldiers being before
half naked.

Shortly after, the Imperials surprising a Castle thereabouts, carried away
many Hungarian Gentlemen prisoners, to learn what they could of the Rebels
proceedings and designs: the Haiducks the while, after many assaults, took
Sendra Castle, putting all the Garrison to the sword; and then departing,
rifled and burnt Filek. They took also, in upper Hungary, besides six other
Castles, the strong Castle of Cabragetia, whither those of Hatwan, for fear of
the Turks, when they besieged Strigonium, had carried their great Ordnance:
after all which, the chief Captains of the Rebels, exacted contribution of the
Mineral Towns so called, chiefly of Newsoli, forcing them to swear obedience
to Botscay, and take his part, threatening fire and Sword, to those that should
refuse the like; and going out to meet Collonitz, who was coming thither to
encourage or defend them, they belaying all passages, forced him to retire to
his Castle of Lebentsia, where he laying in great danger with his Wife then in
Childbed, having (...) 50 Germans with him (for he durst not trust his
Hungarian Cossacks) he sent in Post to Vienna, most humbly requesting a new
supply of Germans, for his relief and furtherance of the Emperors service,
etc.

While Basta lay at Eperia and thereabouts, he daily received great harm from
the Haiducks, who slew his Soldiers, fetching in Wood and other necessaries;
yea, they often troubled his Camp, assailing his Soldiers in his Trenches; and
about the end of December, they by night, breaking into Charles Collonitz,
Copell, and Pettinger, their quarters, slew Copell with almost all his
Soldiers, burnt Pettinger in his Tent, Collonitz being hardly beset also: till
he by true valor, forced them at last, to retire (...) the Woods, whence they
came, having slain 14 with his own hand: about which time, a spy being taken,
one of Botscay's chief men, discovered by one that knew him; Basta, after his
Examination and Confession upon torture, had him hanged and quartered, to the
terror of others.

Cicala Bassa, the Turks General against the Persians, was this year by that
King overthrown, and put to flight, and Babylon (now Bagdat) taken: which news
being reported at Prague, October. 22. by the Vayuod of Valachia's Secretary,
sent in Embassage to the Emperor, was afterward confirmed by the Persian
Ambassador himself, who having audience, told the Emperor, that his Master was
not ignorant of his great and difficult War, for many years against the Turk,
against whom he had taken up Arms, so to avert some part thereof from his
Majesty, even upon himself; and that he had already, obtained many notable
Victories and Conquests, recovering a great Territory, wrongfully taken from
his predecessors, by the Turkish Sultans; and now he was very desirous, to join
in a perpetual League and Amity with him; never to be dissevered, or ever to
make peace with the Turk, without each others consent; and that he was minded,
never to give over the War, till he had driven him, even into Constantinople,
so his Majesty would do the like; it being impossible for him to hold out
against them both: requesting him withal, to send back with him, some grave
Ambassador, with sufficient instructions, for the more easy concluding of the
said Confederation.

Unto these foreign Wars, were joined the Turks own (...) and civil Wars
also, the Rebels being yet up in lesser Asia, and the two great Bassaes of
Aleppo and Damasco, of late up in-Arms against each other; so that he of
Aleppo, being in a great and bloody Battle overcome, was pursued by him of
Damasco, to his own City, and so straightly besieged by him, with 30000 men,
(...) through extreme Famine then in the City, and a number (...) his men
slain, whom he secretly sent out to seek for (...), he was glad to yield to
whatever the other Bassa demanded of him: whereat, the Court-Bassaes were much
troubled; young Achmat himself, being the (...), delighted with the pleasures
of the Court, and much rejoicing at the birth of his first Son.

The troubles of HUNGARY, and Transylvania, in one thousand six hundred and
five, yet more and more increased, whose Natural Inhabitants, divided, both in
(...) and affection, did themselves and Country, more harm in a short time,
than had the Turks in many years before: of which, Belgiosa, left by Basta, as
his Lieutenant, was reported the first and chief Author; for whereas the
Assembly of the Clergy at Possonium, had without the knowledge of the States of
Hungary, published a Decree, for the burning or perpetual banishing of those of
the reformed Religion in Hungary: against which, those States solemnly
protesting under the Seal of the Lord Palatine, affirmed by Arms to defend
themselves, if they should be troubled for their Religion, repeating the same
Protestation at Galset; yet Belgiosa cunningly seizing upon the reformed
Churches at Cassovia, would not suffer those Citizens, either to have Sermons
in their private Houses, or to read in the Bible, taking also to himself, all
their Lands and Goods, and not suffering them to bury their dead within the
City, near the Monasteries; and because Botscay denied to lend him some
thousands of Crowns, he caused his Soldiers to ransack two of his Castles, and
spoil him of all Wealth and Treasure therein. Botscay hereat enraged,
proclaimed, to give every Haiduck that would serve him four Crowns a month
pay, with all the booty they could get: whereupon 6000 revolted from Belgiosa,
to Botscay, increasing daily; but when Pallas Lipa, had to this pay, joined
also the defense of the reformed Religion, the Haiducks resorted to him by
heaps, and all people where he came, were ready to join with him against the
Imperialls: the Turks and Tartars also, furthering him with men and money,
which he refused not.

Basta, not able by force, to remedy so great increasing troubles, by Letters,
often times advised Botscay, to change his mind, lay down Arms, and to persuade
with the rest of his followers, to return to their wonted obedience: who at
length answered, if himself alone might govern in Transylvania: if a natural
Hungarian, might be still Lievt. Genesis in Hungary, if none but Hungarians should
command all Garrisons in Hungary: if the (...) and French Soldiers, might be
shut out of Hungary: if natural Hungarians might thenceforth be regarded, and
provided of pay, if every man might have free exercise of his Religion: if the
Authors of these troubles, might be delivered to the HUNGARIANS for
punishment: if the Emperor should be personally present at the PARLIAMENT at
Presburg: if the GERMANE Garrison-Souldiers, should make no excursions into
places near them, and not hurt the poor Countrymen: he could be content so to
have peace. But Basta not liking thereof, sent back the two Messengers without
concluding any thing.

In the mean time, some Haiducks, and a number of Tartars in seeking booty,
surprised Gokara, over against Strigonium: where, (...) some Germane Soldiers,
and rifling the Town, as they were about to fire it, the Governor of
Strigonium, with his Garrison, forced them to depart: but Captain Bathian, the
Imperial, requited this loss, by taking of Palantwar, after a long and cruel
fight, slaying a number of Turks retired thither, with all the (...), diverse
being of good account: which Fortress, he razed, because thereby, the Turks
should no more annoy the Christians.

About which time, the Turks purposing to besiege Vacia, a City, which stood
the Christians in great stead, the Haiducks there in Garrison, conspired to
deliver to them the place; and being far too strong for the Germans in
Garrison with them, they slew most of them, the rest fleeing speedily to
Strigonium; and so they delivered the Town to the Turks, joining with them and
the Tartars, and directing them for the easier spoiling of the Christians
thereabouts. The taking of Vacia, had soon called together great numbers of
Turks and Tartars, who with the Haiducks, made a puissant Army, to the terror
of the Imperials, not then able to hold the Field against them: who turned to
Gokara, with purpose to pass the River upon the Ice, and surprise Strigonium,
which they once before had attempted, but were repulsed with great and small
shot, as now again; yet they of Strigonium, seeing their Enemies daily to
increase, stood more in doubt of a second siege, than of the first.

These things much troubled, and grieved the Emperor, who (...) what power he
could, and levied great sums on his subjects, taking a Duckat upon every
house in Austria, being then in great fear of these miseries, so fast
spreading, and that way approaching. But all, or most part of the aid promised
from the Pope, King of Spain, and Princes of Italy and Germany, this year
failing; and Basta's Forces much weekened with wants, and Winters extremity,
and not able to (...) the Field; the increasing Enemies, began to draw near to
Vicegrade, purposing to besiege it: whereupon, the Germans in Garrison, warned
by the treachery of the Haiducks of Vacia, betime retired into the Castle: so
the Turks and Haiducks, were no sooner come thither, but the Haiducks in the
Town, opened the Gates to them, as to friends, directing them the best they
could, to besiege and win the Castle: which, while the Germans notably
defended, Hassan (...), with Begedes Bassa, wrote to them, persuading them to
yield it up; but the Germans valiantly stood upon their defense, till through
extreme necessity, they yielded by Composition.

Basta the while, laying at and about Eperia, and seeing, that for want of
greater strength, he must lay still as it were besieged, was exceedingly
grieved: yet having procured from the Emperor, a general pardon for all, who
taking part with the Rebels, were willing to return to their allegiance; he
caused Letters of general pardon, to be published, for all to take knowledge
of: which being proclaimed, with the sound of many Drums and Trumpets, Jan.
6th, and ten days liberty given, for such as would come in; diverse Gentlemen
near Eperia, for fear of being spoiled, accepted of the grace offered: others
farther off, little or nothing regarding the same; so that Botscay was now
grown so strong, that he dismissed most of the Turks, which he had used,
reserving some Janissaries, whom he mingled with his GarrisonHaiducks of
Cassovia.

Pallas Lipa, Botscay's Lieutenant General, being by some, envying at his
Estate, accused to Botscay, as if he intended to make him away, and delivering
Cassovia to Basta, to go over again unto the Emperor, was by his Command
beheaded, with five others more, suspected to be partakers in that Conspiracy:
100000 Hungarian Ducats, with seven Chains of Gold, being found in his
Treasure, which he had scraped together in that small time of his
Lievetenantship: with which money, Botscay confirmed in his Rebellion, would
admit of no talk of peace; but on conditions, best liking himself.

Now I will briefly pass over, and even lightly, touch such things, as for the
most part of this year 1605, (...) in this troublesome Country, not staying,
but upon the most weighty matters. The Haiducks, in the beginning of February,
besieged Sacmar Castle, which the Garrison doubting, to be able to defend it,
(nor past sixty sound men being left therein) and destitute of necessary
provision, at length yielded, on condition of sparing their lives; but in going
thence, they were near Tokay, most, slain by other Haiducks, a few escaping by
flight.

Sacmar being taken, they attempted the surprisal of Tokay Town and Castle; but
the Governor timely advertised of their purpose, caused the Ice of the River
to be broken, 40 paces over, nigh the Castle, and lightly covered with straw:
The Haiducks coming by night, by heaps, thrust each other forward, to have
scaled the Castle; but the Ice breaking under them, they by heaps perished:
many also which escaped, being slain with shot out of the Castle, wherein was
no great store of Victuals: wherefore, Basta marched toward Bodac, holden by
the Rebels, in hope with its spoil to relieve Tokay; but the Rebels having
burnt the Town, and got themselves with what they had, into the Castle, so
welcomed Basta with their Ordnance, that having lost some men, he was glad
after four hours stay, speedily to return to Eperia: some Nobles being
reported, in his absence, to have made a Road toward Eperia, to the
endangering thereof: in which his return, Count Turon, and Charles Collonitz,
their Troops lighting on 500 Haiducks in a Village, fired it, and burnt most of
them, slaying the rest, seeking by flight to escape.

In the mean time, a great Turk, brought a great sum of money to Cassovia,
which being divided among Rebels, much confirmed them in Rebellion, and toward
the Turks, who more prevailed by sparing for no cost, than by their greatest
forces, for the Conquest of Hungary.

Basta was no sooner returned to Eperia, but the exclaiming Soldiers, were
about in a mutiny to forsake him for want of pay: who making what shift he
could for money, with much ado, agreed with them for six weeks longer service:
the Eperians being thereby freed of a great fear, to be spoiled by those
mutinous Soldiers.

The roaming Haiducks, March the 2d, in the morning, came to new Soli, and by
many reasons, persuading the Citizens to revolt, had parley with them till
noon; but still approaching nearer the Town; so that Turbel the Governor,
perceiving a yielding inclination in the Citizens, with his Cossacks, retired
into the Castle: which done, the Haiducks breaking into the City, with six
Companies, summoned the Castle, of whom Turbel slew diverse with shot; and in
the evening, sallying forth with Harquebusiers, drove the Haiducks out of the
City, which he afterward, better fortified; and next day, hearing that some
Haidncks and Turks were coming to Turzo with many cattle, women and children,
which they had gotten thereabouts; he sent forth his (...) with his Cossacks,
who slew of them about 150, recovering all the cattle, 200 Horses, and a Mule
loaded with 4000 Hungarian Ducats.

Now Filek-Castle, as it were the Key of that part of upper Hungary, had been
hardly besieged certain months by the Haiducks: which, although for provision,
it might have held out 3 months longer, yet for want of water, the Garrison
were forced to yield it: for keeping whereof, Ferents Captain of the Haiducks,
put therein a Garrison of Haiducks and Turks: as not daring to trust the
Haiducks alone for fear of treachery, nor the Turks for their desire of the
place, for its commodious situation. This Castle, Valiant Collonitz (all the
ways being beset (...) numbers of Turks, Tartars, and Rebels) had in vain often
sought to relieve: neither durst he well trust his own men (most being
Haiducks) for fear of being betrayed: Concerning which matters, he, in a
Writing to a Nobleman (first showing his earnest desire to be discharged of his
service) brake forth: that the Enemies strength and number more and more
increasing; things could not be in a worse state than they were: and he being
attended on with very Traicours, could not possibly serve the Emperor without
a sufficient strength of Germane Soldiers: yet this most comforted him, that
he had done his duty, or else this mischief had spread further: that the
Enemies were then in his Dukedom of (...), spoiling all: and, reckoning up 25
strong Towns and places in upper- Hungary, beside almost all Transylvania,
subject to Rebels.

Now, if Collonitz was thus beset, and spoiled of his Substance, having at one
time received hurt, to the valeu of a hundred thousand Ducats, and not daring
to trust his own Hungarians, in what state may the rest of the people be
thought to have bin, being at the same time exposed to the Rebels, Turks, and
Tartars, for a prey.

But 4000 Haiducks attempting to surprise Wiglace, were so repulsed thence,
that many being slain, 35 Wagons, could scarce carry the wounded over the
Mountains; 100 died by the way. But going thence, and rifling all (...)'s
Country, they commanded all the States within 3 days to submit and swear
fealty to Botscay, or expect all extremities: which for fear, they promised to
do, to Redeius, Botscay's Lieutenant.

Now were 2 grave Counselors sent, in the Emperor's name, to treat with
Botscay of peace: who sent before them an Herald to Cassovia, to advertise him
of their coming: whom the Turks so straightly kept, that none might speak with
him but Botscay, (...) he also, but in the open hearing of the Turks. Botscay
told him, if the Ambassadors were sent from the Nobility and States of
Hungary, they should be right welcome to him; but if from the Emperor, they
should come no farther: for that all matters had with him been often enough
talked of; now more than time to be performed. The Messenger returning told
them what he said, and that the Haiducks had built a very high Bulwark in
Cassovia, beset the gates with strong guards, and so filled the Trenches with
Soldiers, that a man could hardly enter the City; yet one might safely go and
come about his business: also that Redeius, had assembled all Governors
thereabouts, advising them to beware of the excursions of the Haiducks for 14
days: and the while, to bring their wives and children, and best things into
the City, because he could not as yet govern the Headstrong Haiducks, being
yet in their rage and fury: of whom, some bringing many Cattle from toward
Newhuse, were by Collonitz and Trautmanstorff, pursuing them with their
Horsemen, overthrown, and all the booty recovered. About which time, Botscay,
March 29. by Letters, declaring the necessity (...) defending their Privileges
and Religion against strangers; summoned all the Nobility and States of
Hungary, to an Assembly, to be holden at Serents, April 17. and declaring, that
those, who upon a presumptuous or careless contempt should not come, should be
accounted Enemies to their Country; and their goods to be disposed of, as
should to the Nobles and States then, and there assembled, be thought meet.

Much about this time, there was a great tumult of the Court-Souldiers at
Constantinople, a great fire then arising in the City (as has bin often done
by the Janissaries, who in such confusion make their own gains) wherein many
men and women perished, with above 500 rich Shops and Warehouses, most
belonging tothe Jews, of whom almost 200 were said to be burnt. The young
Sultan (...), and seeing the like to arise at Pera, on the other side of the
Haven, could not think but the Soldiers were about foam dangerous Treason:
which suspicion, 2 Messengers lately come from Cicala, increased, who desired
speedy supplies: for, having in a great Battle lost a number of men, he must
else retire, and leave all to the Persian. Howbeit, the fire quenched, and the
Soldiers with spoil satisfied, the tumult was with much ado quieted.

Now Basta's Soldiers, seeing neither pay nor other relief to come unto them,
rose in mutiny, and in great rage brake into his Lodging: where heaping upon
him many Reproaches, with their pieces bent against him, and spoiling certain
Carriages richly laden, they left him, marching toward Presburg; so rifling
and spoiling whatever came in their way, that they seemed to the people worse
than very Turks and Tartars: carrying away (besides other very great prey)
above 10000 Oxen, and 2000 Horses: and threatening as they went to burn the
Suburbs of Presburg, if they were not forthwith paid; Whereupon, many Citizens
for fear removed to Vienna. But the Rebels again in great number, besieging
New-soli, April 16. (...) it, to the exceeding loss of the Citizens: other of
their fellows, but the day before, taking (...), and diverse other places. Thus,
while both Haiducks and Imperials (...) the upper- Hungary; the poor Husbandmen
leaving their dwellings and what they had, fled; some into Poland, others into
the Mountains, where many perished with (...): the Husbandman now dared not to
go forth to till, nor the Shepherd to feed his flock, all places being filled
with misery, mourning, and heaviness. The Turks and Tartars being not the
causers thereof, but even the divided Christians themselves.

These troubles also brake out in other adjoining Provinces, chiefly into
Moravia, which the Haiducks miserably spoiled with fire and sword, taking
certain Towns by force, and (...) them, carried away the very little children,
to be sold afterward to the Turks: for remedy of which encreasing-mischiefs,
Lichtenstein the Governor raising all his power, went against them and with
much ado drove them out of the Country; yet they carried away much of its
wealth, and 4000 Captives appointed to Turkish slavery. Basta also laying at
Presburg, and hearing that of 14000 Turks and Tartars coming to St. Georges,
6000 of them were gone over Danubius; that whilst they made a road into
Austria, the rest might attempt Presburg followed them to cut off straglers who
otherwise might have done great harm, leaving but 300 Walloon Horse, with some
Foot-Companies to keep the City.

These 300 expert Horsemen by night going forth, where the rest of the Haiducks
and Turks securely lay, suddenly fell upon them, and slaying above 500 before
the rest could arm, returned with some few Horses of service to Presburg.

In the mean time, they of Comara, hearing that Begedes Bassa, was to go with a
notable Convoy from Buda with 17 Wagons of money, etc. to Botscay, and the
Tartar-Chams son, who was with some 1000 come to aid him; lay in wait for him,
and setting upon him, slew a number of his men: the Bassa himself being shot in
the Breast, as he was mounting up his Horse; with whose dead Body the Turks
about to flee, were some (...), some taken, the rest (...) escaping: the
exceeding (...) Booty the Soldiers carried to Comara, with the Bassa's head
struck off with his own Scimitar, which (...) his Coat, Pogramus the Governor
sent as a Present to the Emperor. This Bassa was the chief plotter and Author
of all the late troubles in Hungary; having before much confirmed Botscay in
his Rebellion in Transylvania, for he spoke the Hungarians-Language naturally,
and was therein very Eloquent.

Now was the very name of the Germans become odious and contemptible to the
potent Rebels in Hungary: so, that Basta offering to put supplies of Germans
into Tyrna, then in danger, that Governor refused them, and also to let them
have any thing for money: saying, They had Citizens enough to defend the same,
and as they needed not the Germans help so they would have nothing to do with
them: yet, when Redeius came thither with his Army, they presently received him
in, and were about to slay all the Germans, being well nigh a third part of the
Inhabitants: but some of the wiser considering, that they having long dwelt
there, were by Marriages in (...) with the Hungarians, and they with them,
otherwise persuaded them, lest they might seem cruel against their own blood:
and so it being referred to Redeius; he (by the Council of an Eminent Turk)
ordered the Germans lives to be spared, but (...) to use the Hungarian.

About May 24. the Turks, Tartars and Rebels, burnt 14 Villages about the Lake
of Neusidler, and as many more toward Neustat, putting most of the women and
children to the sword, impaling diverse upon stakes, carrying the men away
captive and the cattle as a prey, so leaving the Country as they went, almost
desolate: and about the end of this month, the Rebels surprised 3 Towns, and a
little while after Ginsium, all which they rifled and spoiled, as they did also
Hogengoa, and Niders-Prungia, which they rifled and burnt, by such terror,
forcing all far and near to yield to them. Only Alteoli and Cremnicz, standing
fast to the Emperor, did the Rebels much harm.

About the beginning of June, some Turks and Haiducks, came again to Presburg;
whose Governor issuing out with 3 Troops of Walloons, and some Companies of
Harquebusiers, made them retire: but the Walloons riding about, fell upon them,
when they thought themselves past danger, slaying 500, and driving the rest
into Danubius; so that but 14 escaped, 3 being Turks, and one Fugitive Citizen,
whom with great spoil they brought into the City. At which time, the Citizens
of Vesprivium rose in Rebellion also, causing the Captain of the Castle, his
Lievt. and the Keys to be carried to Redeius Botscay's Lieutenant: with which
revolt the Turks greatly pleased, sent to, and wished the Sultan to have the
coming of his Army, for the passages were now open to his further Conquest;
and, advising him more and more to encourage Botsoay. And now, the Rebels
breaking also into Stiria: (...) and spoiled all as they went: so that Serinus,
Lo. Nadasty and Budian, seeing themselves and all they had in danger to be
spoiled without remedy, submitted to Botscay, as did many other Nobles there
also. The Rebels thence making Head into Austria, did like harm.

Thus was the State of Hungary and Austria, at this time most miserable, as
appeared by the Letters of a Citizen of Vienna, who was himself an Eyewitness
of most part thereof: declaring among other calamities, by fire, etc. that the
Rebels, who lately forraged Austria, carried away upon Horses little Boys and
Children: who, by reason of their tender years could not go (whose pitiful
lamentation might move the very stones) to be sent into Turkey; yea many of
them, were by the way found dashed against the ground: the Turks themselves
being amazed at the Rebels cruel behavior; and whereas they pretended
Religion, their most cruel tormenting of a Minister, did show what lovers they
were thereof; complaining also, that their own mutinous Soldiers excluded them
of (...) from all Victuals, and in cruelty and hostility almost exceeded the
very Enemies.

The Haiducks had most straightly besieged Odenburg, assaulting it in 5 places at
once: upon whom Trautmanstorff, caused some of his Horsemen to sally forth,
skirmishing with them 3 hours, and then the Haiducks beginning to prevail:
himself with other Horse, some Foot and Citizens, and 3 Fieldpieces, suddenly
breaking forth, put them to flight, slew many, and taking 12 Ensigns with many
ptisoners; but the Haiducks in revenge, shortly after returning, burnt the
Suburbs of Odenburg, and spoiled the Villages; yet Basta approaching them, but
with a small power, they rose, and passing over Dravus, carried away 2000
cattle, and many Captives. The Turks having bin often in hand with Botscay, to
deliver Cassovia wholly into their hands, the better to obtain it, sent unto
him three Wagons loaded with money, and other rich Commodities for a Present;
and to supply his wants by a Convoy of 400 Haiducks, and some Turks: which
Haiducks, secretly informed the Governor of Tokay, of their coming that way;
and that if he would receive them, they would with some small help deliver that
rich Booty into his hands, and continue his faithful Soldiers: who forthwith
sending 400 of his Carrison to meet them, they joining, and slaying every one
of the Turks, were with the Booty received into Tokay, and courteously
entertained: Whence, they ere long looking abroad, met with some Companies of
Botscay's men, and slaying near about 500 of them, took 7 Wagons of provision,
30 Horses, and much rich spoil. But the Rebels increasing, more and more
prevailed: the Towns, in upper- Hungary especially, daily revolting unto them:
as also (...) did, whence the Rebels sent part of their Ordnance with Relinger
a German, Governor of the Town, and some other Germans there taken, to
Redeius; Then besieging Newhuse with 30000 Haiducks and Turks: who, as they had
ofttimes sharply assaulted it, so the Soldiers (who protested to hold out even
to the last man) most notably defended it; Wherefore, Redeius (having layen
some months before it) promised his men the whole spoil of the Town; yet were
the Turks often kept back from assault, lest if they should by force take it,
they would by force hold it to themselves, as most commodious for conquering
the rest of upper- Hungary; but Redeius with his Haiducks, July 25. most
furiously assaulted it, advancing, in great hope, 10 Ensigns to the top of the
Rampires, yet were they forced to retire, leaving above 700 dead in the
Trenches. The Bassa of Agria, came afterward to this siege with 3000 Horse, and
many Janissaries: so that through Mines, Shot, and often Assaults, scarce 200
sound men were left in the Garrison: besides, Victuals and powder began to grow
scarce; yet armed with resolution, they still valiantly held out.

The Hungarians in the Isle of Shut, having submitted to the Rebels, did much
trouble the passages to Rab, Comara, and Strigonium; to whom Messengers being
sent, to persuade them to return to their Obedience: they so used the matter,
that those of Shut taking a Truce for 8 days, sent 5 chief men to Presburg,
(...), If they and their goods might be secured, and the Haiducks there with
them entertained into pay, they would be ready again to swear Allegiance, etc.
and leave their wives and children as pledges at Presburg; The Governor gladly
accepting their Offer, courteously dismissed them: who returning, and declaring
what they had done, it was agreed, 4000 of them to join to Collonitz, who wore
special Fea hers in their Crests for distinction's-sake: their Wives and
Children being carried to Presburg. Upon which Agreement, the Rebels and Turks
invaded the Isle, to surprise them; but were by the Inhabitants, aided by some
German Troops, put to flight, 3000 being slain.

About the beginning of July, Commissioners were sent to treat with Botscay
about a pacification; who being honorably entertained, were July 29. dismissed.
Botscay's Propositions were these: 1. Every one to have free exercise of the
reformed Religion; for though he said, he desired not to have an ancient
Hungarian Decree (to burn all not professing, or revolting from, the Catholic
Religion) repealed: yet the Emperor regarding the present troubles, to assure;
That none should thenceforth be troubled for his Religion. 2. He requested to
have Transylvania during his life, after whose death it should return to the
Emperor, yet a natural Hungarian to govern the same, as also Hungary. 3. But
one Bishop to sit in Council, who might (if thought meet) be the Chancellor.
4. Their Liberties and Privileges to be kept inviolate. 5. That he should only
choose the chief Palatine of the Kingdom. 6. All confiscated goods to be given
to men of desert. 7. All State-offendours to be judged by the Council of
Hungary. 8. None to be Bishops, but those of the Noble Hungarian blood. 9. All
former injuries to be forgiven and forgotten. All which, if granted, he
promised to do his utmost for peace betwixt the Sultan and Emperor, upon the
best conditions he could: requesting also, the Charters of peace might be
subscribed and confirmed by the Pope, Emperor, Polish-King, and all the
Imperial Countries.

Achmat hearing of this Treaty, sent in haste to Botscay, seeking by great
Offers and Promises to hinder it, minding him also: that he had lately
subscribed as well as promised, that Botscay having King John's privileges,
should shortly be proclaimed and crowned King of Hungary: Wherefore, he was
even now ready to send a Scepter and Crown to Alba-regalis; but at present, he
sent him 2 goodly Horses with furniture of Gold and precious Stones: also a
rich Scimitar, a pair of Golden Spurs, and a long Horsmans-coat most richly
garnished, persuading him valiantly to (...); who presently after went with a
gallant Train into Transylvania, to take an Oath of the Nobility, for their
(...) to him; sending also Redeius his Chancellor, and others into Poland, to
renew the former Confederacy betwixt the Polonians and Hungarians: who declared
to the King the causes of that civil War, which he imputed chiefly to the
oppression of Religion, and the German's insolency, laboring much to persuade
him thereof: then requesting him of his grace and care, which he and other
Christian Princes had for the quiet of Christendom, chiefly of those 2
distressed Countries, to consult how so great troubles might be appeased, and
to afford his aid to so good a work. The King answered, The renewing of the
ancient (...), was very pleasing unto him, yet he could not well like of
Botscay's revolt from that Family, to which he was so nearly affined: promising
however, to propound the matter to his Nobility: who agreed, That he that
should out of Poland aid Botscay, should lose his head. So the Ambassadors
returned much discontented to Botscay, being now returned with a great power to
Cassovia.

About this time, Lord (...) at Prague, falling from words to blows with
Francis Count Belioisa his Brother: Francis (their men taking each part) was
flain, Belioiosa being dangerously hurt in 5 places: who so prosecuted his
Brothers death, that Rusworm was by the Emperor condemned, and beheaded, and
diverse of his men hanged, with the Weapons at their heels: wherewith they (...)
Francis.

Although the time of the year was now come, that the Turks by reason of the
Persians, and their own Asian Rebels, could not send so great Forces, as they
had wont into Hungary; neither could the Emperor now raise such power as
formerly, to oppose them, through the Hungarians revolt: the Italian and German
Princes affording little or no aid, and his own mercinary Soldiers mutinying
for want of pay. Serdar Bassa, Achmat's Lievt. General, with what Forces he
brought, and supplies of the Rebels, being (notwithstanding 50000 strong: Aug.
29. encamped before Strigonium, having 40 battering-pieces and all necessaries
for the siege: the Tartars who came with them thither, presently passing over
the River Gran, spoiled and burned all the Christian Territory before them.

The Turks the while, to deprive the City of all relief, made a great Bridge of
Boats over the River, which they strongly fortified at both ends: which much
dismayed them of the City; yea Basta, seeing himself so weak, much doubted of
the event: yet during the siege, he showed the utmost of his Valor and Wisdom
for safeguard of the place.

Now those of the Isle of Strigonium, had remained faithful, whom the Rebels
often sought to force and persuade from their Loyalty; 200 Haiducks (returned
to the Emperor's service) were joined to the Islanders; but, the Rebels
suddenly surprised the Isle, cut all these Haiducks in pieces: Wherefore, Basta
would have sent the Walloons for defense thereof, but the Islanders requested
the contrary, lest they should (after their manner) prey upon them; so
Collonitz was appointed, who with Mounsieur de Lavall a French Gentleman,
lately come with his Troop to see service, went into the Island: into which the
Rebels shortly entering, he drove them our, slaying 250, and taking about 50: in
which conflict, Lavall so bravely behaved himself, that everymans mouth was
full of his praises; for he was scarce (...) years old: but the Rebels soon
returning again more numerous and resolute: there was a more bloody fight, yet
the Rebels were forced with loss to retire; Laval, not to be persuaded from
adventurously pressing on the retiring Enemy, was shot and slain; all that knew
him, much lamenting him. But, the Rebels still, in one place or other invading
the Isle, and threatening all extremities, most of the Islanders revolted, and
suddenly setting upon the Count of Rhene, slew 300 of his men grievously
wounding himself also: Wherefore, Basta sent over Ratzians and Walloons, who
spoiled the Islanders of what the Rebels had left them. The Turks before
Strigonium battering St. Thomas Fort for almost 3 weeks together, had with
great charge and loss of men made it saultable: and September. 24. swarming up up
the Hill, furiously assaulted it for 5 hours, with invincible courage by the
Christians endured, many valiant ones falling on both sides, for they came to
handy-blows even in the Breaches: thrice were the Turks forced to retire, and
still brought on again; so at last 900 Christians (...) slain, with Count
Oetingen their Chieftain, and his Lievt. mortally wounded: the Turks entered
the Fort, slaying those few whom they found yet breathing; and whence they
carried certain great pieces to help batter the City; and planting 30 great
pieces against the Low or Water-Town, they most terribly battered it, which
being environed with a Palisado of Wood, the Turks by firing brush-Faggots,
stuffed with powder and brimstone, burnt down, making their way even to the
Walls: which they incessantly battered till they had made a large Breach: and
then not regarding the showers of Bullets, matched hand to hand: the Janissaries
especially had undertaken this service, who with their great Muskets cruelly
gauled the Defendants: the great Bassa was also present at the assault,
encouraging his Soldiers with terror and comfort; the fight was (...) and
terrible, few Bullets falling in vain among such a multitude: howbeit, after 4
attempts, most of the Christians being slain, the Turks forced the rest, and
gained the Breach, (...) both dead Turks and Christians under (...) to get into
the City. Which won; and those that were left, put to the Sword, and the Town
rifled; the Turks attempted the HighTown, hoping in so great confusion of the
Defendants, to have carried that also; yet were they at present notably
repulsed: Wherefore, underminining it, their Mines in few days perfected,
violently blew up Walls, Men, etc. smothering and burning many: which Breaches
so made, that the Christians could not show themselves without danger of their
lives, the Turks forthwith came to the assault: whom the Christian Captains
preparing to withstand, found their Soldiers, as (...) at his most need found
his, not willing in any wise to sight, so that none would come nigh the Walls:
yet the Captains prayed, exhorted, and sometimes threatened them with death, to
stir them up, but all in vain: during which time, the Turks had without any
great resistance gained the foot of the Breach; Whereupon, the cowardly
Soldiers compassing in (...) Dampierre the Governor, would by reasons have
persuaded him to yield, and by threats have feared him from further resistance:
Howbeit, he enraged, continued firmly resolved, his courage (...) in this
mutinous storm; and by diverse Expressions minded them of their Duties, and
persuaded them: saying, For his part, he was resolved rather there to die with
Honor, than to be beholden to his Enemies for an infamous and miserable life:
Wherefore, he besought them to follow him in this (...) Action, carrying with
it (...) the Trophies of their precedent Ones, who had often assisted him in many
actions of less worth, and much more dangerous.

But these Degenerate Soldiers, stood with their hands behind them, without
any Weapons in them: and the while, some of them conceived their cowardly
requests and reasons thereof into writing, which they sent to the Governor;
which he having read, tore in pieces in their fight, and (...) under his feet,
going himself to the Breach with some few to defend it, but they now threatened
to deliver him with the place, to the Enemy to save their lives, if he would
not by Treaty save them from those eminent perils: who being deaf to their
requests or threats, they laying hands upon him, put him in prison, and then
craved parley with the Bassa who sending in Haly Bassa; it was soon agreed,
they to yield up the place, upon safe departurewhither they would, with bag and
baggage, Ensigns frilled up, and fire in their matches, leaving behind them
all their Ordnance and Warlike provision: Which Composition, was now by the
Turks faithfully kept, among many other-like, before by them broken; for it
being yielded October. the 3d. they safely conducted these Cowards within a
League of Comara, helping them to carry their sick and wounded, with their
Fardels: which the Turks often carried upon their own shoulders: their Governor
was also sent out with them. Many Inhabitants who had there dwelt, by leave
remained there still, the rest which would not, might depart whither they
would. Thus famous Strigonium, holden 10 years and one month by the Christians,
fell again into the power of the Turks. These base Soldiers (with their
Governor) come to Comara, were spoiled of Honor and Arms, and sent back to
Presburg; where being detested of all, and chiefly of the revolted Hungarians
themselves, the chief of them were imprisoned, and after some time convicted of
great damnifying Treason; for which they were, according to the quality of
their offenses diversely (...): Capt. Schleker, having his right hand cut off,
and his tongue drawn out at his neck, and both nailed to the gallows, was to
be hanged; yet, through the intercession of many, he was beheaded: 5 other
Captains, were to have their right-hands cut off and nailed to the gallows, and
then to be hanged; but by the intercession of Count Mansfield, their hands were
not cut off: another was to be quartered alive, but by the Count's
intercession, beheaded, and then quartered: 12 others were only hanged:
another, was to serve as a common Soldier 2 years without pay, but by
Mansfield's means, one year was pardoned: diverse others who fled, or stayed
still at Strigonium, had their names set on the gallows: and being caught, some
to be quartered, others hands to be cut off, and nailed to the gallows, and
then hanged. But, as the Sultan received the pleasing news of the winning of
Strigonium in Hungary: so also, the melancholy report, of the overthrow of his
great Armies in Asia, with the loss of Damasco, the greatest City in Syria; for
first, The King of Persia, invaded by Cicala, and hearing that the Bassa of
Caramania, was with all speed to (...) to him with a great supply of Soldiers,
presently with a puissant Army, set forward against Cicala, and by his
unexpected coming, overthrew him, and took all his Ordnance: Cicala with 300
Soldiers with much ado, escaping to Adena, which City, the Persian shortly
after straightly besieged: upon which news, Achmat forthwith wrote to the Bassa
of Trebesond, speedily to aid Cicala, who with a great Army set forward:
Whereupon Cicala, being with 10 trusty Soldiers secretly by night let down
over the walls came to the Bassa, keeping on his way with him, to join Battle
with the King as nigh the City as he could, for he had ordered, that so soon as
they perceived the Battle to be joined, to sally out upon the backs of the
Persians: which the King doubting, left one part of his Army to continue the
siege, and went himself with the other to meet the Bassa, and falling upon him
before he could put his men in (...), made of the Turks such an exceeding
slaughter, that few escaped: Cicala but with 2 or 3, much (...) escaping in a
small Boat over the River: after which, the (...) returning to the siege, after
many sharp and great assaults, and many men lost on both sides, Adena was
yielded to his mercy. Hereupon, Achmat enraged, (...) Cicala's (...) at
Constantinople, full of treasure and wealth to be (...) yet shortly after, he
delivered great sums of money, and raised new Forces for renewing of the
Persian war: Whereunto, many Janissaries being appointed, they mutined: saying,
They would not stir one foot, except they were paid beforehand, and assured
to have their wages increased: grievously complaining, that the Bassa of
Damasco, the Sultan's Treasurer, converting the Treasures to his own use, did
not pay the Soldiers their due: To appease which tumult, the Sultan caused the
same Bassa to be beheaded. The Bassa's of Damasco and Aleppo long agreed not,
after the aforesaid reconciliation; he of Damasco, continuing faithful in his
Allegiance; the other of Aleppo secretly enclining to Rebellion: against whom,
he of Damasco, with those of Tripolis and Gazare, went with 60000 good men,
purposing to besiege him in his City Aleppo; but, he having very soon raised
30000 valiant men, ready cheerfully to follow him, went and joined battle with
them: which was fought with great fury and hideous noise for a great while:
howbeit, at last, the lone Bassa overcame the other (...) and put them to
flight, and eagerly pursuing them, besieged Tripolis, whose Bassa fleeing
thence with all his Treasures into Cyprus, he of Aleppo easily took and
ransackt the same, and forthwith besieged Damasco; whither the Bassa of
Tripolis being coming with another great Army to raise the siege, the Bassa of
Aleppo with most of his Army meeting him, again overthrew and put him to
flight. Whereupon, the besieged dismayed, upon certain Capitulations yielded to
him the City; Who, there seizing upon great Treasure of the Turks Tributes,
resolved thereby to make himself master of all Syria; giving free passage to
all Persian and Indian Merchants unto Damasco. In the mean time, the Beglerbeg
of Natolia, sending his Lieutenant with a great Army against him, he marched
toward his Enemies: and in two days space had taken all passages whereby he
might be distressed, and in the Straits of the Mountains, laid 2000
Harquebusiers and 3000 Horse in Ambush; who, the Enemies being passed, and he
charging them (...), set upon them in the Rear: so that they having lost a
number of men in a great fight, fled. He also intercepted a Ship cast by
weather upon the Coast, laded with the Tributes of Egypt, going to
Constantinople; so that the Persian King, sought to join in amity with him,
highly commending his valiant acts, and sending him a Pistol, Helmet, and
Target, set with gems, esteemed worth 50000 Crowns: This Rebel spread into
Caramania, and so further and further; wherefore the Sultan commanded the
Vizier Bassa, then in Hungary (now Strigonium was taken) upon reasonable
conditions, to conclude a peace, that he might forthwith after, turn his Forces
against the Persians, and Asian Rebels.

But in Hungary, (...) being long besieged by the Rebels and Turks, most of
that Garrison were slain, and the rest grievously wounded: of which strong
Town, the Turks were, for its commodious situation, very desirous, and the
Rebels as unwilling, because it being once in their hand, would scarce be ever
recovered from them: (...), (...), a Captain Hungarian Rebel, by Letters,
requested of (...), that the Town might be delivered to (...), another
Hungarian-Rebel, lest the Turks should get it by force: assuring him, upon the
peril of his life, and confiscation of all his goods, that upon a
reconciliation, made betwixt the Emperor, and the Hungarians, he should
deliver Newhuse into his possession; (...) the Town was yielded October. 17th, to
Humanoius, and the Hungarians only received in; yet so, as that the (...)
there, yet left, might still stay in the Town in pay, and watch and ward with
the rest.

Wherefore, the Turks not a little discontented with the Hungarians, marched
toward the siege at Strigonium: yet, few days after, the Hungarians turned the
Germans with their Captain S(...), out of the Town, conducting them to (...).

At which time, they of Altexsol, not far from Newhuse, being long besieged by
the Rebels; and having but seven Horses left to eat, yielded themselves and
Town to them: as did they of Wiglace, Shemnitz, and Kemnitz.

Botscay the while, with a very great Army, came to Tyrna, about 16 miles from
Vienna: a little before which, Humanoius had summoned Presburg, Botscay, also,
now requiring i by Letters, or else threatening most straightly to besiege them:
wherefore, Schonberg the Governor, doubting of the Faith of the Hungarian
Citizens, retired with a good part of his Soldiers into the Castle,
protesting, to spend life, and all he had, for its defense: whereat, the
Citizens moved, continued firm; so that (...) forthwith removed to Pesth, where
he was presented by the Vizier, with a Crown of curious (...), 60000 Ducats,
and 25 most goodly Horses; and having full power from him, to treat and
conclude of peace (...) the Imperialls, Haly Bassa, and other Turks, being
joined with him, he went to Kirpa, to an Hungarian Assembly, there to be
holden; whither Forgot was come with the Emperors resolution, concerning the
negotiation; and the while, other Commissioners came to Comara, about a Treaty
of peace with the Turks, who required it; (...) Collonitz then by Letters,
advised the Archduke, that (if possible) an atonement should be first made
with the Rebels, and then peace concluded with the Turks, because he perceived
the Turks not to desire peace, but only by endeavoring to keep the Christians
at (...), and in suspense, to do them harm, and (...) good, which was
afterward found so to be.

The Persian King, having sent three Ambassadors to the Emperor, and they
coming one after another, were all with peculiar Letters, dismissed from
Prague, November. 29, congratulating with his successes against the (...), and
desiring a perpetual and firm friendship, to be (...) betwixt them, with a
certain, secure, and free commerce, if the Persian King should extend his
Victories unto the Sea: and that he had then appointed to send unto him, the
famous Baron of Dohna; but all things being ready for his Journey, he suddenly
died, and would have sent another Ambassador, had not the unexpected change of
the Muscovite's affairs, otherwise dissuaded him, he having no other way but
that, who had yet no experience how the Prince there reigning stood affected.
One of these Ambassadors went into Poland, declaring to the King, the great
affection of the Persian King toward him, requesting him to join with him in
all friendship, etc. and then to take up Arms against the Turk, promising, that
his Master should not lay down Arms, till he were utterly destroyed, so the
Christian Princes would likewise impugn him. Such a Message was not before
heard of in Poland, yet the Messenger was bountifully entertained, and with
good words, put in hope of obtaining his request. But in Hungary the Turks and
Rebels assembling at Hidweg, purposed to surprise the Impe ialls in their Camp,
whereof they timely advertised, so received them at their coming, that after a
small fight, they fled: whom the Imperials so (...) toward Canisia, that they
slew above 1000, took about 200, with 1500 Horse; and, leaving sufficient
Garrisons on that side of the Country, (...) toward Vienna.

December. 6th, the Emperors Commissioners at Comara, receiving Letters from the
Bassa of Buda, some of them next day, went by water thither; where after much
talk, they found little difficulty about a peace, only the Turks said, they
could determine nothing, without the (...) and consent of the Hungarians; so
they returned full of hope to Comara, as did Forgot from Botscay, who being
ready to go from Kirpay, (...) Cassovia, gave power to Illishascius, for
furtherance of the Treaty, who having Letters of safe conduct from the ARCH
DUKE, went to (...) about the end of December, where he talked an hour and half
with the Archduke, and every day after, conferred with the Counselors 4
hours; at last, composing all differences touching the peace, except five
Articles concerning freedom of Religion, in any wise required by the Hungarians.

The Haiducks in Hungary, began the next year 1606, with great harm in upper
Hungary, tyrannizing upon all sorts of men; and, giving diverse assaults to
diverse Cities, were valiantly repulsed by the Polonians and Cossacks, (...)
Defendants; yet did they no small harm to the Countrypeople: wherefore, the
King of Poland, upon complaint, obtained by his Ambassador to Botscay, that
those (...) should be recalled.

Illishaschius had so well dealt in the Treaty of peace, that about the end of
Jan. it should have been published at Vienna; but that some chief Clergymen,
would not consent to the free exercise of Religion to all, but only to the
Nobility: whereupon, the Hungarian Commissioners, being about to return greatly
discontented, nothing being concluded, the Emperors Deputies at length,
agreed, that the free Exercise, both of the reformed, as well as the Romish
Religion, should be permitted to all men throughout Hungary, as it was in
Maximilians and Ferdinand's time: concerning which point; Letters were
delivered to Illishascius; all other points being put off to the Assembly of
the States of Hungary, shortly to be holden at Presburg.

About the beginning of March, the Spahi at Constantinople, requested of the
Vizier, that they might take up their Pension of the Husband men in the
Country: which though he denied, as commanded by the Sultan, in few days, to
pay every one in money; yet they presumed to trouble the Country, and do the
Farmers great harm: wherefore, the Sultan beheaded and hanged some of the chief
leaders of them, drowning others, first bound in Chains, so striking no small
fear into the other common Soldiers; but the Rebellion in Asia increasing, and
those Rebels secretly favoring, and furthering the proceedings of the Persian,
the Sultan forthwith, sent sent for the Vizier, to go into Asia against them
both, committing the while, the managing of the War in Hungary, unto his
Lieutenant.

March 18th, being appointed for the Turks and Emperors Commissioners, to meet
at Rab, to further the peace, not past 50 Turks coming to the Gate, desired to
be let in: whom the Christians being about to receive, a Sentinel (it being a
thick mist) perceived 3000 more Turks, lurking thereby, and giving an Alarm,
(...) their treachery, who retired, the Ordnance being discharged after them.
Next month, Messengers came from Eperia, to Vienna, declaring, that the City
was now so, on every side, beset by the Rebels, that no provision could more
come thereunto, by which means, they had lately obtained Tokay, where the
Soldiers eating their shoes, and leather-Jerkins, had killed two Boys to
eat, and cast lots among themselves, which should be killed to eat: Ruber the
Governor, was forced to yield, whom Botscay is said to have offered much
money, etc. to take his part; but he refused all, protesting even unto death,
to abide faithful to the Emperor.

About which time, (...) wrote to a great man at Vienna, declaring, that
Botscay, without the consent of the States of Hungary, could determine nothing
of the peace, who had often told him, rather than to submit to a foreign power,
for ever to put themselves under Turkish protection; yet he promised, that
though he had got the great displeasure of the (...), he would yet seek by all
means, to draw the States in their next Assembly unto him, whereby that which
was concluded at Vienna, about Religion, should not be reversed; for many (he
said) feared that particular would not be performed: wherefore they would not
be persuaded, from Turkish protection, till they were secured, both in their
Religion, and ancient privileges; and that they would not endure a foreign
Governor, with whom they could not talk, nor Clergy men to vote in civil
affairs: therefore, he thought it very needful, for the Emperor herein to
gratify them: and that (...), being now left to Botscay, he should appoint
such a Governor over Hungary, as those States should require; for there was no
hope of peace with the Turks, unless Botscay, and the States, undertook the
Treaty, since they, by a show of peace, were often discovered, but to seek for
their own advantages.

But the Rebels seeing Illishachius labor so much about peace in scorn, called
him Cripelishacius, as inclining too much to the Germans; which he took so
ill, that he departed to Eperia, not purposing to be present at the next
Assembly. But Botscay pacifying and recalling him, he there so notably spoke to
the States, that all began to hope and wish for peace, more than before.

The Turks the while, assembling at Belgrade expected the end of this Treaty;
and Letters from the Sultan to Botscay, were also intercepted, advising him to
join with his forces, and seize upon Austria, Bohemia, and (...); for he could
be content with Hungary and Transylvania, leaving the other Provinces unto
Botscay: About which time, the Tartars were about to inroad into Polonia; but
when by often incursions, they had not a little troubled the Haiducks, they
resolved thenceforth, to fight both against Turks and Tartars; so that the
Turks coming to assault Lippa, the Haiducks leaving the Town, fortified the
Castle with men, and bestowing others in Caves and Cellars in the Town, laid
much Gunpowder in the streets: the Turks entering unresisted, hasted to take the
Castle; but the while, the Powder taking fire, blew up a number of them, and
those who lay hid, forthwith breaking out, made of the Turks a great slaughter,
and so cleared the Town. The Estates of Austria (considering their great harms,
received both from the Rebels, and Emperors mutinous Soldiers, and no more to
rely upon foreign protection, still to seek, when they had most need) in a
general Assembly, agreed to have 2000 Horse, and 8000 Foot, always in
readiyess; 50 Pesants (...) one of those Soldiers. And much about this (...),
Illishaschius, having Letters of safe conduct from the Archduke, came again to
Vienna, more largely to confer with the Emperors Deputies, upon the Articles
of peace: where he was so crossed by the Bishop of Vienna, in respect of the
Article about liberty of Religion, that there was no hope of a conclusion,
while he was (...) in Council: wherefore, he was in the Archdukes name, willed
no more to come into the Council.

So Illishaschius, having traveled to and fro, betwixt the Archduke and
Botscay, with the States of Hungary, and debated the matter; for a full
conclusion, himself, with Humanoius, and diverse others with their Train, came
to Vienna September. 7th, and shortly after, the Treaty was earnestly begun, with
often Messengers betwixt Vienna and Cassovia, to Botscay, then dangerously
sick, till all the Articles of peace, were near about September. 14th, agreed on,
most difference arising about that of Religion; for the Hungarians bringing the
word Religion, to a particularity, would have it set down, that men might
freely exercise the Lutheran, Calvinian, and Romish Religion, without which,
they would conclude no peace: which concluded, they next day sent to the Vizier
at Buda, certifying him of all, and requesting him, not yet to do any thing for
disturbing of the peace. The 15 Articles were,

1. Every man in Hungary, to have freedom of his Religion, and believe what he
would. 2. The Hungarians might choose a Palatine for their Governor; and the
while, the Arch Duke to use the Title of Viceroy. 3. That Crown to be still in
the (...) keeping. 4. The Hungarian Bishops nobly descended, and that had Lands
of their own, to be admitted to Counsel, but the other not so. 5. Botscay and
his Heirs male, for eyer to hold Transylvania. 6. Transylvania to be still
subject to Hungary. 7. Three Crowns, and three open Helmets, to be for his
Arms. 8. No more to style himself Prince, but Lord of part of Hungary. 9. Those
to pay the Haiducks, who levied them. 10. All harms to be for ever forgotten.
11. Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Lausnicium, and Austria, not only to seal to
the Articles, but swear to keep them, so far as concerned them. 12. The
Hungarians to send some to Vienna, in their behalf, to ratify them also with
their Letters, Seals, and Oaths. 13. The Assembly of the Hungarian-States, to
be referred till a more fit time. 14. This agreement to be confirmed, and
enrolled in the Records of Hungary. 15. The Hungarians might by Ambassadors,
invite the Princes of the Empire, to approve and confirm these Articles: which
were subscribed by Commissioners on both sides. September. 20, Botscay and the
Hungarian's Ambassador, admitted to the Arch-Duke's presence, obtained of him,
pardon for all the fore-passed Rebellion: to whom the Provinces also, gave
(...), not to be troubled for the same; but yet was the Title of Prince of
Transylvania left to Botscay, for his life, whose sickness increasing, he would
often say, he could willingly die, so it might please God first to permit him to
excuse himself of his Rebellion, before the whole Empire; and about the end of
September, the Commissioners on both sides, and certain Noblemen of the Empire,
received every one, a fair Copy of the Articles of the peace, in Parchment, and
then returned to their dwellings; but (...), went to Newhuse, to be present at
the peace to be made with the Turks also, whence he wrote to the Vizier,
requesting him, not yet to attempt any thing, but quietly to expect the
Emperor's Commissioners, shortly to come unto him. But while this peace was in
hand, some Tartars at Constantinople, firing a Jew's House, there was such a
terrible fire, that not only many Houses, but many Jews were burnt also: the
harm being valued at 4000000 Ducats: the Sultan also falling from his Horse,
in the Tumult, was a while sick thereof. Also the Turks of Canisia, conspiring
with a Captain of the lesser Comara, came to surprise it; but the suspicious
Garrison, suffering some to enter, shut the Gates, and killed them every one,
the rest returning to Canisia.
The Emperors Commissioners going to Comara, about a peace with the Turks, the
Army followed them, lest they should be intercepted by the way: who carried
with them, Solomon, the Bassa of Buda, and Aly Bassa, prisoners, apparelled in
blew Silk, 6 Wagons, with Presents for the Sultan, following them, to (...), a
most curious Clock, fair Pieces of Plate, 100000 Ducats, with diverse rich
things. But while they there stayed, October. 8th, when as a Hungarian Lutheran,
was preaching in the Pulpit to the people, in the Suburbs, Buchem and Knevie,
Captains, with certain of their Servants, above half drunk, rushing in with
their drawn Swords, (...) out the Preacher, Buchem's Trumpeter, discharging his
Pistol upon him: in which Tumult, diverse Children were trod to death, and the
rest put in great fear: at which insolency, Turson and Budian, Hungarian
Commissioners, would next day have departed from Comara, being hardly entreated
by Mollart, and Collonitz, to stay. Buchem and Knevie, being bound to their
appearance, and the Trumpeter with Irons, clapped in prison; but when fame had
made the Report hereof at Newhuse, much more than it was, as that 150 were
slain, Illishaschius and others, had much ado to appease the tumult there: the
Huugarians determining to join with some Turks and Haiducks, and so by night,
to invade Comara, had not grave Pogranius the elder, coming thence, and
declaring the whole matter, appeased them; but since the said Captains, were
fled by night to Vienna, the Hungarians were very earnest, to have them
severely punished, as breakers of the first Article of the peace. Botscay, the
while, beheaded Catayus his Chancellor, who went about to poison him, in hope
of the Princedom of Transylvania, placing Janusy in his stead, and giving him
his Lands.

Caesar Galen, with some other Captains, being now appointed to find out some
commodious and secure place for the Turks, Emperors, and Hungarians
Commissioners to meet in, at length made choice of three Islands, encompassed
with the arms of Danubius, whereinto they might freely pass over one to
another, to treat of their affairs, as occasions required; and being all thus
apart, arrived in the Islands, toward the end of October. and first by
themselves, then mutually consulting and conferring, November. 19th, the peace
was betwixt all parties fully agreed upon, and Hostages with solemn Oaths and
promises, given for the inviolate keeping of the same: the Articles were, 1.
The Emperor and great Sultan, in all their Letters, etc. to style themselves
only Father and Son, the Emperor, Father (for his years) and the Sultan's
Son. 2. To take on them, only the name of Emperors, in the beginning of
their Letters. 3. They to take order, that Hungary and Austria, might be
assured in full peace and tranquillity. 4. The King of Spain, might enter into
this peace, without let. 5. The Tartars, and all others, to be comprised
herein, so to be disarmed, and the Hungarians assured from their injuries. 6.
Each party to forbear all acts of Hostility against each other, yet to have
power to pursue Thieves and Robbers, etc. and to give notice of them, and cause
them to recompense the wrongs done. 7. All strong Holds to be unattempted, any
way, by either party; and also, the Goods and Families of their Subjects;
Botscay holding all, granted him by the Treaty of (...). 8. All prisoners
taken, to be freed, chiefly, those taken in places, which they sought to
defend; others by exchange or ransom, as should be most expedient. 9. All
Controversies be hither, and beyond Danubius, to be ended by the Governor of
Rab, the Bassa of Buda, the Governor of Sclavonia, and those elsewhere; but
if for their importance, they could not compose them, to be decided by the 2
Emperors: also, that both parties might restore ruined places, but not build
new ones, prejudicial to either. 10. Amurath, the Vizier, to send Presents to
the Archduke Matthias, and the Emperor to send 200000 Ducats, to the Sultan;
and the Sultan also to send great and rich Presents to the Emperor. 11. This
peace to begin in 1607, and remain for 20 years; and every third year, the
Emperors to send one another, honorable and rich Presents, according to their
pleasure and power. 12. The Emperors and Sultan's Successors, with all their
Kinsmen, Allies, etc. to be included in this agreement: as also, those of the
Kingdom of Hungary. 13. The Christians to have Vacia, which they should
fortify at pleasure; but Strigonium, with all Villages belonging, to remain to
the Sultan, yet none to pay any new Tribute; and those who had been free, so to
remain. 14. The Turks not to exact their Tributes by the Sword, but by Justice,
except it should be presumptuously denied, or too long deferred from payment,
and then both sides might use what means they thought good to obtain the same.

For these Articles of peace, all the Towns of Hungary, made great joy and
triumph: The Commissioners also, in token of joy, magnificently feasted one
another, which the Turks began, giving unto nine of the Emperors Commissioners
courageous Horses, gallantly furnished, and to the rest, very rich Garments,
and Tapstry-hangings: And Alla Bassa, to declare his great pleasure received by
the sallies and vollies of shot given by Mansfield's Troop, at the time of the
Feast, sent the Captain 200 Ducats, which he refused, requesting instead
thereof, a Captain then a prisoner with the Turks, whom the Bassa delivering,
sent back also those Ducats for the Soldiers, which yet Mansfield sent back
again.

Every man going home well pleased, the Bassa of Buda, forthwith sent to
Constantinople, to certify the Sultan, of the peace made, who with many
Janissaries, and others, went to the Temple, to give his Mahomet thanks,
spending next day, with great sport and pleasure, purposing thenceforth, to
turn all his force against the Rebels in Asia, and the Persian.

Now for all the aforesaid peace at Vienna, diverse stirs were raised by the
Haiducks in upper Hungary, so that the Inhabitants of Bocotsie, were forced to
fight with them, a number being slain on both sides, and three Villages burnt
about the end of November:

December. 13th, Botscay assembling, the States of Hungary propounded to their
consideration, 1. That the late revolt, with all the troubles thereupon, had
been only for defense of their Religion, and ancient liberty: then, whereas
they had chose him for their Prince, who had hitherto done nothing, without
their consent; and that now by their consent, he was ready to depart from the
Castles and free Cities of upper Hungary, and had sent to Matthias, to send his
Deputies to receive them, whether he should relinquish the Title of Prince, or
not; and for avoiding further troubles, he would, a Decree to be made, that all
injuries should be forgiven, and forgotten, and every man still to hold all
such goods, during the late War: wishing them also in the next general
Assembly, with all their power, to urge the repealing of the Article, about
burning of Heretics; and all other Articles against their Religion, and not to
remit any thing about the choice of their Palatine, as formerly; nor to neglect
any thing, seeming to concern their privileges and liberty: wherefore, they
should be careful to send thither, men as should not be easily overcome, with
the clamours of the contrary part: also, how a sincere confederation might be
made betwixt Hungary and Transylvania, that a safe Commerce might be used.
Which done, (...) sickness increasing, he died at Cassovia December. 30. 1606, to
the great grief of all in general, who had him in great regard. Before his
death, he persuaded (...), not to raise new stirs, or in what he could, suffer
any to be raised; yet some presently after his death, were about to raise new
forces to seize upon Transylvania: wherefore Matthias, sent forthwith to the
States of upper Hungary, advising them, that considering the great miseries
there lately endured, etc. thenceforth, to give themselves to quietness, and
not again to prescribe the Emperor what to do, or how to dispose of
Transylvania: assuring them, he would forthwith, turn all his power, to the
utter destruction, and rooting out such rebellious and seditious persons: by
which warning, some else ready enough to disturb, kept themselves quiet.

Many marvelled, that the Emperor would make peace with the Sultan, he being
so troubled with his own Rebels, and the Persian King in Asia: indeed, time
then well served for the Emperor, not only to have holden his own (which he
did not) in Hungary, but also to recover some good part of his losses there
received; but what avails opportunity, without power? for the revolted
Hungarians, then taking part with the Turks, and they with them, and he with
his own power, not able to hold the Field against them, or well to maintain a
defensive War; and his friends and Allies then at his most need, failing him
also, what should he in such a case do, but as he did?

Now Botscay, was no sooner dead, but some other Hungarian and Transilvanian
Nobles, began diverse ways, to aspire to that Principality under hand, as not
fearing the Archdukes great words: wherefore, some of the Nobility of
Transylvania, assembling at Claudianople, Feb. 12th 1607, chose Sigismund
Ragotsie, for their Prince, binding themselves unto him, by the Oath of their
allegiance; and then sent Messengers to the Archduke, to excuse themselves
thereof, who at Presburg, March 12th, openly protested Ragotsies Election, was
not; because they were about to rebel (for they would always acknowledge the
Emperor for their Sovereign) but so many Nobles gaping after that
Principality, necessitating the same; yet Ragotsie, doubting of his ability,
without great trouble and danger, besides the Emperors displeasure to hold it;
about a year after, giving it up, got away to Sarentum, and straight way
Gabriel Bathor, was about to step up in his place: to whom, the States sent
word by two Noblemen, that the free choice of the Prince, belonged to them:
wherefore, he should not seek to intrude by force, but quietly to come to the
Election, with not above 1000 Horse, and 500 Foot. About which time, Newhuse
was again delivered to Sigefrid Collonitz, for the Emperor, who coming to
(...), told of a number of rebellious Turks at Belgrade, who rifled it; and
burning down Alischria to the ground, went over to the Rebels; and that
Redeius, going to take possession of some Lands Botscay gave him, was slain by
his Tenants, waiting for him upon a strait passage. The Emperors Ambassador,
deferring to set forward with the Presents to Constantinople, the Turks and
Tartars began to roam abroad, into the Christians Territories, and caused the
Pledges of the peace at Buda, to be hardly used, and clapped fast in prison, whom
the Bassa soon suffering a little to walk abroad, the Janissaries tumulting, had
almost slain him with stones, and with many reproaches, called him Traitor; and
wounding grievously one of the pledges: wherefore, the Bassa next night, had
some of them secretly taken, and cast bound into Danubius: yet shortly after,
purposing to make an inroad, to color their harms, they caused the Bassa of
Buda, to write to the arch Duke, of great wrongs done by the Christians, when
as there was no such thing at all. The Sultan desirous, first to appease his
troubles at home, before he further dealt with the Persian, sent a (...) to the
Bassa of Aleppo, to lay down Arms, and deliver over his charge, to whom he had
appointed it, promising hereupon, to pardon him of all past, and to receive him
into favor: who answered, he never took up Arms against him, but to be
revenged of the Bassaes of Damasco and Tripolis, his sworn Enemies, who taken
out of the way, he would both yield himself unto him, and re-deliver the
Tribute sent out of Egypt; and if he pleased to employ him, to bring great
forces against the Persian. The Sultan not contented, sent the Vizier with a
great Army against the Asian Rebels: who by wisdom and discretion, more than by
force, appeasing those in lesser Asia, with 130000 men, marched toward Aleppo,
whose Bassa with 40000 men (most Harquebusiers) in a place of advantage, but
two miles from the City, in three notable Battles, withstood his whole forces;
but preparing for a fourth encounter, and hearing of great aid coming from the
Bassaes of Damasco and Tripolis, he speedily retired into the City, and
trussing up his Treasure, etc. fled into the Mountains, toward Persia, most of
his Army being left following him: after which, the Vizier taking Aleppo by
force, put all the Garrison-Souldiers to the Sword.

But the Bassa forsaken by many of his former friends, by Letters requested the
Vizier, to write for him to the Sultan, if possible to procure his peace: which
easily obtained, the Sultan by Letters sent for him to Constantinople, assuring
him of being employed against the Persian; so the Bassa there arriving with 100
Horse, before many Bassaes humbled himself to the Sultan, who both pardoned
him, and for his ancient descent, great valor, and fair conditions, took him
into favor, and restored him all his goods.

The Sultan (the mean while) had by the Tartar Cham, in vain sought for peace
with the Persian King; for he demanded the restoring of Tauris, with all
Provinces taken from him by the Persians, which he utterly denied, as formerly
belonging to his Ancestors: then also, the Persian King, wrote to the King of
Spain, to this effect; though they were divided in Religion, yet in power and
hatred against the Othoman Empire, conjoined; and considering, he was become
his powerful Neighbor in the East, he most entirely loved him: wherefore, he
had commanded all his Provinces in India, and thereabouts, to be wholly
courteous to his Subjects, demanding no Tribute of them; and he having
recovered the (...) of Aden; had appointed it to the service of the Spanish
Governor of (...): that all Christians dwelling in his Kingdom, should enjoy
the same privileges which his own Subjects had; and that he had for seven
years, warred against the Turks, who by Treason, had taken from him that strong
Town (...); for recovery whereof, he had diverse times overthrown his Armies:
but, since he resolved not to cease, till he had driven them out of those
parts, and recovered the seat of Ismael, and Juchell in Babylon and Caire, he
requested him to confederate with him, and send his dreadful Fleet into the
Persian Gulf, whereby he could easily become Lord of Syria and Egypt.

Then he reckons up the Presents he sent him: the Images of Ismael, Juchel, and
Jonas, with his own, in gold, and set with most rich Stones, and Pearls, a
writing Table, garnished with fair precious Stones, four Dogs, naturally
spotted with red, yellow, and blew: two pieces of Arras, adorned with most
precious Stones and Pearl, wherein were Tamerlane's acts lively to be seen,
four Hunters Horns, very smooth and richly garnished: twelve most gallant
Plumes of feathers of diverse sorts, six drinking-Glasses, not to be broken; and
Couch-Beds, like unto Chaires, having the ancient Wars between Ascanius and
Chiusa, King of the Medes.

The Emperor, in August, calling together the Hungarian States to Presburg
they long expecting the coming of the Archduke, appointed President in that
Assembly, were about to return home, in the beginning of September; but they
were content, by the Archbishops Request, to stay 15 days more, and no
longer; for the Tartars having requested a place in the Borders of Hungary to
dwell in, they desired much, that Parliament to be adjourned, for their more
timely preventing of their designs; and the Turks (the while) hoping the peace
would not long hold, came so to Buda, that Tents were set up for them, to lay
in within the City; for the Bassa, would have none set up in the Fields, lest
the Christians should suspect them to be about raising of an Army.

But the Archduke not coming, the States wrote a solemn Protestation, before
the Chapter of the Cathedral, that they departed from Presburg, not upon
discontent, or contumacy, but for want of necessaries, and other their
urgencies; yet if the Emperor should call another Parliament, they would be
ready upon summons, to return and consult of all things good for the
Commonweal; so nothing were propounded, contrary to the Articles of Vienna:
against which, they would ratify nothing, though by the Emperor allowed.
Which Protestation, they requested to have registered, sealed with the Chapters
Seal. After whose departure, the Haiducks most discontented with this general
peace, began to raise new stirs, craving aid of the Turks and Tartars, and not
of their now loyal Countrymen; and a number of them flocking to Buda, the
Bassa with other Commanders, consulted what to do with these fit instruments,
for disturbing of the peace: so he wrote to them of Comara, except they better
kept the Articles, they should shortly hear of new matters; but, the while, the
Sultan writing to the Bassa, that though the Christians were said to increase
their strength, yet he to attempt nothing against them, till they proceeded to
open force, etc. the Turks again departed from Buda; most of their Ordnance,
brought from Sigeth, being carried back.

But the States of Hungary assembling again October. 14th, at Presburg, decreed,
Tockay to be rejoyned to their jurisdiction: the Ordnance in all free Cities,
to be carried to places whereto they belonged: the Vayuod of Transylvania, to
be warned, not to separate that from Hungary, and the Bassa of Buda, to keep
his Turks within their own bounds: also the Hungarian Nobility, with all their
force, to repress the Haiducks, and all other enemies; yet the Haiducks more
insolent than before, took some Forts, spoiling many places with fire and
sword, and making the people swear to be friends to the Turks, and enemies to
the Germans and Walloons; and demanding of Humanoius, Botscay's Crown, to
crown him, or some other, for their King: who sent them word, he would not
accept of that dignity, but abide faithful to the Emperor; but when the States
were about to go against them, they were deterred by the Bassa of Agria,
threatening with his Turks and Tartars, to take their parts.

About which time, six hundred Haiducks being not let into St. Andrews Castle,
as they desired, openly professed themselves, the great Sultans Servants; and
marching to Budnoc, they took it by force, and ransackt it: then running out
still for booty, Humanoius waiting for them in a strait, slew them almost all,
and sent two of their Ensigns to Vienna, and empaled some of them on stakes at
Cassovia: wherefore, some other Haiducks, lighting on two of the Captains that
had escaped, for the ill leading of their fellows, hanged one, and hewed the
other all to pieces. Some of the prisoners reported, this new Rebellion to be
procured by the Bassaes of Buda and Agria, who promised them all help: the
truth whereof, was shortly confirmed; for, November. 27, almost 15000 Haiducks,
receiving of the Sultan 300000 Ducats, straightly besieged Filek; the Turks of
Agria, sending them Ordnance, whom they promised all places they should win:
yet Bosnias, Captain of Filek-Castle, with his Germans, so repulsed them, and
the winter weather, was so extreme, that they departed.

About the beginning of Novem was a great fire at Constantinople, burning
almost five hundred Shops, with many other fair Buildings, the loss was valued
at above two millions of Gold.

At the time of the Assembly at Presburg, the Emperor appointing another of
the States and Nobles of Austria, at Vienna: certain Articles were propounded,
tending to the securing of Austria and Vienna, against the Turks: also how the
too much inhauncing the value of money, might be restrained, that good orders
might be kept, the Country cleared from the robberies of straggling Soldiers:
the counterfeit Hungarian, and Polonian money, to be prohibited: good orders to
be taken, for staying the Plague, then beginning in many places of Austria; but
when those States assembled, complained, all that Country, with long Wars,
the Rebels incursions, outrages of mutinous Soldiers, to be almost exhausted,
all was to a further time deferred, and the Assembly broken up.

Also at the same time, the Emperor appointed a Diet of Empire at Ratisbone:
Ferdinand, the Archduke of Austria, being chief in his place, where Ortelius
the Emperors Secretary, notably setting forth his love and affection toward
the Electors, Princes and States, and why himself could not be present with
them, he propounded five Articles for them, chiefly to consider of,

1. How the Empire might be preserved against Turkish violence, and the
dangerous rebellions through them stirred up in Hungary, etc. 2. About the
correcting and reforming of the administration of Justice, in the Imperial
Chamber. 3. About the long Wars in the low Countries (a Member and see of the
Empire) and the inconveniency thereof, redounding to the Empire: he having also
heard, that in the Treaty of peace, the confederate Princes were now
acknowledged a free State. 4. Concerning the daily raising of Coin. 5. About
the perfecting the matriculer of the Empire, for the giving unto every man his
due. About the order of the consideration of which Articles, there fell a great
Controversy amongst the Deputies of the Princes: and Jan. 22, 1608, a Writing
by the Emperors, was read unto them, of the combination of the Turks, with the
rebellious Haiducks: these having especially conspired the destruction of the
Germans, confirming that League, by drinking of an health: wherefore, it was
requested, that they would turn their Consultations, unto the first Article,
and resolve, how aid might be sent against the Emperor's enemies; but when in
their often meetings, naught could be concluded, for the different opinions,
betwixt the Protestants and Catholics, (the first, laboring first for
reformation of Justice, and confirming of the peace of Religion: and the
second, first for considera ion of Contribution, to be given against the
enemies in Hungary.)
Ferdinand, calling them together, by Letters declared the Emperors great
grief, for the protracting of the Articles, and had requested the Protestants,
to (...) leave of their Superiors, by Letters, first to determine some
certainty about the first Article: howbeit, this prevailed nothing; so that he,
out of hope of concluding any thing, May 5th, dismissed the Assembly, all being
left undeceived.

Matthias, the Archduke, came the while, with a (...) Train to Presburg,
welcomed by the Bishop of Rab, with an eloquent Oration, before some Hungarian
Nobles, who went as far as Hainburg, to meet him with much joy. Next day, the
Arch Bishop and Cardinal of Strigonium, with a notable Train, came to
Presburg, who in the Castle, conferred with the arch Duke, of many things to be
consulted of. In the mean time, Illishachius arrived there also, honorably
attended: so the chief States being come, the Consultation began, Jan. 23,
where the Arch Bishop, propounding what they were chiefly to consider of, they
answered, The Haiducks determined, not a whit to depart from the last years
Articles, agreed on at Vienna: to confirm which, was alone necessary, to
appease the Tumults of the Haiducks: from which, the Hungarians being not to be
removed, and also grieved at the scoffing of some of the Clergy, were about to
depart, protesting themselves guiltless of such harms, as should afterward
ensue: it was agreed, the whole matter to be decided by 10 Hungarian
Counselors, and 10 of those of Austria: who meeting in Illishaschius's (...),
Jan. 28, they concluded, that for the peace sake of Hungary and Austria, those
Articles which could be agreed on at Vienna, being quite left off, those which
were agreed on, should be still (...) observed and kept: which thing, the
Commissioners of Austria, by a special writing there, confirmed unto the
Hungarians, declaring the Reasons thereof, and promising to the Hungarians, to
give aid for defense of these Articles, being ready to give good reason
thereof, before God, the Emperor, and all the House of Austria, as necessity
should seem to require: hoping also, that the States of Hungary, would rest in,
and observe fully, the said pacification, and be ready to give Austria, their
like aid against their Enemies: so Letters of confederation, were, in
Matthias's name, and of both the Ecclesiastical and civil States of Hungary
and Austria, written, concluding, that if hereafter, any detriment or War,
should be by any made, to the Hungarians, or thereabout, for the said Articles,
they would with united Forces, come to aid their confederate Brethren, and live
or die together: which being signed and sealed, Febr. 1, Illishaschius and
Turson, were sent to the tumultuous Haiducks, who had appointed to send to the
Sultan, and Tartar Cham, to crave their aid, dissuading them therefrom, and
persuading them to quietness, and threatening them to be at once oppressed by
the Power of the States, if they would not hearken to such honest conditions.

Matthias returning to Vienna, assembled the States of Enseric, declaring all
that was done at Presburg, advising them so carefully, to provide for the
Commonweal, as that having money always in readiness, they might go to meet
with the Haiducks, if they would not conform to the Articles, but raise new
broils.

About Spring, Jerome Prince of Valachia, being dead, and leaving a Son, but 13
years old, the Emperor admitted him under Tutors unto the succession:
wherefore, the Valachians trusting to the Turks help, went to choose another
Prince; but the Widow, certifying Polloscie her Son in Law hereof, obtaining
much money of him, and raising 10000 good Soldiers, overcame the Valachians
and Turks, and so preserved that Principality for her Son.

The Duke of Florence, having hitherto done the Turks great harm, in the
Mediterranean Sea, the Sultan sent, and promised him great matters, hereafter
to desist; but the Duke increasing his Fleet, did more harm than before.

Now though Illishaschius and Turson, had delivered to the Haiducks, the
Articles, and commanded them to be quiet, yet they living by their Swords,
could not endure to fall to labor: wherefore, they about Gimerit, wrote to
them about Newsoli, that since they being diverse times certified of the misery
of their Neighbors, had refused to aid them; yet they should now remember, how
needful it was mutually to help each other; for the Haiducks passing over
Teise, were run into that Province, as far as Budnoc, minding to spoil all the
Country, if not speedily encountered; and the rather, because they lately had
30000 Hungarian Ducats from the Turks, whom they owned their Lords, with
Horses, and other gifts for their leaders, and daily expected aid from the
numerous Tartars about Belgrade: so, since the harm, the Haiducks did, was
inexpressible, they should inform their Neighbors, and, with all speed, take
up Arms against them.

About the end of March, Matthias the Archduke, proclaimed throughout Austria,
every man to provide, to take up Arms; joining this Reason, that he intended
himself, to go in April, into Moravia, and there to assemble both Hungarians,
Austrians, and Haiducks, for a War: writing also, to the Vassals of Austria,
that whereas they knew the States of ENSERIC, had approved of their Deputies
report of what was decreed at PRESBuRG; yet some did not only not rest upon
that pacification, but gathered an Army in the Borders of Moravia, purposing to
inroad both into Moravia, and Austria; wherefore the States of Moravia, also
were forced to raise an Army, and crave help of their Neighbors; and therefore
the Archduke, mindful of his promise, resolved in person, to undertake this
expedition, that the States also should with their Servants, join unto him;
that God, in whose name it was to be taken in hand, might soon grant unto those
Countries, wished peace: wherefore, they were to be warned, with what Horse and
Foot, they could raise at a day, to be shortly named, to join to the Archduke,
and not suffer any thing to let them. So that if any thing should happen to
their General, yet to send their Forces under some other, seeing he adventured
his own life and fortunes; and if God saw good, accounted it great gain to lose
them, thereby to benefit his Country. A little after which time, the Cardinal
brought the Emperor's answer to Vienna, that he did (...) all things concluded
with the Hungarians, and Turks, but the Confederation betwixt the States of
Hungary and Austria, should be void: which, the Arch Duke protesting he could
not like of, or suffer, April 15th, with a great many chief-ones, and a good
Army, set forward with 28 Ordnance, expecting his Soldiers, levied in all
places, at Newberg, and declaring, that none should be harmed by his Army; or,
if any chanced to be done, it should be restored, and recompensed. Hereupon,
the Nobility of Bohemia, began to assemble, April 15th: whither, when the
Deputies of the other Countries were come also, it was decreed, that they
should speedily return, and provide themselves and Subjects of necessary Arms,
to defend their Country, as need required; besides, the Emperor caused many
Horse and Foot to be brought to Prague, and April 18(...), wrote to some
Princes of the Empire, and others of Bohemia, (...) all speed to send him aid
to Prague. But Matthias the while, marching on with 20000 Horse and Foot, April
24, came to Zname in Moravia, honorably received by those States, comne
thither with 400 Horse: Thence sending Letters into Bohemia and to Prague, he
requested them to send Deputies to the Assembly, to be at Zaslavia, May 4th,
promising, that himself would there give a reason of his actions, and what he
would do hereafter: he also wrote to the Princes of the Empire, showing the
cause of this his expedition, and sending a Copy of the agreement at Vienna,
April 25, 1606, by the consent of the Archduke, requesting them friendlily,
not to intermeddle in this business; but rather by Counsel and aid, to further
it. But the Emperor, sent the Popes Ambassador, with others laying at Prague,
and sundry Bohemian Ministers to Matthias, still at Zname, whom, the Cardinal
next day followed, to make a good peace with him, if possible: the Emperor the
while, calling the Counselors of old and new Prague, in unwonted manner, most
courceously received them with his own hand, and thanked them for their
fidelity hitherto, requesting them hereafter, so to continue, promising them
all kindness, with the privileges of shutting of the Gates which they lost in
Ferdinana's time; and ere long, there was a General Muster, both in Prague,
and throughout all Bohemia, and 300 Musketeers, appointed to keep the Castle
under Count Solmes, who had Commission to raise other Soldiers also. Then was
it certainly reported from Constantinople, that the Tartar Cham died and the
Sultan to have caused his Son, hitherto detained as a Pledge, to be with
(...) (...) transported over the black Sea, to possess his Fathers Kingdom.
Also, that some seditious Turks, going to surprise Smyrna, and forraging far
and near about it, came to Magnesia, whose (...) offered them 10000 Crowns to
spare the Country thereabouts. The Persian also then to do the Turk great
harms, he Turks and Tartars seeking in vain to withstand him.

The Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, coming to Prague, part of them May
9th, went to Matthias, to Zaslavia, where he lay with 25000 men; who requesting
8 days truce of him, for making a pacification, easily obtained: chiefly,
since those Electors, being bound (...), the Emperor, both for their
Electorship, and in respect of Bohemia, they could not (they said) but send him
present aid: to which end, they had some thousands of Soldiers ready in their
frontiers. About May 17th, Matthias marched toward Prague, with 18000,
Collonitz following him with the rest; and though he had severely commanded his
men not to rob, spoil, or burn, and had hanged some, headed others therefore;
yet some would be straggling sometimes, and doing harm, chiefly, the Hungarians,
who ran out as far as the Emperor's Camp, and new Prague: whom yet, the
Imperials, though 20000 strong, let alone, the Emperor so commanding: howbeit,
some of them going too far abroad, were by the Countrymen slain. May 23, the
States of Bohemia, were assembled at Prague, the Emperor being present: where
they promised, to spend lives and goods in his quarrel; yet requested diverse
things to be granted and confirmed, the chief whereof were, that Religion,
according to the Confession of Bohemia and Augusta, should not be violated, and
the Professors of either, not scoff or despise each other: the Archbishop,
not to meddle with civil affairs: that Protestants and Patrons of the
University of Prague, should be joined to the Consistory, as in Ferdinand's
time: Political Office, not to be void above a month, to which men of both
Religions, should be admitted: every man to enjoy his right, and no decree
published against it: Every man to have access to the Emperor, and not all to
be done by his Councillors: all men to know what was treason: a difference to
be made bet (...) offenses, and none for a leight one to lose goods, life, and
reputation: the suits of Widows, Orphans, and others to be expedited, and not
from day to day deferred: the Father not to pay the Sons debt, which he ran
into without his knowledge, but the Son himself: Lawyers which plead Causes,
to be content with fees, by common decrees appointed them; and in any wise,
they requested the Emperor to ease them of these griefs, before compelled to
answer to what was to be propounded in his behalf: most things he easily
granted; those which concerned Religion only excepted, which were put off unto
the next Assembly. About the end of May, Matthias's Ambassadors came to Prague,
upon safe conduct, who caused their charge to be read before the Council out of
a long writing, in the Bohemian Tongue: then being put aside, and a while
after, called again, they were answered, That the points were of more weight,
than to be sufficiently deliberated of so soon: wherefore, they thought meet,
that Commissioners on both sides, meeting in open field, nigh Debritse, should
consult there, of those Articles: who at length, accordingly, so wrought by
often going to and fro, that the Emperor and arch Duke, were again made
friends: the Articles of which pacification, were June 17th, openly read in the
Castle of Prague; according to the first whereof, the Crown of Hungary, with
its Ornaments, as King Stephen's Sword, the Golden Apple, with the Cross of
the Kingdom upon it, two pair of rich shoes, a very ancient Robe, with a royal
(...), were by the Emperors chief Lieutenant, delivered to the Archduke
Matthias, (to whom also, the arch-Dukedom of Austria, before by the Emperor
possessed, was surrendered) who, with his Army, ranged in order, etc. commanded
three great Vollies of shot to be discharged, and then royally feasted the
Emperors Ambassadors; and many of Matthias his Camp, especially the
Hungarians, went into Prague, to buy necessaries, many coming also, out of the
City, to see his Camp; but (the while) some insolent Soldiers by night,
breaking up some Shops of the Jews, and carrying away much rich Wares, caused
great stirs: so that diverse Soldiers were cast into prison.

July 1, King Matthias departed from Prague, with his chief Counselors toward
Lintze, dividing his Army into three parts, for their more easy passage; but
one Cottovitz, a Noble Bohemian, to whom the Hungarians and Haiducks, had done
great (...) in this expedition, with 600 Harquebusiers, and many Countrymen,
went to Patrovitse, where cutting off the passage, and cutting down Trees
acrosse the ways, he slew about 900 Hungarians, coming that way, carrying away
some prisoners, with much booty of Horses, Wagons and Goods: whereupon, the
Hungarians trod down the Corn, as they went, and began to fire the Villages and
Houses thereabouts; but the King, by the General of Horse, commanded them, not
only to desist, but upon a great penalty, to help quench the fires they had
raised.

In the mean time, great preparation was made at Vienna, for receiving K.
Matthias, and bringing him into the City, according to his Dignity: which
triumphs and Solemnities ended, when as they there began to consult of things
concerning the good Government of Hungary, and crowning of the King; and that
the Protestant States of Austria, began to exercise their Religion, according
to the Confession of Augusta, Leopold the Archduke, and Bishop of Passavia,
Melinus the Popes Nuntio, Cardinal Forgats, and the Bishop of Vienna came, and
by earnest soliciting of the King, obtained, that that exercise of Religion,
should be again abrogated, the Temples shut, and public preaching forbidden:
whereupon, the Protestant States, calling a Council, refused the Oath of
allegiance to the new King, till they had obtained the liberty of their
Religion, commanding all their Subjects and Tenants to be ready in arms; and if
need were, every 30th, 10th, or 5th man, to be pressed to the Wars; but they
supplicating unto the King, 180 Nobles subscribing thereto, and being answered
only, to desist from their purpose, and appear forthwith to take the Oath,
they September. 14, going to Horn, by Letters to the Popish States, protested
themselves clear of all the evils to ensue, if they should take their Oath of
allegiance to the King; and so raised an Army, beginning by all means, to
provide for their affairs; but the States of Bohemia and Moravia, informed
them, that they would intercede for them to the King, yet not to be wanting to
them at their need.

Letters the mean time, came to Vienna, from Constantinople, declaring
Matthias's Ambassadors, to have on his behalf, promised faithfully to keep the
peace, and the Sultan to have received the presents before the chief Bassaes;
but he would in no wise grant them the Government of Transylvania, giving it to
Gabriel Bathor, and commanding the Bassa of Buda, to establish him in that
principality. About the beginning of October, 2 Counts were sent to the
Protestant States at Horn, Maximilian, the Archduke following them, who, by
no means or promises, could draw them to take the Oath of allegiance, without
the freedom of their Religion; but October. 16th, the Popish States took that
Oath to King Matthias at Vienna, with Ordnance, Drums and Trumpets thundering
and sounding, and great feasting, triumph and solemnity: which done, Matthias
came October. 22, to Presburg, being brought by the Hungarian Nobles, with 10000
Soldiers into the City, who November. 6th, offered the King some Articles in
writing, for him to confirm: most being drawn out of the pacification at
Vienna, in 1606: 1. Freedom of Religion to be permitted in every City and Town.
2. All the strong places to be governed by natural Hungarian Captains. 3. That
Crown to be still in Hungary, and kept by temporal men. 4. First of all, a
Palatine to be chosen. 5. If the King did not always reside there, he to be
content, that the Palatine and Council, should, in his absence, conclude of all
things. 6. All public Offices, to be bestowed only upon well deserving
Hungarians, none to be admitted for money. 7. No Jesuits to be in the Kingdom,
nor Ecclesiastical men so much favored as formerly. 8. Officers not to be
bound to give account, but before the Treasurers of Presburg, being natural
Hungarians. 9. Money not to be carried out of the Kingdom, as hitherto. 10. The
Palatine dying, the King to choose another within a year, the chief Justice the
while, (as of old) supplying the place. The Protestant States of Austria, had
sent to those of Hungary, then at Presburg, requesting, that since they could
not obtain the free exercise of Religion, as well within, as without their
Cities, they would afford them the aid due by the pacification at Vienna: who
sent Turson and others, with interceding Letters to Maximilian, who answered,
King Matthias never thought to attempt against the privileges of Austria,
granted by the Emperor Maximilian; but he could by no means, grant to the
Cities, the liberty of Religion, both for Conscience, and for danger, that
might ensue from the Pope, and King of Spain; yet he would promise to suffer
it, without the Cities, and in bestowing public Offices, to regard no
Religion; yet so, that they laid down Arms, submitted to the King, confessed
their fault, craving pardon, whereby perhaps they should prevail most.

The Hungarian Ambassadors, going with this answer to the Austrians, by diverse
Reasons, earnestly persuaded them to submit, and, by request, to solicit their
cause with the King: whereof were, That the League betwixt the Hungarians and
Austrians, concerned as well the Catholics, as Protestants: that the
Hungarian power, could not be brought into Austria, but to its utter
destruction: that (...) Religion, was never planted, or defended with the
Sword, Christ saying, them to be happy, who therefore suffer persecution; and
commanding Peter to put up his Sword into his scabberd: that hereby, Hungary it
self, should be exposed to many dangers, etc.

But all Controversies ended with the Hungarians, Illishashius was chosen
Palatine, and Matthias, November the 14th, proclaimed King of Hungary; and on
the 19th day, Crowned in great Pomp and solemnity at Presburg, and on a high
(...), covered with Cloth, sworn to the HUNGARIANS, as their KING, and they to
him as his Subjects: where many Haiducks and common people, at, or after the
great Feast, scrambling for the money that was cast abroad, and in taking up
the Cloth from the scaffold, had their hands and fingers cut off.

King MATTHIAS, now stayed at Presburg, till the new Building in the Castle was
ended, where the Crown was to be kept, that he might see it, with the other
Ornaments put thereinto, and sealed up with his own Seal, and the while,
labored to appease diverse contentions, and to place fit men in great Offices;
for the Hungarians would not suffer the Germans therein: wherefore many were
displaced, and Sigifrid Collonitz also, a most well-deserving man: yet soon
after, by Maximilian's Counsel, he was by the Hungarians (repenting thereof)
both restored to his former Offices, and had even greater preferments offered
him also; but Illishaschius now Palatine, November. 28, largely and earnestly
entreated with the King, in behalf of the Protestants of Austria, chiefly,
because those of Hungary, seemed in their behalf, much moved, and the Moravian
Ambassadors, openly protested, their States could not forsake them, if their
need required.

The Elector of Saxony, and other Princes of the Empire, earnestly interceded
also for them; yet the Popes Nuntio so withstood them, that the King then
granted nothing: who returning to Vienna, the Protestant States of Austria,
sent six AMBASSADORS to the KING, to know whereto to trust, who answered them,
December the 27, they should be content with the former answer, and submit to
the Kings pleasure, or do what they saw good: whereupon, they levied new
Forces, persuading their Soldiers, that minding their Oaths, to serve
faithfully, wheresoever, and against whomsoever.

Now a great Army of the Protestants lay about Crembsa and Spain: So that the
King sent to those two Towns 1500 Horse, and some Ordnance under Bucheme, to
strengthen them: publishing an Edict, Jan. 10th, 1609, charging the States to
come to Vienna, on the 21 day, to take the (...) of allegiance; yet they most
stiffly refused, remitting nothing of their Requests: so that (...), who had
(...) in this cause, was quite out of (...). Bucheme the while, was like to be
disappointed of a (...) place, he was about to take up for his Horsemen, by
Gerrane's Horse, on the States side: wherefore Bucheime with seven Troops, and
Gerrane with 3, and 3 Companies of Foot, had a hot skirmish, Jan. 13th, 100 of
Bucheimes men being slain, of Gerranes not so many, they having the advantage
of ground: hereupon, the King much moved, proclaimed at Vienna, proscribing all
the Protestants Soldiers, and pronouncing them Rebels, except before Jan. 21,
they laying down Arms, departed their Camp: howbeit, the (...) States,
increased their Forces, and from a Hill, not far from Hallenbynne, discharging
three tire of Ordnance, much terrified the Kings Soldiers within the Town.

The States of Moravia, about this time, sent Ambassadors to those at Horn,
and others to the King, declaring unto him, their States were earnestly
importuned by those of Austria, to (...) them aid, according to their agreement
the year before; and amongst the rest, telling him, the Protestant States were
content to put the controversy, to grave and wise Arbitrators on both sides:
yet so, that for (...) days, no Hostility should be used: the Inhabitants
above, and beneath Amisum, to be comprised in this Truce: those in durance, for
Religion to be freed; and all high ways and passes, to be cleared from all
dangers.

Hereupon, the King gave leave to the States of Moravia, upon the most equal
terms they could, to compose all matters: who so labored therein, that March
the 12th. a Pacification was made betwixt the King and them, the Pope's Nuntio,
and other great Ones seeking in vain to let it: and among other Articles
concerning the liberty of their Religion and Privileges: some who were put out
of Office for not taking the oath of Allegiance, were to be restored to their
places: all grudging, (...), and quarrel, to be on both sides forgiven and for
ever forgotten: the Towns above Amisum, to have the free exercise of the
reformed Religion in their Suburbs and Hospitals.

Ere long, the King going to Lintze with 300 Horse, was with 8 Troops, and 15
Foot. Companies meeting him, most honorably brought into the City; where he
received of the States the Oath of Obedience, which Triumphantly performed, he
May 27. (...) to Vienna; The States of Austria (the while) Zealously exercising
their Religion at Horn, a multitudet of people daily resorted to their
Sermons: the Romanists much grieving and fretting thereat; the King also put
diverse Catholics out of Office, placing Protestants in their rooms, greatly
discontenting many. About which time, the Bassa of Agria, had compacted with
one Drake, for 20000 Crowns beforehand, to have Filek delivered unto him, who
would have effected it, by setting his House on fire in the night; but his
traitorous purpose discovered, and by him confessed, he was alive cut into 4
pieces.

The Bassa of Buda, also went about to exact the Oath of Allegiance of above
400 Christian-Villages, not comprised within the Treaty; but the Haiducks (on
the other side) assembled in great numbers in upper- Hungary, began here and
there to trouble the Turks, till they were commanded to desist, for disturbing
the peace. About this time also, Illishachius (much beloved and lamented of the
Hungarians, died at Vienna: who was, with all Funeral pomp, buried in his own
Territory in Hungary with his Ancestors: in whose stead Turson, was by the
Hungarian Nobility chose Palatine, and by the general acclamations of the
people so saluted.

And now rather worse troubles began to arise in Bohemia for Religion, than in
Austria: the Hussites (so called) earnestly importuning the Emperor for the
free exercise thereof, or rather for removal of some grievances done thereto;
and the Catholics leaving nothing unattempted, to frustrate whatever the
Emperor had in a general Assembly granted to them of the Religion: which
controversy, he having referred to some of his chief Counselors: and they
wholly favoring the Romanists, would give the other no answer to rest on;
they, upon good deliberation, appointed May 4th. to hold a general meeting in
the new Court at Prague, to consult of all matters concerning their Religion;
yet the while, protesting in Parliament by Codovitsius, They appointed it for
the Emperor's good, and quiet of the whole Realm, etc. Immediately after, they
sent Ambassadors to King Matthias, the Electour Palatine, Dukes of Saxony and
Brunswick; requesting them, to mediate for them to the Emperor for the freedom
of their Religion; wholly agreeing with the confession of Augusta, long before
allowed by Maximilian.

Now these (...) were by some commended, by others, both blamed and accused of
Rebellion; but, the Emperor complaining of the inconsideratnesse of his
Counselors, prorogued the Parliament; commanding by a (...), that very day,
to be appointed for concluding that Article of Religion: on which the States
had appointed their Assembly: Howbeit, many troublesome Spirits published in
Writing, that the States-Assembly was only to rise rebelliously against the
Laws, and their Prince; and advised them to forbear from making any such
Assembly: Hereupon in Prague, they of the Religion and Romanists, not daring to
trust each other, were ready upon every false report and vain surmise to go
together by the ears: till the Emperor caused it to be proclaimed in the now
Court at Prague; that he, understanding the States Apology, did abrogate his
late Edict against them, accounting them all for his good Subjects, etc,
Denouncing their appointing their Assembly in the new Court at Prague, not to
be contrary to his Majesty, and that he appointed May 25. for a Parliament to
be in Prague-Castle, for ending the Article about Religion, and reforming other
grievances of the Commonwealth; yet so, that the said States, should safely and
quietly come thither, not entertaining any Foreign Soldiers, as neither
should himself do: Whereupon, they publicly praying, and singing for their
good success, returned from the new Court, to provide to come to the Parliament
next day,

But, the Emperor still delaying the matter, the States weary, and in doubt,
June 3d. offered to the Emperor a short writing concerning their grief and
further purpose, (...) the blame to the troublesome Natures of some
Ecclesiastical and Temporal persons: protesting also, that since they certainly
heard much Warlique preparation, (chiefly in Bavaria) to be: and diverse
consultations to be holden against them (unknown to him and his faithful
Counselors) which might tend to the destruction of himself, and the whole
Kingdom: they would endeavor by Arms to their utmost, to defend him their
Sovereign, with themselves and the Kingdom against Foreign Force and Invasion.

In the mean time, an Ambassador from the Duke of Saxony, came to entreat the
Emperor in the State's behalf: (...) also of the Silesian States came,
requesting the Emperor to have the free exercise of their Religion (...) unto
them, and, promising most readily, to aid the Bohemian States, if need should
be; but the Bohemian States raised a great number of Horse and Foot, whom they
brought even to the City; at length, July the 11. the Saxon Ambassadors
earnestly soliciting their cause, they received answer from the Emperor
according to their desire, by effectual Letters: granting the States of the
Religion a free communicating under both kinds, and a free exercise of their
Religion in all points, throughout all Bohemia, without the let or interruption
of any: and to be (he said) for ever inviolably kept. Which to be for ever
remembered, he would cause the same to be enrolled in the public Records of
Parliament. The Letters were publicly set up in Prague-Castle, July 13. that
all might know, this Article of Religion, the first in that Parliament
propounded, to be concluded according to the minds of the States, who on the 15
day, had a public Sermon, according to the confession of Augusta, preached in
the German Tongue in an assembling place, which had long bin shut up: sending
also to the Duke of Saxony for learned men, for the setting up of the
University of Prage, and governing the lower-Consistory there, both now granted
unto them also by the Emperors Letters. And for all this, the Silesian
Embassadour's still laboring with the Emperor for the religious liberty of
that Province; the Bohemian States would not dismiss their Soldiers mustered
nigh Roggenson, till the Silesians had their request: offering him also a large
Narrative of their griefs.

But the Turks Ambassador coming from Vienna with a notable Train, Sept. 21.
(having first saluted and presented the King with great gifts at Vienna)
coming to Prague, was honorably received by the Citizens and Emperor's
Council, October. 12. and on the 19 day, presented to the Emperor from the
Sultan, a rich Tent of diverse colors, most curiously wrought with Orient
Pearls; 4 courageous Horses with most sumptuous Furniture; some Turkish Weapons
set with precious Stones: a Princely Turks-Robe (used at their Marriages) with
other rare things of less value; He also delivered him the Sultans Letters,
desiring the peace for 20 years, to be again renewed: unto whom Letters were
delivered from the Emperor, with rich Presents for the Sultan: to wit,
Caroches lined within with Damask, and covered without with black Velvet; 6
gallant Horses most richly furnished: a Clock of wondrous workmanship, 2 fair
writing Desks of Ebony, with diverse other-like: who so charged, bountifully
rewarded, and well answered, was Honorably dismissed in the beginning of
January, 1610. The Turkish Emperor, now bending all his Forces against his
Rebels in Asia, and the Sophy of Persia: who, now entered into the Province of
Babylon to join it to Persia: Wherefore, Achmat sends thither a mighty Army
under Nassut Bassa, but the Persians meeting him, defeated him, and slew 20000
of his men.

The Sultan much troubled at rhis mournful news, to repair this loss, levies
new Forces, to be commanded by Gambolat, the potent Rebellious Bassa of Aleppo,
lately reconciled to the Grand Seignior; who, coming to the Port to receive
his Commands, and pass his Army into Asia (whether upon suspicion of his
Intelligence with the Persians; or, those who envied his greatness, giving some
bad Impression of his Loy altie) Achmat caused him to be flain by his Capigi.

The Persian King, seeing what advantage he had gotten of the Turks: sent his
Ambassador to the Emperor at Prague, to persuade him to join with him against
him: they presenting him with a Cross of Gold, set with precious Stones: one
being Amber, whereon was the Image of the Virgin, holding her Babe; so
artificially wrought, that it might seem the work of Nature: an exceeding great
Topaz: 2 Knives of Damask, with Jasper-hafts, and Sheaves covered with
Diamonds: a kind of Indian-wood, most sovereign against pains of the Breast,
and to purge the Stomach; a Pellican's gall, excellent against the Pleurisy,
Apoplexy and Fever; 2 Topazes, White and Violet, this being big enough to make
a Cup: an (...) as big as a Hens-Egg: a Persian Bow, inlaid with a Camels
Veins: an exceeding great rough Diamond: a Water-coloured Stone, preserving
against the Plague, if hung about the neck: 3 exceeding great Orient Pearls: 3
rich Carbuncles: 3 wondrous fair Diamonds, and a Serpentshorn, much esteemed
for its rare Virtues. But, though these Presents were very acceptable, and the
Ambassadors much honored, yet, the Emperors affairs, not suffering him to
join with the Persian, so far from his Countries, the Embassadour's returned
home only with good words; for, if he had broken his peace with the Turk, he
had given his Enemy assured means to ruin him; for the Archduke Leopold,
entering Bohemia, with 9000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, surprised (...) Prague,
attempted the old-Town by force, slaying many resistants: Whereupon, King
Matthias, advances speedily toward Bohemia with a powerful Army. The
Emperor, foreseeing the danger if these 2 Armies, should meet, gave Romeo,
Leopolds Lieutenant, 300000 Florens to pay his Army, and so sent him out of
Bohemia. This division betwixt the Austrian Princes, grew by some of the
Emperors Council: who, being delegated to compound the differences of the
Bohemians, of diverse Religions, made themselves partisans, the one to oppress
the other: besides the Archdukes, Ferdinand and Leopold, practiced to deprive
King Matthias of his Succession, pretended to Bohemia, lest he should take
revenge upon their Partisans, for their former troubling of the Country.

The last year, 1609, the Christians had no good success at Sea, the loss
falling particularly upon the Knights of Malta. The Gallion of the Order,
commanded by Guidoti an Italian, had in 2 fortunate Voyages, brought to Malta
300 Turkish slaves: upon which good success, many Knights made a Fleet of 10
good ships: but meeting with the Turks Fleet in the seas of Cyprus, they were
set upon and most of them slain or made slaves. In this Voyage, the Gallion of
the Order, accompanied with 2 small ones set upon the Caravan of the Turks
Fleet nigh the Rhodes (in which were 2 great Gallions, Ships belonging to the
grand Seignior-women, laden commonly with great riches) (...) a successful
beginning: but 20 galleys of the Rhodes coming forth, through a fair wind,
drew them into safety.

Upon the bruit at Malta, that 80 Turks galleys should besiege the Isle of
Goza; the Great Master caused a good (...), to be there made for fortifying of
the Cattle, sending thither 200 Soldiers, and 30 Knights for supply; but the
enemies Fleet passed on and gave them time to rest. But this year, 1610.
Vignancourt he great Master, sent the 5 galleys of the Order into Barbary,
toward Port Farino, to surprise the galleys of (...), who used to fetch Palms
there in the Spring time: but contrary winds and tempestuous Seas overthrew the
enterprise; yet they returning toward Malta, encountered with a great Gallion
of Tunes. The Raise, who commanded, smiling, promised to free them from their
Enemies: and spoke confidently, that he would not fear 20 galleys of Malta;
but, those 5 coming close under him, so plied him that they sunk him; and then
the Turks began to swim away: but they were all made slaves to serve in the
galleys of Malta. The galleys of the great Duke of Tuscany, parting from
Ligorne, under the conduct of Inghirami, took a Turkish ship in the sight of
Algier, laden with Merchandise Arms and Munition, freeing many
Christian-slaves: and passing on some 25 Leagues further, they went to surprise
Bisquerre, a small Town, but strong and well walled. Inghirami, taking down his
Masts, lest they should discover his coming, sent 2 Long-(...) to find a fit
landing place; where Col. Bindij landing his men, about 11 at night, marched
forward, and forced the Town, and setting their Guards and Sentinels, in the
most important places of the Wall, day being come, they sacked and spoiled it:
some Moors and Turks, had by night retired to a Mosque, which they fortified:
and being summoned, the fear of being slaves made them resolve to die; so, the
Florentines forcing the place, put them all to the Sword, and then embarked,
having filled Bisquerre with fire and blood. At night, they took a Pinnace
laden with Corn, in the Gulf of Bad-woman: and passing on, upon the coast of
Sardinia, Jugharami sends his Galleys to pursue 2 Galliots of Biserta, taking
one with 120 Slaves, and freeing many Christian-captives from the Chain. They
also took a Turkish Galley within half a League of Algier, and spoiled it.

This year, the Morisques or new Christians in Spain (in number 900000 persons,
as the Original writes) who had continued there, from Father to son almost 900
years, were in an instant banished by the Kings Edict; some saying, the King
had reason to do it, because they had secret Intelligence and practices with
the Turks: Others affirmed, he did wisely, to prevent their attempts against
his Estate; which were to be feared considering their so great numbers; and
some said, it was to have their Lands and Inheritance, which had continued so
long in their Races. They had 30 days assigned them to dispose of their
moveable goods before their departure; which they might carry away, not in
Gold, Silver, Jewels or Letters of Exchange; but in Merchandise not prohibited,
bought of the natural Subjects of Spain, and not of others, or in the
Commodities of the said Country. But, after the publication of the Edict; the
term of 30 days was restrained to 20, so that the Morisques were hastened to
depart: and the Vessels of what Country soever, were stayed in all parts of
Spain, to transport them whither they would go. Many passed into Barbary; but
this year, above 150000 of them came into France; the King sending Commissaries
to see them well used, and orderly transported away.

There was a War in Barbary, betwixt Muley Nequy King of Fez, and Sidon his
younger Brother: this forcing the Elder to flee, and craved aid of Philip King
of Spain: who treated with the Mohammedan, promising him Succors, with 100000
Ducats, to return to Alarache, or Arache, a strong Town in the Realm of Fez,
seated on the Ocean, at the mouth of the River Lucus, that held for him, to
draw unto him as many Soldiers as he could, and for the safety of those
Succors, to put Arache into Philip's hands: in which the Kings of Fez, do
usually keep 300 Light Horse. and 300 Harquebusiers in Garrison, because the
Portugals and Castilians, hold almost all the seaTowns of the Provinces of
Habat and Eriff, Arache being in that of Algar. Xequy returned to Arache with
his money in a Ship of the Kings, to whom shortly, many repaired. The Spaniard
the while, preparing a great Fleet, embarked 10000 Soldiers, under the
Marquess of St. Germain: who, November. 20, arrived at the Port of Arache; next
morning, the Marquess calling a Council, imparted his design to force Arache,
if Xequy kept not his promise, the Captains assuring him of their valiant
behavior; but the King of Fez, having no means to go from his word: many of
his people, fearing to fall under the power of Spain, would have abandoned him;
but the Captain of the Castle being his, he thrust out the Garrison, and
delivered the Keys himself to the Marquess: Whereupon, all the Inhabitants ran
to Arms, and after 3 hours valiant Combat, many of them being slain, were
forced to yield to the Marquess; who presently set the Cross and Arms of
Castile, upon all the Towers and Steeples.

This news much pleased the King of Spain, the people making Bonfires for joy.
News came to Constantinople, that the great Cham of Tartary, his Son coming to
enjoy his Fathers Estate; his Uncle practiced to seize upon the Crown; but each
of them joining Battle, with an Army of 60000 men, after 40000 slain upon the
place: the Son had the Victory, and so obtained the Crown.

Some years before, one Willowby an English man, rigging out a ship for War in
the Levant, came into Algier to sell his prize; where one Cattania was Bassa,
who commanded this ship, to be seized and rifled, pretending she had burnt a
Caramousall of his, which indeed he had caused to be fired, under the color,
to seize upon the^ ship and goods: Willowby complained at Constantinople to
(...), an English Ambassador, but could get no satisfaction: Wherefore, he
came into England, obtaining Letters from the King to the Sultan; and Sir
(...). Glover, then residing Ambassador, who went to the Chimacham the Grand
Visiers Lieutenant (he being then employed against the Persian) who would not
suffer these Letters to be delivered to the Sultan: promising justice upon
Catania, whom he discharging of his place, sent for him to Constantinople,
where he denied the Fact. Hereupon, Willowby, suborned one Ofis's Bassa, who
having been at Mecha, was held a very holy Turk; who set his Brother to procure
false witnesses, on promise of the Tenth of what was recovered: these being
(...) to swear, Catania compounded with Willowby, for 4 or 5000 Dollars. Thus
the holiest of the Turks for money, will not stick to swear falsely.

In 1611. Constantinople was so afflicted with the Plague, that it crept into
the Seraglio, one of the Grand Seigniors Sons dying thereof: Wherefore, he
passed the rest of the Summer in a Seraglio, about a League and half from the
City. The contagion so raged for 5 months, that 200000 persons died in that
time; which great mortality is most to be imputed, to the wilful negligence of
the Turks: who, neither turned away from a dead body, going to burial, nor
forbear visiting their infected Friends: for, say they, as soon as a man comes
into the world, God writes in his forehead, all his good and evil haps, and of
what death he shall die, which no humane power can avoid: so that, when any one
is dead, another wears his clothes: Wherefore, Constantinople and Caire are
seldom free; and when the Air is disposed to infection, they number not the
dead but by 100 thousands.

Before this Plague, the Baron of Salignac, French Ambassador, dying at
Constantinople; that King sent the Baron of Mole to supply his place: who,
having visited the Mufti, the Grand Vizier, the Destorda or high Treasurer; the
Bostangi Bassa, or chief Gardener, and other great Ones, was admitted to
Audience, and to kiss the Sultans Hand, being returned to Constantinople about
the end of October.

The Ambassador and his Followers, parted from his Lodging at Pera in Turkish
Robes (for the Majesty of the great Turk is such, that Foreign Ambassadors
approaching him, they and their Train must be attired after the Turkish manner)
and passing the Channel, he was honorably conducted to the (...); and as
honorably received at the Pallace-Royal. Where the grand Vizier attended him
at Dinner in the Hall; his Train dined in a low Gallery: a great Tapistry,
being laid on the ground without Cloth or Napkins, and some Dishes of
water-gruell with Sugar, and pottage with pullets, being thin-set, their drink
being Cerbet, made of the juice of Limons, Water and Sugar.

Then passing into another Gallery, the Ambassador and sixteen of his Company,
had each of them a Robe of Tinsell, which they putting on, were conducted to
the Imperial Chamber; at the entry whereof, two of the 6 Capigi led the
Ambassadors by the arms to kiss the Sultans Hand, or rather his Robe; having
first saluted him from his King: and then was led on the the oneside, going
backward: the French Gentlemen kissing his Robe likewise; but they could hardly
see his face, it being turned toward a Window grated: before which 30 Capigi
the while, passed with the Embassador's presents. Then he made a short Speech,
presenting to the Sultan the chief Letter of his Embassage in the Turkish
Tongue.

But in Transylvania, Gabriel Bator, who governed it since the Cession of
Ragotzi, had put himself into Turkish protection against King Matthias,
pretending a Title through the grant of Sigismund, to the Emperor as King of
Hungary: and had recovered Hermstad, and chased Radville out of Valachia; where
settling a new Vayuod, and placing Haiducks in Garrison, he returned toward
Transylvania, to oppose Forgatsie Matthias Lieutenant who passed the River
Tibisce with Troops: Radville had retired into Moldavia to Constantine:
informing him, that Bator intended to seize on his Country, and make but one
Monarchy of the 3 Provinces: Whereupon, they joining Forces in the end of June,
entered Valachia, expelling Bator's Lievt. with all the Garrison: then entering
Transylvania, they so pursued Bator, that they forced him to fight nigh
Cromstar; where losing the Battle, and part of his Troops, he saved himself in
Hermstad: Upon which disgrace, some chief Inhabitants would have submitted to
King Matthias; but he discovering the attempt, did such execution, that he was
called Cruel.

Forgatsi the while, accorded with Andrew Nage (who had drawn high- Hungary
into Rebellion) and so enters Transylvania: where he taking some strong Holds,
(...) Clausenburg, which he so battered, that the besieged ready to be forced,
yielded, and swear Allegiance to King Matthias, July 25. But Bator being shut
up in Hermstad, conjures all his Friends to come to him: and entreated the
Bassa of Buda and Temeswar to succor him, according to the command from the
Sultan: making also Nage, to revolt again in upper- Hungary, upon surmise, that
Forgatsi had not kept his promise, so as with him he seized upon the (...) of
Bayens, and filling that Country with combustions, Forgatsi could expect no
Succors thence: then receiving some Turks and Tartars, he pursued Forgatsie
with such fury, that he forced him to leave all in Transylvania, and retire
into Valachia. Bator going to surprise Tocai, in the Faire-time with 1000
Horse, found the Garrison so watchful, that with loss, he was forced to
return. Forgatsie, thinking to recover upper-Hungary, by the Country of the
Zeclerians, could not effect it; for Bator stopping his passage: and likewise
the Earl' s of Bucheime, and Dampier passed Tibisce to meet him; so as
Forgatsie, was forced to retire toward Poland, by steep and desart-places,
where his Army for want, miserably perished: few remaining alive, with the
which he passed thither, and soon returned into Hungary, with a very poor
Equipage.

But a more violent Tempest arises in Moldavia; for the Turk hearing, that
Prince Constantine had relieved Radville against Bator his Ally, or rather
Tributary sends a new Prince into Moldavia, the supposed Son of one Thomas (or
Aaron, as some) who had formerly commanded there, with 1500 Soldiers, and
Letters to the Turks and Tartars thereabouts, to assist him. Thus 2 Princes
contend for Moldavia; the one supported by the Polonian, the other by the Turk:
but a third comes and pretends a Title, being the son of Janicolo, who
commanded there: who, escaping from the black-Tower in Constantinople, whither
he was committed prisoner, for losing a Battle against Michael of Moldavia, in
1601. came at last into England; whose estate that King pitying, recommended
him by his Letters to Sir Tho. Glover, then at Constantinople, with command to
assist him, and solicit his restitution: Whereupon, he entertained him in his
House at Pera, with many of his Friends for a long time: and the while,
solicited the Sultan for his restoring, having good access to him, because he
spoke the Turkish Tongue perfectly: to whom he gave good answers, but with
delays, that it was not yet time.

His Competitor in Moldavia hearing hereof, made Friends, and corrupted some of
the Court-Bassa's by Bribes: and Murath the chief Vizier himself, who tried
many means to get the Moldavian into his hands: first sending to Glover, that
the Sultan desired to see the man, if he were capable of the place or not, but
he refused to send him; then he wrote to him, It was the Sultan's pleasure he
should send the Moldavian to him, to confer with him: who answered, Unless he
saw a Warrant under his own hand, he would not deliver him: Hereupon, Murath
with 2000 Janissaries, resolved to fetch him out by force; so, that Glover
fortified his House, arming his people and the Moldavians for defense: Murath
disguising a Janizary like a Greek Shepherd, (he entering his House) found them
all in Arms: then returning, he told Murath, he had to do with a man man, and
if he proceeded, he would hazard many Janissaries: so he desisted.

After which, Glover the Ambassador being called home, the Moldavian
despairing, turned Turk, and was made Bey of Bursia in Asia; but Nassuff
coming from the Persian Wars, soon discharged him.

The great Duke of Tuscany advertised, that the Caravian, which transported the
Turks Tribute of Egypt to Transylvania, prepared to put to Sea, speedily armed
4 Gallions, under the command of Beauregard, a French man, with command to
pass into the Levant, to meet with the Caravan: who arriving in the Port of
Calismene in Candy to water, after 6 days he sailing forward, learned of a
ship of Marseilles, that the Caravan was yet in the Port of Alexandria,
preparing for their Voyage: to attend whom, the Admiral Beauregard, cast Anchor
at the Fort of Sidon, called (...), governed by (...) (...), a Rebel to the
Turks, but a great Friend to the Florentines, where he stayed 12 days to take
his necessaries: and making a stricter League with Facardin, he gave him a
Coffer of Arms, whereby the Florentine ships came most freely into those parts.
Beauregard returning toward Cyprus, found a Christian ship, which came from
Damietta: assuring him, that a great number of Turks galleys were gone out of
the Rhodes, and had taken a Flemish ship; Wherefore, making all things ready,
and prescribing the Order his Captains should use during the fight, he caused
his Ordnance to be mounted; his 4 very good Gallions, having each 40 pieces,
and 400 good Soldiers. Betwixt Cyprus and Caramania, they encountered this
Turkish Fleet, being 40 Galleys and 2 Galleasses, under the command of Bassa
Grego: the Galleasses advance to view them, and find how far their Cannon would
reach: and the while, the Galleys made ready for Combat. Beauregard an old
Sea-Captain, attended till the whole Fleet came up close to him, and then gave
them such furious broad-sides, that the amazed Turks made a stand. Grego well
observing their resolution, dividing his galleys in 2 squadrons, commanded the
one to assault the Florentins, and the rest the while, to prepare to the fight,
which continued 6 hours, and yet could they not board them: Grego seeing 5 of
his galleys sunk, and all the men lost: but suddenly the wind favoring the
Florentines, they chased the Turks, forcing them to seek safety in the Haven of
Famagussa; so of assailants, they became Runnaways: Beauregard seeing his
design against the Caravan disappointed, resolved to return toward Ligorne;
encountering a Turkish Caramousal going to Cyprus, in chase overtaking it,
slaying 130 Turks and taking 300 slaves. The Booty was valued at 140000 Crowns.
After this, their Victuals beginning to fail, they made for Ligorne, but the
wind falling contrary, they stayed 8 days in the Island of Scarpante, and
having chased some Galleys of Tunes, they arrived at Ligorne, June 15. where
was great joy for their return and prize, which was to be divided, one third
part to the men, the other 2 parts for entertainment of the Ships, and payment
of the Captains.

This Caravan, is yearly attended, both by the Gallions of Florence; those of
Malta and Naples, and all the Pirates of the Mediterranean-sea; yet had they
other enterprises upon the Turks Country: besides, the spoil of Merchants,
which many times paid the charge of their Voyage; and sometimes themselves lost
both ships and lives: soon after, the Galleys of Malta, and those of Naples
joined, to set upon the Caravan, or else to execute their long-project upon
some places in Albania, or to surprise or spoil some Island in the Archipelago,
which might pay their charges; but the first failing, they met with a
Venetian-Merchant Ship, worth 180000 Crowns. The Spaniards in the Galleys of
Naples seized on her, but the General of Malta, would not consent, or suffer
any of the Merchandise to be put into his Galleys, because of unjust violation
of the Friendship, betwixt his Order and the Venetian State. The Spaniards,
touched, sent away the ship, but had unloaded all the Merchandise. After which,
they discovered 2 Sail at Sea, sending after them, being 2 Barks, one from
Candy, laden with Wood, the other from Scarpante with wine; who informed the
Generals, that the Caravan of Egypt was not yet past, being advertised, that
50 Christians Galleys attended them: Whereupon, they out of hope to surprise
the Caravan, presently resolved to surprise the Island and Castle of Lango,
upon the coast of Natolia, setting sail with a good Wind, which being changed
next morning, they returned to the Island (...): whence they parted at 8 at
night, and in the morning discovered 3 Florentine ships, who said, they entered
the Isle Nigropont with 7 Galleys; but being discovered, they could effect
nothing: and that their Galleys, were separated from them in the chase of 4
Galliots, continuing their course, they arrived next day at St. Jean de Servae;
where casting anchor, and calling a Council, they resolved to petard the Castle
of Lango toward the Sea; and to that end, to land 30 Knights, and 50 Soldiers
of the Malta Galleys, and 120 Spaniards out of those of Naples; the other men
they should land, were to assault the Town: So departing thence, they arrived
at the Isle Lango, June 6. in the Night, landing 3 miles from the Town, and
marching on with their Petards: but, it being very dark, those of Malta strayed
from their Guide, yet Valor brought them to the Town-Walls, where seeking to
find a fit place to fix the Petard, though much shot at, Captain Beaulague set
it to a Seaport, which he forced, and his men, furiously entering, put all to
the sword that resisted. The Spaniards at another breach entered on the other
side, though at first the Turks played upon them with great and small shot: the
Troops being joined, came before the Castle; but the Bridge was drawn, and they
lay open to their shot: so that 15 Knights were hurt, one slain, with a Spanish
Captain, and some 36 of those of Naples, and as many wounded. Day come, the
General of the Maltezes, came to the Town with 150 Knights, and 450 Soldiers:
the other following him with the two Sons of the Viceroy of Naples, and 1500
Spaniards, who spoiled the Town, and took all alive, Captives: and finding the
Castle impossible to force, they embarked, resolving in their return to attempt
some Towns of Albania; but they heard by the way, the Turks had discovered
their intelligence with the Greeks of the Country: wherefore they put many of
them to death, one being a Patriarch, who being accused to have practiced the
Christians Revolt, was flayed alive, and his skin sent to Constantinople.

The Caravan of Egypt was attending a free passage, staying also the longer
through the great plague at Constantinople; but in the end of October, Mechmet,
Bassa of Caire, in person with a good Convoy put to Sea, and arrived there
without encounter, who carried a years Tribute of Egypt, to the Serail, on
sixty Mules, laden with 20000 Chequins apiece.

This money was then very welcome, and Mechmet, who had faithfully and
diligently collected the same, was made Bassa of the Sea, (he who had it
before, being made Vizier) the Sultan also promising him his Daughter in
Marriage, being but 3 years old.

News coming to the Port, that 50 Vessels of the Christians, came near
HELLESPONT, put the Turks in great fear; and the Grand Seignior being
complained to, that some Caramousals had been taken, he sent for the Admiral of
the Sea, demanding whether those Reports were true: who answered, Yes: then
said he, Why art thou not at Sea? He answered, Because I can get nor men nor
money: Whereupon, the Treasurer being sent for, had lost his Head, had not the
Aga of Sultans Women, entreated for him.

This Summer, great Clouds of Grasshoppers (almost the bigness of a Dormouse,
with red wings) fell upon Constantinople, and round about it.

The Turks consulting with their Wizards, what it might portend, they said,
Great plenty; but indeed, they left no green thing in Country or City, where
they entered into their very Chambers; and soon after, there fell such
extraordinary great hail, with such abundance of Rain, as the water shut up one
of the Gates; and rebounding, so filled their Shops and Houses, that many were
much endangered: some Houses fell down, some were slain, the pavements torn up,
and the stones carried into heaps. There arrived this year at CONSTANTINOPLE, a
Persian Ambassador, who was conducted to his Lodging after the TURK'S manner.

Few days after, the several Tradesmen of the City, marched by themselves
before the Serail: marching as in the Wars, and carrying on their shoulders,
Sheep, Beef, etc. a policy to daunt the said Ambassador, and encourage their
own people; and next day, the Chimacham, or Visiers Lieutenant, sent for this
Persian Ambassador; and, during their conference, had ordered the Emperor of
the Tartars Brother, to come in: whereat, he arising, said, Oh, I know thou
(...) for money for thy Soldiers, thou shall receive it at such a place: which
was done, to terrify the Persian: to which end, they then also sent over
diverse Troops to Scudaret, as if they were ready to march with an Army.

The Turks great Armies are not raised in haste, nor march in Post; for the
Spahi having no other pay than the Revenues of some Land, must, when
discharged, have a years time, to put themselves in equipage: also, its sixty
days march from CONSTANTINOPLE, into Persia. Neither had the Turk in 1609, and
1610, attempted any thing against the Persian, who still solicited him for
peace, which the greatness of the Ottoman Empire, could not resolve to make,
having been so defeated: so this year, Achmat resolved to send an Army of above
150000 men against him, under Serder his Vizier; but before it entered Persia,
Serder died, so that they were forced to stay and attend the Sultans pleasure.
He was suspected to be poisoned by Nassuf Bassa, a Rebel, yet had he many
friends in the Turks Army: wherefore, to prevent mutinies, Serder in his
sickness advised the Grand Seignior by Letters, to make Nassuf General, so to
draw him home, and then dispose of him at pleasure.

This advice approved of, he chose him Vizier and General, who receiving the
Seal, forthwith put many of Serders friends to death, paying all the Soldiers
with their money, some having been without pay five years: he sent also to the
Sultan, 70 mules, laden with Serders Treasure, and 60 with Goods, all which, he
gave to his Wife and Children.

The Grand Seigniors rigor is observable; For, Jan. 7. 1612. he being abroad
in the snow, and not well provided of fuel, caused Stambol Aga, who had that
charge, to be set in the snow naked 4 or 5 hours. This Winter was very
rigorous, abundance of snow and great storms throughout all Turkey; many houses
were beaten down, and the French Consul at Aleppo slain with the fall of his
own house.

Nassuf marching to the Frontiers of Persia, made such spoil, that the Sophie
drew all his Forces together in August, to prevent the ruin of his Country:
but they being about to fight, the Persian finding inequality, offered for
peace a yearly Tribute of silk, enough to load 200 Camels, in acknowledgment of
some Countries he had conquered. This was acceptable at Constantinople; but it
was added, The Persians son should be called Bassa of Tauris, and the Cady or
Judge thereof to be sent from Constantinople. April 26, a Turk lending a good
sum of money to a Christian, came before the day of payment with another Turk,
willing him to pay the money to that other Turk at the day: which the Christian
did accordingly. But the Turk denied the Receipt. Wherefore he that lent it came
and demanded it: The Christian answered, He had paid it to the party assigned.
The Turk replied, Then he was satisfied; yet the other denied it: So the matter
coming before the Judge, the Receiver swear to the contrary, and the Christian
was forced to pay the money again, praying God to show some sign, Which had
done the wrong: So, as the Turk went home, he fell down dead in the street.

Vignancourt, the Grand Master of Malta, having an enterprise against Navarrin,
an important place to the Turk, sent five Galleys under Vaqueras great
Commander of the Order; who coming pretty nigh the shore, were discovered by a
Castle which had allarum'd the whole Country: wherefore they passed thence,
and came near to the Coast of Morea, ten Leagues from Corinth, landing by night
800 men under the General at Land, and an hour before day were at the Gates of
Corinth to force them: some Turks took arms; but the Knights entering, sacked the
Town, and carried away 500 slaves: after which they happily and orderly
retreated, although ten thousand horse and foot were drawn together in that
populous Country, imbarking in view of them their spoil and slaves: so that it
appears to be one of the most desperate Eterprises that has bin of long time
seen.

But at Prague the Germans entertained themselves with consideration of a Crown
appearing in the Firmament over that City in October, giving a huge Light, and
Armies about it fighting for it. At which time, Rodolph the Emperor was upon
the declining of his days, and Matthias who succeeded him, upon the rising of
his triumphs: many expounded this Apparition, as a presage of his being King of
the Romans, who enjoyed the Crown of Hungary already, and that of Bohemia by
designment: Three Suns seen over Vienna the year following, confirming the
Germans in this their hope.

Some of the English Ambassadors men, quarrelling with some Jamoglans of the
next Serail, fell to blows, and one of the Ambassadors men threw a stone,
hitting a Jamoglan on the forehead, whereof he soon died.

The Aga complaining to the Vizier, he sent to make enquiry of the fact: the
Ambassadors went to the Serail, sending for his men, and willing the Turks to
design the party: who all ran upon one Dibbins newly come from Candie, and now
in the Ambassadors service: he threw not the stone, yet the Turks would have
none but him, dragging him away. The Ambassador offering to pledge for him, was
thrust away, his men beaten, and a page wounded. He complained to the Vizier,
but they dragged Dibbins to prison, and kept him a month there, not to be
released, though the English offered great sums for his life.

The day of Execution appointed, the Ambassador sent his Chaplain to the
Prison, to prepare him for death, to whom he confessed, that in England he
killed a man: wherefore, he fled to Candie, whence he came to Constantinople,
(the just judgment of God pursuing him) to suffer for that which he did not.
He was hanged at the Embassador's (...), his head and heels being stolen away
next night by the Turks, as was thought, to use in some sorcery; the rest of
his body they had leave to bury.

This year, 1612, a double nuptial Feast, was celebrated at Constantinople, for
the Marriages of Mehemet Bassa, Son to Cicala, with the Sultan's Sister, and
of Mechmet Bassa, the Admiral, with the eldest Daughter of his Emperor. Great
was the Pomp of the first, but far greater the Magnificence of the second, the
Jewels and movables of this Bride, being in great state conducted from the
Serail, to the Bridegrooms Lodging, the day before the consummation of the
Marriage; and her self next conducted to her Husbands Lodging, with no less
Pomp and State, than her movables. The Ceremony being performed on June 30th,
20 days after the other. But not many days after, the Sultan's second
Daughter, promised to Nassuf Bassa, was carried to her Grave, without any Pomp
or honor; for the Turks do not much esteem of Women.

The day after the Marriage, the Grand Seignior, did cruelly beat his Sultana,
the Mother of this Daughter, stobbing her with his Handiarre, or Dagger,
through the cheek, and treading her under his feet, because she had strangled
one of his Sisters slaves, whom he being enamored with, had sent for: She
having her brought to her Lodging, stripped her, strangled her; and putting her
Clothes upon one of her own slaves, sent her to the Sultan in her stead,
strangling her also, as she had many others, when they appeared with Child by
him.

The Plague beginning furiously to rage in Constantinople, the Sultan returned
to his Country Palace, to avoid the danger; so that it seems, the Turkish
Emperors for their own profit, dispense with some Articles of the r faith; for
they (though the Turks are so obstinately (...) to the belief of
predestination) know well how to flee the danger; yea, and to cause those who
come to kiss his hand, to be led under the Arms, for fear of violence: Thus we
see the defect of false Religions; when we see universality in the faith taken
away: for there all believe, according to their private Interests, as well as
among many others, who have separated from the truth.

Achmat being at his Palace of Darut Bassa, and going to visit a stately
Mosque which he had built there, a Derviser cast a great stone at him, to beat
him down, but it fell upon his shoulder, and hurt him but lightly.

Achmat commands they should draw from this Traitor, the Confession of his
Confederates; but the Officers caused him to be executed next day, cutting but
off his Head.

April 14th, Anne Glover, Sir Thomas's Wife, was buried with such solemnity at
Constantinople, as the like had not been, since the (...) conquered it; and
most Nations in the World were present, the Sermon was under a Cypress-Tree in
a large Garden: and though but few understood it, yet whereas the Jesuits and
Friars, had possessed Turks, Jews, and others, that the English, since the
change of their Religion, had neither Temples, nor form of service, hereby they
perceived both, and that more decently than they; so that the Jesuits durst
not for a while after, walk the streets, the Turks threatening them for so much
belying the English.

The Body was carried from Pera, to the English Graves, almost a mile off, a
great number of all Nations following her to the Grave: the Tomb being of fair
Marble, with an Epitaph upon it.

This year, in June, the Duke of Florence his Galleys running over the
Archipelago, forced and spoiled the Castle of Lango, carrying away 1200
prisoners. Mechmet Bassa, the Admiral, advertized of these spoils by the daily
complaints of Turks, who lost their shipping, and of many other Enterprises
attempted on his Masters Countries, set sail in August with 33 great Galleys,
commanding all Bays in the Archipelago to join with him, with what Galleys they
could make; but while he is there busied, the Russian Pirates descending into
the Euxine, spoiled the Turks Coasts there.

At Land, Constantine of Moldavia annoyed all that depended on the Turk: part
of the King of Polands great Army which mutinied for pay, spoiled Podolia; and
a (...) Prince, angry that Achmat preferred his Cousin before him in the Realm
of the Procopians, with five thousand soldiers spoiled the Rivers of Moldavia
under the Turks Dominion, as he did in the Gulf of Nicopolis. At this time,
Tomsho having bin chosen Vayuod of Moldavia, Constantine arming the Country,
overran it, and made havoc of all, detaining 2 Capigi prisoners, whom the
Sultan had sent to him, with a prohibition not to trouble Tomsho; but he
carried them with him into Poland, whither he went to demand succors, and by
the aid of Potosty his brother in law, obtained from the K. of Poland to be
supported against Tomsho his Competitor. They resolved to send an Ambassador to
Constantinople, to entreat Achmat to call back Tomsho, that Constantine might
quietly enjoy Moldavia, and to acquaint him with the right the Polonians had by
their Capitulations with the Turks, to name a Prince in that Country. This
Ambassador arriving, thought to be soon dispatched, either by a Grant or
Denial, and was visited by all Christian Ambassadors there: but after 6 weeks,
instead of audience, he was arrested and kept prisoner, not to be freed till
the two Capigi were released.

Now that Valachia, Moldavia, yea, and Transylvania, are continually tossed and
turmoild, the Sultan imployes all his thoughts, how to make himself Sovereign
of these Provinces, and to possess all betwixt Danubius, the Sarmatian
Mountains, the River (...), and the Euxine, drawing Forces about Belgrade,
under Bassa Belzergi, commanding the Tartars, to enter Moldavia, and sending a
Fleet toward the mouth of Danubius, which made the Frigots of Russia to
dislodge.

Bator of Transylvania, was then besieging Cromstad; but through the
tediousness thereof, he sent Giezy. Ambassador to the Sultans Port, to demand
succors from him against the Town: who practiced Treason against Bator, to
make the Sultan absolute Sovereign of Transylvania; they concluding, Belzergi
should enter it with his Army, and Giezi to join with him; with some Troops,
and to deliver to him Varadin, Lippa, and some other strong places; for which,
he should have Bator's place; and under the Authority of Achmat.

But the crafty Bassa of Buda, hearing that Bator had some vent of this
practice, and that he, being now in great fear, had raised his siege, and was
read, to crave relief from the Palatine of Hungary; and finding that to depose
Bator, would be more difficult than they expected, diverted Belzergi, ftom
attempting any thing against him: it was also said, that the Bassa would not
attempt any thing in Transylvania, by reason of the Election of the Emperor
Matthias, whereof the Bassa of Buda, was assured by his Ambassador, sent with
the Presents to the Sultan, who was honorably entertained by him at Buda, and
safely conducted to Constantinople.

Belzergi Bassa, hearing that Constantinople had been in Poland, to crave
assistance, resolved to (...) his forces toward Moldavia. But we must know,
that in one thousand six hundred and eight, Jeremy, Prince of Moldavia, dying,
committed the Government to his Brother Simeon, during the minority of his
three Sons, Constantine the eldest, being but eight years old. His three
Daughters, married three Polonian Princes. Simeon governed till 1611, who
deceasing, young Constantine, (by his Mother's persuasion) entered the
Government: at which time, there was at Constantinople, one Stephano, or
Tomsho, who had long practiced the favor of Mehemet, a Vizier Bassa, and
Chimacham, and of some others, by money and otherwise, falsely suggesting, he
was the Son of Aaron, who had been Vayuod before Jeremy; and he so prevailed,
that the grand Seignior, admitted him to the Principality: and the Vizier
informing him, that Constantine, had rashly thrust himself into the Government,
nor would own him for his Sovereign, nor pay the 4000 Chequines yearly Tribute,
he sent Fousseyen Aga, with 20000 Turks and Tartars, to expel (...), and settle
Stephen or Tomsho: who marched so secretly, that they had almost surprised him,
yet with 10000 men, he would attend the issue.

The Aga let him know his Commission, threatening, if he would not let him
proclaim Stephen, Vayuod, and yield him the City Yas, he would cut him in
pieces.

Constantine answered, by Potoskies advice, The Sultan was abused; for if he
understood that his Predecessor had granted to Jeremy and Simeon, that he
should succeed his Father, '(...) not credible, he would seek to dispossess him
without hearing, and put in his place, one who had falsely supposed himself,
the Son of Aaron, neither had he refused the Sultan for his Sovereign, or
denied the wonted Tribute; but, if the Aga would needs proceed, he hoped the
true God of Battle, would not suffer an Usurper to prevail over a lawful
Prince. Fousseyen being corrupted by Stephen, with Presents and promises,
advanced, so that next day, they joined Battle; but the Moldavians oppressed with
multitude, could not make it good. Potoskie entreated Constantine to save
himself, and let him finish the Battle, but he would not be persuaded; so they
both charged again, and defeated many of the Turks Forces; but through a supply
of 2000 Horse, they were forced to yield to their enemies mercy.

Constantine sell to the Tartars share; but as they led him away, he lept into
the River Niestre, either to save himself, or not to survive the disgrace.
Potoskie, was kept in the black Tower at Constantinople, till 1616. So none
daring to oppose Fousseyen's forces, he proclaimed Stephen, Prince of Moldavia,
in the City Yas, and then dismissed his Army.

This Summer, Constantinople, and the Country round, was annoyed with
Grasshoppers, as the year before: wherefore in July, the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Alexandria, with other Bishops and Caloires, in their
Ornaments, went forth solemnly at the North Gate: whereupon, said the Greeks,
they all perished; but abundance were dead, before they cursed them, and many
lived af er their curse, continuing till next Summer. God causing extraordinary
cold dewes to fall, they were thought to be the cause of their destruction.
Gabriel Bator, lawfully descended from the Princes of Transylvania, making
himself the Turks Tributary, and mingling Mahomets Religion with the Christian:
also, exceeding in cruelty, became a memorable example to Posterity: who seeing
many factions made against him, by the descendents of Botscay, Giezy, Bethlem
Gabor, etc. supports himself with the Forces of Nage, who came to assist him
before Cromstad. Bator, inviting him to dinner in his Tent; after dinner, the
more to demonstrate their friendship, they went to take the Air. Nage had drunk
much, Bator entreated him to run his Horse a Carreere, which he refused:
wherefore, Bator spoke to him many contemptible words, who answered in like
manner: Bator wondrously offended, that one, crept up but by degrees of
Rebellion, should give him such words, slew him by 3 blows with his Battel-Axe
on the Head.

But Bator was annoyed by Decaci Botscayes Kinsman, Giezi levies forces to
prosecute him; and Bethlem Gabor, a Transilvanian Noble, and assisted by the
Turk, took many places from him, after Giezi had forced him to raisehis siege
at Cromstad.

Transylvania is peopled by Sicules, Saxons, and Hungarians: the Sicules (of
the Scythians) came with Attila the Hunne, into Pannonia, now Hungary, and
going toward their Country, inhabited that of Transylvania, next Moldavia,
building six Towns. The Saxons mutinying against the Emperor Charlemain, for
certain impositions, retired thither, seizing by force, on that part next
Valachia; building Alba Julia, and six other Towns. The Hungarians inhabited it
from the time of King Stephen; and mastering the others, their successors have
been since called Nobles of Transylvania, and the Princes thereof taken from
among them: they built Varradin, and other Towns. Most of these three Nations,
revolted from Bator, particularly, the Saxons, through his great cruelty: who
thus forsaken and prosecuted, and not daring to trust to the Turk, who openly
favored Gabor, sent Ambassadors to the Emperor Matthias, promising all
obedience, and sending him rich and rare Presents: he would have Matthias
signify to the Bassa of Buda, that this attempt against Transylvania, was
against the Articles of peace: who answered, The Sultan was not to be blamed,
if he seized on that which immediately belonged to him, and kept it quiet from
others practices; but Bator sent also Ambassadors to the Sultan, with rare and
rich Presents, who had secret Treaties with the Bassaes: which Matthias's
Ambassador discovering, sent him word, he entertained a Monster among men.
About which time, Ambassadors came from the Saxon Towns of Transylvania, much
complaining of Bator's cruelty and Tyranny: who (against his Oath) had deprived
them of their privileges, and in a manner ruined them: that he had sought to
root out the ancient Family of the Saxons, afflicting them three years in
prison, only because he brought a great Estate out of Germany: depriving
Widows of their Estates, and exacting upon others: surprising Hermstad, and
suffering the Haiducks to spoil it, and commit all insolences, expelling the
Magistrate, banishing honest Citizens, ravishing Women, slaying Parents, to
deprive Children of their Inheritance: sending 300 Captives to the Sultan, for
a Present, cutting many in small pieces, throwing down some from high places,
hanging up some by the feet, drawing others in pieces with Horses and Trees,
and practicing all barbarous cruelties: having expelled Religious Princes out
of Moldavia and Valachia, he had subjected them to the Turk, that he might
waste all with fire and sword; and having freed Gaudin, he chose 20 of its
chief Inhabitants, and giving them Pikes, forced them to kill each other in the
Marketplace.

But Bethlem Gabor, joining with Serder Bassa, they enter Transylvania, force
Lugatsi, take Deve, and terrify the whole Conntrey. Ogli Bassa also comes, and
lodges in the Suburbs of Cromstad, and thence went and encamped over all
Barsac. Bator attended the Emperors succors, under the Palatine of Hungary
and Forgatsi, but they could not resist the Turk: wherefore, he wrote to
Trinau, for levying of Soldiers; but none, through hatred, would march under
his Ensigns: whereupon, he tells his most familiar friends, he holds it
needful to purchase peace with Serder at any price; but they answered, they had
rather die, than advise him to it: he wanted money, his Subjects, yea, his
Soldiers hated him; so at last, he fell into despair, entreating one of his
servants to kill him, but he refused it; but within few days after, going in
an open Chariot, to view where his Troops were lodged, only with two
Gentlemen, 50 of his Soldiers in ambush, shot and slew him, hurting his
accompaniers: This happened in 1613.

Few days after, Bethlem Gabor, was declared Prince of Transylvania by Serder,
who thus advertised him: Bator shall serve for an example to bad Princes. I
think thou will not follow his steps: beware thou do nothing without my Masters
privity: maintain peace with thy Neighbors, and make men of experience and
honesty, of thy Counsel.

The desire of peace and fear of the Turks Army, drew (...) the Towns in
Transylvania, to swear fidelity to Gabor. Let us now end the remainder of 1612.
Nassuff the Vizier Bassa, brings the Persian Ambassador, to conclude the
aforesaid peace: they with the Army, arrived at Scudaret, whither most of the
Bassaes crossed over to salute him, and then returned; but Nassuf stayed there
two days, and on the third, passing over to Constantinople, with 234 Mules,
laden with gold and silver for the Sultan, where he was very honorably
entertained at the water side.

The Vizier passing by the Sultans Window, bowed very low unto him, from whom
he had a nod, and so rode away fast, as the Turks use, when they salute a
greater than themselves, to run, or ride away a pace. Being come to the
Seraill, he went in to kiss the Sultans hand, staying an hour, the other
Bassaes attending without.

The Emperors, French, English, Polonian, Dutch, and Venetian Ambassadors,
were present at this days pomp. Nassuf, with Hat off, saluting the Emperors,
but not the rest, the Persian being still at Scudaret. The same day, Tomsho
sent many Polonians to Constantinople, whom he took in Wars: who (though they
threw down their Caps, and offered to turn Turks) were put to death. Few days
after, (...) the Vizier sitting in the Divan, had three Robes sent him from the
G. Seignior.

Achmat, to let the Persian see the magnificence of his Court, went out under
pretense, to go to take the air, at his Country Palace of Darut Bassa:
whereupon, the ways from thence to the City (being four English miles) were
covered with Sand, and then he entered in great pomp, into Constantinople, with
a great number of Horsemen, and some Companies of Foot, the Cadis, or men of
justice of the City, all the Talumans, or those of Mahomets Law, then the
Visiers and Bassaes, after whom followed the Sultan, with his Household; many
being most fair Pages, chosen among the Infants of the Tribute, for the
unnatural pleasures of their Master.

Diverse Beglerbegs also attended him, and with their Companies, and Nassuff's
five hundred attendants richly armed, etc. The number of all sorts of
Attendants, was esteemed forty thousand persons.

The Persian Ambassador, that he might carry into his Country, a pattern of
the Ottoman State and greatness, cast out, as the Sultan passed by his Lodging,
one hundred pieces of Silk, which were gathered up by the Archers of his Guard.

There was other pomp celebrated this year in France, Spain, Naples and
Germany, for the Marriages of Lewis the 13th of France, with Anne Infanta of
Spain, and of the Prince of Spain, with Elizabeth, Lewis's eldest Sister; for
the Crowning of the Empress, and the Emperors entrance into Nuremberg.

Four days after, the Persian Ambassador had audience, kissing the Sultans
hand, and presenting unto him in his Masters behalf, four hundred Balls of
Silk, a Bezoar-stone, as big as a man's fist, and others less; nine Bags full
of Turquoises, a Foot and a half long, and above four fingers broad, many
Tapestries of Wool, Silk, Cloth of Gold and Silver, with many other precious
and rare things. Then beginning to treat seriously, after some difficulties, a
peace was concluded: the Persian King, to pay two hundred Camels Loads of Silk,
yearly Tribute to the Turk: the Persian's Son, to be called Bassa of Tauris;
and the Cadi thereof, to be sent from Constantinople.

The Ambassador now returned, leaving most of his Train dead of the Plague at
Constantinople: whose Head, his King cut off for this dishonorable and
burthensom peace, sending back the Chiaux comn from Constantinople, to see him
swear the peace: Some write, he did him some indignities, which made the Turk
and him return to Arms.

Nassuf, to show his Authority, procured to have the Chimacham deprived of his
Bassa's-place, and sent over to Scudaret, pretending to prefer him to a
Government nigh Trebizond, but intending to deprive him of his head: whereupon,
his many and great friends in Court, procured of the Sultan, to have him, sent
for back again; for he was old, and might live at home in quiet; and for his
former services, had one thousand aspers a day allowed him, which much
discontented Nassuf.

Matthias the Emperor, sent Negroni his Ambassador to the Sultan, to complain
of the daily enterprises upon Transylvania, which he said, belonged to him, as
a dependant on Hungary: Negroni kissed the Sultans hand, but his Presents being
of less value than the Persians, were little esteemed. His demands of
Transylvania, were grounded upon an Article of the peace between the Emperor
and Botscay, which was, that Botscay dying without issue-male, Transylvania
should be at the Emperors disposal: this being read, the Mufti answered, it
was against their Law; so those demands were rejected, since Botscay (said the
Vizier) had no power from the (...) to treat, and give to the Emperor
Transylvania after death.

Negroni grounded Botscay's gift upon the 8th. Article of peace, betwixt the
Turk and Emperor, concluded in the Isle of Danubius: to wit, That all, granted
in Botscays Treaty at Vienna, should be faithfully observed: Nassuf replied,
Amurath then Vizier might err in Signing those Articles, showing some other
Articles where that was not inserted: saying, The Sultan would perform only
those, pressing Negroni to sign them, which he refused, so as Nassuf used some
threats; but he replied, In this case he had rather die gloriously for the good
of his Masters affairs, than having signed those, to die with infamy at his
return: yet, promising to acquaint his Emperor, and certify them of his
pleasure.

Achmat after this, went to lay at Hadrianople, where his Janizrries began to
mutiny, spurning at their daily Bread and Rice: and being asked the reason,
answered, No Emperor before him, had so carried out his men in the depth of
Winter. This much incensed Nassuf, who was in such credit with the Sultan, that
while he stayed there, he came 3 times privately to visit him: and obtained a
privilege, none privately to speak with him but himself. Returning to
Constantinople, there was a great fire, 500 Houses being burnt. Nassuf finding
some Janissaries, readier to break open Locks, and rifle Shops than to quench
the fire, struck out the brains of one with his Mace, and brake another arm.
It was an old custom there, that the whole Family, where the fire began, should
die for neglect; but, the Seraill, in Achmats Fathers time, happening on fire,
Cicala petitioned him, this custom to be abolished, as unjust that others
should die, and not so in the Emperor's House; whereto he yielded. Soon after,
there was another great fire, where Nassuf hanged many Janissaries, finding them
too busy in rifling: going up and down with his Scimitar in one hand, and a
Janissaries head he had cut off, in the other. The G. Seignior sent him
Holy Water, wherein he had dipped a piece of (...) Garment; which poured into the
fire, the Turks said, It ceased presently: yet many Eyewitnesses say, It
burned 4 hours after. This Vizier was a cruel Enemy to the Janissaries, sending
16000 into Asia, suffering no more to be made, but only Saphies: and over such
as remained, he made his own servants to be Churbagies and Agaes of fifties and
hundreds: fortifying himself by all means he could to prevent his sudden ruin.

Let us pass into Africa. The Family of the Xeriffs of Fez and Morrocco, began
some 104 years since, from Mahomet Xerif, born at Tigumedet in Dara, a Province
of Morrocco: he was Alfaqui, or Preacher of Mahomet's Law; who, seeing the
divisions betwixt those Sovereign Princes: and that the Portugals, had seized
on the chief Forts of Morrocco, began with 3 of his Sons, Abdalla, Hamet, and
Mahomet, to lay the Foundation of a new Monarchy, by a covnterfeit Piety, on a
godly pretense of warring against the Portugals: and upon a desire to retire
the Moors, who were in their pay, the more easily to chase them out of
Morroeco. The King of Fez (seeing but the outside of his Designs) let his
son's display their Standard against the Portugals in Morrocco: who, being at
first followed by a great number, vanquished in many encounters, the bruit
whereof retired the Moors from their service; whom with Barriga their Leader
they soon after defeated; yet Abdalla lost his life in this Combat: but seized
upon Tarradent in Sus; and in a manner, the whole Country betwixt Morrocco and
Mount Atlas, settling their Principality in Tarradent, their Father being called
Governor of the Province of Sus.

The King of Morrocco, fearing their present greatness, yet assured of some fit
occasion to bring them under, let them enter into Morrocco, but they poisoned
him, seizing upon his Realm. The King of Fez, seeing afar off this Tempest, the
fear of the like calamity much afflicted him; but the Xeriffs, with the fourth
part of the rich spoils, lull his distrust asleep, sending him also the
Tribute due for Morrocco: Hamet is called King of Morrocco, Mahomet King of
Sus; and by a good mutual Intelligence, became fearful to all those Countries,
and then plainly denied the King of Fez the Tribute of Morrocco: saying, They
were issued from Mahomet's line. The King of Fez, seeing the Xeriffs had abused
the liberty he gave them, besieged the City Morrocco with 18000 men, but he was
chased away, and his Army defeated at the passage of a River.

Then these two Brethren through peace and idleness, quarrelled and fought:
where Mahomet, after 2 bloody Battles took Hamet, depriving him of his Realm,
and made him die in prison. Then he turned the Arms, wherewith he had
vanquished his elder Brother, against the King of Fez, vanquishing and taking
him, and depriving him both of Realm and Life. Thus the Xeriffs became
Sovereigns of Fez and Morrocco. These Victories made Mahomet fearful, but his
posterity was miserable; for Cidan was expelled by his Brother Kequi, but
afterward, Kequi was defeated by Cidan, and forced to save his life in 1610,
in Algarbe in Portugal: Abdalla, Kequi's son, hereupon retires toward the
Mountains in Sus, making daily incursions upon his Uncles Territories, with
4000 Arabians Horse and Foot that joined with him; but, finding this too long a
course for Conquest, he made use of a Prophecy, forged in his ambition, and to
work an Impression in the peoples minds: he sent some religious Mahometans to
preach from place to place, that one Flaquere of a holy life, gave a son of his
a Drumm of admirable Virtue, commanding him to keep it carefully, till a Prince
called Abdalla (expelled by the injustice of his own blood) should come into
Morrocco, and then he should beat it, and the people might safely go to war at
the sound thereof that it should give peace to the Realm, and settle all its
Customs and ancient Laws: Which Prophecy, they said, was now accomplished.

This increased Abdalla's party: Wherefore, Cidan sent a great Army against him
into Sus, under Alcas Elmy, to hinder his progress: upon whose approach,
Abdalla retiring toward the Mountains, thence so charged the Enemy, that he in
few days cut off 5000: whereby his Troops daily increasing; Cidan must go
against him with new Forces, defeating and shying him in 1612. Gotardus writes,
that this miraculous Abdalla, whom he calls Muley Hamet, was charmed with
devillish-Incantations, freed from all outward Force, carrying himself for a
Divine Prophet: he instancing in sundry prrticulars concerning him. Yet (having
gotten some Victories against Cidan, and taken the Town of Morocco) in the end,
his Art failing him, he was slain as aforesaid.

In Algier, a wondrous drought had so devoured the Fruits of the earth, as
there was an exceeding Famine throughout the Land: the Turks ascribing the
cause, sometimes to their sins; then to the Moors, who came out of Spain; and
sometimes to the licentiousness of Christians in those places: Wherefore, the
Judge ordered all Turks to pray devoutly to their Prophet for Rain; the Moors
to depart within 3 days on pain of death, and all Christians to shave their
Heads and Beards, which was speedily executed. But the Moors, who through
sickness or otherwise, could not depart Algier at that time, were cut in
pieces. For 13 days, the Turks made Processions without Turbants; crying and
howling for rain: but God held the pipes of Heaven yet stopped. Bernard Murroy,
of the Order of Redemption of Captives, hearing the Turks would revenge their
miseries upon them, and ruin a little Chapel, which the Christian slaves had
in the prison, obtained (through the French Consul) leave from the Dovan or
Judge to make Processions, and to pray to God for the dew of Heaven. They so
continued 5 days: but on the 4th. day, May 8. there fell abundance of Rain; so
that they, seeing their prayers heard, in midst of the Enemies of their Faith,
gave exceeding thanks to God. Yet were these sleaves still detained by this
accident. Murroy with 2 others of the same Order had redeemed 136: but being
ready to embarque them, the Galleys of Genoa, landed some men nigh Algier,
taking the Bassa's Son, with many Turks, and a very fair Slave, a Virgin of
Algier of a Noble Family; and when the rest were redeemed, by a Frigate sent by
the Bassa, the Virgin was detained by a Genoway-Captain; who retired into an
adjoining Isle, there to satisfy his desires with more ease upon her:
Whereupon, the Bassa of Algier put the 136 slaves again into Irons, with those
3 that redeemed them: However, the Genowayes (flattering his lust) say, His
desire to win her to God, and make her a Christian, made him to keep her so
carefully.

But a Capuchin Florentine Friar, lost his life at Tunes, by the cruelty of the
Moors, retired thither out of Spain. He being a slave, daily waited for money to
redeem him: but one day, disputing with a Morisque about Christian Religion, he
said among diverse Turks, His Religion was better than Mahomets; which being
reported to the Cadi, they pressed him with such clamours, that he sentenced the
Capuchin to death; so, they stripping him naked led him through Tunes out of the
Town, some spitting in his Face, others casting dirt at him: then tying him to
a post, and a Morrabour or religious Turk, saying He that gave him not one blow
with a stone, should be no good Turk, they stoned him to death, burning his
Body, and throwing the ashes into the wind. After this, 4 Frenchmen, slaves in
the Island Chios, in the chief Galley belonging to the Governor or Bey,
resolved to carry that Galley with themselves into some Port of Christendom,
drawing to their party the Captain, being a Florentine Renegado: they were to
do it when they went to cut wood; but the Scribe, either through treachery or
indiscretion, being on Land, said aloud, Hoe, we shall return into Christendom.
A Turk near, reported these words to the Patron, who presently apprehending the
Scribe, drew from him the whole enterprise, sending 100 men to seize upon the
four French slaves, and the Captain; but these 5 made such resistance, that if
the other slaves (who were most Moldavians or Borderers on the Black-sea) had
had courage, their design had well succeeded; yet they slew 15. wounding many:
the French men were all slain, and the Florentine taken, whom they continued 6
hours in most violent torments: he still calling upon Jesus Christ even to the
last gasp, and detesting the falsehood of Mahomets Law: this was in October. A
little before, the States of the United Provinces, and Count Maurice: seeing
the losses of their Ships in the Mediterranean, and a great number of their men
made slaves: sent Cornelius Hage Ambassador to Constantinople; who being
forced to fetch a great circuit, because of some creatures to the Pope and
Spaniard in Hungary; and then (...) at Sea, came thither May 1. He was to treat
of the freedom of the Holland-slaves: to make a League with the Turk, and
obtain a free Navigation for the Hollanders throughout his Empire. He kissed
Achmat's hand, and was favorably received, presenting to him the Letters of
his Embassy, and rich and rare Presents, which the Sultan accepted with
Admiration! July 6. After the League betwixt them was sworn, according to the
Ambassadors forementioned charge; Achmat also granting, That the States should
have an Ambassador residing at his Port. About the end of this year, the Moors
(chased out of Spain) having by Presents won the favor of the Cadi of Pera,
who was a Negro, newly placed in by Nassuf, had power to thrust all the Jews
out of Pera, and to ruin their Synagogues: which they did with all violence.
One of the Jews Sect (dwelling in Chios) thinking he had more credit than the
rest, complained to the Cadi; who in stead of doing justice, caused 500 blows
to be given him with a cudgel. The Morisques, threatened also to do as much to
the Christians at Pera, as had bin done to them in Spain, bragging, they would
seize upon their Temples, chiefly that of the Franciscans, reasonable fair; but
the French Ambassador complaining to the Vizier, he prohibited any of their
attempts on rigorous punishment: but throughout all the Levant, and in all
encounters where they came, they did the Christians much more mischief than the
Turks.

At this time, Achmat had collected a mighty Army for Transylvania, encamping
it about his Palace of Darut Bassa, whither the Constantinopolitans walked to
see it: few days after, he went to Hadrianople, meaning to proceed in his
Voyage, leaving only his Admiral at Constantinople to have a care of the City;
who published an Edict, That no man should go out of his House, nor keep light
therein after the Cry, which is an hour within night, when the Talismans from
the top of their Mosques, invite the people to make their Sala or prayer: then
he sent some Chaoux, (...) entreat all Ambassadors there, to suffer none of
their people to go out by night, that their liberty might not give a dangerous
Example; yet 3 English men of the Ambassadors train, going forth, were met by
the Provost of Pera; who took them, and causing each of them to have 150 blows
with a Cudgel, committed them to prison, never opened but with a silver Key.
About the end of the year, the Patriarch of Constantinople (upon diverse
complaints) was deprived by the Vizier, and Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria,
much against his will, preferred to the place. The former Exco^municates all
that wrought his overthrow, but himself was banished into Rhodes: in his
passage, the Vessel being cast upon Mitilene, he there renounced the
Patriarchship before that Bishop, resigning it to him of Patras, who coming to
Constantinople, labored with Nassuf for the place; who, upon promise to pay
15000 Chequines (10000 more than they were wort) made him a grant: whereupon,
Cyril came with the Greeks to expostulate with the Vizier, who said, He must do
what he could for the Emperors fit: Wherefore, if they would give the 15000
Chequines, Cyril should continue: the people were willing, but Cyril refusing,
the other was made Patriarch: who sent for the old one (...) Rhodes, to make
peace with him, holding his excommunication unjust, being deprived by a Council
also. About which time, Nassuf sent for the English, French, Venetian, and
Low Country Ambassadors to raise their Custom, one in the 100 more than the
Merchants formerly paid.

Whilst Achmat's Army drew near to Transylvania, fortifying his places in those
Countries, Cosmo de Medicis, G. D. of Tuscany, bent his designs against the
Fort of Agliman in Caramania (of old Cilicia) being the Fort and Port of the
City Selencia; which in old time contained within it, the most fearful Forces
of the Pirates of those days. The Trophy of the Heads of 40 Florentines were
erected on the Walls of Agliman, by the ignorance of the Captain of the ship.
Prosper caused the G. Duke to study this (...) in the end of March 1613. he
armed 6 galleys under Inghirami, manning them with 6 Companies of Foot,
commanded by Montanto, besides 40 Knights of St. Steven, and many other
Gentlemen, Petro de Medicis being one; from Ligorne, they came to Civita
Vecchia: In the beginning of April, they took in the Earl of Candale, and other
Nobles and Gentlemen of France, who would be partakers in the enterprise. About
mid- April, they landed by night, nigh (...), a small Town in Asia the less,
but they found it forsaken by the Inhabitants: sailing Eastward, they set upon
and took 3 Vessels like Caramousalls. Upon their way to Agliman, they took a
Vessel called Grippe; instructing them, that there were 2 Galleys of Cyprus in
the Port, which was well furnished with all necessaries, and without a good
number of Horsemen, and that one of the Galleys was to come forth to fetch a new
Mast from the Isle Pappadula. Inghirami, laid his Fleet close in the Island to
surprise that Galley; but it discovering them, speedily returned to Agliman,
allaruming all the Country: of which they had news by a Longboat they sent
from the Port Cavalier to discover; yet they pass on, and about 3 in the
morning came near the shore, and before 6 they landed about a mile and half
from the Port. Montanto, the Earl of Candale and a few choice ones landed
first, to discover, encountering with the Turkish-horse; yet Montanto commanded
they should all land, save 20 to guard every Galley. Within this strong Fort,
seated upon a little pleasant Hill, were above 300 fighting men, with store of
necessaries for defense: without were a 100 Horse scouring up and down; and,
within the Port, 2 Galleys, a Caramousall, and a Greek Brigandine, with about
150 fighting men. The order of the Florentines Combat being divided by
Montanto, Candale led them forward without being charged by the Turks, till he
came within 120 paces of the Wall, where he was charged before from the Fort,
behind by the Galleys, and in Flank from the Mountain, with such a horrible
cry, that the Mariners with the Petards, exceedingly terrified, let them fall
and fled, but Monterault, and Tiel took them up. Being come within 15 paces of
the Walls, 20 Turks sallied forth, but being too weak, they fled presently back
into the Town: the Earl tried to enter with them, but the Port was shut so soon
as they were in. While they were fastening the Petard to the Gate, great stones
fell upon the Troop, wherewith Don Pedro was overthrown and halfslain: Whilst
they were thus busied, the Mayor came and told Candale, there was 300
Musketeers come to charge him: they were 2 Beys, come out of the Galleys,
through the bad guarding of those left to hinder their landing: he leaving some
with the Petard, turned with the rest to charge them, but they retreated
toward the Mountain, making many a shot: so the Christians returned to the
(...), which made a Breach for 3 men to enter in Front. Candale entered first
with all his Troop, suddenly running to the Port of the Retrait to apply a
Petard, which also made a Breach: the Turks amazed, fled to their Walls: some
retiring into their Towers, and others into the Barricadoes in the street; they
planted also 2 Ladders on the lower part of the Town, one breaking with the
loss of those upon it: by the other (though the Turks charged them behind) many
got up the Walls, making their way, whilst others taking the Turks Cornet; made
the rest flee to the Mountains. The Knights, with those of the Galley of Mary
Magd. came not to the Tower upon the Hill, till the Petard had wrought effect;
so the Turks being retired thither. they found very great resistance: besides,
the Horse charging them behind; thrice they planted their Ladders and could not
make them hold; Wherefore, the valiant Commander Commis Lanzoni, would go to
some other place, but retreating the last, he was slain with two Musket
Bullets. Those of the Galley of St. John vanquished the 2 Galleys in the Port;
whereof Inghirami, a sign being given him, went to take possession. The fight
in the Fort, Towers, and at the Barracadoes was hot; but at last, after 4 hours
the Christians obtained an absolute Victory; which, as it could not be made
without the loss of their Enemies, so 55 of them were wounded, De Vic a French
man being one: some Gentlemen were slain, among whom was Bossierre a French
man, valourous in this action, the sorrow for whose death was general; 2 other
brave French men were (...) also. So carrying their dead and wounded to their
Galleys, and emptying the Fort of all its Artillery, Munition and Victuals; and
beating down the Florentines Heads, they set all the Houses on fire, shipping
with their Booties 350 Turks-slaves, and freeing about 250 Christians from
Irons.

As Inghirami sailed toward Ligorne, a Turkish Caramousall fell among their
Fleet, the Patrons Galley infesting it; but the Turks made such resistance,
that above 80 Christians were hurt or slain, Candale fighting alone at the
prow: but the Caramousall being taken and entered, it split and sunk suddenly.
They encountered also with some smaller Vessels, taking them, and arriving
happily at their Port. Aug. 12. after Octaviae, General of the Galleys of
Sicily, by that Viceroy's command, parted from Palermo, with 8 good Galleys
toward the Levant, touching first upon Cerigo; where he heard that the Turkish
Admiral with 30 Galleys, was bending toward the Isle Negropont, where 60 others
attended him: also that the Galleys of Rhodes prepared to join with him; all to
fall upon (...) against the Turks Rebels. Yet he sailed to Nicaria Island;
understanding there, that the Turks Admiral would send 12 Galleys to Rhodes, to
guard some Vessels of the Fleet which came from Alexandria: 2 of which 12 were
sent by their Captain to Chio. Octavio resolving to charge those 10, rowed as
secretly as he could along the shore of Natolia, coming at break of day to the
Cape de-Corvo, 20 miles from Chio, sending out his longBoat to discover; but
the while, espying 10 Turkish Galleys: he was so diligent, that at Sunrising
he had invested them: discharging all his Ordnance, he with his own Galley
joined with the Turks Standard Galley: The Spaniards entering, and slaying all
that resisted, going from the prow to the poop, where the Bey or chief
Commander stood, they forced him to yield. The other Galley the while, so
charged the Turks, that they took 5 great Vessels, and fled toward Land; the
Turks having scarce leisure to leap ashore, left them to the pursuing
Spaniards, the other 3 escaped: so 7 were taken, with a very rich Booty; above
1000 Christian slaves freed, and the Turks inchained in their places. The most
no ed prisoners, were Sinan Bey, Commander of the 10 Galleys: the Bey of
Alexandria, son to Piali Bassa, and some (...) and Patrons of Galleys. This
Summer, the Emp. Matthias, being gone to an Assembly at Presburg, Sigismuud
Bator, (...) Prince of Transylvania, living a private life at (...) there died
of an Apoplexy.

At Presburg, the States of Hungary, consulted of fortifying and well manning
their frontier-Towns, doubting of the Turks fidelity; but, there was some
question (upon a decree to the contrary) of admitting Germans into Garrison: at
last they concluded, They should be equally admitted with the Hungarians, all
others to be excluded.

The Turks the while, had burnt and spoiled many Villages in Hungary and
Transylvania, carrying away many captives, and c. so that all feared a new War;
but Achmat, hearing, upon his way toward Transylvania, that Bethlem Gabor, was
owned Prince under his protection, returned; yet chiefly, because the (...)
Rebels had burnt and spoiled many places, and an Arabian usurping the Title of
King, had collected 50000 Rebels, overrunning and spoiling his Country,
threatening his Dominions with greater ruins: besides, the Portugals and
Spaniards, making incursions near the Red Sea, had taken and spoiled Aden; but
Achmat approaching Constantinople, the Plague was so hot, that he stayed at
Hadrianople till the end of this year, and then came unto the City where he
most stately entered, and passing before the Mosques, the Talismans sacrificed
Sheep and Oxen upon Altars in his presence, for his prosperity; then cutting
them in pieces, they gave them to the people.

The G. Seignior after this great plague, yet apprehending the infection, by
the advice of some, had all the dogs of Constantinople, transported to Scutary
in Asia, every Householder being to bring in his dog first to the Cadi, and to
receive a Tuscary or Ticket for his passage, or else to pay 4 Chequines,
whereby 50000 dogs were transported: The reason hereof was; for that he found
in the acts of his Father, that he had sent them all away, 30 years before for
fear. Allowance of bread and flesh, was carried every day to sustain them:
which not sufficing the Inhabitants were much oppressed and ready to mutiny;
but by his Muphti's advice, they were transported to an uninhabited-Island,
where they all perished. The G. Seignior had propounded to his Muphti, they
might be slain: who answered, Every dog had a soul, and so not fit to kill them.

A Jew turning Turk, soon after bought Grapes of another Turk: they falling to
blows about the weighing of them, the Jew beat the other, which he bare very
patiently to encourage him (it seems) in his new Religion; for Another Jew came
to the Turk, demanding, Why he suffered himself to be so abused? Who answered,
Thou shall beat me as much if thou will turn Musulman. In October, at the Turks
Bairan or Easter, observed twice a year, a Turk having drunk Wine too freely,
was carried before the Vizier; who, seeing the fact verified, commanded boiling
Lead to be powered into his mouth and ears, which was speedily executed.

Sarder Bassa, being retired out of Transylvania with his Turks: some nearly
allied to Gabriel Bator (to revenge his death) caused some alterations: and
others had surprised Hust, and other places in the Emperor's Name: Wherefore,
the Sultan wrote to the Nobles and States of that Province, telling them among
other things: That he held Bethlem Gabor, worthy to succeed Bator, and enjoy
Transylvania, where he purposed to do no wrong there, nor suffer it to be done
by any other: and therefore, he would have the Emperor advertised, That if he
meant to have the peace preserved, he should cause those places to be presently
restored to the Prince, or signify his mind to him by Letters.

Of the Rebels in Asia, Facardin, Emir of Sidon hearing that the Bassa of
Damas, and the Bassa of the sea, came to fall upon him with a mighty Army, left
his eldest son with Forces in Sidon and other Forts about it, and with 3 ships
retired into Europe, with his 4 Wives, 10 Sons, 70 Turks, and 14000 pound
weight of Gold: he went from Ligorne to Florence, under the protection of
Cosmo, the G. Duke kissing his Hands, and presenting him with a very curious
Cutlass enrich't with stones, and 2 Jewels to his Duchess worth 6000 Crowns:
Cosmo received this Turk with all kind of (...), defraying his charge, and
furnishing him with money. They say, that Emir made many good Overtures for
settling the Christians in Asia: and Cosmo had proved the good intentions of
most Christian Princes, by many generous enterprises against the Turk; but one
Prince cannot do all.

November. 10. A fearful Tempest, full of Winds, Thunder and Lightning, caused
the loss of many Vessels in the Port of Genoa, the loss being above 800000
Crowns, with a number of persons drowned. Naples was not free, and the Malta
Galleys with many other Vessels had great loss.

The Sultan, having this 2 years had great loss in the Mediterranean by the
Galleys of Naples, Malta, and Florence; and in the Euxine, by the Cassocks:
charged the Christian Armenians, to build him 9 Galleys at their own costs, and
the Grecians 20: such is the Tyranny of the Turk over the poor Christians.

Nassuf the Vizier, re (...) with his Prince from Hadrianople, many Janzaries
conspired to kill him, as he should enter in at the North gate, placing
themselves there to that end; but the Sultan called for him to speak with him,
keeping him by him till entered into the City, whereby he escaped. Nassuf
shortly after, invited the Sultan to a sumptuous Peast; and few days after,
he, caused all the Crosses in the Temple of Sophia to be thrown down: and the
Images defaced, which had stood entire ever since the Christians Government.

The year before, the Persian King had put to death 1200 Armenians: the English
Embassadour's Chaplain desirous of the reason, conferred with the Armenian
Patriarch at Constantinople (for there are 2, one being under the Persian, and
the other at Constantinople under the Turk) who told him, it was by an
Armenian, who had counterfeited Letters from the Armenian Patriarch, offering
to acknowledge the Pope for his and his Churches Head; entreating him to write
to the King of Persia, to give them free leave to do it. The Pope bountifully
rewarding the Messenger, wrote to the King, to let them use their consciences,
who in a rage, caused many Armenians to be put to death: saying, If they would
be Obedient to the Pope, he would expect no service from them; yet the Papists
said, 'twas dove by the Patriarch, but the Armenians, by a counterfeit Rogue.

Soon after, there arrived a Circassian, a Georgian Bishop, and a Mingrelian
Ambassador, at Constantinople, complaining of the Persians oppression and
cruelty, and imploring Succors from the Sultan: and straitway came a Persian
Ambassador, whom the Sultan would not hear, till all differences were ended
betwixt himself and the Emperor; who having sent Gasparo (once a servant to
the English Ambassador) to treat with him, at length all matters were
reconciled.

The Year, 1614. began with great Prodigies in Hungary and Silesia: over Vienna
the Heavens were most fearfully red and darkened; but all these signs, had
none other effect this year, but the ruin of Nassuf Bassa, Grand Vizier of the
Turkish Empire; who being the Son of a Greek Priest, and a Tribute child (the
Turks exacting from the Christians one of three) was sold for three Chequines
(not above 24 s.) to an Eunuch at Constantinople; And afterward pleasing the
Sultana, in overseeing the Building of her stately Mosque, she made him
Governor of her Household: thence he was made Capigi Bassa by the Sultan; and
then Bassa of Aleppo; and soon after, Governor of all (...); where his
Ambition made him practice with the King of Persia, an ancient Enemy to his
Master: who, dissembling the Knowledge of his treachery, the more to gain him,
made him after Muraths death G. Vizier, giving him all his goods, and, making
him his General against the Persian, promised him his Daughter. He entering
Persia, forced Ka Abbas, that King, to conclude a peace beneficial to his
Master. He presents a Million of Gold to his Emperor, is well received at the
Seraglio, and married the Sultans Daughter; but he fearing his Spirit, commands
Bostangi Bassa, to execute him about the end of the year: Nassuf was then sick
at his House, whither Bostangi, goes with but 7 or 8 men because of suspicion,
demanding to speak with him, who excused himself by his servants, by reason of
sickness: the Bostangi replied, He could not return to the Sultan ( who sent
him to have certain news of his health) before he had seen him. Nassuf hereat
distrusted, yet believing, whatever happened to him was inevitable, bid them
let him enter: who at first complemented with him, and asked him about his
health; and then drew forth a Command to Nassuf, to deliver the Seal of the
Empire: which done, he drew out another, enjoining him to send the Sultan his
Head. Nassuf crying aloud, desired to speak with him; but the Bostangi said, He
had no such Commission: then he entreats him, to let him wash himself in the
next Chamber, that his sonl (according to the Turks belief) might not depart in
pollution: this being also denied him; the 7 or 8 Capigies environed his Bed,
to whom at last he turning himself, willed them to do their duties: Whereupon,
they cast a cord about his neck to strangle him; but his fatness not suffering
them to take away his life presently, they cut his throat. His designs tended
to the ruin of the Christians, persuading his Master to break peace with the
Emperor, the French King, and the Venetians, promising him, to make him Monarch
of the whole World, that he might keep his spirit in action, make himself
necessary to his Master, and live more safely in Combustions than in a Calm:
Whereas the Envy and Malice of his Enemies gave him many furious assaults.
Achmat took his riches into his Chasna or Treasury: among which, were found
about two Bushels of Pearls and Diamonds. His death is otherwise related by
one, then in Constantinople: The Sultan dissembled his great discontent against
him, till some fit opportunity; yet Nassuf had discovered it, laboring by
great gifts to the Sultana, and others, to pacify him; yet sending Horsemen
daily into Asia, meaning, to pass himself, when strong enough; but October. 7th,
on their Sabbath, the Moon, about 8 at night, was much eclipsed, which made the
Turks, expect some great accident: the Sultan having it bruited, that he would
pass to visit a new Mosque then building, the streets were hanged with Cloth
of Arras, a cry going before, The King comes.

Nassuf descended his House to salute him, as he passed by; but it was his
Bostangi Bassa, attired like himself, who leaping to Nassuf, told him, (...)
the Sultans pleasure, he should deliver up his Seal: Nassuf amazed, asked what
the Sultan meant to do? He replied, he knew not that, but if he would not
deliver it, he would return with the Message.

Nassuf drawing it forth, gave it him, then he showed him a Warrant for his
Head, whereto he submitting, two Jamoglans strangled him; and his Head was
carried to the great Seignior, his body being thrown into the street. His death
was thought to be procured by Cicala's Wife, the Sultans Sister, he having
deprived her Husband, the Bassa of Babylon, of his Government, whom he allowed
not to have access to the Sultan's presence: wherefore, he accusing Nassuf in a
Letter, of conspiracy with the Persian, to kill the Sultan, and of many capital
things, he sent it, by his Wife, who coming to the Sultans speech, (though
warily observed by Nassuf) left the Letter in his Chamber, who reading it, was
never quiet, till he had his Head: He writes, there were found in his House, 80
Bags of Gold, containing 10000 Chequines a piece.

After this, Mechmet the Admiral was made chief Vizier, the first natural Turk
that was ever Vizier, since Constantinople was won.

The Sultans imperious Letters to the States of Transylvania, were fixed up as
a Mandate, throughout all the Country: at which time, Bethlem Gabor, defeating
some Troops of Lippa and Genoa, which spoiled the Country, those Governors
sent to Vienna, for men and money: then also a Chiaus, brought Letters to the
Emperor, from the great Seignior, to (...).

1. That he should take heed, the twenty years peace, were not violated, which
himself desired faithfully to observe. 2. That in his name, they had seized on
certain places in Transylvania, which he was bound to (...) against all her
Enemies. 3. That Bator's tyranny had made him give forces to Gabor, to
dispossess him, he having invested Gabor to govern it in peace. 4. That he was
since advertised, that some Troops in his name, (against the Articles) had
seized on the Forts of Hust and Vivar, and the Towns Nagipan and Tonase. 5. He
had charged Bethlem, to repel the least enterprise upon his Principality, by
force. 6. Exhorting him, if he desired continuance of peace, to command his
people to restore places (...), or signify his intent by that Chiaus; for the
mischief daily increasing, his affection to peace might grow cold.
The Emperor received the Chiaus very honorably, returning answer, that he
desired to confer with the Electors and States of the Empire, about this
important business, and then he should know his resolution, and to assure
himself, he would not attempt any thing against the peace. In the mean time,
the Turks of Agria, took a great number of Cattle from the Christians:
whereupon, 800 Haiducks, (...) them so speedily, that they soon overtook them,
put them to flight, and made them leave their prize: wherefore, the Bassa of
Agria, goes forth with 1000 men, to recover the booty; but after a sharp
encounter, he was forced to retreat, losing his Horse, and 200 men: thence the
Haiducks went and spoiled about Solnoc: others, took a Turkish Bride, with her
baggage, going from Gran to Buda; and 400 (...) (Haiducks and Turks, which hold
no party but their own) seized on 3 places; but at their recovery, most of them
were (...), and the rest taken, by the Hungarians.

But the Emperor assembling the States of his Hereditary Countries about the
business of Transylvania, told them, the peace was violated in Hungary, by the
Hostilities of the Turks: Achmat having subjected (to the Christians prejudice)
Vaiachia, Moldavia, and Transylvania, under (...) Gabor, who had made himself
his Vassail: the Sultan had also sent him word, not to (...) any thing there,
that it might be wholly united to the Turks Empire: wherefore they should
wisely consider: whether Transylvania should be wholly in the Turks power: and
why the Sultan would not yield to ratify the truce: of means to make War, if
necessity forced him: why the Turk would hinder him from pretending any right
to Transylvania: that the Turks Ambassador, had brought him no Presents: if
they should accord anew with the Turk, to consider upon what assurance, since
he would not consent to the sixth Article of the peace.

Their opinions were diverse; but all consented to maintain the Imperial
Authority: only the Hungarians besought the Emperor, if he would send Forces
into Transylvania, they might march some other way, and not over their Lands:
Gabor the while, provided to make some attempts upon Lippa and other places:
the Governors whereof, represented to Forgatsi, the State of their Garrisons,
fearing, if Bethlem should once possess them, he would deliver them to the
Turk: and if they would send them succors, they would rather endure all
extremities, than yield; yet they hastened not to send succors; and Sander
Bassa, bringing Forces to Bethlem, October. 25, the Cannon being drawn out of
Varadin, to batter Lippa, Bethlem battered it so furiously, that he made a
breach for 400 men to escape: whereupon, the Governor (despairing also of
succors from Hungary, yielded the place, upon his sparing their lives and
goods: Genoe and Arach being delivered on the same condition: which places,
should not be put into the Turks hands, from whom, to take all interest, the
States should pay to Sander, the charges of his Troops.

Bethlem, manned them with new Garrisons, the Imperials being retired to
Forgatsi (...): in high Hungary, But the States of Transylvania, assembling at
Varradin, disputed diversely, whether to resign those three places to the
Sultan; but at length, they concluded, that Bethlem (...) do therein, what he
held most needful for the quiet of the Country, most humbly beseeching him, to
free them from the Imperials, who had seized upon Hust and Vivar.

At Constantinople, Achmat, to beautify the outward part of his Seraigle, upon
the Sea-shoare, caused a platform to be made within the Sea, 800 paces long,
and 120 broad.

The Provost proclaiming this resolution, every House sent a man, and the chief
of Families labored in person.

The Bassaes were Overseers, and the Janissaries and Spahies, carried Scuttles
with all cheerfulness; and at all (...), there was Music of diverse sorts: The
Visiers coming, and casting pieces of silver among the Workmen: so the Sultan
beginning this work in October, saw it finished in 3 months.

In the mean time, there was an employment of Jesuits, into Mingrelia, of old
Colchos: Lewis (...), with two others of this Order, and an Armenian
Interpreter, parting from Thrace, with resolution, to preach unto the people.

About JUNE, this year, they arrived at Verna, a famous Town in Thrace: where
(...) Soldiers (whom necessity had formerly forced to leave the Emperors
service in Hungary) were in Garrison to defend the Turks Subjects against the
Cossack's incursions; yet did they still observe the Roman Religion: thence
they sailed to Cordula, and by the encounter of a small Gallion, entered the
Port of Trebezond: few days after, they were carried to Erissa, in Laxia,
which looks toward both Georgia and Trebezond. These ancient Christians, to
free their Children from Turkish Tribute, caused them to be circumcised after
the Mohammedan manner, marrying their Daughters to JANISSARIES: also abandoning
themselves to MAHOMETANISME, that they might be freed from the Turkish- Yoke:
so that here, the JESUITS, catechized the Men, baptized the Children, telling
the Women married to Turks, what they should do to maintain their Faith.

But their charge being to go to MINGRELIA, they sailed toward GOVEA; but that
Haven being unfit to cast Anchor in, they followed the Galleys of Bassa.

ONEZE, who was to treat a peace for ACHMAT, with the Prince of the
MINGRELIANS, and dispose him to pay a Tribute: they went into the Port
MACROGALO, nine miles off that of GOVEA; but a North-West wind, arising about
midnight, September the fifteenth, drove their Galleys nigh shelfs and Rocks,
one being cast away.

This Tempest continuing many days, another was lost: out of which, the
Jesuits had retired (by advice) during the same: who imputed the cause to
Oneze, who had forbidden them to pass into Mingrelia, before the peace was
concluded: which was long, by (...) of difficulties in the Treaty: at last,
they resolving to pay Tribute, it was concluded.

Twenty days after the Jesuits departure from Macrogalo, they arrived at
Satrapella, in Georgia, where the (...) Vizier, came and saluted them bare
headed, and kneeling on one knee. Gorell the Prince, (then at Barlet, where the
Court was to keep Christmas) hearing of the arrival of these French Preachers,
sent for them, (...) them, as did his Vizier: then causing them to bless his
Court, he much (...) with them, of the truth of the Roman Church: the Popes
power, as Father of all Christendom; (...) being, as it were, enlightened, he
entreated Grangier, to crave absolution of his sins, from the Pope: which he
said, he might give him, by the power he had from God, promising, to send him
his Confession; but hearing the Jesuit had power to absolve him, he made a
general confession of his life:

A Monk of Georgia, who had lived at Rome 12 years, had formerly planted piety
there, which these now altered. Gorell entreated the Jesuits, to send him some
of (...) Company at their return, promising, much to esteem of them, and give
them a House, Temple, and maintenance: he offered them Silver, which they
modestly refused, upon the Rules of their Institution: this Prince, much
commending their manner of living, had them conducted to Satrapella.

Febr. 3d, 1615, they left this Town, arriving at Heraclia, and thence to
Margoula, where Dodran, the Mingrelian Prince, then remained; whither Threbis
Cham, King of Georgia, expelled his (...) by the Persian, in 1613, was come to
visit him.

The Jesuits kissed Dodran's hands, and of his Uncle Lipartia, who was regent
during his minority: who, both promised them assistance, sending them to
Macaury, there to stay, (...) they were busied in the affairs of the Country,
then somewhat confused: that Bishop entertained them, with great show of love;
and feasting Threbis Cham, would needs have the Jesuits assist him at the
Feast: these Mingrelians, and also the Georgians, use to sing at meat: Threbis,
desired the Jesuits might sing, when 'twas their turn, who excused themselves;
but they must do as the rest: so they sung Plange Lingua etc. appointed for
holy Thursday. They reside at Macaury, hoping to labor profitably for the
health of souls. The Colchians, and Georgians, are Christians of the Greek
profession, under diverse Princes, ever in War with the Turk or Persian, being
called Chams, that is, Kings, or sovereign Princes.

In the mean time, a Turk comes out of Asia, into Christendom demanding
favorable succors from Christian Princes, to possess the Empire, whereto his
birth seemed to call him: He termed himself, the Son of Mahomet the 3d,
Father to Achmat; maintaining, that his Father had (...) 4 Women, 4 Sons,
Mustapha, who was strangled; Jacaia, which was himself, Achmat, and Osman, (yet
it seems, by the sequel, he had another Mustapha) that having been sent for
from Magnesia, to Constantinople, his Mother, who had been a Christian, but
afterward for her beauty, used by Mahomet, and called Sultana Lalpare, could
not conduct him to his Father, being dangerously sick of the small Pox: she
well foresaw, that Jacaia the 2d Son, should one day secure the life of
Mustapha the elder: wherefore, to retire him into Christendom, she gave out,
her Son Jacaia, was dead of the small Pox, disguising her design, by
constrained tears, at the Funeral of an Eunuch's Son, dead of the same
disease.

An Eunuch Astam, was her faithful Secretary, with whom she leaves Magnesia,
under a pretext to go to certain Bathes, and so transports her Son into
Morea, lodging as unknown, in a Bishops House at Miclo: where Jacaia (above 9
years old) not being secure, she retires him into Cassandria of Macedonia,
discovering to the Archbishop of Thessalonica, her desire to make him a
Christian: entreating him to take them both into his protection, who lodged her
in a Nunnery, and commits her Son to a learned Abbot, where he much profited
in the Greek Tongue, and many arts. I have seen him (...) in the Company of
learned men, speak the Greek as easily as his Mother Tongue. He continued under
this Abbot, till the age of 17 years: during which time, he became a Christian.

The Archbishop, baptized him in a Temple without Thessalonica, yet secretly,
for fear of the Eunuch.

Jacaia, calling himself Sultan, leaves the Monastery, and with the Eunuch,
travels up and down Greece; and lest he should be known, takes on him the Habit
and License of a Derviser; but coming to Siopia, he heard of his Fathers death,
and the rejoicing for Achmat's advancement, learning also, that Mustapha had
been strangled: wherefore, after many Discourses with his Eunuch, he sends him
to the Son of Peri Bassa, a Rebel of Asia, who receives for his Master, the
Rebels Oath, and, returning to Tarlis, conducted Jacaia to Peri, to be head of
his Troops.

Achmat's Treasurer, was ready upon the banks of the River Bardate, to give
Battle to Peri, with 7000 Horse, and 3000 Foot: his Troops being less in
number, there was a sharp encounter; but at last, Peri Bassa was defeated, and
Jacaia being wounded in four places, saved himself on the other side of the
River, where, wandering up and down, a Peasant relieved him, then an Abbot, who
had him cured, taking him (he said) for a page of the Treasurers.

(...) he returns toward Greece, conferring with his Mother, then with his
Eunuch, of his affairs: the Eunuch is sent to Constantinople, to the Vizier
Dervis, who was then discontented with Achmat, whom he finds disposed, to
entertain the offers of Jacaia: they swear to kill Achmat, and settle Jacaia
in the Throne, who goes to Constantinople disguised; but being ready to execute
their enterprise, they say, the Dervis died: hereupon, Jacaia fled toward the
black Sea, and then wandered into Valachia and Moldavia, following a Polonian
Ambassador on Foot, till he came to Cracovia: where a Turks Chiaus knowing him,
desired that King to stay him, assuring him thereby, strictly to oblige the
affections of Achmat, whose unjust demand, he refused: then the Chiaus, gets
some Tartarians of the Kings Guard, for money to promise to murder him; but a
Flemish embroiderer, gave him notice, and let him hide himself in his Lodging:
after which, he went to Prague, Rodulph the Emperor being then alive: who
furnished him with all necessaries; he was there a year, and in that time,
acknowledged by many Turks, to be Achmat's Brother; but he finding nothing but
good wishes, and fair words at Prague, certain Saxons his friends, advised him
to pass to Florence, to Duke Ferdinand, from whose Ambassador, he takes his
directions; but entering Italy, he hears Ferdinand was dead; yet Cosmo his
successor, honorably entertains him at Florence, lodging him in St. JOHN'S
Fort, and supplying him with all Commodities.

Cosmo, also gave him the Title of Excellency, Horses and Caroches, and Company
for hunting: Ere long, the great Duke, sent him with his armed Galleys, into
the Levant, under Beauregard, where Jacaia, conferred with Nassuf, then chief
Rebel in Asia, who offers him men, arms, and money, if he would march toward
(...); but Beauregard, had no Commission to leave him in Nassuf's hands, so he
carried him back to (...).

While Jacaia was aboard, the great Duke sent into many parts of the Levant,
carefully to be informed, of what he had delivered, who all brought back
certain proofs of the truth thereof: wherefore, he wrote to the King of Spain,
informing him of his quality, that contributing succors, they might undertake
some happy enterprise against the Turk. He commanded the Viceroy of Naples, to
give him suitable reception: Jacaia went toward Naples; but having news from
thence, he stayed at Averso, where he was honorably received by the Governor.
The Viceroy visiting him, gave him the right hand and Title of Excellency; but
the Council of Spain delaying too long the succors expected, he (...) to
Millane, and thence disguised, passed into the Levant, to sound men's good
wills; but prevailing as little as before, he went to Rome to kiss the Popes
feet. Cardinal Bellarmine, received him as the Viceroy of Naples did: the Pope
assuring him of affection and succors; but it was needful, that secular
Princes, should make the first warlike overture. Since, he was at Paris, under
the protection of the Duke of Nevers, and assisted by his Counsel; and, had not
civil combustions directed his Armies, there had been seen some success of the
affairs he treated in Lorain, Germany, etc. Yet some affirm, (and those that
have conversed in the East) that Mahomet had but three Sons, Mustapha,
Achmat, and Osman; however, it was hard to discover in Jacaia's carriage, any
signs of an imposture.

Stephano, or (...), Vayuod of Moldavia, as he held it by usurpation, so he
governed it with all cruelty and inhumanity, like that Tyrant, who said openly,
He respected not the love of his Subjects, so they feared him.

At first, (...) plotted how to root (...) all the Noblemen, called (...), with
all others of credit and authority, both because they supported (...), and for
the jealousy he had of them.

First, he impaled Lord (...), the Princess Widow, her Brother, with two other
chief Nobles; and soon after, he beheaded 75 Boyers, not pardoning one, for all
the great instance of their Kinsfolks, charging them with conspiracy against
his person, without any proof; but these cruelties, the more incensed the
Boyers: many of whom, took up Arms, and had then been revenged, and freed their
Country, if (...) had not conjured those of Yas, by promising them immunities
of all Subsidies, to second him: wherefore, they fought valiantly against the
Boyers, who came to assault Yas: so after some light skirmish, in their
retreat, many were taken, whom the Tyrant slew, or impaled for terrors sake.

Those that escaped, now resolved, to have recourse to the Princess, Widow to
Jeremie, who had fled into Poland, when she heard of the taking of her Son
Constantine: who, understanding from the Boyers, that they desired Prince
Alexander, in the Tyrant (...) (...): She also desiring Command under her Son
(then but 16 years old) they both imparted the design to Visinoviskie her Son
in Law, and Coreskie, who at that time married her youngest Daughter: which
(...), willingly offered to go with Alexander, into Moldavia, and take the care
of his Army so within less than 2 months, collecting 10 or 12000 Horse and
Foot, Polonians, Cossacks, and Transilvanians, Stephane also gathered together
almost 20000 Moldavians, Tartars, and Valachians, whom he kept about Yas, to
attend the Princes coming.

Alexander advancing within two Leagues of Caminithe in Podolia, was much (...)
to pass Niestre, there being a strong Garrison of Moldavians, in a Fort to
defend the Rivers passage; but the Captain of the Fort, much discontented at
Stephanoes cruelties, voluntarily offering his service to Alexander, delivered
him the Fort: so that passing easily into Moldavia, he for joy, discharged many
vollies of his Ordnance: which made Stephano distrust the Moldavians
affections, and feel a pricking in his Conscience.

Alexander, making some stay there (in 1615) advanced, and coming within half a
days journey of Yas, sent out 800 chosen Cossacks, to discover his Enemies
Army, who soon encountered with 1500 Tartars, sent out by Stephano, whom the
Cossacks finding disordered, so charged them, as defeating many, they routed
the rest.

Then they brought back word, that Stephano's Army, might be about fifteen
thousand; yet such as were not trained up to Arms, drawn thereto, rather by
constraint, than free will. Alexander's Army was greatly encouraged, and also
much incensed against Stephano, for Letters he wrote to their Prince, full of
threats, as if they had been already at his mercy: on which day, came Deputies
to Alexander, ( Stephano not knowing it) to know his design, and entreat him to
take pity upon Moldavia, who answered, he intended not to oppress it, but free
it from Stephano's tyranny, being invited by many Boyers, assuring him, 'twas
the common desire of the Moldavians; and if he prevailed, (as by their
assistance, he was certain to do) he would rule them as mildly as his Father
(...) had done: they being well satisfied, and publishing his answer in diverse
places, many came and joined with his Army: who in October, advancing, made a
stand in a Champian, where were two Springs, calling a Council of War: and
the while, sent a Troop of Cossacks, to discover; who brought word, the Enemy
was ranged in Battle, having 20 Cannons in front. Yet Alexander, was not much
amazed, because the General of Artillery, had assured him, he would annoy his
men as little as he could, desiring to serve him, and so be revenged of
Stephano, who had beheaded his Brother in Law, upon a false suspect. Stephano,
to discover the Princes Army, sent 1200 Tartars, and 2 or 300 Moldavians, who
being seen a far off in that plain, Alexander sent 500 Cossacks, and 400
Polonian Lances, to encounter them, who at first, seemed to retire, to draw
them by degrees from their Camp; and being about a League off, stood, thinking
they durst not charge them; but they fell so upon them, that they slew most of
them, not above 5 or 600 escaping to their Camp, causing great amazement.

The Princes Army was much encouraged hereby, increasing daily, as is usual in
civil War. Presently after, the Prince meaning to advance toward the Enemy,
his fore-ward was stayed, by 1000 Horse, who had seized on a narrow passage,
betwixt a Poole and a Marish; but certain Moldavians advising to send some
Horse, by an unknown way, to surprise them behind, the Cossacks speedily went,
Moldavians guiding them: who coming undiscovered, within 50 paces, charged
them; and being seconded by the fore-ward, of the 1000 Horse, there returned
not above 50 to their Camp. Alexander, now coming with his Army, within
Cannon-shot, Visnoviskie, thought they must make an enclosure with Carts,
having no retreating place within 10 Leagues: which Stephano discovering, shot
through that Fort, some being flain, and some hurt: the Prince answered him,
but to small purpose, night surprising them, and having but 8 small Pieces.
Visnoviskie, spent the night, in encouraging his Soldiers from their former
encounters against their Enemies, (who though more in number, yet were most
Peasants) which successes, were assurances, that God would use them, to punish
the tyrannies of Stephano; and then every one should return laden with rich
spoils and recompenses from Alexander.

Hereat, the Soldiers all protested, rather to die, than fail of their duties:
the Princess also, comforted the Colonel and Captain, with the intelligence
from the General of the Artillery. Next day, while they put their Armies in
Battle, Alexanders men had the odds in diverse skirmishes.

Visnoviskie was Alexanders General, as most capable: who, seeing Stephanoes
Horse in three Squadrons, and the Tartars most advanced, ordered the Cossacks
to encounter them: discreetly done; for they both charge freely, are covered
with but skins of Beasts, to seem as fearful as they can, observe no order,
using cries, fearful to the unaccustomed; and being broken, seldom return to
charge.

The Polish Lanciers, called Housarskie, being 1500 well armed, and led by
Coreskie, were set on the right hand, against 3000 Horse: the Hungarian Foot
(about 3000) were in midst of the Army with the Cannon, upon a little Hill: on
the left, were the other Chivalry, led by Alexander and Visnoviskie: the
Baggage being a little behind in the Camp.

Stephano disposing his Army, began about nine in the morning, to play with his
Cannon; but the Bullers flew over Alexanders men: who thereupon, bad the
Cossacks charge the Tartars, whom they defeated: at which time, 2000 Horse,
charging the Foot that guarded Stephano's Cannon, slew most, taking the rest,
and so possessed his Cannon: who seeing his Infantry also endangered, caused 3000
Horse to advance; but Coreskie charged them so furiously, that he slew almost
half, and routed the rest. Presently after, another Squadron followed:
whereupon, Coreskie seeing his men wearied, and tired, retired toward his
Camp. Then came Alexander and Visnoviskie, to encounter these, and that with
the more courage, because, sure that Stephano was there: during this quarter of
an hours charge, Coreskie breathed, collecting what men he could, to succor
those in fight, who were almost tired, and Alexander far engaged: who now
recovering their Forces, their amazed Enemies that were alive, were put to
flight. But Stephano (a coward) had retired to the rest of his Foot, who had
not yet fought, seeming rather to die there, than flee; yet seeing the issue of
this last charge, he soon fled, having not struck a stroke. The Foot that
remained (about 4000) yielded to mercy, crying aloud, God save Alexander,
Vayuod of Moldavia. That day, Prince Alexander entered into Yas, and in the
Castle, was proclaimed by all the Boyers, Vayuod, which before, he would never
accept of. Next day, hearing that many of the chief of Yas, were fled into
Mountains and Forests, to attend the event, he sent Boyers to invite them
home, with all assurance, causing part of his Army to be quartered in the
Country; and 500 Horse, and 1500 Foot, under Coreskie, were sent to Vasseloy,
for that Stephano had fled that way, and might return. Some of the Artillery,
were sent into Poland, some put into the Fort of Cochina, as it were the
Arsenall of Moldavia.

Alexander called his chief Nobles to Counsel, to resolve what to do to
maintain him in his Estate: who concluded among other things, he should send an
Ambassador to the G. Seignior, to let him know, he never intended to take Arms
against him, but was sought to by the Boyers, for the unspeakable cruelties of
the Vayuod Stephano, etc. they were also to inform him, that Stephano had (...)
suggested, that he was Son to a Prince of Moldavia, that he was not truly
informed, that his predecessors had promised Jeremie and (...), that his Sons
should succeed him, if not unworthy, and did pay the yearly Tribute, which was
offered by (...), to Houssine Aga: Alexander, promising to pay it hereafter,
and if need were, to give his Brother Bougdan as a pledge, during the first
year.

The Ambassadors going by Transylvania, lest they should be hindered by Men of
War, then troubling all Thrace, came to Buda, and went to salute that Bassa,
who being a special friend to Stephano, imprisoned them, and then sent them to
Braille, whither Stephano had fled, who they say, gave him 15000 Chequines
reward: causing their Heads to be cut off, one night after Supper, and their
bodies to be cast into Danow: whereby the Sultan was not truly advertised of
passages in Moldavia and Alexander's offers; so that he swear his ruin.

Stephano, with 4000 men from Michna, Vayuod of Valachia, and the relics of
his scattered Forces, marched toward Moldavia: wherefore, Coreskie was sent
with 6000 Horse to Ticouch, a strong Frontier Town, Alexander and Visnoviskie,
staying at Yas, to prevent all alterations, in favor of Stephano: Within few
days, the Prince hearing that those of Horreova, a small Country in Moldavia,
had joined with a great Troop of Tartars, to come and invest him, sent
Visnoviskie to encounter them: who meeting them two Leagues off the City slew
half of them, and put the rest to flight: a great number were taken, the
Horreoveans being brought to Yas, as in triumph: 800 Tartars and others, were
found slain, and but 50 Polonians, with some 100 hurt.

Alexander, went presently with his Company of French, to meet Visnoviskie, and
congratulate his Victory, with many Complements: then casting his eye upon the
poor Horreoveans, he sent them back again, taking an Oath of their fidelity
hoping that his clemency, would draw the most factious to obedience; and giving
God thanks, he sent to Coreskie, to advertise him of this new Victory, who was
then busy in preparing to meet Stephano: they encountered in a Plain, having
on one side the River Sirette, dividing Moldavia from Valachia: it continued
two hours with like advantage; but Coreskie, joining to him 400 Gerbeys, so
charged Stephano in a Squadron of Horse, that he forced them to give back; yet
did the Event seem doubtful: Whereupon another Captain, with five hundred
Light Horse, came in so fitly, that Stephano was forced to fly, the Prince
pursuing, and cutting them in pieces: who afterward found that of Stephano's
side were 3400 slain on the place, besides prisoners and wounded; and of his,
but 350. Then the season being cold in November, he put his Troops in Garrison,
and returned with 150 Horse to Yas, honorably and joyfully received.

The Princess yet in Poland, now returns to Yas, with Bougdan her Son, and
Alexandrina her Daughter, with great feasting and joy: Then they treated of a
Marriage betwixt Coreskie and Alexandrina; but Bellona then opposed it, to try
their patience who loved each other from their youth. For about the end of this
month, 1615, they heard that Michna of Valachia, with Hebraim Bassa, came
against them with 40000 men to succor Stephano: also that Bethlem Gabor had
charge from the Grand Seignior to assail them; but it was false: for that Bassa
was sent with Caphtanes or Roabs which the Sultan sends to Princes under his
power, to Michna and Stephana, but not with any Army; for he was yet ignorant
what had passed against Stephano: yet the Princes thinking this true, called a
Council, resolving to send Boyartskie (a brave Polonian) to Michna to know his
intent and designs: who arriving at Bouza in Valachia, demanded audience before
Michna; who sending him to the Bassa, He (without hearing him) demanded, Who
made his Master so bold, as to bear arms in the Sultans Country without his
authority, commanding the Ambassador presently to be put in Irons: whose
servants escaped as they could, informing Prince Alexander what had past, and
that Michna had no Army, nor intent then to enter Moldavia. The Bassa charged
some of his Officers to examine Boyartskie of all matters, and of Alexanders
forces; and returning to (...), led him with him thither: where he being
examined by a Vizier, in the Divano, was condemned perpetually to the Galleys.
Alexander sent another Ambassador to Beth: Gabor being at Alba Julia, whom he
courteously received: the Ambassador told him, that Alexander had heard, he
levied Men to join with Michna against him, which he could not easily believe,
for he had professed friendship to his Father, and had no cause now to leave
it, entreating him not to meddle, and if there were occasion, he would serve
him to his utmost: Then he gave him his Letters of credit. Who answered, He
never intended any thing against Alexander, whose Father was his true Friend:
nor would he ever give cause of discontinuing that Friendship, etc. Here was
much satisfaction, yet he afterward levied Forces against him, though not
joining with Michna's Army.

Presently after the Bassa's departure, Pr. Michna sent an Ambassador to
Alexander, protesting by Letters his great grief for his Embassadour's ill
usage, without whose consent he was carried away with the Bassa, promising to
do his best for his delivery: He knew also the Sultans Power over him, whom he
might not resist, that he had no Army on Foot, and that he designed not to
support Stephano, unless forced by the Sultan's Command; but he could not
deliver Stephano up to him, unless he should violate the Laws of Hospitality:
also he should incurr the Sultan's indignation, and be in danger to be
dispossessed of his own Estate; Alexander after this, by advice of his Council,
dismissed all his Foot, part of the Cossakes, retaining but 5 or 6000 that
Winter.

About this time Pr. Visnoviski (a Protestant of the Greek Church) receiving
the Communion at Christmas, the (...) (who had usually served him), for money
poisoned the Bread; which he receiving, sickened, and with torments dyed the
next day: whereupon the Priest, apprehended upon suspicion, confessed forthwith
his guilt, being provoked by his Enemies.

He was bound in a Chair made of Copper-wire, and a Fire made round him; so
that for twelve hours, he fearfully cried out for his insupportable pains.
Whilst Alexander and his Court mourned for this beloved Prince; a Spy arrived
out of Valachia, informing him that one Skinder Bassa, with a great Army, was
there arrived, Stephano pressing them daily, to March into Moldavia, sending
400 Men to surprise Berlada, where Coreski had left some men, who keeping bad
Guard, were most cut in pieces, which much puffed up Stephano; but Alexander
sending 400 Cossacks, within three days they arrived at that Town unwalled
(like the rest); and firing many places, forced his Men out, and slew them, the
rest being burnt; so that but five or six escaped, Stephano being much
afflicted.

Then also Coreski, in revenge, with 2500 choice Horse went speedily into
Vaselloy, lest his Garrison there should be so served also: which the Bassa
hearing, sent his Son (twelve or thirteen years old) with an old experienced
Turk, and 7000 Men, to get his Son reputation.

Coreskie advertised hereof, and knowing they must pass a wooden Bridge over a
River by the Town, cunningly disposed some of his Men within Vasselloy, the
rest being covered with a little adjoining Mountain: Some Turks being passed
over, two squadrons from the Town, so charged them, that almost all in Poland
were slain, with the old conductor; for the Turks, having marched almost all
night to arrive early, were benumbed with cold; the rest (on the other side)
retired speedily, fearing perhaps the Bassa's Son might be also lost. Coreskie
pursued them 4 Leagues, killing and taking all in his way: One prisoner saying,
he was the Bassa's nigh Kinsman, Alexander gave him a fit garment and horse,
sending him to the Bassa with a Convoy, whom he entreated also (by a Letter)
not to advance in Stephano's behalf; promising, if the Sultan would let him
quietly enjoy Moldavia, he would be most (...), and pay him the yearly Tribute:
which the Bassa little esteemed, being exceedingly incensed for his Sons bad
success, and his Captains death.

The same day Alexander sending 1500 Horse to Coreskie, 800 of them lodged 6
leagues from Ticouth, where the Bassa and Michna then were with about 25000
men: these 800 neglecting their Guards, drank themselves drunk, (...) sting
their Hosts with all insolences, and forcing their Wives and Daughters:
Wherefore calling to them certain Boyers, they cut all their throats sleeping,
and most drunk.

About the end of the year, Pr. Alexander called a General Council, where it
was resolved to retire to Cochina, 30 French Leagues off, it being the
strongest place of Moldavia, far from Enemies, and near Poland: so next day he
marched, and came thither in 4 days, in the extremest cold: then he sent to
all his Friends and Confederates speedily to come to succor them, ordering the
while to provide all Necessaries for his Army. The Bassa hereupon marched with
Michna and Stephano, toward Yas; but many (through cold) dying on the way,
they stayed till a milder time.

At March, L. Tischevich came to Alexander with 3500 Cossacks, and within few
days, L. Potoskie, Nephew to him who was taken at the first Battle, with 1500
well armed Polonians; other succors came also: so that by the end of this
month he was 10 or 12000 strong: who sending forth one thousand horse, with
his French Cavaliers, to discover the Enemies Army, they staying to refresh
themselves (...) way from Espanocha, where Michna's Tartars lodged: These, with
many Turks, presently invested them, who (though little hope to withstand so
many) behaved themselves very (...), fighting from 10 in the morning, till
night: but 7 Polonians, and 5 French escaping the rest being slain or taken,
Mountespin (the French Captain) being one, whom they would have sent with the
rest to the Galleys; but Stephano preserved him, upon promise of his good
service.

About the end of Aug. 1616. six Jesuits, settled at Pera, at the persuasion of
Henry the 4th, King of France, were accused before the Vizier to be Spies to
Spain, to absolve Renegadoes, baptize Turks, conceal fugitive slaves, sending
them into Christendom: Objecting also, the killing of Kings, if Tyrants, which
had been written by a Spaniard of their coat: all capital crimes. They were
thrust into a Dungeon, and with them a Franciscan, Vicar to the Patriarch of
Constantinople: whereinto the while the Ambassadors entered to renew the Truce,
with Drums beating, and Ensigns displayed.

Some who thought to erect Trophies by the Jesuits ruin, making use of this
Entry falsely advertized, that many thousands of Christians in Greek and Turkish
Habits, came with him to execute the Jesuits project: also informing the Vizier
and Muphti, that the Temples in Pera, and Ambassadors houses were full of arms;
and now when as the Turks Estate, chiefly Constantinople, was unprovided of
Forces, as having Armies in diverse places, they meant to draw the Greeks into
Rebellion, and give entrance to the Cossacks by the Black Sea. The Sultan
commands all to wear the habit of their own Nation, forbidding to wear any Hat,
except the Franks, and they to wear a Greek Habit; enrolling also all
Christians in the City, and Pera: yet not thinking Constantinople free from
danger, he commanded all the Franks to be slain, which took not effect: The
Grand Vizier, and Muphti representing unto him, that by this cruelty, he should
draw upon his estate a dangerous War from all Christian Princes: but he walks
up and down the City all night on Horseback, causing the Friar, Vicar to the
Patriarch, to be executed in his sight, and expressly forbids passing from
Constantinople to Pera, or hence thither; So that the French Ambassador having
passed from Pera to solicit the Jesuits Liberty, returning, found a stop,
going to the Muphti, and leaving his People at the Seaside (for they use to go
to him with a small train), during which time, a multitude ran to see them,
thinking surely they went to put them to Death: they lamenting their misery,
and the Turks furiously charging them with conspiracy; but the Vizier, sending
a Writing by one of his own to the Keeper of the passage, the Ambassador with
his train was let pass; but being at Ptra, one night the People fell into an
exceeding fury, upon a Subject of small importance. Not far from the
Embassadour's house, there happened a dispute in a Lodging betwixt some who
watched about some Employment: whereat the Turks awakened, ran to Arms in the
Street, (1000 in all) crying out, The noise came from the Frankes, (that is,
from Italians, French, Spanish, English and Others); who meant to Rise,
resolving to force the Embassadour's House, and put all to Fire and Sword; But
some better advised, persuaded them to stay till Day; and then the Ambassador
got the Sultan to interpose, so brideling their insolency.

But the Jesuits remained in the Dungeon, till the French Ambassador had let
the Vizier see their innocence, procuring their Liberty, the Sultan by his
Letters, Pattents, publishing the falsehood of the malitions accusations
against them: yet, to avoid the fury of a blind multitude, they went to Sea for
France: but were again committed at the Dardanelles, through some advertisement
to the Sultan to the same effect: who being informed truly of their honesty,
freed them, recalling 2 to Pera, to live as formerly.

Though the Bassa and Stephano were puffed up with Alexander's loss, near
Cochina; yet Michna hearing, he there would defend himself, had no joy thereof;
for an Italian had foretold to him, If ever he fought with the Polonians, he
would be in danger of his Life: wherefore by his Chancellour's and
Camp-Master's advice, he pretended, he heard from his Lieutenant, There are
many Tartars entered Valachia, and spoiling it; So he returned only with 100
Horse for his Guard. But Stephano (to mock Michna) writing to him, that he had
slain 6000 Polonians upon the Place, and taken a great number, whom they would
send to the grand Seignior; he was so discontented, that he beheaded his
Chancellor and Camp-Master, charging them to have secret intelligence with the
Poles.

About the end of March, the Bassa, Stephano, and Monoza a Tartar, advancing
with 20000 Men toward Cochina, made a stand within 2 Leagues for refreshment:
the Princes the while, put their Army in Order, in a Plain near Cochina,
leaving 1000 choice Horse in the Town under Coreskie, as assured that the Turks
would Camp betwixt the Town and Army; that, ifdefeated, they might not retire
into the very strong Fort: They planted also 8 Cannons in a Trench covered with
a Wood. The Bassa informed, they had not half so many Men arrived by 7 in the
Morning nigh Cochina. where making a stand to discover the Princes Army, he
encamped betwixt it and the Town: the Tartars desiring to be revenged of the
Cossakes, entreated to have the Point, and so advanced toward a Battalion of
them, not distrusting the unseen Cannon, which playing upon them, overthrew a
great number, terrifying the rest: So that the Cossakes furiously cut them in
pieces, and so retired; Seeing Valachians and (...) come to succor them; whom
Tischevich with his 15 or 1600 horse coming to encounter, they advanced bravely
toward the Princes Canon: The Combat being long and doubtful, the Turks
Marshal sent 3000 Turks to succor them, and the Princes caused a Squadron of
Cossacks and Moldavians to advance, who forced the Turks to retire above 100
paces: then Alexander cried out, Now my Companions, the Enemy is in disorder,
let us charge them resolutely, and the Victory is sure. So advancing with the
rest, he discharged two Canons, as a sign to Correskie to salley forth: but he
was already come above 300 paces. The Bassa hereupon began to be amazed, and
sending two thousand horse to second his other Troops, retired apart with
Stephano, and the rest of the Turkish Cavalry, to attend the event: a most
furious Combat there was for two hours, full of fearful howlings of Turks, who
at last fainted, seeing no succors come, whereas if the Bassa and Stephano had
joined with them, they had by all appearance won the Victory; but they seeing
no means to collect their routed forces, retreated with above two thousand
horse, which had not yet fought. Tischevich and Correskie the while, cut all in
pieces they could meet; and drawing all their men together, stood upon the
place, suffering none to go to the spoil, before assured of the Enemies hasty
retreat, fearing a pursuit; but the Princes men and horses were almost tired,
above twelve thousand men being slain, besides prisoners and wounded.

Alexander returning so Cochina, they gave thanks to God for this Victory, and
the Princes and Ladies much joyed, who in the Fort attended the fearful Event;
and Coreskie two days after the Victory, was married to Alexandrina, to the
great content of all the Court.

The Bassa and Stephano going to Yas, and finding no safety, the one went
presently to Constantinople, and the Tyrant to Pr. Michna, who was his only
support, though he had apparently mocked him; but he first fired Yas in many
places: so that of 22000 houses, but 600 were untouched. The Princes coming,
and finding it desolate, next day marched toward Valachia to punish Stephano;
and on the other side of the River Siretta, Michna had 400 men in a Borough to
keep the Frontiers, who putting themselves in defense, were every one cut in
pieces, the Inhabitants being well entreated, as not resisting, and hating
Michna for the vexations from the said Garrison: resting 3 days, they speedily
marched toward Bonza, and coming within a league of that City, some
Countrymen ran thither, wishing Michna to save himself speedily from the
Polonian Army: he was ready to go to Dinner with Stephano; but now he was so
amazed, that running into his stable, he mounted without a saddle, and went
toward Tergovist with a few, one of whom gave him his own horse which was
better furnished: Stephano upon his own horse flying alone toward Nicopolis.

The Princes entering Bonza, were wondrously grieved at Stephano's escape, and
that Michna whom they would not have hurt was so amazed: Their Army at first
entrance spoiled the City, ravishing many, which drew the future wrath of God
upon them; yet the Princes could not hinder them.

During their abode, many Boyers, Michna governing insolently, came and
besought Alexander to stay in Valachia, promising the whole Nobility would
willingly obey him: but he thanking them only for their good will, they told
him, they would be glad that Prince (...) (who governing before Michna, had
been expelled by Bethlehem Gabor) might suddenly return to the Vayuodship,
entreating him to give him passage through Moldavia out of Germany, if he came,
which he willingly granted, because Michna favored his Enemy, and had himself
a design upon Moldavia.

Michna staying some days at Playa, attending his train, sent to his wife at
Tergovist, with all speed to go to Nicopolis, fearing the Princes would seize
both upon them and their Estates: Then coming himself to Tergovist, he sent to
Alexander, to know why he entered Valachia with an Army, without cause; he
having shown that he was his Friend in not assisting the Bassa and Stephano
nigh Cochina, though they appeared much stronger; and if he meant only to
seize upon Stephano, he was fled another way: promising if he ever took him, to
deliver him up to him, entreating him to retire, without further spoil, and
that they might remain good Friends. Pr. Alexander answered the Ambassador, he
had sent to inform his Master the Day before, that he meant not to attempt any
thing against him, but only Stephano, who had Fired the City Yas: which that
Michna might know, he had sent him back his Plate and all his rich Movables,
the Ambassador thanking him and returning, found all (...), Michna being freed
from fear.

Alexander sent Troianoskie with 2000 Horse to pursue Stephano, but he heard he
had passed (...) with his Wife and a small train: 1500 Tartars advertised of
this pursuit but with 1000, and that they were tired therein, came to Charge
them; but Troianoskie discovering them afar off in a Plain, had leisure to put
his Men into four squadrons; they approaching and discovering their number,
would gladly have retired; but Troianoskie Commanding two squadrons suddenly to
Charge, they were presently defeated, above 400 being slain, the rest flying:
but 25 Poles were (...), and 50 hurt.

The Princes resolving to leave Valachia, forbad all on pain of Death, to carry
away Valachians with them; hearing some were seized on, for Ransome-sake: being
upon their March, they heard the Horreoveans were again up in Arms, refusing to
own or pay to Alexander, unless it could appear he was confirmed by the Sultan:
Coreskie being sent thither with 5000 Men, they yielded without resistance.
Then Coreskie besiedged Bialigront, on the River Bohou, held by the
Tartars-Praecopenses, where was a Garrison of Janlzaries, and many Moldavian
Boyers, who making many salleys, slew above 300 of his Men, himself being like
to be taken, if Tiscevich and his Troop had not speedily forced the Enemies to
retire, leaving many dead on the place.

Coreskie being without Cannon, now rose and returned to Yas; and soon after
Hebraym Bassa wrote to Alexander (as if his Friend) and told him, thenceforth
he should be quiet in Moldavia, because the chief Vizier, Stephano's greatest
Supporter, was in disgrace, promising to employ himself for him, to the Sultan;
this was to make him careless, or draw some reward from him, if the grand
Seignior should confirm him, as it was somewhat likely; for soon after they
heard he had commanded that Bassa to bring Stephano alive or dead, with all
belonging to him, from Brahile whither he was retired: Who marching thitherward
withal diligence, and a (...) with him, sent one to tell Stephano of his
coming, and that next day he would dine with him: he distrusting nothing, went
early to meet him, alighting to do him reverence as the Bassa did; where after
some little conference, he drew out a Commission to seize upon him, and carry
him to Constantinople.

Whereupon Stephano willed his Servants to shift for themselves; then the (...)
struck Him betwixt the Shoulders with his Mace, and binding him hand and foot,
they drew him in a Cart with four horses to Constantinople: where, to avoid
punishment for his wicked actions and flight, he turned Turk.

The Bassa also had sent to seiz on all he had at Brahile, and Nicopolis where
his wife was: so that he had nothing left, but continual torment of conscience
for his barbarous cruelties in (...): Some of his men, telling at Yas, what
befell him in their sight, they generally gave thanks to God, and were very
joyful.

Soon after, News came to Yas, that the Sultan had appointed (...), (...) of
Moldavia (much better than Valachia) sending Skinder Bassa with a powerful army
to settle him, and expel Alexander: And June 25. 1616. he came to Tergovist,
where was Michna with great preparations: the Bassa entered with 30 or 40
Musicians on horseback, making but silly music; and many Pages, who for
cloaks, ware Leopards, Lions, and Tigers skins, his army being about twenty
thousand men, Turks and Tartars, to whom Michna joined with ten thousand horse
and (...). Being come into the Castle, after many complements, the Bassa and
Michna entered into a great Hall, where he presented him his Letters Patents,
and a Robe his Master had sent him: Michna putting it on in presence of his
Nobles, and being proclaimed Prince and Vayuod of Moldavia, with many
ceremonies: Then Michna led the Bassa into another great Hall, where was a
Feast prepared, offering to serve him; but he made him sit down right against
him.

July 2d. they marched into Moldavia: but the Princess ( Alexanders Mother)
maintained, that the Bassa came only to bring the Patents to her Son, by
reason of (...) Bassa's former Letters, was the cause of their utter ruin.

About which time Zolchelchy (the Polish Kings General) through Envy and
private Interest, wrote to Michna and the Bassa, if they would promise him to
procure the eldest Son of Simeon living with him, to be Prince of Valachia, he
would so weaken Alexander's Army, that he must yield or flee: which granted, he
wrote to some Cossack Captains to come speedily into Poland, to go with
Uladislam their Kings Son, chose Duke of Muscovie, who would go thither with a
great Army through some crosses, and they should be very well paid: Wherefore
concealing that Invitation, they began to mutiny; saying, If they had not money
speedily, they would be gone: 8000 of whom went early in the morning, with
great store of cattle, and the spoils they had gotten. Likewise Bicho,
Alexanders General, whether through fear, or being corrupted, retired toward
the Enemy with two thousand horse: Hereupon many advised Alexander to retreat:
yea Michna (for fear of his false Prophets fore-warning) wrote and advised him
to retire into Poland, before his Army approached nearer: Alexander went to
counsel, July 25. but they could not resolve, most of the Army demanding their
pay, or they would not fight: which they took for a pretext of retreating. The
mean while, Michna's Vanguard of Tartars approaching, made them march from Yas
toward Cochina: but the Tartars having notice, went and charged them in the
Rear, where Potoskie having slain many with his own hand, was at last slain
with an arrow. ' Tischevich coming speedily with a Troop of Cossacks, suriously
slew 800 Tartars on the place, routing the rest. Alexander answered Michna's
Letter, That contrary to his promise, he had craved aid of the Turks, to
dispossess him of Moldavia, to which his predecessors never laid claim, neither
could they, according to the Laws and Conventions, when the Moldavians
submitted to the Sultan: none to be Vayuod there, unless there born; also he
minded him that he might have dispossessed him of Valachia, when he entered
Bonza, which he would not, sending him all his rich moveabls; and that if he
abused his present Power, God would not let him go unpunished: and though his
Army were far less than his, yet he feared them not; putting his chief
confidence in the Almighty, who had used them often to abate the Turks Pride,
which he should abhor, if a true Christian, rather than join to satisfy his
ambition.

Skinder Bassa seeing this Letter, and incensed, Commanded his Lieutenant to
pursue the Poles with 12000 choice Men, who being then at Cotnard, Alexander
hereupon made them advance toward (...): at which time, Cherban's Chancellor,
who came with 150 Horse, to assure him that his Master was coming with 5 or
6000 to aid him, was pursued by the Turks near Yas, only himself and one more
escaping; So that Alexander could have no sure News of Cherban. Coreski also
who stayed with 2500 Horse not far from Cotnard, was encountered by a great
Troop, which he could not discover for a little Mountain; he charged some of
them. But one Troop being defeated, another succeding, he must retreat: yet he
slew almost 6000 Enemies, not above 250 of his own being lost.

The Turkish Commander amazed hereat, collecting his Men, joined with 15000
others sent from Yas, approaching very near to the Polonians, where encouraging
his Men, he sent a Challenge to Coreski, by a Captain whom he confessed the most
Valiant of all the Polonians, who coming and delivering his Charge, Coreskie,
though he could not stand or sit on Horseback for his wounds, would have
accepted the Challenge, if Alexander and the rest had not caused him to excuse
himself, through indisposition: showing what the event of such a Combat, did
import, the Princesses also instantly entreating, and his dearest Spouse, who
was much afflicted for his wounds.

Tischevich entreated leave of Alexander, that he might accept thereof for his
cousin Coreskie; which grantred, he sent to know if the Turks General would own
it, which he did, knowing what Tischevich was: The Combat was to be betwixt the
Armies within a quarter of a League of each other, and neither Party to be
assisted. The Turks General being about 50 paces from his Army, washed his
Mouth, Eyes, Nose, Ears, and privy Parts, believing (after his Law) that it
would serve as a purifying; then praying toward the East, and so mounting,
richly Armed and Furnished, marched softly toward Tischevich, who attended
him: they began with Bows and Arrows, not hurting each other, till Tischevich
shooting the Turk through with a Petronel, in his striving to rise, he rodd over
him, wounding him in the right Arm, and at next blow slew him; then cutting off
his head, he carried it to Alexander.

The Poles were very joyful, and the Turks much amazed, advertising the Bassa
and Michna, they must bring all the Army and Cannon if they would be revenged.
In the mean time, Bicho the Traitor with 2000 Tartars and Moldavians, got
before the (...) to hinder their passage from Cotnard to Bothcan: Michna's Army
investing them on the right hand, and the Turks behind; so that they had but on
the left a Wood to favor their retrait: who being so environed, Resolved to
Fortify themselves with their Ca ts and Carriages; but they were but 5 or
6000, to 22 or 23000, as they were thought to be; true, Cherban and Bossi were
within 2 days journey with 10 or 12000 Men, which made the Enemy the more to
advance. who coming near their Camp, and desiring only to take the Princes and
Princesses prisoners, with the chief Nobles, summoned the Polonians to deliver
them into their hands; the rest to depart with Bag and Baggage: But they all
answered, They would rather die than commit such base treachery. Hereupon some
Canons were discharged, a great number of Poles being slain and wounded: These
shooting to small purpose, with their small pieces, all their bullets being
spent, and part of their powder lately burnt by accident: Tischevich thus
enclosed, furiously with five hundred of the most valiant horse, forced through
3 or 4 Squadrons, set in guard by the Wood side, overthrowing all they
encountered. Correskie would not have failed so to do, and carried Alexander
with him, but he could not sit on horseback: also he had rather die, than leave
his Wife in that extremity: so he disguised himself, giving out, he escaped
with Tischevich, as did the Princesses, that, if to be ransomed, to go for
common persons.

The Turks Cannon having overthrown many of their Carriages, two Squadrons of
Tartars and Turks in two places, came to force their Camp: who thereupon laid
down arms, crying aloud, They yielded: The Enemy was very glad, as very
desirous to take the Princes prisoners, and dispose of the rest: who entering
their camp, and seizing on what they could, Alexander and Bougdan were
delivered to Skinder Bassa, who leading them to Constantinople; for fear of
perpetual Imprisonment, they became Renegadoes: But Bougdan being circumcized,
dyed; and his Mother was confined to the old Seraglio. Coreskie (through
disguise) was led to Yas among the common soldiers, where he was afterward
discovered by a soldier of his own party, who got his liberty and freedom
thereby. the Turk who had gotten this Prince, led him to the Bassa: who
recompencing him well, made both him and the Soldier swear, not to tell it to
any, for he intended to draw some great Ransom from him; knowing, if he carried
him to Constantinople, the Sultan would imprison him, and so he should have no
benefit: but another false Polonian told Michna thereof, who was so (...), that
he told the Bassa before many: He certainly knew, Coreskie was among his
slaves, for whom the G. Seignior would call him to account: He answered, he
would be glad of that, but he had yet no notice of him, thanking Michna for his
caution: and, fearing the event of Coreskies escape for a Ransom, he told
Michna next day, that Coreskie was found disguised, whom he would present unto
his Master, with Alexander and Bougdan, as he did. Coreskies Wife, disguised
and disfigured with her nails and otherwise, fell into the hands of a Tartar.
Captain, with many others, who carried her into Tartary, where she was
inhumanly entreated.

Cosmo, the G. Duke's Galleys parting from Ligorne this year, they drew near
Cerigo, April 25. where meeting with some Christian ships, they heard (...) in
Chio, the Turk had prepared 2 Galleys to pass into Barbary: Inghirami
resolving to set upon them by cover of the night, cast Anchor under
Castle-Roux: but the Moon shining discovered him to the Turks: who advertising
the (...), they began to flee, one rowing a main toward Land, and the other
speeding her course at Sea. Inghiramie's Galley got before that going to land,
being followed by St. Stephens Galley, grapling with it 3 hours, and striving
to enter; but the Turks defending it valiantly, they were above an hour
fastened together, hewing each other furiously, yea, the Turks entering
Inghiramies Galley, fought valiantly upon the Hatches; but at last, the (...)
took her, yet with much loss: It was the Iron Galley of that famous Pirate,
Amurath Raise; the Captain Mustapha. Celebi a Portugal being taken, but sore
wounded. The other was the Captain Galley of the said Raise, commanded by the
Bey of Mitylene, called Amurath: this was infested by 2 Florentine Galleys, the
Combat being no less furious than the other; but after some hours fight, the
Florentines had the Victory: Amurath being slain, and Mustapha, whom these
Galleys carried to Algier. They were great Galleys well furnished, and manned
with 420 Janissaries, practiced in Piracies: 240 Turks were taken, 430
Christians freed. They also recovered a Cannon and 2 Sacres of St. John's
Galley, and a Sail of the G. Duke's Captain-Galley, which Raise had formerly
spoiled: the rich commodities taken, were valued at 200000 Crowns; but the
Florentines had 223 men wounded, and 35 slain: which made Inghirami return to
Ligorn.

But the Emperor's Ambassador coming to Constantinople, was, because the
peace concluded at (...) Torok in 1606, was somewhat altered by diverse
Interpretations made of those Articles: and this year in March, the
Ambassadors of both Emperors assembled at Vienna: wherethey concluded upon
diverse Articles, to remove all pretext of controversy in their explication:
but Ambassadors had first been mutually sent to Constantinople and Prague,
with royal and rich Presents. The peace made at Situa Torok was to be observed
for 20 years complete, beginning at the date of those Presents which were
signed and sealed by Ambassadors on both sides, March 1. 1616. Of these
Articles extracted out of Achmat's Letters Pattents, and of an accord for
execution of the same, touching the Villages in controversy, and razing
Fortifications; thou may read at large in the 1362, 1363, and 1364 pages of
the Turks History.

Alexandrina, Wife to P. Coreskie, being led captive unknown, to Bialigrot in
Tartary, there received many indignities being with child: yea while she lay
in, which was 5 or 6 months after her taking.

There was also one Jaques, a Polonian Soldier under Coreski, who though he
might by her discovery, have purchased his own freedom, yet he would not:
Wherefore the Princess (the Tartarian being one day absent) told Jaques: That
having found him faithful, she would direct him, how to redeem himself from
captivity, so he would observe what she did prescribe: who promising so to do,
yea with the hazard of his life; She said, Thou know the Tartar, whose
captives we are, has an elder Brother (very rich) who is lately become blind
and deaf, through a great defluxion into his eyes and ears, for which his
Brother seems much afflicted. I have a Jewel which my Husband gave me when we
were made sure: which I much esteeming, have hid, sometimes in my hair,
sometimes in rags since my captivity; for he assured me, it had many and
singular Virtues: and that it would restore the sight; and cure deafness, so
'twere not natural or too inveterate. I will give thee this Stone, when thou
have sounded the Tartar, whether he will free thee if thou do cure his
Brother, making him swear solemnly not to retain it, that thou may restore
it me unknown to him: She said also, Thou must demand of the sick man, a Horse,
Money, and Passeports to go into thy own Country, that thou may go speedily
to my dear Husband; where ever thou shall hear of him, and bring me an Answer
of my Letters if possible.

Jaques, having sworn to perform all, she gave him the Stone: who finding the
Tartar one day much afflicted with his Brother's infirmity, told him, He knew
how to cure him, without pain, or taking any thing inwardly: I believe nothing,
said he; for all the Physicians in the Country could not do it: yet if he
could, he promised to free him without Ransom, and give him whererewith to
conduct him: that is that (said Jaques) I meant to demand: thou swearing also
by thy great God, not to fail of thy promise, when I have performed mine, and
not to retain, or let any one take from me what I shall use in the cure. The
Tartar swearing, and laying his right hand upon his heart, although
distrustful, yet acquainted his Brother herewith, who entreated him not to
neglect the offer, promising him both the Ransom, and money he should give him.
The day comne, the Tartar pressed the prisoner to perform his promise, and the
sick man promised him a Horse and (...) Chequines, taking his Brothers Oath; so
he bound the stone to one eye seven hours: which taken off, he saw clearly,
recovering the other eye in like manner, and his hearing by the like
application: Wherea they much rejoicing, gave him what they promised, and
procured him Passports from the Governor: who, before his departure, told the
Tartar, the Polonian-woman was his near kinswoman entreating him for his sake
to use her and her Infant better; and perhaps returning, himself would bring
her ransom; so, he receiving the Ladies Letters to Prince Coreski: he departed,
and by the way met with a Polonian, who being taken with Alex. had escaped; of
whom Jaques carefully enquiring of the captive-Princes, and chiefly of
Coreskie; and, hearing he was in the prisons of the black-sea, enquired how he
might speak with him, or convay some Letters to him: he answered, 'Twas very
difficult, for he was straightly guarded: but he heard the French Ambassador
could sometimes send to visit him. Jaques entreated him, to deliver some
Letters Alexandrina had wrote to her kinsfolks; came to Constantinople; and
through means of one of the French Ambassadors men, employed to carry Coreskie
money, etc. he delivered to him his Letters, which he received with much joy:
and 8 days after he came and received from him an answer to his Wife; and after
many troubles returning to Bialigrot (the Tartar and his servants being a
hunting) he gave her an account, and delivered his Letters, whereat she was
much joyed, though abundantly, grieved for his captivity, hearing all Ransom
was refused: she told Jaques, since his departure, the Tartar was jealous of
her quality, enquiring of her, of her Husband, Kinsfolks, and their Estates:
who said, he was a Captain, taken and carried with Alexander into Turkey; her
other Kinsfolks being Soldiers, ruined in the troubles of Moldavia, bidding
Jaques well to remember it, lest they were found to differ, when treating of
her Ransom. The Tartar coming home, entertained Jaques very kindly: who asked
him, what Ransom he would require for her? he said, 6000 Chequines for her and
her Son, unless he would give him the Stone, with which he had cured his
Brother. Jaques replied, he had restored the stone to a Nobleman, whom he
followed when he was taken: and as for the Ransom demanded, 'twas more than she
and all her Kinn were worth: she being Wife to a Captain taken with Alexander,
still detained for lack of means: the Tartar interruptingly said, he heard she
was of Noble Extraction, and had rich Kinsfolks: True, said the Polonian, she
is of Noble parents, but ruined in the troubles of Moldavia; adding, he would
not have returned, if he had thought he would have demanded above a 1000
Chequines, entreating him to accept thereof, she being his Kinswoman, and for
the good he did to his Brother. Thou have bin satisfied, said the Tartar, and
no cause to complain; yet, after some contest, by the mediation of the cured
man, her Ransom was set at 3000 Chequines: whereof Jaques advertising Charles,
Coreskies Brother, he sent it with all speed: so the Princess and her Infant
were redeemed, and conducted into Poland by their faithful Solicitour: whence,
she certified Coreskie of her deliverance. This was written by a Frenchman, who
said, he was present in all the troubles of Moldavia.

In 1617. a Chiaus, a Spanish Renegado, called Solomon, came to Paris from
Achmat, with Letters for freeing 28 slaves, who being ransomed in Italy,
returning to Constantinople, were taken by ships of Marcelles, which that King
did: but the Chiaus further entreated him for justice (...) the Moors, expelled
Spain, and wronged in goods and persons, passing into France: wherein he had
all contentment; yet he openly said, he was amazed at their long delays in the
dispatch of suits in France, which had the reputation to maintain every man's
right; the Execution being many times longer than the suit it self: whereas the
Turks within eight days see an end of the greatest Suites. He with his train
was defrayed 6 or 7 months at the King's charge.

The Othoman Empire entertained this year 4 great Armies: one against the
Persian, the other against the Pole, almost all Tartars (Land-Armies) as
supporting Michna, whom the Turks had settled in Moldavia; and 2 Naval Armies,
one in the black-Sea against the Russians or Cossacks: who made daily
incursions into the Othoman Country, going to sea in small Boats, carrying but
5 or 6 men, made of hollow Trees; so that, when disadvantage forces them to
retreat, they retire so near to (...), that the Turks Galleys cannot approach
them, so preventing a total overthrow; yea, in the end of the last year,
finding the passage stopped at the mouth of Danubius by the Turkish Galleys, they
brought their Boats in Carts by the Mountains, into the Sea. A fourth Army was
employed, either to conduct the Caravan of Egypt to Constantinople, or in the
search of the annoying Galleys of Malta and Florence. Haly Bassa led that
against the Persian, succeeding Mehemet; who, having lost 60000 men in a
set-Battel, and being sent for, fearing the Sultans revenge, retired to the
Sophie.

The Turks, much annoyed at Sea and Land by the Uscoques, greatly complained to
the Venetian State, with whom they were in League, by whose Territories they
got into Turkey: the small resistance made, gave much cause to suspect there
was secret Intelligence betwixt their Subjects and the Uscoques, dividing the
spoil betwixt them. The Turks, seeing it impossible to revenge themselves in
the Uscoques Country because by Letters of the Venetian State, their passage
was stopped, they resolved to be revenged upon their Subjects, preparing to, come
into the gulphs of Venice with a mighty Army, which doubtless had brought that
State to great extremities, and much prejudiced many Christian Provinces; but
let us show what these Uscoques were. About 1550, there assembled in plains
nigh the Sea, belonging to the House of Austria, people, from diverse confines
of Hungary, and such as were banished the State of Venice, delighting only to
live upon spoil and blood: which Thieves (called Uscoques) as enemies to all
Art and Industry, retired into a Desert Country, receiving no pay from the
Princes of Austria, there commanding; so, adding the spur of poverty to their
inclination, all Liberty was left them to rob and spoil: and making light
foists, they made Sea-courses with the most barbarous cruelty of any inhumane
Nation; yet concluding to shadow their insolences, with a color of going
against the Infidels: Wherefore (at first) all Merchants, Turks Jews, or
Turkish Subjects (though Christians), if they entered the gulf to Traffic, or
furnish Venice, they took them, dividing their goods, and must pay a great
ransom, or die miserably: all the Ports of the Venetian State, whence they had
Victuals, these Pirates soon after shut up; and the Turks now traffiquing no
more, they began to set upon the Venetian ships, forcing the Merchants by
torments, to say, the goods belonged to the Turks, though their chief booty
came from Christians. And having drawn many to them, they (ere long) out of
covetousness, and for the more pretense, that they might be supported in
Princes Courts, entered with all violence into the Turks Country through the
Venetian's, to whom they were as hurtful as to them, from whom they carried
rich spoils and many prisoners.

If they came nigh the Maritime coasts by Sea, all rich and good things were
subject to their greediness: whence grew the aforesaid complaint, and
threatening of the Venetian: which afterward bred a cruel War betwixt that
State, and the Arch. Duke, Ferdinand of Grets, and then Emperor, who seemed to
support them, to engage the Venetian against the Turk.

November. 15. 1617. Sultan Achmat, 30 years old, and Reigning 15, died: being of
a good constitution and complexion, enclining to be fat, strong and active,
exceeding any of his Court, in casting a Horsmans Mace of 9 or 10 li: there
being 2 pillars set up in a Court of the Seraglio, in memory of his dexterity:
he was ambitious and proud, which some hold befitting his (...), not so cruel
as many of his Predecessors: much given to sensuality, entertaining 3000
Concubines and Virgins, the fairest Daughters of Christians: he kept for
hawking, in Greece and Natolia, 40000 Faulkoners, with good yearly pensions,
his Huntsmen being as many and chargeable. Mahomet his Father (according to
their Law, once a day to practice some manual Trade) made Arrows: and Achmat
Horn-rings used in drawing of Bows. This is in the morning, after their
prayers: but it is but for form, for the Sultans scarce make one of these in a
year.

The Reign of Mustapha the first, ninth Emperor of the Turks.
ALthough the Custom of the Turkish Emperors, was to have neither Brother or
Nephew alive, unless saving themselves by flight: yet the Court Officers
concluded, it was not fit Mustapha, Achmats younger Brother should die; for
that, their Emperor being but 15 years old, they feared, that dying in his
nonage, without children able to Govern, the Empire might fall into combustion
and ruin through civil Wars, so Mustapha's life was preserved: yet so, as to
remain still a prisoner in some of the Chambers of the Seraglio: and before
Achmat had children, no cruel Decree was made against him, but he continued his
contemplation without any liberty; but when Achmat had issue, he often propounded
the putting Mustapha to death, which was often concluded: It Is written, his
death was one evening agreed on, and to be executed next day; but Achmat was so
frighted in the night with Apparitions and fearful dreams: that he said, Since
that resolution alone had so terrified him, he believed his torments would much
increase, if put in execution: Wherefore, he commanded his Brother should live.

Another time, Achmat out of a Window, beheld Mustapha, whom he had permitted
to walk in the Gardens with his Guard; and one near him (to (...) him) told
him, 'twas dangerous to suffer his so great liberty: Whereupon, in a rage, he
took his Bow and Arrow (being a very expert Archer as the Turks generally are)
aiming to kill his Brother, but at that instant, he felt such pain in his arm
and shoulder, as not able to let loose his Arrow: saying aloud, Mahomet would
not have Mustapha to die. He had 3 Chambers for Contemplation, whose whole
delight was to read the Arabian Books of their Doctors in diverse Sciences.
Achmat let him sometimes take the air of his Gardens, calling him to consult
with him of State Affairs, taking his advice, knowing him of a sound judgment.
But Achmat falling grievously sick, his Bassaes and Counselors persuaded him
to take some good course for the succession. His young children were not
capable to govern, and besides the Sultana their Mother was dead: but Sultana
Flatra Mustapha's Mother was yet living, who lest her Honor should be
Ecclipsed, by Government of the Bassaes during the Childrens minority,
persuaded dying Achmat, to make Mustapha his Successor; So on his dying day,
he calling sor Mustapha, entreated him to take the Government upon him
presently after his death: who amazed, answered in much fear and humility, He
might not accept of that Honor, since the Empire of right belonged to his
eldest Son.

Achmat, disabled his Son for so great a Government, both for his age and
capacity, recommending the Sultanaes children unto him, entreating him to use
them as he had him, leaving the other children to his discretion: soon after
which words he died: and Mustapha 25 years old ( Osman Achmats eldest son being
but 12) was proclaimed Sultan Cham, who at first, thought he had been in a
dream: causing the Persian Ambassador to be set at liberty, whom Achmat had
restrained, contrary to the public Faith; then, he sent speedily to the Bassa
of Buda, to entertain the Treaty of peace made with the Emperor, inviolably:
yet during his short Reign, he behaved himself insolently and cruelly; for he,
ill entreating the Baron of Mole or Sancie, French Ambassador, set Guards upon
him, as a prisoner, imprisoning and torturing his people: and that upon this
occasion. Prince Coreskie being brought to Constantinople, the G. Seignior, was
exceedingly pleased; for his very Enemies held him for one of the most valiant
and redoubted Princes of Christendom: Wherefore, he was confined to the Towers
of the black-Sea (five miles from Constantinople) appointed for prisoners of
great Quality and Importance: being shut up with Rigaut a French Captain, in a
small Chamber on the top of a Tower, wherein was a Window for a man to pass
through, yet without Bars, as being so high, Coreski was much solicited by the
Turk to turn Renegado; but he would rather die in tedious Captivity, than do
such an act against God and his Conscience: which made the King of Poland write
to the French Ambassador, to be a means that he might be freed from Captivity
at any Ransom: which the Ambassador durst not undertake, though much desiring
it, as having no charge from his King.

The Emperor's Ambassador did what possibly he could, but the Turk would by
no means release him, so as his Friends despaired of his liberty. But there had
been a Lady taken out of Podolia, with her fair young Daughter, and a maid
servant, by the Tartars, who selling them to a Turk, he brought them to
Constantinople to make profit.

This Lady (a Christian) not hearing of her Husband in nine months: went, with
her Daughter to the French Embassadour's House at Pera, to crave his
assistance: where his Secretary ( Martin) promised them all service; and
afterward assured the Mother, if she would promise him, he should marry her
Daughter, he would endeavor their Redemption: Who yielding thereto, and
passing their promise in Writing, he paid 2500 Crowns Ransom, and sent them
home: at whose return, the Lady acquainting her Husband and Friends with the
whole business; the Father wholly disliked of the Marriage; because Martin (he
said) was no Gentleman, and had not an Estate according to his Daughters
quality: the Mother advertising Martin hereof, protested, her Husbands refusal
was the only hinderance; but for the money he disbursed, they would send it him
(if he pleased) with interest. Martin much discontented, diverse Expostulations
passed betwixt them, but he could not obtain their promise: Whereupon, growing
full of grief and melancholy, he went to visit P. Coreskie; complaining unto
him, asking what course he had best to follow (for he knew these Podolians, and
had formerly allowed of his suit to the Virgin) who comforted him: saying, If
he might any way escape, he would maintain him to all Opposers against the
accomplishment of his desires: Hereupon, love suggested unto Martin, to send
unto Coreskie a bottom of Packthred in a little pie, which he sent him with
other meat: writing to him, that on a night appointed, he should let down the
packthred, whereto a Ladder of cords should be tied, whereby he might descend:
to effect which, Martin having engaged a Greek Priest, upon hope of great
reward from Coreskie, himself resolved to be gone for fear of suspicion;
telling the Ambassador, he had some special affairs which pressed his speedy
return for France.

The Greek Priest, failed not at the time, to do as the Secretary had directed
him, attending the descent of the Prince and his Chamber-fellow, and conducting
them to a cave in a Rock, a League off, and in the evening conducting these 2
Cameradoes to his Lodging in Constantinople, in habits like his own, and
concealing them there as long as they thought fit.

At break of day, November. 23. 1617. Some of the Guards entering the Chamber, saw
them escaped, and finding the Ladder of Ropes tied to the Window, were much
amazed, knowing they should smart for it; yet the chief Jailer sent speedily to
Constantinople, to give notice thereof: then Posts were sent to all parts to
enquire of these Fugitives: giving those of the ports and passages special
charge to observe all men that passed, if there were not one who had the little
finger of his right hand shrunk up, as Coreskie had, by a wound. Few days
after, the Turk seized on the French Ambassadors servants, torturing 2 of
them, by laying them (as they are wont) on a Table, on their bellies, and
giving them 3 or 400 blows with a staff on the soles of their feet, calves of
their legs, and buttocks, yet said they nothing to charge their Master; they
did also the same to a poor Turk (a Weaver) dwelling nigh the Ambassador, that
he might falsely depose, he had seen Martin going and coming to his Masters
Lodging, till the time of the prisoners escape: but God suffered him to depose
naught but truth, notwithstanding all those cruel Torments: though the Turks do
generally much rejoice at the dysasters of Christians. Of the guarders, some
were impaled, others beatt to pieces in great Iron Mortars, wherein they pound
their Rice to Meal.

Three days after, the Chiaus Bassa seized upon the French Ambassador
himself, and that very severely and uncivilly, leading him to the Visier's
House, where being examine much, about Coreskies escape, he was left a prisoner
in the Chiaus's House 3 days: who the while, desiring to speak with some
Friends, and also with the Mufti, of his just grievances, he could not, but by
giving 2000 Crowns to his Jailer; who, hereupon told him, if he would have any
favor from the Mufti, it must be by money; so, he giving 3 or 4000 Crowns, the
Mufti acquainted the G. Seignior Mustapha, with his just complaints, and of
what importance his detention was, since naught was found to charge him with
favoring Coreskies escape; and that his Secretary, who did it for private
profit, (...) left him to or 12 days before: and that all the world would tax
him with violating the Law of Nations; no Christian Prince would confide in
him, and to be feared they would all jointly War against him. And truly, the
English and Dutch Ambassadors protested openly, if he were not speedily set
free, they would retire home. Hereupon, Mustapha commanded the said French
Ambassador, to be sent to his House without further displeasure; yet he must
pay 22, or 23000 Crowns for the redemption of his Household servants, who were
threatened to be tormented to the danger of their lives. But soon after, the G.
Vizier hearing of Mustaphaes tyrannous Government, returned from Persia with
his Army, reigning but 2 months and odd days, who had given great sums to the
Janissaries and Spahies, to confirm him in his Throne, keeping young Osman under
sure Guards, and putting to death his Brethren.

But Coreskie, and Captain Rigaut, laying hid 2 months in the Greek Priests
House; he got leave of the Patriarch of Alexandria, for himself and 2 others
(he said) of his Society, to go to Hermites, living in the Deserts of the
Archipelagus, like the ancient Anchorites; So disguised as Priests, they sailed
to Etchut, where an English ship being ready to set sail for Messana, Coreski
thence went to Naples: where discovering himself to the Polish Ambassador, he,
exceedingly glad, led him to the Duke of Ossuna the Viceroy; who furnished him
to go to Rome, where the Pope had great content to see him, and hear of his
Adventures: thence passing to Vienna, the Emperor, worthily entertained him:
after which he went home, full of Honor; yet the English Ambassador said, He
(...) into Poland by the Black-sea.

Osman the first, tenth Emperor of the Turks.
OSman set at libeuty, the G. Vizier, had him proclaimed Sultan, and seated in
the Othoman Throne, with a general applause: whereby, the French Ambassador
freed from his Guard, advertised his Master of his barbarous entreaty by
Mustapha, entreating a revoke from his charge; Wherefore, the King sent 2 to
Osman, to demand reparation of the Indignity to his Ambassador and Secretary;
telling him, He could send no other to his Court, to condole Achmat his Fathers
death, nor congratulate with himself, till suitable satisfaction were received:
Whereupon, the Vizier and Mufti, advised Osman, to send an Ambassador to the
King of France, to confirm their League, and to testify both by word, and
Letters (which he sent unto him by Uri Chiaus) how much he was displeased for
his coffeehouse: whereby the French King receiving full satisfaction for the
said Indignity; soon after, calling home the Baron of Mole, or Sancie, he sent
the Earl of Sezi to succeed him.

The G. Vizier, being sent to invade Persia with a great Army: after many
exploits, news came to Constantinople, that the Vizier had much the better of
the Sophi in a Battle, wherein a hundred thousand men were slain: the Turks
lost most, who retired or fled; for that (...) uses to fight with the Turks,
in giving way a little.

After this, the Vizier entering far into Persia, many doubted, his return would
prove difficult: yet soon after came Letters, that the Turks in Persia, being
much distressed for Victuals; the Sophie had sent to the Vizier to demand
peace; promising hereafter the Tribute of Silks he owed yearly: the Vizier
granting him peace in regard of necessity, which Osman ratifying, the Sophie
sent many Camels laden with Victuals to the Turks Army.

During this War, upon Achmat's Anniversary day, a Comet appeared by night over
Constantinople, like a crooked Sword or Scimitar: it extending from the
Meridian near our Zenith to the Horizon: the point showing it self, it appeared
little and somewhat whitish; (...) an hour more apparent, and of a deeper
color: and the more it rose, the redder and like blood: but at daybreak, it
vanished by degrees in the light. It was so big, when the point drew nigh the
Zenith, that the Hilt was hid under the Horizon: Mathematitians observed, it
followed the Heavens motion, ever rising in one place; and the Swords bending
was toward Crates, but more Southerly: appearing in the very East a quarter
Southward, the point coming directly toward Constantinople, and the blade
extending East and a quarter South, just where Persia is situated: the (...)
directly toward Constantinople. Men discoursed diversely, and many amazed,
feared the loss and defeat of their Army in Persia.

Uri Chiaus, ending his Embassy in France, came into England with the like
charge (to wit) for continuing the bond of Peace, and daily increasing of
Friendship, betwixt the Turkish Emperor and the King, (...) whom he had
audience at Whitehall: Sir Tho. Glover, being Interpreter of his (...): (...)
he made a very brief speech at taking of his leave: beseeching the King to
vouchsafe his Princely Answer by (...), by him his slave, as he had presented
to him the Imperial Letter of the most Mighty Sultan Osman his Lord and Master;
Wherein he declares, that the Turkish Monarchy, had almost till that time been
always hereditary from Father to Son; but his Noble Uncle, Sultan Mustapha,
was for his years, preferred to sit on the Ottoman Throne, taking care of its
affairs for a time; but he having been many years retired in solitariness, and
given to devotion and divine obedience, and, as it were, wearied with cares of
the Empire, of his own accord, withdrew himself from the Government; because
the Scepter of the 7 Climates, was the true right of himself, whereof (he said)
God Almighty (by the consent of all the Visiers, and other Deputies of State,
the Primate of the Musulman Law, and the other Doctors, the other Soldiers,
and all Subjects) had made a worthy gift unto him, etc. and since it was an
ancient Custom of his Predecessors, to certify such Princes thereof as were,
and continued in sincere friendship, with his House of great Majesty, he had
also written those Letters by Uri, or Hussein Chiaus, the choice among his
equals, hoping when they should come to his hands, he (in conformity of the
well-grounded friendship upon the League and (...), of old established with his
Royal Race) would certify to the Governors of his Dominions, his great joy
therefore, that they might know that those former Articles, and firm points of
the Oath, should undoubtedly, during his Reign, be observed with all respect.

Halill Bassa also (chief Vizier) and General against the Persian, at his
return from the Wars to the City Senit, in April 1618, wrote to Sir Paul
Pindar, the English Ambassador, then at Constantinople, giving him a brief
account of the said expedition, and how they went to Van, then to Tauris,
sacking, destroying, and tormenting all the people that came to hand: and
putting 7 or 800 Persians of note, to the Sword, whom some of his Army met
withal; the Persian General, (whom he calls, of perverse Religion, and
accursed) fleeing: they going on toward Erdevil (after a (...)) wherein some
of his, he said, but innumerable of the enemies fell) they went so burning,
spoiling and killing all they met, that from the Confines to Erdevill, 20 days
journey, was by them so destroyed: then the King fleeing out of Erdevil to
Hulchal, made his Army go to the top of a high Mountain, and thence sent 3 or 4
times for peace, promising 100 Somes of silk yearly to the Sultan, and all
places gotten upon the confines in Solyman's time, except Der Ne, and Der Tink,
wherewith he was contented: and so returning the same way, always spoiling,
they came to Erzirum.

The Wars growing hot in Bohemia, against the Protestants in 1619, by the
Emperor's raising what Forces he could to suppress them: the Governors wrote
to Bethlem Gabor, to acquaint them with their affairs: who answered:
Transylvania standing even in the jaws of the Turks, who were always watchful
to embrace all occasions, upon any discord of the Christians, chiefly, having
pacified all quarrels with the Persian, and no Rebels in Asia; he would attend
the consent and favor of the Sultan, that he might have no occasion to break
into the Neighbor Countries, and himself the better to employ his best means
to reconcile the discords among the Christians: so sending to Constantinople
accordingly, he (...) Letters thence Aug. 17th, assuring him of his consent and
favor: whereupon, he resolved, for all the (...) of the House of Austria, the
Pope, and others, to take Arms in defense of the Bohemians, (...) in September.
to be upon the confines of Moravia, if not somewhat stayed in Hungary: Hearing
of Bohemia and Moravia's Estate, he entered upper Hungary with an Army, where
most of the Barons submitted to him: only Humanoy opposed him; but he was fain
to flee into Poland: then Bethlem sent his Army 18000, and took Filek,
Novigrade, and other places, seizing on Newhusall, whose Governor was
delivered unto him bound.

The Palatine of Hungary, wrote to Redei his General, to consider what the
Kings of Spain and France, their forces were, with the House of Austria, and
their Allies, and that Electors, (some excepted) would aid the Emperor: who
answered, he doubted not of those things, yet hoping ere they came, all should
be ended, and their dinners provided.

Soon after, Pr. Bethlem came to Presburg with his Army, where the Hungarian
Kings are usually crowned: whereupon, they sent 3000 Soldiers from Vienna,
with three Ordnance down (...), who entering the Suburbs October. 13th, the
Transilvanians in that stormy and rainy night, slew most of them, their
Commander fleeing with some few: Then Bethlem sent to the Palatine to demand
the Town and Castle, giving him some time to resolve; and after some consulting
with the Nobles, the Town was yielded unto him, after which, he sent part of
his Army to the Gates of Vienna in Austria, where they committed great spoil.

In November. Bethlem Gabor, and the States of Hungary, sending Ambassadors (...)
Prague, propounded (among other Articles) they jointly to send Ambassadors to
the Grand Seignior, and the Prince of Transylvania, to negotiate: and since
Hungary was much exhausted, what should be taken in Stiria, Carinthia, and
Carniola, to be united to it, that it might the better resist the Turk: all
which, tended to the prejudice and ruin of the House of Austria.

Bethlem, knowing he had much incensed the Emperor, and whole House of
Austria, by these actions; he therefore in the end of this year, sent an
Ambassador with Presents to Constantinople, to crave assurance of the Sultans
aid and support, if the Emperor should invade Transylvania, having first
prevailed over the Bohemians: where, being countenanced by many chief Bassaes,

Osman confirmed unto him, his constant support and protection by an Oath,
containing many fearful and Turkish imprecations, Jan. 5th: whereby Gabor
assured, in the beginning of 1620, called an Assembly of the States of Hungary
at Presburg, whither came Ambassadors from the Bohemian King and States, and
incorporated Provinces, concluding a mutual and perpetual League, both there,
and then at Prague, one of the Articles being, that seeing there was chiefly
need, a peace to be made and kept with the Turk, a new Embassage should be sent
to the Sultan from them all, and (...), chiefly to undertake that business; yet
so, that all should (...) their Ambassadors, and bear their shares, both for
the Presents and Charges.

In June, Bethlem Gabor, at an Assembly-of the Hungarian States at Newhusall,
propounded, That he very much desired to restore Hungary, so afflicted, to
freedom, and enjoyment of Religion and privileges, he sparing no cost for its
lawful defense, having (as a Witness that he desired peace) (...) the Crown
offered him at Presburg: that the ground of peace, was to maintain the League
begun with the Bohemians: That he always desired peace with other Princes help,
so it were sincere: to obtain which, he had aided his miserably afflicted
Confederates: That he knew the Emperor desired War, who had let the Cossacks
spoil many places of Hungary, with fire and sword, denying passage for the
Bohemian and Austrian Ambassadors: wherefore, they must now consult how War
might be begun and maintained, etc. and for speedy sending Ambassadors to the
Turk, lest, being engaged in intestine War, the frontier Forts should be
attempted: then there came Ambassadors thither from Bohemia, Austria, Silesia,
Lusatia, Poland, Turkey and Venice; this being content, that Commonwealth
should enter a League; the Turk also offering a perpetual League with them.

Aug. 25, Bethlem Gabor, at the Turks instance and with the applause of most of
the States, was proclaimed King of Hungary, by the Palatine: and then he levied
an Army of 30000, some say 50000, Horse and Foot, with many Ensigns, with
diverse Emblems and devices: wherefore, the Protestants of Vienna, the Emperor
consenting, wrote, humbly entreating to spare the City and Country, for their
innocent Wives and Childrens sakes; yet all the Citizens the while, were to
provide for six months Victuals.

Constantinople had news of an apparition seen at Medina in Arabia, where
(...) being buried, the Turks use to go in Pilgrimage, to visit his Tomb, but
they must first go to Mecha, a few days journey off for a Ticket from the
Beglerbeg.

The Vision continued three weeks, terrifying the whole Country, because none
could discover what it meant.

About September. 20th, there was such a Tempest, and fearful thunder about
midnight, as the Heavens were darkened, and those awake, almost distracted; but
the Element being clear, they might read these words therein in Arabic, Oh why
will ye (...) in lies? Between 2 and 3 a Clock, a Woman in white, was seen
encompassed with the (...), with cheerful countenance, and a Book in her hand.

From the North-west, (right against her) came Armies of Turks, Persians,
Arabians, and other (...), in order, and ready to charge her; but she stirred
not, only opening the Book: whereat they fled; and presently, all the Lamps
about Mahomet's Tomb, went out; for the Vision vanishing, (commonly an hour
before Sun rising) they heard a murmuring wind, imputing their extinguishment
thereto.

The ancient Pilgrims of Mahomet's race, who visiting this place, cut not their
(...), were much amazed, as not conceiving the meaning hereof; but a Derviser,
or Turkish Capuchin, living in contemplation, stepping boldly up, said to the
Company: The World had rever but three true Religions, each having a Prophet:
first God choosing the Jews, did wonders for them in Egypt, bringing them out
by Moses, who gave them a Law, wherein he would have maintained them, if not
obstinate, rebellious and idolatrous: so he gave them over, scattering them
upon the face of the Earth: Presently after, he raised a new Prophet, who
taught the Christian Religion; which Good Man the Jews (...) as a Seducer, not
moved with his Piety, great Miracles, or Doctrine; yet afterward, the
preaching of a few Fishermen so moved men's hearts, as the greatest Monarchs
bowed to his very Title, and yielded to the command of his Ministers; but their
Church being dismembered into East and West, and idolatrously setting up Images,
with many idle Ceremonies, God was weary of them too, sending divisions among
them; and also, forsaking them, dispossessed them of Jerusalem, and
Constantinople: Yet God, the Governor of the World, raised great Mahomet,
giving way to our Nation, so that we shall be for ever happy, if we can serve
this God aright, and take example by others fall; But alas! I tremble to speak
it, we have erred in all points, wilfully breaking our first Institutions, so
as God has showed his wrath by evident signs, keeping our Prophet from us, who
set a time to return with all happiness to his People, 40 years being past, by
our account: Wherefore this strange and fearful Vision foretells some great
troubles and Changes; For either the opening of the Woman's Book foretells our
falling from (...) first intent of our Law, whereat these armed men depart, as
confounded with guilt of Conscience; or (...) other Book in which we have not
yet read, and against which no power shall prevail; so as I fear, our Religion
will be proved corrupt, and our Prophet an Impostor, and then this Christ, whom
they talk of, shall shine like the Sun, and set up his Name everlastingly.

The company at this word charging him with Blasphemy, a Capital offense,
condemned him, and by the Beglerbegs warrant, put him to Death, not beheading
or strangling him as they usually do; but stripping him naked, gave him, 100
blows on the soles of his Feet, till the blood came forth; the poor Priest
crying still upon the Woman that opened the Book: Then they beat all his Body
with a Bulls pizzel, till his sinews cracked, and laying him on a Wheel, with
an Indian Sword of Sinews, they brake his bones to pieces; He crying to the
last gasp, Oh thou Woman with the Book save me! The Beglerbeg (when as there
was a fearful tempest) sent some Spahies to advertise the Sultan of these
tidings.

Michna being made Vayuod of Moldavia by Achmat, and the Polonian party wholly
overthrown in 1616, he enjoyed it not long; but, whether through a natural
death, or disgrace with the Sultan, I read not; yet after him was there another
Vayuod of Moldavia, Gasparo Gratsiani, and this year in disgrace with the grand
Seignior. He was born at Gretz, a Town of great strength belonging to the
Archdukes of Austria; but being of small fortune, and regard, in his own
Country, he went to Constantinople, serving Sir Tho: Glover, before he was
English Ambassador, under whom he learned to Read and Write the Turkish
tongue: Then he came with him into England, and by his recommendation was
employed to Constantinople, for redeeming young Sir Tho: Sherley, a Prisoner
among the Turks: with whom, he coming to Venice, and hearing Sir Tho: Glover
was sent Ambassador to the Sultan, he went to Constantinople, to his old
Master, where he yearly carried Christians into Italy, returning Turks for
them: and arriving with a Shipfull of Turks about the end of Achmat's Reign, he
acquainted the Vizier with his good service, who asking him of his Country and
breeding, asked also, if he would undertake to go to the Emperor, to reconcile
all difficulties touching the Peace, which should be for his advancement; but
before his return, Achmat was dead, yet he pressed the Bassa, to be made Vayuod
of Moldavia, which he effected rather for his Presents, than his Merits; but
growing into some disgrace, the Sultan choosing another, charged certain
Capigies, that, taking 400 Turks upon the Frontiers of Moldavia, to go and
strangle Gasparo; whose Spies advertising him hereof, he with some Troops, met
them on the way, and cut them all in pieces; then returning to Yas, he slew one
thousand Turks: after which, fleeing into Poland, with two thousand Horse, they
write, he thence made diverse incursions into Moldavia, and, aided by the
Cossacks, much spoiled the Turks, keeping possession thereof, though the Turk
had made another Vayuod. For which support, and former quarrels, Osman seeming
much incensed against the Polonians, made it his color, for levying an Army,
(as is said) of 300000 men, having drawn all his Forces out of Asia.

The Turk sending 60 Galleys to Sea, they came into the Mediterranean, and
coasting Sicilie, they sent 20 Galleys, who surprised the Town Manfredonia in
Naples; and spoiling it, carried away 14, or 1500 Captives, and so retired to
Sea.

The other Galleys laying about Vellona, in the Gulf; the Spaniard suspected,
the Venetian knew of this enterprise.

After which, was news, that the Vessels of Algiers, took Juisa, an Isle four
miles about, nigh (...), of great importance: its Haven being able to contain
much shipping; to guard which, the King of Spain had a great Garrison, which
much annoyed those of Algiers: yet was it not then certain, whether the Castle
(as was the Town) were taken.

Osman, imputing his loss in Poland, to the sedition of the Pretorians,
resolved to cashier them, and transport his Throne out of Constantinople, and
establish it in Damascus in Syria: But his design being discovered, his
Soldiers rebelled, and having brought Mustapha, his Uncle, out of prison, they
disrobe Osman, and strangle him with a Bow-string, the 20th of May, one
thousand six hundred twenty two. And so Mustapha was again declared Emperor;
but the year following, he was again shut up in prison.

The Life of Amurath the fourth, Eleventh Emperor of the Turks.
AMurath, Osman's Brother, was chosen in his Place; Who in 1632 concluded a
Truce with the young Persian, and brings back his torn Armies, at which time
his American Navy was cast away, being 10 Ships, whereby he lost 1500 Seamen
of War. In 1634, he hanged a Venetian Merchant, who had (as it were) defiled
his Concubins Palace, with a Prospective Glass; as also the Muphti, that is,
the High Priest, which is strange, he being accounted his Corrivall, and equal
with him in honor.

The Turk had a Battle with the Persians (in 1635), whereby Rava was surrendered
to him. In that Battle were slain 90000 Turks, and 20000 Persians; yet the
Turk, being more numerous, remained Victor: He burned 4 Villages belonging to
Buda, killed 50 poor men, and carried away 70 into slavery; though, but in
August before, he had almost destroyed Buda by Fire. In 1639 the Turks in Asia
conquered Babylon, where the Persians lost 40000 men, but their own loss is
unknown: But in the mean time the Sultan appoints a Navy to go against the
Cossacks, which ran toward Breger in Hungary, devouring the prey; yet the
Plague in Aleppo makes his Imperial Majesty depart for fear.

The Life of Ibraim, Twelth Emperor of the Turks, first of that Name.
AMurath (who had the repute of a good Soldier, but a great Tyrant) dying in
the year 1640, the 33d year of his Age; his Brother Ibraim, in the 27th year of
his Age succeeded him; who continued his endeavor for Peace with Persia, but,
calling the Tartars into his fellowship, threatened War with Poland; his Pirates
likewise took a Spanish Ship, valued to be worth 300000 Florens.

In 1644, the great Vizier presents himself armed before the Sultan, and
reproves evil-affected Persons; whom, being received by the Emperor's Mother,
(an invective Woman) he represseth, by laying to her charge the unruly desire
of Women to bear Command, of which (it appears) she was guilty; for which he
was assaulted with a Dagger, and striving to slip away was slain. Usur Piall,
the High Admiral at Sea, (who was this year scattered by the Ships and People
of Malta, who had taken a Ship, having in it many Concubins of noble Pedigree,
and esteemed at 4000000 l.) was (after endeavor to escape) choked by the
Command of thegreat Turk; who, in 1645, gave Peace to Ragotzi of Transylvania,
through the earnestness of Techerine his Ambassador. Now also the Sultan goes
to Arms by Sea and Land, as threatening the European world, wherewith he
besieges and takes Canea: And deals injuriously with the French and Venetian
Ambassadors at Constantinople.

In 1646 the Emperor straggled with the Venetians, John Capello being his
General in the room of Francis Erizzo, who dyed this year; and Francis Molino
chief Capt. of the Duke's Navy, the first above 70 years of Age, the second one
under.

The Turk's Weapons made Dalmatia tremble, for Novigrade is yielded to him, and
Zare overcome; yet the Venetian recovered them again, freeing another place
from siege, and slaying the Bassa of Bosna: The Turk vanquisheth Schissavian
Castle, but is overcome at Dardanelles, and by Sea, losing 3 Oar-Gallies; yet
had the upper hand at Canea, through the error of the Commander Valettane.
Capello, craving excuse for his Age, had John (...) of Grimana his successor in
General-ship: After which, the Venetians join a doubtful Battle with the Turks
at Retime, a Town that yielded it self unto their violence. At that time also,
the Jews were taken in the very act of passing over, or conveighing Weapons to
the Turks.

In 1647 and 1648, The Venetians afflict the Turks by Sea and Land; For the
Christian Navy under the Knights of Malta, possess some places in their Enemy's
Country, taking many Oar-Galleys, their Land-Army doing the like throughout
Dalmatia, which made the Turk angry with his Captains. Foscol, the
Land-General, vanquisheth three Towns in Dalmatia, and dispersing 4000
Infidels, two places more yielded to him; yet the Turk won Licca, and something
elsewhere. The Venetians get Mirabel in Creet or Candy, with the
Victualling-ships, and fight prosperously at the Forts of Dardanel; for which
the Governor and three Bassaes, were slain at Constantinople; but he lost by
shipwreck, Grimmane the High Admiral, with 1600 Soldiers, and the value of 14
millions. Thirty Galleys come laden with Soldiers and Victuals to Canea, from
the Turk this year 1648, where two Forts are lost and regained by the
Venetians, and that with much blood: the Earl of Solm is killed, with 17
Captains.

The Venetians likewise maintained the Haven of the pleasant vale of Suda, in
that fruitful Island, against the opposing Turks; whose Emperor Ibrahim, by
reason of his Tyranny, is reported about that time, to have given place to his
Son.

The Life of Achmat the second, 13th Emperor of the Turks.
AChmat II, being proclaimed Emperor, and established. In 1649. The Venetians
gave the Turks two overthrowes; one in the Haven of Foggio, where 72
Oar-Galleys perished, 18 bigger Ships, 60 Ships laden, 6000 Turks were slain
with the Bassa, and as many (...) taken: And all this, with the loss of 90
Venetians, and 40 wounded. This made the Sultan change the purple Garments of
Saranzone, his Ambassador, into mourning Weeds. He also makes stop of the
English ships, and so turns his force against the Venetians, who slew 1500
Turks at the Haven of Suda, drowning six Galleys, with the Bassa that was their
chief Captain. They contend vehemently for (...), 4000 Sacks of Wool, and
33000 scaling Ladders, being brought thither for storming; it is twice lost, and
as often recovered, but at the third attempt, a Mine is made, which consumed
3000 Turks, and 200 Christians. Twice were the Alps of Italy crossed, into the
lower (...), for prey. And when Haase had given place unto (...), and had gone
into Dalmatia, twenty thousand Turks were there consumed with the Plague.
However, more than 50000 Christians were captivated by him.

In 1650, He is watchful over the Persians, who appeared in Arms against
Babylon, and he renews Peace with the Hungarians. He likewise reduces the
Cyprians, and the Bassa of Cagre into obedience. But in Candy the Venetian
afflicts him in the Gulf, Del (...); four times he was preyed upon, and the
Haven of Maluase was stopped, together with (...). Whereupon he moves War by
Usais his Bassa, and that chiefly, because his Navy at Dardanelle was penned
up; other Havens also were possessed by the Venetians, that provision could not
be brought in to the Island.

In 1654. The Venetians obtained a great Victory over the Turks, having fought
them two days together in the Dardanelles, wherein they slew 6000 Turks,
wounded the General, Amurath Bassa, to death; taking 4 Men of War, and 16
Galleys; yet not without the loss of one Galliot, and five Galleys. The Turks
about December the same year, thinking to surpize the Fortress of Vesprin in
Hungary by night, found such resistance, that they were forced to retire with
the loss of 900 Men. Not (...) before which, the Grand Seignior of the Turks
(...) advertised that the Vizier Bassa had long projected to make himself
Emperor, through the assistance of the Greeks, who were to have rebelled; also
by the correspondence he held with the Moscovites and Cossacks, whom he
promised to embrace the Greek Religion; He called him before a Private Council,
and being condemned to death, was strangled within 5 or 6 hours; imprisoning
also the Patriarch of Jerusalem.

About April in 1656, there were great (...) (raised by 20000 Janissaries) at
Constantinople, who massacred diverse of the Sultan's Council, strangled the
Vizier Bassa, forced the Sultana, Mother of the Sultan, to fly to the old
Seraglio for safety, the Muphti being glad to fly, (...) trusting these
Mutineers, who designed to dethrone the grand Seignior, and establish his
Brother. They deposing all (...) Officers in the Empire, to secure themselves
from punishment, chose others in their room, who were at their devotion: So
that although this confusion might have stopped the Turks proceedings against
the Venetians, yet the new ones made more vigorous preparations against their
Interest in Candia than formerly; so that the (...) were forced to send Prince
Horatio Farnese, and other chief Commanders with good numbers of Men, and store
of Ammunition to maintain what they held in that Island. The Turks being come
to Bagnaluth, making great Magazines at Clivano, with 8 great Artillery-pieces,
and 1000 yoke of Oxen to draw them, for the besieging of (...), they ordered
Antonio Bernardo to go into Dalmatia, as Commissary General, to assist the
General Zeno. But within 2 or 3 Months after, these tumults in Constantinople
being appeased, the grand Seignior riding through the City, gave Order for
executing of the Ring-(...) of these Disorders: sending for the Bassa of
Damasco, to accept of the slain grand Visier's Office; which great place was
conferred on him, through but 24 years of Age, because of his great abilities.
Who, about June, coming to Constantinople, with great Pomp and Solemnities was
installed into the said Office: Presently after, that (...) Fleet was recruited
with Men, Money, and other necessaries, over which the Venetian Fleet obtained
a notable Victory, June 26, 1656. Who, having stayed one month in the
Dardanelles, to wait for, and fight the Enemy, (7 Galleys of Malta arriving
there); the Turks Capt. Bassa appeared in the sight of the Castles, his Fleet
consisting of 28 great Ships, 60 Galleys, 9 Galeasses, and other small Vessels:
The Venetian Navy had 28 great Ships, 24 Galleys, 7 Galeasses, besides those of
Malta, who keeping in the narrow Channel, the Turks must needs accept the
Battle: The Bassa had raised 2 Batteries on Land on both sides the River,
thereby thinking to facilitate his own going forth, by causing the other to
leave (...) Station; yet the Venetians undauntedly (...) their shot, (...) that
advantage unprofitable.

Wherefore the Bassa, on the 26 in the morning, advanced all his great Ships,
yet he withdrew behind the point of Barbiera; a few hours after, the Venetian
Navy moving, Eleazon Moccenigo, now a Volunteer, commanding the left Wing, and
passing beyond the Turkish Fleet, fought valiantly to stop their retreat: The
Battle being begun, Laurence Marcello, the Venetian General, with him of Malta,
intermingling with the other Venetian Vessels, so hemmed the Turks in from
escaping, that they were forced to fight with more eagerness; but they were
wholly routed with fire, sword, and water, the Captain Bassa only saving
himself with 14 Galleys, 40 Galleys being taken in the fight, 10 sunk and
burnt, with 9 Mahones taken; but the 28 great Ships were (for the most part)
burnt. The number of Turks slain, were judged to be 5000, 4 or 5000 Christian
slaves being released, and 4000 Turks made slaves: The Venetians loss being
their chief Captain Marcello, 500 Soldiers and Mariners; 3 Ships likewise of
theirs were burnt, two in fight, and one by accident. After an extraordinary
joy by the Duke and City of Venice, the Senate ordered for releasing prisoners
for debt, some Banditti being also freed; and Moccenigo, who had contributed
much to the gaining of the Victory, was knighted by the Senate, with a Chain of
Gold of 2000 Crowns conferred on him; and then was declared Generalissimo, in
the room of slain Marcello; in remembrance of whom, a public service was
celebrated at the public charge.

About the same time, some Thieves set fire on the Seraglio of Bosna, four
thousand Houses, four Dovens of Custom-houses, and three Mosques being burned
down to the ground, and the Jews quarter plundered.

In September. in the same year, the Venetians took that considerable Isle and
Fort of Tenedos about the mouth of the Dardanelles, from the Turk; forcing the
Inhabitants of the Isle to surrender it, not only by vexing them with 26
Ordnance, and 5 Morter-pieces, but also by firing their Munitions, and spoiling
their Wells; 800 men, and 300 Women, Turks and Grecians, coming out of it: And
through the fear and confusion that was among the Turks in Constantinople, they
doubted not but soon to take the Isle of Lemnos, besides diverse other places
like to fall into their hands. The Inhabitants of Scio, sent Deputies to the
Venetian Forces, at that time, inviting them to draw near to their Island,
assuring them of an easy entrance through the division of the Turkish
Commanders there, who were, through their oppressions, become so odious to the
Inhabitants, that they always were in hope of an opportunity to cut the
throats of their oppressors.

The Venetians, after Tenedos, soon took Stalimene, or Lemnos Island from the
Turks, and having furnished the Fortress there, with all necessaries for
defense, their Proveditor General, set sail with the Fleet toward Scio and
Zia, to refresh his men: about which time, the Turk cast away all thoughts of
peace with the Venetians, having wholly broken the Treaty that had been begun
at Constantinople, by their Secretary Bellarini.

In July 1657. The Turks having taken the Fort Bossina, in Dalmatia, put 800
Christians to the Sword. And 6000 Turks, coming nigh to Spalatro, turned to the
passage of St. Francois, there to raise Forts; but Possidario sallying out,
drove them away, with the loss of many great Commanders, who in their retreat,
went to Salona, lying between Spalatro and Clissa, where they were recruited
with 6000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. But the Turks under Ussaim Bassa's Command,
came July 2d, in the night, with storming-Ladders, pressing to surprise the
City of Candia; but 500 of those in the City crying our, Turks, Turks, the
Chains were drawn, and the Soldiers and Citizens drove out the Turks: Also,
issuing forth, they disordering the Turks, put many of them to the Sword; who
left behind them 29 Ensigns, and 5 Cornets, which they had put upon the Wall;
1400 Turks were slain, and 2100 (with a great booty) taken.

About August following, the Venetians obtained a signal Victory against the
Turkish Fleet, at the mouth of the Dardanelles, in the sight of the great Turk
himself. But the loss of their General Moccenigo, soured this success, who
being in prosecution of the Victory, and afterward, returning to attaque the
Isle of Scio, a Tire of great Guns being discharged from the Castles of the
Dardanelles, one of them lighted into the Magazine of Powder in his Galley, and
blew him (with many more Nobles) up into the Air.

In October in the same year, the Turks regained the Isle of Tenedos though not
without ruin to themselves: The Venetian Fleet being gone from that Island, to
take in fresh water: the Turks Fleet landed there a great Body of men, who
setting upon the Fort of Tenedos by storm, were at first repulsed; but
preparing for a new Onser, the Venetian Garrison working a Mine under the Fort,
disposed their Powder therein, with a Match fitted to it; and quitting the
place, the Turks taking possession, were blown (Fort and all) up into the Air.
The Venetian Fleet returning, and perceiving what had happened, the Turks Fleet
being at hand, prepared for an encounter, which being resolutely performed on
both sides, (for the Grand Seignior, having come purposely to see that Island
regained, being of so great importance to the commerce of Constantinople,
encouraged the Turks): but in conclusion, the Venetians got a notable Victory,
sinking sixteen (...) men of War, with four that came from Tripoli, taking 4 of
their Galleys.

About December following, a Persian Ambassador, with a gallant Train, coming
to Constantinople, presently went to audience; and making his Proposition,
said, That in case the Grand Seignior would not restore the lesser Babylon, and
make satisfaction for the Merchants Goods, and captivated Persians, which (
during the Treaty of peace) were carried away by the Turks; then in his Kings
Name, he declared War. No Answer followed hereupon, but the Embassador's Head
was (...) from his Body, and the chiefest of his Train cast into prison. So
that, the Turks being sure of War with the Persians, there was but one Camp
with the Turks great Ensign set out against the Venetians: The great Prince
staying at home to supply Recruits, and watch the Muscovites, who spoke Thunder
in their Warlike threatenings against the Turks. Before which time, the Son of
the Grand Vizier, swear, He would be revenged on the Grand Seignior himself,
and all that counseled him to put his Father to death: whereupon, he rose up
in Rebellion, and made no small disturbance.

Then were the Persians also stirring against the Turks, whose Landforces were
to act against them (if they could make no cessation of Arms with them):
wherefore, they then blockt up Lemnos, which being reduced, their Landforces
might be employed against the Persians, or some other parts. The Venetian
Commander, repulsed the Turks in 15 assaults; yet the Turks, at last taking the
said Island of Stalimene or Lemnos, sent thither a Garrison of 10000 men.

In 1658. Prince Ragotzi, being returned out of Poland into Transylvania, the
great Turk (having commanded him in 1657, upon great penalty, not to proceed
against Poland) sent to him to resign his Principality of Transylvania to his
Cousin (...); he at the present yielded thereto; (though to deliver any of his
Forts into the Turk's hands, he utterly denied,) and reasiuming his
Principality without the Turk's consent, he being enraged, would try his utmost
to divest him, and dispossess the Princes of Moldavia and Wallachia: Wherefore,
ordering great Forces against him, about the latter end of April, the Turks
totally defeated the Prince of Vallachia, who was marching to Prince Ragotzi's
aid, (who had sent to Vienna, to demand the promised aid against the Turks from
the King of Hungary;) 8000 being slain upon the place, and a great number of
prisoners taken; among whom, were diverse Boyars, the principal Officers of that
Prince, who flying into Transylvania, the Turks forced another to accept his
(...): The Grand Seignior being still bent to dethrone Ragotzi, sent rigorous
Orders to the Moldavian and Wallachian Princes, That they should invade him.
But he sent more severe Order to the (...) of Buda, threatening, That if he did
not his duty, he should be flead alive, and his skin placed on one of Buda's
Towers: whereupon, Ragotzi challenged the (...) to a fight, advancing about the
beginning of July; who thereupon, breaking up from Lippa, the Transilvanians
fired the Suburbs of Arad Castle, toward which, he was marching. The Turks
Officers, who led the Avaunt, seeing the smoke and fire, hastened directly to
the (...), whom the Hungarians following put to flight, Mustapha Beg being
taken Prisoner: whereby the encouraged Transilvanians drew near the Turks main
Army: the Turks thereupon, discharged 3 great Guns to warn their men to retire
within the Wagons, placed for a (...); but the Transilvanians so plied them
with their great Guns, that they fled into a Valley; who, the Transilvanians
pursuing them into the River Mor, were drowned, and the whole Turkish Army,
became a prey on July 4th, 1658. The chief prisoners, besides Mustapha wounded
being the Bassa of Agria, the Col. Aga of the Janissaries, Col. Gyenety Aga at
Buda, and the Beg of Lippa; Alai Beg of Waitzen being trodden to death by the
Horse: the Bassa was likewise so put to it in flight, that he was forced to run
into the water, whom, a Hussar pursuing, catched by the Garment, to take him;
but he was rescued, and the Hussar slain.

The Prince's men pursuing them above 30 leagues, to one of their chief Cities,
they returned with rich booties. The news of this overthrow caused such an
alteration at Constantinople, that (contrary to the Law of Nation) they
imprisoned the Imperial and French Ambassadors, charging the French of being a
Complice with his Son in his Letter in Ciphers, which he intercepted; and the
other, That his Master had suffered some German Companies to serve under
Ragotzi, (though the Emperor's Deputies had demonstrated it was without his
consent) and that the Turk, for his money, might have as many of them as he
would.

The Turks besieged the chief City of Candia, expecting that the Captain Bassa,
who was at Sea, would shut up all the passages by Sea, with 40 Galleys; but he
hearing that the Venetian Galleys were in his way, retired to Scio. The
Venetian General reinforced his Fleet with Galleys sent by the Pope and the
Grand Master of Malta, having moneys, and all (...) of Ammunitions and
Provisions, with 4 Fireships, provided for him, July 9. wherewith he defeated
44 Turkish Galleys, at the Dardanelles, (which were commanded to clear the
Passage) taking very rich booty.

Prince Ragotzi, having had good success against the Turks, thereby so obliged
the States of Transylvania to him, that they resolved to establish him in that
(...), from which the Grand Seigniour would have (...) him, sending him an
Ambassador, to let him know, That they desired his good Will for the
continuance of the Prince. Who July 18. defeated a Party of Turks, but gave no
Quarter; and holding a General Muster, there appeared 16000 fighting men,
besides a great party of Dragoons which he expected; whereby in part he
recovered two (...) which the Turk had before taken from him. The Hungarians
also raised an Army (...) (...) 7 Towns, (...) to them, which the Turks
formerly had taken, whereof they would restore but three.

July 18. 1658. Prince Leopold of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, was
elected to be Emperor of the Romans, at Franckford, by the Prince Elector
Palatine, the Elector of Mentz, Trior, Colen, Saxony, and the Brandenburgish
and Bavarian Ambassadors, with all the State and Splendor usual in that
Ceremony. And Sept. 24. was received into Vienna with all magnificent Soem nity
possible.

Prince Ragotzi proceeding against the Turks, put the Bassa of Buda (...)
flight, 4 of his chief Commanders, and 6000 men, being taken and killed; But
the Prime Vizier marched toward Belgrade with 80000. men, besides Forces which
were to come.

Aug. 1. Count Vorgats commanded 300. Hussars to fetch away the Cattle from
Graen; but 300 Janissaries issued (...), and put them to flight: yet the Count
at length forced them into a Village, which he set on fire, burning some of
them, and carried away (...) Prisoners.

Aug. 9. Prince Ragotzi came upon the Turks at unawares, defeated them, and
pursued above 30 (...) to one of their chief Cities, and returned with rich
booty; And after that, he burned Lippa to the ground. About this time, the
Hungurian General Prince Gonzaga, finding the Turks in a Warlike posture,
demanded what they intended, and they answered, That they intended no hostility
against Hungary, but that the Great Turk was Resolved to call Ragotzi (...) an
Account for his Actions.

The Turks, Sept. 21. took the Castle Jeno, without much opposition, and
besieged Wardein: 300 foot, and 300 Horse of theirs, falling in at the Old
Castle, put many of Ragotzi's men to the Sword, where was store of Gunpowder;
the rest blew themselves, and the Turks into the Air.

The Venetian Fleet, Sept. 28. departed to Candia to a oid Tempests at Sea; And
the Ships of Malta, and the Pope's Galley's returned home with great booty,
which they got out of the Turkish Islands.

October. 9. The Turks laid waste all the Territories which belong to Ragotzi,
using the people cruelly, carrying away many thousands in Captivity, and from
thence they went toward the Danow to suppress (...) Rebellious Bassaes, which
made the Hungarian States consult daily to help Prince Ragotzi, but could get
no answer from the Emperor concerning this point, because he would know what
the Turkish Ambassador would propound, and had appointed Lamboy to be General
of the Army in Hungary in stead of Gonzaga.

The chief Vizier having taken (...) Castle, besieged Varadin, by reason of
which, Prince Ragotzi finding himself too weak, retired so far, that the
Tartars took AlbaJulia, the Metropolis of Transylvania, and made more then
40000 slaves, October. 12. About which time, the English Ship (...) was set upon,
coming from Constantinople to Legorn, by three ships of the Pirate (...); they
defended themselves bravely, and much endamaged the Pirates, but the captain
seeing that he could not save the ship, blew up themselves with the Pirates
that had boarded her.

The Venetian Generalissimo Morisini, perceiving he could (...) no opportunity
to engage the Turks, as he desired, thought fit, by uniting with the Pope's
Squadrons and those of Malta, to attempt a surprise of the City of (...), which
seemed easy, in regard the Governor was gone forth with the better part of the
Garrison; and had gained Intelligence of the principal (...). For Execution
whereof, the Fleet set Sail to Delos, and staid there three days, under the
command of the Marquess of Villa nova, where the Generalissimo arriving, gave
order for Fireworks, Petards, Scaling-ladders, and other necessary
Instruments, designing to every one what Post to attaque, Seignior Philippo
Ghesi, had command to break the chain in the entrance of the Mole, and Coll.
Dayon, to enter as soon as the passage of the Port should have been cleared.
But as the Soldiers were impatiently expecting the signal to fall on, the
Generalissimo caused the Ladders to be brought back, and the Soldiers to
re-imbarque, none knowing the cause: After which, the Fleet retired to Delos,
from whence, part went to the Seas of Cerigo, and the rest toward Candia, with
no less discontent then astonishment: The cause being, the Governor of Canea
had notice of their purpose; and thereupon returned, and reinforced his (...)
with 5000 men, drawn out of places which the Turks held in Candia, and sent two
Galleyes to Rhodes, to demand aid of the Turkish Fleet. This mischief wrought a
separation betwixt the Venetian Generalissimo, and the chief Commanders of the
Papal and Maltese Squadrons.

Sept. 12. In the Province of Albania, there arose a great tumult, because the
Bassa which commanded there, obstructed the trading betwixt the Albanish
Christians, and Turks: Whereupon these Christians and Turks joined together to
oppose his power, in which Action, much blood was spilt, 4000 of the Bassa's
men being killed.

An Envoy from Prince Ragotzi being come to Vienna, Nov. 12. made several
instances to obtain succor from the Emperor; but notwithstanding all reasons
alleged, the matter would not take effect, in regard the Emperor having other
designs in the limits of Christendom, thought fit to correspond with the Turk
and therefore would leave him to his pleasure, who had settled a Prince in the
room of Ragotzi, which Prince used al means to secure himself, having forces
left there by (...) chief Vizier for his defense.

The Bassa Ussaim not being able to extort from the Inhabitants the 5000
Rixdollars, which they are obliged to pay to the Grand Seignior yearly, fired
all in the two Isles of Paris and Nixia, which are parted only by a Channel of
about five miles, so that the Inhabitants were forced to retire to the
Mountains, to save themselves from the fury of this Bassa. But (in the mean
time) the great differences continuing still in Constantinople, whither the
chief Vizier intended to march with his army, which he had in Trausilvania, to
oppose the rebellious designs of the Bassa of Aleppo. The Persian King
likewise, having made agreement with the Successors of the Great Mogull,
prepared to employ all his Forces for the regaining of Babylon.

Ussaim Bassa, November. 14. being advanced near the head City in Candia, caused
his Ordnance to be planted, and stormed the two Forts, Della Palma, and Corona,
but the Venetian Generals made a resolute sally, putting 3000 to the Sword,
and made them retreat, and fell upon the Island Paris, plundered it, and
enslaved all the Inhabitants, because they refused to let them have provisions
for money, and were forward in supplying the Turks.

The Bassa of Aleppo arrived at Scuton, November. 15th, four miles from
Constantinople, with 40000 men, making great havoc. The Grand Seignior's
Mother put the said Bassa upon this work, because she sought the ruin of the
Vizier, intending to put Ussaim Bassa in his place. There were three factions;
the Janissaries held with the Great Prince; the Spahies were for the Mother; and
the rest with the chief Statesmen, were for the brother of the Great Prince,
because he was more inclinable to preserve the country in peace and safety.

The German Emperor November. 16th, declared (...) Don Hanniball Gonzaga, who was
Vice President over the Militia, chief Commander in Hungary.

The Venetians November. 26, loaded a great number of Vessels, with Biskit,
meal, and other provisions, to repair the want of the chief city of Candia,
occasioned by a fire which happened in their Magazine: The Pirates of Barbary
having taken two ships of Provisions which were sent that way, retired, upon
Intelligence, that some Venetian ships were sent from the Fleet to pursue them:

The tumults in Asia grew greater, forasmuch as the Faction of Ussaim, Bassa of
Aleppo, did every day increase, and that a certain person named Turtaw, joined
to his (...); which pretended to make a Reformation of their Religion affirming
that to be false which the Grand Seignior professed: Against whom the Grand
Seignior dispatched the Soldiers that came from Transylvania, commanded by the
Vizier's Lieutenant; who being arrived at Bursia, where the Rebels were
encamped, fighting a bloody battle, the army of the Grand Seignior, was
totally defeated. November. 29. They were again troubled by Prince Ragotzi, who
had gotten great forces together, the rather, because the Bassa of Aleppo
marched against Constantinople with a mighty Army, demanding the head of the
Prime Vizier. The Great Prince being Resolved to go in person against him, and
to abandone all other enterprises, till he had brought this Rebel to a better
condition, came in all haste to confer with the Venetian Bailiff Capello, and
Secretary Bellarini, who had order to negotiate with him, which made the
Venetians hope for an accommodation, because he would have occasion to employ
all his Forces against the Bassa of Aleppo, who kept the City in continual
fear; He likewise received sad news, That the Persians were in a Body of 30000
Horse, and 30000 Foot, besides another Army, consisting of 100000, which were
set down before Babylon; the Citizens being more affected to the Persians then
Turks.

Prince Ragotzi having lost all, except two of the greater Cities, Dobrintz and
Varad, leaving Coll. Gaude a Scotchman with 5000 men at Varad, did (...) encamp
at Dobrintz: And when the Turk's Army, 50000 strong, first began to besiege
Varad, the Coll. making a gallant sally, put their (...) to flight, killing
above 200, and taking 160 Prisoners, without any loss.

An Edict was published at Constantinople, Jan. 10. 1659. wherein was
expressed, That all the Rebels and their accomplices should be destroyed, and
killed, wherever they were met with; and that those that did execution upon
them, should enjoy the goods of such Rebels, which caused men in diverse
Villages to fall foul one upon another. On the contrary, the Rebelling Bassa
published an Edict, wherein he charged all his Soldiers, and Officers to
destroy all such as opposed, and would not acknowledge his power. The Ministers
of the Divan in Constantinople, after a long deliberation how to satisfy him,
offered to him in the Grand Seigniors name, the perpetual Government of Soria,
for which he should only pay 100000 Sultanin's yearly, whereas 300000 were
due: but he rejected those offers, as far from his pretentions, which were no
less then the dividing of the Empire. And the Persian would so much the more
easily carry Babylon, the Sultan well knew, in regard that the Divan thought
not fit to make use of the forces of the Empire to relieve such a remore place,
the ways to it being seized on by the Rebels, since that they (...) be made
use of with greater advantage for the defense of (...), which otherwise would
be at the mercy of the Rebels. The Grand Seignior being very much perplexed,
promised 400000 (...) to him that should bring the Rebel Bassaes head, besides
the Bassa-ship in his Monarchy; or in case the Bassa would submit, all should
not only be forgiven and forgotten, but he should be vested with any dignity
he pleased to make choice of; But the Bassa went on still in his design, and
whereas formerly he demanded the Prime Vizier's head, now he demands further a
reformation in the Mohammedan Religion, and have the Persian Woman's son settled
in the (...) That young Prince being served in his Court as the Grand Seignior,
and honored as the mighty Emperor, and all respects given him, as if (indeed)
he were the great Prince of Turkey.

The Turkish Chiaux had private audience of Archduke Leopold William, March
19. 1659. having presented him with two Turkish Horses, and other things: his
proposalls was, That the Great Prince of Turkey desired to prolong the peace
with the Emperor, which was granted.

The Bassa of Aleppo totally defeated the Grand Vizier again, March 27.
retiring Victorious to Trocaria, with the Cannon and Baggage which he took.
Nevertheless, the Grand Seignior caused the chief Vizier at his return, to
publish in Constantinople, that the Rebell-Bassa had refused the combat; but
the truth being too much known to be concealed, the carriage of the matter so
discontented the people, that they ran into great disorder. which was not
easily composed. The Bassa of Aleppo, made his head quarter in the Capitol
City of that country, where he settled the pretended Son of Sultan Amurath as
Prince, with a Court, and all Officers and Ministers of State about him, having
made new Laws more agreeable to the humors of the Turks, and chosen a new
Muphti, as their chief Interpreter in matters of Religion, by whom he made an
Interpretation of the Alcaron, which gave more liberty to the people. He
treated them with great humanity and indulgence, severely punishing the
Soldiers for any misdemeaner, Declaring, That he took up arms to reform the
ill Government of the Empire. And as the Caracan was passing from Alexandria to
constantinople, he defaced the Seals of the Passports given by the Grand
Seignior, causing his own to be given them; And sent a Letter by them to the
Grand Seignior, wherein he lets him understand, That the Son of Sultan Amurath,
being lawfully successor of the Empire, he ought of right to have Natolia, and
if he refused that, the said Bassa would make his way into constantinople by
force of Arms: Where, if he should advance the standard of Mahomet to oppose
him, then the said Bassa would erect the standard of the Prophet Ali, by which
means he doubted not to draw the Persians to him.

The said Bassa had well nigh subdued all Asia, and seemed to intend no less
then parting Stake with the Emperor; but the chief Vizier being marched to
Scutari, April 7. with an Army of 20000 Horse, and 30000 Foot, and expecting
60000 more to join with him, being Ordered to reduce him to Obedience; He
having notice of the strength of the chief Vizier, called a Council of his
principal Officers, where, weighing their own inability, they concluded to
implore the mercy of the Grand Seignior by a timely submission. To this end,
they sent a dispatch to complement the chief Vizier, and let him know, That
they had not taken Arms, against their Prince, but against certain persons that
had abused his Trust and Favor; Yet, rather then tumults should be longer
continued, they humbly cast themselves upon the clemency of their Lord, the
Grand Seignior. Of which, when the Sultan was advertized, he was so affected to
see so grand a civil War so soon ended, that he sent his pardon to the Bassa
and his Accomplices.

But he with some of his Associates, putting himself into the tuition of
Mortaza Bassa, who promised to obtain their pardon, he caused them to be
beheaded, and sent their heads to Constantinople, where 31 of the most eminent,
were perched on Poles before the Seraglio, among whom was Keiman Bassa, Brother
to the Bassa of Buda. Afterward the said Mortaza, falling upon a Party which
were rallied in the Territories of Aleppo, cut 3000 in pieces, and dispersed
the rest, so that there remained not the least footstep of their undertaking.

April 20, 1659. Ussaim Bassa heretofore General in Candia, and then Bassa of
Bosna, being returned to Constantinople to give an Account of his Actions, was
imprisoned in the 7 Towers: and was May 9. beheaded by Order from the Grand
Seignior.

The German Emperor having concluded a Peace with the Turk, upon Condition
that the House of Austria should not meddle in Prince Ragotzies cause, sent the
Baron of Radolt to tell Ragotzi, that his best way was to retire out of
Transylvania into some safer place, because he could not protect him, without
hazarding a War in Hungary. He levied 20000 stout men under the command of
General Lamboy, May 18.

The Venetian forces in Morea had good success, May 15. The Infantry being
landed, and divided into 21 Battalions, and the Horse in 4 squadrons, drawing
up within three Leagues of Calamata, the Turks presently advanced thence in a
great body, and good order, but were put to flight toward the said place, and
were so close pursued, that the Venetians entered the City with them, making a
great Massacre, and gained rich booty; during which time, the Turks that kept
the Castle, being terrified with the cries of their men, and the Cities Flames,
quitting the place, got over the River; but some Horse, and 1000 (...) pursuing
them, they were most cut in pieces, and the rest taken Prisoners.

Afterward they passed to Milo, where the Generalissimo, having given a
Months pay to the Soldiers and Seamen, and furnished the men of War, and
Galleys with all necessaries, he sailed toward Mitylene to encounter the
Captain Bassa, whose Armado was supposed to be thereabouts; which consisted of
twenty four Galleys, four Galleasses, and twelve men of War: also the Gallions
under their Captain General Contarini, with a squadron of (...), having run up
and down about the Isles of the Archipelago, and gained good prizes, returned
May the thirtieth, to the mouth of the Dardanelles, where all the Officers
declared a high resolution to oppose the passage of the Turks, which were to
come that way from Constantinople.

The troubles in Asia were not quite extinct by the death of the Bassa of
Aleppo, because a Nephew of his who was Lieutenant of his Army, had openly
declared, That he would revenge his death; and recollecting new forces, drew
one Charan Bassa to his party, a man of a Noble spirit. Hereupon Assam (...),
who had a hand in executing some of the said Bassa's party, which were his
prisoners; gave over that severity, lest upon this stir it should provoke the
people. The Bassa of Bosna likewise, having (...) oppressed the people in his
Government, was complained of to the Grand Seignior, whereupon the Sultan sent
for him to Constantinople; Which order he would not obey, having a Guard of
6000 Horse: But the Inhabitants of Mustar, unable to endure his Tyranny, put
themselves in Arms, and received forty Troops of Horse for succor, from
Constantinople, the Commander of them having Commission to try to gain the
Bassa by fair means, and for that end, to offer him the Government of Buda for
his own, with diverse other advantages, which the said Bassa accepting, and
resting secure, was seized on, and lost his head. Much about that time, it
happened, That one of the Ministers of the Divan, presuming to speak but a word
in the presence of the Grand Seignior, in favor of Ragotzi, was presently
strangled.

Yet Prince Ragotzi, being in hope to win favor from the Grand Seignior, was
content to deliver to him the fortress of Varadin; But fearing the Grand
Seignior might lay claim to the two Countries he held in Hungary, he yielded
them to the Emperor's protection, June the 7th.

The Bey of Jergay, being Resolved to join with the Rebels in Asia, (under
pretense that he had been grieved by the Bassa of Gran Cairo) got an Army of
30000 men, hoping to make them up 100000 by the aid of the Saniac's of Egypt,
who were (mostly) Christians; so that the Sultan not knowing how to entrap him,
was much perplexed, which was like to divert his fury from Dalmatia. But diverse
of (...) Ring leaders were executed, whose sons and Heirs sided with the
Persians for revenge.

The Venetian Generallissimo Morisini riding near the Dardanelles, took two
Turkish Vessels laden with provisions for candia; but twelve got through, which
were carrying provision for the Turkish Fleet, July 8. Their Ambassador
Bellarini was commanded to appear before the chief Vizier, by whom he was
seriously examined how far his Commission did extend about an accommodation,
and whether his Masters would not quit candia for a considerable sum; To which
he answered, that there was no likelihood any such Proposal should be hearkened
unto; whereupon they threatened the Venetian State, and the Ambassador was
re-committed to his old custody. The great Turk extraordinarily honored the
French Ambassador, having heard of the peace between France and Spain, fearing
lest they should aid the Venetian State, which for so many years alone,
sustained the fury of that mighty enemy of the Christian name.

July, 27. contarini, captain of the Venetian Galleys, hearing that about 28
Turks Galleys were near the Dardanelles, he engaged them, and put them to
flight, many being taken, with two principal persons on the Turks side, but he
lost but few; the greatest fury of the encounter having fallen upon the captain
Generall's ship.

Aug. 2, the Pirates of Algiers took several Ships from the Christians, and at
one time, 7 together; two of them were Holland ships, Laden with fine Linen,
and other commodities, valued at 100000 crowns.

Prince Ragotzi desired the Germane Emperor to take his Forts into his
protection, lest the Turk should take them into his own power, and so infest
Hungary with his forces. Hereupon, the Emperors forces in Hungary, went to take
possession of them.

In Venice, Aug. 15. A tempest rose on a sudden, which overturned diverse
houses, dispersed and tore abundance of boats: and the Arms of the Seignory,
which were in Marble, upon the frontispiece of the Arsenal, were blown down.
And on the 24 of Aug. another great tempest, brake down great part of St.
Mary's Church, the mischief done by it, being valued at above 100000 crowns.

The Emperor determining to take Ragotzi into his protection, ordered forces
to be on the Frontires of Hungary, under the command of Archduke Leopold; and
Gonzaga marched thither with 2500 fresh men, that if the Turks should meditate
a passage into Hungary, they might make it a matter of difficulty, for they
threatened to make their way through Hungary, to fall upon Venice.

The Grand Seignior departed from constantinople, Sept. 7. in regard the
pestilence increased daily, and he intended to take this occasion, finally to
extirpate the Rebels: to which end, he ordered most of the Divan to accompany
him, with the Janissaries and Spahies, and all that he could collect, leaving
the care of his affairs to the Muphti and his mother the Sultana.

The chief Vizier ordered two new Forts to be built near the Dardanelles, but
that work was much Interrupted by the frequent shooting of contarini Captain of
the Venetian Galleys, who retarded it, though he could not (...) it.

Prince Ragotzi encountered with his competitor, (who was backed by the Turks)
and defeated him, who took refuge in the Castle Deina, that Garrison intending
to deliver him to Ragotzi, who thereupon was received by the Nobility and
Gentry, whereby his establishment was completed. The great Turk only required
a sum of money to defray his expenses which he sustained in the quarrel of the
other Prince.

A Table whereby you may find most of the remarkable Passages contained in this
foregoing History.
A.
AChmat I. crowned Emperor of Turks, 1233. confirms Hasan in his Generalship,
1247. besieges Strigonium, 1255. but depart, 1260. besieges it again, 1285.
and wins it, 1288. concludes Articles of peace with the Emperor, 1296, 1297.
marries his Daughter to Mechmet Bassa, 1340. commands every Nation to wear its
own habit, 1387. confirms his peace with the Emperor for 20 years, 1400. and
dies, 1406. having first appointed his Brother to be his Successor, 1408.
Achmat II. established Emperor of the Turks, captivates 50000 Christians,
1427. strangles the aspiring Vizier Bassa, 1428. beheads a Persian Ambassador,
and defeats the Prince of Valachia, 1433. imprisons Christian Ambassadors,
1435. drives Ragotzi out of his Country, 1437. honors the French Ambassador,
1446. departs from Constantinople, 1447. Achomates, Bajazets son, comes to
Scutari, and sollicites for resignation of the Empire, 455. spoils Bythinia,
457. puts his Father's Ambassadors to death, and is proclaimed Traitor, 458.
surpriseth useg, 467. and is strangled, 471. Aladin Kingdom erected, 64.
Aladin, Sultan of Iconium, dies, 121. Aleppo's Bassa overthrowes the Bassa of
Damasco, wins Tripolis, 1290. withstands the Turks Forces, but flies, 1301.
Alexander made Vayvod of Moldavia, 1381. puts the Horroveans and Tartars to
flight, 1382. and Turks, 1385, 1390. invades Valachia, 1391. is taken and sent
to Constantinople, 1398. Alexius made Emperor of Greece, 34. is deposed and
strangled, 40. Alexius Angelus crowned Emperor of Greece, 44. seeks the life
of Isaac his Brother's son, 65. (...) from Constantinople, 67. is put to death
by the Latins, 73. Alexius Ducas, or (...), betrays young Alexius, 68. is
chosen Emperor, and strangles Alexius, 69. his eyes are put out, 73. Algier is
perplexed with great drought, but Christian Captives, through their prayers,
obtain rain, 1354. Almericus chosen King of Jerusalem, drives Saracon out of
Egypt, 45. and dies, 48. Alphix Sultan of Egypt, razeth Tripolis, 112. and dies
at Damasco, 113. Amesa, Scanderbeg's Nephew, flies to Mahomet, 346. invades
Epirus, 347. is created King thereof, 350. is taken Prisoner, and brought to
Scanderbeg, 352. is sreed, 353. returns to Constantinople, and dies, 354.
Amurath I. made King of Turks, 170. takes Dydimothicum, 170. Hadrianople, 172.
and Nissa, 175. overthrowes Aladin Sultan of Iconium, and takes Despotopolis,
177, 178. marries the Greek Emperor's Daughter, 180. overthrowes Lazarus his
great Army, 182. and is stabbed, 183. Amurath II. crowned King of the Turks,
231. hangs Mustapha who ruled in Europe, 233. assaults Constantinople in vain,
234. wins Thessalonica, 236. invades Hungary, 237. besieges Belgrade in (...),
239, to 242. sends Alis Bassa to subdue Epirus, who is overthrown, 264.
besieges Ico nium, 265. concludes peace with Hungary, 264. invades Rascia,
283. befiegeth Sfetigrade, 289. and wins it, 294. besieges Croia, 295. and
dies, 303. Amurath III. enthroned Emperor of Turks, murders his Brethren,
879. appoint Stephen Bator, King of Poland, 880. invades Persia, 898. and
fights with Tochomac, 900. subdues Sirvan, but returns in distress, 905, 906,
907. overthrowes the Georgians, 917. circumciseth his son Mahomet, 931.
appoints Ferat Bassa General, 941. his Mother dies, 944. renews his League
with the German Empero:, 952. strangles the Tartar-King, and puts his Brother
in his stead, 954. appoints Osman Bassa to be Chief Vizier and General of his
Army, 956. makes Ebraim Bassa of Egypt, 962. and sends him against the
Drusians, 963. who commits sundry Villainies there, 965, to 971. breaks his
League with the German Empe. our, 991. but strangles Ali Bassa of Buda for
breaking that League, 993. makes a League with the Persians, 994. encourages
Q. Elizabeth against Spain, 996. breaks his League with the Emperor, 1002.
endamageth the Christians, 1004, to 1007. but receives great loss, 1019, 1020.
and dies, 1054. Amurath IV. chosen Emperor of Turks, wins Rava and Babylon from
the Persians, 1429. Andreas Auria wins Corona from the Turks, 588. relieves it,
590, 591. and dies, 791. Andronicus aspires to the Empire, 35. comes to
Constantinople, 37. is joined in the Empire with Alexius, 40. marries Anne the
French King's daughter, 41. is shamefully executed, 43. Andronicus Paleologus
crowned Emperor of Constantinople, 132. is deposed, 158. and dies, 159.
Andronicus the younger obtains the Empire, 156. suffers loss in Asia, 162.
Antioch taken by the Christians, 14. Araphax chosen Sultan of Egypt, 113. Axan,
Nephew to Tangroliphix; invades Media, 4.
B.
BAjazet I. crowned King of Turks, 184. wins Philadelphia, 185. Neapolis, and
Constantinople, 186. overthrowes Sigismund the German Emperor, 187. subdues
Caramania, 191. is put into an iron Cage by Tamerlane, 202. and kills himself,
210. Bajazet II. received Emperor of Turks, 404. puts his Brother Zemes to
flight, 406. murders Achmetes, 411. subdues Caramania, 414. invades Egypt with
loss, 415. wins Lepanto, 427. Modon, 428. and Dyrrachium, 429. concludes a
peace with the (...), 431. poysoneth his son Mahometes, 447. and is poisoned,
464. Bajazet, Solyman's son rebels, 741, 742. is pardoned, 743. seeks his
Brother Selimus his death, 744, 745. fights with his Brother, and retreats,
749. flies to the Persian King, 752. is imprisoned, 753. with his Sons, is
strangled. 755. Baldwin I. subdues Cilicia and Cappadocia, 13. slew 10000.
Turks, with the loss of 4000. Christians, 15. crowned King of Jerusalem, 18.
wins Ptolemais, (...) and Sydon, 19, 20. is made Prince of Antioch, 21. and
dies, 20. Baldwin Brugensis II. crowned King of Jerusalem, 20. overthrows the
Turks in Antioch, 21. dies, 22. Baldwin III. crowned King of Jerusalem, 22.
dies at Berytus, 28. Baldwin IIII. crowned King of Jerusalem, 48. puts Saracon
to flight, 49. and dies, 51. Baldwin V. crowned King of Jerusalem, 51. is
supposed to be poisoned; 52. Baldwin Count of Flanders, crowned I. Latin
Emperor of Greece 71. besieges Adrianople, 72. is barbarously slain, 73.
Baldwin the II. chosen Emperor of Greece, 85. pawned his Son to the Bruges
Merchants, 102. flies from Constantinople, 104. Barbarussa made King of
Algiers, 599. comes to Constantinople, 600. is made 4th Bassa 601. takes
Lucidius and Spelunca, 602. puts Muleasses to flight, 605, wins Tunis, 607. and
New Castle, 654. besieges Nice, a City in Provence in vain, 713. he endamageth
the Christians, 721, 722. and dies, 723. Bassa of Aleppo, a Rebel comes to
Scutari, 1439, overthrows the Grand Seignior's Army, 1440, 1442. submits, and
is beheaded, 1443. Belgrade besieged in vain by Mahomet II. 325. taken by
Solomon, 527. B thlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, assists the Bohemians
against the Emperor, 1416. wins Presburg, 1417. is proclaimed King of Hungary,
1419. Bohemud made Prince of Antioch, 15. Botscay a Rebel, styles himself
Prince of (...); and overthrows Belgiosa, 1262. takes Cassovia 1263. receives
130000 Florens from the Hussars, 1267. 6000 revolt to him, 1270. and wins
Vacia, 1271. propounds Articles of peace to the Emperor, 1283, 1289. and peace
is concluded, 1290. he wins Tokay, 1291. and dies at Cassovia, 1299. Buda in
Hungary is yielded to Solomon, 562. is besieged by Ferdinand in vain, 666, 696.
Bator takes the Government of Transylvania, 1315. submits to Turkish
protection, 1330. is discomfited, ibid. and kills Nage. 1345.
C.
CAmpson Gaurus invades Syria, 487. is chosen Sultan of Egypt, 493. his Army is
put to fl ght by Selimus, and he is (...) to death, 495. Cambalu, 28 miles in
compass, built by Zingis, 63. Caragusa, a Turkish Champion conquered by
Manessi, 285. Carambey the Turks General taken prisoner by Huniades, 255.
ransomed, 264. Cassanes the Tartar, wins Jerusalem and Damasco, 114. Cassan
Bassa of Caramania revolts, and overthrowes 4. Zanzacks, 1128, but is taken and
put to death, 1129. Cayerbeius Governor of Aleppo, revolts to Selymus, 493. is
made Depury of Egypt, 518. Caytheius Sultan of Egypt, comfort Zemes, 406.
overthrowes Caragoses and Achmetes, 413. puts Calibeus to flight, 417.
Catalonians break into Thessaly, 139. take Thebes and Athens, 140. Charles the
French King invadeth Naples, 421. wins Capua, 422. Naples, 423. and dies, 424.
Charles the Emperor besieges Florence, 575. wins it, 576. invades Tunis, 617.
takes Guletta, 621. he rescueth a Captain with his own hands, 624. puts
Barbarussa to flight, 623. wins Tunis, 624. besieges Algiers, 683, 684, 685.
loses 140 Ships, 688. raises his siege, 689. returns with great loss, 690.
delivers up his Empire, 755. and dies, 756. Conrade, Emperor of Germany, goes
to the Holy War, 24. is ill entertained by the Greeks, 25. and puts the Turks
to flight, 26. Constantinople taken by the Latins, 71. regained by the Greeks,
105. won by the Turks, 315. is filled with Grasshoppers, 1336, 1345.
Constantine, Vayvod of Moldavia, is expelled, 1344. Corcutus crowned Emperor of
Turks, resigns it to his Father Bajazet, 404. (...), sent by (...) against the
Arabians, revolts. (...). (...) against Axan, 8. subdues part of Greece, 9.
D.
DAmiata taken by the Christians, 80. again yielded to the Turks, 83. regained
by the Christians, 91. Diogenes proclaimed Emperor of Greece, wins Hierapolis,
puts the Turks to flight, 6. is taken prisoner by the Turks, 7. is set at
liberty by Axan, and has his eyes put out, whereof he dies, 8. Dyrrachium won
by Bajazet II. 429.
E.
EUdocia, Empress of Constantinople, marries Diogenes, 6. Edessa taken by the
Turks, 24. (...) made Emperor of Greece, 23. is discomfited by the Turks, 31.
concludes a peace with their Sultan, 34. and dies, ibid. Edward, son to Hen.
3d. of England, comes to Tunis, and wins Nazareth, 109. he narrowly escapes
murder, and is crowned at his return, 110. (...) comes into lesser Asia, 120.
(...) a Castle, 121. and dies, 122.
F.
FErat (...) made General by Amurath III, 941. fortifies Castles at Lori, 945.
is threatened by the Janissaries, 948, 949. is discharged of that Office, 950.
regains it, 986. takes Genge, 994. is made General in Sinan's place, 1060. is
discomfited, 1062. is fent for home and strangled, 1079. Ferdinand King of
Bohemia, claims Hungary, and comes to Buda, 565. subdues Transylvania, 566.
breaks his League with Solomon, 637. besieges Exek in vain for want of
Victuals, 640. suffers (...), 642. to 645. takes Vicegrade, 663. besieges
Buda, 666. is discomsited by the Turks, 673, 674. besieges it again, 696. but
shamefully departs, 699. Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, besieges Canisia,
1175. but is forced by cold to depart, 1160. Frederick German Emperor wins
Iconium, and is drowned, 55. Frederick his son is made General, 16. overthrowes
the Turks, and dies at the siege of Tire, 56.: Frederick the Emperor King of
Sicily, has all Palestine yielded to him, and is crowned King of Jerusalem,
87. Fulk King of Jerusalem, overthrown by Sanguin the Turk, dies by a fall off
his horse, 23.
G.
GOdfrey goes to the Holy War, 11. besieges Jerusalem, 17. takes it, is made
King thereof, and dies of the Plague, 18. Guy crowned King of Jerusalem, 52. is
made King of Cyprus, 60. Gazelles, an Egyptian Champion yields to the Turks,
510. but rebels, 526. and is (...), 527.
H.
HAssan Bassa besieges AlbaRegalis, 1167. and wins it, 1169. comes to relieve
Buda in vain, 1173. (...) slain in a Battle against the (...) in Asia, 1176.
Henry, Baldwin's Brother, crowned Emperor of Greece, 73. and dies, 84. Henry
King of France, obtains a Fleet of Solomon, 729. Horruccius becomes King of
Algiers, 598. coming to Ora, is put to flight, and slain, 599. Hungary
imbroyled in Civil Wars, 239. Huniades puts the Turks to flight, 243. is in
danger, 244. overthrowes Mesites, 245. discomfits the Turks, 250. slayes 30000
Turks, 253. conquers Carambey, 255. after three days fight, flies, 282. puts
the Turks to flight, 283. repulseth them at Belgrade, 326. and dies, 327.
Hysmael, (...)'s son, flies after his Father's death, 433. embraces his
Superstition, 434. takes Tauris, 435. puts Elvan the Persian King to flight,
436. subdues Mesopotamia, 437. fights with Selimus, 477, 478. and retires, 479.
pursues him, and takes his Ordnance, 480.
I.
JAcaia, second Son to Mahomet, is sent into Morea, joins with the Rebels in
Asia, and is wounded, 1374. Janissaries, their first rise, 173. make a Tumult in
Constantinople, 1185, 1277, 1428, 1429. Ibraim I. chosen Emperor of Turks,
strangles his Admiral, 1425. has various events against the Venetians, 1426.
is deposed, 1427. Jerusalem taken by the Christians, 18. is won by Cassanes the
Tartar, and given to the Christians, 114. is retaken by the Turks, 115. John
the Greek Emperor takes Tarsus, and dies, 23. John, King of Jerusalem,
bebesiegeth Damiata, 78. and takes it, 80. John Ducas succeeds Lascaris in the
Empire at Nice, 85. and dies, 96. John Castriot delivers his sons for Hostages
to Amurath, 236. John, Vayuod of Transylvania, chosen King of Hungary, 564. is
deposed, 566. re-installed at Buda by Solomon, 575. besieges Strigonium, 577.
and dies, 659. John made Vayuod of Valachia by Selimus II. 876. overthrowes
Peter, Vayuod of Transylvania, 870. takes Teina, discomfits the Turks, 872. is
vanquished by the Turks, 874. Jonu^ses Bassa is sent to Damasco, 406. wounded
in Selimus's sight, 509. is executed, 520. he slew his wife, 522. Isaac
Comnenus taken prisoner by Axan, 8. Isaac saluted Emperor of Greece, 42, 43.
is deprived of sight and Empire, 44. is restored to his Crown, 67. and dies,
68. (...), saluted King of Persia, for his cruelty is killed, 893.
L.
LAdislaus chosen King of Hungary, 278. Lascaris crowned Emperor of Greece at
Nice, 72. and dies, 85. Leopold of Austria, crowned Emperor of the Romans,
1436. denies aid to Ragotzi, 1138. concludes a peace with the Turk, 1444. takes
Ragotzi into his protection, 1447. Lepanto besieged in vain by Solomon Bassa,
384. yielded to the Turks, 427. Lewis 8th of France makes a vain Expedition
into Palestine, 27. Lewis 9th of France, takes Damiata, 91. wins Carthage,
besieges Tunis, and dies, 108. Lewis King of Hungary is overruled by his
Nobles, 560. is drowned, 562.
M.
MAhomet I. invested King of Turks, 212. overthrowes Cara, 214. puts his
Brother Isa to flight, 217, 219. sends Musa into Europe, where he is made King,
222. is put to flight by Musa, 224. takes Musa prisoner, and strangles him,
226. takes the Caramanion King prisoner, 227. and dies, 229. Mahomet II.
crowned Emperor of Turks, 306. subdues Caria, 308. besieges Constantinople,
309. wins it, 315. beheads Irene, 321. conquers (...), and Athens, 322. (...)
Servia, assaulteth Belgrade, 325. is wounded, and departs, 326. befiegeth
Rhodes with loss, 327. wins (...), 328. and (...), 329. takes Mytelene and its
Prince, 333. subverts Bosna, and sends Amesa into Epirus, 334. besieges Croia,
370. again besieges Croia, but returns with loss, 372. takes it, 387. takes
the Island Euboea, 375. subdues Mysia, 378. and (...), 380. besieges (...) in
vain, 382. loses an Army in Valachia, 383. surpriseth the Venetians, 385.
after infinite loss wins Scodra, 395. invades Transylvania with loss, 396.
besieges Rhodes, 397. but leaves it, 401. and dies, 402. Mahomet made King of
Persia, is hated, 895. is invaded by the Turks, 898. sends his son against
them, 910. who regains Sumachia, 911. Mahomet III. saluted Emperor of Turks,
1055. suffers loss, 1056. proclaims War against the Emperor, 1092. invades
Transylvania, 1097. besigeth Agria, 1100. wins it, 1102. is discomfited, 1104.
invades Hungary, 1114. suffers loss, 1119. besieges Canisia, 1149. wins it,
1151. Ibrahim Bassa being dead, he appoints Hassan General, 1154. appeaseth
Rebels in Asia, 1190. puts his eldest Son Mahomet to death, 1191. invades
Hungary, 1205. is sorely troubled by Rebels, 1214. and at Sea, 1215. he suffers
loss, 1224, 1225. and dies, 1230. (...) besieged by Solomon, 767. who takes
Elm-Castle, 773. but returns with loss, 790. its Knights suffer loss by Sea,
(...). takes the Castle Lango, 1333. Manucchiar Prince of the Georgians joins
with the Turks, 900. and is circumcised, 914. but revolts, 943. (...) an
Engineer in Rhodes, defeated, 55. Turkish Mines, 541. Masut divides the Turks
Kingdom, 29. Matthias King of Hungary spoils Servia, 364. wins the Kingdom of
Bosna, 373. Count Mantsfield is made General of Upper Germany, 1061. besieges
Dotis, 1066. and Strigonium, 1067. discomfits the Bassa of Buda, 1072. takes
the Lower Town of Strigonium, 1074. and dies, 1075. Matthias made Archduke of
Austria, 1022. wins Novigrade, 1023 besieges Strigonium, 1026. but raises the
siege, 1033. is made General of Lower Hungary, 1061. wins (...) and (...),
1077. takes Ali Bassa prisoner, 1167. is crowned King of Hungary, 1317. makes
an agreement between Papists and Protestants, 1319. makes Illeshachius
Palatine, 1317. who dies, 1320. is crowned Emperor of Germany, 1339. sends
Negroni Ambassador to (...) I. 1350. Maximilian crowned Roman Emperor, 803.
concludes a peace with Selimus, 806. Maximilian made General of the Emperor's
forces, 1098. wins Hatwan, 1099. overthrows the Turks, 1104. but flies, 1105.
Melechsala, made Sultan of Damasco, but is betrayed to Saladin, 48. Meledin
Sultan of Egypt, dies 91. Melechsala chosen Sultan of Egypt, 91. overthrows the
French Army, 94. and dies, 112. Duke Mercury made General, 1130. wins
Alba-Regalis, 1155. discomfits Hassan Bassa, 1175. (...) come into Greece, 185.
Michael Ducas made Emperor instead of Diogenes, 8. Michael Emperor of Greece,
goes to Magnesia, but returns with loss, 135. and dies, 144. Michael is
created Vayvod of Valachia, 1050. revolts from the Turk, 1052. wins Hersowa and
Silistra, 1054. overthrowes Turks and Tartars, 1056, 1057. submits to the Turk,
1107. yet takes Nicopolis, 1118. invades Transylvania, 1125. overthrowes Bator
Vayvod thereof, 1126. and wins it, 1127. receives an Ambassador, and rich
Presents from the Turk, 1137, 1138. subdues Moldavia, 1140. is overthrown by
(...), 1145. resigns Transylvania to the German Emperor, 1146. recovers it,
and drives out Sigismund, 1162. is slain in his Tent, 1163. Michna Vayvod of
Valachia, proclaimed Prince of Moldavia, 1394. (...) is made Admiral by the
Venetians, (...) does great harm to the Turks, 377, 378. gives up that charge,
379. is chosen Duke of Venice, 383. Moses revolts from Scanderbeg, 342. and
comes to Epirus with an Army, 343. is discomfited, 344. submits to Scanderbeg,
345. is taken by the Turks, and is flead alive, 366. Moses, Sigismunds
Lieutenant, is overthrown by (...), 1165, 1197. loses Solomose Castle, 1198.
invades. Transylvania, 1109. wins Claudinopolis, 1201. puts the Valachians to
flight, but is discomfited and slain, 1203. Mustapha chosen Emperor of Turks.
1408. imprisoneth the French Ambassador for (...) escape, 1411. but frees him,
1412.
N.
NAdasti, who had done excellent service for the Emperor in Hungary, dies,
1229. Nassuf, the Grand Vizier, his life related, 1365. he is strangled, 1366.
Nice is recovered by the Christians, 161. Noradine, Sultan of Damasco, fires
Panead, 27. wins it, and Arethusa, 45. and dies, 48.
O.
(...) wins Prusa, 160. is established King of Turks, 161. wins Nice, 163. and
(...), 165. and dies, 169. Original of the Turks uncertain, 1, 2. Osman Bassa
is sent for by Amurath III, 952. puts the Tartars to flight, 954. is appointed
Chief Vizier, and General, 956. is surprised by the Persian's sleights, 975.
wins Tauris, 976. falls sick, 977. his Army is discomfited by the Persians,
978, 979. and dies, 980. Osman I. proclaimed Sultan, 1113. sends an Ambassador
to K. James of England, 1414. and is strangled, 1423. Othoman made Governor of
the Oguzian Turks, 123. surpriseth the Castle Chalce, 124. and Einegiol, 128.
settleth his Kingdom, 129. subdues Bythinia, 130, and dies, 160. Otranto taken
and fortified by the Turks, 402. but regained, 403.
P.
(...) crowned Emperor of Greece, 101. gains Constantinople from the Latins,
105. and dies, 85. Palfi, Governor of Strigonium, dies, 1130. Pappa yielded to
the Turks, 1133. Persian King (...) Taur's, 984. his eldest son Hamsy is slain,
990. recovers Tauris, 1214. wins Babylon, 1237, 1268. overthrows Cicola, 1243,
1246, 1268. wins Damasco and Adena, 1289. defeats the Turks, 1323. kills 60000
Turks, 1404. besieges Babylon, 1440. Peter stirs up Christian Princes to the
Holy War, 10. Peter Count of Flanders, chosen Emperor of Constantinople, 84.
dies, 85. Philip 2. of France, departs for Sicilia, 57. returns out of Syria,
59. invades Normandy, 61. Philes Paleologus chaseth the Turks out of Europe,
143. Plague in the Christian Camp, whereof 50000 dye, 15. in Constantinople,
where 200000 dye, 1328, 1340. Prodigies seen in the Air, 1339, 1365, 1414,
1419. Ptolemais yielded to the Christians, 58. and razed by the Turks, 114.
R.
R(...) Prince of Transylvania, deposed by the Turk, re-aslumes his Government,
1433. discomfits the Turks, 1434. the States establish him, 1435. puts the
Bassa of Buda to flight, 1436. delivers Varadin to the Turk, 1446. takes his
Competitor prisoner, 1448. Rhodes besieged by Mahomet in vain, 398 -- 401. its
situation, 541. besieged by Solomon, 542. and yielded to him, 558. Richard I.
King of England, sets forward to Syria, takes Cyprus, with its King, 57. and
becomes King of Jerusalem, 60. Robert of Normandy chosen King of Jerusalem, 18.
Rodolph the Emperor makes a League with Amurath III. 952. which is broken,
991, 1002. overthrowes the Turks at SisegCastle, 1012. wins Subatska, 1017.
discomfits the Turks, and takes Filek, 1018. sends an Ambassador to the Duke
of Muscovy, who promises aid, 1024. takes Jasperin Castle, 1026. and Rab,
1112. overthrowes the Turks and Tartars, 1122. takes a prize from the Turks,
1123. besieges Buda, 1171. wins (...), 1172. and Adona, 1174. raises Buda's
siege, 1175. discomfits the Turks, 1213. takes Hatwan, 1222. has aid from the
Pope, 1250. has a Treaty of peace with the Turks, 1252, 1253. which is broken,
1254. suppresseth the Rebels of Transylvania, 1265. has Cassoria yielded to
him, 1266. puts the Turks and Rebels to flight, 1289. concludes Articles of
peace with the Hungarians, 1293, 1294, 1307, 1308. grants free exercise of
Religion in Bohemia, 1322. and dies, 1339. Ronzerius entertained by the Greek
Emperor, and slain, 136. Roxalana, a slave, married to to Solomon, married to
Solomon, 731. plotteth Mustapha's destruction, 732, 733.
S.
SAladin is made Sultan of Egypt, 47. invades the Holy Land, and is put to
flight, 49. breaks his League with Baldwin, and is overthrown, 50. loses 15000
men, and flies, 52. takes Ptolemais, and (...) Towns, with (...), 53. makes a
great slaughter of the Christians, 55. and dies, 61. Saracon invades Egypt, is
vanquished by Almericus, 46. is appointed Sultan of Egypt, and dies, 61.
Scanderbeg delivered to the Turks for Hostage, 236. has (...) delivered to
him, 259. gains Petrella and Petralba, 260. takes Sfetigrade, 262. puts Alis
Bassa, 264. Ferises, 276. and Muslapha to flight. 277. overthrows the
Venetians, 284. takes Mustapha, 285. assaults the Turks Camp, 291, 298. takes
Amesa prisoner, 335. kills Debrias, 336. receives aid from Alphonsus, 339. is
surprised at Belgrade, 340. discomfits his revolted Nephew Amesa, 352.
concludes 2. years peace with the Turk, 354. defeats Sinam, Asam, Jussumbeg,
and Caraza, 355. makes a peace with Mahomet, 357. spoils the Turks borders,
360. surprizeth Seremet Bassa, 363. (...) Balabanus 4. times, 365 -- 368. and
slew Jacup, 369. With Venetian aid he raises Croia's siege, where (...) is
slain, 371. dies, and is interred in Lyssa, 373. Scrivano, a Rebel, overthrows
Mehemet Bassa, 1153, 1164. wins many Cities in Asia, and dies, 1176. Selimus I.
aided by the Tartar, comes into Europe, 448. to Hadrianople, 450. is put to
flight by his Father, 454, 455. is made General, and saluted Emperor, 462.
invades Armenia, 474. fights with Hysmael, 477, 478. puts Aladeules to flight,
485. sends Sinan Bassa into Egypt, 498. takes Caire, 509, 510. and dies, 524.
Selimus II. installed Emperor of Turks, 799. invades Cyprus, 815. wins
Nicosia, 821. besieges Famagusta, 822, 823. and wins it, 837. makes John
Vayuod of Valachia, 876. subdues it to himself, 876. wins Tunis, and dies, 878.
Sigismund cator Vayvod of Transylvania, revolts from the Turks, 1047. makes a
League with the German Emperor, 1028. wins Tergovista, 1082, 1083. and Zorza
Castle, 1084. goes to the Emperor in person, 1090. overthrowes the Turks and
Tartars at Temeswar, 1096. resigns Transylvania to the Emperor, 1108.
reassumes the Government, 1116. yields it to the Turks, 1121. takes Basta
prisoner, 1160. is expelled, 1162. is received again, 1164. and submits to the
Emperor, 1166, and dies at Prague, 1361. Sinan is made General against the
Persians, 923. dismisseth his Army, 929. is made Vizier. 931. is degraded, 937.
is made General against the Hungarians, 1001. marches toward Buda, and wins
Siseg Castle, 1014. and Vesprizcium, 1015. is put to flight, 1017. takes Dotis,
1037. besieges Rab with loss, 1038, (...). but takes it, 1042. is called
home, 1060. regains his Generalship, and is discomfited, 1079. He dies, 1090.
Solymaa, son to Orchanes, takes Callipolis, 168. is slain with a fall, 169.
Solomon, son to Bajazet, is made Sultan in Europe, 218. invades Asia, and is
received in Prusa, 220. returns into Europe, and puts Musa to flight, 222. is
forsaken and strangled, 223. Solomon installed Emperor of Turks, 526. wins
Belgrade, 527. comes in person to Rhodes, 541. gives two assaults with losle,
945, 546, 548, 553. commands (...) and Pyrrhus to be executed, but spares them
upon entreaty, 549. (...) Mustapha to rule Egypt, 550. enters Rhodes, 558.
invados Hungary, 560. overthrowes the Kings Army, and wins Buda, 562. gives the
Kingdom to Joha Sepusius, 563. besieges Vienna, 570. and raises that siege,
575. besieges Gunza, 581. spoils the Country, 583. renews his League with the
Venetians, 593. sends Grittus into Hungary, 574. who kills the Vayvod of
Transylvania, 595. and is slain, 597. takes Tauris, 608. and Babylon, 610. is
driven out of Persia, 612. murders Amurath Bassa, 614. invades Italy, 629.
besieges Corfu in vain, 633. turns Hungary into a Turkish Province, 678.
subdues Transylvania, 681. aids the French King against Charles the Emperor,
701. invades Hungary, 703. takes Strigonium, 706. and Alba-Regalis, 711.
concludes a Peace with Charles the Emperor, 723. breaks it, 725. wins (...) in
Barbary, 727. and Temeswar in Hungary, 728. marries Roxalana, 731. murders his
son Mustapha, 735. besieges Zigeth, 739, 794. wins it, 795. invades Hungary,
792. takes Giula Castle, 793. and dies, 795. Stephen Vayvod of Moldavia, turns
Tyrant, 1377. is defeated by Alexander, 1381. and put to flight by Coreski,
1383. turns Turk, 1394. Strigonium is won by the Christians, 1077. besieged by
the Turks in vain, 1255. and taken by them, 1288.
T.
TAmas the Persian King concludes a peace with Selimus, 808. and dies, 881.
Tamerlan's Original, he is made King, and overthrowes the Muscovite, 194.
conquers China, 195. razeth Sebastia, 198. overthrows Bajazet's Army, and takes
him prisoner, 202. wins Prusa, 203. puts the Egyptian Sultan to flight, takes
Damasco, 206. Damiata, 207. and Caire, 208. razeth Damasco, 210. and dies, 216.
Tangrolipix proclaimed Sultan of Persia, 3. Tarquemius a Mamaluke is created
Sultan of Egypt, 35. Tartars invade Moldavia, 1085. but are kept back, 1086. do
much harm in Hungary, 1177, 1192. overthrow Radall of Valachia, ibid. fire a
Jew's house in Constantinople, doing great harm, 1295. Techellis lives
obscurtly, 432. invades the Turks Dominions, 438. encouraged by Hysmaell, 439.
puts the Asian Viceroy to flight, 440. takes Catay, 441. discomfits Alis Bassa,
443. flies into Armenia, and is burnt alive, 444. Theodore saluted Emperor of
Greece, 97. dies, and leaves his sou John to succeed, 99. Tomombeius is chosen
Sultan of Egypt, 497. his (...) discovered to the Turks, 503. fortifieth Caire,
507. is taken, and strangled, 515. Transylvania (...) great misery through
famine, 1238, 1244. Tumults arise in Constantinople, 995, 1428. Tuscanian Duke
endangereth the Turks, 1332, 1333, 1360, 1361.
V.
VEnetians with 200 Galleys, defeat the Turks near Rhodes, take Smyrna, 15.
Chios and Rhodes, 22. Besiege Corinth, but leave it, 355. win Aulis, Larsum,
Himber, and Alhens, but suffer loss at Patras, 363. Spoil the Turks Dominions,
377. Put the Turks to flight in Epirus, but are vanquished, 384, 385. Take
(...), 428. Discomfite the Turks at Ambracia, 429. Besiege Mytelene in vain,
429, 430. overthrow the Turks at Corcyra, 691. Send Ragazonius to treat of
peace with Selimus 11, 828. Conclude a with the Pope and King of Spain, 830.
discomfite the Turks in the battle of Lepanto, 849, to 854. make Fuscarinus
Admiral, 859. recover Tunis, 873. make a League with the Turks, 874. give them
two (...), 1427, 1428. Defeat them, making Moccenigo (...), and win (...),
1430. and (...), driving. the Turks from Candia, 1431. difcomfit them with the
loss of (...), but lose Tenedos, 1432. defeat the Turks at the Dardanelles,
1435. attempt to surprise Canea in vain, 1437. (...) rives at (...), 257. makes
a the Turks in Morea, 1444. suffer great loss by Tempests, 1447. defeat the
Turks, 1448. Villerius Lilladamus chosen Great Master of the Rhodes, 528.
encourages the Citizens, 536, 554. is honorably received by Solomon, 557.
(...) passes over Danubius against the Turks, 252. arLeague with Amurath, 264.
breaks it, 267. sends to Scanderbeg for aid, 268. is slain, 272. Uscoques, what
they are, 1405. Usun (...) overthrowes the Persian King, and Mustapha,
Amurath's son, 380. but is put to slight, 181.
X.
XAynes, a Rhodian, treachecherously taken by the Turks, 535. Xene, Mother to
Alexius, condemned and strangled, 39. The Xeriffs seize upon the Province of
Suz, and Morocco, 1362. defeat the King of Fez.
Z.
ZEllaly, a Rebel, overthrowes the Bassa of Bosna, and takes his Government,
1227. is driven out by Zeffer Bassa, and is made Governor of Temeswar, 1240.
his design to surprise Lyppa is frustrated, 1243. Zemes, (...)'s son, flies
into Egypt, 406. and to Rhodes, 409. is delivered to the Pope, 412. and is
poisoned, 419.


FINIS.

