ARCHBISHOP LAUD's HISTORY.

Effigies Reverendissima et Sanctissimi Praesulis Willelmi LAUD Archepiscopi
Cantuariensis, Qui pro Christi Ecclesia^ Martyrium passus est, Anno: 1644/5
Ianuar: 10: AEtatis suae: 72. --.



THE HISTORY OF THE TROUBLES AND TRIAL OF The Most Reverend Father in God, and
Blessed Martyr, WILLIAM LAUD, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Wrote by HIMSELF, during his Imprisonment in the Tower.

To which is prefixed THE DIARY OF HIS OWN LIFE Faithfully and entirely
Published from the Original Copy: And subjoined A SUPPLEMENT to the Preceding
HISTORY: The Archbishop's Last Will; His Large Answer to the Lord Says Speech
concerning Liturgies; His Annual Accounts of his Province delivered to the
King; And some other Things relating to the History.

IMPRIMATUR, Martij: 7: 1693/4.

JO: CANT.

LONDON: Printed for Ri: Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St: Paul's
Churchyard, M DC, XCV.

THE PREFACE.
THAT the Reader may be satisfied, how it came to pass, that an History wrote
of, and by, a Person of so great a Character in this Nation, and by him
designed for the Public, has lain hid, and been suppressed for near Fifty
Years; through whose Hands it has passed; and by what means, and by whose
Labor it is at last Published; he may be pleased to take the following Account.

The Most Reverend Archbishop, the Author and Subject of this History, was
very exact and careful in keeping all Papers, which concerned himself, or any
Affairs of Church and State, passing through his Hands; not only kept a Journal
of his own Actions, but from time to time, took minutes of whatsoever passed at
Council Table, Star Chamber, High-Commission-Court, etc. Digested all his
Papers in most exact Order; wrote with his own Hand on the back or top of every
one, what it Concerned, when it was Received, when Wrote or Answered, etc.

This his Enemies knew full well; and therefore, when after they had caused him
to be Impeached of High Treason, of endeavoring to introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Government, and to be Imprisoned upon the Impeachment in the end of
the Year, 1640. and had now in vain labored for two Years and an half, to find
out Evidence to prove this their Accusation; but the more they sought, they
found to their confusion, so much the greater Evidence of the contrary: After
they had in vain ransacked all Papers left by the Archbishop in his Study at
Lambeth, and Examined all his Intimate Friends and subaltern Agents upon Oath;
when nothing did appear, they hoped to find somewhat against him, either in his
private Journal of his Life, which they knew to be kept by him, or in those
Papers, which he had carried with him from Lambeth at his first Commitment, in
order to his future Defense. Upon these hopes, they with great privacy (...) an
Order, for the searching his Chamber and Pockets in the Tower, in May 1643. and
committed the Execution of it, to his inveter ate Enemy, William Prynne; who
thereupon took from the Archbishop Twenty One Bundles of Papers, which he had
prepared for his Defense; his Diary, his Book of Private Devotions, the Scotch
Service Book, and Directions accompanying it, etc. And although he then
faithfully promised Restitution of them within three or four days, yet never
restored any more than three Bundles; employed such against the Archbishop at
his Trial, as might seem prejudicial to his Cause; suppressed those, which
might be advantageous to him; Published many, Embezzeled some; and kept the
rest to the day of his Death.

As soon as Prynne was possessed of the Archbishop's Papers, he set himself
with eager Malice to make use of them to his Defamation, and to prove the
charge of Popery and abetting Arbitrary Government, by the Publication of many
of them. His first Specimen in this kind, was a Pamphlet, which came out in
August following, Entitled, Rome's Masterpiece, in Five Sheets in Quarto,
containing the Papers and Letters relating to the Plot, contrived by Papists
against the Church and State then Established in England, and discovered by
Andreas ab Habernfeild. But never did Malice appear so gross and ridiculous
together, as in this case. For from this Plot, if there were any Truth in it,
it appeared, that the Life of the Archbishop was chiefly aimed at by the
Plotters, as the grand Obstacle of their Design, and one who could by no Arts
be wrought to any connivance of them, much less concurrence with them. This
Pamphlet being, after the Publication of it, carried to the Archbishop in the
Tower, he made several Marginal Annotations on it, in Answer to Prynne's
Falsifications and Malicious Calumnies intermixed therein. Which Copy, coming
afterward into the Hands of Dr: Baily, the Archbishop's Executor, was by him
given to the Learned Antiquary, Mr: Anthony Wood, and by him Transmitted to me,
in order to be placed among the other Papers and Memorials, which are to follow
this History, according to the Archbishop's own Direction.

But Prynne's Malice could not be abated by the shame of one Miscarriage. In
the next place, he bethought himself of Publishing the Archbishop's Diary, as
soon as his Trial ended, wherein it had been often produced as Evidence against
him. This then he Published in the beginning of September, 1644. in Nine Sheets
in Folio, with this Title, A Breviat of the Life of, etc. (intending it, as he
says, for a Prologue to the much desired History of his Trial) but neither
entire, nor faithfully, as far as he did Publish it; but altered, mangled,
corrupted, and glossed in a most shameful manner; accompanied with desperate
Untruths, as the Archbishop complains in this History; and therefore adds:
For this Breviat of his, if God lend me Life and Strength to end this (History)
first; I shall discover to the World, the base and malicious Slanders, with
which it is fraught. This the Archbishop wrote, when he despaired that ever
his Diary should be recovered out of those vile Hands, in which it then was;
and be Published faithfully and entirely, which would be the most effectual
discovery of the Baseness and Malice of Prynne therein.

Yet notwithstanding so vile and corrupt an Edition of it, all those who have
wrote any thing of this Excellent Prelate, have been forced to make use of it;
not being able to gain the sight of the Original, nor perhaps so much as
suspecting any such fraud in the Edition of it. Particularly, it is much to be
lamented, that Dr. Heylin, who wrote the History of the Archbishop's Life with
great Care and Elegance, was forced, in most things, to borrow his Account from
this corrupted Edition of his Diary, and has thereby been led into many and
great Errors. Others also have, since him, taken up and divulged many false
Opinions concerning the Diary it self; as that it was wholly wrote in Latin by
the Archbishop, that it was by himself Entitled A Breviat of his Life, and
that it was Translated and Published entire (...) Prynne.

The True and Faithful Publication of it, which I have made from the Original,
now in my Hands, will not only supply the defect of what the Archbishop
intended in the words before related, but never effected; but will also
undeniably assert his Innocence from those greater Accusations (...) brought
against him, and will farther clear (...) from many later Aspersions of lesser
moment. I will name but one, which is to be found in the Life of Archbishop
Williams, wrote by Bishop Hacket, and lately Published: Therein (page 63, 64.)
Dr. Laud is taxed of high Ingratitude against Williams, who is there in a long
Relation represented as his great Benefactor, and who particularly gained of
King James the Bishopric of St. David's for him, by his great and restless
importunity, when the King had determined not to Promote him, as unworthy of
his Favor, for Reasons there expressed. I question not Bishop Hacket's
Veracity, or that Archbishop Williams did indeed relate this to him. But then
Williams will be found strongly to have prevaricated, when he pretended that
Laud owed that Preferment to his Kindness, and thereupon taxed him of
Ingratitude. For from what is related in the following Diary, at June 29 1621.
it appears indeed, that Williams stickled hard to gain the Bishopric of St.
David's for Laud, not out of any Kindness to him, but for his own ends, that so
himself might retain the Deanery of Westminster, with the Bishopric of Lincoln,
(to which he was then Nominated) which otherwise had slipped from him; the King
having designed to give it to Dr. Laud, upon the avoidance of it by the
Promotion of Dr. Williams to the Sea of Lincoln. But whatever may be in this
Matter alleged against Dr. Laud; I am sure, no Art or Color can defend that
bitter Revenge of Archbishop Williams, related in this History; which prompted
him to move earnestly in the House of Lords, that the Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Canterbury (then a Prisoner in the Tower) might be Sequestered,
and put into the Hands of his Inferior Officers; which by his importunity he
obtained, to the great Prejudice of the Church, and no small Infamy of himself.

I do not pretend to justify the whole Proceeding of Archbishop Laud, during
the whole course of his Power and Government, against Archbishop Williams. I
do rather lament it, as the great Misfortune, both of themselves, and the
Church at that time; that two such Eminent Prelates, equally endued with
extraordinary Learning, Wisdom, and Greatness of Mind, should be engaged in
constant Opposition and Enmity to each other, at first raised by mutual
Distrust and Emulation, and ever after kept up and fomented by reciprocal
Injuries, and false Representations on each side. But that the blame of this
Misfortune should be cast wholly on the one side; that unworthy Reflections
should be made and Published in prejudice of Archbishop Laud; that he should
be accused of base Ingratitude, of impotent Malice, of insatiable Revenge;
while the other is represented as the most Calm, most Innocent, and most
Heroical Person imaginable; I cannot without some Indignation observe in the
before mentioned Historian, otherwise of Eminent Worth and Character; who to
approve his Gratitude to his Patron and Promoter, has grossly neglected the
Laws of History; and cared not how injuriously he treated the Memory of
Archbishop Laud, that he might justify the Quarrel, and heighten the Encomium
of Archbishop Williams. Upon this Hacket's Life of Archbishop Williams, Par.
1. page 64.
Account, and with this design, Williams is pretended to have been the great
Patron and Benefactor of Laud, to have procured him his first Rotchet, etc.
that so the latter might appear guilty of the highest Ingratitude against the
other. Hence these Reflections are frequently repeated. Of all Men, Bishop Laud
was the Man, whose Enmity was most tedious Par. 2 page 115.
and most spightful against his great Benefactor Williams. This dealing of Laud
is past Excuse, and can bear no Apology. And the Par. 2: page 65, 66.
Cause of his ( Bishop Williams's) incessant molestations for Twelve (...). 2.
page 85.
Years, was his known Enemy Bishop Laud. Could he so soon forget him, that
first made him a Bishop? etc. -- The undoing of his Page 86. 115. etc.
Brother was so much in his Mind; that it was never out of his Dreams. In other
places Laud is represented, as utterly implacable and irreconcilable in his
Malice against Williams; is accused of impotent Malevolence; and his implacable
spite against a Bishop, his Raiser, and Page 129.
now ( by being a Prisoner in the Tower) become a spectacle of pity, said to be
unpardonable. Again he is Traduced to have been possessed with a Revengeful
Mind. Whereas to the other, this lofty Encomiam is beslowed; Page 131.
that, There did not Live that Christian, that hated Revenge Page 230.
more than he, or that would forgive an Injury sooner. These and many like
Passages, are as far remote from Truth and Justice, as they are from that
Sincerity and Impartiality, which become an Historian.

I had intended to have said no more upon this Head. But I cannot prevail with
my self to pass by an heinous Accusation, formerly brought against Archbishop
Laud, concerning his having altered the Oath Administered to King Charles I: at
his Coronation, in favor of the Crown, and prejudice of the People. Which
Accusation, it has pleased an Honorable, Reverend, L. C. Baron Atkin's Speech
to the Lord Mayor, October: 1693. page: 4, 5.
and Learned Person, very lately to renew in a Public Speech, in these words
-- The striking out of that part of the Ancient Oath in King Charles his time
at his Coronation, by Archbishop Laud (that the King should consent to such
Laws, as the People should choose) and instead of that, another very unusual
one inserted, Saving the King's Prerogative Royal. -- And I could tell you of
somewhat more of that kind, done since, in the time of the late King James; at
the time of his Coronation, there was much more struck out of the Coronation
Oath: which might well be worth the enquiring, how it came about. I must not
presume to oppose any thing delivered by an Oracle of the Law, in a Court of
Judicature, to a great Auditory, upon a Solemn Occasion. However, I beg leave
to acquaint the Reader, that a full and undeniable justification of Archbishop
Laud from this Charge, may be found in this History, cap. 33. I may farther
presume, that the Author of this Speech, is too Just and Honorable, to intend
by the latter Clause, any (...) upon another Archbishop, who Administered the
Coronation Oath to King James II. Or if any Reader should be so ill informed,
as to mis-conceive his Lordship herein; I hope it will be no offense to say,
that it would be no difficult matter, to justify in this Case the Proceeding
of the one Archbishop, as clearly, as this History does the other.

I might farther add, that the entire Publication of this Diary, contributes
very much to Illustrate the History of those Times; and that both it, and the
following History, discover many Secrets (before unknown) in Matters of Church
and State, and correct many Errors, commonly taken up and received in Relation
to either. To give one particular instance; I know a certain (...), who would
fain be esteemed, and is generally accounted by these of his Party, to know
more of the Secret History of the Transactions preceding and accompanying the
Grand Rebellion, than the whole (...) besides; who has confidently Related,
that when the Earl of Strafford entered into the Service of King Charles I. and
began to be employed as Chief Minister of State, he covenanted with him, that
no Session of Parliament should be called or held during his Ministry. Now the
(...) of this Report appears from what the Archbishop has wrote in his Diary
at Dec. 5. 1639. that the first movers for calling a Parliament at that time,
were the Earl of Strafford and himself. Nothing also can reflect more Honor
upon the Memory of any Person, that what the Archbishop (in the following
History, cap. 9.) relates of the Earl's rejecting the unworthy Proposition
made to him, by Mr. Denzell Hollis, in the Name of the Leading Men of the House
of Commons; a matter wholly unknown before.

But to proceed with Prynne, soon after the Martyrdom of the Archbishop,
whether prompted by his unwearied Malice, or by his eternal itch of scribbling,
or incited by the Order of the House of Commons, made March 4. 1644/5. desiring
him to Print and Publish all the Proceedings concerning the Archbishop of
Canterbury's Trial: He immediately set himself to Defame the Archbishop, and
justify the Proceedings of the Rebel Parliament against him, more at large. To
which purpose, he Published in 1646. in 66 Sheets in Folio, his Necessary
Introduction to the History of the Archbishop of Canterbury his Trial: Which
in the Preface, he calls A New Discovery of sundry Plots, and hidden Works of
Darkness: Containing bitter Invectives and Accusations against the whole
Proceedings of the Court, from the time of the Treaty about the Spanish Match,
to that day; and laboring to prove, that both King James and Charles designed
to overthrow the (...) Religion, and to introduce Popery, using Archbishop
Laud as their chief Instrument in that bad Design: An Accusation, which neither
himself, nor any other Man in his Wits, ever believed.

Soon after this, in the same Year 1646. was Published by the same Author,
Canterbury's Doom, or the First Part of a complete History of the Trial of the
Archbishop, in 145 Sheets in Folio, containing (as himself Epist: Ded.
acknowledges) only the History of the Preliminaries of the Trial till the
commencement of it, together with the Commons Evidence, his Answers to it, and
their Replies upon him, in maintenance of the first general Branch of their
Charge of High Treason against him, to wit, his Traiterous endeavors to alter
and subvert God's True Religion by Law Established among us, to introduce
Popery, and to reconcile the Church of England to the Church of Rome. The
remaining part of the Trial he engaged (by Promise Rushworth also promised to
Publish such an exact History of the Trial of this Archbishop, as he had done
of that of the Earl of Strafford. Collect. Par. 3. vol. 2. page 833. but never
did effect it.
made both in the beginning and end of that Book) to Complete and Publish with
all convenient speed; but never made good his Undertaking; nor, as I believe,
ever did intend it. For he well knew, that however what was urged against the
Archbishop at his Trial in this matter, and was largely amplified in his
History, in proof of the Archbishop's endeavor to subvert the Established
Religion, carried with it some show of Truth in the Judgment of a then
miserably deluded People; who were cheated into a Belief (cursed be the wilful
Authors of that Cheat, which in great measure yet continues) that good Works,
Building, Repairing, Consecrating and Adorning Churches, bowing at the Name of
Jesus, prosiration to God in Prayer, wearing Copes, retaining the use of
Canonical Hours in Prayer, and such like Decent Vsages and Ceremonies, were
downright Popery (for these and such like were the Proofs of that Accusation
brought against the Archbishop) Yet that all which they did or could produce
in confirmation of their other Heads of Accusation against the Archbishop,
carried not with it the least appearance of proof. For which Reason, Prynne
began the History of his Trial with the Charge and Proofs of Popery; although
that was not the first, but the last, Head of Accusation, brought against him,
and canvassed in the course of his Trial.

However, the Godly Cheat, once begun, was by any means to be continued; and
therefore it was pretended by Prynne, and other Adversaries of the Archbishop;
that although, to give him his due (for such are Prynne's own words, page 462.)
the Archbishop made as full, as gallant, as pithy a Defense of so bad a Cause;
and spoke as much for himself, as was possible for the Wit of Man to invent;
and that with so much Art, Sophistry, Vivacity, Oratory, Audacity and
Confidence, without the least acknowledgment of Guilt in any thing, etc. yet
that after all, the Crimes objected being undeniably proved against him; and
himself thereupon despairing of being able to justify and clear his Innocence,
either to the then present or to succeeding times, did burn all the Notes of
his Answers and Defense before his Death, of purpose to prevent their
publication after it. Which Calumny Prynne has twice (in Epist. Dedic. and
page 461.) repeated, pretending to have received the knowledge of it from the
Archbishop's own Secretary Mr. Dell.

The falsity of this base Report appears sufficiently from this History, wrote
by the Archbishop, and now Published. He had begun to compose it before the
end of the Year 1641. and continued it from time to time, till the 3d of
January 1644/5. which was the seventh day before his Execution. For on the 4th
of January, being acquainted that Sentence had passed upon him in the House of
Lords, he conveyed the Original Copy of his History into safe hands, and
prepared himself for Death. That he had begun it before the end of 1641. and
augmented it from time to time; appears evidently from several places of it.
And although in the Narration of his Trial, many things said or alleged in the
Recapitulation on the last days, be interwoven with the History of every days
Trial; yet all those passages were added by him afterward on the blank pages,
which he had for that purpose left over against every written page in the
Original Copy; and from thence were according to his directions transcribed in
the other Copy into one entire Narration. Hence it comes to pass, (which the
Reader will easily observe) that the Archbishop writing down the Transactions
of every day, as they happened, has left so many plain Indications of haste,
and sometimes of heat. Some things seem to have been wrote, while his Spirits
had not yet recovered a sedate Temper; many improprieties of Language
committed; and other defects admitted: which the Archbishop himself being
sensible of, had wrote in the first leaf of his Book: Non apposui manum
ultimam. W. Cant.

That the most Reverend Author wrote this History for the public Vindication
of himself, cannot be doubted. Nay himself more than once affirms, that he
intended it for the Vindication of himself to the whole Christian World; and
chiefly indeed for the defense of himself and the Church of England in Foreign
parts; where wrong Notions are generally entertained of the Constitution of our
Church, as being for the most part taken from the Writings of some Puritanical
Divines among us. For this Reason the Archbishop earnestly desired (which
desire is thrice in this Work expressed) that it might be carefully and exactly
Translated into Latin, and Printed; that he might thereby appeal to the
Judgment of the Learned in all parts of Christendom. To this end himself had
procured the Liturgy, which he had composed for the Church of Scotland, to be
turned into Latin, that it might be Published with it. To the end (says he)
that the Book may be extant, and come to the view of the Christian World, and
their Judgment of it be known, I have caused it to be exactly Translated into
Latin; and if right be done me, it shall be Printed with this History. This
Latin Translation of the Scotch Liturgy, as also the English Original Copy of
the first draught of it, are now in my Hands; and shall one or both of them be
hereafter (God willing) published in the Collection of Memorials. It should
seem, that when the Archbishop designed a Latin Edition of his History, he
despaired that the generality of this Nation, then miserably distempered in
Matter of Religion, would ever so far regain the use of their Wits, as to be
able to pass an impartial Judgment upon his Cause. But, God be thanked, the
Church, for which he suffered, and which was ruined with him, was in a short
time after beyond hope Re-established; and therewith Sobriety returning into
the minds of Men, no place is now so fit for the publication of this History,
as our own Island; and no Language more proper for it, than our own, which is
the Original, wherein it was wrote.

It should seem, that what was already wrote of this History, in May 1643. when
Prynne searched the Archbishop's Chamber in the Tower, and seized his Papers
found there, escaped his ravenous Hands. Whether after the Archbishop's death,
and the completion of it, the Copy of it came into his hands, I cannot
certainly affirm (the Reason of my uncertainty I shall relate presently) but do
believe, that it did. Which if it did, I suppose he having got notice of it,
seized it by Virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, March 4. 1644/5.
empowering him to send for all Writings, etc. relating to the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Trial.

To proceed, all the Archbishop's Papers taken from him by Prynne, either out
of his Study at Lambeth soon after his Commitment, or out of his Chamber and
Pockets in the Tower, or seized after his Martyrdom, remained in Prynne's hands
until his Death. When Archbishop Sheldon, well knowing that the Papers of his
Predecessor Archbishop Laud had been unjustly seized and detained by him;
procured an Order of the King and Council, deputing Sir William Dugdale, and
some others, to view his Study, and taking thence all the Books and Papers
formerly belonging to Archbishop Laud, to deliver them into his hands. This
was accordingly done; and the Books and Papers being seized, brought to
Archbishop Sheldon; although very much diminished in number, and embezeled,
since they had come into Prynne's hands. For he seems either to have Printed
many of them from the Originals, to save the labor of transcribing them; or to
have burned them, or otherwise employed them to common uses, when once Printed.
So that very few of those Papers, which Prynne had published in the several
Pamphlets and Books before named, came into Archbishop Sheldon's hands. And
not a few, even of those which had not been Published, were found wanting.
Particularly the Papers of Archbishop Laud, concerning the Conversion of his
Godson, Mr. William Chillingworth; which the Archbishop says were taken away
from him by Mr. Prynne, and being by him produced at the Committee for drawing
up his Charge, were there Examined.

Whether the Copy of this History was seized at this time in Mr. Prynne's
Study, or came to Archbishop Sheldon by other means, I cannot certainly
affirm. But this I am assured of, that Archbishop Sheldon having about this
time got into his Hands the Copy of this History, and having now gained also
the other Papers of Archbishop Laud; sent for the truly Reverend and Learned
Dr. William Sancroft, then Dean of St. Paul's, and delivered both to him;
ordering him to Publish the History, with such Papers as were necessary to it,
with all convenient speed. This Dr. Sancroft willingly undertook; but upon
Reading of the History, found the Copy to be so very vicious; that it would not
be sit to be Published, till the Original might be recovered, whereby the
defects of it might be supplied and corrected. Hereupon they set themselves to
search after the Original; which at last they found in St. John's College in
Oxford, having been deposited there (as I suppose) by Dr. Richard Baily,
formerly President of that College, and Executor to the Author.

After this was done, a new scruple was started concerning the Language,
wherein it should be Published. Archbishop Sheldon was desirous it might be
Translated into, and Published in Latin, in compliance with the Desire and
Intention of the Author. The Dean of St. Paul's on the other side was of
Opinion; that it would be more useful to the Public, and serviceable to the
Memory of the Author, to Publish it in English. This difference of Opinion
protracted the Edition of it from time to time; until at last Archbishop
Sheldon continuing resolved in his Opinion, the Dean yielded to his Authority;
and only desiring that some Learned Civilian might be joined with him, who
might render the Forms of Pleading in apt Latin Expressions, prepared himself
for the undertaking. But in the interim Archbishop Sheldon dying, the Dean was
most deservedly chosen to succeed him in the Archbishopric. Whereby being
involved in constant Public Business both of Church and State, he was forced
to lay aside his design of publishing this History, yet not without hopes of
finding at some time or other opportunity to perform it: for which Reason he
devolved not the care of it upon any other; but kept it by him, and in the mean
time endeavored to get into his Hands all other Papers relating to Archbishop
Laud or his Cause.

But in vain did he hope to find so much leisure, while the Administration of
the chief Office in the Church took up his whole care and thoughts. What he
could not then do, he hoped to accomplish after his Retirement into Suffolk, in
August 1691. Yet neither then did he set about it, until the middle of the Year
1693. when opening his Papers, he began to collate the Copy with the Original,
to divide the History into Chapters, to examine the Citations, to write down
several Directions and Memoranda's for his own use in preparing the Edition, to
Note what places deserved to be amended or considered, to write several
Observations on the (...), to draw up a Catalogue of the Memorials to be added
as an Appendix to the History, to Note which of them were in his Hands, and
which being wanting to him, were to be sought elsewhere.

He was earnestly employed about this Matter; and the Original and Copy, with
many of the Papers belonging to it, lay on his Scrutoire before him; and
himself was then writing certain Quaeries, Memoranda's and Directions for his
use therein in a (...) paper; when a violent (...) seized him, August 25. which
having (...) him to his Bed full thirteen weeks, he at last surrendered up his
Pious Soul to God, the 24th: of November, on Friday, early in the Morning, in
the 77th Year of his Age.

As soon as he had Reason to apprehend, that his Sickness would prove mortal;
remembering what he was last employed about, the Edition of this History, he was
desirous to see me, that so he might commit the care of it to me. But so it
was, that I hearing of his Sickness, and not knowing any thing, either of this
History being in his Hands, or of his Intentions about it, took a Journey into
Suffolk, to wait upon him, as in Duty bound, (having the Honor and the
Happiness to be his Chaplain) whither I came on the last day of October. He was
then pleased to acquaint me with his Design; related to me, how the History
with the other Papers of Archbishop Laud came into his Hands, how he had often
prepared himself for the perfection of this Edition, and was at last hindered by
his present Sickness. In fine, he laid his Commands upon me, to perfect what he
had begun, and to Publish the History, as soon as might be; and then
immediately caused to be delivered to me the Original and Copy of the History,
with the Diary, and all other Papers of Archbishop Laud, or his own, relating
to them, which then laid upon or about his Scrutoire, or could be found in his
Study. His Voice was then very weak, and his Spirits faint; so that he could
not give to me that perfect account, by what means the Copy came into
Archbishop Sheldon's Hands, which I had desired of him. For he having omitted
to tell me that distinctly, and I desiring satisfaction in that and some other
Questions about this Book; he could only answer me: These are material
Questions; but I am weary with speaking, and my Spirits are faint. I cannot
make to you any farther Answers herein. After which, I never presumed to
trouble him with the Question.

However, having observed, upon Reading the Book, and looking over the Papers,
that many even of those Memorials were wanting, which I found that my Most
Reverend Patron had in his written Notes marked to be in his Hands; I took the
boldness, when I next waited on him (on November 22. following) to acquaint him
with this defect. Whereupon, he immediately ordered me to search all his
Papers, (the greater part of which had not been opened, nor put in order, since
his removal from Lambeth) which I began forthwith to do; and thereby found many
Papers relating to this History, or other Papers of Archbishop Laud, scattered
and divided among several parcels of other Writings. But before I had searched
half way, evident signs of approaching Death appearing in him, I quitted the
search at that time; and renewed it not again, till several weeks after his
Death; when I looked over the remaining part of his Papers, and, with the leave
of his Executors, took thence whatsoever related to, or might be subservient to
this Design.

In this latter search I found many things; but neither first nor last could
find several Papers of Archbishop Laud, of great moment; which I am well
assured were in the Hands of my late Lord Archbishop Sancroft; because I find
them testified so to be in the Catalogue of Archbishop Laud's Papers in his
hands, drawn by himself. Among these, is a large Answer of Archbishop Laud, to
a Speech made by William Lord Viscount Say and Seal against the Civil Power of
Bishops, and Printed by him, London, 1642. His Answer to the Speech of the same
Lord against the Liturgy, and Printed London 1641. I found, and have published
in the end of this Volume; as well because it contains many Historical passages
of the Archbishop's own Life and Actions; as for that, it is no where referred
to in this History, and so could not well be placed among the Memorials
intended for the Second Part. Archbishop Laud had also wrote a large and
elaborate Answer to the Speech of Nathaniel Fiennes, Son to the Lord Say,
against the new Canons, made in the end of the Year 1640. and Printed London,
1641. which (...) to in this History. This also was in the Hands of my late
Lord Archbishop Sancroft; as I find as well by the written Catalogue before
mentioned, as by a particular Paper of Observations made by him upon it, toward
the completion and illustration of it; whereby it appears to consist of above
fifty Pages in Folio. But this, after a tedious and diligent search, I could
not find. Which will not appear incredible to those, who know what a vast
multitude of Papers and Collections my late Lord Archbishop Sancroft left
behind him; and therein more perhaps wrote with his own Hand, than any Man,
either of this or the last Age, ever did write.

Having obtained all the Papers, which could be found, I set my self to perfect
the Edition of this History; which I have at last performed, yet with greater
trouble and labor, than can easily be imagined. I caused the Diary to be
exactly Transcribed, adjoined an English Translation to the Latin part of it,
diligently collated the Copy of the History with the Original, the Articles and
other Memorials with the Printed Copies, if any such were; added what
Observations I thought necessary, in the Margin; have every where Religiously
retained the Author's own words and expressions throughout, (although therein,
I must confess, against the Judgment of my most Reverend Patron expressed in
his written Notes) have only amended the Orthography (which both in Original
and Copy was monstrously vicious) inserted some words, where the Sense was
imperfect, but have always included such in Crotchets; and in some places
substituted Greek words instead of Latin, in Citations out of Greek Fathers or
Authors. So that the Reader may be assured, this History is faithfully conveyed
to the Public.

I have retained all my late Lord Archbishop Sancroft's Observations, whether
wrote in the Margin of the Book, or elsewhere, if considerable; subjoyning to
them the Letters: W: S: A: C: I have subjoined to many of my own Observations
of greater moment, the Letters, H. W. And where Archbishop Laud had added any
thing in the Margin, I have adjoined the Letters, W: C:

As for the Collection of Memorials and other Papers, which by the Author's
Direction should have accompanied this History; finding that they could (...)
be Published in the same Volume without swelling it to too great a bulk; I have
reserved them for a Second Part; and (if God grant me Life and Health) will
cause them shortly to follow; and therewith give to the Public what farther
Account of them I shall then judge necessary.

The Originals, both Diary and History, I intend at my Death to leave to St:
John's College in Oxford, where the Author the Archbishop was bred, to which
place he ever bore so great a Love, and where his Body now remains. Which
Intention of mine I chose here to mention; that the (...) and Fellows of that
College may hereafter, if they shall think so (...), demand them from my
Executors.

To conclude, although Private and Personal Matters or Affections, ought (...)
to be admitted to accompany a Work of such a public Nature; yet I cannot
forbear to say, that it is an inexpressible satisfaction to me, that in the
Edition of this Work, I have been able to serve the Illustrious Author of it,
and my most Reverend Deceased Patron, and the Church of England, at the same
time: And more particularly, that I account it the most Fortunate Transaction
of my whole Life, to have contributed herein to the vindication of the Memory
and the Cause of that most Excellent Prelate and Blessed Martyr, to whom I have
always paid a more especial Veneration, ever since I was able to form any
Judgment in these matters; as firmly believing him to have taken up and
prosecuted the best and most effectual Method (although then in great measure
unsuccessful, through the malignity of the Times) and to have had the Noblest,
the most Zealous, and most sincere Intentions therein, toward Re-establishing
the Beauty, the Honor, and the Force of Religion, in that part of the
Catholic Church (the Church of England) to the Service of which I have
entirely devoted my Life, my Labors, and my Fortunes.

Feb: 2. 1693/4. Hen. Wharton.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS VOLUME.
Archbishop Laud's Diary of his Life; wrote by himself, and published from the
Original. Page 1 His Account of matters of Piety and Charity, projected to be
done by himself. 68 His large History of his own Troubles and Trial, divided
into CHAPTERS. 71 CAP. I. An Account of his first Accusation and Commitment. 73
CAP. II. Of the Original Causes and Occasions of his Troubles. 75 CAP. III. The
Articles exhibited against him to the Parliament by the Scottish Commissioners,
with an Answer to them. 87 CAP. IV. The Additional Charge of the Scots
exhibited against him, with an Answer to it. 137 CAP. V. An Account of what
passed in relation to him or his Cause, from his Commitment to Febr. 26. (...).
144 CAP. VI. An Account of what Passed at the Bar of the House of Lords, when
the Commons brought up their Charge against him. 148 CAP. VII. The first
Articles of the Commons exhibited against him, with an Answer to them. (...)
CAP. VIII. An Account of his Commitment to the Tower, and what passed (...)
thence, to March 13. (...). 174 CAP. IX. Of what passed from thence to May 1.
1641. Page 176 CAP. X. Of what passed from thence to September 23. 1641. 181
CAP. XI. Of what passed from thence to January 4. (...). 183 CAP. XII. Of what
passed from thence to February 24, (...). 187 CAP. XIII. Of what passed from
thence to March. 6 (...). 190 CAP. XIV. Of what passed from thence to March 24.
(...). 192 CAP. XV. Of what passed from thence to May 16. 1642 194 CAP. XVI. Of
what passed from thence to January 6. (...). 196 CAP. XVII. Of what passed from
thence to May 27. 1643. 200 CAP. XVIII. Of the Search made upon him in the
Tower, and his Papers taken away from him, May 31. 1643. 205 CAP. XIX. Of what
passed from thence to October 3. 1643. 207 CAP. XX. Of what passed from thence
to March 9. 1643/4. 211 CAP. XXI. An Account of the Preliminaries and
Preparation to his Trial, which began March 12 (...). 216 CAP. XXII. An account
of his First Day's Trial, March 12. 1643/4. 220 CAP. XXIII. Of the Second Day's
Trial, March 13 (...). 229 CAP. XXIV. Of the Third Day's Trial, March 16.
(...). 242 CAP. XXV. Of the Fourth Day's Trial, March 18. 1643/4. 244 CAP.
XXVI. Of the Fifth Day's Trial, March 22. 1643/4. 260 CAP. XXVII. Of the Sixth
Day's Trial, March 28 1644. 270 CAP. XXVIII. Of the Preparation to the Seventh
Day's Trial. 280 CAP. XXIX. Of the Seventh Day's Trial, Apr. 16. 1644. 282 CAP.
XXX. Of the Eighth Day's Trial, May 4. 1644. 292 CAP. XXXI. (...) the Ninth
Day's Trial, May 16. 1644. 301 CAP. XXXII. Of the Tenth Day's Trial, May 20.
1644. 310 CAP. XXXIII. Of the Eleventh Day's Trial, May 27. 1644. Page 317 CAP.
XXXIV. Of the Twelfth Day's Trial, June 6. 1644. 329 CAP. XXXV. Of the
Thirteenth Day's Trial, June 11. 1644. 338 CAP. XXXVI. Of the Fourteenth Day's
Trial, June 14. 1644. 347 CAP. XXXVII. Of the Fifteenth Day's Trial, June 20.
1644. 354 CAP. XXXVIII. Of the Sixteenth Day's Trial, June 27. 1644. 390 CAP.
XXXIX. Of the Seventeenth Day's Trial, July 5. 1644. 366 CAP. XL. Of the
Eighteenth Day's Trial, July 17. 1644. 374 CAP. XLI. Of the Nineteenth Day's
Trial, July 24. 1644. 389 CAP. XLII. Of the Twentieth Day's Trial, July 29.
1644. 400 CAP. XLIII. The Archbishop's Recapitulation of his Defense, made at
the Bar of the House of Lords Sept. 2. 1644. 412 CAP. XLIV. The Plea or Defense
made for the Archbishop by his Council at the Bar of the House of Lords,
October. 11. 1644. 422 CAP. XLV. The Archbishop's Defense of himself, at the Bar
of the House of Commons, November. 11. 1644. 432 CAP. XLVI. An Account of what
passed from thence in both Houses to his Condemnation, Jan. 4. (...). 441 A
short Account of the Archbishop's Condemnation and Suffering, taken from Mr.
Rushworth's Collections. 443 A larger Account of the same, and of the manner of
his Suffering, taken from Dr. Heylin's Life of him. 444 The Archbishop's
Speech made upon the Scaffold Jan: 10: (...). with his Prayers and behavior
there. 447 The Archbishop's Last Will and Testament. 454 Nine Passages taken
out of the Archbishop's Conference with Fisher the Jesuit, referred to in the
preceding History. 458 Twelve Passages out of other Printed Books, referred to
in the preceding History and Trial. 461 The Archbishop's large Answer to the
Speech of the Lord Say and Seal, touching the Liturgy. Page 470 The
Archbishop's Annual Accounts of his Province, presented to the King; with the
King's Apostils or Marginal Notes upon them. 515 The King's Instructions sent
to Archbishop Abbot, in the Year 1629. 517 Archbishop Abbot's Account of his
Province to the King, for the Year 1632. 519 The Kings Instructions sent to
Archbishop Laud, in the Year 1634. 520 A Memorial of the Archbishop's Account
of his Province to the King, for the Year 1635. 523 A Note of Archbishop
Sancroft, and a Letter to him about the same. 524 Archbishop Laud's Account of
his Province to the King, for the Year 1633. 525 His Account for the Year,
1634. 529 His Account for the Year: 1635. 535 His Account for the Year: 1636.
538 His Account for the Year: 1637. 546 His Account for the Year: 1638. 553 His
Account for the Year: 1639. 558 A Pamphlet published against the Archbishop by
Will. Pryn, entitled Rome's Masterpiece; with the Archbishop's Notes upon
it. (...) Two Letters of the Archbishop's (then Chancellor of the University
of Oxford) to the Vice Chancellor there, charging him to enquire after, prevent
and punish the Practices of some Romish Emissaries in that Place. 609 The
Archbishop's Letter to Sir Kenelm Digby, upon the News of his Reconciliation
to the Church of Rome. 610 The Testimony of Mr: Jonathan Whiston concerning the
Joy expressed at Rome upon the News of the Archbishop's Death. 616 The
Testimony of Mr: John Evelyn concerning the same. 616
AN INTRODUCTION To the Following HISTORY: Containing the DIARY OF THE Most
Reverend Father in God WILLIAM LAUD, LORD Archbishop of Canterbury: EXTENDING
From His Birth to the middle of the Year, MDCXLIII. Being the Seventieth Year
of His Age.

Faithfully and Entirely Published from the Original Copy, Wrote with His own
Hand.

The Latin part rendered into English, and adjoined.

LONDON, Printed for Ri: Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St: Paul's
Churchyard, 1694.

AN INTRODUCTION To the following History: CONTAINING THE DIARY OF THE Most
Reverend Father in God WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Anno 1573.
NATUS fui October: 7: 1573. Redingi. In infantia pene perii morbo, etc.

I WAS born October: 7: 1573. at Reading. In my Infancy I was in danger of Death
by Sickness, etc.

Anno: 1589.
I came to Oxford, July: 1589.

Anno: 1590.
I was chosen Scholar of St: John's, June: 1590.

Anno: 1593.
I was admitted Fellow of St: John's, June; anno: 1593.

Anno: 1594.
My Father died, April: 11: 1594. die Mercurii.

I proceeded Batchelour of Arts, June: 1594.

Anno: 1596.
I had a great Sickness,: 1596.

Anno: 1597.
And another, anno: 1597.

Anno: 1598.
I proceeded Master of Arts, July: 1598.

I was Grammar Reader that Year; and fell into a great Sickness at the end of
it.

Anno 1600.
My Mother died November 24. 1600.

I was made Deacon, 4. Januar. 1600. comput. Angl.

Anno 1601.
I was made Priest, April 5. 1601. being Palm Sunday: both by Dr. Young, Bishop
of Rochester. [ Viz. Both Orders were conferred by him.]

Anno 1602.
I read a Divinity Lecture in St. John's College, anno 1602. It was then
maintained by Mrs. May. I was the last that read it.

Queen Elizabeth died at Richmond, March 24. 1602. comput. Angl.

Anno 1603.
I was Proctor of the University, chosen May 4. 1603.

I was made Chaplain to the Earl of Devonshire, September. 3. 1603.

Adjecta est spes mea de A. H. Jan. 1. 1603. Which after proved my great
happiness. Incaepi sperare, Januar. 21. 1600. comp. Angl.

Hope was given to me of A. H. Jan. 1. etc. I first began to hope it, Jan. 21.
etc.

Anno 1604.
I was Batchelour in Divinity, July 6. being Friday, 1604.

Anno 1605.
My cross about the Earl of Devon's Marriage, December: 26: 1605. die Jovis.

Anno 1606.
The Quarrel Dr: Ayry picked with me about my Sermon at St. Mary's, October. 21.
1606.

Anno 1607.
I was inducted into the Vicaridge of Stanford in Northamptonshire, November
13. 1607.

Anno 1608.
The Advowson of North-Kilworth in Leicestershire given to me, April 1608.

My acquaintance with C. W. began.

I proceeded Doctor in Divinity in the Act, anno 1608.

I was made Chaplain to Dr. Neile, then Ld. Bishop of Rochester, August 5. 1608.

After my unfortunateness with T. (whose death was in July, 1604.) the first
offer in this kind that I had after, was by M. Short, June 1606. then by P. B.
not accepted.

Anno 1609.
My first Sermon to King James at Theobalds, September. 17. 1609.

I changed my Advowson of North-Kilworth for West-Tilbery in Essex; to which I
was inducted, October. 28. 1609. to be near my Ld. of Rochester, Dr. Neile.

My next unfortunateness was with E. M. December. 30. being Saturday, 1609. A
stay in this.

Anno 1610.
My Ld. of Rochester gave me Cuckstone in (...), Maii 25. 1610.

I resigned my Fellowship in St: John's College in Oxford, October: 2: 1610. and
left Oxford the 8th: of the same Month.

I fell Sick of a Kenish Ague, caught at my Benefice, November: 5: 1610. which
held me two Months.

In the midst of this Sickness, the Suit about the Presidentship of St: John's
began.

I left Kuckstone, and was inducted in Norton, November: 1610. by Proxy.

The Lord Chancellor Elsmere's Complaint against me to the King at Christmas,
1610. He was incited against me by Doctor Abbot, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Elect.

Anno: 1611.
My next unfortunateness was by S. B. Feb: 11: 1611. It continued long.

I was chosen President of St: John's, May: 10: 1611.

The King sat in Person three hours to hear my Cause about the Presidentship of
St: John's at Tichburne, Aug: 29: 1611. It was Dies Decollat. S: Johannis-Bapt.
The Archbishop of Canterbury was the Original Cause of all my Troubles.

I was Sworn the King's Chaplain, November: 3. 1611.

Anno: 1612.
My next unfortunateness was by S. S. June: 13: 1612. It ended quickly.

My next with A: D: which effected nothing, and ended presently, September: 1612.

My great Business with E. B. began Januar: 22: 1612. It settled, as it could,
March: 5: 1612. comp: Angl: It has had many changes; and what will become of
it, God knows.

Anno: 1614.
My great misfortune by M. S. began April: 9: 1614.

A most fierce salt Rheum in my left Eye, like to have endangered it.

Dr: Neile, then Bishop of Lincoln, gave me the Prebend of Bugden, April: 18:
1614.

Anno: 1615.
Dr: Neile, the Bishop of Lincoln, gave me the Archdeaconry of Huntingdon,
December: 1: 1615.

Anno: 1616.
The King gave me the Deanery of Gloucester, November: 1616.

I resigned my Parsonage of West-Tilbery.

I set forward with the King toward Scotland, March: 14: 1616. Stilo nostro;
and returned a little before him, 1617.

My acquaintance began with W: Sta. March: 5: 1616. comp: Angl:

Anno: 1617.
.... Cum E. B. July: 28: 1617. Die Lunae, prime.

St: John's College on fire under the staircase in the Chaplain's Chamber, by
the Library, September: 26: 1617. die Veneris. Both these days of Observation to
me.

I was inducted to Ibstock in Leicestershire, Aug: 2: 1617. in my return out of
Scotland; and left Norton.

Anno: 1618.
Lu. Bos. B. to E. B. May: 2: 1618. Et quid ad me?

My ill hap with E. Beg. June 1618.

The great Organ in St. John's Chapel set up: It was begun Febr. 5. 1618.
comp. Angl.

Anno 1619.
I fell suddenly dead for a time at Wickham, in my return from London, April 2.
1619.

Anno 1620.
I was Installed Prebendary of Westminster, Januar. 22. 1620. comp. Angl.
having had the Advowson of it Ten Years the November before.

Anno 1621.
The King's Gracious Speech unto me, June 3. 1621. concerning my long Service.
He was pleased to say: He had given me nothing but Gloucester, which he well
knew was a Shell without a Kernel.

June 29. His Majesty gave me the Grant of the Bishopric of St. David's, being
St. Peter's day. The general expectation in Court was, that I should then have
been made Dean of Westminster, and not Bishop of St. David's. The King gave me
leave to hold the Presidentship of St. John Baptist's College in Oxon, in my
Commendam with the Bishopric of St. David's: [But by Reason of the strictness
(...) Clause is (...), omitted by Prynne.
of that Statute, which I will not violate, nor my Oath to it, under any
color, I am resolved before my Consecration to leave it.]

October. 10. I was chosen Bishop of St. David's, October. 10. 1621.

I resigned the Presidentship of St. John's in Oxford, November. 17. Hence may be
corrected an Error of Dr: Heylin, and (...), who following him, relate, that
Dr: Laud held the Presidentship of St: John's, in Commendam with the Bishopric
of St: David's.
1621.

I Preached at Westminster, November. 5.

I was Consecrated Bishop of St. David's, November. 18. 1621. at London-House
Chapel, by the Reverend Fathers, the Lords Bishops of London, Worcester,
Chichester, Elye, Landaffe, Oxon. The Archbishop being thought Irregular for
casual Homicide.

Januar. 6. The Parliament, then sitting, was dissolved by Proclamation,
without any Session.

Januar. 14. The King's Letters came to the Archbishop, and all the Bishops
about London, for a Contribution of the Clergy toward recovery of the Palatinat.

Januar. 21. The Archbishop's Letters came to me about this business.

Januar. 25. I sent these Letters and my own into the Diocese.

Febr. 17. I Preached at Westminster. All my former Sermons are omitted.

March. 9. I heard of the death of L. B. He died Januar. 17. between 6 and 7 in
the Morning.

March 18. Dr. Theodore Price went toward Ireland out of London, about the
Commission appointed there.

March 24. I Preached at Court, commanded to Print.

Anno 1622.
April. 13. The King renewed my Commendam.

April 16. I was with his Majesty and the Prince's Highness, to give notice of
Letters I received of a Treasonable Sermon Preached in Oxford, on Sunday, April
14. by one Mr. Knight of (...).

April 14. Sunday, I waited at the Entertainment of Count Swartzenburge, the
Emperor's Ambassador, in the Parliament House.

April 23. Being the Tuesday in Easter week, the King sent for me, All these
Passages concerning his Conference with Fisher, and settling the Marquess and
Countess of Buckingham in Religion, are omitted by Prynne.
and set me into a course about the Countess of Buckingham, who about that time
was wavering in point of Religion.

April 24. Dr. Francis White and I met about this.

May 10. I went to the Court to Greenwich, and came back in Coach with the Lord
Marquess Buckingham. My promise then to give his Lordship the Discourse he
spoke to me for.

May 12. I Preached at Westminster.

May 19. I delivered my Lord Marquess Buckingham the Paper concerning the
difference between the Church of England and Rome, in point of Salvation, etc.

May 23. My first Speech with the Countess of Buckingham.

May 24. The Conference between Mr. Fisher a Jesuit, and my self, before the
Lord Marquess Buckingham, and the Countess his Mother. I had much Speech with
her after.

June 9. Being Whitsunday, my Lord Marquess Buckingham was pleased to enter
upon a near Respect to me. The particulars are not for Paper.

June 15. I became C. to my Lord of Buckingham. And

June 16. Being Trinity Sunday, he Received the Sacrament at Greenwich.

June 22. etc. I saw two Books in Folio of Sir Robert Cottons. In the one was
all the Order of the Reformation in the time of Hen: 8. The Original Letters
and Dispatches under the Kings and the Bishops, etc. own hands. In the other,
were all the Preparatory Letters, Motives, etc. for the suppression of the
Abbeys: their suppression and value, in the Originals. An Extract of both which
Books I have per Capita:

July 5. I first entered into Wales.

July 9. I began my first Visitation at the College in Brecknocke, and
Preached.

July 24. I visited at St. David's, and Preached July 25.

August 6, 7. I visited at Carmarthen, and Preached. The Chancellor and my
Commissioners visited at Emlyn, etc. July 16, 17. and at Haverford-West, July
19, 20.

Aug. 15. I set forwards toward England from Carmarthen.

September. 1. My Answer given to His Majesty about 9: Articles delivered in a
Book from Mr: Fisher the Jesuit. These Articles were delivered me to consider
of, Aug. 28.

The Discourse concerning them the same Night at Windsor, in the presence of
the King, the Prince, the Lord Marquess Buckingham, his Lady, and his Mother.

September. 18. aut circiter. There was notice given me, that Mr. Fisher had
spread certain Copies of the Conference had between him and me, Maij 24. into
diverse Recusants hands.

October..... I got the sight of a Copy, etc. in October; made an Answer to it.

October. 27. I Preached at Westminster.

December. 12. My Ancient Friend, Mr: R: Peashall died, hora 6. matutina. It was
Thursday, and Sol in Capri. Lucia Virgo in some Almanacks a day before, in
some, a day after it.

December. 16. My Lord Marquess Buckingham's Speech to me about the same Keye.

December. 25. I Preached at St. Giles without Cripplegate.

I was three times with the King this Christmas; and Read over to him the
Answer which I had made to Fisher; which he commanded should be Printed: and I
desired it might pass in a third Person, under the Name of R. B.

Januar. 11. My Lord of Buckingham and I in the inner Chamber at York House.

Quod est Deus Salvator noster Christus Jesus.

Januar. 17. I received a Letter from E. B. to continue my favor, as Mr. R. P.
had desired me.

Januar. 19. I Preached at Westminster.

Januar. 27. I went out of London about the Parsonage of Creek, given me into
my Commendam.

Januar. 29. I was instituted at Peterborough to the Parsonage of Creek.

Januar. 31. I was inducted into Creek.

Februar. 2. Being Sunday and Candlemas day, I Preached and Read the Articles
at Creek.

Febr. 5. Wednesday, I came to London. I went that Night to his Majesty,
hearing he had sent for me. He delivered me a Book to read and observe. It was
a Tract of a Capuchin, that had once been a Protestant. He was now with the
French Ambassador. The Tract was to prove, that Christ's Body was in two
places at once, in the Apparition to St: Paul, Act: IX:

Feb. 9. I gave the King an account of this Book.

Febr. 9. Promovi Edmundum Provant Scotum in Presbyterum. Primogenitus meus
fuit in Domino.

I Ordained Edmund Provant a Scot Priest. He was my Firstbegotten in the Lord.

Febr. 17. Monday, the Prince and the Marquess Buckingham set forward very
secretly for Spain.

Febr. 21. I wrote to my Lord of Buckingham into Spain.

Febr. 22. Saturday, I fell very ill; and was very suddenly plucked down in 4
days.

I was put into the Commission of Grievances. There were in the Commission the
Lord Marquess Buckingham, Lord Arundel, Lord Pembroke, Bishop of Winchester,
and my self. The Proclamation came out for this, Febr. 14.

March 9. I Ordained Thomas Owen, Bat: of Arts, Deacon.

March 10. I Ordained him and John Mitchel, Priests.

March 23. I Preached at White Hall.

Anno 1623.
March 31. I received Letters from my Lord of Buckingham out of Spain.

April 9. I received Letters from my Lord of Buckingham out of Spain.

April 13. Easter Day, I Preached at Westminster.

April 26. I Ordained John Borough, Master of Arts, Deacon and Priest.

May 3 and 16. My Speech with B. E. and the taking off my Jealousies about the
great business.

June 1. Whitsunday, I Preached at St. Brides.

June 13. I received Letters from the Duke of Buckingham out of Spain.

June 15. R. B. died at Stony Stratford; which what it will work with B. E. God
in Heaven knows; and be merciful unto me.

July 6. I Preached at Westminster.

July 15. St. Swythin: A very fair day till toward 5 at Night. Then great
extremity of Thunder and Lightning. Much hurt done: The Lanthorn at St. James's
House blasted: The Vane bearing the Prince's Arms, beaten to pieces. The Prince
then in Spain. It was Tuesday; and their St. James's day, Stilo Novo.

Aug. 17. I received Letters from the Duke of Buckingham out of Spain.

Aug. 31. I Preached at Sunninge, with my Lord of Bristol.

September. 8. I was at Bromley; and heard of the unfortunate passage between my
Friends there.

October. 3. Friday, I was with my Lord Keeper; to whom I found some had done me
very ill Offices. And he was very jealous of L. B's Favor.

October. 5. The Prince and the Duke of Buckingham landed at Portsmouth, from
Spain.

October. 6. Monday, they came to London. The greatest expression of Joy by all
sorts of People, that ever I saw.

October. 20. I Ordained Thomas Blackiston, Batch. of Arts, Deacon.

October. 26. The fall of an House, while Drewrye the Jesuit was Preaching, in
the Black-Fryars. About 100 slain. It was in their Account, November. 5.

October. 31. I acquainted my Lord Duke of Buckingham with that which passed
between the Lord Keeper and me.

November. 12. Wednesday night, a most grievous Fire in Bread-street in London.
Alderman Cocking's House, with others, burnt down.

November. 18. Tuesday night, the Duke of Buckingham Entertained the two Spanish
Ambassadors, Don Diego de Mendoza the Extraordinary, and Don Carolos Columnas
the Ordinary, and Mexia (I think his Name was) Ambassador from the Archdukes.
One of the Extraordinary Ambassadors of Spain, Marquess Iniioca came not;
because Mendoza and he, could not agree upon Precedence. His Majesty and the
Prince were there. The Bishop of London and my self waited upon the King.

December. 14. Sunday night, I did Dream that the Lord Keeper was dead: that I
passed by one of his Men, that was about a Monument for him: that I heard him
say, his lower Lip was infinitely swelled and fallen, and he rotten already.
This Dream did trouble me.

December. 15. On Monday Morning, I went about business to my Lord Duke of
Buckingham. We had Speech in the Shield-Gallery at White Hall. There I found,
that the Lord Keeper had strangely forgotten himself to him; and I think was
dead in his Affections.

December. 21. I Preached at Westminster.

December. 27. St. John's day, I was with my Lord Duke of Buckingham. I found,
that all went not right with the Lord Keeper, etc. He sent to speak with me,
because he was to Receive the next day.

December. 30. I adventured to tell my Lord Duke of Buckingham, of the Opinion
generally held touching the Commission of sending Sir Edward Coke, and some
others into Ireland, before the intended Parliament.

Januar. 3. I received my Writ to appear in Parliament, Febr. 12. following.

Januar. 10. I received a Command under Seal from my Lord of London, to warn
for the Convocation.

Januar. 10. I was with my Lord Duke of Buckingham; and showed him the state of
the Book Printed about the Visitation of the Church, and what was like to ensue
upon it.

Januar. 11. I was with his Majesty, to show him the Epistle, that was to be
Printed before the Conference between me and Fisher the Jesuit, Maij 24. 1622.
which he was pleased to approve. The King brake with me about the Book Printed
then of the Visitation of the Church. He was hard of belief, that A. B. C. was
the Author of it. My Lord Keeper met with me in the with-drawing-Chamber, and
quarrelled me gratis.

Januar. 12. I sent the Summons down into the Country to the Clergy, for their
appearance at the Convocation.

Januar. 14. I acquainted my Lord Duke of Buckingham, with that which passed on
the Sunday before, between the Lord Keeper and me.

Januar. 16. I was all day with Doctor W. about my Papers of the Conference;
and making them ready for the Press.

Here is left a large void space in the Original, to insert the Occurrences of
the Eight following Days: which space was never filled up.

Januar. 25. Dies Solis erat. Ego solus, and nescio qua tristitia languens.
Premebat anxium invidia J. L. and odium gratuitum. Sumpsi in manus Testamentum
Novum Groeco idiomate, pensum diei ordine lecturus. Caput autem mihi occurrit
ad Hebr. XIII. Ibi statim occurrit mihi moerenti metuentique illud Davidis,
Psalm. 56. Dominus mihi Adjutor; non timebo quid faciat mihi homo. Exemplum mihi
putavi propositum; and sub eo Scuto quis non tutus? Protege me O Dominus Deus
meus.

Januar. 31. Commissio emissa sub magno Sigillo Angliae me inter alios Judicem
Delegatum constituit in Causa Dilapidationis inter Rev. in Christo Patrem
Richard. Neile Dominum Episcopum Dunelm. and Franciscum James Filium and
Haeredem Praedecessoris. Huic Commissioni inservivi ab hora secunda (...) ad
quintam. Dies erat Saturni. Locus Camera magna, ubi Legum Doctores simul
convivant, vulgo dictus Doctors Commons.

Februar. 1. Dies solis erat. Astiti Illust. Principi Carolo Prandenti.
Hilaristum admodum, sibi conviva; multa obiter cum suis. Inter caetera, se, si
necessitas aliquod genus (...) imponeret, Juristam esse non posse. Subjunxit
Rations. Nequeo (inquit) malam causam defendere, nec in bona succumbere. Sic
in majoribus succedas in aeternum faustus, Serenissime Princeps.

Februar. 4. Dies Mercurij erat. Colloquium cum Fishero Jesuita habitum, Maij
24. 1622. Jussu Sereniss. Regis Jacobi Scriptis mandatum, Regi ipsi antea
perlectum, typis excudendum hodie traditur; cum Approbatione Episcopi London.
Nunquam ante-hac sub praelo Laboravi. Nullus Controversor. Et ita oro, amet
beetque animam meam Deus; ut ego been and ad gloriam nominis ejus sopitas cupio
conorque Ecclesiae nunquam satis deflendas distractiones. Invisi hodie Ducissam
Buckinghamiae. Ostendit mihi illa, (...), Faemina Precum formulam. Hanc ei in
manus dedit alia, mihi ne de Nomine nota, Mulier. Perlegi. Mediocra omnia:
nihil egregium, nisi quod Poesi similior canebat.

Januar. 25. It was Sunday. I was alone, and languishing with I know not what
sadness. I was much concerned at the Envy and undeserved Hatred born to me by
the Lord Keeper. I took into my Hands the Greek Testament; that I might Read
the portion of the day. I lighted upon the XIII Chapter to the Hebrews; wherein
that of David, Psalm. 56. occurred to me then grieving and fearing: The Lord is
my helper: I will not fear, what man can do unto me. I thought an Example was
(...) to me; and who is not safe under that Shield? Protect me O Lord my God.

Januar. 31. A Commission, passed under the Broad Seal of England, constituted
me among others a Judge Delegate in a Suit of Dilapidation, between the Rev.
Father in God Richard Neile, Lord Bishop of Durham, and Francis James Son and
Heir of his Predecessor. I attended the Execution of this Commission from Two
to Five a Clock in the Afternoon on Saturday, in the great Chamber at Doctors
Commons.

Februar. 1. Sunday. I stood by the most Illustrious Prince Charles at Dinner.
He was then very merry; and talked occasionally of many things with his
Attendants. Among other things, he said, that if he were necessitated to take
any particular Profession of Life, he could not be a Lawyer; adding his
Reasons. I cannot (says he) defend a bad, nor yield in a good Cause. May you
ever hold this Resolution and succeed (most Serene Prince) in Matters of
greater moment, for ever prosperous.

Februar. 4. Wednesday, my Conference held with Fisher the Jesuit, May 24.
1622. and put in writing at the Command of King James, having been before Read
to the King, was this day put into the Press; being Licensed by the Bishop of
London. I had not hitherto appeared in Print. I am no Controvertist. May God so
Love and Bless my Soul; as I desire and endeavor, that all the never to be
enough deplored distractions of the Church, may be composed happily, and to the
Glory of his Name.

This day I waited on the Duchess of Buckingham. That Excellent Lady, who is
Goodness it self, showed me a Form of Devotions, which another Woman, unknown
to me, had put into her Hands. I Read it. All was mean in it: nothing
extraordinary; unless that it was more like to Poetry.

Febr. 6. Friday, my Lord Duke of Buckingham told me of the Reconciliation the
day before made with the Lord Keeper.

Febr. 10. Shrove-Tuesday, at the Commons, Sentence in my Lord of Durham's Case.

Febr. 12. Thursday, the Parliament was to begin; but was put off to Monday the
16 of February.

Febr. 15. Sunday, I Assisted at the Consecration of Dr: Harmer Bishop of St.
Asaph.

Febr. 16. Dies Lunae erat. Dux Richmondiae subita Paralysi correptus, mortuus
est. Hoc fatum rejecit Parliamentum in 19 Februarii.

Febr. 16. Monday, The Duke of Richmond, being seized suddenly with the Palsy,
died. This accident put off the Parliament to the 19 of February.

Februar. 18. Wednesday, my Lord Duke of Buckingham told me of the
Reconciliation and Submission of my Lord Keeper; and that it was confessed unto
him, that his Favor to me was a chief Cause. Invidia quo tendis? etc. At ille
de novo foedus pepigit.

Februar. 19. Thursday, The Parliament began.

Februar. 20. Friday, The Convocation began.

Februar. 22. Will. Fulwell, Mr. of Arts, of Qu. Coll. in Cambridge, made
Deacon.

Februar. 24. Tuesday, The Duke of Buckingham's Relation of the Negotiation
with Spain about the Prince's Marriage, to both Houses of Parliament.

Febr. 29. Sunday, In the Evening the Duke of Buckingham's Coach overthrown
between Exeter-House and the Savoy. The Spanish Ambassador lay there. No Omen I
hope, more than that they thought to Soil him. Secretary Conway was in the
Coach with him. Mr. Bond came into the help, and told it me.

March 7. Mid-Lent-Sunday, I Preached at White Hall.

March 14. Passion-Sunday, I Preached at Westminster.

March 17. Lord Keeper his Complementing with me. Will. Fulwell made Priest.

March 22. Monday, Dismal day. The Accident of my Lord of Rutland giving Not
Content to the Form consented to in the Parliament House, being the only Voice
dissenting.

March 23. Tuesday, The Censure of Morley, Waterhouse, and the Printer, about
the Petition against my Lord Keeper.

That Afternoon the King declared to the Committee, that he would send a
Messenger presently into Spain, to signify to that King, that his Parliament
advised him to break off the Treaties of the Match and the Palatinate, and to
give his Reasons of it; and so proceed to recover the Palatinate as he might.

Bonfires made in the City by the forwardness of the People, for Joy that we
should break with Spain. O quoties tenuit me illud, Psalm. LXVII. 31. Dissipa
gentes, quae bella volunt: Sed spero, quia coacti.

March 24. Wednesday, Initium Regis Jacobi. The Earl of Oxford, practicing a
Tilt, fell and brake his Arm.

That Night, inter horas 6. and 7. a great Eclipse of the Moon.

March 25. Thursday, The Recess of the Parliament for a Week.

Anno 1624.
March 26. Good Friday, Viscouut Mansfeild, running at Tilt to practice, with
the shock of the meeting, his Horse, weaker or resty, tumbled over and over,
and brake his own neck in the place; the Lord had no great harm. Should not
this day have other Employment?

March 27. Saturday, Easter-Even, my Speech with my Lord Duke of Buckingham
about a course to ease the Church in times of Payment of the Subsidy now to be
given. His Promise to prepare both the King and the Prince.

March 28. Easter Day, Richard Earl of Dorset died, being well and merry in the
Parliament House on Wednesday the 24.

Quam nihil est vita Hominis? Miserere nostri Deus.

His Grandfather, Thomas Earl of Dorset, died suddenly at the Council Table.
His Grandmother rose well, and was dead before Dinner. His Father Robert lay
not above two days. And now this Man. Sir Edward Sackvill......

March 29. Easter-Munday, I went and acquainted my Lord Keeper, with what I had
said to my Lord Duke. He approved it, and said it was the best Office that was
done for the Church this Seven Years. And so said my Lord of Durham. They
persuaded me to go and acquaint my Lord's Grace (of Canterbury) with what I had
done. I went. His Grace was very angry. Asked, what I had to do to make any
Suit for the Church. Told me, never any Bishop attempted the like at any time,
nor would any but my self have done it. That I had given the Church such a
wound, in speaking to any Lord of the Laity about it, as I could never make
whole again. That if my Lord Duke did fully understand what I had done; he
would never endure me to come near him again. I answered: I thought I had done
a very good Office for the Church; and so did my Betters think. If his Grace
thought otherwise, I was sorry I had offended him. And I hoped, being done out
of a good Mind, for the support of many poor Vicars abroad in the Country, who
must needs sink under Three Subsidies in a Year, my Error (if it were one) was
pardonable. So we parted.

I went to my Lord Duke, and acquainted him with it; lest I might have ill
Offices done me for it, to the King and the Prince.

Sic Deus beet me servum suum, laborantem sub pressura eorum, qui semper
voluerunt mala mihi.

So may God bless me his Servant, laboring under the pressure of them, who
always wished ill to me.

April 16. Friday, My Conference with Fisher the Jesuit Printed, came forth.

April 18. Sunday, I Preached at Paul's Cross.

April 27. Tuesday, My very good Friend Dr. Linsell cut for the Stone, Circiter
horam nonam ante Meridiem. About Nine a Clock in the Forenoon.

May 1. Saturday, E. B. Married. The Sign in Pisces.

May 5. Wednesday, Ascension-Eve, The King's Speech in the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, to the upper House of Parliament, concerning the Hearing of the Lord
Treasurer's Cause, which was to begin the Friday following. This day my Lord
Duke of Buckingham came to Town with his Majesty Sick. And continued Ill till
Saturday, May 22.

May 13. Thursday, Lionel Earl of Middlesex, Lord Treasurer of England, and
Master of the Wards, Censured in Parliament for Bribery and Extortion, and
Deceiving the King, etc. To lose his Offices. To be ever disinabled to bear
any: Fined to the King in 50000 l. Imprisoned in the Tower, during the King's
Pleasure. Never to sit again as a Peer in Parliament. Not to come within the
Verge of the Court.

May 15. Saturday, Whitson-Eve, The Bill passed in Parliament, for the King to
have York-House in exchange for other Lands. This was for the Lord Duke of
Buckingham.

May 16. Whitsunday night, I watched with my Lord Duke of Buckingham. This was
the first Fit, that he could be persuaded to take orderly.

May 18. Tuesday night, I watched with my Lord Duke of Buckingham: he took this
Fit very orderly.

May 19. Wednesday, The Bishop of Norwich, Samuel Harsnet, was presented by the
House of Commons to the Lords. His Cause was referred by the House to my Lord's
Grace of Canterbury and the High Commission.

May 22. Saturday, My Lord Duke of Buckingham missed his Fit.

May 26. Wednesday, He went with his Majesty to Greenwich.

May 28. Friday, E. B. came to London. He had not leisure to speak with me
(though I sent and offered to wait all opportunities) till June 16 being
Wednesday.

May 29. Saturday, The first Session of Parliament ended. And the Prorogation
was to the Second of November.

June 6. Second Sunday after Trinity, I Preached at Westminster.

June 8. Tuesday, I went to New-Hall to my Lord Duke of Buckingham, and came
back to London on Friday, June 11.

June 16. Wednesday, I took my lasting leave of E. B.

The great dry Summer.

My Dream June 4. Wednesday night, 1623. In this Dream was all contained, that
followed in the carriage of E. B. toward me; and that Night R. B. Sickned to
the Death.

May 29. Saturday night, 1624. I was marvellously troubled with E. B. before
they came to London. That there was much declining to speak with me; but yet at
last I had Conference, and took my lasting leave. And this so fell out, Respice
ad Maij 28. See May 28.

July 7. Wednesday night, My Lord of Durham's quarrel about the trifling
business of Fr. N.

July 23. Friday, I went to lie and keep House, and Preach at my Livings, held
in Commendam, Creek and Ibstock. That Friday night, at St. Albans, I gave R. R.
my Servant, his first Interest in my Businesses of moment.

July 27. This I confirmed unto him, the Wednesday Morning following, at
Stanford.

August 7. Saturday, while I was at Long Whatton with my Brother, my passion by
Blood, and my fear of a Stone in my Bladder.

August 8. Sunday, I went and Preached at my Parsonage at Ibstock, and set
things in order there.

August 26. Thursday, My Horse trod on my foot, and lamed me: which stayed me
in the Country a week longer than I intended.

September. 7. Tuesday, I came to London.

September 9. Thursday, My Lord of Buckingham consulted with me about a Man, that
offered him a strange way of Cure for himself and his Brother. At that time I
delivered his Grace the Copies of the two little Books, which he desired me to
write out.

September. 16. Thursday, Prince Charles his grievous fall, which he had in
Hunting.

September. 25. Saturday, My Lord Duke's proposal about an Army, and the Means,
and whether Sutton's Hospital might not, etc.

October. 2. Saturday, In the Evening at Mr. Windebanks, my Ancient Servant Adam
Torless fell into a Swoon; and we had much ado to recover him; but I thank God,
we did.

October. 10. Sunday, I fell at Night in Passionem Iliacam; which had almost put
me into a Fever. I continued ill fourteen days.

October. 13. Wednesday, I delivered up my Answer about Sutton's Hospital.

November. 21. Sunday, I Preached at Westminster.

December. 6. Monday, There was a Referment made from his Majesty to my Lord's
Grace of Canterbury, My Lords of Durham and Rochester, and my self, to Hear and
Order a Matter of Difference in the Church of Hereford, concerning a
Residentiaryship, and the Lecturer's place; which we that day Ordered.

December. 13. Monday, I received Letters from Brecknock; that the Saltpeter Man
was dead and buried the Sunday before the Messenger came. This Saltpeter Man
had dug in the Colledge-Church for his work, bearing too bold upon his
Commission. The News of it came to me to London, about November. 26. I went to my
Lord Keeper, and had a Messenger sent to bring him up, to answer that
Sacrilegious abuse. He prevented his punishment by Death.

December. 21. Tuesday, Fest. Sancti Thomae, Mr. Crumpton had set out a Book,
called St: Augustins Sum. His Majesty found fault with diverse passages in it.
He was put to recall some things in Writing. He had Dedicated this Book to my
Lord Duke of Buckingham. My Lord sent him to me to overlook the Articles, in
which he had recalled and explained himself; that I might see, whether it were
well done, and fit to show the King. This day Mr: Crumpton brought his Papers
to me.

December. 23. Thursday, I delivered these Papers back to Mr. Crumpton. The same
day at York-House, I gave my Lord Duke of Buckingham my Answer, what I thought
of these Papers. The same day I delivered my Lord a little Tract about
Doctrinal Puritaenism, in some Ten Heads; which his Grace had spoken to me that
I would draw for him, that he might be acquainted with them.

December. 31. Friday, His Majesty sent for me; and delivered unto me Mr.
Crumpton's Papers, the second time (after I had read them over to himself) and
commanded me to correct them, as they might pass in the Doctrine of the Church
of England.

Januar. 3. Monday, I had made ready these Papers, and waited upon my Lord Duke
of Buckingham with them; and he brought me to the King. There I was about an
hour and a half, reading them, and talking about them with his Majesty and my
Lord Duke. After this, I went to visit my Sister, who lay then Sick at London.

Januar. 5. Wednesday, My Lord Duke of Buckingham showed me two Letters of,
etc. the falsehood of, etc. That day, as I waited to speak with my Lord,
Secretary Calvert fell in Speech with me about some differences between the
Greek and the Roman Church. Then also, and there, a Young Man, that took on him
to be a Frenchman, fell into discourse about the Church of England. He grew at
last earnest for the Roman Church; but Tibi dabo claves, and Pasce oves: was
all he said, save that he would show this proposition in St. Augustine, Romana
Ecclesia facta est caput omnium Ecclesiarum ab instante mortis Christi. I
believe, he was a Priest; but he wore a Lock down to his shoulders. I heard
after, that he was a French Gentleman.

Januar. 15. Saturday, The Speech which I had with my Lord Duke at
Wallingford-House.

Januar. 21. Friday, The business of my Lord Purbeck, made known unto me by my
Lord Duke.

Januar. 23. Sunday Night, the Discourse which Lord Duke had with me about
Witches and Astrologers.

Januar. 25. Tuesday Night, I acquainted my Lord Duke with my hard hap in my
business with L. C. D. For which I had been so often blamed.

Januar. 28. Friday, I took my leave of my Lord Duke. His wish that he had
known K. L. sooner, but, etc.

Januar. 30. Sunday Night, my Dream of my Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. One of the most comfortable passages that ever I had in my Life.

Febr. 12. Saturday, I Ordained Mr. Thomas Atkinson, of St. John's, Deacon.

Febr. 13. Sunday, I Preached at Westminster.

March 5. Saturday, The High Commission sat first about Sir R. H. etc.

March 6. Sunday, the first in Lent, I Preached at the Temple, at the Reader's
Solemnity. The Duke of Buckingham and diverse other Lords there.

March 13. Sunday, second in Lent, I Ordained Robert Rockell Priest, Eleazar
Dunkon and Edward Quarles Deacons. They were Masters of Arts of Pembroke-Hall
in Cambridge.

Anno 1625.
Mart. 27. (...) media quadragesimae, Concionem habui in Aula Regia vulgo dicta
White Hall.

Turbatus and tristissimis temporibus ascendi suggestum, Rumoribus tum
praevalentibus Regem Serenissimum Jacobum, and Sacratissimae mihi Memoriae
mortuum esse. Avocatus Doloribus Ducis Buckinghamiae, Sermonem abrupi medio.

Mortuus est Rex Theobaldi, quum tempus numer asset tres quartas ultra horam
undecimam ante meridianam, Religiosissime and constantissima fide intrepidus
emisit Animam Beat am.

Eo die horam circiter quintam, Proclamatione Carolus Princeps, quod faustum
foelixque sit, Rex promulgatur.

AEgrotare incaepit Rex, Mart. 4. die Veneris. Morbus, qui apparuit Tertiana
Febris. Sed vereor repercussam Medicinis a pedibus ad inveriora Podagram.

Apr. 1. Die Veneris, Accepi Literas a Comite Pembrochiae Camerario Regio, in
iis Mandatum Serenissimi Regis Caroli de concione per me habenda in Comitiis
Parlamentariis coram ipso and Proceribus Regni, Maij 17. proxime futuro.

Apr. 3. Die Solis, Dedi in manus Ducis Buckinghamiae, Annotationes breves in
Vitam and Mortem Augustissimi Regis Jacobi; quas jussit ut describerem.

Apr. 5. Die Martis, Schedulam exhibui, in qua Nomina erant virorum
Ecclesiasticorum sub Literis, O. and P. Nomina ut sic digererem jussit ipse Dux
Buckinghamiae, traditurus ea (ut dixit) Regi Carolo.

Apr. 9. Die Sabbati, Mihi omnibus nominibus colendissimus Dux Buckinghamiae
certiorem me fecit: Aliquem ex nescio qua Invidia Nomen meum denigrasse apud
Serenissimam Majestatem Caroli. Causa arrepta ex errore, in quem nescio quo
fato olim in causa Caroli Comitis Devoniae, December. 26. 1605. incidi.

Eodem die in Mandatis accepi, ut Reverendum Episcopum Winton adirem, and quid
velit in causa Ecclesiae sciscitarer; Responsumque referrem, praecipue in
quinque Articulis, etc.

Apr. 10. Die Solis post concionem finitam adij Episcopum, qui tum in Camera
sua in Aula (...) erat. Protuli quae accepi in Mandatis. Responsum dedit. Simul
inde Livimus.
invisi, ut preces in Domo Somersetensi audituri. Audimus. Postea ibi
invisimusCorpus nuperrimi Regis Jacobi, quod ibi expectabat adhuc diem Funeris.

Apr. 13. Die Mercurij, Retuli ad Ducem Buckinghamiae, quid responderit
Episcopus Winton.

Eodem tempore certiorem me fecit de Clerico, qui Regi erat a Conclavi,
Venerando Episcopo Dunelm. quid statuerat Rex, and de Successore.

Apr. 17. Die Paschatis, AEgrotante Episcopo Dunelm. Assignatus fui (sed
petitione dicti Episcopi) ab Illustrissimo Comite Pembrokiae Domi Camerario, ut
inservirem Regiae Majestati loco Clerici a Conclavi; quod munus praestiti, ad
Maij primum.

Apr. 23. Burton Scriptum tradidit Regi.

Maij. 1. Conjugium Celebratum Parisiis, inter Regem Serenissimum Carolum, and
Insignissimam Heroinam Henriettam Mariam Galliae Henrici Quarti Filiam.

Maij 7. Die Saturni, Funus ducimus Jacobi Regis.

Maij 11. Die Mercurij, Primo mane Dux Buckinghamiae versus mare se transtulit;
obviam iturus Reginae Mariae in Galliam.

Dedi ad Ducem eo die Literas, sed quae properantem sequerentur.

Maij 17. Parliamentum rejectum est in Maij ult.

Maij 18. Iter brevius suscepi cum Fratre meo ad vicum Hammersmith; visurus ibi
communes Amicos. Dies erat Mercurij.

Maij 19. Die Jovis, Literas secundas misi ad Ducem Buckinghamiae, tum
paulisper morantem Parisiis.

Maij 29. Die Solis, Literas tertias dedi in manus Episcopi Dunelm: qui cum
Rege iturus, traderet eas Duci Buckinghamiae ad Littus applicanti.

Maij 30. Die Lunae, Chelsey profectus sum ad Ducissam Buckinghamiae.

Maij 31. Die Martis, Parliamentum secundo expectat initium Junij 13. Die Lunae.

Carolus Rex versus Doroberniam iter suscepit, obviam iturus Reginae.

Junij 5. Die Pentecostes, mane instanter iturus ad Sacra, Literae e Gallia a
Duce Clarissimo Buckinghamiae, in manus meas se dedere.

Junij 6. Responsum dedi Aurora proxima. Post datum Responsum, Episcopus
Venerabilis Lancel. Winton, and ego simul proficiscimur ad aedes Tusculanas,
quas juxta Bromlye possidet Joh. Roffensis. Prandemus, Redimus Vesperi.

Junij 8. Die Mercurij Chelsey profectus sum; sed frustratus redij.

Junij 12. Die Solis, (...) Trinitatis Dies fuit, Regina Maria maria
pertransiens, ad Littus nostrum appulit circiter horam 7. vespertinam. Det
Deus, ut Hespera sit and foelix Stella Orbi nostro.

Junij 13. Die Lunae, Parliamentum iterum expectans Regem, recedit in Diem
Sabbati, Junij 18.

Junij 16. Die Jovis, Rex and Regina Londinum venerunt. Salutaverunt Aulam ad
horam quintam. Dies erat tristior, and nubibus operta. Quum jam ad Turrim
Londinensem pervenerunt (nam aqua usi sunt pro curru) and eduxit Rex Reginam in
exteriora Cimbae, ut videret and Populum and Vrbem; magnus e coelo cecidit
Imber, qui utrumque coegit in interiores recessus. Duravit Imber, usque dum
intrassent Aulam, finemque accepit.

Junij 18. Dies Sabbati erat. Initium dedit primo sub Serenissimo Rege Carolo
Parliamento, toties dilato. Interfuere Dux de Shiveruz and alii Nobiles
Galliae, Episcopus etiam, qui Reginae inservivit. Metu Pestilentiae, quae tum
caepit grassari, abstinuit Rex a pompa illius diei; ne populus in multitudine
conflueret. Et concio, quae mihi imposita est habenda in Cathedrali
Westmonasteriensi, in initiandis illis Comitiis, rejecta est in diem proximum,
i. e.

Junij 19. Dominicam primam post Trinitatem, quo die illam habui in Sacello
Aulae Regiae, quae dicitur Alba.

Junij 20. Initium dedit Convocationi.

Junij 24. Festum fuit S. Johannis Bapt. Rex jussit Archiepiscopum Cant. cum
sex aliis quos nominavit Episcopis consilium inire de Jejunio Publico and
Precibus publicis, ut Deus misereatur nostri, dum grassari inciperet
Pestilentia, and coelum supra modum nubilum minabatur famem; and simul ut
bearet Classem jam mare petituram. Episcopi erant Londinensis, Dunelmensis,
Wintoniensis, Norwicensis, Roffensis, Menevensis: Quod factum fuit.

Junij 25. Die Sabbati, Episcopi simul omnes, qui tum praesentes erant,
introducti sunt, ut osculo officii salutarent manus Reginae Mariae. Illa nos
summa cum gratia accepit.

Julij 2. Die Sabbati, celebratum est Jejunium ab utraque Domo Parlamenti in
exemplum totius Regni.

Julij 3. Die Solis, In Somnis apparuit mihi Serenissimus Rex Jacobus. Vidi
tantum velociter praetereuntem. Hilari Vultu fuit and sereno. In transitu me
vidit, annuit, subrisit, and subito Oculis meis subductus.

Julij 7. Die Jovis, R. Montague inductus est in Domum Parliamenti inferiorem,
etc.

Julij 9. Die Saturni, Placuit Serenissimo Regi Carolo, intimare Domui illi,
sibi non placere, quae de Montacutio dicta ibi and statuta fuere se inconsulto.

Julij 11. Die Lunae, Parliamentum translatum est Oxonium, in diem primum
Augusti.

Julij 13. Die Mercurij, quum mortui sint Londini priori septimana 1222.
Profectus sum rus in Domum amicissimi Francisci Windebank. Iter mihi eo
facienti obviam mihi casu factus est R. Montacutius. Primus fui, qui eum
certiorem feci de Regis erga ipsum gratia.

Julij 15. Die Veneris, Profectus sum Windlesoriam; negotia quaedam mihi a
venerando Episcopo Dunelm Commissa peregi. Redij ea nocte. Curia tum ibi.

Julij 17. Die Solis, iterum Windlesoriam invisi. Regi inter prandendum astiti.
Philosophica quaedam discussa. Prandebam: Postea in domo Episcopi Glocestrensis
Comedi. Interfuit ibi Baro Vaughan cum Filio not u maximo. Proximo die unus e
servis Episcopi, qui mensae astitit, Peste correptus est. Mihi caeterisque
faveat Deus. Ea nocte redij, subito claudus, nescio quo humore in crus
sinistrum delapso. Aut, ut existimavit R. An. ex mortu Cimicum. Convalui intra
biduum.

Julij 20. Die Mercurij, Jejunium publicum per totam Angliam.

Concionem ego habui in Parochia de Hurst, ubi cum Magistro Windebanke
commoratus sum.

Julij 21. Die Jovis, Invisi Rich. Harrison militem, and redij.

Julij 24. Die Solis, Concionatus sum in Parochia de Hurst.

Julij 29. Die Veneris, Oxonium ingressus sum.

Julij 31. Die Solis, In triclinio Hospitij Presidentis Collegij D. Joh.
Baptistae Oxon. Nescio quomodo cecidi; and laesum retuli Humerum sinistrum and
coxendicem.

Aug. 1. Die Lunae, incaepit Parlamentum Oxonij. Statim fere magnus impetus
fuit in Duoem Buckinghamiae.

Aug. 12. Die Veneris, solutum est Parliamentum: Populo non satis auscultante
Regis propositis.

Aug. 15. Relapsus meus; nunquam infirmior, test M. dies erat Lunae. Eodem die
iter suscepi versus Walliam.

Aug. 21. Die Solis. Concionatus sum Brecon, ubi per biduum transigendis
negotiis intentus commoratus sum.

Ea nocte in somnis visus est mihi Dux Buckinghamiae in lectum meum ascendere;
ubi multo erga me amore se gessit, post illam quietem qua fessi admodum solent
gaudere. Et visi etiam sunt mihi multi cubiculum intrare, qui hoc videbant.

Non multis diebus antea in somnis visus sum videre Ducissam Buckinghamiae,
egregiam illam Dominam, primo perplexam satis circa Maritum, sed postea hilarem
and gaudentem, quod metu Abortionis liberata sit, ut debito tempore (...)
iterum esse matter.

Aug. 24. Dies erat Mercurij, and Festum St. Bartholomaei, in aedes proprias
apud Aberguillye tutus (Deo gratiae) perveni. Quum tamen bis eo die inter
Aber-Markes and domum meam eversus sit currus meus. Prima vice ego in eo fui;
posteriore vero vacuus fuit.

Aug. 28. Dies erat Solis, Consecravi Capellam sive Oratorium propriis
sumptibus extructum in domo mea communiter vocata Aberguillye-House. Nomen
indidi Capellae S. Joh. Baptistae, in gratam memoriam Collegij S. Joh. Bapt.
Oxon. cujus primo Socius, and dein Praeses fui. Et hoc consulto feci.
Intervenit autem aliud, non mali omnis spero, de quo nunquam cogitavi. Hoc
fuit. Die Sabbati, vesperi immediate praecedente Consecrationem celebrandam,
dum precibus eram intentus; nescio qui violenter in mentem meam irruit adesse
diem Decollationis S. Joh. Bap. Finitis Precibus fasta consului. Reperio diem
illum in diem Lunae, 29 scilicet Augusti, non in diem Solis incidere. Optassem
diem ipsum; sed gavisus sum, me Consecrationem solennem peracturum, Vigilia
saltem illius Diei. Nam illa die Serenissimus Rex Jacobus causam meam circa
Electionem in Praesidentem Colleg j S. Joh. Bapt. Oxon per tres integras horas
ad minimum audivit, and me e manu inimicorum potentum justissime liberavit.

September. 4. Die Solis, Nocte sequente valde turbatus sum per insomnia. Totum
me tenuit Dux Buckinghamiae, Servi and Familia ejus; non satis ordinata omnia.
Ducissa male se habens, evocat Ancillas, and lectum petit. Det Deus meliora.

September. 11. Die Solis, (...) habui apud Carmarthen, Judicibus tum
praesentibus. Eadem nocte somniavi quod Dr. Theod. Priceus monuit me de Ma. 3.
and quod erga me infidus fuit, and patefecit omnia, quae novit: Et ut ideo
caverem, neque amplius, etc.

Postea de Sack. Croe, quod peste mortuus esset, quum non diu [ante] cum Rege
fuisset.

September. 24. Ordines Sacros solus unus a me petiit: Examinationi undique impar.

September. 25. Cum Exhortatione non ordinatum dimisi. Dies erat Sabbati.

September. 26. Die Solis, Ea nocte somniavi de Nuptiis, nescio cujus Oxon. Omnes
qui aderant, vestibus viridioribus florentes. Neminem novi praeter Tho.
Flaxnye. Statim post sine interjecta vigilia (quantum novi) visus est mihi
Episcopus Wigorn. Capite and Cervicibus linteis obductus. Suasit mihi amice, ut
cum illis habitarem; designando locum ubi Curia Marchionatus Walliae tum
tenebatur; sed (responsione (...) non expectata) respondit ipse, se scire me
non potuisse tam exiliter vivere, etc.

October. 8. Die Sabbati, Rediit e Wallia Comes. North. Praeses Walliae, itinere
per mare suscepto.

October. 9. Die Solis, Concionatus sum apud Carmarthen.

October. 10. Die Lunae, Equo vectus Montes petij: Dies erat pro tempore Anni
serenissimus, and adeo temperatus, ut redeuns prandium sumpsimus and ego and
qui mecum erant sub dio, in loco dicto Pente Cragg, ubi Registrarius
rusticabatur.

October. 30. Die (...), Sr. Thom. Coventrey, made Lord Reeper.

November. 11. Dies er at Veneris, Iter suscepi, rediturus in Angliam.

November. 17. Die Jovis, Carolus Filius Ducis Buckinghamiae, natus.

November. 20. Die Solis, Concionem tum habui apud Hony-Lacye in Comitatu
Herefordensi.

November. 24. Die Jovis, Perveni ad aedes Amicissimi F. Windebank apud
Hains-Hill. Ibi Vxor Amici mei (nam ille eo tempore Aulicus) statim a primo
adventu narravit, Duci Buckinghamiae, tum apud Belgas negotium Regni agenti,
natum esse Filium: Cui Deus omnibus bonis Coeli and Terrae benedicat.

December. 4. Die Solis, Concionem habui apud Hurst. Ibi Ruri degebam ad festum
usque Nativitatis.

December. 14. Dies erat Mercurij, Windlesoriam petij, sed redij eodem die.

December. 25. Die Solis, Concionem habui apud Hurst in Festis Domini Natalitiis.

December. 31. Die Sabbati, ad Aulam Regiam profectus sum (quae erat tum
Hamptoniae) Ibi,

Januar. 1. Die Solis, accepi me inter alios Episcopos nominatum, ut die
Mercurij sequente apud Aulam White Hall dictam, consilium ineamus de Ceremoniis
Coronationis. Accepi simulLegatum extraordinarium Gallorum destinatum esse, ut
in maxima part AEdium Dunelmensis Episcopi resideret.

Januar. 2. Die Lunae, Reversus sum ad Hains-Hill. Ibi enim, horum negotiorum
nescius, Chartas necessarias una cum cistula post reliqui. Has quum aptaverim,
ad aedes me contuli Rich. Harrison militis; ut valedicerem amicis. Ibi primum
quid de me senserit F. H. ni fallor, cognovi. Ipse aperte dixi, quo animo fui,
etc. Redij.

Januar. 3. Die Martis, veni Londinum ad aedes proprias Westmonasterij. nam
hebdomada ante Natalitia, misi servum, qui mea omnia e domo Amici mei Episcopi
Dunelm (quo cum ut Hospes per totum quadriennium vixi) ad aedes proprias
deferret, praeter libros, quos male distuli in adventum meum. Cogebat enim and
Legati Gallici adventus, ut nimis properarem; and moles negotiorum optavit
Libros ad manum. Vesperi adij Ducem Buckinghamiae.

Januar. 4. Die Mercurij, Convenimus Aulae vulgo dictae White Hall, ad
deliberandum de Caeremoniis Coronationis. Misi servum, qui Libros adduceret:
adduxit. Ea nocte disposui per Musaeum: Nec dabatur mora. Nam quum simul eramus
in deliberatione de Caeremoniis, exiit a Rege and ad nos venit Comes
Pembrochiensis, Regiae Domus Camerarius Honoratissimus; and nomine Regis jussit
me paratum esse in Febr. sextum, ut eo die in initio Parlamenti Concionem
habere possim.

Januar. 6. Die Veneris, Dies erat Epiphaniae; convenimus iterum de
Caeremoniis, and responsum damus Regi.

Januar. 16. Mandatum Regis mihi exposuit Archiepiscopus Cant. me supplere
debere in Coronatione futura, vices Decani Westmonasterij. Nolle enim Regem, ut
Episcopus Lincoln. tum Decanus interesset Caeremoniis. Dies erat Lunae.

Eodem die consultum est Jussu Regis, quid in causa Rich. Montacutii agendum.
Aderant Episcopi Londin. Dunelm. Winton. Roffens. Meneven.

Januar. 17. Responsum per Literas dedimus, subscriptas Die Martis. Hoc die
etiam Episcopus Lincoln. me deputavit Scriptis suis Sigillo munitis ad
supplendum vices suas, qua Decanus er at Westmon. in Coronatione Regis Caroli.

Januar. 18. Die Mercurij, Ad Regem me adduxit Dux Buckinghamiae: Ostendi illi
Notulas, si quae offenderint, etc.

Eodem Die jussu Regis Archiepiscopus Cant. cum Londin. Dunelm. Winton.
Roffens. Meneven. consulebant de Precum Formula, ut gratias agamus pro Peste
remissa.

Januar. 23. Libellum perfectum de Caeremoniis Coronationis paratum habui, per
omnia cum Libro Regali. Dies erat Lunae.

Januar. 29. Dies erat Solis, Intellexi quid D. B. collegit de causa, Libro,
and Opinionibus Rich. Montacutij, R. C. apud se statuisset. Videor videre Nubem
surgentem and minantem Ecclesiae Anglicanae. Dissipet pro Misericordia sua Deus.

Januar. 31. Dies erat Martis, Episcopi, and alij Proceres antea nominati a
Rege ut de Caeremonijs Corationis Consilium inirent, ut mos antiquus
observaretur, Regis Jussu ipsum adimus. Inspicit Rex omnia Regalia: Induit se
Tunicis S. Edwardi: Jussit me legere Rubricas directivas. Omnibus Lectis,
retulimus Regalia ad Ecclesiam Westmon. and loco suo condimus.

Feb. 2. Die Jovis and Purificationis B. V. Mariae, Coronatus est Rex
Serenissimus Carolus: Ego functus sum vice Decani Westmon. Intravit Rex
Ecclesiam, quum nondum sonuit Hora Decima; and Tertia praeterijt, antequam
exivit. Dies clarissimo gaudebat Sole.

Solemnibus finitis, in Aula magna Westmon. quum tradidit mihi in manus
Regalia, quae in Ecclesia B. Pet. Westmon. servantur: De novo dedit Gladium
Cortanam dictum, and duos alios, qui coram Rege eo Die deferebantur, ut
servarentur cum reliquis Insignibus in Ecclesia. Redij, and ad Altar
Solemniter obtuli Nomine Regis, and cum alijs reposui.

Nihil in tanto negotio, and frequentia Populi incredibili, amissum, fractum,
turbatum nihil. Pulpitum sive Scena vacuum, and expeditum Regi, Proceribus and
negotio; and audivi Comites alloquentes Regem inter redeundum, se nunquam
vidisse Solennia, etiam multo minora, tam pacifica, tam ordinata.

Feb. 6. Lunae erat Dies, Concionem habui coram Rege Carolo, and Proceribus
Regni, in initio Parlamenti.

Feb. 11. Die Sabbati, Ad instantiam Comitis Warwicensis Colloquium fuit in
(...) Rich. Montacutij in AEdibus Ducis Buckinghamiae, etc.

Feb. 17. Die Veneris, Colloquium praedictum secundo habitum est, non paucis
Porceribus Regni praesentibus, Loco praedicto.

Feb. 21. Dies erat Martis, and Carnivale: Misit D. Buckinghamiae, ut ad se
venirem. Tum in Mandatis mihi dedit, ut, etc.

Feb. 23. Die Jovis, Quaesivi Ducem apud Chelsei. Ibi primo vidi nuper Natum
Haeredem ejus Carolum. Ducem non inveni. Redij, dein inveni (...) ejus me
quaerentem. Cum eo propero, and in Aula invenio. Quid a me factum narro.

Febr. 24. Die Veneris, and S. Matthiae, Cum eo fui in AEdibus suis per Horas
fere tres, ubi sua manu, etc. aliquid ut adderem jussit. Dicto obsequutus sum;
and proximo Die attuli: Feb. 25.

Feb. 26 Dominica prima Quad. Concionem, quam habui in initio Parlamenti, Regio
Mandato Typis jam excusam in manus Serenissimi Regis Caroli dedi, Vesperi.

Feb. 27. Die Lunae, Periculum Regis Caroli ab Equo, qui fractis duobus
Ephippiorum cingulis, and Ephippio una cum Sessore in ventrem devoluto, tremens
constitit, donec Rex salvus, etc.

Martij 1. Dies erat Mercurij, and Festum S. Davidis, Clamor incaepit in Domo
Inferiori Parlamenti, Nominatim contra Ducem Buckinghamiae ob moratam Navim
dictam, The St. Peter of Newhaven, post Sententiam latam. Perpetuae in Domo
illa agitationes erant a die illo.

Martij 6. Resignavi Rectoriam de Ibstock, quam habui in Commendam.

Martij 11. Proposuit in Domo Dr. Turner Medicus Quaesita Septem, vulgo dicta
Quaeres, contra Ducem Buckinghamiae: Non alio tamen nixas Fundamento, quam quod
ex Fama quidem Publica, ut dixit, petijt. Dies erat Saturni.

Martij 16. Die Jovis, Proposuit quidam e Belgia Nomine Joh. Oventrout se viam
ostensurum, qui Occidentalis-India excuteret Jugum Hispaniae, and se Regi
nostro Carolo subderet. Res refertur (...) Comiti de Totnes, Baroni Conway
Secretario Principali: and quia dixit Stratagema suum a Religione non minimas
vires petiturum, adjungor ego. Proposuit Senex quaedam de Arica capienda: Nec
qui capi potuit, ullis Argumentis edocuit; nisi quod velit dividi Incolarum
animos in causa Religionis, immisso illic Catechismo Hidelbergiae. Dimisimus
Hominem; nec Sapientiores redimus.

Anno 1625.
March 27. Midlent Sunday, I Preached at White Hall.

I ascended the Pulpit, much troubled, and in a very melancholy moment, the
Report then spreading, that his Majesty King James, of most Sacred Memory to
me, was Dead. Being interrupted with the dolours of the Duke of Buckingham, I
broke off my Sermon in the middle.

The King died at Theobalds, about three quarters of an hour past Eleven in the
forenoon. He breathed forth his Blessed Soul most Religiously, and with great
constancy of Faith, and Courage.

That day, about five a Clock, Prince Charles was Solemnly Proclaimed King. God
grant to him a Prosperous and Happy Reign.

The King fell Sick, March, 4. on Friday. The Disease appeared to be a Tertian
Ague. But I fear it was the Gout, which by the wrong application of Medicines,
was driven from his feet to his inward vital parts.

April 1. Friday, I received Letters from the Earl of Pembroke, Lord
Chamberlain to the King, and therein a Command from his Majesty King Charles,
to Preach a Sermon before himself and the House of Peers in the Session of
Parliament, to be held on the 17 day of May next following.

Apr. 3. Sunday. I delivered into the Duke of Buckingham's hands, my short
Annotations upon the Life and Death of the most August King James; which he had
commanded me to put in writing.

April 5. Tuesday, I Exhibited a Schedule, in which were wrote the Names of
many Churchmen, marked with the Letters O. and P. The Duke of Buckingham had
commanded to digest their Names in that method; that (as himself said) he might
deliver them to King Charles.

April 9. Saturday, The Duke of Buckingham, whom upon all accounts I am bound
for ever to Honor, signified to me, that a certain Person, moved through I
know not what envy, had blackened my Name with his Majesty King Charles; laying
hold for that purpose of the Error; into which, by I know not what Fate, I had
formerly fallen in the business of Charles Earl of Devonshire, 1605. December: 26.

The same day I received in Command, to go to the Right Reverend the Bishop of
Winchester, and learn from him, what he would have done in the Cause of the
Church; and bring back his Answer, especially in the matter of the Five
Articles, etc.

April 10. Sunday, after Sermon was done, I went to the Bishop, who was then in
his Chamber at Court. I acquainted him with what I had received in Command. He
gave to me his Answer. From thence we went together to hear Prayers in
Somerset House. Having heard Prayers, we afterward saw there the Body of the
late King James; which rested there till the day of his Funeral Rites.

April 3. Wednesday, I brought back to the Duke of Buckingham, the Answer of
the Bishop of Winchester.

At the same time the Duke made known to me, what the King had determined
concerning his Clerk of the Closet, the Right Reverend the Bishop of Durham,
and about his Successor in that Office.

April 17. Easter Day, The Bishop of Durham being Sick, I was appointed (but at
the desire of the said Bishop) by the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke,
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, to wait upon his Majesty in the Quality of
Clark of the Closet; which place I Executed till the first of May.

April 23. Burton presented his Paper to the King.

May 11. The Marriage was Celebrated at Paris, between his Majesty King
Charles, and the most Illustrious Princess Henrietta Maria of France, Daughter
of Henry IV.

May 7. Saturday, we Celebrated the Funeral of King James.

May 1. Early in the Morning the Duke of Buckingham went toward the Seaside,
to pass over into France to meet Queen Mary.

I wrote Letters to the Duke that day; which might follow after him. For he
went in great haste.

May 17. The Parliament was put off till the last day of May.

May 18. I took a short Journey, with my Brother to Hammersmith; that we might
there see our common Friends. It was Wednesday.

May 19. Thursday, I sent Letters the second time to the Duke of Buckingham,
then staying for a while at Paris.

May 29. Sunday, I gave a third Letter into the hands of the Bishop of Durham,
who was to Attend the King; that he might deliver them to the Duke of
Buckingham at his first Landing.

May 30. Monday, I went to Chelsey, to wait upon the Duchess of Buckingham.

May 31. Tuesday, The Parliament was a second time put off, till Monday the 13.
of June.

King Charles set forward toward Canterbury, to meet the Queen.

June 5. Whitsunday, in the Morning, just as I was going to Prayers, I received
Letters from France, from the most Illustrious Duke of Buckingham.

June 6. I wrote an Answer next Morning. After I had finished my Answer, the
Right Reverend Lancelot Lord Bishop of Winchester and I, went together to the
Country House, which John Lord Bishop of Rochester has by Bromley. We Dined
there; and returned in the Evening.

June 8. Wednesday, I went to Chelsey, but returned with my Labor lost.

June 12. Sunday, it was Trinity Sunday, Queen Mary crossing the Seas, Landed
upon our Shore about Seven a Clock in the Evening. God grant, that she may be
an Evening and an Happy Star to our Orb.

June 13. Monday, the Parliament waiting for the King's coming, adjourned again
till Saturday, the 18th of June.

June 16. Thursday, the King and Queen came to London. They arrived at Court at
five a Clock. It was ill weather, and the day cloudy. When they came by the
Tower of London (for they came by water instead of Coach) the King led out the
Queen to the outside of the Barge, that she might see the People and the City.
But at the same time, a violent shower of Rain falling down, forced them both
to return into the inward part of the Barge. The shower continued, until they
had entered White Hall; and then ceased.

June 18. Saturday, The first Parliament of King Charles, which had been so
often put off, now began. There were present at the opening of it, the Duke of
Shiveruz, with other French Noblemen; a Bishop also, who Attended the Queen.
For fear of the Pestilence, which then began to be very rife, the King omitted
the pomp usual upon that day, lest the great conflux of People should be of ill
consequence. And the Sermon, which had been imposed upon me to be Preached in
Westminster Abbey at the beginning of this Session, was put off to the next
day, that is, to

June 19. First Sunday after Trinity, on which day, I Preached it in the
Chapel at White Hall.

June 20. The Convocation began.

June 24. Was the Feast of St: John Baptist. The King Commanded the Archbishop
of Canterbury, with six other Bishops, whom he then Named, to advise together
concerning a Public Fast, and a Form of Prayer, to implore the Divine Mercy,
now that the Pestilence began to spread, and the extraordinary wet weather
threatened a Famine; and also to beg the Divine Blessing upon the Fleet now ready
to put to Sea. The Bishops were London, Durham, Winchester, Norwich, Rochester,
St. David's. This was done.

June 25. Saturday, All the Bishops, who were then in Town, were introduced
together, that they might wait upon Queen Mary, and kiss her Hand. She received
us very Graciously.

July 2. Saturday, The Fast was kept by both Houses of Parliament, to set an
Example therein to the whole Kingdom.

July 3. Sunday, in my Sleep his Majesty King James appeared to me. I saw him
only passing by swiftly. He was of a pleasant and serene Countenance. In
passing he saw me, beckned to me, smiled, and was immediately withdrawn from my
Sight.

July 7. Thursday, Richard Montague was brought into the Lower House of
Parliament, etc.

July 9. Saturday, it pleased his Majesty King Charles, to intimate to the
House of Commons; that what had been there said and resolved, without
consulting him, in Montague's Cause, was not pleasing to him.

July 11. Monday, The Parliament was Prorogued to Oxford, against the first day
of August.

July 13. Wednesday, there having died in the former week at London 1222
Persons. I went into the Country, to the House of my good Friend Francis
Windebank. In going thither, Richard Montague met me by chance. I was the
first, who certified him of the King's Favor to him.

July 15. Friday, I went to Windsor; and performed some Businesses committed to
my trust by the Right Reverend Bishop of Durham. I returned that night. The
Court was there at that time.

July 17. Sunday, I went again to Windsor. I stood by the King at Dinner time:
Some Matters of Philosophy were the Subject of Discourse. I Dined: Afterward I
Eat in the House of the Bishop of Gloucester. Baron Vaughan was there present,
with his Eldest Son. The next day one of the Bishops Servants, who had waited
at Table, was seized with the Plague. God be merciful to me and the rest. That
Night I returned, being become lame on the sudden, through I know not what
humor falling down upon my left Leg, or (as R: An: thought) by the biting of
al. (...).
Buggs. I grew well within two days.

July 20. Wednesday, A Public Fast was held throughout all England.

I Preached in the Parish of Hurst; where I then abode with Master Windebanke.

July 21. Thursday, I visited Sir Richard Harrison, and returned.

July 24. Sunday, I Preached in the Parish of Hurst.

July 29. Friday, I entered into Oxford.

July 31. Sunday, I fell down, I know not how, in the Parlour of the
President's Lodging at St. John's College, and hurt my left shoulder and hip.

Aug. 1. Monday, The Parliament began at Oxford. Presently after the beginning
of it, a great assault was made against the Duke of Buckingham.

Aug. 12. Friday, The Parliament was dissolved; the Commons not harkening, as
was expected, to the King's Proposals.

Aug. 15. My Relapse, I never was weaker, in the judgment of the Phisician. It
was Monday. The same day I began my journey toward Wales.

Aug. 21. Sunday. I Preached at Brecknock; where I stayed two days, very busy
in performing some Business.

That Night, in my Sleep, it seemed to me, that the Duke of Buckingham came
into Bed to me; where he behaved himself with great kindness toward me, after
that Rest, wherewith wearied Persons are wont to solace themselves. Many also
seemed to me to enter the Chamber, who saw this.

Not long before, I dreamed that I saw the Duchess of Buckingham, that
Excellent Lady, at first very much perplexed about her Husband, but afterward
cheerful, and rejoicing, that she was freed from the fear of Abortion, so that
in due time she might be again a Mother.

Aug. 24. Wednesday, and the Festival of St. Bartholomew, I came safely (thanks
be to God) to my own House at Aberguille. Although my Coach had been twice that
day overturned between Aber-Markes and my House. The first time I was in it;
but the latter time it was empty.

Aug. 28. Sunday, I Consecrated the Chapel or Oratory, which I had built at my
own charge in my House, commonly called Aberguilly-House. I Named it the
Chapel of St. John Baptist, in grateful remembrance of St. John Baptist's
College in Oxford, of which I had been first Fellow, and afterward President.
And this I had determined to do. But another thing intervened (of no ill Omen
as I hope) of which I had never thought. It was this. On Saturday, the Evening
immediately preceding the Consecration, while I was intent at Prayer, I know
not how, it came strongly into my mind, that the day of the Beheading of St.
John Baptist was very near. When Prayers were finished; I consulted the
Calendar. I found that day to fall upon Monday, to wit, the 29th of August, not
upon Sunday. I could have wished, it had fallen upon that same day, when I
Consecrated the Chapel. However, I was pleased, that I should perform that
solemn Consecration at least on the Eve of that Festival. For upon that day,
his Majesty King James heard my Cause about the Election to the Presidentship
of St. John's College in Oxford, for three hours together at least; and with
great Justice delivered me out of the hands of my powerful Enemies.

September. 4. Sunday, The Night following I was very much troubled in my Dreams.
My Imagination ran altogether upon the Duke of Buckingham, his Servants, and
Family. All seemed to be out of order: that the Duchess was ill, called for
her Maids, and took her Bed. God grant better things.

September. 11. Sunday, I Preached at Carmarthen, the Judges being then present.
The same Night I Dreamed, that Dr: Theodore Price, admonished me concerning Ma:
3. and that he was unfaithful to me, and discovered all he knew: and that I
should therefore take heed of him, and trust him no more, etc.

Afterward I dreamed of Sackville Crow, that he was dead of the Plague, having
not long before been with the King.

September. 24. One only Person desired to Receive Holy Orders from me; and he
found to be unfit, upon Examination.

September. 25. I sent him away with an Exhortation, not Ordained. It was then
Saturday.

September. 26. Sunday, That Night I dreamed of the Marriage of I know not whom
at Oxford. All that were present, were clothed with flourishing green
Garments. I knew none of them, but Thomas Flaxnye. Immediately after, without
any intermission of Sleep, (that I know of) I thought I saw the Bishop of
Worcester, his Head and Shoulders covered with Linen. He advised and invited
me kindly, to dwell with them, marking out a place, where the Court of the
Marches of Wales was then held. But not staying for my Answer, he subjoyned,
that he knew I could not live so meanly, etc.

October. 8. Saturday, the Earl of Northampton, President of Wales, returned out
of Wales, taking his Journey by Sea.

October. 9. Sunday, I Preached at Carmarthen.

October. 10. Monday, I went on Horseback up to the Mountains. It was a very
bright day for the time of Year, and so warm, that in our return, I and my
Company dined in the open Air, in a place called Pente-Cragg, where my
Registrary had his Country House.

October. 30. Sunday, Sir Thomas Coventry, made Lord Keeper.

November. 11. Friday, I began my Journey, to return into England.

November. 17. Thursday, Charles the Duke of Buckingham's Son, was born.

November. 20. Sunday, I Preached at Honye-Lacye in Herefordshire.

November 24. Thursday, I came to the House of my great Friend Fr. Windebank.
There the Wife of my Friend (for himself was then at Court) immediately as soon
as I came told me, that the Duke of Buckingham (then negotiating for the
Public in the Low Countries) had a Son born; whom God bless with all the good
things of Heaven and Earth.

December. 4. Sunday, I Preached at Hurst. I stayed there in the Country until
Christmas.

December. 14. Wednesday, I went to Windsor; but returned the same day.

December. 25. Sunday, I Preached at Hurst upon Christmas day.

December. 31. Saturday, I went to the Court, which was then at Hampton Court.
There,

Januar. 1. Sunday, I understood, that I was Named among other Bishops, who
were to consult together on Wednesday following at White Hall, concerning the
Ceremonies of the Coronation. I was also at the same time informed, that the
bigger part of the Bishop of Durham's House was appointed for the Residence of
the Ambassador Extraordinary of the King of France.

Januar. 2. Monday, I returned to Hains-Hill. For there, not then knowing any
thing of these Matters, I had left my necessary Papers with my Trunk. When I
had put these in order; I went to Sir Richard Harrison's House, to take leave
of my Friends. There (if I mistake not) I first knew, what F. H. thought of me.
I told my mind plainly, etc. I returned.

Januar. 3. Tuesday, I came to London, and fixed my self at my own House at
Westminster. For the week before Christmas I had sent my Servant, who had
brought all my things out of the House of my good Friend the Bishop of Durham
(with whom I had abode as a Guest for Four Years complete) to my own House,
save only my Books; the removal of which, I unadvisedly put off till my own
coming. For the coming of the French Ambassador forced me to make overmuch
haste; and the multitude of business then laying upon me, made it requisite,
that I should have my Books at hand. In the Evening I visited the Duke of
Buckingham.

Januar. 4. Wednesday, We met at White Hall, to consult of the Ceremonies of
the Coronation. I sent my Servant to bring my Books, who brought them. That
Night I placed them in order in my Study. And it was high time. For while we
were in consultation about the Ceremonies, the Right Honorable the Earl of
Pembroke, Lord Chamberlain of the Household to his Majesty, came from the King
to us, and delivered to me the King's Order, to be ready against the sixth day
of February, to Preach that day at the opening of the Parliament.

Januar. 6. Friday, Epiphany day, We met again, to consult concerning the
Ceremonies; and gave up our Answer to the King.

Januar. 16. The Archbishop of Canterbury made known to me the King's
Pleasure, that at the Coronation I should supply the place of the Dean of
Westminster. For that his Majesty would not have the Bishop of Lincoln, then
Dean, to be present at the Ceremony. It was then Monday.

The same day, by the King's Command, a Consultation was held, what was to be
done in the Cause of Richard Montague. There were present, the Bishops of
London, Durham, Winchester, Rochester, and St. David's.

Januar. 17. Tuesday, We gave in our Answer in Writing, Subscribed this day.
This day also, the Bishop of Lincoln deputed me under his Hand and Seal, to
supply the place for him, which he, as Dean of Westminster, was to Execute in
the Coronation of King Charles.

Januar. 18. Wednesday. The Duke of Buckingham brought me to the King, to whom
I showed my Notes, that if he disliked any thing therein, etc.

The same day, by the King's Command, the Archbishop of Cant. and the Bishops
of London, Durham, Winchester, Rochester and St. David's, consulted together
concerning a Form of Prayer, to give Thanks for the decrease of the Plague.

Januar. 23. I had a perfect Book of the Ceremonies of the Coronation made
ready, agreeing in all things with the Kings Book. It was Monday.

Januar. 29. Sunday, I understood what D. B. had collected concerning the
Cause, Book, and Opinions of Richard Montague, and what R. C. had determined
with himself therein. Methinks, I see a Cloud arising, and threatening the
Church of England. God of his Mercy dissipate it.

Januar. 31. Tuesday, The Bishops and other Peers before nominated by the King
to consult of the Ceremonies of the Coronation, that the ancient Manner might
be observed, by his Majesty's Command went together to him. The King viewed all
the Regalia; Put on St. Edward's Tunicks; Commanded me to read the Rubricks of
direction. All being read, we carried back the Regalia to the Church of
Westminster, and laid them up in their place.

Febr. 2. Thursday and Candlemas day, His Majesty King Charles was Crowned. I
then officiated in the place of the Dean of Westminster. The King entered the
Abby-Church a little before Ten a Clock; and it was past Three, before he went
out of it. It was a very Bright Sun-shining Day.

The Solemnity being ended, in the great Hall at Westminster, when the King
delivered into my hands the Regalia, which are kept in the Abby-Church of
Westminster, he did, (which had not before been done) deliver to me the Sword
called Curtana, and two others, which had been carried before the King that
day, to be Kept in the Church, together with the other Regalia. I returned, and
Offered them Solemnly at the Altar in the Name of the King, and laid them up
with the rest.

In so great a Ceremony, and amidst an incredible concourse of People, nothing
was lost, or broke, or disordered. The Theater was clear, and free for the
King, the Peers, and the Business in hand; and I heard some of the Nobility
saying to the King in their return, that they never had seen any Solemnity,
although much less, performed with so little Noise, and so great Order.

Febr. 6. Monday, I Preached before King Charles and the House of Peers, at the
opening of the Parliament.

Febr. 11. Saturday, At the desire of the Earl of Warwick, a Conference An
Account of this Conference is in my hands but wrote very Partially, in favor
of Dr: Preston and prejudice of Dr: White. H: W:
was held concerning the Cause of Richard Montague, in the Duke of Buckingham's
House [ between Dr. Morton and Dr. Preston on the one side, and Dr. White on
the other.]

Febr. 17. Friday, The foresaid Conference was renewed, in the same place, many
of the Nobility being present.

Febr. 21. Shrove-Tuesday, the Duke of Buckingham sent for me to come to him;
and then gave me in Command, that, etc.

Febr. 23. Thursday, I sought the Duke at Chelsey. There I first saw his Son
and Heir Charles lately born. I found not the Duke. Returning, I found his
Servant, who was seeking me. I went immediately with him, and found the Duke at
Court. I related to him, what I had done.

Febr. 24. Friday, and S. Matthias's Day, I was with the Duke in his own House
almost Three Hours; where with his own hand, etc. he commanded me to add
somewhat. I did so, and brought it to him next Day, Febr. 25.

Febr. 26. First Sunday in Lent, in the Evening, I presented to his Majesty
King Charles my Sermon, which I had Preached at the opening of the Parliament,
being now Printed, by his Majesty's Command.

Feb. 27. Monday, The Danger which hapened to King Charles from his Horse;
which having broken the two Girts of the Saddle, and the Saddle together with
the Rider fallen under his Belly, stood trembling, until the King, having
received no hurt, etc.

March 1. Wednesday, and the Festival of S: David, a Clamor arose in the House
of Commons, against the Duke of Buckingham, more particularly for stopping a
Ship, called, The St: Peter of Newhaven, after Sentence pronounced. From that
day there were perpetual Heats in the House.

March 6. I resigned the Parsonage of Ibstock, which I held in Commendam.

March 11. Dr. Turner, a Physician, offered in the House Seven Queries against
the Duke of Buckingham; yet grounded upon no other Foundation, than what he
received from public Fame; as himself confessed. It was then Saturday.

March: 16: Thursday, a certain Dutchman, Named John Oventrout, proposed to
show a way how the West Indies might shake off the Yoke of Spain, and put
themselves under the Subjection of our King Charles. The Matter was referred to
be disclosed to the Earl of Totnes, the Lord Conway Principal Secretary; and
because he said that his Stratagem did depend in a great measure upon Religion,
I was added to them. The Old Man proposed somewhat about the taking of Arica;
Yet showed not to us any Method, how it might be taken; unless it were, that he
would have the Minds of the Inhabitants to be divided in the Cause of Religion,
by sending in among them the Catechism of Heidelberg. We dismissed the Man, and
returned, not a whit the wiser.

Anno 1626.
Martij 26. Die Solis, Misit me ad Regem D. B. Ibi certiorem feci Regem de
duobus negotijs, quae, etc. Gratias egit Rex Serenissimus.

Martij 29. Rex Carolus utramque Domum Parliamenti alloquitur, praecipue vero
Inferiorem, and per se, and per Honoratissimum Dominum Custodem Magni Sigilli,
in Palatio de White Hall. In multis Domum Inferiorem reprehendit. Multa etiam
adjecit de Duce Buckinghamiae, etc.

In Convocatione illo Die habita multa agitata sunt de Concione, quam habuit
Gabr. Goodman Episcopus Glocestr. coram Rege Die Solis praecedente, Dominica 5.
Quadragesimae.

April 5. Die Mercurij, Mane misit Rex, ut Episcopi Norwicensis, Lichfeldensis,
and Menevensis nosmetipsos coram sisteremus. Adsumus ego and Litchfeldensis:
Norwicensis Rus abijt. Accipimus Mandata Regis circa, etc. Redimus.

April 12. Die Mercurij, Hor. 9. ante Meridiem, convenimus Archiepiscopus Cant.
Episcopi Winton. Dunelm. and Meneven. jussi a Rege consulere de Concione, quam
habuit coram Majestate Regia Episcopus Glocestrensis Dr. Goodman, Dom. 5.
Quadrag. ultimo elapsa: Consulimus; and Responsum damus Regi; quaedam minus
caute dicta, falso nihil: Nec innovatum quidquam ab eo in Ecclesia Anglicana:
Optimum fore, si iterum tempore a seipso electo iterum Concionem haberet, and
ostenderet quomodo and in quibus male acoeptus intellectusque fuit ab
Auditoribus. Ea nocte post horam nonam Regi renuntiavi, quae in Mandatis accepi
die 5. April, and alia eo spectantia; inter caetera, de Impropriationibus
reddendis. Multa gratissime Rex; ego quum prius disserui de modo.

April 14. In Febrem incidit Dux Buckinghamiae. Dies erat Veneris.

April 19. Die Mercurij, Petitio Joh. Digbye Comitis Bristoliensis contra Ducem
Buckinghamiae lecta est in Domo Superiori Parlamenti: Acris illa, and quae
perniciem minatur alteri partium.

April 20. Die Veneris, Retulit Cognitionem totius negotij and etiam Petitionis
Comitis Bristoliensis Domui Parlamenti Rex Carolus.

April 21. Dies erat Sabbati, Misit Dux Buckinghamius, ut ad se venirem. Ibi
audivi, quid Primicerius Regius Dom. Joh. Cocus contra me suggessit,
Thesaurario Angliae, and ille Duci. Domine miserere Servi tui.

April 22. Die Solis, Misit Rex, ut omnes Episcopi cum ipso essemus, Hora
quarta pomeridiana. Adsumus 14. numero. Reprehendit, quod in causis Ecclesiae
hoc tempore Parlamenti silemus, and non notum facimus ei, quid Vtile vel
Inutile foret Ecclesiae; se enim paratum esse promovere causam (...).

Deinde jussit, ut in Causis Bristoliensis and Buckinghamiae Conscientia nostra
duce, sequamur tantum probationes, non rumores.

April 30. Die Solis, Concionem habui apud White Hall coram Rege.

Maij 1. Lunae Dies erat, Comes Bristoliensis accusatur Laesae Majestatis in
Parlamento ab Atturnato Regio Roberto Heath Milite: Comes dictus Articulos 12.
exhibuit tum and ibidem contra Ducem Buckinghamiae, and illum ejusdem Criminis
reaccusat. Et alios Articulos contra Baronem Conwaye Secretarium. In custodiam
traditur Comes Bristol. Jacobo Maxwell Ordinario Domus Par. Officiario.

Maij 4. Die Jovis, Arthurus Lake Bathon. and Well. Episcopus Londini mortuus
est.

Maij 8. Dies erat Lunae, Hora 2da. post Meridiem, Domus Inferior detulerunt
Ducem Buckinghamiae accusationibus 13. (...) ad Domum Superiorem.

Maij 11. Die Jovis, Rex Carolus venit in Domum Parlamenti. Paucis alloquitur
Proceres de Honor Nobilium conservando, contra viles and infestas Calumnias
eorum e Domo Inferiori, qui detulerunt Ducem, etc. Octo fuerunt qui in eo
negotio parts sortitas exornarunt. Prologus Dudleius Diggs, and Epilogus, Joh.
Elliot, hoc die jussu Regis Turri Mandati sunt. Liberati intra paucos dies
uterque.

Maij 25. Dies erat Jovis, Quia non remissus Domui Comes Arundelius, nec causa
patefacta; suspicio crevit de laesis Privilegijs. Conclusum est inter Proceres
de Domo comperendinanda in crastinum: Quo die,

Maij 26. Iterum comperendinant in Junij 2. Statuentes se nihil acturos ante
restitutum Comitem, vel causam saltem prolatam, etc.

Maij 25. Quo die hae turbae primo moverunt, erat Urbani Papae; and hodie sedet
Urbanus Octavus; cui and Hispano simul si quid gratum facere velint, quibus id
maxim curae est; non video, quid melius excogitare possint, quam ut in Parts
distrahant Concilium Regni.

Junij 15. Die Jovis, Post multas agitationes privata Malitia in Ducem
Buckinghamiae superavit, and suffocavit omnia publica Negotia. Nihil actum est,
sed Parlamentum solutum.

Junij 20. Dies erat Martis, Serenissimus Rex Carolus me nominavit in Episcopum
Bathon. and Wellen. Et simul injunxit, ut Concionem haberem paratam in Solenne
Jejunium, quod Proclamatione sanxit in diem Julij 5. sequentem.

Julij 5. Solenne Jejunium institutum, partim ob grassantem adhuc in multis
locis Regni Pestilentiam, and partim ob metum Hostium minitantium. Concionem
habui eo die coram Rege and Proceribus apud White Hall. Dies erat Mercurij.

Julij 8. Concionem praedictam jussit Rex, ut Typis excusam in publicum
emitterem. Dies erat Sabbati.

Julij 16. Die Solis, Theobaldis Concionem illam, quae jam Praelum sensisset,
in Regias Manus dedi, and redij.

Julij 26. Dies erat Mercurij, Signavit Rex Congedeslier, etc. ut potestas sit
Decano and Capitulo me eligendi in Episcopum Bathoniensem.

Julij 27. Die Jovis, Mane detulit ad me Dr. Field Episcopus Landavensis
Literas quasdam ab Illustrissimo Duce Buckinghamiae. Litterae apertae erant,
and partim Characteribus Conscriptae. Misit autem eas ad me Dux; ut consulerem
quendam Nomine Swadlinge, nominatum quidem in ipsis Literis, ut qui possit
Characteres legere. Ipse etiam nominatus eram, utpote cui iste Swadlinge notus
erat; and educatus in Collegio S. Joh. Oxon. eo tempore quo Ego Praeses eram
Collegij.

Aug. 1. Venit ad me Thomas Swadlinge, quem a discessu e Collegio, ad diem
illum per 8. fere Annos aut circiter ne semel vidi. Ille opera insumpta tandem
legit Characteres, and

Aug. 4. Dies Veneris erat, Ego and ille una adimus Ducem. Legit: malitiosa
quaedam erant. Dux, ut decuit, contemnit. Redimus.

Aug. 16. Electus fui in Episcopum Bathoniensem. Dies erat Mercurij, and
Littera D.

Aug. 25. Dies erat Veneris, Duae Rubeculae seu Rubelliones simul per ostium in
Musaeum volant, quasi unus alterum persequens. Motus ille subitus me quasi
resilire facit. Dimisi sicut intrarunt. Ego tum paraturus eram Concionem in
Ephesians. 4. 30. and chartis incubui.

September. 14. Die Jovis, Vesperi voluit Dux Buckinghamiae, at Instructiones
quasdam in formam redioerem, partim Politicas, partim Ecclesiasticas, in causa
illa Regis Daniae paulo ante afflicti a Duce Tillio, mittendas per omnes
Parochias. Brevissima Capita mihi tradita sunt. Paratas esse voluit in diem
Saturni sequentem.

September. 16. Paravi, and hora praefixa attuli: Legi. Ducit me ad Regem. Ibi
iterum jussus perlegi; uterque approbant.

Sept. 17. Die Solis, Propositae lectaeque sunt (nam deposui apud Ducem
chartas) coram Honoratissimis Regis Consiliarijs. Deo gratias, ab omnibus
probatae sunt.

Sept. 18. Lunae die, Confirmata est electio mea in Bathon. and Wellen.
Episcopum.

Sept. 19. Die Martis, Apud Theobaldas Homagium juravi Seren (...) Regi, qui
ibi statim restituit me ad Temporalia a tempore mortis.

Quae inter me and Dom. Baronem Conwaye Principalem Regis Secretarium
acciderunt, dum simul redimus.

Sept. 21. Die Lunae, Hora matutina fere quarta Lancelotus Andrews Episcopus
Winton. Meritissimus, Lumen Orbis Christiani, Mortuus est.

Sept. 30. Die Saturni, Certiorem me fecit Dux Buckinghamiae, quod decrevit
Serenissimus Rex, ut ego Successor sim Episcopo Winton. defuncto in Officio
Decanatus Sacelli Regis.

October. 2. Die Lunae, narravit idem mihi, quid de me ulterius eo die Rex
statuisset, si: A. B. C. etc.

October. 3. Die Martis, Ad Aulam profectus sum; ea tum Hamptoniae erat. Ibi
gratias egi Regi pro Decanatu Sacelli, mihi tum concesso. Redij Londinum.

October. 6. Juramentum a Decano Sacelli suscipiendum subivi in Sacrario coram
Honoratissimo Camerario Regio Philippo Mongomeryae Comite: Ministrante
Juramentum Stephano Bouton Sub-decano. Dies erat Veneris.

November. 14. Vel circiter, occasion sumpta ex abrupta tum incaeptione tum
finitione Precum Publicarum die 5. November. petij a Serenissimo Rege Carolo, ut
interesset Lyturgiae aeque ac Concionibus quolibet die Dominico, and ut
quocunque tempore Precum advenisset, Sacerdos qui Ministraret pergeret usque ad
finem Precum. Non modo annuit Rex Religiosissimus; sed and gratias mihi egit.
Non factum hoc antea ab initio Regni Jacobi ad hunc diem. Nunc, Deo gratias,
obtinet.

December. 21. Somniavi de Sepultura nescio cujus, and me astitisse pulveri, etc.
Evigilavi (...).

December. 25. Christmas Day: Dies erat Lunae, Concionem habui primam ut Decanus
Sacelli (...), at White Hall, in S. (...) 1. 14. par. 1. 1626.

Januar. 5. (...) erat Epiphaniae, and dies Veneris, nocte (...) avi Matrem
meam diu ante defunctam lecto meo astitisse, and deductis paululum stragulis,
hilarem in me aspexisse, and laetatus sum videre eam aspectu tam jucundo.
Ostendit deinde mihi Senem diu ante defunctum, quem ego, dum vixit, and novi
and amavi. Jacuisse videbatur ille humi, laetus satis, sed rugoso vultu; Nomen
ei Grove. Dum paro salutare, evigilavi.

Januar. 8. Dies erat Lunae. (...) visum Ducem Buck. Gavisus est, and in manus
dedit Chartam de Invocatione Sanctorum, quam dedit ei Matter, Illi vero nescio
quis Sacerdos.

Jan. 13. Dies erat Saturni, Episcopus Lin. petiit reconciliationem cum (...)
Buckinghamiae, etc.

Januar. 14. Die Solis, versus mane somniavi Episcopum Lin. nescio que
advenisse cum catenis ferreis; sed redeuns liberatus ab iis equum insiluit;
abiit, nec assequi potui.

Januar. 16. Die Martis, Somniavi Regem venatum (...); and quod quum esuriit,
abduxi eum de improviso in Domum Fran. Windebanck Amici mei. Dum parat
comedere, ego, dum alii aberant, Calicem ei, de more porrigebam. Potum attuli;
non placuit. Iterum adduxi; sed poculo argenteo. Dicit Serenissimus Rex: Tu
(...), me semper e vitro bibere. Abeo iterum: evigilavi.

Januar. 17. Die Mercurij: Ostendi Rations Regi, cur Chartae Episcopi Winton.
defuncti de Episcopis quod sint Jure Divino, praelo tradendae sint, contra
illud quod misere, and in maximum damnum Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Episcopus
Lincoln. significavit Regi; sicut Rex ipse mihi antea narravit.

Febr. 7. Dies erat Cinerum, Concionatus sum in Aula ad White Hall.

Feb. 9. Die Veneris, nocte sequente somniavi me morbo scorbutico laborasse;
and repent Dentes omnes mihi laxos fuisse; unum praecipue in inferiori
maxilla, vix digito me retinere potuisse, donec opem peterem, etc.

Feb. 20. Die Martis, Incaepit Jo. Fenton (...) pruriginis (...), etc.

Febr. 22. Die Jovis, Iter suscepi versus Novum Mercatum, ubi tum Rex fuit.

Martij. 3. Dies Saturni erat, Cantabrigiam concessi una cum Duce
Buckinghamiae, Cancellario istius almae Academiae, and alijs Comitibus and
Baronibus. Incorporatus ibi fui; and sic primus, qui praesentatus fuit
Illustrissimo Duci, tum sedenti in domo Congregationis, ipse fui. Habitus ibi
fuit ab Academicis Dux insignis and Academice and celebriter. Redimus.

Martij 6. Die Martis, Rediit Rex e Novo Mercato, and ego, versus Londinum.

Martij 8. Die Jovis: Veni Londinum. Nocte sequente somniavi me reconciliatum
fuisse Ecclesiae Romanae. Hoc anxie me habuit; and miratus sum (...), unde
accidit. Nec solum mihi molestus fui [propter Errores illius Ecclesiae, sed
etiam] propter scandala, quae ex illo lapsu meo multos egregios and doctos
viros in Ecclesia Anglicana onerarent. Sic turbatus insomnio, dixi apud me, me
statim iturum, and confessione facta veniam ab Ecclesia Anglicana petiturum.
Pergenti obviam se dedit Sacerdos quidam; voluit impedire. Sed indignatione
motus, me in viam dedi. Et dum fatigavi me morosis cogitationibus, evigilavi.
Tales impressiones sensi; ut vix potui credere me somniasse.

Martij 12. Die Lunae, cum Rege concessi Theobaldas. Redij die proximo, Martij
13.

Martij 17. Die Saturni Vigilia Palmarum: Hora noctis fere media, sepelivi
Carolum Vicecomitem Buckinghamiae Filium natu maximum and tum unicum Georgij
Ducis Buckinghamiae, AEtdtis (...) fuit Anni unius and fere quatuor mensium.
Mortuus est Die Veneris praecedente.

Anno 1626.
March 26. Sunday, D. B. sent me to the King. There I gave to the King an
account of those two Businesses, which, etc. His Majesty thanked me.

March 29. King Charles spoke to both Houses of Parliament (but directed his
Speech chiefly to the Lower House) both by himself, and by the Right Honorable
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, in the Palace at White Hall. He also added
much concerning the Duke of Buckingham, etc.

In the Convocation held that Day, there was much debating concerning the
Sermon which Gabriel Goodman Bishop of Gloucester had Preached before the King
on the Sunday preceding, being the fifth Sunday of Lent.

April: 5: Wednesday, The King sent in the Morning, commanding the Bishops of
Norwich, Litchfeild, and St: David's, to attend him. I and the Bishop of
Litchfeild waited upon him; the Bishop of Norwich being gone into the Country.
We received the King's Commands about, etc. and returned.

April 12. Wednesday, at 9. in the Forenoon, we met together, viz. the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester, Durham, and St: David's;
being commanded by the King to consult together concerning the Sermon, which
Dr: Goodman the Bishop of Gloucester had Preached before his Majesty on the 5th.
Sunday in Lent last past. We advised together, and gave this Answer to the
King; That some things were therein spoken less cautiously, but nothing
falsely; That nothing was innovated by him in the Doctrine of the Church of
England. That the best way would be, that the Bishop should preach the Sermon
again, at some time to be chosen by himself, and should then show, how, and
wherein he was misunderstood by his Auditors. That Night after 9. a Clock, I
gave to the King an account of what I had received in command on the 5th. of
April, and of other things relating thereto. Among the rest, concerning
restoring Impropriations. The King spoke many things very graciously therein;
after I had first discoursed of the manner of effecting it.

April 14. Friday, The Duke of Buckingham fell into a Fever.

April 19. Wednesday, The Petition of John Digby Earl of Bristol, against the
Duke of Buckingham was read in the House of Lords. It was very sharp, and such
as threatens Ruin to one of the Parties.

April 20. Friday, King Charles referred the Cognizance of that whole matter,
as also of the Petition of the Earl of Digby, to the House of Parliament.

April 21. Saturday, the Duke of Buckingham sent to me to come to him. There I
first heard what Sir John Cook the King's Secretary had suggested against me to
the Lord Treasurer, and he to the Duke. Lord be merciful to me thy Servant.

April 22. Sunday, The King sent for all the Bishops to come to him at 4. a
Clock in the Afternoon. We waited upon him, 14. in number. Then his Majesty
chid us, that in this time of Parliament we were silent in the Cause of the
Church, and did not make known to him what might be Useful, or was Prejudicial
to the Church; professing himself ready to promote the Cause of the Church.

He then commanded us, that in the Causes of the Earl of Bristol and Duke of
Buckingham we should follow the direction of our own Consciences, being led by
Proofs, not by Reports.

April 30. Sunday, I Preached before the King at White Hall.

May 1. Monday, The Earl of Bristol was accused in Parliament of High Treason,
by the King's Attorney Sir Robert Heath; the Earl then and there preferred 12.
Articles against the Duke of Buckingham, and therein charged him with the same
Crime; and other Articles also against the Lord Conway Secretary of State. The
Earl of Bristol was committed to the Custody of James Maxwell, the Officer in
Ordinary of the House of Peers.

May 4. Thursday, Arthur Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells Died at London.

May 8. Monday, At Two a Clock in the Afternoon, the House of Commons brought
up to the House of Peers a Charge against the Duke of Buckingham, consisting of
13. Articles.

May 11. Thursday, King Charles came into the Parliament House; and made a
short Speech to the Lords, concerning preserving the Honor of the Nobility
against the vile and malicious Calumnies of those in the House of Commons, who
had accused the Duke, etc. They were Eight, who in this matter chiefly
appeared. The Prologue, Sir Dudly Digges, the Epilogue, John Elliot, were this
day by the King's Command committed to the Tower. They were both dismissed
thence within few days.

May 25. Thursday, The Earl of Arundel not being sent back to the House, nor
the Cause of his detainment made known, the House of Peers began to be jealous
of the breach of their Privileges; and resolved to Adjourn the House to the
next day: On which day,

May 26. They Adjourned again to June 2. resolving to do nothing, until the
Earl should be set free, or at least a Cause given, etc.

May 25. On which day these Troubles first began, was the Feast of Pope Urban;
and at this time Urban VIII. sits in the Papal Chair; to whom and to the
Spaniard, if they, who most desire it, would do any acceptable service; I do
not see, what they could better devise in that kind, than to divide thus into
Parties the great Council of the Kingdom.

June 15. Thursday, After many Debates and Struglings; private Malice against
the Duke of Buckingham prevailed, and stopped all public Business. Nothing was
done; but the Parliament was dissolved.

Junij 20. Tuesday, His Majesty King Charles named me to be Bishop of Bath and
Wells: And at the same time commanded me to prepare a Sermon for the Public
Fast; which he had by Proclamation appointed to be kept on the 5th. of July
following.

July 5. A Solemn Fast appointed, partly upon account of the Pestilence yet
raging in many Parts of the Kingdom, partly on account of the Danger of Enemies
threatening us. I Preached this day, before the King and Nobility, at
White Hall. It was Wednesday.

July 8. The King commanded me to Print and Publish the Sermon. It was Saturday.

July 16. Sunday, I presented that Sermon, which was now Printed, to his
Majesty; and returned.

July 26. Wednesday, The King signed the Conge d' Eslire, empowering the Dean
and Chapter to elect me Bishop of Bath and Wells.

July 24. Thursday, In the Morning Dr. Field Bishop of Landaff, brought to me
(...) Letters from the most Illustrious Duke of Buchingham. The Letters were
open, and wrote partly in Characters. The Duke sent them to me; that I should
consult one Named Swadlinge, mentioned in those Letters, as one who could read
the Characters. I was also named in them, as to whom that Swaddling was known,
having been educated in S. John's College in Oxford, at what time I was
President of that College.

Aug. 1. Thomas Swadlinge came to me, whom, from his leaving the College to
that day, for almost 8. Years, I had not once seen. He bestowing some pains, at
length read the Characters, and

Aug. 4. Friday, I and he went to the Duke. He read them: They were certain
malicious things. The Duke, as was fit, despised them. We returned.

Aug. 16. I was elected Bishop of Bath and Wells, being Wednesday, the Letter D.

Aug. 25. Friday, Two Robinred-breasts flew together through the Door into my
Study, as if one pursued the other. That sudden motion almost startled me. I
was then preparing a Sermon on Ephesians. 4. 30. and Studying.

September. 14. Thursday Evening, the Duke of Buckingham willed me to form
certain Instructions, These may be found in Heylin's Life of Laud. p: 162.
partly Political, partly Ecclesiastical, in the Cause of the King of Denmark,
a little before brought into great streights by General Tilly, to be sent
through all Parishes. Certain heads were delivered to me. He would have them
made ready by Saturday following.

Sept. 16. I made them ready, and brought them at the appointed hour. I read
them to the Duke. He brought me to the King. I being so commanded, read them
again. Each of them approved them.

Sept. 17. Sunday, They were read (having been left with the Duke) before the
Lords of the Privy Council; and were (thanks be to God) approved by them all.

Sept. 18. Monday, My election to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells was
confirmed.

Sept. 19. Tuesday, At Theobalds I swore Homage to his Majesty; who there
presently restored me to the Temporalties, from the death of my Predecessor.

What passed between me and the Lord Conway, Principal Secretary to the King,
in our return.

Sept. 21. Monday, about four a Clock in the Morning, Died Lancelot Andrews,
the most worthy Bishop of Winchester, the great Light of the Christian World.

Sept. 30. Saturday, The Duke of Buckingham signified to me the King's
Resolution, that I should succeed the Bishop of Winchester in the Office of
Dean of the Chappel-Royal.

October. 2. Monday, The Duke related to me, what the King had farther resolved
concerning me, in case the Archbishop of Canterbury should die, etc.

October. 3. Tuesday, I went to Court, which was then at Hampton Court. There I
returned Thanks to the King for the Deanery of the Chapel, then granted to me.
I returned to London.

October. 6. I took the Oath belonging to the Dean of the Chapel, in the Vestry,
before the Right Honorable Philip Earl of Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain;
Stephen Boughton the Sub-Dean Administering it. It was Friday.

November. 14. Or thereabout, taking occasion from the abrupt both beginning and
ending of Public Prayer on the fifth of November, I desired his Majesty King
Charles, that he would please to be present at Prayers as well as Sermon every
Sunday; and that at whatsoever part of the Prayers he came, the Priest then
Officiating might proceed to the end of the Prayers. The most Religious King
not only assented to this Request; but also gave me thanks. This had not before
been done from the beginning of K. James's Reign to this day. Now, thanks be to
God, it obtains.

December. 21. I dreamed of the burial of I know not whom, and that I stood by
the Grave. I awaked sad.

December. 25. Christmas Day, Monday, I Preached my first Sermon, as Dean of the
Chappel-Royal, at White Hall, upon S. John: 1: 14. part: 1.

Januar. 5. Epiphany-Eve, and Friday, In the Night I dreamed, that my Mother,
long since dead, stood by my Bed, and drawing aside the Clothes a little,
looked pleasantly upon me; and that I was glad to see her with so merry an
aspect. She then showed to me a certain Old Man, long since deceased; whom,
while alive, I both knew and loved. He seemed to lie upon the ground; merry
enough, but with a wrinkled Countenance. His Name was Grove. While I prepared
to salute him, I awoke.

Januar. 8. Monday, I went to visit the Duke of Buckingham. He was glad to see
me, and put into my hands a Paper concerning the Invocation of Saints, which
his Mother had given to him; a certain Priest, to me unknown, had given it to
her.

Januar. 13. Saturday, The Bishop of Lincoln desired reconciliation with the
Duke of Buckingham, etc.

Januar. 14. Sunday, toward Morning, I Dreamed, that the Bishop of Lincoln
came, I know not whether, with Iron Chains. But returning loosed from them,
leaped on Horseback, went away; neither could I overtake him.

Januar. 16. Tuesday, I Dreamed, that the King went out to Hunt; and that when
he was hungry, I brought him on the sudden into the House of my Friend Francis
Windebank. While he prepares to eat, I, in the absence of others, presented
the Cup to him after the usual manner. I carried Drink to him; but it pleased
him not. I carried it again, but in a silver Cup. Thereupon his Majesty said:
You know, that I always drink out of Glass. I go away again; and awoke.

Januar. 17. Wednesday, I show my Reasons to the King, why the Papers of the
late Bishop of Winchester, concerning Bishops, that they are Jure Divino,
should be Printed; contrary to what the Bishop of Lincoln had pitifully, and to
the great detriment of the Church of England, signified to the King; as theKing
himself had before related to me.

Febr. 7. Ash Wednesday, I Preached at Court, at White Hall.

Febr. 9. Friday, The following Night I Dreamed, that I was troubled with the
Scurvey; and that on the sudden all my Teeth became loose; that one of them
especially in the lower Jaw, I could scarce hold in with my Finger, till I
called out for help, etc.

Febr. 20 Tuesday, John Fenton began the cure of a certain Itch, etc.

Febr. 22. Thursday, I began my Journey toward New Market, where the King then
was.

March 3. Saturday, I went to Cambridge with the Duke of Buckingham, Chancellor
of that famous University, and other Earls and Lords. I was there incorporated;
and so I was the first who was presented to the most Illustrious Duke, then
sitting in the Congregation House. The Duke was treated by the University in an
Academical manner, yet splendidly. We returned.

March 6. Tuesday, The King returned from New Market, and I with him, toward
London.

March 8. Thursday, I came to London. The Night following I dreamed, that I was
reconciled to the Church of Rome. This troubled me much; and I wondered
exceedingly, how it should happen. Nor was I aggrieved with my self, [ These
Words are most maliciously omitted by Prynne.
only by Reason of the Errors of that Church, but also] upon account of the
Scandal, which from that my fall, would be cast upon many Eminent and Learned
Men in the Church of England. So being troubled at my Dream, I said with my
self, that I would go immediately, and, confessing my fault, would beg pardon
of the Church of England. Going with this resolution, a certain Priest met me,
and would have stopped me. But moved with indignation, I went on my way. And
while I wearied my self with these troublesome thoughts, I awoke. Herein I felt
such strong impressions; that I could scarce believe it to be a Dream.

March 12. Monday, I went with the King to Theobalds. I returned next day,
March 13.

March 17. Saturday, the Eve of Palm Sunday, about midnight I buried Charles
Viscount Buckingham, the Eldest, and then only, Son of George Duke of
Buckingham. He was then about a year and four months old. He died on the Friday
before.

Anno 1627.
Martij 25. Dies erat Paschatis. Concionatus sum in Aula, etc.

Martij 27. Die Martis; sequente nocte somnium habui quale sequitur. (...)
quaedam data erant Dominae Dorotheae Wright, viduae Georgij W. Militis,
familiaris mei: Legatae erant 430 minae and amplius: Datae a Consanguineo
quodam, Viduae and Filiis, Nomine Farnham. Ad instantiam Viduae, quum Legata
solvere Executor aut negavit aut distulit, Literas obtinui ab Illustrissimo
Duce Buckinghamiae in gratiam Viduae. (Dux enim erat Magister Equitum, and
dictus Georgius W. sub eo fuit inter Ministros Regis) quum Literas jam in
manibus haberem, daturusque eram Viduae, ut mitteret in Hiberniam, ubi Executor
degebat, hac nocte apparuit mihi in somnis Georgius W. Miles, per biennium ante
ad minimum mortuus, visus est mihi valde habilis hilarisque satis. Dixi, quid
pro Vidua and Liberis ejus tum egi. Cogitabundus paulisper respondit;
Executorem sibi, dum in vivis esset, satisfecisse pro Legatis illis: Et statim,
inspectis quibusdam Chartis in museolo suo adjacente, addidit iterum ita esse.

Et insuper mihi in aurem dixit, me causam esse, cur Episcopus Lin. non iterum
admitteretur in gratiam and in Aulam.

Apr. 4. Die Mercurij. Quum Rex Serenissimus Carolus absolvebat D. Dun circa
lapsus quosdam in Concione habita Die Solis Apr. 1. Quod gratiosissime mihi tum
dixit, literis nunquam delendis, cum summa Gratiarum action Deo and Regi, in
cord scripsi.

Apr. 7. Dies erat Saturni, Dum Aulam petij, ut Regiae coenae servus intersim,
e Rheda exeuns, titubante pede praeceps ruebam; graviori casu nunquam sum
lapsus; sed miserante Deo, contusa (...) Coxendice, idque leviter, evasi.

Apr. 24. Dies erat Martis, (...) ad me missae sunt Exceptiones, quas exhibuit
A. B. C. contra Concionem Doctoris Sibthorp, and quae sequuntur.

Apr. 29. Die Solis, Factus sum Serenissimo Regi Carolo a Consiliis
Secretioribus. In honorem (...) and bonum Regni and Ecclesiae, oro, (...) Deus.

Maij 13. Die Pentecostes, Concionem habui coram (...), etc.

Anno 1627.
March 25. Easter Day, I Preached at Court, etc.

March 27. Tuesday, That Night I had the following Dream. Some Legacies had
been given to the Lady Dorothy Wright, the Widow of Sir George Wright my
Acquaintance. The Legacies amounted to above 430 l. being bequeathed by a
certain Kinsman named Farnham, to the Widow and her Children. When the Executor
denied or deferred to pay the Legacy, I had, at the desire of the Widow,
obtained Letters in her behalf from the Duke of Buckingham (for the Duke was
Master of the Horse, and the said Sir George W. was employed under him in the
King's Service) when I had now those Letters in my Hands, and was about to
deliver them to the Widow, that she might send them into Ireland, where the
Executor dwelt; this Night Sir George Wright appeared to me in my Sleep, having
been dead two Years before at least. He seemed to me in very good plight, and
merry enough. I told him, what I had done for his Widow and Children. He, after
a little thought, answered; That the Executor had satisfied him for those
Legacies, while he was yet alive. And presently looking upon some Papers in his
Study adjoining, he added, that it was so.

He moreover whispering in my Ear, told me; that I was the Cause, why the
Bishop of Lincoln was not again admitted into Favor, and to Court.

Apr. 4. Wednesday, When his Majesty King Charles forgave to Doctor Done
certain slips in a Sermon Preached on Sunday, Apr. 1. what he then most
graciously said unto me, I have wrote in my Heart with (...) Characters, and
great (...) to God and the King.

Apr. 7. Saturday, Going to Court, to wait upon the King at Supper, in going
out of the Coach, my foot stumbling, I fell headlong. I never had a more
dangerous fall; but by God's mercy, I escaped with a light bruise of my Hip
only.

Apr. 24. Tuesday, There were then first sent to me the Exceptitions, which the
Archbishop of Canterbury had Exhibited against Doctor Sibthorp's Sermon, and
what followed.

April 29. Sunday, I was made Privy-Councellour to his Majesty King Charles.
God grant, it may conduce to his Honor, and to the good of the Kingdom and the
Church.

May 13. Whitsunday, I Preached before the King, etc.

Junij 7 and 8. I attended King Charles from London to Southwick by Portsmouth.

Junij 11. His Majesty dined a-board the Triumph; where I attended him.

June 17. The Bishopric of London was granted me at Southwick.

June 22. We came to London.

June 24. I was commanded to go all the Progress.

June 27. The Duke of Buckingham set forwards toward the Isle of Ree.

June 30. The Progress began to Oatlands.

July 4. The King lost a Jewel in Hunting of a 1000 l. value. That day the
Message was sent by the King for the Sequestring of A. B. C.

July 7. Saturday-night, I dreamed that I had lost two Teeth. The Duke of
Buckingham took the Isle of Ree.

July 26. I attended the King and Queen at Wellingburrough.

July 29. The first News came from my Lord Duke of his Success: Sunday.

August 12. The second News came from my Lord Duke to Windsor: Sunday.

August 26. The third News came from my Lord Duke to Aldershot: Sunday.

September. News came from my Lord Duke to Theobalds: The first fear of ill
Success; News from my Lord Duke to Hampton Court; I went to my Lord of
Rochester, to consider about A. B. C. and returned (...) (...)-Court.

(...) King's Speech to me in the withdrawing Chamber. That if any did, etc. I,
etc. before any thing should sink, etc. The business of Doctor Bargrave.
Bargar, Dean of Canterbury, began about the Vicaridge of Lidd.

October. The Commission to the Bishops of London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford,
and my self then Bath and Wells, to Execute Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction, during
the Sequestration of my Lord's Grace of Canterbury.

The Dean of Canterbury's Speech, that the business could not go well in the
Isle of Ree. There must be a Parliament, some must be Sacrificed, that I was as
like as any. Spoken to Doctor W. The same Speech after spoken to the same Man,
by Sir Dudlye Diggs. I told it, when I heard it doubled, Let me desire you, not
to trouble your self with any Reports; till you see me forsake my other
Friends, etc. Ita Chapter R. The Retreat out of the Isle of Ree.

November. My Lord Duke's return to Court. The Countess of Purbeck censured in
the High Commission for Adultery.

December 25. I Preached to the King at White Hall.

January 29. Tuesday, A resolution at the Council Table for a Parliament, to
begin March 17. if the Shires go on with levying Money for the Navy, etc.

January 30. Wednesday, My Lord Duke of Buckingham's Son was Born, the Lord
George: New Moon die 26.

February 5. Tuesday, The straining of the back sinew of my right Leg, as I
went with his Majesty to Hampton Court. I kept in till I Preached at the
opening of the Parliament, March 17. but I continued lame long after, saving
that

Februar. 14. Thursday, Saint Valentine's-day, I made a shift to go and
Christen my Lord Duke's Son, the Lord George, at Wallingford-House.

March 17. I Preached at the opening of the Parliament; but had much ado to
stand; it was Monday.

Anno 1628.
June 1. Whitsunday, I Preached at White Hall.

June 11. My Lord Duke of Buckingham Voted in the House of Commons to be the
Cause, or Causes, of all Grievances in the Kingdom.

June 12. Thursday, I was complained of by the House of Commons for warranting
Doctor Manwaring's Sermons to the Press.

June 13. Dr. Manwaring answered for himself before the Lords; and the next day,

June 14. Being Saturday, was Censured. After his Censure my Cause was called
to the Report. And by God's Goodness toward me, I was fully cleared in the
House.

The same day the House of Commons were making their Remonstrance to the King:
One Head was Innovation of Religion. Therein they Named my Lord the Bishop of
Winchester and my self. One in the House stood up, and said: Now we have Named
these Persons, let us think of some Causes why we did it. Sir Edw. Cook
answered, Have we not Named my Lord of Buckingham without showing a Cause, and
may we not be as bold with them?

June 17. This Remonstrance was delivered to the King on Tuesday.

June 26. Thursday, The Session of Parliament ended, and was Prorogued to
October 20.

July 11. Tuesday, My Conge-deslier was Signed by the King for the Bishopric
of London.

July 15. Tuesday, St. Swithin, and fair with us: I was Translated to the
Bishopric of London. The same day the Lord Weston was made Lord Treasurer.

August 9. Saturday, A terrible salt Rheum in my left Eye, had almost put me
into a Fever.

August 12. Tuesday, My Lord Duke of Buckingham went toward Portsmouth to go
for Rochell.

August 23. Saturday, St: Bartholomew's Eve, the Duke of Buckingham slain at
Portsmouth by one Lieutenant Felton, about Nine in the Morning.

August 24. The News of his Death came to Croydon; where it found my self and
the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, and Carlisle, at the Consecration of Bishop
Montague for Chichester, with my Lord's Grace.

August 27. Wednesday, Mr. Elphinston brought me a very Gracious Message from
his Majesty, upon my Lord Duke's Death.

August 30. As I was going out to meet the Corpse of the Duke, which that Night
was brought to London, Sir W: Fleetwood brought me very Gracious Letters from
the King's Majesty, written with his own Hand.

September 9. Tuesday, The first time that I went to Court after the Death of
the Duke of Buckingham, my dear Lord: The Gracious Speech, which that Night the
King was pleased to use to me.

September 27. Saturday, I fell Sick, and came Sick from Hampton Court.
Tuesday, September. ult. I was sore plucked with this Sickness, etc.

October 20. Monday, I was forced to put on a Truss for a Rupture. I know not
how occasioned, unless it were with swinging of a Book for my Exercise in
private.

November. 29. Felton was Executed at Tyburn for killing the Duke; and afterward
his Body was sent to be Hanged in Chains at Portsmouth. It was Saturday and St.
Andrew's Even; and he killed the Duke upon Saturday St. Bartholomew's Even.

December 25. I Preached at White Hall.

December 30. Wednesday, The Statutes which I had drawn, for the reducing of
the Factious and Tumultuary Election of Proctors in Oxford to several Colleges
by course, and so to continue, were passed in Convocation at Oxford, no Voice
dissenting.

January 26. Monday, the 240 Greek Manuscripts were sent to London-House. These
I got my Lord of Pembrooke to buy and give to Oxford.

January 31. Saturday-night, I lay in Court. I dreamed, that I put off my
Rochet, all save one sleeve; and when I would have put it on again, I could not
find it.

Feb. 6. Friday, Sir Thomas Roe sent to London-House 28 Manuscripts in Greek,
to have a Catalogue drawn, and the Books to be for Oxford.

March 2. Monday, The Parliament to be dissolved declared by Proclamation, upon
some disobedient passages to his Majesty that day in the House of Commons.

March 10. Tuesday, the Parliament Dissolved, the King present. The Parliament,
which was broken up this March 10. labored my ruin; but, God be ever blessed
for it, found nothing against me.

Anno 1629.
March 29. Sunday, Two Papers were found in the Dean of Paul's his Yard before
his House. The one was to this effect concerning my self; Laud, look to thy
self; be assured thy Life is sought. As thou art the Fountain of all
Wickedness, Repent thee of thy monstrous Sins, before thou be taken out of the
World, etc. And assure thy self, neither God nor the World can endure such a
vile Councellor to live, or such a Whisperer; or to this effect. The other was
as bad as this, against the Lord Treasurer. Mr. Dean delivered both Papers to
the King that Night. Lord, I am a grievous Sinner; but I beseech thee, deliver
my Soul from them that hate me without a Cause.

April 2. Thursday, Maundy-Thursday as it came this Year, About Three of the
Clock in the Morning the Lady Duchess of Buckingham was delivered of her Son
the Lord Francis Villiers, whom I Christened, Tuesday Apr. 21.

Apr. 5. I Preached at White Hall.

Maij 13. Wednesday, This Morning, about Three of the Clock the Queen was
delivered before her Time of a Son. He was Christened, and Died within short
space, his Name Charles: This was Ascension Eve. The next Day being

Maij 14. Ascension Day, Paulo ante mediam Noctem, I Buried him at Westminster.
If God repair not this loss; I much fear it was Descention-day to this State.

Aug. 14. Dies erat Veneris, I fell sick upon the way toward the Court at
Woodstock, I took up my Lodging at my ancient Friend's House, Mr. Francis
Windebanck. There I lay in a most grievous burning Fever, till Monday Sept. 7.

September. 7. On which Day I had my last Fit.

October. 20. I was brought so low, that I was not able to return toward my own
House at London, till Tuesday October. 29.

October. 26. I went first to present my humble Duty and Service to his Majesty
at Denmark-House, Monday 26. October.

March 21. After this I had diverse Plunges, and was not able to put my self
into the service of my Place, till Palm Sunday, which was March 21.

Anno 1630.
Apr. 10. The Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward, being Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, died of an Apoplexy.

Apr. 12. The University of Oxford chose me Chancellor; and word was brought me
of it, the next Morning, Monday.

April 28. Wednesday, The University came up to the Ceremony, and gave me my
Oath.

Maij 29. Saturday, Prince Charles was born at St. James's. Paulo ante Horam
primam post Meridiem, I was in the House 3. Hours before, and had the Honor
and the Happiness to see the Prince, before he was full one Hour old.

Junij 27. Sunday, I had the Honor, as Dean of the Chapel, my Lord's Grace of
Canterbury being infirm, to Christen Prince Charles at St. James's, Hora fere
quinta Pomeridiana.

August 22. Sunday, I Preached at Fulham.

Aug. 24. Tuesday, St: Bartholomew, Extreme thunder, Lightning, and Rain: The
Pestilence this Summer: The greatest Week in London was 73. a 7. October. ad 14.
spread in many Places, miserably Pestis.
in Cambridge. The Winter before was extreme wet; and scarce one Week of Frost.

This Harvest scarce: A great Dearth in France, England, the Fames.
Low Countries, etc.

October. 6. Wednesday, I was taken with an extreme Cold and Lameness, as I was
waiting upon St. George his Feast at Windsor; and forced to return to Fulham,
where I continued ill above a Week.

October. 29. Friday, I removed my Family from Fulham to London-house.

November. 4. Thursday, Leighton was degraded at the High Commission.

November. 9. Tuesday, That Night Leighton broke out of the Fleet. The Warden
says, he got or was (...) over the Wall; the Warden professes, he knew not this
till Wednesday Noon. He told it not me till Thursday Night. He was taken again
in Bedfordshire, and brought back to the Fleet within a Fortnight.

November. 26. Friday, Part of his Sentence was executed upon him at Westminster.

December. 7. Tuesday, The King Swear the Peace with Spain: Don Carlo Colonna was
Ambassador.

December. 25. I Preached to the King, Christmas Day.

January 16. Sunday, I Consecrated St. Catherine Creed-Church in London.

January 21. The Lord Wentworth Lord President of the North, and I, etc. In my
little Chamber at London-House, Friday.

January, 23. I consecrated the Church of St. Giles in the Fields, Sunday.

Feb. 20. This Sunday Morning Westminster Hall was found on Fire, by the
Burning of the little Shops or Stalls kept there: It is thought, by some Pan of
Coals left there over night; it was taken in time.

Feb. 23. Ash Wednesday, I preached in Court at White Hall.

March 20. Sunday, His Majesty put his great Case of Conscience to me, about,
etc. Which I after answered. God Bless him in it.

The Famine great this Time: But in part by Practice.

Anno 1631.
March 27. Coronation day, and Sunday, I Preached at St. Paul's Cross.

April 10. Easter-Munday, I fell ill with great pain in my throat, for a Week.
It was with Cold taken after Heat in my service, and then into an Ague. A
fourth part almost of my Family Sick this Spring.

June 7. Tuesday, I Consecrated the Chapel at Hammersmith.

June 21. Tuesday, and June 26. Saturday, My nearer Acquaintance began to
settle with Dr. S. I pray God bless us in it.

June 26. My business with L. T. etc. about the Trees which the King had given
me in Shotover, toward my building in St. John's at Oxford. Which work I
resolved on in November last. And published it to the College about the end of
March. This day discovered unto me that which I was sorry to find in L. T. and
F. C. sed transeat.

July 26. The first Stone was laid of my building at St. John's.

Aug. 23. In this June and July were the great disorders in Oxford, by
appealing from Doctor Smith then Vice Chancellor. The chief Ringleaders were
Mr. Foord of Magdalen-Hall, and Mr. Thorn of Baliol College. The Proctors Mr.
Atherton Bruch and Mr. John Doughty received their Appeals, as if it had not
been perturbatio pacis, etc. The Vice Chancellor was forced in a Statutable way
to Appeal to the King. The King with all the Lords of his Council then present,
heard the Cause at Woodstock, Aug. 23. 1631. being Tuesday in the Afternoon.
The Sentence upon the Hearing was: That Foord, Thorn, and Hodges of (...)
College, should be banished the University: (...) both the Proctors were
commanded to come into the Convocation House, and there resign their Office;
that two others might be Named out of the same Colleges. Doctor Prideaux
Rector of Exeter College, and Dr. Wilkinson Principal of Magdalen Hall,
received a sharp admonition for their mis-behaviour in this business.

Aug. 29. Monday, I went to Brent-wood, and the next day began my Visitation
there, and so went on and finished it.

November. 4. Friday, The Lady Mary, Princess, born at St. James's, inter horas
quintam and sextam matutinas. It was thought, she was born three weeks before
her time.

December. 25. I Preached at Court.

Januar. 1. The extremest wet and warm January, that ever was known in memory.

February 15. I Preached at Court, Ashwednesday.

February 19. D. S. came to my Chamber, troubled about going quite from Court
at Spring: First Sunday in Lent, after Sermon.

Anno 1632.
April 1. I Preached at Court. Easter Day.

Maij 26. Saturday, Trinity-Sunday Eve, I Consecrated the Lord Treasurer's
Chapel at Roehampton.

Maij 29. Tuesday, My meeting and settling upon express Terms with K. B. in the
Gallery at Greenwich. In which business God bless me.

Junij 15. Mr. Francis Windebancke my Old Friend was sworn Secretary of State;
which place I obtained for him of my Gracious Master King Charles.

Junij 18. Monday, I Married my Lord Treasurer Weston's Eldest Son to the Lady
Frances, Daughter to the Duke of Lenox, at Roehampton.

Junij 25. Monday, D. S. with me at Fulham, cum Ma. etc.

Junius. This was the coldest June clean through, that was ever felt in my
memory.

Julij 10. Tuesday, Doctor Juxon, then Dean of Worcester, at my suit sworn
Clark of his Majesty's Closet. That I might have one that I might trust near
his Majesty, if I grow weak or infirm; as I must have a time.

Julij 17. Tuesday, I Consecrated the Church at Stanmore magna in Middlesex,
built by Sir John Wolstenham.

The cold Summer, Harvest not in within forty miles of London after Michaelmas,
etc.

December. 2. Sunday, The small pox appeared upon his Majesty; but God be
thanked, he had a very gentle Disease of it.

December 27. Thursday, the Earl of Arundel set forward toward the
Low Countries, to fetch the Queen of Bohemia and her Children.

December. 25. I Preached to the King, Christmas Day.

Januar. 1. My being with K. B. this day in the afternoon..... troubled me
much, God send me a good issue out of it.

The warm open Christmas.

January 15. Tuesday, K. B. and I, unexpectedly came to some clearer
Declaration of our selves. Which God bless.

Febr. 11. Munday-night, till Tuesday-morning, the great Fire upon London
Bridge....... Houses burnt down.

Feb. 13. Wednesday, The Feoffees, that pretended to buy in Impropriations,
were dissolved in the Chequer-Chamber. They were the main Instruments for the
Puritan Faction to undo the Church. The Criminal Part reserved.

Feb. 28. Thursday, Mr. Chancellor of London, Dr. Duck, brought me word, how
miserably I was slandered by some Separatists. I pray God give me patience and
forgive them.

March 6. Ashwednesday, I Preached at White Hall.

Anno 1633.
April 13. The great business at the Council Table, etc. When the Earl of
Holland made his submission to the King.

This April was most extreme wet, and cold, and windy.

Maij 13. Monday, I set out of London, to attend King Charles into Scotland.

Maij 24. The King was to enter into York in State. The Day was extreme Windy
and Rainy, that he could not, all day long: I called it York-Friday.

Junij 6. I came to Barwick. That Night I dreamed that K. B. sent to me in
Westminster-Church, that he was now as desirous to see me, as I him, and that
he was then entering into the Church. I went with Joy, but met another in the
middle of the Church, who seemed to know the Business, and laughed: But K. B.
was not there.

Junij 8. Saturday, Whitsun-Eve, I received Letters from K. B. unalterable,
etc. By this, if I return, I shall see, how true, or false, my Dream is. etc.

Junij 15. Saturday, I was sworn Counselor of Scotland.

Junij 18. Tuesday after Trinity-Sunday, King Charles Crowned at
Holyrood-Church in Edinburgh. I never saw more expressions of Joy, than were
after it, etc.

Junij 19. Wednesday, I received second Letters from K. B. no Changling, etc.
Within Three Hours after, other Letters from K. B. Believe all that I say, etc.

Junij 29. Friday, Letters from K. B. no D. true if not to my Contentment, etc.

Junij 30. I Preached to his Majesty in the Chapel in Holyrood-House in
Edinburgh.

July 1. Monday, I went over Forth, to Brunt-Island.

July 2. Tuesday, To St. Andrews.

Julij 3. Wednesday, Over Taye, to Dunde. Julij 4. Thursday, To Faukland.

Julij 7. Sunday, To St. Johnston.

Julij 8. Monday, To Dunblain, and Sterling. My dangerous, and (...) Journey,
crossing part of the Highlands by Coach, which was a Wonder there.

July 9. Tuesday, To Lithgow, and so to Edinburgh.

July 10. Wednesday, His Majesty's dangerous Passage from Brunt-Island to
Edinburgh.

Julij 11. Thursday, I began my Journey from Edinburgh toward London.

Julij 12. Friday, That Night at Anderweek, I Dreamed that L. L. came and
offered to fit above me at the Co. Ta. and that L. H. came in, and placed him
there.

Julij 20. Saturday, The King came from Scotland, to Greenwich; having come
Post from Barwick in four Days.

Julij 26. Friday, I came to my House at Fulham, from Scotland.

Julij 28. Sunday, K. B. and I met: All the strange Discourses mistaken. And
that which was a very High Tide at -- was then the lowest Ebb at Greenwich,
that ever I saw: I went away much troubled: But all settled again well, Aug. 3.
Saturday following.

Aug. 4. Sunday, News came to Court of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's
Death; and the King resolved presently to give it me. Which he did Aug. 6.

Aug. 4. That very Morning, at Greenwich, there came one to me, Seriously, and
that avowed ability to perform it, and offered me to be a Cardinal: I went
presently to the King, and acquainted him both with the Thing and the Person.

Aug. 7. Wednesday, An absolute Settlement between me, and K. B. after I had
made known my Cause at large. God bless me in it.

Aug. 14. Wednesday, A Report brought to me, that I was Poisoned.

Aug. 17. Saturday, I had a serious offer made me again to be a Cardinal: I was
then from Court, but so soon as I came thither (which was Wednesday Aug. 21.) I
acquainted his Majesty with it. But my answer again was; that somewhat dwelt
within me, which would not suffer that, till Rome were other than it is.

Aug. 25. Sunday, My Election to the Archbishopric was returned to the King
then being at Woodstock.

September. 19. Thursday, I was translated to the Archbishopric of Canterbury.
The Lord make me able, etc. The Day before, viz.

Sept. 18. When I first went to Lambeth, my Coach, Horses and Men sunk to the
bottom of the Thames in the Ferry-Boat, which was over-laden, but I Praise God
for it, I lost neither Man, nor Horse.

A wet Summer, and by it a Casual Harvest. The Rainy Weather continuing till
November: 14. which made a mavelous ill Seed-time. There was Barley abroad this
Year, within 30: Miles of London, at the end of October.

November. 13. Wednesday, Richard Boyer, who had formerly named himself Lodowick,
was brought into the Star Chamber, for most grossly Misusing me, and Accusing me
of no less than Treason, etc. He had broke Prison for Felony, when he did this.
His Censure is upon Record. And God forgive him.

About the beginning of this Month the Lady Davis Prophesied against me, that I
should very few Days outlive the Fifth of November.

And a little after that, one Green came into the Court at St. James's, with a
great Sword by his Side, swearing, the King should do him Justice against me,
or he would take another course with me. All the wrong I ever did this Man,
was, that being a poor Printer, I procured him of the Company of the Stationers
5 l. a Year during his Life. God preserve me, and forgive him. He was committed
to Newgate.

November. 24. Sunday in the Afternoon I Christened King Charles his Second Son,
James Duke of York, at St. James's.

December. 10. and 29. Twice or Thrice in the Interim, I advertised his Majesty
of the Falsehood and Practice that was against me, by L. T. etc. This brake out
then.

Jan. 1. The way to do the Town of Reading good for their Poor; which may be
compassed by God's Blessing upon me, though my Wealth be small. And I hope God
will bless me in it, because it was his own Motion in me. For this way never
came into my Thoughts (though I had much beaten them about it) till this Night,
as I was at my Prayers. Amen Lord.

Anno 1634.
March 30. Palm Sunday, I Preached to the King at White Hall.

Maij 13. I received the Seals of my being chose Chancellor of the University
of Dublin in Ireland. To which Office I was chosen Sept. 14. 1633. There were
now, and somewhat before, great Fractions in Court: And I doubt, many private
ends followed to the prejudice of Public Service. Good Lord preserve me.

Junij 11. Mr. Prynne sent me a very Libellous Letter, about his Censure in the
Star Chamber for his Histriomastix, and what I said at that Censure; in which
he has many ways mistaken me, and spoken untruth of me.

Junij 16. I showed this Letter to the King; and by his command sent it to Mr.
Attorney Noye.

Junij 17. Mr. Attorney sent for Mr. Prynn to his Chamber; showed him the
Letter, asked him whether it were his hand. Mr. Prynn said; he could not tell,
unless he might read it. The Letter being given into his hand, he tore it into
small pieces, threw it out at the Window, and said, that should never rise in
Judgment against him: Fearing, it seems, an Ore tenus for this.

Junij 18. Mr. Attorney brought him, for this, into the Star Chamber; where
all: this appeared with shame enough to Mr. Prynn. I there forgave him, etc.

Julij 26. I received word from Oxford, that the Statutes were accepted, and
published, according to my Letters, in the Convocation-House that Week.

Aug. 9. Saturday, Mr. William Noye, his Majesty's Attorney General, dyed at
Brainford, circa Horam Noctis Decimam. And Sunday Morning,

August 10. His Servant brought me word of it to Croydon, before I was out of
my Bed. I have lost a dear Friend of him, and the Church the greatest, she had
of his Condition, since she needed any such.

Aug. 11. One Rob: Seal of St: Albans, came to me to Croydon; told me somewhat
wildly about a Vision he had at Shrovetide last, about not Preaching the Word
sincerely to the People. And a Hand appeared unto him, and Death; and a Voice
bid him go tell it the Metropolitan of Lambeth, and made him swear he would do
so; and I believe the poor Man was overgrown with Fancy. So I troubled not
my self further, with him, or it.

Aug. 30. Saturday, At Oatlands the Queen sent for me, and gave me thanks for a
Business, with which she trusted me; her Promise then, that she would be my
Friend, and that I should have immediate address to her, when I had Occasion.

September. 30. I had almost fallen into a Fever with a Cold I took; and it held
me above three weeks.

October. 20. The extreme hot and faint October and November, save three days
frost, the dryest and fairest time. The Leaves not all off the Trees at the
beginning of December. The Waters so low, that the Barges could not pass. God
bless us in the Spring, after this green Winter.

December. 1. Monday, My Ancient Friend, E. R. came to me, and performed great
Kindness, which I may not forget.

December. 4. I Visited the Arches, it was Thursday.

December. 10. Wednesday, That Night the Frost began, the Thames almost frozen;
and it continued until the Sunday Sevennight after.

Dec. 15. X. E. R.

Januar. 8. Thursday, I Married the Lord Charles Herbert and the Lady Mary,
Daughter to the Duke of Buckingham, in the Closet at White Hall.

Januar. 5. Munday-night, being Twelfth-Eve, the Frost began again; the Thames
was frozen over, and continued so till February 3. 1634.

A mighty Flood at the Thaw.

Feb. 5. Thursday, I was put into the great Committee of Trade and the King's
Revenue, etc.

March 1. Sunday, The great business, which the King commanded me to think on,
and give him account, and L. T.

March 14. Saturday, I was Named one of the Commissioners for the Exchequer,
upon the death of Richard Lord Weston, Lord High Treasurer of England.

That Evening K. B. sent to speak with me at White Hall, a great deal of free
and clear expression, if it will continue.

March 16. Monday, I was called against the next day into the Foreign
Committee, by the King.

March 22. Palm Sunday, I Preached to the King at White Hall.

Anno 1635.
April 9. Wednesday, and from thence-forward, all in firm Kindness between K.
B. and me.

Maij 18. Whitson-Munday, At Greenwich, my Account to the Queen put off till
Trinity-Sunday, Maij 24. then given her by my self. And assurance of all that
was desired by me, etc.

May, June and July, In these Months, the Troubles at the Commission for the
Treasury, and the difference, which happened between the Lord Cottington and my
self, etc.

Julij 11. Saturday, and Julij 22. Wednesday, Two sad meetings with K. B. and
how occasioned.

Julij 12. Sunday, At Theobalds the Soap business was ended, and settled again
upon the new Corporation, against my offer for the Old Soap-boylers; yet my
offer made the King's Profit double; and to that, after two Years, the new
Corporation was raised; how it is performed, let them look to it, whom his
Majesty shall be pleased to trust with his Treasurer's Staff. In this business
and some other of great consequence, during the Commission for the Treasury, my
old Friend, Sir F: W: forsook me, and joined with the Lord Cottington: Which
put me to the exercise of a great deal of patience, etc.

August 16. Sunday-night, Most extreme Thunder and Lightning. The Lightning so
thick, bright and frequent, I do not remember that I ever saw.

September. 2. Wednesday, I was in attendance upon the King at Woodstocke, and
went thence to Cudsden, to see the House which Dr: John Bancroft then Lord
Bishop of Oxford had there built, to be a House for the Bishops of that See for
ever. He having built that House at my persuasion.

September. 3. Thursday, I went privately from the Bishop of Oxford's House at
Cudsden, to St: John's in Oxford, to see my building there, and give some
directions for the last finishing of it. And returned the same Night, staying
there not two Hours.

September. 23. Wednesday, I went to Saint Paul's to view the building, and
returned that Night to Croydon.

September. 24. Scalding Thursday.

September. 29. The Earl of Arundel brought an Old Man out of Shropshire. He was
this present Michaelmas-day showed to the King and the Lords, for a Man of 152
or 153 Years of Age.

October. 26. Monday, This Morning between four and five of the Clock, lying at
Hampton Court: I dreamed, that I was going out in haste, and that when I came
into my outer Chamber, there was my Servant Will: Pennell in the same Riding
Suit, which he had on that day sevennight at Hampton Court with me. Methoughts
I wondered to see him (for I left him sick at home) and asked him, how he did,
and what he made there. And that he answered me, he came to recieve my
Blessing; and with that fell on his knees. That hereupon I laid my Hand on his
Head, and Prayed over him, and therewith awaked. When I was up, I told this to
them of my Chamber; and added, that I should find Pennell dead or dying. My
Coach came; and when I came home, I found him past Sense, and giving up the
Ghost. So my Prayers (as they had frequently before) commended him to God.

November. 15. Sunday, at Afternoon the greatest Tide that has been seen. It
came within my Gates, Walks, Cloisters, and Stables, at Lambeth.

November. 21. Saturday, Charles Count Elector Palatine came to White Hall, to
the King.

This Month the Plague, which was hot in some parts of France and in the
Low Countries, and Flanders, began at Greenwich. God be merciful unto us.

November. 30. Saint Andrew's day, Monday, Charles Prince Elector Palatine, the
King's Nephew, was with me at Lambeth, and at solemn Evening Prayer.

December. 1. Many Elm-Leaves yet upon the Trees; which few Men have seen.

December. 14. Monday, Charles Prince Elector came suddenly upon me, and dined
with me at Lambeth.

December. 25. Christmas Day, Charles Prince Elector Received the Communion with
the King at White Hall. He kneeled a little beside on his left Hand. He sat
before the Communion upon a Stool by the wall, before the Traverse; and had
another Stool and a Cushion before him to kneel at.

December. 28. Monday, Innocent's-day, about ten at Night, the Queen was
Delivered at St. James's, of a Daughter Princess Elizabeth. I Christend her on
Saturday following, Jan. 2.

Feb. 2. Tuesday, Candlemas-day, My nearer care of J. S. was professed, and his
promise to be guided by me, And absolutely settled on Friday after, Feb. 5.

Feb. 14. Sunday-night, my Honest Old Servant Rich. Robinson dyed of an
Apoplexy.

Feb. 28. I Consecrated Doctor Roger Manwaring, Bishop of Saint David's.

March 6. Sunday, William Juxon Lord Bishop of London made Lord High Treasurer
of England: No Churchman had it since Henry 7. time. I pray God bless him to
carry it so, that the Church may have Honor, and the King and the State
Service and Contentment by it. And now if the Church will not hold up
themselves under God; I can do no more.

Anno 1636.
April 7. Thursday, The Bill came in this day, that two dyed of the Plague in
White-Chappel. God bless us through the Year.

An extreme dry and hot April and May, till the middle of June.

Maij 16. Monday, The Settlement between L. M. St. and me. God bless me, etc.

Maij 17. Tuesday, I Visited the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's London, etc.

Maij 19. Thursday, the Agreement between me and L. K. Chapter which began very
strangly, and ended just as I thought it would.

Junij 21. Tuesday, My Hearing before the King about my Right to Visit both the
Universities Jure Metropolitico. It was Ordered with me: The Hearing was at
Hampton Court.

Junij 22. Wednesday, The Statutes of Oxford finished, and Published in
Convocation.

Aug. 3. Wednesday-Night, toward the Morning, I Dreamed, that L. M. St. came
to me the next Day Aug. 4. and showed me all the Kindness I could ask. And that
Thursday, he did come, and was very Kind toward me. Somniis tamen haud multum
fido.

Aug. 19. Friday, I was in great danger of breaking my Right Leg. But God be
Blessed; for his Providence only delivered me.

Aug. 29. Monday, King Charles and Queen Mary entered Oxford, being to be there
entertained by me as Chancellor of the University.

Aug. 30. On Tuesday, I entertained them at St. John's College. It was St.
(...) his Day; and all passed happily. Charles Prince Elector Palatine, and his
Brother Prince Rupertus, was there. These two were present in Convocation; and
with other Nobles, were made Masters of Arts.

Aug. 31. Wednesday, They left Oxford, And I returned homewards, the Day after:
Having first entertained all the Heads of Houses together.

October. 14. Friday Night, I Dreamed marvelously, that the King was offended
with me, and would cast me off, and tell me no cause why. Avertat Deus. For
Cause I have given none.

November. 4. Friday Night, the most extreme Wind, that ever I heard; and much
Hurt done, by Sea, and by Land.

Twice or thrice since, Thunder, and Lightning, and Hail.

November. 20. Sunday Night, my fearful Dream. Mr. Cobb brought me word. etc.

December. 24. Saturday, Christmas-Eve, That night I Dreamed, I went to seek Mr.
St. and found him with his Mother sitting in the Room. It was a fair Chamber;
he went away, and I went after, but missed him; and after tired my self
extremely; but neither could I find him, nor so much as the House again.

Anno 1637
March 30. Thursday, I Christened the Lady Princess Ann, King Charles his third
Daughter: She was born on Friday, March 17.

Junij 10. My Book It is a very noble and fair Volum in Fol. curiously Written
and richly (...). It is still kept in the Library at Lambeth. H: W:
of the Records in the Tower, which concerned the Clergy, and which I caused to
be Collected, and Written in Vellam, was brought me finished. It Is ab Ann. 20.
Ed. 1. ad Ann. 14. Ed. 4.

Junij. 14. This Day Jo: Bastwick Dr: of Physic Hen: Burton Batch: of
Divinity, and Will: Prynne. Barrister at Law, were Censured for their Libells
against the Hierarchy of the Church, etc.

Junij forsan 16.
26. The Speech I then spoke in the Star Chamber, was commanded by the King, to
be Printed. And it came out Junij the 25.

Junij 26. This Day, Monday, The Prince Elector and his Brother Prince Rupert,
began their Journey toward the Sea Side, to return for Holland.

Junij 30. Friday, the above named three Libellers lost their Ears.

Julij 7. Friday, A Note was brought to me, of a Short Libel pasted on the
Cross in Cheapside: that the Arch-Wolf of Cant. had his Hand, in persecuting
the Saints, and shedding the Blood of the Martyrs: Memento, for the last of
June.

Julij 11. Tuesday, Dr. Williams Lord Bishop of Lincoln was Censured in the
Star Chamber for tampering, and corrupting of Witnesses.
Wit, in the King's Cause.

Julij 24. Being Monday, He was suspended by the High Commission, etc.

Aug. 3. Thursday, I Married James Duke of Lenox, to the Lady Mary Villars,
sole Daughter to the Lord Duke of Buckingham: The Marriage was in my Chapel at
Lambeth; the Day very Rainy; the King present.

Aug. 23. Wednesday, My Lord Mayor sent me a Libel found by the Watch at the
South Gate of St. Paul's. That the Devil had let that House to me, etc.

Aug. 25. Friday, Another Libel brought me by an Officer of the High
Commission, fastened to the North Gate of St. Paul's. That the Government of the
Church of England is a Candle l. and
in the Snuff, going out in a Stench.

Aug. 25. The same Day at Night, my Lord Mayor sent me another Libel, hanged
upon the Standard in Cheapside. My Speech in the Star Chamber, set in a kind of
Pillory, etc.

Aug. 29. Tuesday, Another short Libel against me, in Verse.

October. 22. Sunday, A great Noise about the perverting of the Lady Newport:
Speech of it at the Council: My free Speech there to the King, concerning the
increasing of the Roman Party, the Freedom at Denmark-house, the Carriage of
Mr. Wall. Montague and Sir Toby Matthews. The Queen acquainted with all I said
that very Night, and highly displeased with me; and so continues.

November. 22. Wednesday, The extreme and unnatural hot Winter Weather began, and
continued till December. 8.

December. 12. Tuesday, I had Speech with the Queen a good space, and all about
the Business of Mr. Montague, but we parted fair.

Anno 1638.
April 29. The Tumults in Scotland, about the Service Book offered to be
brought in, began July 23. 1637. and continued increasing by fits, and has now
brought that Kingdom in danger. No question, but there is a great Concurrence
between them, and the Puritan Party in England. A great aim there to destroy me
in the King's Opinion, etc.

Maij 26. Saturday, James Lord Marquess Hamilton set forth, as the King's
Commissioner, to appease the Tumults in Scotland. God prosper him, for God and
the King. It was a very Rainy Day.

June. My Visitation then began of Merton Coll. in Oxford, by my Visitors; was
Adjourned to my own Hearing, against, and upon October. 2.

October. 2. 3. 4. I sat upon this Business these Three Days, and Adjourned it
to July 1. inter Horas primam and tertiam, Lambeth. The Warden appeared very
foul.

October. 19. Friday, News was brought to us, as we sat in the Star Chamber,
That the Queen Mother of France was Landed at Harwich; many and great
Apprehensions upon this Business; Extreme Windy and Wet Weather a Week before,
and after; the Watermen called it, Q: Mother Weather.

October. 26. Friday, A most Extreme Tempest upon the Thames. I was in it, going
from the Star Chamber Home, between six and seven at Night. I was never upon
the Water in the like Storm: And was in great Danger at my Landing at Lambeth
Bridge.

October. 31. Wednesday, The Q: Mother came into London, and so to St: James's.

November. 13. Tuesday, The Agreement between me and Ab. S. etc.

November. 21. Wednesday, The General Assembly in Scotland began to Sit.

November. 29. Thursday, The Proclamation issued out, for dissolving the General
Assembly in Scotland, under pain of Treason.

December. 20. They sat notwithstanding; and made many strange Acts, till
December. 20. which was Thursday, and then they rose. But have indicted another
Assembly against July next.

Januar. 14. Monday, About 5. at Night, a most grievous Tempest of Wind,
Thunder, Lightning and Rain.

Feb. 10. My Book against Fisher the Jesuit was Printed; and this day, being
Sunday, I delivered a Copy to his Majesty.

Feb. 12. Tuesday-night, I dreamed, that K. C. was to be Married to a
Minister's Widow. And that I was called upon to do it. No Service Book could be
found; and in my own Book, which I had, I could not find the Order for Marriage.

Anno 1639.
March 27. Wednesday, Coronation-day, King Charles took his Journey Northward,
against the Scottish Covenanting Rebels. God of his infinite Mercy bless him
with Health and Success.

March 29. Friday, An extreme Fire in St. Olaves Parish Southwark: forty Houses
burnt down.

April 3. Wednesday, Before the King's going, I settled with him a great
business for the Queen; which I understood she would never move for her self.
The Queen gave me great Thanks. And this day I waited purposely on her, to give
her Thanks for her gracious acceptance. She was pleased to be very free with
me, and to promise me freedom.

April 29. Monday, This day the King went from York toward New Castle; but
stays at Durham for a week at least.

Maij 28. His Majesty encamped two Miles West from Barwick by Tweed.

Junij 4. Whitson-Tuesday, As I was going to do my duty to the Queen; an
Officer of the Lord Mayor's met me, and delivered to me two very Seditious
Papers, the one to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the other to excite the
Apprentices, etc. Both Subscribed by John Lilburn, a Prisoner in the Fleet,
Sentenced in the Star Chamber, etc.

Junij 5. Wednesday, I delivered both these to the Lords of the Council.

Junij 15 and 17. Saturday and Monday, The Peace concluded between the King and
the Scottish Rebels. God make it safe and Honorable to the King and Kingdom.

Junij 28. Friday, I sent the remainder of my Manuscripts to Oxford, being in
number 576. And about an Hundred of them were Hebrew, Arabic, and Persian. I
had formerly sent them above 700 Volumes.

Aug. 1. Thursday, His Majesty came back from his Northern Journey to
Theobalds, and to White Hall on Saturday, Aug. 3.

Many Varieties, since the Assembly held and ended in Scotland. The Bishops
thrust out. The Parliament there yet sitting.

October. 11. and 12. Friday and Saturday, The Spanish Navy was set upon by the
Hollanders in the Downs. The Fight began to be hot, when they were past Dover.
They were in all near 60 Sail. The Spaniards suffered much in that Fight, not
without our dishonor, that they should dare to begin the Fight there. But this
is one of the effects of the Scottish daring.

December. 2. Monday, A. Sh. my Chyrurgeon in trust, gave me great and unexpected
ease in my great Infirmity. But after, the weakness continued.

December. 5. Thursday, The King declared his Resolution for a Parliament, in
case of the Scottish Rebellion. The first Movers to it were my Lord Deputy of
Ireland, my Lord Marquess Hamilton, and my self. And a Resolution Voted at the
Board, to assist the King in extraordinary ways; if the Parliament should prove
peevish, and refuse, etc.

December. 27. Friday, Being St: John's-day, at Night, between 12 and 2 of the
Clock next Morning, the greatest wind that ever I heard blow. Many of the poor
Watermen at Lambeth had their Boats tumbled up and down, as they lay on the
Land, and broken to pieces. One of my Servants went into London; and durst not
come home; the Evening was so foul. And it was God's great Blessing both on him
and me. Hence may be corrected a great mistake committed by Heylin in the Life
of the Archbishop, p: 450: The Relation also, which follows in Heylin, (...)
p: 451. concerning the Accident which happened that Night at Christ's-Church
Canterbury, is a (...) less wide mistake, being unadvisedly taken, as well as
the former, from Prynne (Breviat of the Archbishop's Life: p: 34, 35.) who not
(...) took the latter from a lying Pamphlet, Wrote and Published by that (...)
Villain Richard Culmer, Entitled, Cathedral News from Canterbury, H:
For that Night the shafts of two Chimneys were blown down upon the Roof of his
Chamber, and beat down both the Lead and the Rafters upon his Bed; where had he
been that Night, he must have perished. At Croydon, one of the Pinnacles fell
from the Steeple; and beat down the Lead and the Roof of the Church, near 200
foot square.

Januar. 24. Friday, At Night I dreamed, that my Father (who died 46 Years
since) came to me; and, to my thinking, he was as well and as cheerful, as ever
I saw him. He asked me, what I did here? And after some Speech, I asked him,
how long he would stay with me? He answered; he would stay, till he had me away
with him. I am not moved with Dreams; yet I thought fit to remember this.

Januar. 25. Saturday, St. Paul's, A very blustering and a tempestuous day.

Januar. 26. Sunday, I received the Queen's Gracious Assurance of her favor in
the business, which his Majesty had committed to me with others, etc.

February 9. Sunday, A large passage inserted, and afterward blotted out.

Anno 1640.
April 13. Monday, The Parliament sat down, called about the Rebellion of
Scotland.

April 14. Tuesday, The Convocation began at Saint Paul's.

April 24. Friday, The hot Contestation in the Lords House, which should have
precedence, the King's Supply, or the Subjects Grievance. Voted in the upper
House for the King.

May. 5. Tuesday, The Parliament ended, and nothing done. The Convocation
continued.

May 9. Saturday, A Paper posted upon the Old-Exchange, animating Prentices to
sack my House upon the Monday following, May 11. early.

H: W: From this place, four Pages together in the Original are in part burned,
in the form of a Crescent. This damage was done to the Book, while it was in
Mr: Prynne's hands, before it was produced as Evidence against the Archbishop
at his Trial. For in the following History, at March:13: 1643. The Archbishop
says. I know into whose Hands my Book is fallen; but what has been done with
it, I know not. This is to be seen; some passages in that Book are half burnt
out; whether purposely, or by chance, God knows. And the like words of the
Archbishop occur afterward, at July: 29: 1644. That passage (of Febr: 11:
1640. urged against the Archbishop out of his Diary) is more than half burnt
out; as is to be seen; whether of purpose by Mr: Prynne, or casually, I cannot
tell; yet the passage as confidently made up, and read to your Lordships, as if
nothing were wanting. It is indeed undeniably evident to any one, who compares
the Original with Prynne's Printed Copy; that this Accident had befallen the
Book, before Prynne had caused it to be Transcribed for the Press. Yet he
takes no notice of it; but fills up the places with such Words, as himself
pleases; and publishes the whole without any distinction of his own
Additions. I have partly from Prynne, partly from my own conjecture, supplied
the mutilated places, as well as I could; but have included all such suppletory
Words in Crotchets; that so the Reader may easily distinguish those Words,
which are yet to be Read in the Original, from those which are not; and may
judge, whether the several places be aptly filled up.

May 11. Munday-night, At Midnight my House a [t Lam] beth was beset with 500
[of] these Rascal Routers. [I] had notice, and stren [gthened] the House as
well as I could; and God be [thanked, I had] no harm, t [hey continued] there
full two hours: Since I have [e -- for]tified my House as well as I can; and
hope all may be safe. But yet Libels are continually set up in all places of
Note in the City.

My deliverance was great; God make me thankful for it.

Maij 21. Thursday, One of the Chief being taken, was Condemned at Southwark,
and Hanged and Quartered on Saturday Morning following, Maij 23.

But before this, May 15. Some of these mutinous People came in the day time,
and brake the White-Lyon Prison; and let loose their Fellows, both out of that
Prison, and the King's Bench, and (...) other Prisoners also out of the
White-Lyon.

Maij 29. Friday, The Convocation sat after the ending of the Parliament till
May 29. and then ended; having made in that time 17. Canons; which, I hope,
will be useful to the Church.

Maij. 29. The Bishop of Gloucester, Godfrye Goodman, suspended for notorious
Scandal to the Church, in refusing first to subscribe the Canons, and after l.
for professing.
to profess a Reservation. He had long before been suspected as inclining to
Popery.

The Canons were all [voted] Nemine dissenti [ ente,] save this Bishop, who had
in general consented before.

Julij 10. Friday, I took my Oath to the new Canons at the Council Table; and
so did my Lord Bishop of London; and after him the Bishop of Gloucester
submitted himself, and took the Oath; and was released out of Prison by the
King's Command.

Julij 22. Tuesday, I Christened the King's young Son Henry, at Oatlands. The
Queen was there happily Delivered of him, Julij 8.

On Wednesday, being the Day of the Solemn Fast, about 6. of the Clock in the
Evening: Aug. 20. Thursday, His Majesty took his Journey toward the North in
haste, upon Information that the Scots were entered the Monday before into
England, and meant to be at New Castle by Saturday: The Scots entered Aug. 20.

Aug. 22. Saturday, A [vile] Libel brought me, [found in] Covent Garden; Any
[mating] the Apprentices [and Soul]diers to fall up [on me] in the King's
absence.

Sept. 21. I received a [Letter from] John Rockel a M [an both by] Name and
Person [unknown] to me. He was [among the] Scots, as he tra [velled through
the] Bishopric of [ Durham] he heard them [inveigh and] rail at me
[exceedingly, and that] they hoped Shortly [to see me, as the Duke was] Slain
by [one least] suspected. His Letter [was to] advise me to look to my self.

September. 24. Thursday, A great Council of the Lords were called by the King to
York, to consider what way was best to be taken to get out the Scots; and this
day the Meeting began at York, and continued till October. 28.

October. 22. Thursday, The High Commission sitting at St. Paul's, because of the
Troubles of the Times: Very near 2000 Brownists made a Tumult at the end of the
Court, tore down all the Benches in the Consistory; and cried out, they would
have no Bishop, nor no High Commission.

October. 27. Tuesday, Simon and Jude's Eve, I went into my upper Study, to see
some Manuscripts, which I was sending to Oxford. In that Study hung my Picture,
taken by the Life; and coming in, I found it fallen down upon the Face, and
lying on the Floor, the String being broken, by which it was hanged against the
Wall. I am almost every day threatened with my Ruin in Parliament. God grant
this be no Omen.

November. 3. Tuesday, The Parliament began: the King did not ride, but went by
Water to Kings Stairs, and thorough Westminster Hall to the Church, and so to
the House.

November. 4. Wednesday, The Convocation began at St. Paul's.

November. 11. Wednesday, Thomas Vis [count] Wentworth, Earl of Straffor] d,
Accused to the Lords [by the] House of Commons, for [High] Treason, and
restrained to the Usher of the House.

November. 25. Wednesday, He was sent to the Tower.

December. 2. Wednesday, A great Debate in the House, that no Bishop should be so
much as of the Committee for preparatory Examinations in this Cause, as
accounted Causa Sanguints; put off till the next day.

December. 3. Thursday, The Debate declined.

December. 4. Friday, The King gave way, that his Council should be Examined upon
Oath in the Earl of Strafford's Case. I was Examined this day.

December. 16. Wednesday, The Canons Condemned in the House of Commons, as being
against the King's Prerogative, the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, the Liberty
and Propriety of the Subject, and containing diverse other things tending to
Sedition, and of dangerous Consequence. Upon this I was made the Author of
[them,] and a Committee put upon me to enquire into all my Actions, [and] to
prepare a Charge.

The same Morning, in [the] Upper House, I was na [med as an] Incendiary by
[the Scot] tish Commissioners; and [a....] Complaint promised to [be drawn up]
to morrow.

December. 18. Friday, I w [as Accu]sed by the House [of Commons] I was
Consecrated Bishop of Saint David's, November: 18: 1621.
for High Trea [son, without] any particular [Charge] laid against me; [which
they] said, should be [prepared] in convenient time. [Mr. Denzell] Hollys was
the [Man that brought] up the Message [to the Lords. Soon] after, the Charge
[was brought into] the Upper-House [by the Scottish] Commissioners, [tending to
prove me an [ Incendiary.] I was presently [committed to] the Gentleman Us
[her; but was permitted] to go in his Company [to my House at Lam] beth, for a
Book or two to Read in, and such Papers, as pertained to my Defense against the
Scots.

I stayed at Lambeth till the Evening, to avoid the gazing of the People. I
went to Evening Prayer in my Chapel. The Psalms of the day, Psalm. 93, and 94.
and Chap. 50. of Esai, gave me great Comfort. God make me worthy of it, and fit
to receive it.

As I went to my Barge, hundreds of my poor Neighbors stood there, and prayed
for my safety, and return to my House. For which I bless God and them.

December. 21. Monday, I was Fined 500 l. in the Parliament House, and Sir John
Lamb and Sir Henry Martin 250 l. a piece, for keeping Sir Robert Howard close
Prisoner in the Case of the Escape of the Lady Viscountess Purbecke out of the
Gate House; which Lady he kept avowedly, and had Children by her. In such a
Case, say the Imprisonment were more than the Law allow; what may be done for
Honor and Religion sake? This was not a Fine to the King, but Damage to the
Party.

[ December. 23.] Wednesday, The Lords Ordered me to pay the Money presently;
which was done.

[ Januar. 21.] Thursday, A Parliament [Man] of good Note, and Interessed
[with] diverse Lords, sent me word, [that] by Reason of my patient [and
m]oderate Carriage since my [Commit]ment, four Earls of great [power] in the
Upper-House [of] the Lords were not [now] so sharp against me [as at] first.
And that now they [were] resolved only to Se [quester] me from the King's Coun
[cil, and] to put me from my [Arch-]Bishoprick. So I see, what Justice I may
expect; since here is a Resolution taken, not only before my Answer, but before
my Charge was brought up against me.

Febr. 14. Sunday, A. R. And this, if I Live, and continue Archbishop of
Canterbury, till after Michaelmas-day come Twelvemonth, Anno 1642. God bless
me in this.

Febr. 26. Friday, This day I had been full ten weeks in restraint at Mr.
Maxwell's House. And this day, being St. Augustin's day, my Charge was brought
up from the House of Commons to the Lords, by Sir Henry Vane the Younger. It
consisted of fourteen Articles. These Generals they craved time to prove in
particular. The Copy of this General Charge is among my Papers. I spoke
something to it. And the Copy of that also is among my Papers. I had Favor
[from the] Lords not to go to the [ Tower] till the Monday following.

March 1. Monday, I went [in Mr.] Maxwell's Coach to the [ Tower.] No noise,
till I came [into] Cheapside. But from [thence] to the Tower, I was [followed]
and railed at by the [Prentices and] the Rabble, in great [numbers] to the very
Tower [Gates, where I left] them; and I thank God, [he made me] patient.

March 9. Shrove-Tuesday, [........] was with me in [the Tower;] and gave great
[engagements of his] Faith to me. The defects of this place are supplied from
the following History.


March 13. Saturday, [Divers Lords] Dined with the [Lord Herbert, at his] new
House by [ Fox-Hall in] Lambeth. Three [of these Lords in the] Boat together,
[when one of] them saying, he [was sorry for my] Commitment, because [the
buil]ding of St. Paul's went [slow] on there-while; the Lord Brook replied; I
hope, some of us shall live to see no one stone left upon another of that
Building.

March 15. Monday, A Committee for Religion settled in the Upper-House of
Parliament. Ten Earls, ten Bishops, ten Barons. So the Lay-Votes shall be
double to the Clergy. This Committee will meddle with Doctrine as well as
Ceremonies; and will call some Divines to them to consider of the Business. As
appears by a Letter hereto annexed, sent by the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, to some
Divines to attend this Service. Upon the whole matter, I believe this Committee
will prove the National Synod of England, to the great dishonor of this
Church. And what else may follow upon it, God knows.

March 22. Monday, The Earl of Strafford's Trial began in Westminster Hall; and
it continued till the end of April, taking in the variation of the House of
Commons, who after a long Hearing drew a Bill of Attainder against him.

[ Anno 1641.]
[ March 25.] Thursday, A. Sh. performed his Promise to the uttermost.

[ May 1.] Saturday, The King came into the Upper-House; and there declared
before both Houses, how diligently he [had] hearkened to all the Proceedings
with the Earl of Strafford; [and] found that his fault, whatever [it was],
could not amount to [High Tre]ason: That if it went by [Bill] it must pass by
him; and [that] he could not with his Con [science] find him Guilty, nor
[would] wrong his Conscience [so fa]r. But advised them to pro [ceed] by way of
Misdemeanour; [and he] would concur with them. The same day, after the [King]
was gone, a Letter was [Read] in the Upper-House from the Scots; in which, they
did earnestly desire to be gone. It was moved for a present Conference with the
House of Commons about it. The Debate about it was very short; yet the Commons
were risen beforehand.

Maij 12. Wednesday, The Earl of Strafford beheaded upon Tower Hill.

June 23. Wednesday, I acquainted the King by my Lord of London, that I would
resign my Chancellorship of Oxford, and why.

June 25. Friday, I sent down my Resignation of the Chancellorship of Oxford,
to be published in Convocation.

July 1. Thursday, This was done; and the Earl of Pembroke chosen Chancellor by
joint consent.

August 10. Tuesday, The King went Post into Scotland, the Parliament sitting,
and the Armies not yet dissolved.

September. 23. Thursday, Mr: Adam Torles, my Ancient, Loving and Faithful
Servant, then my Steward, after he had served me full forty two Years, dyed, to
my great loss and grief.

October. 23. The Lords in Parliament Sequestered my Jurisdiction to my inferior
Officers; and Ordered, that I should give no Benefice, without acquainting them
first, to whom I would give it; that so they might approve. This Order was sent
me on Tuesday, November. 2. in the Afternoon.

November. 1. News came to the Parliament of the Troubles in Ireland, the King
being then in Scotland, where there were Troubles enough also.

November. 25. Thursday, The King at his return from Scotland, was sumptuously
Entertained in London; and great joy on all hands. God prosper it.

December. 30. Thursday, The Archbishop of York, and eleven Bishops more, sent
to the Tower for High Treason, for delivering a Petition and a Protestation
into the House, that this was not a free Parliament, since they could not come
to Vote there, as they are bound, without danger of their Lives.

Januar. 4. Tuesday, His Majesty went into the House of Commons; and demanded
the Persons of Mr: Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr: John Pym, Mr: John
Hampden, and Mr: William Stroude; whom his Attorney had the day before,
together with the Lord Kimbolton, Accused of High Treason, upon seven Articles.
They had Information; and were not then in the House: they came in after, and
great stir was made about this Breach of the Privileges of Parliament.

Febr. 6. Saturday, Voted in the Lords House, that the Bishops shall have no
Votes there in Parliament. The Commons had passed that Bill before. Great
Ringing for joy, and Bonfires in some Parishes.

Febr. 11. Friday, The Queen went from Greenwich toward Dover, to go into
Holland with her Daughter the Princess Mary, who was lately Married to the
Prince of Orange his Son. But the true Cause was, the present Discontents here.
The King accompanied her to the Sea.

Febr. 14. His Majesty's Message to both Houses, Printed, by which he puts all
into their Hands; so God bless us.

Febr. 14. An Order came, that the Twelve Bishops might put in Bail, if they
would; and that they should have their Hearing upon Friday, February: 25: They
went out of the Tower on Wednesday, February: 16: and were sent in again,
February: 17: the House of Commons, on Wednesday-night, protesting against
their coming forth, because they were not in a Parliamentary way made
acquainted with it.

Feb. 20. Sunday, There came a tall Man to me, under the Name of Mr: Hunt. He
professed, he was unknown to me; but came (he said) to do me service in a great
particular; and prefaced it, that he was not set on by any Statesman, or any
of the Parliament. So he drew a Paper out of his Pocket, and showed me 4.
Articles drawn against me to the Parliament, all touching my near conversation
with Priests, and my Endeavors by them to subvert Religion in England. He told
me, the Articles were not yet put into the House: they were subscribed by one
Willoughby, who (he said) was a Priest, but now come from them. I asked him,
what Service it was he could do me. He said; he looked for no advantage to
himself. I conceived hereupon, this was a piece of Villainy: And bad him tell
Willoughby, he was a Villain; and bid him put his Articles into the Parliament,
when he will. So I went presently into my inner Chamber; and told Mr: Edward
Hide, and Mr: Richard Cobb, what had befallen me. But after I was sorry at my
Heart, that my Indignation at this base Villainy made me so hasty, to send Hunt
away; and that I had not desired Mr: Lieutenant to seize on him, till he
brought forth this Willoughby.

Feb. 25. Friday, The Queen went to Sea for Holland, and her Eldest Daughter
the Princess Mary with her.

March 6. Sunday, After Sermon, as I was walking up and down my Chamber before
Dinher, without any Slip or Treading awry, the Sinew of my Right Leg gave a
great crack, and brake asunder in the same place where I had broken it before.
Feb: 5: (...).

Orders about Stisted.

Anno 1642.
It was two Months, before I could go out of my Chamber. On Sunday ( Maii: 15:)
I made shift between my Man and my Staff to go to Church. There one Mr: Joslin
Preached, with Vehemence becoming Bedlam, with Treason sufficient to hang him
in any other State, and with such particular Abuse to me, that Women and Boys
stood up in the Church, to see how I could bear it. I humbly thank God for my
Patience.

All along things grew higher between the King and the Parliament. God send a
good Issue.

Maij 29. Four Ships came into the River, with part of the Ammunition from Hull.

August 22. Monday, the King set up his Standard at Nottingham.

August 24. The Parliament having committed Three Officers of the Ordinance,
and sent two new ones in the room: This day they brake open all the Doors, and
possessed themselves of the Stores.

August 27. Saturday, Earl of Southampton and Sir Jo. Culpepper sent from the
King to have a Treaty for Peace, refused; unless the King would take down his
Standard, and recall his Proclamation which made them Traitors.

September. 1. Thursday, Bishops Voted down, and Deans and Chapters, in the Lower
House. That Night Bonfires and Ringing all over the City: Ordered cunningly by
Pennington the new Lord Mayor.

About this time ( ante ult. Aug.) the Cathedral of Canterbury grossly Profaned.

September. 9. Friday, An Order from the House, about the giving of
Alhallows-Bread-street. The Earl of Essex set forward toward the King.

September. 10. Voted down in the upper House ( Dubitatur)

October. 15. Saturday, Resolved upon the question, that the Fines, Rents, and
Profits of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and of such notorious
Delinquents who have taken up Arms against the Parliament, or have been active
in the Commission of Array, shall be sequestered for the use and service of the
Commonwealth.

October. 23. Sunday, Keinton Field.

October. 24. Monday, An Order from the House to keep but Two Servants, speak
with no Prisoner or other Person, but in the presence of my Warder, (this
common to other Prisoners)

October. 26. Wednesday, Mr. Cook's Relation to me of some Resolutions taken in
the City, etc.

October. 27. The Order of October. 24. not shown me till October. 26. and I sent a
Petition to the House, for a Cook and a Butler, Thursday.

October 28. This Order revoked, Friday: And this granted me.

November. 2. Wednesday Night, I Dreamed the Parliament was removed to Oxford;
the Church undone: Some old Courtiers came in to see me, and jeared: I went to
St. John's; and there I found the Roof off from some parts of the College, and
the Walls cleft, and ready to fall down. God be Merciful.

November. 8. Seventy Eight Pounds of my Rents taken from my Controuler, by Mr.
Holland and Mr. Ashurst; which they said was for Maintenance of the King's
Children.

November. 9. Wednesday Morning, Five of the Clock, Captain Brown, and his
Company entered my House at Lambeth, to keep it for Public Service; and they
made of it

The Lords, upon my Petition to them, denied they knew of any such Order; and
so did the Committee; yet such an Order there was, and diverse Lords hands to
it; but upon my Petition they made an Order, that my Books should be secured
and my Goods.

November. 10. Some Lords went to the King about an Accommodation.

November. 12. Saturday, A Fight about Brainford: Many slain of the Parliaments
Forces, and some taken Prisoners; Such as would not serve the King, were sent
back with an Oath given them. The Fight is said to begin casually about
billotting. Since this, Voted in the House for no Accommodation, but to go on,
and take all advantages.

November. 16. Wednesday, An Order to bar all Prisoners Men from speaking one
with another, or any other, but in presence of the Warder; nor go out without
the Lieutenants leave: And to bar them the Liberty of the Tower.

November. 22. Tuesday, Ordered, That any one of them may go out to buy Provision.

November. 24. Thursday, The Soldiers at Lambeth House brake open the Chapel
door; and offered violence to the Organ; but before much hurt was done, the
Captains heard of it, and stayed them.

December. 2. Friday, Some of the King's Forces taken at Farnham. About an
hundred of them brought in Carts to London: Ten Carts full, their Legs bound.
They were sufficiently railed upon in the Streets.

December. 19. Monday, My Petition for Mr: Coniers to have the Vicaridge of
Horsham. Before it came to be delivered, the House had made an Order against
him, upon complaint from Horsham of his disorderly Life. So

December. 21. St. Thomas's day, I petitioned for my Chaplain, Mr. William
Brackstone. Refused: yet no Exception taken.

That day, in the Morning, my young dun (...) were taken away, by Warrant under
the Hands of Sir John Evelyn, Mr. Pim, and Mr: Martin.

December. 23. Thursday, Dr. Layton came with a Warrant from the House of
Commons, for the Keys of my House to be delivered to him, and more Prisoners to
be brought thither, etc.

January 5. A final Order from both Houses, for settling of Lambeth Prison, etc.
Thursday. All my Wood and Coals spent, or to be spent there, not reserving in
the Order, that I shall have any for my own use; nor would that Motion be
hearkened to.

January 6. Friday, Epiphany, Earl of Manchester's Letter from the House, to
give All-Hallowes-Bredstreet to Mr. Seaman.

January 26. Thursday, The Bill passed the Lords House for Abolishing
Episcopacy, etc.

Feb. 3. Friday, Dr. Heath came to persuade me to give Chartham to Mr. Corbet,
etc.

Febr. 14. Tuesday, I received a Letter from his Majesty, dated January 17. to
give Chartham to Mr: Reddinge, or lapse it to him. That Afternoon, the Earl of
Warwick came to me, and brought me an Order of the House to give it to one Mr:
Culmer. This Order bare date, Febr: 4:

Febr. 25: Saturday, Mr: Culmer came to me about it. I told him, I had given my
Lord my Answer.

(...) (...): Thursday, St: Cedd's day, The Lord Brook shot in the left Eye,
and killed in the place, at Lichfeild, going to give the Onset upon the Close
of the Church; he having ever been fierce against Bishops and Cathedrals: His
Bever up, and armed to the Knees; so that a Musket at that distance could have
done him but little harm. Thus was his Eye put out, who about two Years since
said, he hoped to live to see at St: Paul's not one Stone left upon another.

March 10. Friday, This Night preceding, I dreamed a Warrant was come to free
me; and that I spoke with the Lieutenant, that my Warder might keep the Keys of
my Lodging, till I had got some place for my self and my Stuff, since I could
not go to Lambeth. I waked, and slept again; and had the very same Dream a
second time.

March 20. Monday, The Lord of Northumberland, Mr: Pierpoint, Sir John Holland,
Sir William Ermin, and Mr: Whitlock, went from both Houses to Treat of Peace
with his Majesty. God of his Mercy bless it and us.

March 24. Friday, One Mr: Foord told me (he is a Suffolk Man) that there was a
Plot to send me and Bishop Wrenn, as Delinquents to New England, within
fourteen days. And that Wells, a Minister that came thence, offered wagers of
it. The Meeting was at Mr: Barks, a Merchant's House in Friday-street, being
this Foord's Sonin-Law. I never saw Mr: Foord before.

Anno 1643.
March 28. Tuesday, Another Order from the Lords, to give Chartham to one Mr:
Edward Hudson. My Answer, as before.

April 11. Tuesday, Another Order for the same, and very peremptory. This came
to me April 12. whereupon I petitioned the House Thursday, April 13. My former
Answer being wilfully mistaken by Hudson.

That present day another Order, very quick; which was brought to me Friday,
April 14. I Petitioned the House again the same day with great submission; but
could not disobey the King.

April l. 21.
12. Another peremptory Order, to Collate Chartham on Mr: Edw: Corbet, brought
to me Saturday April 22.

April 24. Monday, I gave my Answer as before, but in as soft Terms as I could.

April 25. Tuesday, It was moved in the House of Commons to send me to
New England. But it was rejected. The Plot was laid by Peter's, Wells, and
others.

Maij 1. Monday, My Chapel windows at Lambeth defaced, and the steps torn up.

Maij 2. Tuesday, The Cross in Cheapside taken down.

Maij 9. Tuesday, All my Goods seized upon, Books and all. The Seizers were
Captain Guest, Layton, and Dickins. The same day an Order for further restraint
of me, not to go out of it without my Keeper. This Order was brought to me Maij
10.

Maij 16. Tuesday, An Order of both Houses for the (...) of my Benefices, etc.
void, or to be void. This Order was brought to me Wednesday, Maij 17. at Night.
Methinks, I see a cloud rising over me, about Chartham business: There having
been a Rumor twice, that I shall be removed to a Prison Lodging.

Maij 23. Tuesday, I sent my Petition for Maintenance.

This day the Queen was Voted a Traitor in the Commons House.

Maij l. 20.
19. Saturday, Another Order to Collate Edward Corbet to Chartham. It was
brought to me Friday, Maij: 26. I Answered it Saturday, Maij: 27. as before.

H: W: Thus far the Archbishop had proceeded in his Diary; when it was
violently seized, and taken out of his (...) by William Prynne, on the last day
of May 1643. The (...) of (...) by Prynne himself ( Breviat of the
Archbishop's Life, p. 28.) and gloried in, as a most worthy Action. But the
barbarous manner of it is more largely described by the Archbishop himself in
the following History. After the Book came into his Enemies Hands, it was
frequently urged against him as Evidence at his Trial; and when the Trial was
near finished, Prynne caused it to be Printed, and Published it in the
beginning of September 1644. but corrupted, and in part only; of which see
before in the Preface. The Archbishop had almost filled up his Paper Book
(wherein he wrote this Diary) when it was taken from him. But in the last Leaf
of it, are found certain Projects wrote with his own Hand, (at what Time, or in
what Year, is uncertain) which I have subjoyned.

Things which I have Projected to do, if God Bless me in them.
I: BLotted out.

II: To Build at St: John's in Oxford, where I was bred up, for the good and
safety of that College. Done.

III: To overthrow the Feoffment, dangerous both to Church and State, going
under the specious pretense of buying in Impropriations. Done.

IV: To procure King Charles to give all the Impropriations, yet remaining in
the Crown, within the Realm of Ireland, to that poor Church. Done, and settled
there.

V: To set upon the Repair of St: Paul's Church in London. Done.

VI: To Collect and Perfect the broken, crossing, and imperfect Statutes of the
University of Oxford; which had lain in a confused Heap some Hundred of Years.
Done.

VII: Blotted out.

VIII: To settle the Statutes of all the Cathedral Churches of the new
Foundations; whose Statutes are imperfect, and not confirmed. Done for
Canterbury.

IX: To annex for ever some settled Commendams, and those, if it may be, sine
cura, to all the small Bishoprics. Done for Bristol, Peterborough, St. Asaph,
Chester, Oxford.

X: To find a way to increase the Stipends of poor Vicars.

XI: To see the Tithes of London Settled, between the Clergy and the City.

XII: To set up a Greek Press in London and Oxford, for Printing of the Library
Manuscripts; and to get both Letters and Matrices. Done for London.

XIII: To settle 80. Pounds a Year for ever, out of Dr: Fryar's Lands, (after
the Death of Dr: John Friar the Son) upon the Fabric of St: Paul's, to the
repair till that be finished, and to keep it in good state after.

XIV: To procure a large Charter for Oxford, to confirm their ancient
Privileges, and obtain new for them, as large as those of Cambridge, which
they had gotten since Hen: 8: which Oxford had not. Done.

XV: To open the great Square at Oxford between St: Maryes and the Schools,
Brasen-nose and All Souls.

XVI: To settle an Hospital of Land in Redding, of 100. Pounds a Year, in a new
way. I have acquainted Mr: Barnard, the Vicar of Croydon, with my Project. He
is to call upon my Executors to do it; if the Surplusage of my Goods (after
Debts and Lega. cies paid) come to three Thousand Pounds. Done to the value of
200. Pounds per Annum.

XVII: To erect an Arabic Lecture in Oxford, at least for my Life time, my
Estate not being able for more: That this may lead the way, etc. Done. I have
now settled it for Ever. The Lecture began to be read Aug: 10: 1636.

XVIII: The Impropriation of the Vicaridge of Cuddesden to the Bishop of
Oxford, finally Sentenced Wednesday: April 19: 1637. And so the House built by
the now Bishop of Oxford Dr: John Bancroft, settled for ever to that Bishopric.
Done.

XIX: A Book in Vellam fair Written, containing the Records, which are in the
Tower, and concern the Clergy. This Book I got done at my own Charge, and have
left it in my Study at Lambeth for posterity, Junij: 10: 1637. Ab Anno 20: Ed:
1: ad Annum 24: Ed: 4: Done.

XX: A new Charter for the College near Dublin to be (...) of his Majesty; and
a Body of new Statutes made, to rectify that Government. Done.

XXI: A Charter for the Town of Reading, and a Mortmain of etc. Done.

XXII. If I live to see the repair of St: Paul's near an end, to move his
Majesty for the like Grant from the High Commission, for the buying in of
Impropriations, as I have now for St: Paul's. And then I hope to buy in two a
Year at least.

XXIII: I have procured for St: John Baptist's College in Oxford the perpetual
Inheritance and Patronage of etc.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF THE TROUBLES AND TRIAL OF THE Most Reverend Father in God
WILLIAM LAUD, Lord Archbishop Of CANTERBURY.

Wrote by Himself, during his Imprisonment in the Tower.

Psalm: XI: 3: Old Translation. The Foundations will be cast down; and what has
the Righteous done? Or, as it is Rendered in the last Translation.

If the Foundations be destroyed; what can the Righteous do? LONDON, Printed
for Ri: Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St: Paul's Churchyard, M DC XCIV.

THE HISTORY OF THE TROUBLES OF WILLIAM LAUD LORD Archbishop of Canterbury:
Which began to fall upon him, (...) 18: 1640.
CAP. I.
December. 18. 1640. being Friday. Upon this day, Mr. Densell See Rushworth's
Collections, par: 3. vol: (...) 123. Prynne's Count. Hist: p: 19. etc.
Hollis, second Son to John Earl of Clare, by Order from the House of Commons,
came up to the Lords, and Accused me of High Treason; and told the Lords, they
would make proof thereof in convenient time: But desired in the mean time, that
I might be committed to safe Custody. This was strange News to my Innocence:
For this I can say of my self, without falsehood or vanity, that to the
uttermost of my Understanding, I served the King, my Gracious Master, with all
Duty and Faithfulness; and without any known or wilful Disservice to the State
there-while. And this I did, with as true and free a Heart, as ever any Man
did, that served a King. And I thank God, my care was such for the Public,
that it is well known, I much neglected my own private Fortunes there-while.
The more was I amazed at the first apprehension of this heavy and undeserved
Charge.

Upon this Charge, I was commanded to withdraw. But I first desired leave to
speak a few words: And I spoke to this effect; That I was heartily sorry for
the Offense taken against me; and that I was most unhappy, to have my Eyes open
to see that day, and mine Ears to hear such a Charge: But humbly desired their
Lordships, to look upon the whole course of my Life, which was such, as that I
did verily persuade my self, not one Man in the House of Commons did believe in
his Heart, that I was a Traitor. Here my Lord the Earl of Essex interrupted me,
and said, That Speech of mine, was a Scandal put upon the whole House of
Commons, that they should viz. should charge me.
bring me up charged with so high a Crime, which themselves did not believe. I
(...) desired then, that I might be proceeded with in the Ancient Parliamentary
way of England. This the Lord Say excepted against; as if I would prescribe
them, how they should proceed. So I withdrew, as I was commanded, and was
presently called in again to the Bar; and thence delivered to Mr. James
Maxwell, the Officer See the Order of the Lords for his Commitment apud Prynne
p. 22.
of the Black Rod, to be kept in safe Custody, till the House of Commons should
farther Impeach me.

Here I humbly desired leave, that I might go home to fetch some Papers,
necessary for my Defense. This was granted me with some difficulty; and Mr.
Maxwell was commanded to Attend me all the while I should stay. When I was gone
to Lambeth, after some little discourse (and sad enough) with my Steward, and
some private Friends, I went into my Chapel to Evening Prayer. The Psalms
Psalm: 93. and 94. In vulgara Editione, Ps. 92, and 93.
for that day gave me much comfort, and were observed by some Friends then
present, as well as by my self. And upon the Comfort I then received, I have
every day since (unless some urgent Business prevented me) Read over both these
Psalms, and, God willing, purpose so to do every day of my Life. Prayers being
ended, I went with Mr. Maxwell, as I was commanded; Hundreds of my Poor
Neighbors standing at my Gates to see me go, and Praying (...) for my safe
return to my House: For which, I blessed God, and them.

CAP. II.
AND because here I am sure to find my self, being now Imprisoned; I will begin
farther off, and show briefly why, and how, this Malignity pursued, and
overtook me.

When I was first Bishop of London, His Majesty expressed a great desire, which
he had, to settle a Liturgy in the Church of Scotland; and this continued in
agitation many Years. And what my part was therein, I shall clearly and
ingenuously set down hereafter, when I come to Answer the Scottish Accusations
of me in that behalf, or the Articles of the Parliament here, one of which
relates to them. In the Year 1633. His Majesty went into Scotland, and was
Crowned there; I attended his Majesty in that Service. The Parliament then
sitting in Scotland, was very quick about some Church Affairs; and the King was
much unsatisfied with some Men, and their Proceedings. At his Majesty's Return,
in the same Year, I was, by his special Grace and Favor, made Archbishop of
Canterbury, 19 Septembris. The debate about the Scottish Liturgy was pursued
a-fresh; and at last it was resolved by the King, that some Scottish Bishops
should draw up a Liturgy, as near that of England as might be; and that then
his Majesty would have that Confirmed and Settled for the use of that Kingdom.
This Liturgy was carefully considered of, and at last Printed and Published,
An. 1637. It seems, the Bishops, which were trusted with this business, went
not the right way, by a General Assembly, and other Legal Courses of that
Kingdom. But what way soever was taken, or in whomsoever there was a failure;
this was certain in the Event: The Bishops were deceived in their expectation
of a peaceable admission of that Service Book; The King lost the Honor and
Safety of that Settlement; And that Kingdom such a Form of God's Service, as I
fear they will never come near again. And that People, by cunning and factious
practices, both at home and from hence, were heated into such a Frenzy, as
will not easily be cured. And it is well, if we their Neighbors run not mad for
Company.

These violent Distempers continued from the Publishing of this Service Book,
in the Year 1637. till the Year 1638. Then they grew up into a formal Mutiny:
And the Scottish Subjects began to Petition with Arms, in their Mouths first,
and soon after in their Hands. His Majesty was often told, that these Northern
Commotions had their Root in England. His Majesty's Goodness was confident upon
the Fidelity of his Subjects of both Nations, and would not believe that of
either, which was most true of a powerful Faction in both: Till at last, after
much intercourse and mediation lost, and cast away, the King was so betrayed by
some of his own Agents, that the Scots appeared upon their Borders in a formal
Army. His Majesty went with an Army to Barwick. There, after some stay, a
Pacification was made; and his Majesty returned to White Hall, Aug. 3. 1639.

Now during all this time, from the Publishing of this Service Book, to this
Pacification, I was voyced by the Faction in both Nations, to be an Incendiary,
a Man that labored to set the two Nations into a bloody War: Whereas, God
knows, I labored for Peace so long, till I received a great check for my
labor. And particularly at the beginning of these Tumults, when the Speech of
a War first began in the Year 1638. openly at the Council Table at Theobalds,
my Counsels alone prevailed for Peace, and Forbearance, in hope the Sea this
Confirmed by the King's own Testimony, in his large Declaration, p: 420. W: S:
A: C:
Scots would think better of their Obedience. But their Counsels were fomented
to another end, as after appeared.

The Pacification being made, was in Terms as follows.

The Articles of the Pacification.
1.The Forces of Scotland to be disbanded, and dissolved within (...) twenty
four hours.
Eight and Forty Hours after the Publication of his Majesty's Declaration being
agreed upon.

2.His Majesty's Castles, Forts, Ammunitions of all sorts, and Royal Honors to
be delivered after the Publication, so soon as his Majesty al. shall.
can send to receive them.

3.His Majesty's Ships to depart presently after the delivery of the Castles,
with the first fair Wind; and in the mean time no interruption of Trade or
Fishing.

4.His Majesty is Graciously pleased, to cause to be restored, all Persons,
Goods, and Ships, detained, and arrested, since the first of November last past.

5.There shall be no Meetings, Treatings, Consultations, or Convocations of his
Majesty's Lieges, but such as are warrantable by Act of Parliament.

6.All Fortifications to desist, and no further working therein, and they to be
remitted to his Majesty's Pleasure.

7.To restore to every one of his Majesty's Subjects their Liberty, Lands,
Houses, Goods, and Means whatsoever, taken and detained from them by whatsoever
means, since the aforesaid time.

The Copy of the Act of the Pacification as it passed The Articles of
Pacification were concluded 1639. (...) 17: Signed by the King, June: 18:
under his Majesty's Hand, and includes these Articles above written, is as
follows.

Chapter R.

WE having considered the Papers, and humble Petitions presented unto us, by
those of our Subjects of Scotland, who were admitted to attend our pleasure in
the Camp; and after a full Hearing by Our Self of all, that they could say or
allege thereupon, having communicated the same to Our Council of both
Kingdoms; upon mature deliberation, with their unanimous Advice, We have
thought fit, to give them this Just and Gracious Answer: That though We cannot
condescend to Ratify and Approve the Acts of the pretended General Assembly at
Glasgow, for many Grave and Weighty Considerations, which have happened, both
before, and since, much importing the Honor, and Security of that true
Monarchical Government Lineally descended upon Us from so many of Our
Ancestors; Yet such is Our Gracious Pleasure, That notwithstanding the many
disorders committed of late, We are pleased, not only to confirm, and make
good, whatsoever Our Commissioner has granted and promised in Our Name; But
also, We are further Graciously pleased, to declare and assure, That according
to the Petitioner's humble desires, all Matters Ecclesiastical shall be
determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk, and Matters Civil by the Parliament,
and other inferior Judicatories Established by Law; which accordingly shall be
kept once a Year, or as shall be agreed upon al. by the General Assembly, and
Our Commissioner for the time being.
at the General Assembly.

And for settling the general distractions of that Our Ancient Kingdom, Our Will
and Pleasure is, that a free General Assembly be kept at Edinburgh, the sixth
day of August next ensuing, where We intend God willing to be personally
present; And for the Legal Indiction whereof, We have given Order and Command
to Our Council; and thereafter, a Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh, the
20th day of August next ensuing, for Ratifying of what shall be concluded in
the said Assembly, and settling such other things, as may conduce to the Peace
and Good of Our Native Kingdom, and therein, an Act of Oblivion to be passed.

And whereas, We are further desired, that Our Ships and Forces by Land, be
recalled, and all Persons, Goods, and Ships, restored, and they made safe from
Invasion: We are Graciously pleased to Declare, that upon their disarming and
disbanding of their Forces, dissolving and discharging all their pretended
Tables and Conventicles, and restoring unto Us, all Our Castles, Forts, and
Ammunitions of all sorts; as likewise, Our Royal Honors, and to every one of
Our Good Subjects, their Liberty, Lands, Houses, Goods, and Articulo 7:
Means whatsoever, taken and detained from them, since the late pretended
General Assembly; We will presently thereafter recall Our Fleet, and retire our
Landforces, and cause Restitution to be made to all Persons, of their Ships
and Goods detained, and arrested, since the aforesaid time: Whereby it may
appear, that Our intention in taking up of Arms, was no ways for Invading of
Our Native Kingdom, or to Innovate the Religion and Laws, but merely, for the
Maintaining, and Vindicating of Our Royal Authority.

And since that hereby it does clearly appear, that We neither have, nor do
intend any alteration in Religion, or Laws, but that both shall be maintained
by Us, in their full integrity: We expect the performance of that Humble and
Dutiful Obedience, which becomes Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, and as in their
several Petitions they have often professed.

And as We have just Reason to believe, that to Our peaceable, and
well-affected Subjects, this will be satisfactory; so We take God and the World
to witness, that whatsoever Calamities shall ensue by Our necessitated
suppressing of the Insolences of such, as shall continue in their disobedient
Courses, is not occasioned by us, but by their own procurement.

This Pacification was not much sooner made by the King, than it was broken by
the Scots. For whereas it was agreed by the Seventh Article, and is repeated in
the Body of the Pacification; That every one of his Majesty's good Subjects
should enjoy their Liberty, Lands, Houses, Goods, and Means whatsoever, taken,
and detayned from them since the aforesaid time, The * Lord Lindsay in the Name
of the rest made a Protestation either in the Camp at Dunns, or at the Cross in
Edinburgh, that no Bishop, or Clergyman was included in this Pacification;
which yet in manifest and plain Terms, extended it self to all the Kings good
Subjects. And this Protestation was so pursued, as that it obtained; and no
Clergyman was relieved in any the Particulars.

Upon this and other Particulars agitated in Parliament amongst them, his
Majesty thought fit to look to himself, and examine their Proceedings farther.
To this end he often called his Council; and in particular, made a Committee of
eight, more particularly to attend that service. They were the Lord Bishop of
London, then Lord Treasurer, the Lord Marquis Hamilton, the Earl of
Northumberland Lord Admiral, the Earl of Strafford Lord Deputy of Ireland, the
Lord Cottington, Sir Henry Vane, and Sir Francis Windebanck Secretaries, and my
self; to which was after added the Earl of Arundel Lord Marshal. And though I
spoke nothing of these Scottish Businesses, but either openly at Council Table;
or in presence of all, or so many of this Committee, as occasionally met, and
so had Auditors and Witnesses enough of what I did or said; yet it was still
cast out among the (...), that I was a chief Incendiary in the Business: Where
yet, had I said or done any thing worse than other, there wanted not Sir Henry
Vane to discover it.

At this Committee many things were proposed diversely, for the Aid and
Assistance of the King; and many Proposals rejected as Illegal. At last the
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland proposed the calling of a Parliament. Much was not
said against this, but much said for it: Nor indeed was it safe for any Man to
declare against it, after it was once publicly moved. So a Parliament was
resolved on, and called against April 13. 1640. At that time it sat down, and
many Tumultuary Complaints were made by the Scots against the Bishops and
Church Government in England, and with great vehemence against my self. All
this while the King could get no Money, to Aid him against the Scottish
Rebellion. At last, after many Attempts, Sir Henry Vane told the King plainly,
that it was in vain to expect longer, or to make any other overture to them.
For no Money would be had against the Scots.

Hereupon his Majesty called all his Lords of Council together; and upon Maij
5. being Tuesday at Six in the Morning they met in the Council Chamger. I, by
the mistake of the Messenger, was warned to be there at Seven in the Morning
(as if need be, I can prove by sufficient Witness) and at that Hour I came. By
this accident I came late, and found a Resolution taken, to Vote the
dissolution of that Parliament, and the Votes entered upon; my Lord Cottington
being in his Speech, when I came into the Council Chamger. All Votes concurred
to the ending of that Parliament, save two. The Persons dissenting, were the
Earls of Northumberland and Holland. I co-operated nothing to this breach, but
my single Vote: Yet the very next day, Libels were set up in diverse parts of
the City, animating and calling together Apprentices and others, to come and
meet in St. George's Fields, for the Hunting of William the Fox, for the Breach
of the Parliament. This setting up of Libels, and animation of the baser People
continued. I acquainted his Majesty and the Council with it. But upon Monday
night following, being May 11. Five Hundred of them came about my House at
Lambeth, to offer it and me violence. By God's Merciful Providence, I had some
Jealousy of their intent; and before their coming, left the best Order I could
to secure my House; and by the Advice of some Friends, went over the water, and
lay at my Chamber in White Hall that Night, and some other following. So, I
praise God, no great hurt was done. One young Fellow only had a little hurt
with a Dag, who was after taken and Executed. Thus you see, how the malignity
of the Time fastened and continued upon me. For this Libelling, in a very base
and most unworthy manner, continued against me. But not one of them charged me
with any one Particular, save the breaking of the Parliament, of which I was
not guilty.

During this Parliament, the Clergy had agreed in Convocation, to give his
Majesty six Subsidies, payable in six Years: which came to Twenty Thousand
Pound a Year, for six Years; but the Act of it was not made up. His Majesty,
seeing what lay upon him, and what fears there were of the Scots, was not
willing to lose these Subsidies; and therefore thought upon the continuing of
the Convocation, though the Parliament were ended; but had not opened those
Thoughts of his to me. Now, I had sent to dissolve the Convocation at their
next sitting; haste and trouble of these businesses making me forget, that I
was to have the King's Writ for the Dismissing, as well as the Convening of it.
Word was brought me of this from the Convocation-House, while I was sitting in
Council, and his Majesty present. Hereupon, when the Council rose, I moved his
Majesty for a Writ. His Majesty gave me an unlooked for reply: Namely, that he
was willing to have the Subsidies, which we had granted him; and that we should
go on with the finishing of those Canons, which he had given us power under the
Broad Seal of England to make. And when I replied, it would be excepted against
in all likelihood by diverse, and desired his Majesty to Advise well upon it:
The King Answered me presently; That he had spoken with the Lord Keeper, the
Lord Finch, about it, and that he assured him it was Legal. I confess, I was a
little troubled, both at the difficulties of the Time, and at the Answer it
self; that after so many Years faithful Service, in a business concerning the
Church so nearly, his Majesty would speak with the Lord Keeper, both without
me, and before he would move it to me: And somewhat I said thereupon, which
pleased not; but the Particulars I do not well remember. Upon this, I was
Commanded to sit, and go on with the Convocation. At first, some little lege
Question was made.
Exception was taken there, by two or three of the Lower House of Convocation,
whether we might sit or no. I acquainted his Majesty with this doubt; and
humbly besought him, that his Learned Council, and other Persons of Honor,
well acquainted with the Laws of the Realm, might deliver their Judgment upon
it. This his Majesty Graciously approved; and the Question was put to them.
They answered, as follows under their Hands.

The Convocation being called by the King's Writ, under the Great Seal, does
continue, until it be dissolved by Writ, or Commission under the Great Seal,
notwithstanding the Parliament be Dissolved.

14. Maij 1640. Jo. Finch. C. S. H. Manchester. John Bramston. Edward
Littleton. Ralph Whitfield. John Banks. Rob. Heath.

This Judgment of these great Lawyers, settled both Houses of Convocation. So we
proceeded according to the Power given us under the Broad-Seal, as is required
by the Statute 25 H. 8. Cap. 19. In this Convocation thus continued, we made up
our Act perfect for the gift of six Subsidies, according to Ancient Form in
that behalf, and delivered it under Seal to his Majesty. This passed Nemine
Refragante, as may appear apud Acta. And we followed a President in my Lord
Archbishop Whitgift's time, An. 1586, who was known to be a Pious and a
Prudent Prelate, and a Man not given to do boisterous things against the Laws
of the Realm, or the Prerogative of the Crown; but one, that went just and fair
ways to both. Nor did this Grant lie dead and useless; for diverse Processes are
yet to be seen, for the fetching in of that which was so Granted to the Queen's
use, in case any Man refused payment.

Together with this Act for Subsidies, we went on in deliberation for certain
Canons, thought necessary to be added, for the better Government and more
settled Peace of the Church, which began to be much disquieted by the
proceedings of some Factious Men (which have since more openly and more
violently showed themselves.) In the Debates concerning these Canons, I dare be
bold to say, never any Synod sat in Christendom, that allowed more freedom
either of Speech or Vote. The Canons, which we made, were in number seventeen;
and at the time of the Subscription, no Man refused, or so much as checked at
any one Canon, or any one Branch in any one of them: Saving a Quaere, who were
these Canonists, and how had they Votes in Convocation? Have we any such;
properly so called? W: S: A: C:
Canonist or two, who excepted against two or three Clauses in some of the last
of the Canons, which concerned their Profit, and their Carriage toward the
Clergy; in which, they were publicly, and by joint consent, overruled in the
House: And excepting I suppose to be here meant some Civilians, Graduates Legum
five utriusque Juris, viz: of the Canon and Civil (or Imperial) Laws, or others
perhaps interessed in the Spiritual Courts, being in Holy Orders, and sitting
in that Convocation, either in their own Right, as Deans or Archdeacons, or by
Delegation from the Clergy of some Diocese; or perhaps, Proxies for some absent
Members of the Convxation. H: (...)
Godfrey Goodman Lord Bishop of Gloucester, who was startled at the first Canon,
about the Proceedings against the Papists. This Canon is very express for the
use of all good and Christian means, to bring them out of their Superstitious
Errors, and to settle them in the Church of England. This Canon would not down
with my Lord of Gloucester. And the Morning before the Subscription was to be,
he came over to Lambeth to me; and after great expressions of his dislike, I
gave him the best Counsel I could, that he would keep himself out of that
scandal, which his refusing to Subscribe would bring, both upon his Person, his
Calling, and the Church of England, in these broken times especially. But I
fell so short of prevailing with him; that he told me plainly, He would be torn
with wild Horses, before he would Subscribe that Canon: And so we parted.

The hour of Convocation drew on; and we met to Subscribe the Canons. When it
came to the Bishop of Glocester's turn, his Lordship would neither allow the
Canons, nor reject them; but pretended, (as he had once done about a week
before) that we had no Power to make Canons out of Parliament time, since the
Statute of H. 8. It was then told his Lordship, that we had the King's Power
according to that Statute; And that his Lordship was formerly satisfied by the
Lawyers Hands, as well as we; And that this was but a pretense to disgrace our
Proceedings, the better to hide his unwillingness to Subscribe that Canon
against the Papists; as appeared by that Speech, which he had privately used to
me that Morning, and with which I publicly charged him upon this occasion; and
he did as publicly in open Convocation acknowledge, that he spoke the words
unto me. Besides this, he was further told; that in all Synods the Suffragants
were to declare themselves by open Affirmation or denial of the Canons agreed
upon; and that therefore he ought to express his Consent or his Dissent.

And though at that time I pressed it no further on him, yet it stands with all
Reason it should be so. For otherwise it may so fall out, that the Synod may be
disappointed, and be able to determine nothing. And it seems, they were bound
to declare in Synod. For otherwise, when points of difficulty or danger came,
the Fathers might have with more sasety forborne to Vote; which yet they did
not. For in the Case of Nestorius in the Council Ephesians: Par: 1: and 2:
Ephesine Council, the heats grew very high between Cyril of Alexandria, and
John of Antioch; and though most of the Votes went with Cyril for the
deposition of Nestorius; yet the rest held with John who was thought to favor
Nestorius. So, for matter of Opinion, and point of Faith, when Cyril had set
out his twelve Anathematisms, Recorded in the Council Ephesians: Par: 3:
Acts of the Ephesine Synod; The Eastern Bishops in a Body, and Theodoret by
himself, set out their Confutations of them. And this I believe verily, they
had not done, the temper of those Times considered, if they might have sat
still as Spectators only, without declaring their Judgment.

But this appears more plainly by the Fourth Council of Toledo; where it was
Decreed, That no Man Council. Tol: 4: cap: 3: Bin: To: 2. par: 2: p: 346.
Concilium quoque (...) solvere audeat, (...) fuerint (...) determinata; (...)
deliberatione communi (...), Episcoporum (...) manibus (...).
should dare to dissolve the Council, till all things were determined and
subscribed by the Bishops: For this makes it evident, that every one who had a
Voice in Council, was not only to declare his Judgment, but subscribe his Name.
Nor can I see, why either the absence of a Bishop being Summoned thither, or
his departure thence before all things were concluded, should be so penal, as
by the Ancient Canons it was; in case they were not bound to declare their
Judgments being once come thither; (It being all one upon the matter, to be
absent thence, and to say nothing there:) For by the Council: Arelat: 2: (...):
9: Bin: To: 1: par: 1: p: 589.
Council of Arles, it was no less than Excommunication. And though that was
after mitigated in the Council: Aurelianense, 5: (...). To: 2: par: 2: p: 39.
Council of Orleans, to suspension for six Months, in the Year 552. Yet in the
Council: Hispalense: Ibid: p: 295.
Council of Sevil, in the Year 590. upon sight of the Inconveniences which
fell out upon it, it was made Excommunication as it was formerly.

And a President of this, we have in our own Acts of Convocation, An. 1571. And
this was not only since the Act of the submission of the Clergy, but since the
Reformation too. For there it appears, that I have seen the Records of some
Proceedings against this Bishop Cheyney; from which it appears, that he was
suspected of being a secret Papist, as was afterward his Successor Bishop
Goodman. H: (...)
Richard Cheyney Bishop of Gloucester, for not attending the Convocation, though
he were then in Westminster, and going home without leave asked of the
Archbishop, was Excommunicated by the joint consent of all his Brethren. Yet I
may not deny, that in the Question of King Hen. 8th's Marriage with his
Brother's Wife, when the business came to Voting in the lower House of
Convocation, Quatnordecim affirmasse, septem negasse, (...) dubitasse, Acta
Synod: Land: A: 1533. M: S:
fourteen affirmed, that the Law, De non ducenda fratris Relicta, for a Man's
not Marrying the Widow of his Brother, was indispensable; and seven denied; and
one doubted. As also in the Act of the Submission of the Clergy, consisting of
three Articles, when it came to Voting in that Acta Synod: Land: An: 1532. M: S:
House, the first Article was denied by eighteen, and referred by eight: The
two other were denied by nineteen, and referred by seven; the residue
consenting unto all.

But neither of these, had they then been thought on, could have relieved the
Bishop of Gloucester: Because he neither doubted, nor referred; but peremptorily
said to me that Morning, that he would be torn with wild Horses, before he
would subscribe that Canon against the Papists: And yet when it came to the
Subscription, he would neither affirm, nor deny the Canon; but would have
turned it off, as if we had not Power to make those Canons. Therefore when his
Lordship would not do either, I with the consent of the Synod suspended him.
Diverse of my Lords the Bishops were very tender of him, and the Scandal given
by him. And John Davenant then Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and Joseph Hall then
Lord Bishop of Exeter, desired leave of the House, (and had it) to speak with
my Lord of Gloucester, to see if they could prevail with him. They did prevail;
and he came back and Subscribed the Canons, in open Convocation. But I told
him: Considering his Lordship's Words, I did not know with what Mind he
Subscribed; and would therefore according to my Duty acquaint his Majesty with
all the Proceedings, and there leave it. The Subscription to the Canons went
on, no one man else checking at any thing. And that work ended, the Convocation
was dissolved Maij 29. being Friday.

The Convocation thus ended, I did acquaint his Majesty with my Lord of
Glocester's Carriage, and with that which was done upon it. His Majesty having
other Jealousies of this Bishop besides this, resolved to put him to it. So his
Lordship was brought before the King, and the Lords in Council; and restrained
to his Lodging, and a Writ Ne exeat Regnum sent him. But this Writ proceeded
not for any thing said or done by his Lordship in the Convocation, but upon
other information which his Majesty had received from some Agents of his beyond
the Seas; As shall appear hereafter, if this be objected against me. In the
mean time let this Bishop rest for me.

The Canons, thus Freely and Unanimously Subscribed, were Printed. And at their
first Publication they were generally approved in all Parts of the Kingdom; and
I had Letters from the remotest Parts of it, full of Approbation: Insomuch,
that not my self only, but my Brethren which lived near these Parts, and which
were not yet gone down, were very much Joyed at it. But about a Month after
their Printing, there began some Whisperings against them by some Ministers in
London; and their Exceptions were spread in writing against them: And this set
others on work both in the Western, and the Northern Parts: Till at last, by
the practice of the Faction, there was suddenly a great alteration, and nothing
so much cried down as the Canons. The comfort is, Christ himself had his Osanna
turned into a Crucifige in far less Time. By this means the Malice of the Time
took another occasion to whet it self against me.

The Synod thus ended, and the Canons having this Success; but especially the
Parliament ending so unhappily; The King was very hardly put to it, and sought
all other means, as well as he could, to get supply against the Scots. But all
that he could get, proved too little, or came too late for that service. For
the averse party in the late Parliament, or by and by after, before they
parted, ordered things so, and filled Men's Minds with such strange Jealousies;
that the King's good People were almost generally possessed, that his Majesty had
a purpose to alter the ancient Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and to bring
in Slavery upon his People: A thing (which for ought I know) his Majesty never
intended. But the Parliament Men, which would not relieve the King, by their
meeting in that Assembly, came to understand and inform one another; and at
their return, were able to possess their several Countries with the
Apprehensions themselves had; and so they did. Upon this, some Lords and
others, who had by this time made an underhand solemn Confederacy with a strong
faction of the Scots, brought an Army of them into the Kingdom. For all Men
know, and it has been in a manner confessed; that the Scots durst not have
come into England at that Time, if they had not been sure of a Party here, and
a strong one; and that the King should be betrayed on all hands, as shall after
appear.

By these, and the like means, the King being not assisted by his Parliament,
nor having Means enough to proceed with his Forces in due Time, the Scots were
brought in (as is aforesaid) upon both King and Kingdom. They under the Conduct
of Sir Alexander Leshley their General, passed the Tyne at Newborn, Aug. 17:
Aug..... 1640. and took New Castle the next Day after. And all this gross
Treason, though it had no other end than to Confirm a Parliament in Scotland,
and to make the King call another in England, that so they might in a way of
Power extort from him what they pleased in both Kingdoms; yet Religion was made
almost all the pretense both here, and there; and so in pursuance of that
pretense, Hatred spread and increased against me, for the Service Book.

The King hearing that the Scots were moving, Posted away to York, Aug. 20.
being Thursday. There he soon found, in what Straights he was; and thereupon
called his Great Council of all his Lords and Prelates to York to be there by
September 24. But in regard the Summons was short and sudden, he was
Graciously pleased to dispense with the Absence of diverse, both Lords, and
Bishops, and with mine among the rest. How things in Particular succeeded
there, I know not; nor belongs it much to the Scope of this short History,
intended only for my self. But the Result of all, was a present Nomination of
some Lords Commissioners, to treat at Rippon about this Great Affair with other
Commissioners from the Scotch Army.

But before this Treaty at Rippon, one Melborne, or Meldrum, Secretary to
general Leshly (as he was commonly said to be) at the Shire-House in Durham,
when the Country-Gentlemen met with the chief of the Scottish Army, about a
composition to be made for Payment of Three Hundred and Fifty Pounds a Day for
that County, expressed himself in this Manner, September. 10. 1640. I wonder,
that you are so Ignorant, that you cannot see what is good for your selves. For
they in the South are sensible of the good that will ensue, and that we came
not unsent for, and that oftener than once, or twice, by your own Great Ones.
There being a Doubt made at these words Great Ones: He replied, your own Lords;
with farther Discourse. These Words were complained of, during the Treaty at
Rippon, to the English Lords Commissioners, by two Gentlemen of the Bishopric
of Durham; to whom the Words were spoken by Meldrum. The Gentlemen were Mr.
John Killinghall, and Mr. Nicholas Chaytor; and they offered to Testify the
Words upon Oath: But the Lords required them only to Write down those Words,
and set their Hands to them; which they did very readily. The Lords acquainted
the Scotch Commissioners with the Words. They sent to Newcastle to make them
known to General Leshly. He called his Secretary before him, questioned him
about the Words. Meldrum denied them: (was that enough, against two such
Witnesses?) This Denial was put in Writing, and sent to Rippon. Hereupon some
of the English Lords Commissioners required, that the two Gentlemen should go
to Newcastle to the Scotch Camp, and there give in their Testimony before
General Leshly. The two Gentlemen replied (as they had great reason to do) that
they had rather testify it in any Court of England, and could do it with more
safety: Yet they would go and testify it there, so they might have a safe
Conduct from the Scottish Commissioners, there being as yet no Cessation of
Arms. Answer was made by some English Lords, that they should have a safe
Conduct. Hereupon one of the Kings Messengers attendant there, was sent to the
Scotch Commissioners for a safe Conduct for the Two Gentlemen. He brought back
Word from the Earl of Dumfermling (to whom it was directed) that the Two
Gentlemen were unwise, if they went to give such Testimony at the Camp. And
then speaking with the Lord Lowdon, he came again to the Messenger, and told
him, that such a safe Conduct could not be granted, and that he would satisfy
the Earl that sent for it (who was Francis Earl of Bedford.) The Messenger
returning with this Answer, the Gentlemen were dismissed. So the business dyed;
it being not for somebody's safety, that this Examination should have
proceeded; for it is well enough known since, that many had their hands in this
Treason, [for Gross Treason it was by the express Words of the Statute of 25
Edw. 3. c. 2.] The Truth of all this will be sworn to by both the Gentlemen yet
living, and by a very honest grave Divine, who was present at all these
Passages at Rippon, and gave them to me in Writing.

In this Great Council, while the Treaty was proceeding slowly enough; it was
agreed on, that a Parliament should begin at London Nov. 3. following: And
thither the Commissioners and the Treaty were to follow; and they did so. After
this how things proceeded in Parliament, and how long the Scotch Army was
continued, and at how great a charge to the Kingdom, appears olsewhere upon
Record; for I shall hasten to my own particular, and take in no more of the
Public, than Necessity shall enforce me, to make my sad Story hang together.

After they had continued at York till October. 28. the King and the Lords
returned, and the Parliament sat down November. 3. Great Heats appeared in the
very beginning. On Wednesday Nov. 11. Rushw.
November. 10. Tho. L. (...) Earl of Strafford was accused by the House of
Commons of High Treason, and Committed by the Lords to Mr. James Maxwell the
Officer of the House: And upon general Articles The (...) Diary says Nov 22.
W: (...). A: C.
sent up, He was upon Wednesday November. 25. committed to the Tower. It is
thought, (and upon good Grounds) that the Earl of Strafford had got Knowledge
of the Treason of some Men, and that he was preparing to accuse them. And this
Fear both hastened and heated the proceedings against him. And upon Dec. 4.
being Friday, his Majesty, at the great Importunity of some Lords of his
Council, gave way that his Council should be examined upon Oath in the Earl of
Strafford's Case; and I (with others) was examined that very Day. There were
great Thoughts of Heart upon this Business, and somewhat vapoured out at Men's
Tongues; but the thing was done.

Now at, and after the breaking up of, the late Parliament, Sir Hen. Vane, at
the private Committee concerning the Scotch Affairs (before mentioned) instead
of setting down the Heads of the several Businesses then Treated of, Writ down
what every Man said at the Committee, though it were but Matter of deliberation
and debate. Afterward by a cunning conveyance between his Son (who had been
Governor in New England) and himself, this Paper, or a Copy of it, was
delivered to some Members of the House of Commons; and in all probability, was
the Ground of that which was after done against the Lord Strafford, my self,
and others, and the Cause, why the King was so hard pressed to have the Lords
and others of his Council examined, was, that so Sir Henry Vane might upon Oath
avow the Paper which his Son had seen and showed; and others be brought to
witness as much (had Truth, and their Memories been able to say as much) as his
Paper.

After The Bishops were before this inveighed against in several Speeches Nov.
7 9. 21. 25. etc. Rushw.
the examination of me and others, concerning these Particulars; there arose
great and violent Debates in the House of Commons against the Bishops, and
particularly their Votes in Parliament. After that, December. 16. 1640. they
Voted against the late Canons, as containing in them many Matters contrary to
the fundamental Laws, and Statutes of the Realm, to the Rights of Parliaments,
to the Property, Vide Rushw. par. 3. vol. (...) page 99. -- 112.
and Liberty of the Subject; and matters tending to Sedition, and of dangerous
Consequences. I was made the Author of all, and presently a Committee put upon
me to inquire into my Actions, and prepare a Charge. The same Morning in the
Upper-House, I was The Order for erecting this Committee may be found in (...)
Compl. Hist. p. (...)
Named as an Incendiary, in an Accusation put in by the Scottish Commissioners:
For now by this Time they were come to that Article of the Treaty, which
reflected upon me. And this was done with great noise, to bring me yet further
into Hatred with the People, especially the Londoners; who approved too well
the Proceedings See the Petition of the Londoners against the Bishops,
presented Dec. 11. 1640. apud Rushw. p. 93.
of their Brethren the Scots, and debased the Bishops and the Church Government
in England. The Articles, which the Scots put into the Upper House (by the
Hands of their Lords Commissioners against me December. 15.) were read there
December. 16. I took out a true Copy as it follows here. And though I was to make
no answer December. 16. 1640.
then, till the House of Commons had digested them, and taken as much out of
them as as they pleased, to fill my intended Charge withal; yet because I
after found, that the House They are Printed entire in Rushw. page 113. Pryn p.
31. etc. Abbreviated in Heylin's Life of Laud. p. 466. Published by the Scots
themselves London 1641. (...). and soon after by Pryn in his Antipathy of the
English Prelacy. par. 1. p. 334.
of Commons insisted upon very few of these particulars (if any) I thought my
self bound to vindicate my Innocence even in these Particulars; which shall now
appear in their full strength against me, if they have any in Wise and Learned
Men's Judgments.

CAP. III
THe Novations in Religion (which are universally acknowledged to be the main
Cause of Commotions in Kingdoms and States, and are known to be the true Cause
of our present Troubles) were many and great; besides the Book, Rushw.
Books of Ordination and Homilies. First, some particular alterations in
matters of Religion pressed upon us without Order, and against Law, contrary to
the Form established in our Kirk. Secondly, a new Book of Canons [ Rushw. and
Pryn.
and Constitutions Ecclesiastical.] Thirdly, a Liturgy, or Book of
Common Prayer; which did also carry with them many dangerous Errors in matters
of Doctrine. Of all Which, Rushw, and Pryn.
these we challenge the Prelate of Canterbury To be, Rushw.
as the prime Cause on Earth.

I shall easily grant; that Novations in Religion are a main Cause of
Distempers in Commonwealths. And I hope it will be as easily granted to me (I
am sure it should) that when great Distempers fall into Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths; the only way to engage at home and get Credit abroad, is to
pretend Religion; which in all Ages has been a Cloak large enough to cover (at
least from the Eyes of the Many) even Treasons themselves. And For the present
Troubles in Scotland, Novations in Religion are so far from being known to be
the true Cause, as that it is manifest to any Man, that will look upon it with
a single Eye, that Temporal Discontents, and several Ambitions of the great
Men, which had been long a working, were the true cause of these Troubles: And
that Religion was called in upon the bye, to gain the Clergy, and by them the
Multitude.

For besides that which was openly spoken by the right Honorable James then
Earl of Carlisle, that somewhat was a brewing in Scotland among some
discontented there, which would break out to the Trouble of this Kingdom; it is
most apparent, there were many discontents among them: Some whereof, had no
relation at all to Religion, and were far antienter than the Troubles now
began, and were all Legally proved against the Process against the Ld.
Balmerino: A Copy whereof I had by me when I writ this. W. C.
Lord Balmerino, who was condemned of high Treason before any of these Stirs
began. For there were Grievances (as they said) propounded in the Convention,
Anno 1628. about Coining, and their black Money; which (they say) were slighted
again in the Parliament held 1633. Murmuring also there was, as if the Articles
and Parliament were not free. Great Clamor likewise was there against the
Bishops Power in choosing the Lords of the Articles; though that Power belonged
unto them by the fundamental Laws of that Kingdom. As much against the Act of
Revocation, and the Taxations (which yet were voluntarily offered, and
miscalled on purpose to edge the People:) As also for Applying (as they said)
these Taxations to wrong uses: With all which, and more, Religion had nothing
to do. Nay, this discontented Party grew so High and so Bold; that a very Base
and Dishonorable Libel was made and spread against the King, Anno 1633. by
these and the like Pretenses to alienate the Hearts of the People from him. Of
this Libel if one See, (...) CHAPTER large Declaration, p. 13, etc.
Hagg were the Author, Balmerino was the Divulger, and so proved. And though
it be true, that then also some things were to be done against the
Church Government; yet their Novations now spoken of were not then on Foot. So
that it is evident enough to any Man that will see, that these Commotions had
another, and a higher cause, than the present pretended Innovations. And if his
Majesty had played the King then, he needed not have suffered now. Besides,
they are no Fools who have spoken it freely (since the Act of Oblivion for the
Scottish Business was passed) that this great League before mentioned, between
the discontented Party of both Kingdoms, was Consulted on in the Year 1632. and
after the King's being in Scotland, Anno 1633. it went on, till they took
occasion another way to hatch the Cockatrice Egg, which was laid so long before.

But they say, these Novations were great, besides the Books of Ordination, and
Homilies. So the Books of Ordination, and Homilies, were great Novations. Had
they then in Scotland no set Form of Ordination? I promise you, that is next
Neighbor to no Ordination; and no Ordination to no Church, formal at least.
And therefore if this be a Novation among them, its high time they had it. And
for the Homilies, if they taught no other Doctrine than was established and
current in the Church of Scotland, they were no Novations; and if they did
contain other Doctrine, they might have Condemned them, and there had been an
end. Howsoever, if these Books be among them in Scotland; they were sent
thither in King James his Time, when the Prelate of Canterbury neither was, nor
could be, the prime cause on Earth of that Novation.

The other Novations, which they proceed unto, are first, some particular
Alterations in matters of Religion, pressed upon them without Order, and
against Law. To this I can say nothing, till the particular Alterations be
named. Only this in the general; be they what they will, the Scottish Bishops
were to blame, if they pressed any thing without Order, or against Law. And
sure I am, the Prelate of Canterbury caused them not, nor would have consented
to the causing of them, had he known them to be such. The two other Novations,
in which they instance, are the Book of Canons, and the Liturgy; which (they
say) contain in them many dangerous Errors in Matter of Doctrine. To these,
how dangerous soever they seem, I shall give (I hope) a very sufficient, and
clear answer; and shall ingenuously set down whatsoever I did, either in or to
the Book of Canons, and the Liturgy; and then leave the ingenuous Reader to
judge, how far the Prelate of Canterbury is the prime cause on Earth of these
Things.

ART. I.
AND first, that this Prelate was the Author and Vrger of some particular
Changes, Rushw. and Pryn.
Things which made great disturbance amongst us, we [ Rushw. and Pryn.
make] manifest, first by Fourteen Letters Subscribed W. Cant. in the space of
two Years, to one of our pretended Bishops, Ballatine; wherein he often enjoins
him, and our other pretended Bishops, to appear in the Chapel in their Whites,
contrary to the Custom of our Kirk, and to his [ Rushw. and Pryn.
own] Promise made to the pretended Bishop of Edinburgh at the Coronation; That
none of them after that Time should be more pressed to wear those Garments;
thereby moving him against his Will, to put them on for that time.

Here begins the first Charge about the Particular Alterations. And first, they
Charge me with Fourteen Letters written by me to Bishop Ballantyne. He was then
Bishop of Dunblain, and Dean of His Majesty's Chapel Royal there. He was a
Learned and a Grave Man; and I did write diverse Letters to him, as well as to
some other Bishops, and some by Command; but whether just fourteen or no, I
know not. But sure I am, their Love to me is such; that were any thing worse
than other, in any of these Letters, I should be sure to hear of it.

First then, They say, I enjoined wearing of Whites, etc. surely I understand
my self a great deal better, than to enjoin where I have no Power. Perhaps I
might express that, which His Majesty Commanded me, when I was Dean of his
Majesty's Chapel here; as this Reverend Bishop was in Scotland: And His
Majesty's Express Command was, that I should take that care upon me; that the
Chapel there, and the Service, should be kept answerable to this, as much as
might be; And that the Dean should come to Prayers in his Form, as likewise
other Bishops when they came thither. And let my Letters be showed; whether
there be any Injoyning, other than this; and this way. And I am confident, His
Majesty would never have laid this Task upon me; had he known it to be, either
without Order, or against Law.

Next I am Charged; that concerning these Whites, I brake my Promise to the
Bishop of Edinburgh. Truly to the uttermost of my Memory, I cannot recall any
such Passage, or Promise, made to that Reverend and Learned Prelate. And I must
have bin very ill advised, had I made any such Promise; having no Warrant from
his Majesty to engage for any such thing. As for that which follows; that he
was moved against his will to put on those Garments: Truly he expressed nothing
at that time to me, that might signify it was against his Will. And his
Learning and Judgment were too great, to stumble at such External Things:
Especially such having been the Ancient Habits of the most Reverend Bishops
from the descent of many Hundred Years; as may appear in the Life of St. When
St. Cyprian was brought to the place of his Execution, exuit se lacernum
birrum, quem indutus erat, etc. dehinc tunicam tulit, and Diaconibus tradidit;
and stans in (...) expectabat Spiculatorem. Now if you ask, what that linea
was, sure it could not be his Shirt. For that could not stand with his
Episcopal Gravity; nor was it necessary for him, in regard of his kind of
Death, which was Beheading. But Baronius tells us, Annal. Eccles. An. 261. n.
40. that it was (...) illud Vestimentum, (...) omnibus Commune, Italice Rocheto
dicunt. And by this passage concerning S. Cyprian, it is evident; that this
Habit there mentioned was the usual and known Habit of a Bishop in those times.
Cyprian. And therefore the Novation was in the ( Church) of Scotland, when her
Bishops left them off, not when they put them on.

In these Letters, he ( the Prelate of Canterbury) directs (Bishop Ballantine)
to give Order for saying the English Service in the Chapel twice a day: For
his neglect, showing him that he was disappointed of the Bishopric of
Edinburgh, promising him upon his greater care of these Novations, advancement
to a better Bishopric.

For the direction for Reading the English Service, it was no other than His
Majesty Commanded me to give. And I hope, it is no Crime for a Bishop of
England, by His Majesty's Command, to signify to a Bishop in Scotland, what
his pleasure is for Divine Service in his own Chapel. Nor was the Reading of
the English Liturgy any Novation at all in that place. For in the Year 1617. I
had the Honor, as a Chaplain in Ordinary, to wait upon King James of Blessed
Memory into Scotland; and then the English Service was Read in that Chapel,
and twice a Day. And I had the Honor again to wait upon King Charles, as Dean
of His Majesty's Chapel Royal here, at his Coronation in Scotland, in the Year
1633: And then also was the English Service Read twice a Day in that Chapel.
And a strict Command was given them by His Majesty, that it should be so
continued; and Allowance was made for it. And none of the Scots found any fault
with it at that time, or after, till these Tumults began. And for Bishop
Ballantyn's missing the Bishopric of Edinburgh, and my promising him another
upon his better Care of his Majesty's Commands; I gave him both the Answers,
and the Reason, and the Promise, which His Majesty gave me, and Commanded me to
write to him. It follows -- That I taxed him ( that is, Bishop Ballantine) for
his boldness in Preaching the sound Doctrine of the Reformed Kirks against Mr.
Michell; who had taught the Error of Arminius in the Point of the Extent of the
Mercy, (...).
Merit of Christ.



They should do well to show my Letter; and then I will answer punctually to
any thing in it. In the mean time I do not know, that ever Mr. Michell Preached
Arminianism. For that Christ died for all Men, is Christus Crucisixus est
propter (...) humanum. Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 246. (...). Athan. de
Incarn. (...). Eusebius. (...) Orb universo. Greg. Naz. Orat. 42. Aug. in Ps. 95.
Pro Proditore (...). S. Ambros. L. de Paradiso, c. 8 Pro (...) qui curari
(...). S. Amb. Lib. 2. de Cain and Abel. c. 3. Pro Gentibus, sed (...) non
voluerunt. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 1 Timothy 2. Pro (...), si omnes redimi
vellent. S. Hieron in 1 Timothy 2. 1. Primasius, Ibid. (...) ratio dubitandi est,
Prosper. L. 2. de Vocat. Gent. c. 16. Non pro sidelibus (...), sed pro, etc.
Theoph. in Heb. 11. 9. Oecumenius, Ibid.
the Universal and constant Doctrine of the Catholic Church in all Ages, and
no Error of Arminius: And are the S. (...). 3. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 15. Heb. 2. 9.
(...) Tim. 2. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 S. Jo. 2. 1, 2.
express words of Scripture it self, in more places than one. And the Nemo
mortalium est, qui non (...) and serio per ministros Evangelij vocari ad (...)
remissionis Peccatorum and (...) per mortem Christi: Act. 13. 38. and S. Jo. 3.
17, 18. Evangelio autem nibil falsum aut simulatum subest; sed quicquid in
(...) per (...) effertur, aut (...) hominibus, id (...) ab Authore (...)
offertur and (...). Sic (...) pro omnibus mortuus est, ut omnes and singuli,
mediante, (...) possint virtute (...) hujus (...) and vitam (...) consequi.
etc. Sententia Theologorum Magn. Britan. apud Acta Synod. Dord. Artic. 2. These.
3.
Synod of Dort, called purposely about the Errors of Arminius, allows this for
Orthodox; Christum Mortuum esse pro omnibus. And for my part, I wish with all
my heart, that this had been the greatest Error of Arminius. But yet whether I
taxed that worthy Prelate for this or no, I know not: This I know, that if I
did tax him, he deserved it. And for Bishops, even of diverse Churches, to write
one to another about Points of Divinity, yea, and sometimes to tax one another
too, as their Judgments lead them, has been usual in all Times and Places. The
next Charge is -- That I bid him send up a List of the Names of the
Counselors, and Senators of the College of Justice, who did not Communicate
in the Chapel, in a Form which was not received in our Kirk: And that I
commended him, when I found him Obsequious to these my Commandments; telling
him, that I had moved the King the Second time, for the Punishment of such as
had not received in the Chapel.



Here I must desire again, that this Letter of mine may be produced. For I have
cause enough to suspect some material Change in the Matter or Form of my Words.
Howsoever, if they be justly set down, I answer; That if this be one of the
Things which made great Disturbance amongst them, they would be greatly
disturbed with a very little. For first, I writ nothing in this, but what I was
expressly Commanded by His Majesty: And I have His Majesty's Warrant under His
Hand to keep a Correspondence with that Bishop of Dunblain; that from time to
time he might receive His Majesty's Direction by me, for the Ordering of all
those Things. And howsoever, the thing it self is no more than as if His
Majesty should Command all his Counselors and Judges here, once in the Year at
least to receive the Communion in his Chapel at White Hall.

And if you say it is more, because it was to Communicate in such a Form as was
not received in the Church of Scotland; under Favor, that is not so neither.
For this Form here spoken against, was to receive it Kneeling: And to receive
the Sacrament Kneeling, was an Dr. Lindsay, Proceedings in the Assembly at
Perth. An. 1618. Par. 2. p. 26.
Article of the Synod of Perth, made in a General Assembly, and Confirmed by
Act of Parliament; Both then in force, when my Letters were written. And
therefore either this Form was received in their Kirk, (which is here denied;)
Or else there was little Obedience in their Kirk, and Kirk-Men, either to
General Assembly, or Parliament. See the Articles of Perth in Heylin's Life of
Laud. p. 78. and in Spotswood's Hist. of the Church of Scotland, p. 538.


As for that which comes fluttering after, That I commended him, when I found
him Obsequious; I had reason to do it: For (whatsoever is said here) it was to
the Kings Commands, not to mine. And the Reason why I writ, that I had moved
the King a Second time for the Punishment of such as disobeyed, was, because
the Bishop had written unto me, that if some were not Checked, or Punished,
none would obey. And it is true too; that I took occasion, once, and a second
time, (but upon Second Letters of his to the same effect) to move the King: But
only by showing His Majesty, what was written by him, that was upon the place,
and trusted with the Office. Nor did I ever meddle farther in those Businesses,
than by laying before His Majesty what was written to me to that end: Leaving
the King (as it became me) to Judge both of the Motion, and the Person that
made it, as in his Princely Wisdom he thought fit. The next thing is, that in
these Letters, I did upbraid him ( Bishop Ballantine, that is) that in his
First Synod at Aberdeen, he had only disputed against our Custom in Scotland,
of Fasting sometimes on the Lord's Day: And that I did Presumptuously Censure
their Kirk, that in this we were opposite to Christianity it self, and that
amongst us there Were (...). Rushw. and Pryn.
was no Canon at all. More of this stuff may be seen in the Letters themselves.



And my humble desire is, that the Letters may be seen. For whatsoever account
is made of this Stuff, it was once, (and in far better times of the Church)
valued at a better rate. And I shall not be ashamed of any Stuff, contained in
any of my Letters to this Bishop, or any other; let them be produced when they
please. But what then is this Stuff? It Is, that I upbraid this worthy Prelate
about their Custom in Scotland of Fasting sometimes on the Lord's Day: And
censure their Church presumptuously, as opposite herein to Christianity. Surely
I do not use to upbraid meaner Men than the Bishop is; much less presumptuously
to censure a Church. If I thought (as I do) that (...) in an Error for only
disputing against that which he should have reformed; I conceive, it was no
upbraiding.

As for the Custom in Scotland, of Fasting on the Lord's Day; It is not only
sometimes, as is here expressed; but continually, when they have any Solemn
Fast, the Lord's Day is the Day for it. And if I did Write, that that was
opposite to Christianity it self; I doubt it is too true. For it is against the
Practice of the whole Church of Christ: And that which is so, must oppose
Christianity it self. And this I find: That as Apostolical Universal Tradition
settled the Lord's Day for Holy and Public Worship; So from the very Apostles
times, the same general Tradition has in all times accounted it unlawful to
Fast upon that Day. And if an Ordinary Fast were not Lawful upon that Day, much
less was a Solemn. Nor is there any thing more clear in all Antiquity. For in
the (...). Can. Apost. 65.
Canons of the Apostles (which if they be not theirs, are very ancient) If a
Priest did fast upon the Lord's day, he was to be deposed; and if a Layman, he
was to be Excommunicated. And (...). St. Igna. Epist 8.
S. Ignatius tells us, if any Man fast upon the Lords Day, he is Christ's
Interfector, a Murderer of Christ: And that I am sure is against Christianity
it self. Die (...) nefas esse ducimus. Tert. de (...). militis c. 3.
Tertullian professes it is altogether unlawful. The (...). Si quis tanquam hoc
(...) convenire judicans, Die Dominico Jejunaverit, (...) in ejusdem diei
contemptum, Anathema sit. Con. Gangren. Can. 18.
Council of Gangra, held An. 324. decreed against it, and set an Anathema upon
it; and that not only when it is done in contempt of the Day: but also though
it be done as a help to Continency. And Constitutum est, ne diebus deminicis
jejunaretur. S. Hill. (...). in Psalm.
S. Hilary agrees with this; and calls it not a Custom, but a Constitution;
such a Constitution, as that if any Man shall advisedly, and of set purpose,
Fast on the Lord's Day, by the Decree of the Fourth Qui Die Dominico fludiose
jejunat, non credatur Catholicus. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 64. Anno 398.
Council of Carthage, he should not be accounted a Catholic: And they must
needs do it advisedly, and of set purpose, who appoint a public solemn Fast
upon that Day, and then keep it. And this was so strictly observed in
Quadragesima totis (...) Sabbatum, and Dominicum Jejunatur diebus. Ambros. de
Elia and Josu. c. 10.
S. Ambrose his time; that it was not held Lawful to Fast upon that Day, no not
in Lent. Nay he goes farther: For Hoc est in Resurrectione Christi non credere,
si Legem quis Jejunij Die Resurrectionis indicat. S. Ambros. Epist. 83.
he says expressly, If any Man make a Law, or give a Command for Fasting on the
Lord's Day; he believes not in the Resurrection of Christ. And is not this
opposite to Christianity it self? And is not that Legem indicere, when they
Proclaim, or Command a Public Fast? With him (...) hunc Diem Jejunio
decernendum putaverit, non parvo Scandalo erit. S. Aug. Epist. 86. Christus
enim gaudium manducantibus, Luctum (...) deputavit. S. Mat. 9. 15. Ibid.
S. Augustine joins very fully; and first says, it is a great Scandal: Then he
gives the reason of it; Because Christ joined Mourning with Fasting, which
becomes not this Day; unless Men think it is fit to be sorry, that Christ is
risen from the Dead. And this I am sure, is opposite to Christianity it self.
For if Christ be not Risen, then is our Preaching vain, and your Faith is also
vain. 1. Cor. 15. 14.
1. Cor. 15. After this Quis non Deum offendet, si velit cum scandalo totius,
(...) ubique dilatata est, Ecclesiae Die Dominico Jejunare? Ibid. Versus Med.
he asks this Question, Who does not offend God, if with the Scandal of the
whole Church of Christ, he will Fast upon the Lord's Day? I will not go lower
down: This is enough if any thing be. Yet this I will add, that as this Fasting
on Sunday was anciently prohibited; so was it never practiced of old, but by
notorious and professed Heretics; as by the Manichees, who appointed that Day
for fasting, (so Illum ut legitimum diem suis Auditoribus ad Jejunandum
constituerunt. S. Aug. Epist. 86.
S. Aug.) and were justly condemned for it; (so S. Ambrose Epist. 83.
Manichaeos ob istius diei Jejunia jure damnamus.
S. Ambrose) And by Aerians, who Fasted on Sunday, and Feasted on Fridays; (so
Epiphan. Haeres. 85. n. 3.
Epiphanius:) And by the Priscilianists, whom Manichaeorum simillimos. S. Aug.
Epist. 86.
S. Aug. therefore calls the Imitators of the Manichees; and so they were
indeed: For neither of them believed, that our Blessed Savior was a true Man;
and therefore disregarded the Day of his Resurrection, as appears in S. Leo.
Epist. 93. c. 4.
S. Leo. And as against these the Council held at Conc. Caesar. August. can. 2.
apud Bin. To. I. par. 1. p. 553.
Caesar-Augusta, An. 381. provided; so before An. 324. the Council Conc.
Gangrens. c. 18. and Baron. Annal. An. 361. (...). 53.
at Gangra, made their Canon against Eutactus the Armenian Monk, and his Ground
was pretense of Abstinence, as if he could never Fast enough. This is enough;
and all this is within the compass of the Primitive Church; which certainly if
these Men did not scorn, they would never have urged this against me. Well!
This is (they say) drawn out of my fourteen Letters. Next they will prove me
the Author of many Disturbances among them.

2. By two Papers of Memoirs and Instructions from the Pretended Bishop of St.
Andrews, to the pretended Bishop of Ross The Word coming is added from Rushw.
and Pryn.
[coming] to this Prelate ( that is, of Canterbury) for ordering the Affairs of
the Kirk, and Kingdom of Scotland.

It is manifest here by their own Words, that these Memorials, and
Instructions, whatsoever they were, had not me the Prelate of Canterbury for
their prime cause on Earth; for they came from the Reverend and Prudent
Archbishop of St. Andrews, to the Reverend To be delivered.
Bishop of Ross, by him to deliver to me, for the ordering of the Affairs of
the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland. Surely, I think no Man will judge it to be a
Crime in me, to give my Brethren the Bishops of Scotland the Best Counsel, and
with that Counsel the best Assistance to his Majesty, that I could in their
Church Affairs; considering their absence, and remoteness from him, and the
Place that I bear about him. And for my own part, had I been defective therein;
I should have thought my self not only unkind to them, but faulty otherwise in
my Duty, both to his Majesty, and that Church. But for the Affairs of that
Kingdom (though I had the Honor to be a Sworn Counselor of that State as well
as this) yet I never meddled with them, but at such time, and in such a way, as
I was called and commanded to, by his Majesty. Let us therefore see the
Particulars, which are Named.

As not only to obtain Warrants to order the Exchequer, the Privy Council, the
great Commission of Surrenders, The matter of Balmerinoe's Process, as might
please our Prelates; but Warrants also for the sitting of the
High-Commission-Court once a Week in Edinburgh; and to gain from the Noblemen,
for the Benefit of the Prelates and their Adhaerents, the Abbacies of Kelsoe,
Arbroth, St. Andrews and Lindores.

For the first of these, my obtaining Warrants to order the Exchequer there;
that is indeed an Affair of the Kingdom, and a great one. But all or most that
I did herein, was at the earnest entreaty of the Earl of Traquair, Treasurer
Depute, and after that Lord Treasurer; who avowed to me, that if the Orders
were settled for the Exchequer, he would not only bring the King out of Debt,
but raise him some Revenue also; with a Protestation farther, that for that,
and some such like particulars, he could trust no hand but mine in his absence
to get them done, and kept private. And at so great an Officers entreaty, and
for Matters under his own Charge, I could not refuse so much Service for the
King, as was pretended by him.

As for Orders to the Privy Council, I remember not any procured by me. And
sure I am, if I did any thing to that Honorable Body, it was by his Majesty's
Command, and in relation to Church Affairs there. And for the Great Commission
of Surrenders, in which both the Bishops, and the inferior Clergy, were deeply
interessed, and did much fear the loss of their Tithes, and to be made
Stipendiaries; I conceive, I had all the reason in the World to give them my
best assistance; and yet I undertook not this Care, till his Majesty gave me a
special Command to do what I did. And if the Bishops were in any thing mistaken
in this Commission; that cannot Be charged.
charge upon me, who followed it no farther than I received special directions
from his Majesty for the public good. For the Lord Balmerinoe's Process, I
heard much discourse of it at Court, but I meddled nothing with it, one way or
other, saving that at the entreaty of some Men of Honor of that Nation, I did
twice (if not thrice) adventure to become an humble Suitor to his Majesty in
that Lord's behalf. And this was all the Harm I did him.

As for the High-Commission-Court, if there were no fault in it, as such a
Court, then I am sure, there could be none in the Sitting of it once a Week. If
the having of such a Court be a Fault (as it seems it is now accounted, as well
here, as there) yet for my own part, with all humble Submission to better
Judgment, I cannot think it is; and I must still pray, that both Nations have
not Cause to Repent the Abolishing of it. But howsoever, this was not of my
procuring. A Scotchman of good Place was employed about it from the Bishops,
and effected it; and I could name him; but since it is here charged as a Fault,
I shall accuse no Man else, but defend my self. And this for the Sitting of it
once a Week. But for the establishing of that Court in that Kingdom; that was
done long before I was a Bishop, or had any thing to do in the Public. For it
appears by one of the greatest Ad Anglicani Tribunalis Exemplar (...) est. An.
1610. Aliud in Scotia, cujus Authoritate, and Potestate (...) (...) efformandum
erat. Quidam Ministri Episcopalem Jurisdictionem and (...) in Ecclesia
affectantes, armati sunt Potestate utriusq, gladii, quo facilius Episcopalem
Dominationem invaderent; idque sub diplomate Regio, absque (...) Statuto vel
Specie minimi consensus Procerum and Ordinum Regni, ut in Anglia. Delegata
Commissariorum Jurisdictione freti, Ecclesiam (...) in hunc usque Diem vi
subigunt, and miserum in modum opprimunt. Spottiswodius Andr politanus; Laws
Glascuensis, etc. Altar Damascenum p. 28. Typis excusus est hic Liber An. 1623
Factionists in that Kingdom; that the Hich-Commission-Court was settled, and in
full Execution in the Year 1610. when all Men know I led a private Life in
Oxford; by which it is more than manifest, that I neither was, nor could be,
Author of this pretended Novation, or any disturbance that followed from it.

The next is a great Charge indeed, were there any Truth in it: That I labored
to gain from the Noblemen, for the Benefit of the Prelates, and their
Adhaerents, the Abbacies of Kelsoe, Arbroth, S. Andrews, and Lindores. To begin
at the last; The Man that followed that, was Mr. Andrew Lermot. He came
recommended to me very highly, and with assurance that the Title which he laid
to Lindores was Just and Legal. But notwithstanding all this, my Answer was,
That I knew not the Laws of that Kingdom, nor would meddle with any thing of
that nature. And though he made great means to me, yet he could never get me to
meddle in it; and which is more, I told him and his Friends; that for so much
as I did understand, I did much fear this way, taken by him, would do Mischief.
And though Mr. Lermot have the general repute of an Honest and a Learned Man; yet
for this very business sake, I have made my self a Stranger to him, ever since;
and that all this is Truth, he and his Friends yet living are able to Testify.

For St. Andrews, his Majesty took a resolution to Rebuild the Cathedral there;
which he found he could no way so well do, as by annexing that Abbey to the
Archbishopric of St. Andrews, with a Legal Caution for so much Yearly to be
laid out upon that Building. My Lord Duke of Richmond and Lenox, who was owner
of it; had for it....... Thousand Pounds. The Earl of Tarquair (who then
managed the Lord Duke's Affairs) made the Bargain with the King; and that which
I did in it, was merely to consider, how security might be given, that the
Money, which the King intended for so good and great a Work, as the rebuilding
of that Cathedral, might be employed to the right use, and no other.

For Arbroth, my Lord Marquis Hamilton, without any the least Thought of mine
that way, made his earnest Suit to me; that his Majesty would take Arbroth, and
join it to the very poor Bishopric of Brechen, close to which it lay, and give
him for it (...) Grant a Request, or (...) desired.
a Suit here in England. At his Lordship's entreaty I obtained this: And he
very Nobly conveyed Arbroth, as he promised. But things were so carried by the
Earl of Traquair the Lord Treasurer of Scotland, that the poor Bishop of
Brechen could never get that settled upon his See: which was not the only thing,
in which that Lord played fast and loose with me.

For Kelsoe, the like earnest Suit did my Lord the Earl of Roxborough make to
me of himself for an Exchange, and pressed me three or four times, before he
could get me to move his Majesty. Indeed, I was fearful, least the King should
grow weary of such Exchanges; (for sure I was, whatsoever was pretended, none
of these Lords meant to lose by their Bargain:) Till at last, my Lord of
Roxborough was so Honorable, as that he would needs leave Kelsoe to the King's
disposing, and stay for such Recompense, as he should think fit to give him,
till his Majesty found his own time. This (at his earnest entreaty still) I
acquainted the King with: And so that business settled for a small time; but how
it is now, I know not. And this was all, that ever I did about Arbroth and
Kelsoe. And these two Honorable Lords are yet living, and will witness this
Truth. But the Charge says farther -- That in the smallest Matters, they (the
Prelates) received his Commandments: As for taking down Galleries, and stone
Walls, in the Kirks of Edinburgh, and St. Andrews, for no other end, but to
make way for Altars, and Adoration toward the East: which (beside other Evils)
made no small noise and disturbance amongst the People, deprived hereby of
their ordinary accommodation for Public Worship.



This Charge is like the rest. Is it probable, that such Grave and Learned Men,
as those of the Scottish Bishops were, which held intercourse with me, should
not resolve in the smallest Matters, till they received my Commandments; who
never sent Command to any of them in my Life, but what I received expressly from
the King? And they certainly were not for the smallest Matters.

As for the taking down of Galleries in St. Andrews; to the uttermost of my
Memory, I never gave either Command or Direction. Nor can it stand with any
show of probability, that I should command the taking down of Galleries in St.
Andrews, where I had nothing to do, and let Galleries stand in so many Churches
in London, and other parts of my Province, where I had Power. The Truth is; I
did never like Galleries in any Church. They utterly deface the grave Beauty
and Decency of those Sacred Places; and make them look more like a Theater,
than a Church. Nor in my Judgment, do they make any great accommodation for the
Auditory: For in most places, they hinder as much room beneath, as they make
above; rendering all, or most of, those places useless, by the noise and
trampling of them, which stand above in the Galleries. And if I be mistaken in
this, it is nothing to the business in hand: For be Galleries what they will for
the use, I commanded not the taking of them down at St. Andrews.

At Edinburgh the King's Command took down the stone Walls and Galleries, which
were there removed, and not mine. For his Majesty having in a Christian and
Princely way, Erected and Endowed a Bishopric in Edinburgh; he resolved to
make the great Church of St. Giles in that City, a Cathedral: And to this end,
gave Order to have the Galleries in the lesser Church, and the Stone-wall which
divided them, taken down. For of old, they were both one Church, and made two
by a Wall, built up at the West end of the Chancel; So that that which was
called the lesser Church, was but the Chancel of St. Giles, with Galleries
round about it; And was for all the World like a square Theater, without any
show of a Church: As is also the Church at Brunt-Iland over against it. And I
remember, when I passed over at the Frith, I took it, at first sight, for a
large square Pigeon-House: So free was it from all suspicion of being so much
as built like an Ancient Church. Now, since his Majesty took down these
Galleries, and the Stone-wall, to make St. Giles's Church a Cathedral there;
certainly my Command took them not down, to make way for Altars, and Adoration
toward the East; which I never commanded in that, or any other Church in
Scotland. The Charge goes on.

ART. II.
The second Novation which troubled our Peace, was a Book of Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical obtruded upon our Kirk, found by our General
Assembly to be devised for Establishing a Tyrannical Power in the Persons of
our Prelates, over the Worship of God, and over the Consciences, Liberties, and
Goods of the People, and for Abolishing the whole Discipline and Government of
our Kirk, by General and Provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, and
Kirk-Sessions; which was settled by Law, and in continual practice from the time
of Reformation.

This Charge begins with a General, and will come to Particulars after. And
first, it seems they are angry with a Book of Canons. Excellent
Church Government, it seems, they would have, that will admit of no Canons, to
direct or control their Liberty. And if they mean by obtruding upon their
Church, that the Canons were unduly thrust upon them, because that Book was
Confirmed by the King's Anthority; then it is a bold Phrase to call it
Obtruding. For if His Majesty that now is, did by his Sole Authority Command
the present Book of Canons to the Church of Scotland; he did but Exercise that
Power which King James challenged did in the right of his Crown belong to him:
As appears manifestly by a Letter of his to the Prelates of Scotland then
Assembled at Perth. That Royal Letter is large, but very worthy any Man's
Reading, and is to be seen in the Proceedings at Perth. p. 50.
Relation of those Proceedings. But because they speak of my Novations, if they
mean that this Book of Canons was Obtruded upon their Church by me; Or if it
were found in a Just Synod, and upon fair Proceedings, to Establish a
Tyrannical Power of the Prelates over the Worship of God, or the Consciences,
Liberties, or Goods of the People; Or for Abolishing any thing that was settled
by Laws; they had Reason both to be troubled, and to seek in a Dutiful manner,
first rightly to inform His Majesty, and then to desire a Remedy from him. But
if the Book of Canons did really none of these things, as (for ought I yet
know) it did not, and as I hope will appear, when they come to Particulars;
then this will be no longer a Charge, but a Slander. And howsoever, if any
thing in those Canons were Ordered against their Laws; it was by our invincible
Ignorance, and their Bishops fault, that would not tell us, wherein we went
against their Laws, if so we did. And for my own part; I did ever advise them
to make sure in the whole Business, that they attempted nothing against Law.
But if their late General Assembly, in which (they say) these things were found
to be against Law, did proceed Unwarrantably, or Factiously, (as the most
Learned Men of that Kingdom avow it did;) the less heed must, and will in
future times, be given to their Proceedings. But before they come to
Particulars, they think fit to lay Load on me, and say -- That Canterbury was
Master of this Work, is manifest, by a Book of Canons sent to him, written upon
the one side only, with the other side blank, for Corrections, Additions, and
putting all in better Order, at his pleasure: Which accordingly was done; as
may appear by the Interlinings, Marginals, and filling up of the Blank Pages,
with Directions sent to our Prelates.



I was no Master of this Work, but a Servant to it, and Commanded thereunto by
His Sacred Majesty (as I have to show under his Hand.) And the Work it self was
begun in His Majesty's Blessed Fathers Time: For the Bishops of Scotland were
gathering their Canons then. And this is most manifest by a Passage in the
Sermon, which my Lord the Archbishop of S. Andrews Preached before the General
Assembly at Perth, An. 1618, when I was a private Man, and had nothing to do
with these things. The words are these: And when I least expected, these
Articles (that is, the five Articles of Perth) were sent unto me; not to be
proponed to the Church, but to be Proceedings of Perth. p. 40.
inserted amongst the Canons thereof, which were then in gathering, touching
which Point I humbly excused my self, etc. So this Work was begun, and known to
that Church, long before I had any thing to do with it. And now, when it came
to be Perfected, I did nothing but as I was Commanded, and Warranted, by His
Majesty. But indeed according to this Command, I took a great deal more pains
than I have thanks for; as it too often falls out with the best Churchmen. To
this end, it is true, a Book of Canons was not sent me, but brought by my Lord
the Bishop of Ross, and delivered to me: And if it were written on one side
only, and left Blank on the other for Corrections, or Additions; I hope there is
no sin in that, to leave room and space for me to do that, for which the Book
was brought to me. As for that which follows, it has less fault in it. For
they say, it was for my putting all in better Order. And I hope, to put all in
better Order, is no Crime Censurable in this Court. And whatever they of
Scotland think; that Church did then need many things to be put in better
Order, and at this Day need many more.

Yea, but they say, this should not be done at my pleasure. I say so too;
Neither was it. For whatsoever I thought fit to correct, or add in the Copy
brought to me, I did very humbly and fairly submit to the Church of Scotland:
And under those Terms delivered it back to the Bishop which brought it, with
all the Interlinings, Marginals, and fillings up of Blank Pages, and the best
Directions I was able to give them. And all this was in me, Obedience to His
Majesty, and no Wrong, that I know, to the Church of Scotland; I am sure not
intended by me. Neither are these Interlinings, or Additions, so many, as they
are here insinuated to be; for the Bishops of Scotland had been very careful in
this Work. All which would clearly appear, were the Book produced. Yet the
Charge goes on against me still.

And that it was done by no other than Canterbury, is evident by his
Magisterial way of Prescribing; and by a new Copy of these Canons, all written
with S. Andrews own hand precisely to a Letter, according to the former
Castigations and Directions, sent back to procure the King's Warrant unto it;
which accordingly was obtained.

By no other Hand than Canterburies, is very roundly affirmed. How is it
proved? Why, by two Reasons. First they say, it is evident, by his Magisterial
way of Prescribing. An Excellent Argument! The Book of Canons was delivered to
me ready made. That which was mine, is here confessed to be but Interlinings,
and Marginals, and Corrections; and at most some Additions: And they would be
found a very small Some, were the Original Book seen. And yet it must be
Evident, that no Hand but mine did this, by my Magisterial way of Prescribing,
in an Interlining, or a Marginal. Excellent Evidence! Secondly, they have
another great Evidence of this. But because that is so nervous and strong; I
will be bold to reduce it to some Form, that it may appear the clearer, though
it be against my self. There was (they say) a new Copy of these Canons all
written with S. Andrews own Hand, and according to the former Castigations and
Directions, sent to have the King's Warrant to it, which was obtained:
Therefore these Interlinings and Marginals, etc. were done by no other than
Canterbury. Most Excellent Evidence, and clear as Midnight!

The plain Truth is contrary to all this Evidence. For by the same Command of
His Majesty, the Reverend Bishop of London was joined with me in all the view,
and Consideration, which I had either upon the Book of Canons, or upon the
Service Book after. So it is utterly untrue; that these Interlinings, or
Marginals, or Corrections, or call them what you will, were done by no other
than Canterbury. For my Lord of London's both Head and Hand were as deep in
them as mine. And this I avow for well known Truth, both to the King, and those
Scottish Bishops which were then employed; and this notwithstanding all the
Evidences of a Magisterial way, and a New Copy. And yet this General Charge
pursues me yet farther, and says, The Kings Warrant was obtained (as is said)
to these Canons, but with an Addition of some other Canons, and a Page of Some
other, Rushw. and Pryn.
New Corrections, according to which the Book of Canons thus Composed, was
Published in Print. The inspection of the Books, Instructions, and his Letters
of Joy for the success of the Work, and of other Letters of Rushw, and Pryn.
from the Prelate of London, and the Lord Sterling, to the same purpose, (all
which we are ready to exhibit,) will put the Matter out of all debate.



Yet more ado about nothing? Yet more noise of Proof to put that out of all
debate, which need never enter into any? For if no more be intended, than that
I had a view of the Book of Canons, and did make some Interlinings, and
Marginals, and the like; I have freely acknowledged it, and by whose Command I
did it, and who was joined with me in the Work. So there will need no Proof of
this, either by my Letters, or the Prelate of Londons, or the Lord Sterlings.
Yet let them be exhibited, if you please. But if it be intended (as it is laid)
that this was done by no other than Canterbury; then I utterly deny it; and no
Proof here named, or any other shall ever be able to make it good.

As for the Addition of some other Canons, and Pages of New Corrections,
according to which the Book of Canons is said to be Composed and Published:
Truly, to the utmost of my Memory, I know of none such; but that the Copy
written by my Lord of S. Andrews own Hand, and sent up, (as is before
mentioned) was the very Copy which was Warranted by His Majesty, and Published
without any further Alteration. But if any further Alteration were; it was by
the same Authority, and with the same Consent. And for my Letters of Joy for
the Success of the Work; let them be exhibited, when you please. I will never
deny that Joy, while I live, that I conceived of the Church of Scotland's
coming nearer, both in the Canons, and the Liturgy, to the Church of England.
But our gross unthankfulness both to our God, and King, and our other many and
great Sins, have hindered this great Blessing. And I pray God, that the loss of
this. which was now almost effected, do not in short time prove one of the
greatest Mischiefs which ever befell this Kingdom, and that too. This is the
General Charge about the Canons; Now follow the Particulars.

Beside this General Charge; there be some things more special, worthy to be
adverted unto, for discovering his Spirit. First, the Fourth Canon of Cap 8.
For as much as no Reformation in Doctrine or Discipline can be made perfect at
once in any Church: Therefore it shall and may be Lawful for the Kirk of
Scotland, at any time, to make Remonstrances to His Majesty, or his
Successors, etc. Because this Canon holds the Door open to more Innovations;
he writes to the Prelate of Ross, his Prime Agent in all this Work, of his
great Gladness, that this Canon did stand behind the Curtain; And his great
desire, that this Canon might be Printed fully, as one that was to be most
useful.

Now come the Particulars, worthy to be adverted unto for the discovery of my
Spirit. And the first is taken out of the Fourth Canon of Cap. 8. The Charge
is, that this Canon holds the Door open to more Innovations. First I conceive,
this Accusation is vain. For that Canon restrains all Power from private Men,
Clergy or Lay; nay, from Bishops in a Synod, or otherwise, to alter any thing
in Doctrine or Discipline, without Authority from His Majesty or his
Successors. Now all Innovations come from private assumption of Authority, not
from Authority it self. For in Civil Affairs, when the King and the State, upon
Emergent Occasions, shall abrogate some Old Laws, and make other New, that
cannot be counted an Innovation. And in Church Affairs, every Synod, that has
sat in all times, and all places of Christendom, have with leave of Superior
Authority, declared some Points of Doctrine, condemned other-some; Altered some
Ceremonials, made new Constitutions for better assisting the Government. And
none of these have ever been accounted Innovations, the Foundations of Religion
still remaining firm and unmoved. Nay, under favor, I conceive it most
necessary, that thus it ought to be. And therefore, this Canon is far from
holding a Door open for more Innovations; since it shuts it upon all, and
leaves no Power to alter any thing, but by making a Remonstrance to the Supreme
Authority, that in a Church Way approbation may be given when there is Cause.

And therefore, if I did write to the Prelate of Ross, that this Canon might be
Printed fully, as one that was to be most useful: I writ no more then, than I
believe now. For certainly it is a Canon, that in a well-governed Church may be
of great use: And the more, because in Truth, it is but Declaratory of that
Power, which a National Church has, with leave and approbation of the Supreme
Power, to alter, and change, any alterable thing pertaining to Doctrine or
Discipline in the Church. And as for that Phrase, said to be in my Letter, that
this Canon did stand behind the Curtain: it was thus occasioned. My Lord, the
Bishop of Ross, writ unto me, from the Archbishop of S. Andrews, that no words
might be made of this Canon; (what their Reason was, they best know:) I
returned Answer belike in this sort; That the Canon stood behind the Curtain,
and would not be thoroughly understood by every Man; yet advised the Printing,
in regard of the necessary use of it. For let this Canon be in force, and right
use made of it; and a National Church may ride safe by God's Ordinary Blessing,
through any Storm; which without this Latitude it can never do. The next Charge
is in -- 2. The Title prefixed to these Canons by our Prelates. For there it is
thus: Canons agreed on to be proponed to the several Synods of the Kirk of
Scotland; And is thus changed by Canterbury; Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, etc. Ordained to be observed by the Clergy. He will not have
Canons to come from the Authority of Synods, but from the Power of Prelates, or
from the Kings Prerogative.



I perceive, they mean to sift narrowly, when the Title cannot escape. But truly
in this Charge, I am to seek, which is greater in my Accusers, their Ignorance,
or their Malice: Their Ignorance in the Charge; or their Malice in the
Inference upon it. The Title was, Canons agreed upon to be proponed to the
Synods of the Kirk of Scotland. And this was very fit, to express the Prelates
intendment, which (for ought I know) was to propose them so. But this Book,
which was brought to me, was to be Printed: And then that Title could not stand
with any Congruity of Sense. For no Church uses to Print Canons, which are to
be proponed to their Synods; but such as have been proposed, and agreed on. Nor
did this altering of the Title, in any the least thing hinder those worthy
Prelates from Communicating them with their Synods, before they Printed them.
And therefore the Inference must needs be extreme full of Malice, to force from
hence, that I would not have Canons come from the Authority of Synods, but from
the Power of Prelates, or the King's Prerogative: Whereas most manifest it is,
that the fitting of this Title for the Press, does neither give any Power to
Prelates, nor add to the King's Prerogative more than is his due, nor does it
detract any thing from the Authority of Synods. For I hope, the Bishops had no
purpose but to Ordain them in Synod to be observed by the Clergy, etc. and
Approved and Published by the King's Consent and Authority. After this, comes
-- 3. The formidable Canon, Cap. 1. 3. threatening no less than Excommunication,
against all such Persons whatsoever shall open their Mouths against any of
these Books; proceeded not from our Prelates, nor is to be found in The Copies,
Rushw. the Copy, Pryn.
Copies sent from them, but is a Thunderbolt forged in Canterbury's own Fire.



First, whether this Canon be to be found in the Copies sent from your
Prelates, or not, I cannot tell; but sure it was in the Copy brought to me, or
else my Memory forsakes me very strangely. Secondly, after all this Noise made
of a Formidable Canon, because no less is threatened than Excommunication; I
would fain know, what the Church can do less upon Contempt of her Canons,
Liturgy, and Ordinations, than to Excommunicate the Offenders; or what Church,
in any Age, laid less upon a Crime so great. Thirdly, suppose this Thunderbolt
(as it is called) were forged in Canterbury's Fire; yet that Fire was not
outrageous. For this Canon contains as much as the 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Canons of the
Church of England, made in the beginning of the gracious Reign of King James:
And yet to every one of those Canons there is an Excommunication in Facto
affixed, for every one of these Crimes single: Whereas this Canon shoots this
one Thunderbolt but once against them all. And this I would my Accusers should
know; that if no more Thunderbolts had been forged in their Fire, than have
been in mine; nor State, nor Church would have Flamed, as of late they have
done.

4 Our Prelates in diverse Places witness their dislike of Papists. A Minister
shall be deposed, if he shall [ Rushw.] be found negligent to convert Papists.
Cap. 8. 15. The Adoration of the Bread is a Superstition to be condemned. Cap.
6. 6. They call the Absolute Necessity, Pryn. and Rushw.
Absoluteness of Baptism, an Error of Popery. Cap. 6. 2. But in Canterbury's
Edition the Name of Papists and Popery It Rushw, and Pryn.
are not so much as mentioned.

Here Is a great general Accusation, offered to be made good by three
Particulars. The general is, that in the Copy of the Canons, which their
Prelates sent, there is a dislike of Papists: But none in the Edition, as it was
altered by me. Now this is utterly untrue; for it is manifest cap. 1. 1. There
is express care taken for the King's Majesty's Jurisdiction over the Estate
Ecclesiastical, and abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant to it. And again in
the same Canon, That no Foreign Power has (in his Majesty's Dominions) any
Establishment by the Law of God: And this with an Addition, That the Exclusion
of all such Power is just. And, Cap. 2. 9. it is Ordained, that every
Ecclesiastical Person shall take the Oath of Supremacy. And, Cap. 10. 3. All
Readers in any College or Schools, shall take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy. And sure, I think, it is no great matter, whether Papists, or Popery
be Named; so long as the Canons go so directly against them. This for the
General. Now for the three Particulars.

And first, That which was in Cap. 8. 15. That a Minister shall be deposed, if
he be found negligent to convert Papists; I did think fit to leave out, upon
these two Grounds. The one, that the Word Negligent is too general an
Expression, and of too large an extent, to lay a Minister open to Deposition.
And if Church Governors, to whom the execution of the Canons is committed,
should forget Christian Moderation (as they may Pati humana) a very worthy
Minister might sometimes be undone for a very little Negligence; for Negligence
is Negligence, be it never so little. Besides, I have learned out of the Canons
of the Church of England, that even Can. 69.
gross Negligence, in a matter as great as this is, is punished but with
Suspension for three Months. The other Ground, why I omitted this clause, is;
Because I do not think the Church of Scotland, or any other particular Church,
is so blessed in her Priests, as that every of her Ministers is for Learning,
and Judgment, and Temper, Able and Fit to convert Papists. And therefore I did
think then, and do think yet; that it is not so easy a work, or to be made so
common; but that it is, and may be much fitter for some able selected Men to
undertake. And if any Man think God's Gifts in him to be neglected (as Men are
apt to overvalue themselves;) let them try their Gifts, and labor their
Conversion in God's Name: But let not the Church by a Canon set every Man on
work; lest their Weak or Indiscreet Performance hurt the Cause, and blemish the
Church.

The second Particular is an excellent one. It Is about the Adoration of the
Bread in the Blessed Sacrament, Cap. 6. 6. And it is employed, as if this
Superstition were condemned in the Copies sent by their Prelates, but left out
by me. Good God! how shameless are these Churchmen! for they drew up these
Articles against me, though the Lay-Commissioners delivered them. And was there
neither Clergy nor Layman among them so careful, as to compare the words of
the Charge, with the words of the Canon, before they would venture to deliver
them into so great a Court as the Parliament of England? Would not Mr.
Alexander Henderson, who was the Prime Leader in these Church Affairs, be so
careful for himself, and his own Reputation, as not publicly to deliver in a
most Notorious Untruth? For most manifest it is, that these words, As therefore
the Adoration of the Bread is condemned, etc. stand still in the Copy Revised
by me, as is to be seen in the Printed Copy of those Canons; and in the same
place by them quoted; and in a different Character; that I wonder how any Man's
Eye could miss them. So here I am accused for putting that out, which I left in.

The third Particular is, That their Prelates call the Absoluteness of Baptism
an Error of Popery, Cap. 6. 2. Which is (...) out too (they say) in my Edition
(as they will needs call the Printed Copy.) The Truth is, this we did think fit
to leave out: Because the Absolute necessity of Baptism (in the Ordinary way of
the Church, leaving God (as he is) most free to save with Baptism, or without,
as himself pleases) is no Popish Error, but the true Tenet of the Catholic
Church of Christ; and was, by their good leave, an Error in your Prelates to
call it so: And I provided both for Truth, and their Credit, by keeping it from
the view of Christendom. Nor could you expect other from me in this Point,
being an Archbishop of the Church of England, which maintains the Necessity of
Baptism, such as is above mentioned: As appears in the Rubric before Public
Baptism in the Service Book, confirmed by Act of Parliament. The Words are
these: Though it be fittest to Administer Baptism on Sundays and other
Holydays, etc. Nevertheless, if Necessity so require, Children may at all times
be Baptized at Home. And again, in the Rubric before private Baptism, thus;
When great need shall compel them to Baptize their Children at Home, it shall
be Administered on this fashion. And farther, the Church (...). 69.
of England takes care to have such Ministers Punished, as shall defer Baptism,
if the Child be in Danger. So that I could not let this Clause stand in the
Scottish Canons, but I must Charge my Mother the Church of England, as guilty
of maintaining an Error of Popery, and the Parliament of England for confirming
it.

5. Our Prelates have not the boldness to trouble us in their Canons, with
Altars, Fonts, Chancels, Reading of a long Liturgy before Sermon. Rushw. and
Pryn.
Sermons, etc. But Canterbury is Punctual and Peremptory in all these.

When I met so often with this Phrase; Our Prelates do not this, and that, in
which Canterbury is Punctual and Peremptory: It made me hope at first, these
Men had some good Opinion of their own Prelates. But so soon as they had once
gotten the Power into their own Hands; they made it presently appear, that
though their Prelates had not the boldness to trouble them; yet they had the
Impudence to cast the Prelates out of all the Means they had, and without any
the least Mercy to themselves, their Wives, and Children: And that in a most
Ignorant, and Barbarous manner, calling them the Limbs and Members of
Antichrist.

But what is the Crime, which your Prelates had not the boldness to trouble you
with, and in which Canterbury (that strange Man,) is so Punctual and
Peremptory? O! Grave Crimen Caie Caesar! It Is a Charge indeed; A mighty Charge!
A Novation of above Thirteen Hundred Years old. For after the Church was once
formally settled under the Christian Emperors; (nay, and for some Years before)
I challenge these Men to show any Church under Heaven, without that which was
promiscuously called, The Holy Table, or Altar; Or without a Font, or a
Chancel, or a formal set Liturgy before Sermon, etc. And therefore if I were
punctual in these, I did but my Duty. But Peremptory I am sure I was not, as
well knowing the difference between things of Decency and Uniformity, and
things of Necessity to Salvation. But the Charge must go on for all this.

6. For although the words of the 10 Canon, Cap. 3. be fair; yet the wicked
Intentions of Canterbury and Ross may be seen in the point of Justification of
a Sinner before God, by comparing the Canon as it came from our Prelates, and
as it was returned from Canterbury, and Printed.

Here Is a Confession, that the words of the 10 Canon, Cap. 3. are fair; And so
they are indeed. The Canon runs thus; It is manifest, that the Superstition of
former Ages is turned into great Profaneness; and that People, for the most
part, are grown cold for doing any good; esteeming that Good Works are not
necessary. Therefore shall all Presbyters, as their Text gives occasion, urge
the necessity of Good Works to their Hearers. These words they say are fair;
and sure they are so. What Is amiss then? What? Why, the wicked Intentions of
Canterbury and Ross. God bless us! Wicked Intentions under such fair words? Now
God forbid. I hope Ross had none; I am sure Canterbury had not. But how come
they to be Judges of our Intentions? How? Why, they say, they may be seen in
the point of the Justification of a Sinner before God. That Is a high Point, and
a dangerous, for any Man to have Wicked Intentions about it. How then may our
Wicked Intentions be seen? Why, by comparing the Canons; so they say. And I
desire nothing more, than that the Book, which I perused, may be produced: And
upon sight of it, I will acknowledge and make good whatsoever I did; or humbly
crave Pardon for what I cannot make good. And though I cannot get to see the
Book, yet you shall hear the Comparison.

Our Prelates say thus: It is manifest, that the Superstitions of former Ages,
are turned into a great Profaneness, and that People are grown cold, for the
most part, in doing any good; thinking there is no place for Good Works,
because they are excluded from Justification. Therefore shall all Ministers, as
their Text gives occasion, urge the necessity of Good Works, as they would be
Saved; and remember that they are, Via Regni, the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven,
quamvis non sint Causa Regnandi, howbeit they be not the Cause of our Salvation.

How the Canon goes now, is manifest in the words preceding: How it went
before in the Copy which their Prelates sent, is now expressed. And if it be
fairly related, here are two things Charged to be left out. The one is this
passage, Because they are Excluded from Justification. And the other is, that
known place of St. Bernard, That Good Works are Via Regni, non Causa Regnandi.
Now I conceive, both these Passages may be left out of this Canon, without any
Wicked Intentions in either Canterbury or Ross against the point of
Justification. But let the Charge proceed.

Here Ross gives his Judgment, that he would have this Canon simply commanding
Good Works to be Preached, and no mention made what place they have or have not
in Justification. Upon this motion so agreeable to Canterbury's mind, the Canon
is set down, as it stands, without the distinction of Via Regni, and Causa
Regnandi, or any word sounding that way, urging only the Necessity of Good
Works.

Well! now at last I see the bottom of this Charge: And I see too, that too
many Men are shye of Good Works; and for fear more should be attributed to
them, than is fit, refuse to acknowledge that which is due unto them. But sure
I am, there is a Command, and more than one, expressly, in the Text, for the
doing of Good Works, and that without any distinction. And so I conceive the
Scripture is warrant enough for this Canon, to command the Preaching of Good
Works, even without any distinction at all whatsoever; since God has so
absolutely and so expressly commanded, that we should serve him in Good Works:
To which Deuteronomy. 10. 12
Moses and Mat. 7. 19. and 22. 37. and 6. 16.
Christ, The Esai. 1. 19, 20.
Prophets, and Ephesians. 2. 10. and 1 Timothy 6. 18. and Titus 2. 7. 14. and 3. 1, 8,
14. S. James 2. 17. and 1 S. Pet. 2. 12. S. Je. (...). 3. (...). and 21. 27.
and 22. 12.
Apostles, do sufficiently bear witness.

But it seems, these Men have very good Intelligence, that when I looked over
these Canons (which I protest I did alone by my self, and then sent them to my
Lord the Bishop of London, for him to do the like) can yet tell, that here Ross
gave his Judgment, and would have the Canon go absolutely, and that this being
according to Canterbury's mind, so it went. Where yet I shall humbly crave
leave to observe two Things. The one is; That if this be true, that Ross would
have these things out: Then one of their own Prelates, and he trusted from the
rest, was the Cause of this omission: And so Canterbury was neither Master of
the Work, nor were all things in it done by him, and no other; as is before
affirmed in the beginning of the second Novation. The other thing is, the
omission it self: Of which, I shall say two things. The one is; That if Ross
did give that Reason, That it was fit that Canon should command the Preaching
of Good Works in general, because it was a time of such Profaneness, as is
mentioned in the beginning of the Canon; I for my part, cannot but approve it.
The other is, That the leaving out of that known saying of St. Bernard's, I
humbly conceive is no fault, either in my self, or any other. For though the
Speech be good, and though the Sayings of private Men, Eminent in their times,
were sometimes put into the Canons of National Churches; yet usually it was
not so. And since themselves confess, the words of the Canon, as it now is, are
fair; were any Charity in them, they would not make so foul an Interpretation
of other Men's Intentions.

7. By comparing Canon 9. Cap. 18. as it was sent in Writing from our Prelates,
and as it is Printed at Canterbury's Command, may be also manifest; that he
went about to Establish Auricular Confession, and Popish Absolution.

I have showed before, that this Book of Canons was not Printed by my Command.
But I have a long time found by sad experience, that whatsoever some Men
disliked, was presently my doing. God forgive them. But to the present Charge,
I shall answer nothing; but only Transcribe that Canon, and leave it to the
Judgment of all Orthodox and Moderate Christians, whether I have therein gone
about to establish Auricular Confession, and Popish Absolution. The Canon is as
follows.

Albeit Sacramental Confession, and Absolution, have been in some Places very
much abused; yet if any of the People be Grieved in Mind, for any Delict or
Offense committed, and for the unburdening of his Conscience, Confess the same
to the Bishop, or Presbyter; they shall, as they are bound, Minister to the
Person so Confessing, all Spiritual Consolations out of the Word of God; and
shall not deny him the Benefit of Absolution, after the manner which is
prescribed In the Service Book both of England, and Scotland.
in the Visitation of the Sick, if the Party show himself truly Penitent, and
humbly desire to be Absolved. And he shall not make known or reveal what has
been opened to him in Confession, at any time, or to any Person whatsoever;
except the Crime be such, as by the Laws of the Realm his own Life may be
called in question for concealing the same.

This is the Canon word for word; where first give me leave to observe the Care
that I had of the Laws of the Kingdom. For I believe, it will hardly be found
that such a Clause is inserted in any Canon, concerning the Seal of Confession,
as is expressed in this Canon, in relation to the Laws of the Realm, from the
time that Confession came into solemn use, till our English Canon was made Anno
1603. with which this agrees. And then for the matter Can. 113.
of the Canon; if here be any thing to establish Popish Confession, or
Absolution, I humbly submit it to the Learned of the Reformed Churches thorough
Christendom: All Men (for ought I yet know) allowing Confession; and
Absolution, as most useful for the good of Christians, and condemning only the
binding of all Men to confess all Sins, upon absolute danger of Salvation. And
this indeed B. (...), Argumento in Lib. Tertul. de (...). p. 471.
some call Carnificinam Conscientiae, the Rack or Torturing of the Conscience;
but impose no other Necessity of Confessing, than the weight of their own Sin
shall lay upon them; nor no other inforcement to receive Absolution, than their
Christian Care to ease their own Conscience shall lead them unto: And in that
way Calvin commends Confession exceedingly; and, if you mark it, you shall find
that our Savior Christ, who gives the Priest full Power of the Keys to Bind
and Loose; that is, to receive Confession, and to Absolve or not Absolve; as he
sees Cause in the Delinquent; yet you shall not find any Command of his to
enforce Men to come to the Priest, to receive this Benefit. It Is enough, that
he has left Power in the Ministry of the Church to give Penitent Christians
this Ease, Safety, and Comfort, if they will receive it when they need. If they
need, and will not come; or if they need, and will not believe they do so, let
them bear their own Burden. But yet they have not done with our Prelates; one
Charge more comes.

8. Our Prelates were not acquainted with Canons for inflicting of Arbitrary
Penalties: But in Canterbury's Book, wheresoever there is no Penalty expressly
set down, it is provided, that it shall be Arbitrary, as the Ordinary shall
think fittest. By these and many other The like, Rushw. and Pryn.
like it is apparent, what Tyranical Power he went about to establish in the
Hands of our Prelates over the Worship of God, and the Souls, and Goods of Men,
overturning from the Foundation the whole Order of our What Seeds of Popery he
did sow in our Kirk; Pryn, and Rush.
Kirk; and how large an entry he did make for the grossest Novations afterward;
which has been a main Cause of this Combustion.

This is the last Shot against these Canons, and me for them: And I conceive,
this is no great thing. For Arbitrary Government is one thing: And it is quite
another, that wheresoever there is no Penalty expressly set down, it is
provided, that it shall be Arbitrary, as the Ordinary shall think fittest,
which are the words of the Canon. For since no Law can meet with all
particulars; some things must of necessity be left Arbitrary in all Government,
though that be perfectest and happiest that leaves least. Nor is it an unheard
of thing, to find something Arbitrary in some Canons of the Church, which are
very ancient. As in the Pauco tempore (...), ut (...) esse videatur, Conc.
Elib. Can. 21.
Council of Eliberis the Punishment of him who was absent from the Church three
Sundays, was that he should be Abstentus, and barred from the Church for some
small time; that his negligence in the Service of God may seem to be punished.
But this small Time being not limited, is left to Arbitrary Discretion. So
likewise in the In quantum Ratio (...). Conc. Valentin. Can. 2.
Council of Valence, An. 374. The giving of the Sacrament to such as had vowed
Virginity, and did afterward Marry, was to be deferred, as the Priest saw
Reason and Cause for it; and that sure is Arbitrary. The like we find in the
third Ut (...) secundum peccatorum (...) Episcopi (...) Tempora (...). Conc.
Carthag. 3. Can 3.
Council of Carthage; where the Time of Penance, according to the quality of
the Sin, is left to the Discretion of the Bishop. And these Councils were all
within the fourth Century. By all which it is apparent, that in Church as well
as in State, some things may be left Arbitrary; and have been in Better and
Wiser Times, than these of ours. Nay it is confessed by Author of the Observations
(...) some of (...) Majesty's late Answers, p. 34.
one that Writes almost as well as Junius Brutus, that there is an Arbitrary
Power in every State, somewhere, and that no Inconvenience follows upon it. And
the Conc. Ancyran. Can. 1. and 2.
Council of Ancyra, inflicting Censures upon Presbyters first, and then
Deacons, which had fallen in time of Persecution, yet gives leave to the Bishop
to mitigate the Penance at his Discretion.

Again, it is manifest by the care taken in the preceding Canons, that here is
little or nothing of moment left Arbitrary: And then the Ordinary will fall
into an Excess more dangerous to himself, than his Arbitrary Punishment can be
to him that suffers it, if he offer to Tyrannize. For this Clause, wheresoever
it is inserted in Canon or Statute, (as it is in the Statutes of very many
Colleges) stands but for a Proviso, that Disorderly persons may not think they
shall escape Punishment, if they can cunningly keep off the Letter of the Law:
And yet so, that the Arbitrary Punishment be Regulated by that, which is
expressed in the Canons or the Statutes, for Omissions or Commissions of like
nature.

And therefore that which is inferred upon all this Charge, and the Particulars
in it; Namely, That I went about to establish a Tyranical Power in the Hands of
their Prelates, either over the Worship of God, or the Souls and Goods of Men,
is utterly false, and cannot be proved to follow out of any of the Premises.
Not over the Goods of the People; For no Prelate, not invested with Temporal
Power, can meddle with them; so that were there any Canon made for that, it
would be void of it self. Nor over the Souls of Men; for they are left free in
all things, save to commit Sin and Disorder; which to repress by Canons is, and
has been, the Church way. Much less over the Worship of God: For these Canons
have labored nothing so much, as to Honor, and Establish that in Decency and
Uniformity. And as for that which follows, That these Canons over-turn from the
Foundation, the whole Order of their Kirk; It Is more than I believe will be
proved, that they have over-turned any good Order in their Church, much less
Foundations: Though it may be thought by some, (and perhaps justly,) that there
is so little Order in their Church, and that so weakly founded, that it may be
over-turned with no great stress. And for the large Entry made for the Gross
Novations afterward, you see what it is: And when you have considered the
Gross Novations, which are said to come after; I hope you will not find them
very Gross, nor any way fit to be alleged as a main Cause of this Combustion.
Now follows

ART. III.
The third, and great Novation, which was the Book of Common Prayer,
Administration of Sacraments, and other parts of Divine Worship, Rushw.
Service, Pryn.
Service, brought in without Warrant from our Kirk; to be Universally received
as the only Form of Divine-Service, under the highest pains, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical.

Now we are come to the Arraignment of the Liturgy, and the Book of
Common Prayer; and this (they say) was brought in without Warrant from their
Kirk. If this be true; it was the fault of your own Prelates, and theirs only,
for ought I know. For though I like the Book exceeding well, and hope I shall
be able to maintain any thing that is in it, and wish with all my Heart, that
it had been entertained there; yet I did ever desire, it might come to them
with their own liking and approbation. Nay, I did ever, upon all Occasions,
call upon the Scottish Bishops, to do nothing in this Particular, but by
Warrant of Law. And farther, I professed unto them before His Majesty, that
though I had obeyed his Commands in helping to Order that Book; yet since I was
ignorant of the Laws of that Kingdom, I would have nothing at all to do with
the manner of introducing it; but left that wholly to them, who do, or should,
understand both that Church, and their Laws. And I am sure, they told me, they
would adventure it no way but that which was Legal. But they go on; And say,
this Book Is found by our National Assembly, besides the Popish Frame, and
Forms in Divine Worship, to contain many Popish Errors and Ceremonies, and the
Seeds of manifold and gross Superstitions, and Idolatries; and to be repugnant
to the Doctrine, Discipline, and Order of our Reformation, to the Confession of
Faith, Constitutions of General Assemblies, and Acts of Parliament Establishing
the true Religion. That this was also Canterbury's Work, we make manifest.



This is a great Charge upon the Service Book indeed: But it is in Generals,
and those only affirmed, not proved. And therefore may with the same case, and
as justly, be denied by me, as they are affirmed by them. And this is all I
shall say, till they bring their Proofs. And though this be no more
Canterbury's Work, than the Canons were; yet, by their good will, I shall bear
the burden of all. And therefore, before they go to prove this great Charge
against the Service Book; they go on to make it manifest, that this was my How
far this was my Work, you may see afterward.
Work: And so far as it was mine, I shall ingenuously and freely acknowledge in
each Particular, as occasion shall be offered me. But how do they make it
manifest, it was my Work? Why; 1. By the Memoirs. Rushw. Memories, Pryn.
Memoirs and Instructions, sent unto him by our Prelates; wherein they give
special account of the Diligence they Had. Rushw. and Pryn.
have used to do all which herein they were enjoyed.



This Proof comes very short. For considering the Scottish Bishops were
Commanded by His Majesty to let me see, from time to time, what they did in
that Service Book; they had good reason (as I conceive) to give me some Account
of their Diligence and Care in that behalf: And yet this will never conclude
the Work to be mine. Why, but if this Proof come not home, yet it will be
Manifest 2. By the approbation of the Service Book sent unto them, and of all
the Marginal Corrections, wherein it varies from the English-Book; showing
their desire to have some few things changed in it, which notwithstanding was
not granted. This we find written by S. Andrews own Hand, and subscribed by him
and Nine other of our Prelates.



This Argument is as loose as the former. For I hope, though I had had nothing
at all to do with that Book; yet I might have approved both the Book it self,
and all the Marginal (or other) Corrections, wherein it differs from, (so it be
not contrary to) the English Book: Therefore my approving it will not make me
the Author of it. As for that which follows, that their Prelates did desire to
have some few things changed in it, which was not granted: First you see, they
say before, that the Popish Errors in that Book be many; and yet the change of
a few things would serve their turn. And if this Change were not granted, that
was not my fault, but their own; who might have changed what they pleased,
whether I would or no. But they should do well, to show this Paper under St.
Andrews Hand, and nine other Bishops. For my part, as I remember it not, so I
believe it not. But they hope to prove it better -- 3. By Canterbury's own
Letters, witnesses of his Joy, when the Book was ready for the Press; of his
Prayers that God would speed the work; of his hope to see that Service set up
in Scotland; of his diligence in sending for the Printer, and directing him to
prepare a Black Letter, and to send it to his Servants at Edinburgh for
Printing this Book; of his Approbation of the Proofs sent from the Press; of
his fear of delay In, Rushw and Pryn.
for bringing this work speedily to an end, for the great good (not of that
Church) but of the Church; of his encouraging Ross, who was entrusted with the
Press, to go on In, Rushw. and Pryn.
with this piece of Service, without fear of Enemies. All which may be seen in
the Autographs.



This Argument is as weak as any of the former. Indeed, it is nothing but a
heap of Non Sequiturs. My Letters express my Joy, when the Book was ready for
the Press: Therefore I made the Book. As if I might not be glad, that a Good
Book was ready for the Press; but I must be the Author of it. Next, I prayed,
that God would speed the Work: I did indeed, and heartily: but may not I humbly
desire God to bless a Good Work, though I be not the Author of it? Yea, but I
hoped to see that Service set up in Scotland. I did indeed, and was heartily
sorry when my hopes failed: And that Nation will one day have more cause to be
sorry for it, than I. But what then? It follows not thence, that the Work was
mine. Again, I was diligent with the Printer to prepare Letters, and send to
his Servants. I was indeed diligent herein; but it was at the entreaty of my
Brethren the Scottish Bishops. And truly I could do little for them, the
Printer being then in England, If I would not send to him, and desire him to be
diligent. Yea, but I Approved the Proofs that were sent from the Press. And
there was good Reason I should, if they were well done. But I hope, many a Man
takes care of the Proofs from the Press, though the Work be not his.

The next they would fain have seem something; but it is no better than the
rest. For they would prove this Book was my work, because I feared delay;
whereas, I would have a speedy end for the Good of (not that Church, but) the
Church. Fear of delay, is no proof that the work was mine. But do you not mark
the subtlety? For the good of the Church, not that Church. They would fain have
some Mystery hid here; but sure there is none. For if I writ any such thing,
The Church, and That Church, were the same Church of Scotland. For when a Man
writes to a Learned Man of another Nation, and desires any thing to be done for
the good of the Church; he is to be understood, of the good of that Church;
unless some circumstance sway his meaning another way; which is not here. Yea,
but I encouraged Ross, who was entrusted with the Press, to go on without fear
of Enemies: Therefore the work was mine. Will not young Novices laugh at this
Logic? Well, they say all this appears in the Autographo. Let them show the
Autographon: And if all this be there, then you see all is nothing; they have
showed but their Weakness to collect so poorly. And if it be not there, then
they have showed their Falsehood, with which some of them are too well
acquainted. But prove it good, or bad; another proof they have. And that is, 4.
By Letters sent from the Prelate of London, [to Ross:] wherein, [ To Ross] are
added from (...) and (...)
as he rejoices at the sight of the Scottish Canons, which although they
should make some noise in the beginning, yet they would be more for the good of
the Kirk, than the Canons at Edinburgh for the good of the Kingdom: So
concerning the Liturgy, he shows, that Ross had sent to him, to have from
Canterbury an Explanation of some passages of the Service Book, and that the
Press behoved to stand, till the Explanations came to Edinburgh; which
therefore he had in haste obtained from his Grace, and sent the dispatch by
Cant. his own conveyance.



This Argument is much ado about nothing: In which, notwithstanding, I shall
observe some passages, and then come to the force of the Argument, such as it
is. And first, though the business of the Canons be over, yet a Merriment in
the Bishop of London's Letter must be brought in. Secondly, Though by this
Letter of the Prelate of London, it be manifest, he had to do with those Canons
as well as I; and though he past as full and as Honorable a Censure upon them,
as I do in any Letter of mine; yet against their Knowledge, and their
Conscience, they avouch peremptorily before, that this was done by Cant. and no
other; and all this, to heap all the Envy they could upon me alone. Thirdly,
Here Is the same Phrase used by my Lord of London, that was used a little before
by me: Namely, that these Canons would be for the good of the Kirk. And yet
here is never a wise Observation upon it, as was upon me; that they would be for
the good (not of that Church, but) of the Church.

Now for the force of Mr. Henderson's Logic (for these Arguments out of doubt
are his:) Ross writ to the Prelate of London, to have from Canterbury an
Explanation of some passages of the Service Book, because the Press staid; and
he obtained them; Therefore this Book was Canterbury's work, as is before
asserted. Certainly, if Mr. Henderson had any Learning in him, he would be
ashamed of this stuff. Ross sent to me for the Explanation of some things,
which perhaps were my Additions or Alterations in that Book, and used the
Prelate of London for his means, and the Press staid, and I know not what? As
if any of this could make me Author of that Book: Which yet if I were, I would
neither deny, nor be ashamed of. Howsoever, he should do well to let Canterbury
alone, and answer the Learned Divines of Aberdeen; who have laid him and all
that Faction, open enough to the Christian World, to make the Memory of them,
and their Cause, stink to all Posterity.

5. But (say they) the Book it self, as it stands interlined, margined, and
patched up, is much more than all that is expressed in his Letters; and the
Changes and Supplements themselves, taken from the Mass Book, and other Romish
Rituals, by which he makes it to vary from the Book of England, are more
pregnant Testimonies of his Popish Spirit, and Wicked Intentions, which he
would have put in Execution upon us, than can be denied.

In the next place, the Book it self is brought in Evidence; and that is a
greater Evidence, than all that is expressed in my Letters. A greater Evidence!
But of what? Not that the Book was of my sole making, which they have hitherto
gone about to prove, and which the former part of this Argument would seem to
make good. But now, these Interlinings, and Margins, and Changes, and
Supplements, are pregnant proofs of my Popish Spirit, and Wicked Intentions.
First, I Praise God for it, I have no Popish Spirit: And, God bless me, as (to
the utmost of my knowledge) I had no Wicked Intentions in any thing, which I
did in, or about, that Service Book.

For the other stuff, which fills up this Argument, That these Changes and
Supplements are taken from the Mass Book, and other Romish Rituals; and that by
these the Book is made to vary from the Book of England; I cannot hold it worth
an Answer, till I see some particulars named. For in this I could retort many
things, could I think it fit to put but half so much Gall into my Ink, as has
made theirs black. In the mean time, I would have them remember, that we live
in a Church Reformed; not in one made New. Now all Reformation, that is good
and orderly, takes away nothing from the old, but that which is Faulty and
Erroneous. If any thing be good, it leaves that standing. So that if these
Changes from the Book of England be good, it is no matter whence they be taken.
For every line in the Mass Book, or other Popish Rituals, are not all Evil and
Corruptions. There are many good Prayers in them; nor is any thing Evil in
them, only because it is there. Nay, the less alteration is made in the Public
Ancient Service of the Church, the better it is; provided that nothing
Superstitious or Evil in it self, be admitted or retained. And this is enough,
till I see particulars charged: Yet with this; That these Variations were
taken, either from the first Book of Edw. 6. which was not Popery; or from some
Ancient Liturgies, which savored not of Popery.

The Large Declaration professes, that all Rushw. and Pryn.
the variation of our Book from the Book of England, that ever the King
understood, was in such things as the Scottish Humors would better comply
with, than with that which stood in the English Service.

That which the Large Declaration professes, I leave the Author of it to make
good. Yet whosoever was the Author, thus much I can say, and truly; That the
Scottish Bishops (some of them) did often say to me, that the People would be
better satisfied by much, to have a Liturgy composed by their own Bishops, (as
this was) than to have the Service Book of England put upon them. But to what
end is this added out of the Large Declaration? Why, it is to cast more hatred
upon me. For thus they infer: These Popish Innovations therefore have been
surreptitiously inserted by him, without the King's knowledge, and against his
Purpose.



This is as false, as it is bold: For let them prove, that any one particular,
be it the least, was so added by me to that Book; and let no Justice spare me.
In the mean time, here I take it upon my Salvation, that I inserted nothing
without his Majesty's Knowledge, nor any thing against his Purpose.

Our Scottish Prelates do Petition, that somewhat may be abated of the English
Ceremonies; as the Cross Here Rushworth's Copy adds,
in Baptism, the Ring in Marriage, and some other Things. But Canterbury will
not only have those kept, but a great many more, and worse, super added; which
was nothing else but the adding of Fuel unto the Fire. To express and discover
all, would require a whole Book. We shall only touch some few in the matter of
the Communion. So also Pryn.


I cannot remember, that ever any such Petition was showed to me. This I
remember well; that when a deliberation was held, whether it were better to
keep close to the English Liturgy, or venture upon some additions; some of your
Scottish Bishops were very earnest to have some Alterations, and some
Additions. And they gave this for their Reason: Because, if they did not then
make that Book as perfect as they could, they should never be able to get it
perfected after. Canterbury therefore was not the Man, that added this Fuel to
your Fire. And whereas, to heap on farther hatred, it is said, That I did not
only add more, but worse Ceremonies; I can say nothing to that: Because I know
no one Ceremony in the one Book, or the other, that is Bad. And when they give
an Instance in the Ceremonies, which they say are worse in their Book than in
ours; I shall give such answer as is fitting, and such as I doubt not shall be
sufficient. And now it seems, they will come to particulars: For they say -- 1.
This Book inverteth the Order of the Communion, in the Book of England, as may
be seen by the numbers setting down the Order of this new Communion, 1. 5. 2.
6. 7. 3. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11. Of the diverse secret Reasons of this Change, we
mention one only; injoyning the Spiritual Praise, Rushw. and Pryn.
Sacrifice, and Thanksgiving, which is in the Book of England pertinently after
the Communion, with the Prayer of Consecration, before the Communion; and that
under the Name of Memorial, or Oblation; for no other end, but that the
Memorial and Sacrifice of Praise mentioned in it, may be understood according
to the Popish meaning: (Bellarm. de Missa. l. 2. c. 21.) not of the Spiritual
Sacrifice, but of the Oblation of the Body of the Lord.



This Book, (they say) Inverts the Order of the Communion in the Book of
England. Well, and what then? To Invert the Order of some Prayers, in the
Communion, or any other part of the Service; does neither pervert the Prayers,
nor corrupt the Worship of God. For I hope, they are not yet grown to be such
superstitious Cabbalists, as to think that Numbers work any thing. For so, the
Prayers be all good (as it is most manifest these are) it cannot make them ill
to be read in 5. 7. or 3. place, or the like; unless it be in such Prayers
only, where the Order is essential to the Service then in hand. As for Example,
to read the Absolution first, and the Confession after; and in the Communion to
give the Sacrament to the People first, and read the Prayer of Consecration
after. In these Cases to Invert the Order, is to Pervert the Service; but in
all other ordinary Prayers, which have not such a necessary dependence upon
Order, first, second, or third work no great effect. And though I shall not
find fault with the Order of the Prayers, as they stand in the Communion-Book
of England, (for, God be thanked, it is well;) yet, if a Comparison must be
made, I do think, the Order of the Prayers, as now they stand in the Scottish
Liturgy, to be the better, and more agreeable to use in the Primitive Church;
and I believe, they which are Learned, will acknowledge it. And therefore these
Men do bewray a great deal of Will and Weakness, to call this a New-Communion;
only because all the Prayers stand not in the same Order.

But they say; there are diverse secret Reasons of this Change, in the Order.
Surely there was Reason for it, else why a Change? But that there was any
hidden secret Reason for it (more than that the Scottish Prelates thought fit
that Book should differ in some things from ours in England; and yet that no
differences could be more safe, than those which were in the Order of the
Prayers; especially since both they, and we, were of Opinion, that of the two
this Order came nearest to the Primitive Church) truly I neither know, nor
believe.

As for the only Reason given of this Change, it is in my Judgment a strange
one. It Is, forsooth, for no other end (they say) but that the Memorial and
Sacrifice of Praise mentioned in it may be understood according to the Popish
meaning, not of the Spiritual Sacrifice, but of the Oblation of the Body of the
Lord. Now Ignorance, and Jealousy, whither will you? For the Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving, no Man doubts, but that is to be Offered up: Nor does
any Man of Learning question it, that I know, but that according to our
Savior's own Command, we are to do, whatsoever is done in this Office, as a
Memorial of his Body and Blood Offered up and shed for us. S. Luc. 22. Now it is
one thing to Offer up his Body, S. Lu. 22. 19.
and another to Offer up the Memorial of his Body, with our Praise, and Thanks,
for that infinite Blessing: So that were that Change of Order made for this
end, (which is more than I know) I do not yet see, how any Popish Meaning, so
much feared, can be fastened upon it. And the Words in that Prayer are plain,
(as they are also in the Book of England) That we offer and present unto God,
our Selves, our Souls and Bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
Sacrifice unto him. What is there here, that can be drawn to a Popish Meaning,
unless it be with the cords of these Men's Vanity? Yet thus much we have gained
from them; That this Prayer comes in the Book of England pertinently after the
Communion. Any approbation is well of that Antichristian Service Book (as it is
often called:) And I verily believe, we should not have gained this Testimony
of them for it, but only that they are content to approve that, to make the
greater hatred against their own. Next they tell us -- 2. It seems to be no
great matter, that without warrant of the Book of England, the Presbyter going
from the North end of the Table, shall stand during the time of Consecration,
at such a part of the Table, where he may with the more ease and decency use
both his Hands; Yet being tried, it imports much: As that he must stand with
his hinder parts to the People; representing (says Durand) that which the Lord
said to Moses, Thou shall see my hinder parts.



Truly, this Charge is, as it seems, no great matter. And yet here again they
are offended, that this is done without warrant of the Book of England. How
comes this Book of England to be so much in their esteem, that nothing must be
done without warrant from it? Why, it is not that they approve that Book, for
they will none of that neither: But it is only, to make their Complaint more
acceptable in England. Yet they say, this very remove of the Presbyter during
the time of Consecration, upon trial imports much. The Rubric professes, that
nothing is meant by it, but that he may use both his Hands with more ease and
decency about that work. And I protest in the presence of Almighty God, I know
of no other Intention herein, than this. But these Men can tell more. They are
sure it is, that he may turn his hinder parts to the People, representing that
which the Lord said to Moses. And what Warrant have they for this? Why Durand
says so. Now truly the more Fool he. And they shall do well to ask their own
Bishops, what acquaintance they have with Durand? For as for my self, I was so
poorly satisfied with the first Leaf I Read in him, that I never meddled with
him since. Nor indeed, do I spend any time in such Authors as he is. So I have
nothing to do with this. Yea, but they find fault with the Reason given in the
Rubric. For they say -- He must have the use of both his Hands, not for any
thing he has to do about the Bread and the Wine; (for that Must, Rushw.
may be done at the North end of the Table, and be better seen of the People.)
But (as we are taught by the Rationalists) That he may be stretching Forth,
Rushw. and Pryn.
out his Arms, represent the extension of Christ on the Cross.



But the Reason given in the Rubric does not satisfy them: For they say
plainly, They have no use of both their Hands, for any thing that is to be done
about the Bread and the Wine. Surely these Men Consecrate these Elements in a
very loose and mean way, if they can say truly, that they have not use of both
their Hands in this work. Or, that whatsoever is done, may as well be done at
the North end of the Table; which in most places is too narrow, and wants room,
to lay the Service Book open before him that Officiates, and to place the Bread
and Wine within his reach. So that in that place it is hard for the Presbyter to
avoid the unseemly disordering of something, or other, that is before him,
perhaps the very Elements themselves; which may give Scandal to them which come
to Communicate: Especially, since in the Margin of the Prayer of Consecration,
he is ordered to lay his Hand upon the Bread and the Wine, which he
Consecrates. As for his being better seen of the People; that varies according
to the Nature of the Place, and the Position of the Table: So that in some
Places he may be better seen, and in some not. Though I am not of Opinion, that
it is any End of the Administration of the Sacrament to have the Priest better
seen of the People. Thus much against the Viz. Their Argument Taken from the
Reason of the Posture of the Priest, given in the Rubric, H. W.
Reason given in the Rubric.

Next, they produce other Reasons of this Position of his at the Holy-Table.
And first, they say, it is not for the more convenient use of both his Hands, in
the Celebration of that Work: But it is (say they) that he may, by stretching
out his Arms, represent the Extension of Christ on the Cross. Why, but I say
not this; nor is there any such thing Ordered or Required in the Book; nor does
any English Divine practice this that I know. Why then is this Charged upon me?
Nor is it sufficient for them to say, they are taught thus by the Rationalists;
unless I did affirm, or practice, as those Rationalists do. Here Is a great deal
of Charity wanting. But they bring another Reason, as good as this is: And that
is -- That he may the more conveniently lift up the Bread and Wine Above Rushw.
and (...).
over his Head to be seen, and adored, of the People; who, in the Rubric of
General Confession a little before, are directed to kneel humbly on their
Knees, that the Priests Elevation, so magnified in the Mass, and the Peoples
Adoration may go together.



Good God! whither tends this Malice? There is not a Word in the Book of this
neither: Not of lifting the Bread and Wine over his Head; much less is there
any thing, to have it Adored by the People. And as there is nothing in the
Book, so nothing has ever been said, or done, by me, that tends this way. Now,
if none of this has been said, or done by me; what means this? Sure they mean
to charge the Rationalists with this, and not me; unless I did by Word, or
Deed, approve them herein. Yea, but a little before, in the Rubric of General
Confession, the People are directed to kneel humbly on their Knees. That Is
true: And what Posture so fit, as that which is Humble, when Men are making
Confession of their Sins to God? But that which follows, namely, that the
Priest's Elevation, and the Peoples Adoration, may go together, is utterly
false. There is not one Word of it in the Rubric, nor ever was there one
Thought of it in my self, or (as I verily believe) in any of the Compilers of
that Book. And it is well known, that through the whole Church of England, the
Form is to receive that Blessed Sacrament Kneeling; and yet without any
Adoration at all of the Bread and Wine. So this Charge, which way soever it
look, cannot hit me. However, God forgive this Malice. For are the People
directed to Kneel, to the end the Priest's Elevation, and the Peoples
Adoration, may go together? why then so let them go: For the Priest with us
makes no Elevation; nor therefore the People any Adoration, of those Elements.
But there is yet more behind: For they say -- That in this Posture, speaking
with a low Voice, and muttering (for at some times he is Commanded to speak
with a loud voice, and distinctly) he be not heard by the People; which is no
less a mocking of God and his People, than if the Words were spoken in an
unknown Language.



This again, by my Accusers good leave, is utterly false. For there is no
Rubric in the whole Book, that commands the Priest to use a muttering or low
Voice. This therefore is drawn in only by consequence, and that an ill one. As
if, because he is sometimes commanded to speak aloud, he were thereby enjoined,
in other parts of the Service, to speak with a low Voice; which is not so. In
the Book of England, in some places the Minister is directed before he begins
the Prayer, to say, Let us Pray; which is but to keep their Attention waking;
and to put them in mind what they are doing, or ought to do. And shall any Man
infer upon this, Let us Pray; therefore they were not at Prayer before? So
here, if in some principal part of the Service, there be a Caveat given, that
the Presbyter shall speak with a loud Voice, and Distinctly: (I say [ If] for I
do not yet find the Rubric where it is) It implies, That he be very careful in
that place, that his Voice be Audible and Distinct; but it imports not, that
therefore in other parts of the Service, it may be low, or confused, or
unheard. And yet, if such a Consequence were to be drawn; it is no new thing in
the Church of Christ, that the Minister did Pray sometimes in the Public
Assembly, in a very low Voice, if at all Audible. For it was ordered in the
(...). (...). Can. 18.
Council of Laodicea, That among the Prayers which were made by the Faithful,
after the Hearers and the Penitents were gone out, that the first should be in
Silence: Perhaps for the Presbyter to commend himself, and his Office which he
was then to execute, privately to God. But howsoever, in the Public Service,
that all should be Public, I rather approve.

As for that which follows; That to utter the Common Service of the Church in a
low voice, not heard by the People, is no less a mocking of God, and his
People, than if the Words were spoken in an Unknown Tongue: This were well
Charged, if any Man did command that the Public Service should be Read in so
low a voice, that the People might not hear it. But since no Man, that I know,
approves it, and since there is nothing in the Book that requires it; I know
not to what end it is urged here. And yet this by their leave too; were Prayers
Read in so low a voice, it were a mocking of the People I confess, to call them
to Church, and not let them hear. But how either Prayer in a low voice, or a
Tongue unknown to the People, should be a mocking of God, I cannot conceive;
unless these Men think (as Elias put it upon the Prophets of Baal) That their
God is talking, or journeying, or perhaps sleeping, and must be awaked before
he can hear; or, that any Tongue unknown to the People, is unknown to God also.
But this I presume they will not dare to say, if it be but for that of St.
Paul; He that speaks in the Church in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto Men,
for they understand him not; yet he speaks to God, and doubtless does not mock
him; for he edifies himself; and in the Spirit speaks Mysteries: neither of
which can stand with the mocking of God. Now say they -- As there is no word of
all this in the English Service; so does the Book in King Edward's Time, give
to every Presbyter his liberty of Gesture: which yet gave such offense to Bucer
(the Censurer of the Book, and even in Cassander his own Judgment, a Man of
great Moderation in Matters of this kind) that he calls them,
Nunquam-satis-execrandos Missae gestus; and would have them to be abhorred,
because they confirm to the Simple and Superstitious, ter-impiam and exitialem
Missae fiduciam.



As there is no word of all this in the English Service; so neither is there,
in the Book for Scotland, more, or other, or to other purpose, than I have
above expressed. For the Book under Edw. 6. An. 1549. Citantur (...) Bucero in
Script. Anglican. p. 455.
at the end of it, there are some Rules concerning Ceremonies; and it does give
liberty of Gesture to every Presbyter. But it is only of some Gestures, such as
are there named, and Similes, not of all. But if any will extend it unto all,
then I humbly desire, it may be Piously and Prudently considered; whether this
confusion, which will follow upon every Presbyters Liberty and Choice, be not
like to prove worse, than any Rule that is given in either Book for Decent
Uniformity.

And yet (say they) these Gestures, for all this Liberty given, gave such
offense to Bucer the Censurer of the Book, that he calls them
Nunquam-satis-execrandos Missae gestus, the never sufficiently execrable
Gestures of the Mass. First it is true; Bucer did make some Observations upon
that Common Prayer Book under Edw. 6. And he did it at the entreaty of
Archbishop Cranmer: And after he had made such Observations upon it, as he
thought fit, he writ thus to the Archbishop. Memor (...) quid (...), and (...)
Anglicanis cum primis debeam, (...) datum est mibi bac in re (...), id (...)
subscribere; (...) Paternitas (...), aliique (...) de his Judicabunt. (...)
Epist. ad (...). quae extat (...) Opera ejus Angl. p. 456.
Being mindful how much I owe to your most Reverend Father-Hood and the English
Churches, that which is given me to see and discern in this business, I will
subscribe: This done, your most Reveverend Father-hood, and the rest of your
Order (that is, the rest of the Bishops) may judge of what I write. Where we
see, both the care of Bucer to do what was required of him, and his Christian
Humility, to leave what he had done, to the judgment of the then Governors of
this Church. By which it appears, that he gave his Judgment upon that Book, not
as being the Censurer of it, (as these Men call him) but as delivering up his
Animadversions upon it, to that Authority which required it of him. Much less
was it such a Censure, as must bind all other Men to his Judgment, which he
very modestly submits to the Church. Howsoever, this has been the common Error
(as I humbly conceive) of the English Nation, to entertain and value Strangers
in all Professions of Learning beyond their desert, and to the contempt, or
passing by at least, of Men of equal worth of their own Nation; which I have
observed, ever since I was of ability to judge of these things.

But be this as it may. These Men have Notoriously corrupted Bucer. For they
say, he calls them Nunquam-satis-execrandos Missae gestus, referring the
Execration to the Ceremonial Gestures. But Bucer's words are,
Nunquam-satis-execrandae Missae gestus, referring the Execration to the Mass it
self, not to the Gestures in it, of bowing the Knee, or beating the Breast, or
the like, which in themselves, (and undoubtedly in Bucer's Judgment also) are
far enough from being In (...). (...). p. 465.
Execrable.

As for that which follows, (and which are Bucer's words indeed) That, These
Gestures, or any other which confirm to the simple, ter impiam and exitialem
Missae fiduciam (as he there calls it) the thrice impious and deadly Confidence
of the Mass, are to be abhorred, there is no doubt to be made of that: Unless,
(as Cassander infers well out of Luther and Bucer both,) they be such
Ceremonies, as Impeach not the free Justification In (...) de (...) Viri. p.
867.
of a Sinner by Faith in Christ, and that the People may be well instructed
concerning the true use of them. Now all this at the most, is but Bucer's
Speech against such Ceremonies (and in such time and place, must be understood
too) as are apt to confirm the simple People in their Opinion of the Mass. But
such Ceremonies are neither maintained by me, nor are any such Ordered or
Established in that Book. Therefore this Charge falls away quite from me, and
Bucer must make his own (...). (...).
Speeches good. For my own part, I am in this point of Ceremonies of the same
Mind with Cassander, (that Man of great Moderation in Matters of this kind, as
my Accusers here call him:) And he says plainly a little after, in the same
place, concerning Luther's and Bucer's Judgment in these things, Quanquam est,
quod in istis viris desiderem; though I approve them in many things, yet there
is somewhat which ^
I want in these Men. But the Charge goes on. -- 3. The Corporeal (...).
Corporal Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, is also to be found here.
For the Words of the Mass Book, serving to that purpose, are sharply censured
by Bucer in King Edward's Lyturgy, and are not to be found in the Book of
England, and yet are taken in here. Almighty God is in called, that of his
Almighty Goodness he may vouchsafe so to Bless and Sanctify with his Word and
his Spirit these gifts of Bread and Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and
Blood of Christ. The change here, is made a work of God's Omnipotency: The
words of the Mass, ut fiant nobis, are Translated in King Edward's Book, that
they may be unto us; which ^
is again turned into Latin by Alesius, ut fiant nobis.



They say, the Corporal Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, is to be
found in this Service Book. But they must pardon me; I know it is not there. I
cannot be my self of a contrary Judgment, and yet suffer that to pass. But
let us see their proof. The words of the Mass Book, serving to that purpose,
which are sharply censured by Bucer, in King Edward's Liturgy, and are not to
be found in the Book of England, yet are taken into this Service Book. I know
no words tending to this purpose in King Edard's Liturgy, fit for Bucer to
censure sharply; and therefore not tending to that purpose: For did they tend
to that, they could not be censured too sharply. The words it seems are these.
In the Prayer of Consecration in the (...) for Scotland.
O Merciful Father, of thy Almighty Goodness, vouchsafe so to Bless and
Sanctify with thy Word and Holy Spirit, these thy Gifts and Creatures of Bread
and Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly
beloved Son. Well; if these be the words, how will they squeeze Corporal
Presence out of them? Why, first the Charge here, is made a work of God's
Omnipotency. Well, and a work of Omnipotency it is, what ever the Change be.
For less than Omnipotence cannot Change those Elements, either in Nature, or
Use, to so high a Service as they are put in that great Sacrament. And
therefore the Invocating of God's Almighty Goodness to effect this by them, is
no proof at all, of intending the Corporal Presence of Christ in this
Sacrament. It Is true, this passage is not in the Prayer of Consecration in the
Service Book of England; but I wish with all my Heart it were. For though the
Consecration of the Elements may be without it; yet is it much more solemn and
full by that Invocation.

Secondly, these words (they say) intend the Corporal Presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, because the Words in the Mass are The words in the Canon of the Mass
are. Ut nobis Corpus and Singuis fiant dilectissimi (...) tui Domini nostri
Jesu Christi.
ut fiant nobis, that they may be unto us, the Body and the Blood of Christ.
Now for the good of Christendom, I would with all my Heart, that these words,
ut fiant nobis; That these Elements might be, To us, worthy Receivers, the
blessed Body and Blood of our Savior; were the worst Error in the Mass. For
then I would hope, that this great Controversy, which to all Men that are out
of the Church, is the shame, and among all that are within the Church, is the
division of Christendom, might have some good Accommodation. For if it be only,
ut fiant nobis, that they may be to us, the Body and the Blood of Christ; it
implies clearly, that they are to us, but are not Transubstantiated in
themselves, into the Body and Blood of Christ, nor that there is any Corporal
Presence, in, or under the Elements. And then nothing can more cross the
Doctrine of the present Church of Rome, than their own Service. For as the
Elements after the Benediction, or Consecration, are, and may be called, the
Body and Blood of Christ, without any addition, in that real and true Sense in
which they are so called in Scripture: So, when they are said to become the
Body and the Blood of Christ, nobis, to us that Communicate as we ought; there
is by this addition, fiant nobis, an allay in the proper signification of the
Body and Blood: And the true Sense, so well signified and expressed, that the
words cannot well be understood otherwise, than to imply not the Corporal
Substance, but the Real, and yet the Spiritual use of them. And so the words,
ut fiant nobis, import quite contrary to that which they are brought to prove.
And I hope, that which follows, will have no better success.

On the other side, the Expressions of the Book of England, at the delivery of
the Elements; of feeding on Christ by Faith; and of eating and drinking in
remembrance that Christ died for thee, are utterly deleted.

Before, they went about to prove an intendment to establish the Doctrine of
the Corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, by some positive words: And
here they go about to prove the same by the omission of some other words of the
Book of England. For they say (and it is true) that those words are expressed in
the English Liturgy, at the delivery of the Elements, and are left out of the
Book prepared for Scotland. But it is altogether false, either that this
omission was intended to help to make good a Corporal Presence; or that a
Corporal Presence can by any good consequence be proved out of it. For the
first, of feeding on Christ by Faith, if that omission be thought to advantage
any thing toward a Corporal Presence; surely, neither the Scottish Bishops, nor
my self, were so simple to leave it out here, and keep these words in In the
Collect of Thanksgiving after the Receiving.
immediately after; that thou do vouchsafe to feed us, which have duly
received those Holy Mysteries, with the Spiritual food of the most precious
Body and Blood of thy Son. For the feeding on Christ by Faith, and the
Spiritual Food of the Body and Blood of Christ, are all one; and it is hard,
that the asserting of a Spiritual Food, should be made the proof a Corporal
Presence; or, that the omitting of it in one place, should be of greater force,
than the affirming it in another. The like is to be said of the second
omission, of eating and drinking in remembrance that Christ died for us. For
that remembrance of his Death and Passion, is expressed almost immediately In
the Prayer of Consecration.
before. And would not this have been omitted as well as the other; had there
been an intention to forget this remembrance, and to introduce a Corporal
Presence? Besides, St. Paul himself, in the 1 Cor. 11. adds this, in a Cor. 11.
24. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
remembrance of me: But in the 1. Cor. 10. The Cup of blessing, which we bless,
is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Which Interrogation there, is a
pressing Affirmation; and these words in remembrance of Christ, are omitted.
And what then will these my Learned Adversaries say, that St. Paul omitted this
to establish a Corporal Presence? I hope they will not.

But whatsoever this omission may be thought to work; it cannot reflect upon
me. For when I shall come to set down, (as I purpose God willing to do) the
brief Story, what hand I had in this Liturgy for Scotland; it shall then
appear, that I labored to have the English Liturgy sent them, without any
Omission or Addition at all, this or any other; that so the Public Divine
Service might, in all his Majesty's Dominions, have been one and the same. But
some of the Scottish Bishops prevailed herein against me; and some Alterations
they would have from the Book of England, and this was one; as I have to show
under the then Bishop of Dunblain's Hand, Dr. Wetherborne, whose Notes I have
yet by me, concerning the Alterations in that Service Book. And concerning this
particular, his words are these: The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was
given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul unto Everlasting Life: And so, The
Blood of, etc. whereunto every Receiver answered, Amen. There is no more in
King Edw. 6. his first Book. And if there be no more in ours, the Action will
be much the shorter. Besides, the words which are added since, take, eat in
remembrance, etc. may seem to relish somewhat of the Zuinglian Tenet, That the
Sacrament is a bare Sign taken in remembrance of Christ's Passion. So that for
my part, First, I see no hurt in the omission of those latter words, none at
all: And next, if there be any, it proceeded not from me. That which follows,
is a mere flourish in the general: For they say --

Many Evidences there be in this part of the Communion of the Bodily presence
of Christ, very agreeable to the Doctrine taught by his Secretaries, (...).
Sectaries; which this Paper cannot contain. They teach us, that Christ is
received in the Sacrament Corporaliter, both Objective, and Subjective. Corpus
Christi est objectum, quod recipitur; at Corpus nostrum est subjectum, quo
recipitur.

Many weak Collections and Inferences are made by these Men out of this part of
the Communion of the Bodily Presence of Christ; but not one Evidence is, or can
be showed. As for Sectaries, I have none, nor none can have in this Point. For
no Men can be Sectaries, or Followers of me in that, which I never held or
maintained. And it is well known, I have maintained the contrary, and Conference
with Fisher,. 34. puncto 4. p. 292. etc.
perhaps, as strongly, as any my Opposits, and upon Grounds more agreeable to
the Doctrine of the Primitive Church. Among these Sectaries, which they will
needs call mine; they say there are, which teach them, that Christ is received
in the Sacrament Corporaliter, both Objective, and Subjective. For this
Opinion, be it whose it will, I for my part do utterly condemn it, as grossly
Superstitious. And for the Person that affirms it, they should have done well
to name him, and the place where he delivers this Opinion. Had this been done,
it had been fair: And I would then have clearly acknowledged what Relation (if
any) the Person had to me; and more fully have spoken to the Opinion it self,
when I might have seen the full scope together, of all that he delivered. But I
doubt, there is some ill Cause, or other, why this Author is not named by them.
Yet the Charge goes on -- 4. The Book of England, abolishes all that may import
the Oblation of an unbloody Sacrifice: but here we have, besides the any,
(...). and Pryn.
preparatory Oblation of the Elements, which is neither to be found in the Book
of England now, nor in King Edward's Book of old; The Oblation of the Body, and
the Blood of Christ, which Bellarmin calls, Sacrificium Laudis, quia Deus per
illud magnopere laudatur. This also agrees [ well, (...). and Pryn.
well] with their late Doctrine.



First, I think no Man doubts, but that there is, and ought to be offered up to
God at the Consecration and Reception of this Sacrament, Sacrificium Laudis,
the Sacrifice of Praise: And that this ought to be expressed in the Liturgy,
for the Instruction of the People. And these Words, We entirely desire thy
Fatherly Goodness, Mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of Praise, and
Thanksgiving, etc. are both in the Book of England, and in that which was
prepared for Scotland. And if Bellarmin do call the Oblation of the Body, and
the Blood of Christ a Sacrifice of Praise, sure he does well in it; (for so it
is) if Bellarmin mean no more, by the Oblation of the Body, and the Blood of
Christ, than a Commemoration, and a Representation of that great Sacrifice
offered up by Christ himself: As Bishop Jewel very Learnedly, and fully
acknowledges. Respons. ad Harding, Art. 17. divis. 14.
But if Bellarmin go farther than this; and by the Oblation of the Body and the
Blood of Christ, Differentia (...) in modo; illic enim Christus (...) occisus
est: Hic (...) sit (...). Hugo Grot. in Consult. Cassandri. ad Art. 10. p. 25.
mean, that the Priest Offers up that, which Christ himself did, and not a
Commemoration of it only; he is Erroneous in that, and can never make it good.
But what Bellarmin's Opinion and Meaning is, when he calls it Sacrificium
Laudis, a Sacrifice of Praise, I cannot tell; till they be pleased to cite the
place, that I may see, and consider of it. In the mean time there is as little
said in the Liturgy for Scotland, which may import an Oblation of an unbloody
Sacrifice, as is in the Book of England. As for the In the Prayer of
Consecration in the Liturgy for Scotland.
Oblation of the Elements; that is fit, and proper: And I am sorry for my part,
that it is not in the Book of England. But they say farther.

We are ready (when it shall be judged convenient, and we shall be desired) to
discover much more of Matters in this kind, as Grounds laid for Missa Sicca, or
the Half Mass; for Private Mass without the People; of Communicating in one
kind; of the Consumption by the Priest, and Consummation of the Sacrifice; of
receiving the Sacrament in the Mouth, and not in the Hand, etc.

Here Is a Conclusion of this Charge against me concerning the Service Book: And
these charitable Men, which have sought no less than my Life, now say, they are
ready, when it shall be convenient, and that they shall be desired, to deliver
much more in this kind. Sure the time can never be more convenient for them
than now, when any thing they will say shall be believed, even against apparent
Evidence, or most full Proof to the contrary. And I do desire them, that
notwithstanding this is Hora vestra, and Potestas Tenebrarum, their most
convenient time; that they will discover any thing which they have more to say.
But the Truth is; here is nothing in this threatened Heap, but Cunning and
Malice. For they would seem to reckon up many things; but diverse of them are
little different, as Missa Sicca, and Communicating in one kind. And neither
these, nor any of the rest, offered with any Proof; nor indeed are they able to
prove, that any Grounds are laid for any one of them, in that Service Book. And
for my own part, I have expressed my self as fully against these particulars,
as any Protestant that has Written. Yet they say -- Our Supplications were
many against these Books: But Canterbury procured them to be Answered with
when, (...). and Pryn;
Horrible Proclamations. We were constrained to use the Remedy of Protestation:
But for our Protestations, and other Lawful Means, which were used for our
Deliverance, Canterbury procured us to be declared Rebels and Traitors to all
the Parish-Kirks of England terrible Rush. and Pryn.
where we were seeking to possess our Religion in Peace, against those Devices,
and Novations; Canterbury kindled, Rushw. and Pryn.
kindles War against us. In all these it is known, that he was, although not
these ole, yet the principal, Agent and Adviser.



Their Supplications against these Books of the Canons and the Service, were
many indeed: But how well qualified, (the matter duly considered) I leave to
them, who shall take the pains to look into them. And howsoever, most untrue it
is, that I caused them to be answered with Horrible Proclamations. Nor were
they constrained by any thing that I know, but their own wilfulness, to use the
Churlish Remedy of Protestation against their Sovereigns Lawful Power in Lawful
Things. They add, that for their Protestations, and other Lawful Means, which
they used for their Deliverance, Canterbury procured them to be proclaimed
Rebels. Now truly I know no other Lawful means, that they used, but taking up
of Arms professedly against the King: And I for my part do not conceive, that
Lawful for Subjects to do, in any Cause, of Religion, or otherwise; and this I
am sure, was the Ancient Christian Doctrine

And yet when they had taken up Arms, I did not procure them to be declarered
Rebels, and Traitors. The Proclamation for that went out by Common Advise of
the Lords of the Council; and their carriage at that time deserved it
plentifully; let them paint over that Action how they can. And let the World,
and future Ages judge; whether to take Arms against their Sovereign were a
Christian, and an orderly, seeking to possess their Religion in Peace;
especially being against no worse Devices, or no greater Novations, than they
have quarelled at, in these Books. Yet for all this, I shall after make it
appear, that I kindled no War against them, but kept it off from them, as much,
and as long as I could. And as themselves confess, I was not the Sole; so
neither they, nor any man else, shall ever be able to prove, I was the
Principal, Agent or Adviser of that War. Yea but -- When by the Pacification at
Barwick, both Kingdoms looked for Peace and Quietness; he spared not openly in
the hearing of many, often before the King, and privately at the Council Table,
and the Privy Junto, to speak of us, as of Rebels and Traitors; and to speak
against the Pacification, as dishonorable, and meet to be broke. Neither did
his malignancy and bitterness ever suffer him to rest; till a new War was
entered upon, and all things prepared for our destruction.



This Article about the breach of the Pacification, the Parliament of England
have thought fit to make a part of their Charge against me: And therefore I
shall put off the main of my Answer, till I come to those Articles. In the mean
time thus much in brief I shall say to some circumstantial things in this
Charge. And first, I do not think, that any thing can be said to be Privately
spoken at the Council Table, that is openly delivered there, in the hearing of
his Majesty and all the Lords present: And so was all which I spoke there.
Secondly, they say, I did openly, and often speak of them (the Scots) as of
Rebels and Traitors. That indeed is true; I did so: And I spoke as I then
thought, and as I think still. For it was as desperate a plotted Treason, as
ever was in any Nation. And if they did not think so themselves, what needed
their Act of Oblivion in Scotland? or the like in England, to secure their
Abetters here? Thirdly, For the Pacification at Barwick, whatever I said
touching the Dishonor of it (as shall after appear) yet no Man can truly
Charge me, that I said, it was meet to be broken. Fourthly, I had no Malignity
answerable to their bitterness against the Church of England; nor did the
entering upon a new War proceed from my Counsels; nor did I give farther way to
it, than all the Lords of the Junto did. Lastly, it is manifest here, how truly
the King was dealt with on all Hands. For here ye see, they take on them to
know, not only what was done at the Council Table, but what was said also at
the private Junto: When in all that time his Majesty could get no information
of any thing, that proceeded in Scotland. But they proceed yet farther against
me.

By him was it, that our Covenant, approven by National Assemblies, Subscribed
by his Majesty's Commissioner, and by the Lords of his Majesty's Council, and
by them commanded to be Subscribed by all the Subjects of the Kingdom, as a
Testimony of our Duty to God and the King: By him was it still called, Ungodly,
Damnable, Treasonable: By him were Oaths invented, and pressed upon diverse of
our poor Countrymen, upon the pain of Imprisonment, and many [ Rushw.
other] Miseries, which were unwarranted by Law, and contrary to their National
Oath.

This their Covenant indeed, as it was made at first, without at least, if not
against, the King, I did utterly dislike. And if I did say, it was Ungodly,
Damnable, and Treasonable; I said no more than it deserved. Nor was it any
thing the better, but much the worse, if (as it was so made at first) it were
approved by National Assemblies: For that was but the greater sign, that the
Rebellious Faction grew stronger. But I never What is meant by (...) the King
into the Covenant, and his Commissioner Subscribing it, see the King's Large
Declaration. p. 134. etc. W. S. A C.
found fault with their Covenant, after they were pleased to take in the King,
and by his Authority, signified by the Subscription of his Commissioner, to do
what was fit to be done. Nor was there any Oath invented or pressed by me upon
their Countrymen, unwarrantable by Law; for I neither invented nor pressed any:
But whatsoever was done in this kind, was done by Public Authority at the
Council Table. And if any Oath, tendered to them there, were contrary to their
National Oath; I doubt it will easily be found, that their National Oath (if
such it be) was contrary to their due and Natural Allegiance. But what is next?
Why, this: When our Commissioners did appear to render the Reasons of our
demands; he spared not, in the presence of the King and the Committee, to rail
against our National Assembly, as not daring to appear before the World and
Kirks abroad; where himself and his Actions were able to endure trial: And
against our just and necessary Defense, as the most malicious and treasonable
Contempt of Monarchical Government, that any bygone Age had heard of. His hand
also was at the Warrant of Restraint and Imprisonment of our Commissioners,
sent from the Parliament, warranted by the King, and seeking the Peace of the
Kingdom.



There are diverse things in this part of the Charge. And the first is, that I
railed at their National Assembly, in the presence of the King and the
Committee. But that under favor is not so. Nor is it my fashion to rail at any
body, much less in such a Presence. I was then openly taxed, and by Name, by
the L. Lowdon, one of the Commissioners; and that which I said in answer to
him, was in my own defense: And it was to this effect. That whatsoever their
Assembly had concluded, did not much move me. For I did assure my self, nothing
they could say or do, could sink my Credit in Christendom; going upon grounds,
which would every where abide trial: And I somewhat doubted, whether the Acts
of their Assembly would do so; since even at home, not the Bishops only, but
the Learned Divines of Aberdeen, opposed diverse of them. This was not railing
against their Assembly. And if it shall be thought too much to be spoken by
(though for) my self; I humbly desire the Christian Reader to remember, That
even S. Paul 2 Cor 12. 11.
was forced to commend himself, when false Brethren accused him, 2 Cor. 12.

Next, they say, I spoke against their just and necessary defense. Truly not I:
That which I spoke, was against their defense, as being neither Just nor
Necessary. And if I then said (speaking of things, as they stood then) that
they were Treasonable Contempts of Monarchical Government; then, being such,
their defense of them could neither be Just, nor Necessary. And truly, as they
stood then I held them very desperate, against the Honor and just Power of the
King. I say, as they stood then. For since his Majesty has referred them to
Honorable Commissioners of both Nations, and out of his Clemency and Goodness,
has admitted all, or most of them, (which I believe few Kings would have
done;) I have spoken nothing of them, but in Prayer, that God will graciously
be pleased to turn all these things, to the Good and Peace of both Kingdoms;
which must be little less than a Miracle, if he do.

As for my Hand, that it was at the Warrant of Restraint of the Commissioners,
sent from the Parliament, etc. This also is but a mere clamor, to bring me
into further hatred, which has been their aim all along. For why else, is my
Hand picked out alone; whereas, the Hands of all (for ought I know) that were
then present at the Committee, were subscribed to that Warrant? And yet it
seems, no Hand has troubled them but mine. And for these Commissioners,
seeking the Peace of the Kingdom, I will not offer to enter upon their
Thoughts, what they sought; but leave it to future times, that will discover
the success of things, and by it open the aim of the Agents, how they sought
the Peace of these Kingdoms. But yet they go on -- For when we had (say they)
by our Declarations, Remonstrances, and Representations, manifested the Truth
of our Intentions, and Lawfulness of our Actions to all the good Subjects of
the Kingdom of England; when the late Parliament could, (...). and Pryn.
would not be moved to assist, or enter into a War against us, maintaining our
Religion and our Liberties; Canterbury did not only advise the breaking up of
that High and Honorable Court, to the great grief and hazard of the Kingdom;
but (which is without Example) did sit still in the Convocation, and make
Canons and Constitutions, against us, and our Just and Necessary defense.



They did indeed offer by many Pamphlets, Printed and sent into England, to
manifest the Truth of their Intentions; which was to join close with their
Party here, and come and gain some good Booty in England: And this end they
have obtained. But the lawfulness of their Actions, they neither have, nor can
make good, to any Impartial and Judicious Reader of them. And whereas they say,
they have made the lawfulness of them manifest, to all the good Subjects of the
Kingdom of England; you must know, that they are only such English as join with
them in their Plot, or at least in their (...).
in Affection to Religion: And it is easy, to make any thing that fits their
Humor, and comes from their Associats, manifest enough. But God forbid, these
should be all the good Subjects of England, which (it may too justly be feared)
are none of them. And yet it cannot be denied, but that England has, at this
day, much too many of these good Subjects.

They add further; that the late Parliament would not assist, nor enter into a
War against them. I believe that is true; and I leave the Parliament to give
their own Reasons, why they would not. But I am sure, that which follows is
most untrue, That I gave Advice for the breaking of it up; as appears, by that
which I have formerly set down, and will not repeat. And I shall ever wish from
my Heart, that the Kingdom may never be hazarded more than it has been by my
Counsels; and then, by God's Blessing, it shall be a happier Kingdom, than the
youngest now alive are like to see it, if things go on in the Track they now
are.

Next they say; that without all Example, I sat still in Convocation, though
the Parliament were risen: Without Example: What is that to them, if it were
so? But the Archbishops of Canterbury have sat in Convocation, and made
Canons too, when no Parliament has been sitting; as is most manifest by the
Records of that See. Yea, but there is no Example of it since the Reformation.
Be it so: Nor is it, for all that, forbidden in the Statute of the submission
of the Clergy, 25 H. 8. so they sit by the King's Writ. And yet here I was so
careful, as that I caused the great Lawyers of the Kingdom to be consulted
abaut it, and followed their Judgments, as is before expressed. And for the
Canons which were made, they were not against them. One branch indeed of the
first Canon, is against Subjects bearing Arms against their King, offensive, or
defensive, under any pretense whatsoever. But this, as it is the Ancient
Doctrine, which the Church of Christ has ever Taught in all times and places:
So is it not against them at all, unless they, against p. 40.
Christian Religion, and Natural All giance, bear Arms against their King. But
if they do, or have done so; the Canon, that was not made against them, hits
them full. And in this Case, let them pretend what they list, their Defense can
neither be Just nor Necessary. Yea, but they say farther, that I -- Ordained
under all highest pains, That hereafter the Clergy shall The place is corrected
from Pryn. and Rush.
Preach four times in the Year, such Doctrine, as is contrary not only to our
Proceedings, but to the Doctrine and Proceeding.
of other Reformed Kirks, to the Judgment of all sound Divines and Politics,
and tending to the utter Slavery and Ruin of all States and Kingdoms, and to
the dishonor of Kings and Monarchs.



This goes high indeed; if it were as full in proof, as it is loud in
expression. But here is not one show of Proof added, either from Reason or
Authority, Divine or Humane, more than their bare word; And therefore I must
answer it in the same Key. First then, it is true, that in the Preface of the
first Canon, every Minister is enjoined, under a Penalty, to Publish to his
People the Exposition of Regal Power contained in that Canon; and this once
every quarter of a Year. So then, if the Doctrine contained in that Canon be
true, (and it was approved for Truth, by the whole National Synod of England;)
then all this high Charge falls low enough. Besides, it will concern them to
consider well, what their Proceedings have been. For as for this Canon, it is
according to the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church: And they,
surely, were both Pious and Sound Divines that lived in it; and I, for my part,
shall hold no Man a Sound Divine, that runs contrary to it.

Now, that the Primitive Christians were of Opinion, that Subjects ought not to
take Arms against their Kings, Offensive or Defensive, upon any pretense
whatsoever (which are the words in our Can. 1. sub Carolo.
Canon, which they are so angry with) no, not for, or under, pretense of
Religion, see the Proofs in the Margin. Plures nimirum, etc. vestra omnia
(...), urbes, insulas, castella, etc. (...) bello non idonei, etc. qui (...)
libenter (...), si non apud istam disciplinam occidi magis liceret, quam (...)?
Tert. Apologet. c. 37. And in another place, speaking of the Rebellions raised
by Cassius, Niger, and Albinus, he Notes, that none of their (...) were
Christians. Nunquam Albiniani, (...), vel Cassiani, (...) Christiani: And then
adds; (...) nullius est (...), nedum Imperatoris, etc. (...). ad Scapulam, c 2
2. Constantius the (...) Emperor (...) heavy upon the (...) Christians: And
when it was suggested unto him, that (...) and other (...), had secretly
stirred up (...) to invade the Empire; the Holy Father having fully confuted
the Calumny, concludes thus: (...). S. Athanas. (...). ad Constantium. Edit.
Gr. Lat. p 681. The like faithful Subjects the Christians showed themselves to
Julian the (...), when he used them very sowrly. And though they would not obey
him, when he commanded them to (...) Idols; yet in other things they did, and
Rebelled not, S. (...). in Psalm. 124. Nor did they forbear, either for want of
strength or opportunity: For when Julian dyed, the whole Army cried our, We are
all Christians. Soc. Lib. 3. Hist. (...). c. 22. And so St. Amb. to (...) the
Younger: Against your Forces, my Weapons are Prayers and Tears; (...) nec debeo
nec possum resistere, etc. Non ego me vallabo circumfusione Populorum, etc.
(which as the case stood then with him, he was able to do;) (...), Auguste, non
pugnamus. S. Amb. in Orat. (...). inter Epistolas 32, and 33. The like for
Defensive Arms: Inde est enim, quod nemo nostrum, quando apprehenditur,
reluctatur, nec adversus injustam violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and
copiosus noster sit Populus, ulciseitur. Cyprian. Epistola ad Demetrianum. Quum
tam (...), ne verb quidem reluctamur; sed Deo (...) ultionem. Lactant. L. 5.
Divin. Instit. c. 22. Neque tunc Civitas Christi quanquam haberet, (...)
magnorum agmina Populorum, adversus impios persecutores pro temporali salute
pugnavit. Sed (...) ut obtineret (...), non repugnavit. S. Aug. Lib. 22. de
Civitat. Dei. c. 6.
For in the most bitter Times of Persecution, for the very highest points of
Religion, whatever Miseries they endured, they still contained themselves
within the bounds of their Obedience: And that too, not out of any want of
Power, but will, to hurt. And if the Doctrine of other Reformed Churches be
contrary to this, they shall do well to show it; and then I Will give such
farther Answer as is fit.

But if the Canon be contrary to the Judgment of sound Politiques; I know not
which they call sound. For if they mean such as are of their Feather, I think
their Judgments are alike Sound; that is, neither. And if they mean Learned and
well experienced Politiques, I believe they will be able to show none of their
Opinion; unless they be such, as have been bred up either in their Faction, or
in the Opposite at Rome. For Nec singulis civibus, nec universis fas est summi,
Principls vitam, famam aut fortunas in discrimen (...), and si omnium scelerum,
etc. Poenis acerbissimis statuendum est in eos, qui (...) scriptis subditos in
Principes armare consueverunt. Bodin. L. 2. de Repub. c. 5. p. 210, and 212.
Bodin is clear, That Arms may not be taken up against the Prince, be he never
so Impious and Wicked: And instances in Saul, and Temporibus and Locis nimium
servientes, etc. Nec hoc locum habet in privatis tantum, sed nec Magistratibus
inferioribus hoc licet, etc. Grotius. L. 1. de Jure belli and pacis, c. 4. n. 6.
Nebuchadnezzar. And Grotius does not only say as much as Bodin, but Censures
them which hold the contrary, to be Men which serve Time and Place, more than
Truth. Nor is it any whit more Lawful for Inferior Magistrates, to make this
resistance against the King, than it is for private Men. Ibid. n. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14.
And this is universally true, where the Princes are free, and have not
undertaken the Government, under that or the like Condition; or being free,
seek with a Hostile Mind to ruin their People, which is scarce possible. And a
great Civilian Rebellem proprie and stricte dici, qui contra Imperatorem, vel
ejus officiales resistit, in pertinentibus ad statum Imperij. Asserit Lancelot
Conradus. L. 1. de praestantia and potestate, Imperat. n. 12.
tells us, that he is properly a Rebel, that resists the Emperor or his
Officers, in things belonging to the State of the Empire. Some Cases he lays
down indeed, in which the pleasure of a Prince may not be obeyed, but none, in
which his Greg. Turonens. L. 5. Hist. n. 18.
Power is to be resisted.

Nor is it any marvel, that Christians do disallow the taking up of Arms
against the Prince; since even the soundest Politics among the Heathen, have
declared so likewise. Aristoteles citat. apud Grotium. L. 1. de Jure (...), c.
4. n. 2.
Aristotle was of this Opinion, that if the Magistrate strike, yet he is not to
be struck again: And Seneca. Epist. 73.
Seneca; that Men are to bear the unjust, as well as the just Commands of
Princes. And Tacitus. L. 4. Histor.
Tacitus, that good Emperors are to be desired, but whatever they be, to be
born with. And Nec (...) nec licitum Regis (...) manus (...). Plutarch. In vit.
Agidis and Cleomen.
Plutarch, that it is not Lawful to Boni expetendi, qualescunque tolerandi.
offer any Violence to the Person of the King. And (...). L. 1. Epist Fam.
Epist. 9. (...), nec patriae vim offerri oportere.
Cicero, That no Force is to be offered either to a Man's Parent, or to his
Country: And therefore (in his Judgment) not to the Prince, who is Pater
Patriae, the Father of his Country. And the truth is, wherever the contrary
Opinion is maintained, the Prince can never be safe, nor the Government settled.
But so soon as a Faction can get a fit Head, and gather sufficient strength;
all is torn in pieces, and the Prince lost for no considerable Error, or
perhaps none at all. For a strong Party, once Heated, can as easily make
Faults, as find them, either in Church or Commonwealth: And make the King say,
as Zedekiah sometimes did to his potent Nobles, Behold Jeremiah is in your
Hands; for the King is not he, that can do any thing against you. Jerem. 38.
Jerem. 38. 5.


But whereas they say; it is a Doctrine, that tends to the utter Slavery and
ruin of all States and Kingdoms: That will appear most untrue by the very
Letter of the Canon it self; which gives way to no Tyranny, but expresses only
the true Power of a King given by God, and to be exercised according to God's
Law, and the several Laws of Kingdoms respectively. And, I hope, there will
ever be a real difference found in Christian Kingdoms, between the Doctrine
that tends to Slavery and Ruin, and that which forbids taking up of Arms
against their Sovereign; which is all that this Canon does. And in the mean
time, I pray God this, not Doctrine only, but Practice also, of taking up Arms
against the Lord's Anointed, under mere pretense of Religion, do not in a
shorter time, than is feared, bring all to Confusion, wherever it is
Practiced. For howsoever it bears a show of Liberty, yet this way of
maintaining it is not only dishonorable to Kings, but the ready way to make
them study ways of Force, and to use Power, whenever they get it, to abridge
the Liberties of such over-daring Subjects. And in all times it has sown the
Seeds of Civil Combustions, which have ended in Slavery and Ruin of
flourishing Kingdoms. And I pray God, these do not end so in this. But they go
on -- And as if this had not been sufficient, he Procured, Rushw. and Pryn.
procures six Subsidies to be lifted of the Clergy, under pain of Deprivation
to all who should refuse.



The giving of the King Subsidies is no new thing. The Clergy have bin ever
willing to the uttermost of their Power; But what I and my Brethren of the
Clergy did at this time therein, is p. 9.
before set down: And I hold it not fit to lengthen this Tract with the
needless Repetition of any thing.

And which is yet Worse, Rushw. and Pryn.
more, and above which Malice it self cannot ascend; by his means a Prayer is
framed, Printed, and sent through all the Parishes of England, to be said in
all Churches in time of Divine Service, next after the Prayer for the Queen and
Royal Progeny, against our Nation by Name, as Traiterous Subjects, having cast
off all Obedience to our Anointed Sovereign, and coming in a Rebellious manner
to Invade England; that shame may cover our Faces, as Enemies to God and the
King.

We are now come to the last part of their Charge; and that is the Prayer, which
was made and sent to be used in all Churches when the Scots came into England.
But this Prayer was made not by my means, or procurement, but by his Majesty's
special Command to me to see it done. And it has bin ever usual in England,
upon great and urgent occasions, to have one or more Prayers made by some
Bishop or Bishops, nearest hand, to fit the Present business. And this may
appear by diverse Forms and Prayers so made, and publicly used in all times
since the Reformation. And since this Prayer was made by his Majesty's own
Command; I am sorry they should say of it, that Malice it self cannot ascend
above it. Though I persuade my self they thought to hit me, not him in this
Speech.

Now, what I pray is that, above which Malice it self cannot ascend? Why, first
it is, That they were called in that Prayer, traiterous Subjects, which had
cast off all Obedience to their Anointed Sovereign. Why, but Truth spoke this,
not Malice? For Traiterous Subjects they were then, if ever a King had any: And
the Kings Proclamation called them so before that Prayer came forth. And what
Title soever it is fit to give them now, since his Majesty has bin graciously
pleased to treat with them, and pass by their Offense, that is another thing;
but as the case stood then, they had shaken off all Obedience, and were as they
were then called, Traiterous Subjects. And I had a special Charge from the
King, not to spare that Name.

Secondly, They except against this, that it is there said, that they came in a
Rebellious manner to Invade this Kingdom. And that is most true too; for
whereas they said, they came in a peaceable manner to deliver their Petitions
to the King, for the Liberty of their Religion and Laws: Is it a peaceable way
to come two or three and twenty Thousand Men strong, and Armed, to deliver a
Petition? Let the whole World judge, whether this were not a Rebellious
Invasion.

Thirdly, They say it is desired in the Prayer, that God would with shame cover
the Faces of his, and the King's Enemies. Out of doubt, this Petition proceeds
from Devotion, not from Malice. And if the Scots (when they Invaded England,
upon a Treacherous Plot, and Conjunction.
Conjuncture with the like Faction here, that so both might have their Ends
against the King, and the Church,) were not God's Enemies, and the Kings, the
Prayer meddles not with them: If they were (as for my part I must believe, if I
judge by their Actions) they deserve all that can be prayed against them, so
long as they continue in that Disobedience. And yet the Prayer was not (as it is
said) against their Nation by Name: No, God forbid; their Nation has I doubt
not very many devout Servants to God, and Loyal Subjects to their King. But it
was aginst that prevailing Faction among them, which in that great Rebellious
Action became Enemies both to God, and the King. Now follows the Conclusion.

Whosoever (...), Rushw. and Pryn.
will Impartially Examine what has proceeded from himself in these two Books of
Canons, and Common Prayer; what Doctrine has bin Published and Printed these
Years By (...), Rushw. and Pryn.
past in England, by his Disciples and Emissaries; What gross Popery in the
most material Points we have found, and are ready to show in the Posthume
Writings of the Prelates of Edinburgh and Dunblaine, his own Creatures, his
nearest Familiars, and most willing Instruments to advance his Counsels and
Projects; shall perceive, that his Intentions were deep and large against all
the Reformed Kirks, and Reformation of Religion, which in his Majesty's
Dominions was Panting, and had by this time rendered up the Ghost, if God had
not in a wonderful way of Mercy prevented It, (...).
us.

The Conclusion is like the rest; much said in it, and nothing proved. Where
first I desire no favor, but an Impartial Examination of a Discreet, Pious,
and Judicious Reader, of all things done by me in the one Book or the other.
Next, for the Doctrine which has been Printed these Years past; (though little
or none has been Published by any Disciple or Emissary of mine:) I persuade my
self, the Intelligent, and Impartial Reader will find it to be as sound and
Orthodox, as any that has been Printed in any so many Years since the
Reformation. And if they, whom I was necessarily to trust in that Business,
have slipped any thing; they are subject to answer the Laws in that behalf.
Thirdly, what gross Popery they have found in the Posthume Writings of the
Prelates of Edinburgh and Dunblaine, I know not. This I know; it is an Easy,
but a base thing, to abuse the Dead, who cannot answer for themselves: And they
which are so over-bold with the Living, may easily and justly enough be
suspected not to hold over-fair quarter with the Grave.

But whereas it is said, that these worthy Men (for such they were) were my
Creatures, my nearest Familiars, my willing Instruments, and the like: This I
do here avow for truth; I was a mere Stranger to Dr. Forbys, (...).
late Prelate of Edinburgh. The first time that ever I saw him, was when I
attended as a Chaplain in Ordinary upon King James of blessed Memory, in the
Year 1617. At which time I heard him Preach very learnedly before his Majesty.
After that time I never saw him, till I attended his Majesty, that now is, as
Dean of his Chapel, into Scotland, in the Year 1633. In the mean time I had
contracted no Friendship; no Letters had passed between us. Then he Preached
again very Learnedly, and his Majesty resolved to make him Bishop of Edinburgh;
which was done accordingly; and to my Remembrance, he lived not above a Year
after, or very little more. And this was all the near Familiarity that was
between him and me.

With the Bp. of Dunblaine, Dr. Wedderborne; I confess, I had more, and longer
Acquaintance; for he lived some Years in England, and was recommended unto me,
as a Man that had very good parts and Learning in him. He lived long with Mr.
Isaac Casaubon, who was not like to teach him any Popery, and who certainly
would not have retained him so long, or so near unto him, had he not found him
a deserver. After I came acquainted with him, I wished him very well for his
worth sake, and did what I could for him to enable him to live. But sure if my
Intentions were so deep, as they are after said to be, he could be no fit
Instrument for me; he being a mere Scholar, and a Book-Man, and as unfit for,
as unacquainted with, such Counsels and Projects, as these Men would make me
Author of. And if my Intentions were so deep; out of doubt I had Brains enough
to make a wiser Choice of Instruments to advance them. This for the Men.

But for the Matter, if any posthume Papers of theirs be other than they ought;
their Credit must answer for them to the World, as their Conscience has
already done to God. And for my own part, I protest I do not, nor ever did,
know of any such Papers which they had, or left behind; nor do I believe, they
left any behind them, but such as were worthy their Learning and Integrity.

But my Intentions (they say) were deep and large against all the Reformed
Kirks. Surely the deeper, the worse, if they were so ill. But as I cannot be so
vain, to assume to my self any such depth: So I humbly thank God for it, I am
free from all such wickedness. The worst thought I had of any Reformed Church
in Christendom, was to wish it like the Church of England; and so much better,
as it should please God to make it. And the deepest intention I had concerning
all or any of them, was how they might not only be wished, but made so: As for
the Reformation of Religion in his Majesty's Dominions, which (they say) was
panting, and had given up the Ghost, if God had not in a wonderful way of Mercy
prevented them. First, this is, under Favor, most untrue, and a base and most
undeserved Scandal put upon his Majesty's Government. Secondly, I shall take
leave to Prophesy, that unless after all this Tumbling the People can be (...),
that all stand for matters of Religion, both Doctrine, and Discipline (and that
rather with addition to the Churches Power, than detracting from it) as they
then did, when these Men say the Reformation was pantting, and giving up the
Ghost: I much doubt, that neither they, nor their Childrens Children after,
shall see such Happy Days again for all things, as these were, which they so
unthankfully to God and their King, murmured against, and as these Men yet
snarl at. And for the Spirit which prevented them in this Action, in such a
wonderful way of Mercy, if ever they awake out of this Lethargy (for better it
is not) they will then see whence he is, and whither he tends. They add to this
-- That if the Pope himself had been in his place, he could not have been more
Popish; nor could he more Zealously have Negotiated for Rome against the
Reformed Kirks, to reduce them to the Heresies in Doctrine, the Superstitions
(...). and (...).
Superstition, and Idolatry in Worship, and the Tyranny in Government, which
are in that See, and for which the Reformed Kirks did separate from it, and
came forth of Babel. From him certainly has issued all this Deluge, which
almost has overturned all.



What, not the Pope himself? now surely he could do little then. For (as I told
you in the very last Passage) I never intended more to the Reformed Churches,
than to wish them in Doctrine and Discipline, like the Church of England. And I
hope, that was neither to Negotiate for Rome, nor to reduce them to Heresy in
Doctrine, nor to Superstition and Idolatry in Worship, no, nor to Tyranny in
Government. All which are here most wrongfully imputed to me. And this
comparing of me with the Pope himself, I could bear with more ease, had I not
Written more against Popish Superstition, than any Presbyter in Scotland has
done. And for my part I would be contented to lay down my Life to Morrow, upon
Condition the Pope and Church of Rome would admit and confirm that
Service Book, which has been here so eagerly charged against me: For were that
done, it would give a greater blow to Popery; which is but the Corruption of
the Church of Rome, than any has yet been given: And that they know full well.
And whereas they say, that for these things the Reformed Churches did separate
from it, and came forth of Babel. That is true, that they did separate; and for
these things: But not till for the maintaining of the contrary to these things,
they were Excommunicated, and Thrust out. Then indeed they separated, but not
till they were forced by a double necessity; of Truth, from which they might
not depart; and of that Punishment, which would not suffer them to enter. And
yet the Reformed Churches, all and every of them, had need look well to
themselves: For if they came out of Babel to run down into Egypt, they will get
little by the Bargain. Now they end in Confidence.

We are therefore confident, that your Lordships (this they speak to the
English Commissioners, who were to deliver this their Charge against me into
the Lords House;) will by your means deal effectually [with the Parliament]
that this great Firebrand Desunt (...), in Rushw.
may be presently removed from his Majesty's Presence; and that he may be put
to Trial, and put to, Rush, and Pryn.
have his deserved Censure, according to the Laws of the Kingdom: Which shall
be good Service to God, Honor to the King and Parliament; Terror to the
Wicked, and Comfort to all good Men; and to us in special, who, by his means
principally, have been put to so many and grievous Afflictions; wherein we had
Perished, if God had not been with us.

December. 14. 1640. Ad. Blayer. Who was Register, or Secretary, to the Scotch
Commissioners.


They were, and they might well be confident upon their Lordships: For all, or
some chief of that Committee were in league with them: And some of them the
principal Men which brought the Scots in, to have their ends upon the King. And
they did deal effectually with the Parliament: For (as appears by the Date)
this Charge was delivered to the English Commissioners, December. 14. It was Read
in the upper House, December. 14. 1640.
and transmitted to the House of Commons; and such haste made of it there, that
they, though they had no Articles drawn, yet came up in haste, and accused me
to the Lords of High Treason, desiring my Commitment, and Promising the
bringing up of their Articles and Proof against me in convenient time. So upon
this Accusation only, I was, upon December. 18. committed to Mr. James Maxwell,
the Officer December. 18. 1640.
of the House, and so removed from his Majesty's Presence; which was the great
aim against me. For they conceived I would speak my Conscience, if I came near
him: And they could not with any Color of Justice take me from him, but by an
Accusation of High Treason; of which I would not for all the World be as Guilty
as some of them are, which Accused me. This was their desire for my Commitment.

Their next desire was, That I might be brought to Trial, and receive my
Censure according to the Laws. And this has been, and yet is my desire, as
well as theirs. For I long for nothing more than a Trial; and I can fear no
Censure that is according to Law; and am as free from the Breach of any Law,
that can make me guilty of Treason, as I was when my Mother bare me into the
World. And when I was thus far on upon my Answer, I had remained at Mr.
Maxwell's, and in the Tower Eleven Months (so many it was when I writ this) But
before I came to my Hearing I had been Thirteen Months in Prison, and neither
brought to Trial, no nor so much as a Particular Charge brought up against me,
that I might prepare for an Answer, in so heavy a Business. And I am somewhat
farther of my Accusers Mind; That to bring me to a just Trial according to Law,
would be good Service to God, Honor to the King, and the Parliament, who
cannot but suffer in the Judgment of Moderate Men, for laying a Man of my Place
and Calling so long in Prison, (a thing without all Precedent) and yet charging
me with no particular. Nay, and I think, in a good Sense too, it would be a
Terror to the Wicked, to see an Innocent Man brought to such a Trial. Yea, and
yet a Comfort to all Good Men too, when they see, that an Innocent Man shall
not be let lie, and languish to Death in Prison, (which may be my Case for
ought I see) but that in some time they may hope for Trial: Yea, and to them,
the Scots in special. For this Bold, and most true Word I Will speak: The
Scottish Nation in general, the City of Edinburgh in special, and very many
particular Men of good Worth, and some Men of Honor, besides Clergymen of all
sorts, during the time I had Interest in Court, have been more beholding to me,
than to any ten English Subjects of what rank and condition soever: And this
his Majesty knows, and I dare say will Witness. And for their present
Afflictions which they speak of, the Current of this Discourse will show to the
indifferent Reader, what a Principal means I have been of them. In the mean
time, I little deserved from them the Name of This great Firebrand; for many of
them have warmed themselves at me, but yet I never Fired any of them. Nor can I
make any doubt but that God Ecclus. 51. (...).
will deliver me out of the midst of this Fire, which he knows I kindled not.
Howsoever letthem take heed, for as sure as they now make themselves in the
Conjunction.
Conjuncture of a great Party, in which one Wave seconds, and keeps up another;
yet though these Waves of the Sea are mighty, and rage horribly, the Lord that
dwells on High is Mightier. And Psalm: (...)
under him I rest, and I hope shall, till their Waves be broken against some
Rock or other.

CAP. IV.
NOW follows Adam Blair the second, with a Codicil, or a Corollary to this
Charge. And this though it concerns my Brethren, the Bishops, as much as me;
yet because it charges upon the Calling, and was delivered in with the Charge
against me, though December 15. 1640.
under another date, of December 15. I shall express what I think of that too.
For I think the Scotch Commissioners took another day in upon advice, that they
might have a fling at the whole Calling. And I cannot but think, it was upon
design among them, when I consider, how eagerly the House of Commons has
followed Episcopacy ever since. This Codicil to their last Will and Testament
concerning me begins thus: We do indeed confess, that the Prelates of England
have been of very different humors, some of them of a more hot, and others of
them Men of a moderate Temper; some of them more, and some less inclinable to
Popery: yet what known Truth, and constant Experience, has made undeniable, we
must at this Opportunity Profess, Rushw. and Pryn.
express.



And so must we: For we as ingenuously confess, that the Presbyters of Scotland
have been of very different humors; some of them of a more hot, and others of
them Men of a moderate Temper. And the more moderate for Temper, and the more
able for Learning among them, have ever declared for the Episcopacy of England.
But whereas they say, some of the Bishops of England, are more, and some less
inclinable to Popery; that may seem to imply, that all of them are more or less
inclinable to Popery: which I dare say is a loud untruth. Perhaps that which
some of them call Popery, is Orthodox Christianity, and not one whit the worse
for their miscalling it, though they much the worse for disbelieving it. But
now you shall hear, what that known truth is, which constant experience (they
say) has made undeniable.

That from the first time of the Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland, not only
after the coming of King James of Happy Memory into England, but before, the
Prelates of England have been by all means uncessantly working the overthrow of
our Discipline and Government.

A little change in the words answers this. For from the very first of the
Reformation of the Church of England, as well before, as after, the coming in
of King James of Happy Memory, the Presbyters of Scotland have been by all
means uncessantly working the overthrow of Episcopacy, our Discipline and
Government: As appears most manifestly in The Scottish (...). The Survey of the
Discipline.
Archbishop Bancroft's Works. So then, either this is a loud untruth, if our
Prelates did not so practice against them: Or if it be truth, our Bishops had
altogether as much reason, (if not more, the justice of the Cause considered)
to work the overthrow of their Discipline, than they had of Episcopacy. But
they tell us: It has come to pass of late, that the Prelates of England having
prevailed and brought Us to Subjection in point of Government, and finding
their long-waited-for Opportunity, and a rare Congruity of many Spirits and
Powers ready to cooperate for their Ends, have made a strong Assault upon the
whole External Worship and Doctrine of our Kirk.



Surely for their Doctrine, it is too large a Field to beat over at this time.
Yet many Doctrines are on foot amongst them, which are fitter to be weighed,
than swallowed, would they permit them to be brought to the Sanctuary and
Balanced there. And for the whole External Worship which they speak of, I have
heard it said, they have none at all; and out of doubt, it is very little they
have, if any. And therefore if the Prelates of England had gotten an
Opportunity, and a Congruity of Spirits and Powers to cooperate, (which yet is
not so) they had been much to blame, if they had not pursued it, till they had
brought both the one and the other to a better Condition than they stand in at
present. And if they had such an Opportunity, they were much to blame that
deserted it; And if they had not, these Men are unworthy for asserting it. But
what End had the Prelates of England in this? Why sure -- By this their doing
they did not aim to make us conform to England; but to make Scotland first
(whose weakness in resisting they had before experienced in Novations of
Government, and of some Points of Worship) and Thereafter, Pryn and Rushw.
therefore England, conform to Rome, even in those matters wherein England had
separated from Rome, ever since the time of Reformation.



These Men out of doubt have, or take on them to have, a great insight into the
Hearts and Souls of the Prelates of England. They know that we did not aim to
make them conformable to England, but to make Scotland first, and then England,
conformable to Rome. But I know the contrary; and will leave the Book it self
to be judged by the Learned in all parts of Christendom, (for it is carefully
Translated into Latin;) whether it teach, or practice Conformity with Rome, or
not: which trial is far beyond their unlearned, and uncharitable Skill.
Assertion. And if any other of my Brethren have had this aim, they should do
well to name them. But they are so void of Charity; that they cannot forbear to
say, that we aim to make them Conformable to Rome, even in those things wherein
England had separated from Rome, ever since the Reformation. Which is so
monstrous an untruth that I wonder how Impudence it self dare utter it;
considering what the Bishops of England have written in defense of their
Reformation against Rome, and how far beyond any thing which the Presbyters of
Scotland have written against it.

As for the Reason, which is given, why we began with Scotland, namely, because
we had experience of their weakness in resisting Novations of Government, and
of some Points of Worship: I know not what they mean by their weakness in
resisting, unless it be, That they did not prevail against King James of
Blessed Memory, (for resist they did to their power;) when he brought in
Bishops, (which it seems they call Novations in Government,) and the Articles
of Perth, which they style Novations in some Points of Worship. And if this be
that which they mean; there is no Novation in the one, or the other. And for
their weakness in resisting, you may see what it is. For no sooner have they
gotten the Opportunity, which they speak of in the beginning of this Codicil,
but they cast out all their Bishops; reversed all the Articles of Perth; all
the Acts of Parliament, which confirmed both; brought back all to the rude
draught of Knox and Buchanan; saving that they have made it much worse, by
admitting so many Lay Elders with Votes in their General Assemblies, as may
enable the Laymen to make themselves what Religion they please: A thing which
the Church of Christ never knew in any part of it. Nor have they stayed here;
but made use of the same Opportunity, to cry down the Bishops, and
Church Government in England: As you will see by that which comes next.

An Evil therefore, which has issued, not so much from the Personal
Disposition of the Prelates themselves, as from the innate Quality and Nature
of their Office, and Prelatical Hierarchy, which did bring forth the Pope in
Ancient times, and never Ceased. Rush.
cease till it Brought. Rushw.
bring forth Popish Doctrine and Worship, where it is once rooted, and the
Principles thereof fomented, and constantly followed.

They tell us here, that this Conformity with Rome, is an Evil that issues not
so much from the Personal Disposition of the Prelates themselves, as from the
innate Quality and Nature of their Office. Conformity with Rome in any Error,
or Superstition, is doubtless an Evil; but that it issues from the Nature of a
Bishop's Office, cannot be. For that Office is to Preach Christ, and to govern
the Church of Christ, according to his Laws. If any Bishop break this, it is his
Personal Error, and most unnatural to his Office; to which if he adhere, he can
neither teach, nor practice, Superstition. Therefore certainly, what Error
soever comes, is from his Person, not his Office. And it is great Ignorance to
call this Evil an innate Quality of the Office; when the Office is a thing of
Institution, not of Nature; and therefore cannot possibly have any innate
Quality in it.

But since they will needs have it thus; let us invert it a little, and see how
it will fit them, against their King; more than it can fit the Bishops for the
Pope. For if we should say (as perhaps we may too truly) that the dangerous
Positions, which too many of the Presbyterian Faction publicly maintain, and
in Print, proceed not so much from the Personal Disposition of the
Presbyterians themselves, as from the innate Quality and Nature of their
Presbyteries, and their Antimonarchical Party; I believe it would trouble them
to shape a good Answer to it, unless they will admit of that which I before
have given. But then, if they do this, they Charge themselves with falsehood in
that which they lay upon the Bishops Office.

Next they tell you, that this Prelatical Hierarchy did bring forth the Pope in
Ancient times. But truly I think they are thus far deceived; The Hierarchy
cannot be said to bring forth the chief parts of it self. Now the Patriarchs,
(of which the Bishop of Rome was one, if not Prime in Order,) were the
Principal parts of the Hierarchy: Therefore the Hierarchy cannot well be said
to bring them forth. But suppose it be so, that the Pope were brought forth by
the Bishops; what fault is there in it? For the Pope was good, both Nomine and
Re, in name, and in being, as they were at first. For thirty of them together
were Martyrs for Christ (...), in Platinae Hyginum. Vide autem (...). Dissert
1. 4. 2. W S. A. C. Romans 1. 8.
: And the Church of Rome was famous for her Faith over the World in the very
Apostles times. Romans 1. And if either the Popes, or that Church, have
degenerated since; that is a Personal Crime, and not to be imputed to the
Office. And therefore these Men do very ill, or very ignorantly, to affirm,
that this Office (of Episcopacy) never ceases till it bring forth Popish
Doctrine and Worship. For in all the time of these thirty Popes, there was no
Doctrine brought forth, which may justly be accounted Superstitious, or called
Popery. For the last of those thirty died in the Year 309...... And they cannot
be ignorant that Jewell's Reply to Dr. Harding.
Bishop Jewel, on the behalf of the Church of England, challenged the Current
of the Fathers, for full Six Hundred Years, to be for it, against Rome, in very
many and main Points of Popery. And therefore I may well say, there was no
Popery in the World, when the Thirtieth Pope died. Well, if this Evil do not
arise from the Hierarchy; yet it does -- From the Antipathy and Inconsistence
of the two Forms of the Ecclesiastical Government, which they conceived, and
not without Cause, one Island, United. Rushw and Pryn.
joined also under one Head and Monarch, was not able to bear: The one being [
The same is added from Pryn and Rush.
the same] in all the Parts and Powers which it was in the time of Popery, and
still is in the Roman Kirk: The other being the Form of Government received,
maintained, and practiced by all the Reformed Kirks; wherein, by their own
Testimonies and Confessions, the Kirk of Scotland had amongst them no small
Eminency.



Sure these Men have forgotten themselves. For they tell us immediately before,
that this Evil of bringing forth Popish Doctrine and Worship, proceeds from the
very Office of a Bishop: And now they add, and from the Antipathy of these two
Forms of Church Government. Does the Bishops Office produce Popery? And does
the Antipathy between the Presbytery and Episcopacy produce Popery too? So then
belike in these Men's Judgments both Bishops, and they which oppose Bishops,
produce Popery. And if that be true, Popery must needs increase, that is
produced on all sides.

An Evil then there is, though perhaps not this, which issues from that
Antipathy and Inconsistence of these two Forms of Ecclesiastical Government,
which (they say) we Prelates of England conceived, and not without Cause, one
Island, joined also under one Head and Monarch, was not able to bear: And that
Evil was (as I conceive) the continual Jarrs and Oppositions, which would daily
arise among His Majesty's Subjects of both Kingdoms, concerning these different
Forms of Government: And these would bring forth such Heart-burnings and
Divisions among the People, that the King might never be secure at home, nor
presume upon united Forces against a Foreign Enemy. And this is Evil enough to
any Monarch of two divided Kingdoms; especially lying so near in one Island.
Now, if the Bishops of England did conceive thus, and, as our Adversaries here
confess, not without Cause; Then certainly by their own Confession, the
Prelates of England had Reason to use all just endeavors to remove, and take
away this Inconsistence, that the Form of the Ecclesiastical Government might
be one, in one Island, and under one Monarch, that so Faction and Schism might
cease; which else, when they get Opportunity, find a way to rent the Peace of
Kingdoms, if not Kingdoms themselves. And this Island (God of his Mercy
preserve it) is at this Jan. 22. 1641.
time in great hazard to undergo the fatality of it in a great measure.

The next is a manifest untruth. For though there be (as is said) an
Inconsistence between the Governments, which makes one Island under one King
unable to bear both, in the different parts of the Island; or at least unsafe,
while it bears them: Yet neither is Episcopacy in all the Parts and Powers of
it, that which it was in time of Popery, and still is in the Roman Church. And
this is most manifest to any Man, that will but look upon what Power the
Prelates had before, and what they have since the Statute of the Submission of
the Clergy in Hen. 8. time: Beside all those Statutes which have since been
made in diverse Particulars, to weaken their Power. Nor is the other Form of
Government received, maintained, and Practiced in all other Reformed Churches;
unless these Men be so strait Laced, as not to admit the Churches of Sweden,
and Denmark, and indeed, all, or most of the Lutherans, to be Reformed
Churches. For in Sweden they retain both the Thing and the Name; and the
Governors of their Churches are, and are called Bishops. And among the other
(...) habens Lutherus rem sine Ecclesiae pernicie abrogari non posse, quod unum
potuit nomen sustulit, (...); puriore vocabulo Graeco parum Latinum supposuit;
pro Episcopis Superintendentes, pro Archiepiscopis Generales Superintendentes
appellans. Tilenus (...) ad Scotos, c. 6. And he well knew the state of his
Neighbor Churches. Saravia similiter, Praefat. L. de diversis Ministrorum
Evangelii gradibus. Zanchius de Relig. Observat. c. 25. n. 10, 11. Jacob.
Haerbrand Lutheranus. In (...) Commun. p. 699. Saving that he dislikes not the
Alteration of the Name.
Lutherans the Thing is retained, though not the Name. For instead of Bishops
they are called Superintendents, and instead of Archbishops, General
Superintendents. And yet even here too, these Names differ more in sound, than
in sense. For Bishop is the same in Greek, that Superintendent is in Latin. Nor
is this change very well liked by the Learned. Howsoever Luther, since he would
change the Name, did yet very wisely, that he would leave the Thing, and make
choice of such a name as was not altogether unknown to the Ancient Church. For
S. Aug. L. 19. de Civ. Des, c. 19. (...), Latin superintendere possumus
dicere, quod ille, qui (...), eis, quibus (...), (...), (...) sc. (...).
St. Augustine mentions it as plainly and as fully as any of these. As for the
Eminency which (they say) their Kirk of Scotland had amongst them; I envy it
not; but God bless it so, that it may deserve Eminence, and have it. And now we
are come to the close of all, in which their desire is expressed.

This also we represent to your Lordships most serious Consideration: That not
only the Firebrarnds may be removed, but the Fire may be provided against; that
there be no more Recombustion after this, Rushw. and Pryn.
Combustion afterward.

December. 15. 1640. Ad. Blayer.

Their request is, That not only the Bishops, whom they are pleased to call the
Firebrarnds (which indeed themselves and their Adherents are) but the Office,
or Episcopacy it self, (which they call the Fire) may be provided against; That
there may be no combustion after. This I as heartily wish, as any Man can; but
see as little cause to hope for. For what hope can there be against
after-Combustion, while the Fire, which they themselves have kindled, while
they call other Men Incendiaries, burns on still, and is like to fasten upon
the very Foundations, to the eating of them out?

Yet I desire here that the Justice, and the Indifferency of these Men may be
well considered, and that in two things. The one in the Cause it self: For
Episcopacy is settled by Law here; Nay it is many ways woven into the Laws and
Customs of this Realm. And their great Complaint is, that their Presbyteries
(which they say are established by their Law) were offered to be suppressed: So
they are angry that their Presbyteries should be touched against their Law; but
Episcopacy must be destroyed, though it be never so much against our Law. The
other piece of their Justice, is Personal to me. For here, at one and the same
time, and in this one and the same Charge, they do by Consequences lay load on
me, as if I had invaded their Laws: while they invade ours avowedly, and dare
present this their Invasion, as well as that by Arms, in full and open
Parliament of England, to have their Will in the one, and their Reward for the
other.

Now if these two Forms of Ecclesiastical Government, by Episcopacy, and by
Presbyteries, be inconsistent under one Monarch (as they themselves here
confess) then I (were I at liberty) would humbly beseech the Lords to consider,
First, whether these men have any show, or color of Justice in this their
demand. Secondly, whether that Form of Church Government, which has come down
from the Apostles, continued to this Day, is established by the Laws, and usage
of this Kingdom, ever since it was Christian, be not fitter for them to embrace
and settle; than that Form which is but of Yesterday, and has no acquaintance
at all with our Laws, nor is agreeable with Monarchy? And lastly, when the
Bishops are taken away, and a Parity (the Mother of confusion) made in the
Church, and the Church Lands Sacrilegiously made a Prey (which I have long
feared is not the least Aim of too many) whether then the Temporal Lords shall
not follow after? And whether their Honor will not then soon appear too great,
and their Means too full, till a Lex Agraria will pass upon them, and lay them
level with them, whom some of them Favor too much? And when these things are
considered, God Bless them, whom it most concerns, to lay it to Heart betimes,
if Time be not slipped already.

Here (having answered to all, which the Scots have laid in against me) I would
have the Scotch Service inserted and Printed. The Book lies by me, very exactly
translated into Latin: And so I hope, this Tract shall be.

CAP. V.
AND now having answered (and I hope sufficiently) to all the Particulars in
the Charge of the Scots against me; I must return to the History again, as I
left it: Where I told you, the House of Commons were very angry with the late
Canons; and joining this Accusation of the Scots to such Articles, as they in
their Committee had framed against me, upon December. 18. 1640. they accused me
of High Treason ( as is before expressed) and I was committed to Custody to Mr.
James Maxwell, the Officer of the Upper House. When they had lodged me here, I
was followed with sharpness in both Houses, upon all Occasions of any Complaint
made against the proceedings at Council Table, Star Chamber, High Commission,
See Rushw. par. 3. vol. 2. page 135. 152, 153, 154. 174. 183, 184, 187. 193,
194, etc. 207. 235. etc. 282, etc.
or any place, or thing, in which I had ought to do. Nothing omitted by some
cunning Agents, which might increase the Rage and Hatred of the People against
me. The chief Instruments herein were the Brownists, and they which adhered
unto them; who were highly offended with me, because I hindered, and Punished (
as by Law I might) their Conventicles, and Separation from the Church of
England. And though I pitied them (as God knows) from my very Heart; yet
because necessity of Government forced me to some Punishment, their Malignity
never gave me over.

Among, and above the rest, there were three Men, Mr. Henry See the Petitions
of these three Men presented to the House of Commons against the Archbishop,
apud Rushworth. par. 3. vol. 1. p. 74, etc.
Burton, a Minister Benificed in Friday-street in London, Dr. John Bastwick, a
Phisician, and Mr. William Pryn, a Common Lawyer, who were censured Junii 14.
1637. in the Star Chamber, for notorious Libels, Printed, and Published by them
against the Hierarchy of the Church. They were then and there Sentenced to
stand in the Pillory, and lose their Ears; and because they should not stay
farther to infect London, they were sent away by Order of that Court; Mr.
Burton to Garnsey, Dr. Bastwick to Silly, and Mr. Pryn to Jersy. In the giving
of this Sentence I spoke my Conscience; and was after commanded to Print my
Speech. But I gave no Vote; because they had fallen so personally upon me, that
I doubted many Men might think Spleen, and not Justice, led me to it. Nor was
it my Counsel that advised their sending into those remote Parts. The
Brownists, and the preciser Part of the Kingdom, were netled at this; and the
Anger turned upon me, though I were the Patient all along. For they had published
most venomous Libels against me; and I did but show such as came to my Hands to
the State, and there left them to do what they pleased in it. But that for
which they were Sentenced, was a Book Written by Mr. Burton, and Printed and
sent by himself to the Lords sitting in Council; and a Letany, and other
Scandalous things, scattered, and avowed by Dr. (...); and things of like
nature by Mr. Pryn. And he was thought to deserve less Favor than the rest;
because he had been censured before in that great Court, for gross abuses of
the Queens Gracious Majesty, and the Government, in his Book Entitled
Histriomastix.

This Censure being past upon these Men, though I did no more than is before
mentioned, yet they, and that Faction continued all manner of Malice against
me: And I had Libel upon Libel, scattered in the Streets, and pasted upon
Posts. And upon Friday July 7. 1637. a Note was brought to me of a short Libel,
pasted on the Cross in Cheapside, that the Arch-Wolf of Canterbury had his Hand
in persecuting the Saints, and shedding the Blood of the Martyrs. Now what kind
of Saints and Martyrs these were, may appear by their Libellous Writings;
Courses, with which Saints and Martyrs were never acquainted. And most certain
it is, that howsoever the Times went then, or go now, yet in Queen Elizabeth's
Time, Penry was Hanged, and Vdal Condemned, and Dyed in Prison for less than is
contained in Mr. Burton's Book; as will be evident to any Man that compares
their Writings together. And these Saints would have lost their Lives, had they
done that against any other State Christian, which they did against this. And I
have yet one of the desperatest It was (...) Libel indeed in strictness of Law,
having the Author's Name set to it; but it is called a Libel for the scurrilous
and soul Language of it. H. W.
Libels by me, that has ordinarily been seen, which was sealed up in form of a
Letter, and sent to me by Mr. Pryn, with his Name to it: And but that it is
exceeding long, and from the present business, I would here have inserted it.

To return then: The Faction of the Brownists, and these three Saints, with
their Adherents, (for they were now set at Liberty by the House of Commons, and
brought into London in great Triumph) filled the Press almost Daily, with
Ballads and Libels, full of all manner of Scurrility, and more Untruth, both
against my Person, and my Calling. These were cried about London-streets, and
brought (many of them) to Westminster, and given into diverse Lords Hands, and
into the Hands of the Gentlemen of the House of Commons: And yet no Order taken
by either House to suppress the Printing of such known and shameless Lies, as
most of them contained: A thing which many sober Men found much fault withal,
and which (I believe) has hardly been seen, or suffered, in any Civil
Commonwealth, Christian or other. But when I saw the Houses of Parliament so
regardless of their own Honor, to suffer these base and Barbarous Courses
against an Innocent Man, and as then not so much as Charged in general; I
thought fit to arm my self with Patience, and endure that which I could not
help. And by God's Blessing I did so; though it grieved me much more for my
Calling, than for my Person. And this spreading of Libellous, Base Pamphlets
continues Jan. 26. 1641.
to this Day without control; and how long it will continue to the Shame of
the Nation, I cannot tell.

While I was thus committed to Mr. Maxwell, I found I was, by the course of the
House, to pay in Fees for my Diet and Custody, Twenty Nobles a day: This grew
very heavy. For I was stayed there full ten weeks, before so much as any
General Charge was brought up by the House of Commons against me; which in that
time came to Four Hundred Sixty Six Pound Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence:
And Mr. Maxwell had it all, without any Abatement. Dec. 21. 1640.
In the mean time, on Monday December 21. upon a Petition of Sir Robert Howard,
I was Condemned to pay Five Hundred Pounds unto him for false Imprisonment. And
the Lords Order was so strict; that I was commanded to pay him the Money
presently, or give Security to pay it in a very short time. I paid it, to
satisfy the Command of the House; but was not therein so well advised as I
might have been, being Committed for Treason.

Now, the Cause of Sir Robert Howard was this. He fell in League with the Lady
Viscountess Purbeck. The Lord Viscount Purbeck being in some weakness and
distemper, the Lady used him at her pleasure, and betook her self in a manner,
wholly to Sir Robert Howard, and had a Son by him. She was delivered of this
Child in a Clandestine way, under the Name of Mistress Wright. These things
came to be known, and she was brought into the High Commission; and there,
after a Legal Proceeding, was found guilty of Adultery, and Sentenced to do
Penance: Many of the great Lords of the Kingdom being present in Court, and
agreeing in the Sentence. There were present, and concurring in the Sentence,
Sir The. Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, (...). (...) of Manchester,
Lord President of the Council, W. Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward, Philip (...)
of (...), Lord Chamberlain, Edw. Earl of (...), Oliver Lord Viscount Grandison,
George Lord Bishop of London, Rich. Lord Bishop of Duresme, Sam. Lord Bishop of
(...), (...). Lord Bishop of Rochester, William Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells,
Sir (...). Coke Secretary, Sir Hen. Martin, Jo. (...), Dean of St. Paul's, Walt.
(...), Dean of Rochester, Tho. (...), Doctor of Divinity, Edm. Pope, and Hugh
Barker, Doctors of Law, and Sir Charles (...), who only desired to be spared,
and so gave no Sentence.
Upon this Sentence she withdrew her self, to avoid the Penance. This Sentence
passed at London-House, in Bishop Mountain's time, November. 19. An. Dom. 1627. I
was then present, as Bishop of Bath and Wells. After this, when the Storm was
somewhat over, Sir Robert Howard conveyed her to his House at....... in
Shropshire, where she Lived avowedly with him some Years, and had by him...
Children. At last, they grew to that open boldness; that he brought her up to
London, and lodged her in Westminster. This was so near the Court, and in so
open view; that the King and the Lords took notice of it, as a thing full of
Impudence, that they should so publicly adventure to outface the Justice of
the Realm, in so fowl a business. And one day, as I came of course to wait on
his Majesty, he took me aside, and told me of it, being then Archbishop of
Canterbury; and added, that it was a great Reproach to the Church and Nation;
and that I neglected my Duty, in case I did not take order for it. I made
answer, she was the Wife of a Peer of the Realm; and that without his leave I
could not attach her; but that now I knew his Majesty's pleasure, I would do my
best to have her taken, and brought to Penance, according to the Sentence
against her. The next day I had the good hap to apprehend both Her and Sir
Robert; and by Order of the High-Commission-Court, Imprisoned her in the
Gate House, and him in the Fleet.

This was (as far as I remember) upon a Wednesday; and the Sunday sevennight
after, was thought upon her to bring to Penance. She was much troubled at it,
and so was he. And therefore in the middle of the week following, Sir Robert
dealt with some of his Friends, and among the rest, with one Sir....... of
Hampshire; who with Money, corrupted the Turn-Key of the Prison (so they call
him) and conveyed the Lady forth, and after that into France in Man's Apparel
(as that Knight himself has since made his boast.) This was told me the
Morning after the escape: And you must think, the good Fellowship of the Town
was glad of it. In the mean time, I could not but know, though not perhaps
prove as then, that Sir Robert Howard labored and contrived this conveyance.
And thereupon, in the next sitting of the High Commission, Ordered him to be
Close Prisoner from the High-Commission-Court was not to shut him up in his
Chamber, but only not (...) suffer him to go out of the Prison. W. C.
close Prisoner, till he brought the Lady forth. So he continued close Prisoner
about some two or three Months. For this the Fine above mentioned was imposed
upon me, as being a most Unjust and Illegal Imprisonment. Whereas the
Parliament (to the great Honor of their Justice be it spoken) have kept me in
Prison now Jan. 28. 1641.
full thirteen Months, and upward, and have not so much as brought up a
particular Charge against me; and how much longer they will keep me, God knows.
Now say that all Forms of Law were not observed by me; yet somewhat was to be
indulged, in regard I did it to vindicate such a crying Impiety. But yet, I do
here solemnly protest, I observed the Order of the Court in which I sat, and
that Court settled by an Act of Parliament, 1. Eliz. And I did not knowingly err
in any particular. More I could say in these my sufferings; but I will blast no
Family of Honor for one Man's fault.

On Thursday, Januar. 21. 1640. A Parliament Man, of Good Note Jan. 21. 1640.
in the House of Commons, and well interessed in diverse Lords, gave me to
understand; that some Lords were very well pleased with my patient and moderate
carriage since my Commitment: And that four Earls, of great power in the House,
should say, that the Lords were not now so sharp against me, as they were at
first; and that now they were resolved, only to Sequester me from the King's
Counsels, and to put me from my Archbishopric. I was glad to hear of any
favor, considering the Times; but considering my Innocence, I could not hold
this for favor. And I could not but observe to my self, what Justice I was to
expect; since here was a Resolution taken among the Leading Men of the House,
what Censure should be laid upon me, before any Charge, so much as in general,
was brought up against me.

CAP. VI.
UPon Friday, Feb. 26. I had been full ten weeks in restraint, Feb. 26. 1640.
at Mr. Maxwell's House: And this day, being St. Augustine's day, my Charge in
general Articles was brought up from the House of Commons to the Lords, by Sir
Hen. Vane the Younger. It consisted of Fourteen Articles. Rushworth says, they
were carried up by Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Maynard, and inserteth Pym's
Speech, made at the (...) of them to the Lords, Par. 3. Vol. p. 195. 199. etc.
So also Pryn, page 24, 25, 28. who also Exhibits, p. 23, 24. the Preliminary
Votes and Orders of the (...), made Febr. 22, 23, 24, 26. for the framing and
carrying up the Articles to the Lords. H. W.
These Generals they craved time to prove in Particular; and that I in the mean
time might be kept safe. Upon this I was presently sent for to the House, and
the Articles were Read to me at the Bar. When the Clark of the Parliament had
done Reading, I humbly craved leave of the Lords, to speak a few words; which
were to this effect.

My Lords; This is a great and a heavy Charge; and I must be unworthy to live,
if it can be made good against me: For it makes me against God, in point of
Religion; Against the King, in point of Allegiance; And against the Public, in
point of Safety, under the Justice and Protection of Law. And though the King
be little, if at all mentioned; yet I am bold to Name him, because I have ever
been of Opinion, that the King and his People are so joined together, in one
Civil and Politic Body, as that it is not possible for any Man to be true to
the King, as King, that shall be found Treacherous to the State Established by
Law, and work to the Subversion of the People: Though perhaps every one, that
is so, is not able to see thorough all the Consequences, by which one depends
upon the other. So my Charge, my Lords, is exceeding heavy in it self; though I
as yet, do not altogether feel the weight of it. For it is yet (as your
Lordships see) but in Generals; And Generals make a great noise, but no Proof:
Whereas, it is Proof upon Particulars, that makes the weight of a Charge sit
close upon any Man. Now, my Lords, it is an old and a true Rule, Errare
contingit descendendo, Error does most often happen, and best appear, when Men
descend to Particulars: And with them when I shall be Charged, I hope my
Innocence will furnish me with a sufficient Answer to any Error of mine, that
shall be thought Criminal, or any way worthy the Cognizance of this High and
Honorable Court. As for Humane Frailties, as I cannot acquit my self of them,
so I presume your Lordships will be favorable Judges of them: Since in the
Transaction of so many businesses as passed my Hands, Men, far abler than ever
I can be, have been subject to them, and, perhaps, to as many, and as great.
But for Corruption in the least degree (I humbly praise God for it) I fear no
Accuser, that will speak Truth. But ( my Lords) that which goes nearest unto me
among these Articles, is, that I should be thought foul and false in the
profession of my Religion: As if I should profess with the Church of England,
and have my Heart at Rome, and labor by all cunning ways to bring Romish
Superstition in upon the Kingdom. This ( my Lords) I confess, troubles me
exceedingly; and if I should forget my self, and fall into passion upon it; I
should but be in that case which St. Jerome confessed he was in; when he knew
not how to be patient, when Falsehood in Religion was charged upon him. And yet
that was nothing so high a Charge as this which is laid against me: Which is
not only to be basely false my self; but withal, to labor to spread the same
Falsehood over the whole Kingdom.

And here I humbly besought their Lordships, that I might a little enlarge my
self, and I did so. But because I purpose here to set down the general
Articles, that were brought up against me, and that one of them comes home to
this point of Religion; I shall put it off till I come to It Is Article 10.
that Article, and there set it down at large, what I now said. And this I do,
to avoid an useless and a tedious Repetition. Here then follow the Articles
themselves, as they were that day Charged upon me, with my general Answer to
each of them. And more I cannot give, till Particulars shall be put up against
me.

CAP. VII.
ARticles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in maintenance There are
Printed also in Rushworth, par. 3 vol 1. p. 196. etc. (...) Compl. Hist. p. 25,
etc.
of their Accusation against William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, whereby he
stands Charged with High Treason, and other High Crimes and Misdemeanors Rushw.
.
1. That he has Traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of This Kingdom of England. Rush. and Pryn.
the Kingdom: And instead thereof to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law: And to that end has wickedly and Traitorously advised
His Majesty, that he might at his own Will and Pleasure Levy and take Money of
his Subjects without their consent in Parliament. And this he affirmed, was
warrantable by the Law of God.

I did never endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws of this Ad (...).
Kingdom of England; nor to introduce an Arbitrary or Tyrannical Government,
contrary to Law. I could not endeavor this; my knowledge and judgment going
ever against an Arbitrary Government, in comparison of that which is settled by
Law. I learned so much long ago, out of Arist. L 3. Polit. c. 11.
Aristotle; and his Reasons are too good to be gone against. And ever since I
had the honor to sit at the Council Table, I kept my self as much to the Law
as I could; and followed the Judgment of those great Lawyers which then sat at
the Board. And upon all References which came from His Majesty, if I were one,
I left those freely to the Law, who were not willing to have their business
ended any other way. And this the Lord Keeper, the Lord Privy Seal, and the
Council Learned, which attended their Clients Causes, can plentifully witness.

I did never advise His Majesty, that he might at his own Will and Pleasure
levy Money of his Subjects without their Consent in Parliament. Nor do I
remember that ever I affirmed any such thing, as is Charged in the Article. But
I do believe, that I may have said something to this effect following: That
howsoever it stands by the Law of God, for a King, in the just and necessary
defense of himself and his Kingdom, to levy Money of his Subjects; yet where a
particular National Law does intervene in any Kingdom, and is settled by mutual
consent between the King and his People, there Moneys ought to be Levied by and
according to that Law. And by God's Law, and the same Law of the Land, I humbly
conceive, the Subjects, so met in Parliament ought to supply their Prince, when
there is just and necessary cause. And if an Absolute necessity do happen by
Invasion, or otherwise, which gives no time for Counsel or Law; such a
Necessity (but no pretended one) is above all Law. And I have heard the
greatest Lawyers in this Kingdom confess; that in times of such a Necessity,
The King's Legal Prerogative is as great as this.

And since here is of late such a noise made about the Subversion of the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and Men's Lives called this way in question;
it is very requisite, that these Fundamental Laws were known to all Men: That so
they may see the danger, before they run upon it: Whereas now, the Common Laws
of England have no Text at all. In so much, that many, who would think
themselves wronged, if they were not accounted good Lawyers, cannot in many
points assure a Man what the Law is. And by this means, the Judges have liberty
to retain more in Scrinio Pectoris, than is fitting; and which comes a little
too near that Arbitrary Government, so much and so justly found fault with:
Whereas there is no Kingdom (that I know) that has a settled Government, but it
has also a Text, or a Corpus Juris of the Laws written, save England. So here
shall be as great a punishment, as is any where, for the breach of the Laws,
and no Text of them for a Man's direction. And under favor, I think it were a
work worthy a Parliament, to Command some prime Lawyers, to draw up a Body of
the Common Law, and then have it carefully Examined by all the Judges of the
Realm, and thoroughly weighed by both Houses, and then have this Book Declared
and Confirmed by an Act of Parliament, as containing the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom. And then let any Man go to Subvert them at his Peril.

2. He has for the better accomplishment of that his Traiterous Design,
advised and procured, diverse Sermons and other Discourses, to be Preached,
Printed, and Published, in which the Authority of Parliaments, and the force of
the Laws of this Kingdom are denied, and an Absolute and Unlimited Power over
the Persons and Estates of his Majesty's Subjects is maintained and defended,
not only in the King, but also in himself, and other Bishops, above and against
the Law. And he has been a great Protector, Favourer, and Promoter of the
Publishers of such false and pernicious Opinions.

I have neither advised nor procured the Preaching, Printing, or Ad Secundum.
Publishing of any Sermons, or other Discourses, in which the Authority of
Parliaments, and the force of the Laws of this Kingdom are denied, and an
Absolute and Unlimited Power over the Persons and Estates of his Majesty's
Subjects maintained and defended. Nay, I have been so far from this, that I
have, since I came into place, made stay of diverse Books, purposely written to
maintain an Absolute Power in the (...). King.
Kingdom, and have not suffered them to be Printed, as was earnestly desired.
And were it fit to bring other Men's Names in question, and expose their Persons
to danger, I have some of those Tracts by me at this present.

And as I have not maintained this Power in the King's Majesty; so much less
have I defended this, or any other Power against Law, either in my self, or
other Bishops, or any other Person whatsoever: Nor have I been a Protector,
Favourer, or Promoter of any the Publishers of such false and pernicious
Opinions, knowing them to be such Men.

3. He has by Letters, Messages, Threats, Promises, and diverse other ways, to
Judges and other Ministers of Justice, interrupted and perverted; and at other
times by the means aforesaid, has endeavored to interrupt and pervert, the
course of Justice, in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and other Courts, to
the Subversion of the Laws of this Kingdom; whereby, sundry of his Majesty's
Subjects have been stopped in their Just Suits, and deprived of their Lawful
Rights, and subjected to his Tyrannical Will, to their utter Ruin and
Destruction.

I have neither by Letters, Messages, Threats, nor Promises, nor Ad Tertium.
by any other Means, endeavored to interrupt or pervert the course of Justice
in his Majesty's Judges, or other Ministers of Justice, either to the
Subversion of the Law, or the stopping of the Subjects in their Just Suits:
Much less, to the ruin or destruction of any one; which God forbid I should
ever be guilty of. The most that ever I have done in this kind, is this. When
some poor Clergymen, which have been held in long Suits, some Seven, Nine,
Twelve Years, and one for Nineteen Years together, have come and besought me
with Tears, and have scarce had convenient Clothing about them to come and make
their address; I have sometimes underwritten their Petitions to those Reverend
Judges, in whose Courts their Suits were, and have fairly desired Expedition
for them. But I did never desire, by any Letter, or Subscription, or Message,
any thing for any of them, but that which was according to the Law and Justice
of the Realm. And in this particular, I do refer my self to the Testimony of
the Reverend Judges of the Common Law.

4. That the said Archbishop has Traitorously and Corruptly sold Justice to
those that have had Causes depending before him, by Color of his
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as Archbishop, High-Commissioner, Referree, or
otherwise; and has taken unlawful Gifts and Bribes of his Majesty's Subjects:
And has, as much as in him lies, endeavored to corrupt other Courts of
Justice, by advising [and procuring] his Majesty to sell places of Judicature,
Rushw. and Pryn.
and other Offices, [and procuring the Sale of them] contrary to the Desunt in
Rushw. and Pryn.
Laws and Statutes in that behalf.

I did least of all expect this Charge. For I have not corruptly Ad Quartum.
sold Justice, either as Archbishop, High-Commissioner, Referree, or
otherwise: Nor have I taken any unlawful Gift or Bribe, of any his Majesty's
Subjects. And though in this Article, there is no particular mentioned, more
than in the rest; yet I am not ignorant, that I have been Charged in the House
of Commons, for taking two Pipes of Sack, from one Mr. Tho. All this about
Stone, is afterward more perfectly related, and so this to be omitted here,
according to the Archbishop's Direction, p. 159. Only compare them first
together. W. S. A. C. The Account being short, I thought it better to let it
stand here, than (...) the History, for the sake of one single Repetition. H. W.
Stone, as a Bribe for the abarement of a Fine, imposed upon some Men of
Chester, by the High Commission at York: Which power of Abatement was in me, by
virtue of a Broad-Seal granted me to that purpose, bearing Date..... Now,
because there is no Particular known to me but this, belonging to this or any
other Article; and because I know not what course the Parliament will hold with
me; namely, whether they will produce Particulars, or proceed by Bill of
Attainder, I will take opportunity here to unfold all that is true in this
odious Accusation of Stone. And the Case is thus,

Mr. Stone, knowing that these Fines with other were given by his Majesty
toward the repair of St. Paul's in London; and that the Trust of that Business,
with Power to abate any Fine, was committed to me, under the Broad Seal of
England; became a very earnest Suitor to me in the behalf of these Chester-Men,
fined at York. And he set diverse of his Friends and mine upon me, for abatement
of this Fine: And among others, his own Son-in-Law, Mr. William Wheat,
Barrister at Law, who had been bred under me in St. John's College in Oxford;
and Mr. Wheat's Brother, Doctor Baylie, then Dean of Salisbury. In this Suit
Stone pretended and protested too, that these Men ought him two or three
Thousand Pound, (I well remember not whether) and that he should lose it all,
if these Men's Fines were not abated. For they would hide their Heads, and never
appear again. During this Suit, he came twice, if not thrice, to my Steward,
and told him, he had at present excellent Sack, and that he would send in two
Pipes for me. My Steward at each time refused his motion, and acquainted me
with it (as my Command ever was he should do in Cases of receiving any thing
into my House.) I at every of these times commanded it should not be received.
Mr. Stone then protested to my Steward, that he did not offer this as any Bribe
or Gratuity for the business of the Chester-Men; but merely as a Token of his
Thankfulness for many and great Kindnesses done by me to himself, his
Son-in-Law, and his Friend Doctor Baylie. Notwithstanding this, I gave absolute
Command the Sack should not be received: When Mr. Stone saw this, he found a
time to send in the Sack when my Steward was not in the House, and told my
Under-Servants that my Steward was acquainted with it. The next time Mr. Stone
came to the House, which (as far as I remember) was the very next day: My
Steward told him, he would send back the Sack, and was about to do it (as he
after assured me.) Then Mr. Stone was very earnest with him, that he would save
his Credit, and not send the Wine back to his disgrace; renewing his former
deep Protestations, that he had in this no relation at all to the Chester-Mens
business. Upon this, my Steward being acquainted with him, and his forenamed
Friends, trusted him, and let the Wine stay, contrary to my former Commands.
After all this, this unworthy Man put the price of this Wine upon the
Chester-Mens Account; as if for that Gift I had abated their Fine; and so gave
them an occasion to complain of me to the Parliament. Whereas both the
Chester-Men, and Mr. Stone himself, had before acknowledged, I had used them
kindly in the Composition for their Fine, and wished they had been referred to
me for the whole Cause. And for my whole carriage in this business, I dare
refer my self to the Testimony of Mr. Stone's own Sonin-Law, and Doctor Baylie,
who were the chief Men whom Mr. Stone employed to me.

Besides, after all this cunning, it will appear by my Servants their Accounts,
that the Wine was not brought into my House, in the cunning manner before
mentioned, till diverse days after I had compounded with the Chester-Men for
their Fine; so a Bribe for doing a business it could not be. And upon the whole
matter, I am verily persuaded, considering Stone's Profession in Religion, (for
he is a Brownist, or next Neighbor to him) that he did this of set purpose, to
see if he could ensnare me in this way. Lastly, I desire the Lords, and all
Men, that have had any thing to do with me, to look upon me in the whole course
of my Life; wherein they shall find me untainted with so much as the value of
Sixpence in this base way. And it is not unknown to the World, that for many
Years together I had opportunities enough to enrich my self by such a way, had
I been minded to take that course: Whereas now, it is well known, my Estate is
the meanest of any Archbishop's of Canterbury that has sat for many Years.
And having carried it thus along for all my Life, I presume no Man can be so
injurious to me, as to think I would now in mine Old Age (being Sixty Eight
when this was Charged upon me) sell either my Conscience, or my Honor, for a
Morsel of Bread, or a Cup of Wine.

And for the other part of this Article. I did never advise his Majesty, to
sell Places of Judicature, or other Offices, or procure the Sale of them
contrary to Law.

5. He has Traiterousty caused a Book of Canons to be Composed and Published,
[and those Canons to be put in Execution] without Desunt in (...). and Pryu.
any lawful Warrant and Authority in that behalf. In which pretended Canons,
many Matters are contained contrary to the King's Prerogative, to the
Fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to the Right of Parliament, to the
Propriety and Liberty of the Subjects, and Matters tending to Sedition, and of
dangerous Consequence; and to the Establishment of a vast, unlawful, and
presumptuous Power in himself and his Successors: Many of the which Canons, by
the practice of the said Archbishop, were surreptitiously passed in the last
Convocation, without due Consideration and Debate; others by fear and (...)
were Subscribed to by the Prelates and Clerks there (...); which had never been
Voted and passed in the Convocation, as they ought to have been. And the said
Archbishop has contrived and endeavored, to assure and confirm the Unlawful
and Exorbitant Power, which he has Usurped and Exercised over his Majesty's
Subjects, by a Wicked and Ungodly Oath, in one of the said pretended Canons,
enjoined to be taken by all the Clergy, and many of the Laity of this Kingdom.

I Composed no Book of Canons: The whole Convocation did it, with Ad Quintum.
unanimous Consent. So, either I must be free, or that whole Body must be
guilty of High Treason. For in that Crime all are Principals, that are guilty;
Accessory there is none.

Neither did I publish, or put in Execution those Canons, or any of them, but
by Lawful Authority. And I do humbly conceive, and verily believe, there is
nothing in those Canons contrary either to the King's Prerogative, the
Fundamental Laws of the Realm, the Rights of Paliament, the Propriety and
Liberty of the Subjects, or any matter tending to Sedition, or of dangerous
consequence, or to the establishment of any vast or unlawful Power in my self
and my Sucessors.

Neither was there any Canon in that Convocation surreptitiously passed by any
practice of mine, or without due Consideration and Debate. Neither was there
any thing in that Convocation, but what was voted first, and subscribed after,
without fear or compulsion in any kind. And I am verily persuaded, there never
sat any Synod in Christendom, wherein the Votes passed with more freedom, or
less practice, than they did in this. And for the Oath enjoined in the sixth
Canon, as it was never made to confirm any unlawful or exorbitant Power over
his Majesty's Subjects; so I do humbly conceive, that it is no Wicked or
Ungodly Oath in any respect. And I hope I am able to make it good in any
learned Assembly in Christendom, that this Oath, and all those Canons (then
made and here before recited) and every Branch in them, are Just and Orthodox,
and Moderate, and most necessary for the present Condition of the Church of
England; how unwelcom soever to the present Distemper.

6. He has traitorously assumed to himself a Papal and Tyrannical Power, both
in Ecclesiastical and Temporal Matters, over his Majesty's Subjects in this
Realm of England, and other places; to the Disinherison of the Crown, Dishonor
of his Majesty, and Derogation of his Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical
Matters. And the said Archbishop claims the King's Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as incident to his Episcopal and Archiepiscopal Office in this
Kingdom; and does deny the same to be derived from the Crown of England; which
he has accordingly exercised, to the high contempt of his Royal Majesty, and
to the destruction of [ Rush. and (...)
diverse of] the King's Liege-People in their Persons and Estates.

I have not assumed Papal or Tyrannicl Power, in matters Ecclesiastical Ad
Sextum.
or Temporal; to the least Disinherison, Dishonor, or Derogation of his
Majesty's Supreme Authority in matters Ecclesiastical or Temporal. I never
claimed the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as incident to my Episcopal or
Archiepiscopal Office in this Kingdom: Nor did I ever deny, that the exercise
of my Jurisdiction was derived from the Crown of England. But that which I have
said, and do still say, concerning my Office and Calling, is this, That my
Order, as a Bishop, and my Power of Jurisdiction, is by Divine Apostolical
Right, and unalterable (for ought I know) in the Church of Christ. But all the
Power I, or any other Bishop has to exercise any the least Power, either of
Order or Jurisdiction, within this Realm of England, is derived wholly from the
Crown: And I conceive it were Treasonable to derive it from any other Power,
Foreign or Domestic. And for the Exercise of this Power under his Majesty, I
have not used it to the Contempt, but to the great Advantage of his Royal
Person, and to the Preservation, not the Destruction of his People: Both which
appear already by the great Distractions, Fears, and Troubles, which all Men
are in since my Restraint; and which (for ought I yet see) are like to
increase, if God be not exceeding Merciful above our Deserts.

7. That he has traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert God's true
Religion by Law established in this Realm; and instead thereof to set up Popish
Superstition and Idolatry; and to that end has declared and maintained in
Speeches and Printed Books diverse Popish Doctrines and Opinions, contrary to
the Articles of Religion established [ Rushw. and (...).
by Law.] He has urged and enjoined diverse Popish and Superstitious
Ceremonies, without any warrant of Law, and has cruelly persecuted those who
have opposed the same, by Corporal Punishment and Imprisonment; and most
unjustly vexed others who refused to conform thereto, by Ecclesiastical
Censures of Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, and Degradation; contrary
to the Law of the Kingdom.

I never endeavored to alter or subvert God's true Religion established Ad
Septim.
by Law in this Kingdom; or to bring in Romish Superstition. Neither have I
declared, maintained, or Printed any Popish Doctrine, or Opinion, contrary to
the Articles of Religion established, or any one of them, either to the end
mentioned in this Article, or any other. I have neither urged nor enjoined any
Popish or Superstitious Ceremonies without warrant of Law; nor have I cruelly
persecuted any Opposers of them. But all that I labored for in this particular
was, that the external Worship of God in this Church, might be kept up in
Uniformity and Decency, and in some Beauty of Holiness. And this the rather,
because first I found that with the Contempt of the Outward Worship of God, the
Inward fell away apace, and Profaneness began boldly to show it self. And
secondly, because I could speak with no conscientious Persons almost, that were
wavering in Religion, but the great motive which wrought upon them to
disaffect, or think meanly of the Church of England, was, that the external
Worship of God was so lost in the Church (as they conceived it;) and the
Churches themselves, and all things in them, suffered to lie in such a base and
slovenly Fashion in most places of the Kingdom. These, and no other
Considerations, moved me to take so much care as I did of it; which was with a
single Eye, and most free from any Romish Superstition in any thing. As for
Ceremonies; all that I enjoined, were according to Law. And if any were
Superstitious, I enjoined them not. As for those which are so called by some
Men, they are no Innovations, but Restaurations of the ancient approved
Ceremonies, in, and from the beginning of the Reformation, and settled either by
Law or Custom; till the Faction of such as now openly and avowedly separate
from the Church of England, did oppose them, and cry them down. And for the
Censures which I put upon any, I presume they will to all indifferent Men,
which will Understandingly and Patiently hear the Cause, appear to be Just,
Moderate, and according to Law.

8. That for the better advancing of his Traitorous Purpose and Designs, he did
abuse the great Power and Trust his Majesty reposed in him; and did intrude
upon the Places of diverse great Officers, and upon the Right of Other, Rushw.
and Pryn.
diverse his Majesty's Subjects; whereby he did procure to himself the
Nomination of sundry Persons to Ecclesiastical Dignities, Promotions and
Benefices, belonging to his Majesty, and diverse of the Nobility, Clergy, and
others; and has taken upon him the Commendation, Rushw. and Pryn.
Nomination of Chaplains to the King; by which means he has preferred to his
Majesty's Service, and to other great Promotions in the Church, such as have
been Popishly affected, or other wise Unsound and Corrupt both in Doctrine and
Manners.

I did never wittingly abuse the Power or Trust, which His Majesty Ad Octavum.
reposed in me. Nor did I ever intrude upon the Places of any great Officers,
or others, to procure to my self the Nomination of Persons Ecclesiastical, to
Dignities, Promotions, and Benefices, belonging to His Majesty, the Nobility,
or any other. And though here be no Particular named; yet I guess at that which
is meant, and will clearly set down the Truth.

His Majesty, some few Years since, assumed to himself, from the Right
Honorable the Lord Coventry, the Lord Keeper that then was, and from my Lord
Cottington, then Master of the Court of Wards, the disposing of all such
Benefices, as came to the King's Gift by Title of Wardship, of what value
soever they were. The Reason, which moved His Majesty to do this, was; The Lord
Keeper and the Lord Cottington became humble Suitors to him, to end a
Contention between them, about the giving of those Benefices, both for their
own Quiet, and the Peace of other His Majesty's Subjects. For the Course was,
when any thing fell void in the Gift of a Ward, he of these two great Officers,
which came first to know of the avoidance, gave the Living. This caused great,
and oft-times undue, Practicing among them which were Suitors for the
Benefices. And many times the Broad-Seal, and the Seal of the Court of Wards,
bore Date the same Day: And then the Bishop, which Clerk soever he Instituted,
was sure to offend the other Lord. And these Lords too many times, by the
earnest putting on of Friends, were not well pleased one with another in the
Business. Upon this Suit of their own, His Majesty gave a Hearing to these
Lords; and in Conclusion of it, took the Disposal of all such Benefices into
his own Hands, and (for ought I know) with both their liking and content. In
the disposing of these Benefices to such Men, as had served His Majesty at Sea,
or otherwise, I was trusted by the King; and I served him in it faithfully; but
proceeded no farther, nor otherwise, than he directed, and commanded me. But I
never took the Nomination of any one to my self, or my own disposing. And the
Truth of this, as His Majesty knows; so I am Confident, my Lord Cottington, who
is yet living, will Witness.

For the Nomination of Chaplains to the King, if I had done it, I think the
work was as proper for the Archbishop, as for any Man: Yet because by Ancient
Custom it was conceived to belong in a great part to the Lord Chamberlain (who
was then the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrook;) I never Named any to His
Majesty, but I did fairly acquaint the Lord Chamberlain with it, and desired
his favor. But in all my time I never was the means to prefer any Man to His
Majesty's Service, as a Chaplain, or to any Promotion, whom I knew to be
Popishly affected, or any way Corrupt in Doctrine or Manners.

9. He has for the same Traiterous and Wicked intent, chosen and employed such
Men to be his [ Pryn, and Rushworth.
own Domestical] Chaplains, whom he knew to be Notoriously disaffected to the
Reformed Religion; grossly addicted to Popish Superstition; and Erroneous, and
unsound both in Judgment and Practice: And to them, or some of them, he has
committed Licensing of Books to be Printed; By which means diverse false and
Superstitious Books have been Published, to the great Scandal of Religion, and
to the seducing of many of His Majesty's Subjects.

I never chose any Man to be my Chaplain, who I knew, or had Ad (...).
good Cause to suspect, was Popishly affected: Nor any that was unsound in
Judgment or Practice. Nor did I commit the Licensing of Books to any such; but
to those only, who I then did, and do still believe, are Orthodox and Religious
Divines, and Men of very good Judgment, for that Necessary and great Service.
And if they, or any of them, have by negligence, or otherwise suffered any
Erroneous and Dangerous Books to pass the Press; they must answer both the
Church and the State, for whatsoever they have done amiss in that kind; for it
is not possible for the Archbishop to perform all those Services in Person: And
in the committing of them to my Chaplains, and other Divines of Note, I have
done no new thing, but that which my Predecessors have done before me. This I
am sure of: I gave often, and express and strict Command to all and every of
them, that they should License nothing that was contrary to the Doctrine and
Discipline Established in the Church of England, or might Personally or
otherwise give Offense or Distaste. And I hope they have Obeyed my Directions:
If not, they must Answer for themselves.

10. He has Traitorously and Wickedly endeavored to reconcile the Church of
England with the Church of Rome: And for the effecting thereof has Consorted,
and Confederated with diverse Popish Priests and Jesuits, and has kept secret
intelligence with the Pope of Rome; And by himself, his Agents and Instruments,
treated with such as have from thence received Authority and Instruction. He
has permitted and countenanced a Popish Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical Government
to be Established in this Kingdom. By all which Traiterous and Malicious
Practices this Church and Kingdom have been exceedingly endangered, and like to
fall under the Tyranny of the Roman See.

The Article is now come, of which I spoke before; and in my Ad (...).
Answer to which I promised to set down the substance of that which I spoke in
the Parliament House, to the Lords, when this General Charge was brought up
against me; and I shall somewhat enlarge it, yet without any Change of the
Grounds upon which I then stood. And now I shall perform that Promise. And I
shall be of all other least afraid to answer all that is here said concerning
Religion. For my Heart (I bless God for it) is sound that way, to the uttermost
of my Knowledge; and I think I do well understand my Principles. And my Old
Master Aristotle has taught me long since, that Arift. l 2. Rhetor. c. 5.
Arift. Rhet. l. 2. c. 7.. 12. (...)
Qui se been habent ad divina, audaciores sunt; they which are well and
setledly composed in things pertaining to God, (that is, in Religion) are much
the bolder by it: And this not only against Slanders and Imputations cast upon
Men for this, but in all other Accidents of the World, what ever they be.

And surely I may not deny it: I have ever wished, and heartily Prayed for, the
Unity of the whole Church of Christ, and the Peace and Reconciliation of torn
and divided Christendom. But I did never desire a Reconciliation, but such as
might stand with Truth, and preserve all the Foundations of Religion entire.
For I have Learned from a Non omnis (...) perficit (...) boni, sed solum illa,
a qua dependet esse perfectum (...). Tho. 1. 2. q. 36. Art. 3. ad quint:
Prime School-Man of their own; That every Union does not perfect the true
Reason, or Definition of that which is good; but that only, upon which depends,
Esse perfectum Rei, the perfect Essence of that thing. So that in this
particular, if the substance of Christian Religion be not perfected by any
Union; that Union it self cannot have in it Rationem boni, the true Being and
Nature of Good. And therefore I did never desire, that England and Rome should
meet together, but with forsaking of Error and Superstition; especially such
as grate upon and frett the Foundations of Religion. But were this done, God
forbid, but I should Labor for a Reconciliation; if some Tenets of the Roman
Party on the one side, and some deep and imbittered Disaffections on the other,
have not made it impossible; as I much doubt they have. But that I should
practice with Rome, as now it stands, and to that end should confederate with
Priests and Jesuits; or hold secret intelligence with the Pope, or treat with
him, or any I would not adventure to (...) and disjoint the History; The Reader
(if he so pleases) may (...) by such Repetitions. H. W.
Instruments Authorized by him, or by any Agents, is utterly untrue: As I hope
may fully appear by that which follows. I find that some things in my general
Answer to the Articles are repeated again in the beginning of my particular
Answers, when my Trial came on. I desire (for I had no time to do it my self)
that, to avoid tediousness, all those may be left out of the first Answer, that
are perfected in the 2d. W. (...)
vid. init. libri.

And First, (in hope that they which have observed my Life in times past, will
give me Credit in this time of my Affliction) I do here make my solemn
Protestation, in the Presence of God, and this great Court, that I am Innocent
of any thing, greater or less, that is charged in this Article, or any part of
it. And I do here offer my Corporal Oath (Please it the Lords to give it me) in
the strictest form that any Oath can be conceived; that I am wholly Innocent of
this Charge. And let nothing be tendered against me but Truth, and I do
challenge whatsoever is between Heaven and Hell to come in and Witness
whatsoever they can against me in this Particular. For all that I have feared
in all this Charge against me, is not Guilt, but Subornation of Perjury:
Against which Innocence it self cannot be safe. And I have found the deadly
Hatred of some Men against me to be such, as that, though I cannot suspect the
House of Commons of such an Irreligious Baseness, yet I have great Cause to
suspect some particular Men, which I see make no Conscience of the Way, so they
may compass their End.

Secondly; Should I practice (be it with whom you will) to superinduce Romish
Tyranny and Superstition over the true Religion 2.
established in England, I have taken a very wrong way to it. For I have
hindered as many from going to the Roman Party, and have reduced as many from
it; and some of great Quality, and some of great Learning and Judgment; as I
believe any Divine in England has done. And is this the way to bring in Romish
Superstition, to reduce Men from it? Or is this the Reward from the State,
which Men must look for, that have done these Services?

Thirdly; The Book, which I have Written against Mr. Fisher the Jesuit, must of
Necessity either acquit me of this Calumny, or proclaim me a Villain to the
World. And I hope, I have so 3.
lived, as that Men have not that Opinion of me; sure I am, I have not deserved
it. And had this Book of mine been written according to the Garb of the Time,
fuller of Railing than Reason; a Learned Jesuit would have Laughed at it and
me; and a Learned Protestant might have thought I had Written it only to
conceal my self and my Judgment in those Difficulties. But being Written in the
way it is, I believe no Romanist will have much Cause to Joy at it, or to think
me a Favourer of their Cause. And since I am thus put to it, I will say thus
much more. This Book of mine is so Written (by God's great blessing upon me) as
that whenever the Church of England (as they are growing toward it apace)
shall depart from the Grounds which I have therein laid, she shall never be
able, before any Learned and disingaged Christian, to make good her Difference
with, and her Separation from, the Church of Rome. And let no Man think I speak
Pride or Vanity in this. For the Outrages, which have been against me, force me
to say it; and I am confident, future times will make it good; unless
Profaneness break in, and overrun the whole Kingdom; which is not a little to
be feared.

Fourthly; I must confess, I am in this Particular most unfortunate. For many
Recusants in England, and many of that Party beyond the Seas, think I have done
them and their Cause more 4.
Harm, than they which have seemed more fierce against them. And I doubt not,
but I shall be able to prove, that I have been accounted beyond Sea, the
greatest Enemy to them that ever sat in my Place. And shall I suffer on both
sides? Shall I be accounted an Enemy by one part for opposing the Papist; and
accused for a Traitor by the other for Favoring and Complying with them? Well;
If I do suffer thus, it is but because Truth usually lies between two Extremes,
and is beaten by both: (As the poor Church of England is, at this day, by the
Papist and the Separatist.) But in this, and all things else, in despite of
all Malice, Truth shall be either my Protection from Suffering, or my Comfort
while I suffer: And by God's gracious assistance I shall never depart from it,
but continue at the Apostle's Ward, 2 Cor. 13. Nihil possum contra veritatem, I
can do 2 Cor. 13. 8.
nothing against the Truth; and for it, I hope God will enable me patiently to
suffer any thing.

Fifthly; If I had practiced with the Pope, or his Agents, for the 5.
alteration of Religion in England; surely I must have used many great and
dextrous Instruments to compass my end. And in a business of so great
Consequence, Difficulty and Danger, to all that should have a Hand, nay but a
Finger in it, no Man would venture to meddle without good pay. And it is well
known, that I have filled no Purse, nor laid up any store, to set ill
Instruments on work, upon that or any other unworthy design.

Sixthly; I am a Man in Years, great Years for a Man so loaded 6.
with business as I have been all my Life: And it cannot be long, before I must
go to give God Almighty an account of all my Actions. And whatsoever the
Malignity of the Time may put upon me; yet they which know me and my ways, will
easily believe, that I have not so little Conscience, or care of my Soul, as to
double with God to my very Death. Nay, could I have doubled thus, I could
easily have seen a way through all this difficulty; and how to have been as
gracious with the People, as any, even the worst, of my Predecessors. But I
have ever held, that the lowest depth of Baseness, to frame Religion to serve
turns; and to be carried about with every wind of vain Doctrine, to serve and
please other Men's Fancies, and not a Man's own either Understanding or
Conscience.

Seventhly; I think the greatest Enemies I have, are of Opinion, 7.
that if I would have turned to the Roman Party, especially if I would have
been such an active Instrument for them, as this Article would make me, I might
have been welcome to them, and should have been rewarded by them; at least,
that I should have been made able to live in Credit, if not in Honor. And this
being granted; I would fain know, what could stay me here, save only my
Conscience in and to the Truth. Surely, not any care of Wife and Children, for
I have them not: And as this Storm drives upon me, I most humbly and heartily
bless God for it, that I have not any of these Clogs to hang about me. Not the
Greatness of my Place: For if in this present Tumble, any thing be put either
upon it or me, that a knowing Conscience ought to check at, the World shall
soon see, how little I value Canterbury in regard of Conscience. Not the Honor
of my place neither: For if I stood upon that, I cannot but see how Malice has
laid that in the Dust, or lower if it may be. And can any Man think then, that
I would endure so much hatred, and so many base Libels, as have filled the
Streets against me, and such bitter revilings of me in Print, as the Gall of
some Pens have cast upon me, when I might go live elsewhere with Content and
Reputation? Sure nothing but Conscience could stay me here in such a Condition.
Not the Wealth to be gotten in my place: For the Archbishopric of Canterbury
is far short of the value put upon it, (according as I have given a faithful
Account to his Majesty.) And if it were of never so great a value, I have made
it manifest to the World, that Wealth is not my aim. For whatsoever benefit
has accrewed to me, over and above my necessary and decent Expenses, I have
refunded back upon the Poor, or the Public, or the Church from whence I had
it; as in better times Churchmen were wont to do. So there could be no
external motive to work upon me, to make me stay here, if my Conscience went
along with Rome. And my Conscience being not that way set, (as most certainly
it is not) no Man can so much as probably think, I should with hazard of my
Life and Honor, and all things, practice the Change of Religion, and that
against my Conscience.

Eighthly; This scandalous false Report, that I should Negotiate (...).
with the Pope, and with Rome, for the Change of Religion in this Kingdom, was
first spread by the Scots, who In a Book (...), The Remonstrance of the
Nobility, (...), (...), Ministers and Commons, within the Kingdom of Scotland.
Feb. 27. 1639. p. 12. Edinburgh.
shamelesly Printed it in these words; Canterbury did Negotiate with Rome,
about the frame of our Service Book and Canons, etc. Now if this be false, why
did they Print it? And if it be true, why do they desert it? It comes a great
deal more home, than double all else they have said against me. And yet it
seems, when they had considered better of it, and found they could not make it
good, they left it quite out of those Articles which they preferred into the
Parliament of England against me. And I presume, they would never have left
that out which they had published in Print to the World, could they have gotten
any show of Proof. Immediately upon the arrival of this Pamphlet in England,
Court, City, and Country grew presently full of it; that the Archbishop of
Canterbury had Negotiated with Rome about the alteration of Religion. And since
they have thus Defamed me, and that in Print, I do challenge Mr. Alexander
Henderson, (who doubtless was either sole Author of that Remonstrance, or had a
great hand in it) either to make it good against me; or by like Public
acknowledgment of it in Print, give me satisfaction for so foul a Calumny; or
to answer me, when I shall not fail to challenge him for it, at the Bar of
Christ.

Lastly; I received Information out of Holland, when his Majesty 9.
was last in the North, that there was a Plot laid of a dangerous Treason
against his Majesty's Life: That this Treason was plotted here in England, by
Signior Con and his Accomplices; and that these Contrivers took a deep dislike
against me, because they could not get within me, nor make me pliable to their
Projects about Religion; and that they were so angry with me for it, as that
they resolved my Life must be first taken away, before they could hope to get
their Will of the King. This Advertisement came to me from one, that professed
he was in the Bosom of Con, and knew all the Secrets of his Employments hither.
This business was first made known under an Oath of (...) (as I remember) to
Sir William Boswell, his Majesty's Agent in Holland; and it was ordered between
them, that his Papers should be sent over sealed to me, as they were, and that
by an Express; and a Charge to deliver them to no Hand but mine, as he tendered
the King's safety, in regard so many Great Men were (as he said) in the
Treason. I sent away these Letters and Papers to his Majesty's own Hands; and
received direction, what Answer I should give to Sir William Boswell. At his
Majesty's return, at the beginning of this Parliament, he named a Committee of
Lords to hear this business, and commanded me to bring the Papers thither. This
I did, and they were all Read before his Majesty and the Committee. Sir William
Boswell's These Papers were taken (...) the Archbishop by Pryn, 1643. May. 31.
and shortly after Published (...) a Pamphlet Entitled Rome's Masterpiece. H.
W. Ps. 31. (...), 16.
Letters and the other Papers are yet all in my Hands; but it seems, the
Particulars could not all be got out. Now this is a hard straight, into which I
am cast. The Pope's Agent (as it is said) plots my Death on the one side,
because I will not be wrought upon to help to bring in the Roman Superstition;
and the Parliament on the other side Articles to overthrow me, out of a
Jealousy that I go about to bring it in. So that I am in the Prophet David's
Case, Ps. 31. For I (also) have heard the Blasphemy of the Multitude, and fear
is on every side, while they conspire together against me, and take their
Counsel to take away my Life. But my hope has been (and is) in thee, O Lord.

And for the latter part of this Article, it is utterly untrue, that ever I
either permitted or countenanced any Popish Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical
Government to be Established in this Kingdom: And if any such be Established,
it is more than I know, to this Instant. But this I am sure of, and can prove,
that when the Queen's Almoner was to be made a Bishop, I labored as much
against it as I could: Whereupon he delayed the taking of his Bishopric upon
him, for a good time. And when diverse Offers were made on his behalf, and the
Queen grew earnest for his Preferment; I was called again by his Majesty, in
the presence of a Secretary of State, and commanded to speak my Judgment and my
Conscience. And I did so: And declared clearly against any Bishops of the Roman
Party his coming into the Kingdom, to reside, or exercise any Jurisdiction
here. And I gave then for my Reason, the very self-same which is since
Published by the (...) of Commons in their Remonstrance; A different and
Remonst. die Mercurij. 15. December. 1641. p. 20.
inconsistent Church within a Church, which ever brought hazard upon the State.
And in this Judgment I persisted, and never permitted, much less countenanced,
any Popish Hierarchy to settle in this Kingdom; but hindered it, by all the
(...) and means I could.

11. He in his own Person, and his Suffragans, Visitors, Surrogats,
Chancellors, or other Officers, by his Command, have caused diverse Learned,
Pious, and Orthodox Ministers, Rushw. and (...).
Preachers of Gods Word, to be Silenced, Suspended, Deprived, Degraded,
Excommunicated, or otherwise grieved and vexed, without any just and lawful
Cause; whereby, and by diverse other Means, he has hindered the Preaching of
God's Word, caused diverse of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects to forsake the
Kingdom, and increased and cherished Ignorance and Profaneness amongst the
People: That so he might the better facilitate the way to the effecting of his
own Wicked and Traiterous Design, Rush. and Pryn.
Designs, of altering and corrupting the True Religion here Established.

I have neither by my self, nor by my Command to my Officers, (...)
Silenced, Suspended, Deprived, Degraded, or Excommunicated any Learned, Pious,
and Orthodox Preachers, nor any other, but upon Just Cause Proved in Court, and
according to Law. And I think it will appear, that as few (be the Cause never
so Just) have been Suspended or Deprived in my Diocese, as in any Diocese in
England. Nor have I by these Suspensions, hindered the Preaching of Gods Word,
but of Schism and Sedition; as now appears plainly by the Sermons frequently
made in London, since the time of Liberty given and taken since this Parliament
[first began.] Nor have I caused any of his Majesty's Subjects to forsake the
Kingdom; but they forsook it of themselves, being Separatists from the Church
of England; as is more than manifest to any Man, that will but consider what
kind of Persons went to New England.

And whereas in their late Remonstr. Die Mercurij 15. (...) 1641. p. 14.
Remonstrance they say; The high Commission grew to such excess of Sharpness
and Severity, as was not much less than the Romish Inquisition; and yet in many
Cases by the Archbishops Power was made much more heavy, being assisted and
strengthened by Authority of the Council Table. I was much troubled at it, that
such an Imputation from so great a Body should be fastened on me. And therefore
first I considered, that my Predecessors were all or most of them strengthened
with the same Authority of the Council Table, that I was: And therefore if I
did use that Authority to worse ends, or in a worse manner, than they did, I
was the more to blame. Therefore to satisfy my self and others in this
particular, I did in the next place cause a diligent search to be made in the
Acts of that Court (which can deceive no Man) what Suspensions, Deprivations or
other Punishments had past in the Seven Years of my Time before my Commitment.
Then I compared them with every of the Three Seven Years of my immediate
Predecessor (for so long he sat, and somewhat over, and was in great esteem
with the House of Commons all his Time) and I find more by Three Suspended,
Deprived, or Degraded, in every Seven Years of his Time, than in the Seven
Years of my Time, so cried out upon (as you see) for Sharpness and Severity,
even to the equasling of that Commission almost to the Romish Inquisition. So
safe a thing it is for a Man (...) Imbarque himself into a Potent Faction; and
so hard for any other Man, be he never so entire, to withstand its Violence.

12. He has (...) endeavored to cause Division and Discord between the Church
of England and other Reformed Churches: And to that end has Suppressed and
Abrogated the Privileges and Immunities, which have been by his Majesty and
his Royal Ancestors granted to the French and Dutch Churches in this Kingdom;
And diverse other ways has expressed his Malice and Disaffiction to these
Churches; that so by such Distinction, Rushw. Disunion, Pryn.
Disunion the Papists might have more advantage for the Overthrow and
Extripation of both.

I never endeavored to set Division between the Church of England Ad (...).
and other Reformed Churches: And if I had so done, it had been a very
Unchristian and unworthy Act; but yet no Treason, as I conceive. And for the
Privileges and Immunities, granted by his Majesty, and his Royal Progenitors,
to the French and Dutch Churches in this Kingdom; I did not seek to Suppress or
Abrogate any of them, which kept Conform to their first Toleration here; much
less did I labor by any Disunion betwixt them and us to advantage the Papists,
to the overthrow of both. But this I found, that they did not use their
Privileges with that Gratitude and Fairness to his Majesty, the State, and
Church of England, as they ought to have done. And hereupon I acquainted his
Majesty and the Lords, in full and open Council, with what I conceived
concerning that business. As Namely,

1. That their living as they did, and standing so strictly to their own
Discipline, wrought upon the Party in England, which were addicted to them, and
made them more averse, than otherwise they would have been, to the present
Government of the Church of England.

2. That by this means they lived in England, as if they were a kind of God's
Israel in Egypt, to the great Dishonor of the Church of England, to which at
first they fled for Shelter against Persecution. And in that time of their
Danger, the Church of England was in their Esteem not only a true but a
glorious Church. But by this Favor, which that Church received, it grew up and
incroached upon us, till it became a Church within a Church, and a kind of
State within a State. And this I ever held dangerous, how small beginning
soever it had: And that upon two main Reasons. The one, because I find the
Wisdom of God against it. For he says plainly to his prime People, One Law,
(and especially for Divine Worship) shall be to him that is home-born, and to
the Stranger that Sojourns among you, Exodus 12. And the other, because Exodus
12. 49.
I find the Wisdom of this State against it. For this Parliament, in their
Remonstrance, give the self-same Reason against the Papists, Which.
but must hold good against all Sects that labor to make strong and enlarge
themselves. The Words are these, Remonst. Die Mercurii, 15. December. 1641. p. 20.
Another State molded within this State, independent in Government, contrary
in Interest and Affection, (...) corrupting the Ignorant or Negligent
Professors of our Religion, and closely Uniting and Combining themselves
against such as are sound, in this posture waiting for an Opportunity, etc. And
the Words are as true of the one Faction, as the other; and I ever pressed the
Argument alike against both; as I can prove by good Witness, if need be. And I
pray God, this Faction, too little feared, and too much nourished among us,
have not now found the Opportunity waited for.

3. That they live here, and enjoy all freedom, and yet for the most part scorn
so much as to learn the Language, or to converse with any, more than for
advantage of Bargaining. And will take no Englishman to be their Apprentice,
nor teach them any of their Manufactures: which I did then, and do still, think
most unreasonable.

4. That for Religion, if after so many descents of their Children born in the
Land, and so Native Subjects, these Children of theirs should refuse to Pray
and Communicate with the Church of England, into whose bosom their Parents fled
at first for succor; I thought then, and do still, that no State could with
safety, or would in Wisdom, endure it. And this concerning their Children, was
all that was desired by me: As appears by 26. September. 1635.
the Act, which my Vicar General made concerning those Churches at Canterbury,
Sandwitch, and Maidstone, in my Diocese, and 11. October. 1635.
the Publication of this Act in their Congregations, by their own Ministers, in
this Form following.

I am commanded to signify unto you, that it is not his Majesty's intent, nor
of the Council of State, to dissolve our Congregations. And to that end, his
Majesty is content to permit the Natives of the first degree, to continue
Members of our Congregations, as before. But the Natives in this Church, after
the first descent, are enjoined to obey my Lord Archbishop his Injunction;
which is to conform themselves to the English Discipline and Liturgy, every one
in his Parish; without inhibiting them notwithstanding, from resorting
sometimes to our Assemblies. And my Lord Archbishop of (...) means
notwithstanding; that the said Natives shall continue to contribute to the
Maintenance of the Ministry and Poor of this Church, for the better subsisting
thereof: And promises to obtain an Order from the Council, if need be, and
they require it, to maintain them in their Manufactures, against those which
would trouble them by Informations.

Now that which I enjoined the French and Dutch Churches, was to a syllable all
one with this, in all parts of my Province where these Churches resided: As at
South-hampton, and Norwich. And I have a Dat. Sept. 14. 1635.
Letter to show, full of thanks, from the Ministers and Elders of the French
and Walloon-Churches at Norwich. All which is far from an endeavor to suppress
any just Privileges and Immunities, which these Churches had in England, or
ought to have in any well-governed Kingdom.

And since this time I have not only seen, but gotten, the very Original Letter
of Queen Elizabeth of Happy Memory, written to the Lord Treasurer Pawlet,
specifying what Order she would should be taken with, and for, these Churches.
The Letter is Signed with her Majesty's own Hand and Signet; and gives them not
half so much Liberty, I do not say as they take, but as I have been ever most
content to give them. For the Queen in these Letters allows them nothing
contrary to her Laws; and therefore nothing but our Liturgy in their own
Language, not another Form of Divine Service and Discipline, much different
from it. This was the Wisdom of those times, which I pray God we may follow.
The Queen's Letter follows in these words.

Elizabeth.
RIght Trusty and right well-beloved Cozen, we greet you well.
Whereas in the time of our Brother, and Sister also, the Church of the late
Augustine Friars was appointed to the use of all the Strangers reparing to the
City of London, for to have therein Divine Service; considering, that by an
Universal Order, all the rest of the Churches have the Divine Service in the
English Tongue, for the better edifying of the People, which the Strangers Born
understand not. Our Pleasure is, that you shall Assign and Deliver the said
Church, and all things thereto belonging, to the Reverend Father in God the
Bishop of London, to be appointed to such Curates and Ministers as he shall
think good, to serve from time to time in the same Churches, both for daily
Divine Service, and for Administration of the Sacraments, and Preaching of the
Gospel: so as no Rite nor Use be therein observed, contrary or derogatory to
our Laws. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge
in that behalf.

Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminster the...... of February, the
Second Year of our Reign.
To our Trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, the Marquess of
Winchester, High Treasurer of England.

13. He has maliciously and Traitorously Plotted, and endeavored to stir up
War and Enmity betwixt his Majesty's two Kingdoms of England and Scotland; and
to that purpose has labored to introduce into the Kingdom of Scotland diverse
Innovations both in Religion and Government, all or the most part tending to
Popery and Superstition; to the great Grievance and Discontent of his Majesty's
Subjects of that Nation. And for their refusing to submit to such Innovations,
he did traitorously Advise his Majesty to Subdue them by Force of Arms: And by
his own Authority and Power, contrary to Law, did procure sundry of his
Majesty's Subjects, and enforced the Clergy of this Kingdom, to contribute
toward the Maintenance of that War. And when his Majesty with much Wisdom and
Justice had made a Pacification betwixt the two Kingdoms; the said Archbishop
did presumptuously censure that Pacification, as Dishonorable to his Majesty;
and [by his Counsel and Endeavours] so incensed These Words are added from
Pryn, and Rushw.
his Majesty against his said Subjects of Scotland, that he did thereupon, by
Advice of the said Archbishop, enter into an offensive War against them, to
the great (...) of his Majesty's Person, and his Subjects of both Kingdoms.

I did not Endeavor to stir up War between his Majesty's two Ad 13.
Kingdoms of England and Scotland; but my Counsels were for Peace: As may
appear by the Counsel which I gave at Theobalds in the beginning of these
unhappy Differences. For there my Counsel only put a stay upon the Business, in
hope his Majesty might have a better Issue without, than with a War. And if I
were mistaken in this Counsel, yet it agreed well with my Profession and with
the Cause, which was differences in Religion, which I conceived might better be
composed by Ink than by Blood. And I think it cannot easily be forgotten that I
gave this Counsel: For my Lord the Earl of Arundel opposed me openly at the
Table then, and said my Grounds would deceive me. And my Lord the Earl of
Holland came to me, so soon as we were risen from Counsel, and was pleased to
say to me, that I had done my self and my Calling a great deal of Right, and
the King my Master the best Service, that ever I did him in my Life. And Mr.
Patrick Maule.
Male, of his Majesty's Bedchamber, when he heard what I had done, came and
gave me a great deal of Thanks in the Name of that Nation.

Nor did I labor to introduce into the Kingdom of Scotland any Innovations in
Religion or Government: Neither do all, or the most part, or indeed any of
those pretended Innovations tend to Popery or Superstition, as has before been
sufficiently proved. Neither did I, upon their refusal to submit to these,
Advise his Majesty to Subdue them by force of Arms, but the Counsels which I
gave were open, either at the Committee, or the Council Table. Neither did I by
my own Power and Authority, contrary to Law, procure any of his Majesty's
Subjects, or enforce the Clergy of England to contribute to the maintenance of
that War: But the Subsidies which were given to his Majesty at that time, were
given freely, and in open Convocation, and without any practice of my self, or
any other; as appears by what I have formerly laid down.

But because so much noise has been made against me both in the Scottish
Charge before answered, and in this Article about Popish Innovations in that
Service Book, and that I labored the introducing both of it and them: I think
it fit, if not necessary, to set down briefly the Story what was done, and what
I did, and by what Command in all that Business. And it follows.

Dr. John Maxwel, the late Bishop of Ross, came to me from his Majesty, it was
during the time of a great and dangerous Fever, under which I then labored: It
was in the Year 1629. in August or September, which come that time is Feb. 8.
1641.
Thirteen Years since. The Cause of his coming was to speak with me about a
Liturgy for Scotland. At his coming I was so extreme Ill, that I saw him not.
And had Death (which I then expected daily, as did my Friends and Physicians
also) seized on me, I had not seen this heavy time. After this, when I was able
to sit up, he came to me again, and told me it was his Majesty's Pleasure, that
I should receive Instructions from some Bishops of Scotland concerning a
Liturgy for that Church; and that he was employed from my Lord the Archbishop
of St. Andrews, and other Prelates there about it. I told him I was clear of
Opinion, that if his Majesty would have a Liturgy settled there, it were best to
take the English Liturgy without any variation, that so the same Service Book
might be established in all his Majesty's Dominions: Which I did then, and do
still think would have been a great Happiness to this State, and a great Honor
and Safety to Religion. To this he replied, that he was of a contrary Opinion,
and that not he only, but the Bishops of that Kingdom thought their Countrymen
would be much better satisfied, it a Liturgy were framed by their own Clergy,
than to have the English Liturgy put upon them; yet he added, that it might be
according to the Form of our English Service Book. I answered to this, that if
this were the Resolution of my Brethren the Bishops of Scotland, I would not
entertain so much as Thoughts about it, till I might by God's Blessing have
Health and Opportunity to wait upon his Majesty, and receive his farther
directions from himself.

When I was able to go abroad, I came to his Majesty, and represented all that
had passed. His Majesty avowed the sending of Dr. Maxwell to me, and the
Message sent by him. But then he inclined to my Opinion, to have the English
Service without any alteration to be established there: And in this Condition I
held that Business, for two if not three Years at least. Afterward, the
Scottish Bishops still pressing his Majesty that a Liturgy Framed by
themselves, and in some few things different from ours, would relish better
with their Countrymen. They at last prevailed with his Majesty, to have it so,
and carried it against me, notwithstanding all I could say or do to the
contrary. Then his Majesty Commanded me to give the Bishops of Scotland my best
Assistance in this Way and Work. I delayed as much as I could with my
Obedience; and when nothing would serve, but it must go on; I confess I was
then very serious, and gave them the best help I could. But wheresoever I had
any doubt, I did not only acquaint his Majesty with it, but Writ down most of
the Amendments or Alterations in his Majesty's Presence. And I do verily
believe, there is no one thing in that Book, which may not stand with the
Conscience of a right Good Protestant. Sure I am his Majesty approved them all;
and I have his Warrant under his Royal Hand for all that I did about that Book.
And to the end the Book may be extant, and come to the view of the Christian
World, and their Judgment of it be known; I have caused it to be exactly
Translated into Latin, and, if right be done, it shall be Printed with this
History. This was that which I did concerning the Matter and Substance of this
Service Book.

As for the way of Introducing it, I ever advised the Bishops, both in his
Majesty's Presence, and at other times, both by Word and by Writing, that they
would look carefully to it, and be sure to do nothing about it but what should
be agreeable to the Laws of that Kingdom: And that they should at all times be
sure to take the Advice of the Lords of his Majesty's Council in that Kingdom,
and govern themselves and their Proceedings accordingly. Which Course if they
have not followed, that can no way reflect upon me, who have both in this, and
all things else, been as careful of their Laws as any Man who is a Stranger to
them could be. And in a Letter of mine after my last coming out of Scotland,
thus I wrote to the late Reverend Archbishop of S. Andrews, September. 30. 1633.
concerning the Liturgy: That whether that of England, or another were resolved
on, yet (...) should proceed Circumspectly; Because his Majesty had no
intendment to do any thing, but that which was according to Honor and Justice,
and the Laws of that Kingdom: And a Copy of this Letter I have yet by me to
show: And for the truth of this Narration, I know His Majesty, (and my Lord of
Ross) himself will avow it.

And here I take leave to acquaint the Reader, That this was no new Conceit of
His Majesty, to have a Liturgy framed, and Canons made for the Church of
Scotland: For he followed his Royal Father King James his Example and Care
therein, who took Order for both at the Proceedings of the Assembly at Perth.
p. 40. and 68.
Assembly of Perth, An. 1618.

And now to return again to the Article. There is one Charge more in it, and
that is concerning the P. 41.
Pacification made the (...) Year. The Article says I did Censure it as
Dishonorable; and Advise for a new War: But I did neither. That which I spoke,
was openly at the Council Table, and in His Majesty's presence: And it was
this. There arose a debate at the Table, about these Affairs, and the
Pacification; and I said that I did often wish from my Heart that His Majesty
had kept the Army which he had at Barwick together but Eight or Ten Days
longer: And that I did not doubt, but that if he had so done, he might have had
more Honorable Conditions of his Scottish Subjects. This I said, and more or
otherwise I said not; and whosoever shall relate them otherwise, forgets Truth.
Now to say, that His Majesty might have had more Honorable Conditions, does
not infer, that the Pacification then made was upon Dishonorable Conditions;
but only upon less Honorable than it might have been. And I had great Reason
to observe my own words, and remember them; because I saw some Lords at the
Table touched with them, perhaps in their own Particulars.

Nor was I alone in this Judgment: For my Lord the Earl of Holland, though he
then said nothing at the Council Table; yet at his first return from Barwick,
his Lordship did me the Honor to come and see me at Lambeth: And in the
Gallery there, while we were discoursing of the Affairs in the North; of
himself he used these words to me: That His Majesty did too suddenly dissolve
his Army there; indeed so suddenly, that every body wondered at it: And that
for his part he was so sorry, especially for the dismissing of all the Horse;
(which he said were as good as any were in Christendom:) And farther, that he
offered His Majesty to keep one Thousand of them for a Year at his own and his
Friends Charge, till the King might see all things well settled again in
Scotland. By which it is apparent, that in his Lordships Judgment things might
have been better, had not that Army been so suddenly dissolved: And I hope it
was no Sin in me to wish the best success, and the most Honor to the King's
Affairs.

Now that which moved me to say thus at the Council Table, was this. The last
Article in the Pacification was, To restore to every one of His Majesty's
Subjects their Liberties, Lands, Houses, Goods and Means whatsoever, taken and
detained from them by whatsoever means since the aforesaid time: But within two
Days (or three at the most) after the Pacification agreed upon, and concluded,
the Lord Lindsay made an open and public Protestation either in the Camp at
Dunns, or at the (...) in Edinburgh, or both, that no Clergy Man, his Goods or
Means (...).
was included in the Pacification: Which yet expresses every one of His
Majesty's Subjects. And this, I did then conceive, (and do still) was a very
bold audacious Act of that Lord, very injurious to the Poor Clergy, and not so
Honorable for the King. And this made me say, and I say it still, His Majesty
might have had more Honorable Conditions, and his Pacification better kept,
had he continued his Army but Eight or Ten Days longer: For in all probability
the Scots could not so long have continued their Army together. And I did
farther conceive, that by this Act of the Lord Lindsay in protesting, and by
the Scots making his Protestation good against the Clergy, there was a direct
and manifest Breach of the Pacification on their behalf. And then, though I saw
no Reason why the King should be bound to keep that mutual Pacification, which
they had broken; (for a Knot must be fast at both ends, or loose at both:) Yet
remembering my Calling, I did not Incense His Majesty against his Subjects in
Scotland; nor did hereupon advise the undertaking of an Offensive War against
them; nor ever give other Counsel in this Particular, than what I openly gave
before the Lords, either in the Committee, or at the Board: And there my
Concurring in Opinion with all the rest of the Lords, was (I hope) no other,
nor no greater fault, than in them, though I be thus singled out.

And for the Pacification, I shall say thus much more: Though I could with all
my Heart have wished it more Honorable for the King, and more express and safe
for my Brethren of the Clergy; yet all things Considered, which were put unto
me, I did approve it. For before the Pacification was fully agreed upon, His
Majesty did me the Honor to write unto me all with his own Hand: In this
Letter He Commanded me, all delay set apart, to send him my Judgment plainly
and freely what I thought of the Pacification; which was then almost ready for
conclusion. I in all Humility approved of the Pacification, as it was then put
to me; and sent my Answer presently back, and my Reasons why I approved it:
Little thinking then, but that my Poor Brethren the Bishops of Scotland should
have had all restored unto them, according to the Article of the Pacification,
before recited; or at least for so long, till they had defended themselves and
their Calling, and their Cause, in a free General Assembly, and as free a
Parliament. Now this was ever Assured.
assumed to me should be done; and to procure this, was all which the Bishops
seemed to desire of me. And for the Truth of this I appeal to His Majesty, to
whom I writ it: And to my Lord Marquess Hamilton, to whom the King showed my
Letter, (As my Lord Marquess himself told me at his return.) And to Dr. Juxon
Lord Bishop of London, then Lord High Treasurer of England; to whom I showed my
Letter before I sent it away. And this is all I did concerning the Pacification.

14. That to preserve himself from being questioned for these and other his
Traiterous Courses, he has labored to subvert the Rights of Parliament, and
the Ancient Course of Parliamentary proceedings; And by false and malicious
Slanders to incense His Majesty against Parliaments. By which Words, Counsels,
and Actions, he has Traitorously, and contrary to his Allegiance, labored to
alienate the Hearts of the Kings Liege People from his Majesty, to set a
Division between them, and to (...) and Destroy his Majesty's Kingdoms. For
which they do impeach him of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and Dignity.

I did never Labor to subvert the rights of Parliaments, or the ancient Ad 14.
Course of their Proceedings: And not doing it at all, I could not do it to
keep my self from being questioned. Much less did I by any malicious Slanders,
or any other way, incense his Majesty against Parliaments, nor ever thereby
labor to alienate the Hearts of the King's Liege People from his Majesty, nor
to set any Division between them, or to Ruin and Destroy his Majesty's
Kingdoms. And am no way Guilty in the least Degree of High Treason against our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

It is true, I have been much and very often grieved, to see the great
distractions which have happened of later Years, both in King James his time,
and since, about the Breaches which have been in Parliaments. And I have as
heartily wished, and to my Power endeavored, that all Parliaments which have
been called, might come to their Happy Issue, and end in the Contentment of the
King and his People. And I have ever been of Opinion, and I shall Live and Dye
in it; That there can be no true and settled Happiness in this or any other
Kingdom, but by a fair and Legal, as well as Natural Agreement between the King
and his People; and that, according to the Course of England, this Agreement is
in a great proportion founded upon Parliaments. Now Parliaments (as I humbly
conceive) can never better preserve their own Rights, than by a free and
honorable way, to keep up the Greatness and Power of their King; that so he
may be the better able, against all Foreign Practices, to keep up the Honor
as well as the Safety of the Nation; both which usually stand or fall together.
And if any particular Men's Miscarriages have distempered any Parliaments, and
caused or occasioned a Breach; I have (upon the Grounds before laid) been as
sorry as any Man for it, but never contributed any thing to it. And I hope it
is not Criminal to think, that Parliaments may sometimes, in some things, by
Misinformation or otherwise, be mistaken, as well as other Courts.

This in conclusion I clearly think, Parliaments are the best preservers of the
Ancient Laws and Rights of this Kingdom. But this I think too, that Corruption
optimi est Pessima; that no Corruption is so bad, so foul, so dangerous, as
that which is of the best. And therefore, if Parliaments should at any time be
misguided by practice of a (...) Party; nothing then so dangerous as such a
(...); because the highest Remedy being Corrupted, (...) sure Redress left at
all. And we had a lamentable (...) of such a Parliament, (...) Hen. 4. was set
up. For that (...) was the Cause of (...) the Civil Wars, and that great (...)
of Blood which followed soon after in this Kingdom. God make us mindful and
careful to prevent the like.

The said Commons do farther aver, that the said William Archbishop of
Canterbury, during the time, in which the A forementioned Crimes, Rushworth.
Crimes aforementioned were done and committed, Pryn.
Treasons and Offenses aforementioned were Committed, has been a Bishop, or
Archbishop in this Realm of England, one of the King's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Matters, and One of, Rush. and Pryn.
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council: And that he has taken an Oath
for his Faithful discharge of the said Office of Counselor, and has likewise
taken the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance. And the said Commons by
Protestation, saving to themselves the Liberty of Exhibiting at any time
hereafter, any other Accusation or Impeachment against the said Archbishop,
and also of replying to the Answers that the said Archbishop shall make unto
the said Articles, or to any of them; and of offering farther Proof also of the
Premises, or any of them [ These words are added from Pryn and Rushworth.
or of any other Impeachment or Accusation that shall be exhibited by them] as
the Case shall, according to the Course of Parliaments, require; do pray that
the said Archbishop may be put to answer to all and every the Premises; and
that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trial and Judgment may be upon every of
them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

This is the Conclusion of these general Articles then put up against me; and
is added only for Form, and so requires no Answer from me. But in the Close,
they of the House of Commons make two Petitions to the Lords; and both were
granted, as it is fit they should. The one is, That they may add farther
Accusations, or farther Proof of this, as the Course of Parliaments require.
And I refuse no such either Accusation or Proof; so the due Course of
Parliaments be kept. The other is, That there may be such Proceedings,
Examinations, Trial and Judgment, as is agreeable to Law and Justice. And such
Proceedings my Innocence can never decline. But whether the Proceedings
hitherto against me, be according to the Ancient Proceedings in Parliament, or
to Law and Justice, I leave Posterity to judge: Since they which here seem so
earnestly to call for Examinations, Trial and Judgment, have not to Feb. 10.
1641.
this Day proceeded to any Trial, nay, have not so much as brought up any
particular Charge against me, it being almost a full Year since they brought up
this general Charge, and called for Examinations and Trial; and yet have kept
me in Prison all this while, to the great Weakening of my Aged Body, and Waste
of my poor Fortunes: And how much longer they mean to keep me there, God knows.
Whereas all that I do desire, is a Just and Fair Trial, with such an Issue,
better or worse, as it shall (...) God to give.

CAP. VIII.
WHen these Articles had been Read unto me in the Upper House, and I had spoken
to the Lords, in a general Answer to them, what I thought fit, as is before
expressed: I humbly desired of the Lords (this being upon Friday Feb. 26.) that
my going Feb. 26. 1640.
to the Tower might be put off till the Monday after, that so I might have time
to be the better fitted for my Lodging. This I humbly thank their Lordships was
granted. I returned to Mr. Vide (...). p. 202.
Maxwell's Custody, and that Afternoon sent my Steward to Sir William Balfore,
then Lieutenant, that a Lodging might be had for me with as much convenience as
might be. On Monday March 1. Mar. (...). 1640.
Mr. Maxwell carried me in his Coach to the Tower. St. George's Feast, having
been formerly put off, was to begin that Evening. By this means Mr. Maxwell
(whose Office tied him to attendance upon that Solemnity) could not possibly go
with me to the Tower at Evening, as I desired. Therefore Noon, when the
Citizens were at Dinner, was chosen as the next fittest time for Privateness.
All was well, till I passed through Newgate Shambles, and entered into
Cheapside. There some one Prentice first Hallowed out; And more.
more and followed the Coach, (the Number still increasing as they went) till
by that time I came to the Exchange, the shouting was exceeding great. And so
they followed me with Clamor and Revilings, even beyond Barbarity it self; not
giving over, till the Coach was entered in at the Tower-Gate. Mr. Maxwell, out
of his Love and Care, was extremely troubled at it; but I bless God for it, my
Patience was not moved: I looked upon a higher Cause, than the Tongues of
Shimei and his Children.

The same Day there was a Committee for Religion named in the Mar. 1. 1640.
Upper House of Parliament; Ten Earls, Ten Bishops, and Ten Barons. So the Lay
Votes will be double to the Clergy; that they may carry what they will for
Truth. This Committee professes to meddle with Doctrine, as well as Ceremonies;
and to that end will call some Divines to them, to consider of and prepare
Business. This appears by a Letter sent by Dr. Williams, then Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, now Lord Archbishop of York, to some Divines, which were named to
attend this Service. The Copy of the Letter follows.

WIth my best Wishes unto you in Christ Jesus. I am Commanded Mar. 12. 1640.
by the Lords of the Committee for Innovations in Matters of Religion, to let
you know, that their said Lordships have assigned and appointed you to attend
on them as Assistant in that Committee. And to let you know in general, that
their Lordships do intend to examine all Innovations in Doctrine or Discipline,
introduced into the Church without Law since the Reformation; and (if their
Lordships shall in their Judgments find it behoveful for the good of the Church
and State) to Examine after that, the degrees and perfection of the Reformation
it self: Which I am directed to intimate unto you, that you may prepare your
Thoughts, Studies and Meditations accordingly: Expecting their Lordships
pleasure for the particular points, as they shall arise; and giving you to
understand, that their Lordships next sitting, is upon Friday next in the
Afternoon. I recommend you to God's protection, being

Your very loving Friend and Brother, Jo. Lincoln.
West. Coll. 12 Martij 1640. To my very loving Friends and Brethren, Dr.
Brownrig. Mr. Shute. Dr. Featly. Mr. Calamy. Dr. Hacket. Mr. White. Dr.
Westfield. Mr. Marshal. Dr. Burges.

What use will be made of this Committee, for the present I shall expect; but
what it shall produce in future, I dare not prophecy. But it may be, it will
prove in time superior to the National Synods of England: And what that may
work in this Church and State, God knows.

I settled my self in my Lodging in the Tower, where I yet am, and pass my weary
time as well as I can. On Saturday, Mar. 13. Diverse Mar. 13. 1640.
Lords dined with the Lord Herbert. Son to the Earl of Worcester, at his new
House by Fox-Hall in Lambeth. As they came back after Dinner, three young Lords
were in a Boat together, and St. Paul's Church was in their Eye. Hereupon one
of them said, he was sorry for my Commitment, if it were but for the building
of St. Paul's, which would go but slowly on there-while. The Lord Brook, who was
one of the three, replied, I hope one of us shall live to see, no one stone
left upon another of that building. This was told and avowed by one of the
Lords present: And when I heard it, I said, now the Lord forbid; and bless his
poor Church in this Kingdom.

CAP. IX.
ON Monday, Mar. 22. the Earl of Strafford's Trial began in Mar. 22. 1641.
Westminster Hall: And it continued with some few Intermissions till the end of
April. The Earl got all the time a great deal of Reputation by his Patient, yet
Stout and clear Answers, and changed many Understanding Men's Minds concerning
him: Insomuch, that the great Lawyers of his Council affirmed there openly,
That there was no Treason appearing to them by any Law. Upon this the House of
Commons (who were all the while present in a Body) left the Hall, and instead
of leaving the whole Cause to the Judgment of the Lords in the ordinary Way of
Parliaments, betook themselves to their Legislative Power, and so passed a Bill
of Attainder against him; and having none, made a Law to take away his Life.
This Bill was denied by two or three and fifty, as able Men as any in the House
of Commons. But the Faction grew so hot, that all their Names were Pasted up at
the Exchange under the Title of Straffordians, thereby to increase the Hatred
of the People, both against him and them; and the Libels multiplied

This Bill went on with great haste and earnestness; which the King observing,
and loath to lose so great and good a Servant, his Majesty came into the House
of Lords, and there upon Saturday Maii 1. Declared unto both Houses how
carefully he had Maij 1. 1641.
heard and observed all the Charge against the Earl of Strafford, See the
King's Speech apud Rush. p. 239.
(for he was present at every Days Hearing) and found that his Fault, whatever
it were, could not amount to Treason: And added, That if they meant to proceed
by Bill, it must pass by him, and that he could not in his Conscience find him
guilty, nor would ever wrong his Honor or his Conscience so far, as to pass
such a Bill; or to that Effect. But advised them to proceed by way of
Misdemeanour, and he would concur with them in any Sentence. This displeased
mightily, and I verily think it hastened the Earl's Death. And indeed to what
end should the King come voluntarily to say this, and there, unless he would
have abode by it, whatever came? And it had been far more Regal to reject the
Bill when it had been brought to him, (his Conscience standing so as his
Majesty openly professed it did) than to make this Honorable Preface, and let
the Bill pass after.

The House of Commons, and some Lords too, it seems, eagerly bent against the
Earl of Strafford, seeing by this the King's bent, grew more sharp, and pursued
the Bill the more violently: In so much that within two or three Days after,
some Citizens of London and Prentices came down in Multitudes to the
Parliament, called there for Justice, and pretended all Trade was stopped, till
Justice was done upon the Earl of Strafford. Who brought on the People to this
way, I would not tell you if I did certainly know; but wise Men see that plain
enough without telling. These People press upon the Lords in a way unknown in
the English Government, yea or in any settled Government in Christendom. In
conclusion, they are taught to threaten the King and his Court in a strange
Manner, if they may not have speedy Justice. The Bill comes up to the Lords,
when the House was none of the fullest, (but what made so many absent I know
not) and there it past. And upon Sunday, May 9. the King was so laid at, and so
Maij 9. 1641.
frighted with these Bugbears, that if Justice were not done, and the Bill
Passed for the Earl of Strafford's Execution, the Multitude would come the Next
Day, and pull down White Hall, (and God knows what might become of the King
himself) that these fears prevailing, his Majesty gave way, and the Bill
passed; and that Night late, Sir Dudly Carlton, one of the Clerks of the
Council, was sent to the Tower, to give the Earl warning that he must prepare
to Dye the Wednesday Morning following.

The Earl of Strafford received the Message of Death with great Courage, yet
Sweetness; (as Sir Dudly himself after told me:) On Monday Morning the Earl
sent for the Lord Primate of Armagh to come to him. He came; and the same Day
visited me, and gave me very high Testimony of the Earl's Sufficiency and
Resolution: And among the rest this; That he never knew any Layman in all his
Life, that so well and fully understood Matters of Divinity, as the Earl did;
and that his Resolutions were as firm and as good.

In this Interim before the Day of his Death, he made by his Friends two Suits
to his Majesty: The one, that he might Dye privately within the Tower; the
other, That his Death might be Respited till the Saturday, that he might have a
little more time to settle his Estate. His Majesty sent these Requests to the
Houses. Answer was returned to the first, That the People would not
besatisfied, nor believe he was Dead, unless they saw him Dye publicly. And to
the second, That time enough was given already; and that if any farther delay
were used, the People would think Justice should not be done at all, and resort
thither again in Multitudes, to the hazard of Public Peace.

The Earl made these two Suits; and in the mean time one Offer was made to him.
It was this, That if he would employ his Power and Credit with the King, for
the taking of Episcopacy out of the Church, he should yet have his Life. His
Christian Answer was very Heroical; Namely, That he would not buy his Life at
so dear a rate. The Man that sent him this Message was his Brother-in-Law, Mr.
Denzill Hollis, one of the great Leading Men in the House of Commons: And my
Lord Primate of Armagh, avowed this from the Earl of Strafford's own Mouth. And
as he was of too Generous a Spirit to lie basely, so being in preparing of
himself to leave the World, it cannot be thought he would with a Dying-Mouth
belly his Brother.

These Answers being returned, the Earl prepared himself: And upon Wednesday
Morning, about Ten of the Clock, being May the Twelfth, he was Beheaded on the
Tower Hill, many Thousands beholding Maij 12. 1641.
him. The Speech which he made at his End, was a great Testimony of his
Religion and Piety, and was then Printed: And It is (...) apud Rushw. p. 267.
in their Judgment, who were Men of Worth, and some upon, some near the
Scaffold, and saw him Dye, he made a Patient, and Pious, and Courageous end;
insomuch, that some doubted whether his Death had more of the Roman or the
Christian in it, it was so full of both. And notwithstanding this hard Fate,
which fell upon him, he is dead with more Honor, than any of them will gain
who hunted after his Life. Thus ended the Wiseest, the Stoutest, and every way
the Ablest Subject, that this Nation has bred these many Years. The only
Imperfections which he had, that were known to me, were his want of Bodily
Health, and a Carelessness (or rather Roughness) not to oblige any: And his
Mishaps in this last Action were, that he groaned under the Public Envy of the
Nobles, served a Mild and a Gracious Prince, who knew not how to be, or be made
great; and trusted false, perfidious and cowardly Men in the Northern
Employment, though he had many Doubts put to him about it. This Day was after
called by diverse, Homicidium Comitis Straffordiae, the Day of the Murder of
Strafford: Because when Malice it self could find no Law to put him to Death,
they made a Law of purpose for it. God forgive all, and be Merciful.

The Earl being thus laid low, and his great Services done in Ireland made part
of his Accusation, I cannot but observe two things: The one, That upon Sunday
Morning before, Francis Earl of Bedford (having about a Month before lost his
second Son, in whom he most Joyed) Dyed; the Small Pox striking up into his
Brain. This Lord was one of the Main Plotters of Strafford's Death: And I know
where he, with other Lords, before the Parliament Sat down, resolved to have
his Blood. But God would not let him Live to take Joy therein, but cut him off
in the Morning, whereas the Bill for the Earl of Strafford's Death was not
Signed till Night. The other is, That at this time the Parliament tendered two,
and but two Bills to the King to Sign. This to cut off Strafford's Head was
one, and the other was, that this Parliament should neither be Dissolved, nor
Adjourned, but by the consent of both Houses; in which, what he cut off from
himself, Time will better show than I can. God Bless the King and his Royal
Issue.

I told you before, the People came in a Tumultuous Way to call for Justice:
And half an Eye may see how, and by whom they were set on. In the mean time let
me tell you farther, that this Art being once begun, without Consideration of
the Danger, or Care of the Dishonor of such Proceedings; whenever there was
any thing proposed in the House of Commons, which it was thought the Lords
would stick at, or the King not grant, by and by the Rabble came about the
Houses, and called for this and that Justice, as they were prompted. God Bless
the Government of this Kingdom, or all is lost.

I must tell you farther, that from the time that the Earl of Strafford was
first brought to his Answer in Westminster Hall, the bitter and fierce Libels
of the factious People came daily out, to keep up and increase the Peoples Hate
against him. And though they were full of most notorious Untruths, yet coming
from that Party, were swallowed and believed by the most. Among diverse others,
they spread one, in which they delivered to the World, that the Earl of
Strafford drawing near to his End, when he saw no Remedy, but he must Dye, fell
into great and passionate Expressions against me; That I and my Counsels had
been the Ruin of him and his House; and that he cursed me bitterly. Now as
this is most false in it self, so am I most able to make it appear so. For his
Lordship, being to Suffer on the Wednesday Morning, did upon Tuesday in the
Afternoon desire the Lord Primate of Armagh, then with him, to come to me, and
desire me that I would not fail to be in my Chamber Window at the open Casement
the next Morning, when he was to pass by it, as he went to Execution; that
though he might not speak with me, yet he might see me, and take his last leave
of me. I sent him word I would, and did so. And the next Morning as he passed
by, he turned toward me, and took the Solemnest leave, that I think was ever
by any at distance taken one of another; and this in the sight of the Earl of
Newport, then Lord Constable of the Tower, the Lord Primate of Armagh, the Earl
of Cleveland, the Lieutenant of the Tower, and diverse other Knights and
Gentlemen of Worth. Besides, though during the time of both our Restraints, and
the nearness of our Lodgings, we held no Intercourse each with other; yet Sir
William Balfore, then Lieutenant of the Tower, told me often what frequent and
great expressions of Love the Earl made to me: Which cannot stand with that
base Slander which the lewd Libel vented. But I leave that Honorable Person in
his Grave, and while I live shall Honor his Memory. But must here a little go
back.

For May the first, after the King had declared his Conscience Maij 1. 1641;
and his Judgment concerning the Earl of Strafford's Offenses to both Houses
(as is before set down) and was gone away, a Letter was read in the Upper House
from the Scots, in which their Army did earnestly desire to be gone. It was
moved to have a present Conference with the Commons about it; and the Debate
was very short, many Lords being desirous to lay hold of that Opportunity to be
rid of the Scots. But so good and so quick was the Intelligence from some of
the Lords, that the House of Commons was risen before the Messengers from the
Lords could get thither, and so the Conference was not only prevented, but
things so ordered, that the Scots stayed in England till the middle of August
following, at a mavelous great Charge to the Kingdom, and with what Wrong and
Dishonor to King and Kingdom, let Posterity Judge.

Before the Death of the Earl of Strafford, the Libels came out thick, and very
Malicious against him. And all this to whet the Malice that was against him,
and make the People more greedy for his Death. But no sooner was he gone into
his Rest, but the Libellers, which during that time reviled him, fell on me;
and no question but to the same end. And the Libels and Ballads against me were
frequently spread through the City, and sung up and down the Streets. And (I
thank God for it) they were as full of Falsehood as Gall. Besides, they made
base Pictures of me; putting me into a Cage, and fastening me to a Post by a
Chain at my Shoulder, and the like. And diverse of these Libels made Men sport
in Taverns and Alehouses; where too many were as Drunk with Malice, as with the
Liquor they sucked in. Against which my only Comfort was, that I was fallen but
into the same Case with the Prophet David, Psalm. 69. For they that sat in the
Gate Psalm. 69. 12.
spoke against me, and I was the Song of the Drunkards. About this time I fell
into a Tertian Ague, which was Comfortless in a Prison. But I humbly Praise God
for it, after seven or eight Fits he restored me to my Health; the only Comfort
which I have under him in this time of my Affliction.

CAP. X.
UPon Wednesday, June 23. I acquainted His Majesty by my Lord Junij 23. 1641.
of London, that now I had answered all Complaints come against me concerning
the University of Oxford, I thought it requisite for me to Resign the
Chancellorship of that place: And I gave His Majesty such Reasons, as he
approved, for my so doing. And the truth is, I suffered much by the Clamours of
the Earl of Pembroke, who thought it long, till he had that place, which he had
long gaped for: And after the Cloud was once spread over me, spared me in no
Company; though I had in all the time of my Prosperity observed him in Court,
more than ever he had deserved of me. And I had reason, notwithstanding all his
causless Heat, to keep the place till I had justified my self against the
Towns-Mens Petition to the Lords; wherein they Charged me with no less than
Treason, for setting out a Proclamation about Regulating the Market in my own
Name: But I made it appear to the Lords, that I did no more therein, than the
Earl of Leicester in Queen Elizabeth's time, or the Earl of Dorset in King
James his time, did before me, when they were Chancellors of that University.
And I was able to show the Lords, and did so, the Copies of both their several
Proclamations in Print in their own Names. And farther I made appear by the
University Records, that the Chancellors for the time being had frequently done
it, ever since the time of King Edward 3: And that the Lord Mayor of London,
and other Mayors having the Clark-ship of the Market, (as the Chancellors of
Oxford have, and not the Mayor) do it daily. So this great, and most Malicious
Complaint of the City of Oxford, vanished, when they, and some body else for
them had showed their Teeth, but could not bite. But having ended this
Business, and my Vice Chancellor (whom I was not willing to Expose to another
f. Hatred.
hand) had finished his Year, and that according to Duty, I had given His
Majesty an Account of the Business, I pursued my Resolution: And upon Friday,
June the 25th, I sent down Junij 25. 1641.
my Resignation of the Chancellorship of Oxford, to be Published in
Convocation; which was done accordingly, and the Earl of Pembroke had his
desires, and was chosen into it. God bless the University Julij 1. 1641.
there-while, and grant they may never have need of me, now unable to help them.

On Tuesday, August 10. His Majesty rode away Post into Scotland; Aug. 10. 1641.
the Parliaments Sitting in both Kingdoms, and the Armies not yet dissolved.
There was great Scanning about this Journey: And the House of Commons sent some
Commissioners thither, as the Scots had some here. Among the Scotch
Commissioners the Prime Man was the Earl of Rothes, who also was one of the
greatest, and most Zealous Leaders of the Scottish Rebellion under the pretense
of Religion, and a deadly Enemy to the Earl of Strafford, and was heard to say
more than once, they would have his Head; And they had it. But much about this
time, Rothes his Zeal was so hot among the Ladies, and the Citizens Wives, that
he fell very foully into the Pox: And diverse of his Friends (as they told me
themselves) going to visit him were not admitted to see him; and at last he was
conveyed from London to Richmond by his Aunt the Lady Roxborough, where he
dyed: But this base and dishonorable End of his in Rottenness, they concealed
as much as they could.

What the King did in Scotland, has no Relation, for ought I yet hear, to this
poor Story of mine. And the Parliament here made a Recess From (...) 9: till
October: 20: So Rushworth p: 387, 388.
Aug.... till October...... leaving a considerable Committee Sitting to prepare
Business against the House met again. During this Recess there was all silence
concerning me; And as is conceived, upon this Ground; Because before the
Recess, the Committee appointed for that Business, failed in some Proofs, which
they well hoped should have reached me home in Matters of Religion; and
thereupon have done little since: And the Libels since that time have neither
been so frequent, nor so Malicious against me. God quiet this Storm; though (I
praise God) I know not why it was raised so high against me. On Thursday,
September: 23: 1641. Mr: Adam Torless, my Ancient, Loving, and Faithful
Servant, and then my Steward, after he had served me full Forty and Two Years,
dyed, to my great both loss and grief. For all my Accounts since my Commitment,
were in his Hands; and had he not been a very Honest and Careful Man, I must
have suffered much more than I did; yet I suffered enough besides the loss of
his Person, who was now become almost the only Comfort of my Affliction, and my
Age. So true it is, that Afflictions seldom come single.

CAP. XI.
DUring the Recess of the Parliament, Sir Hen: Martyn dyed, and I made Dr:
Merricke Judge of the Prerogative: Dr: Duck missing his hopes of this Office,
by his own absence and default, and finding me under this thick Cloud, hoped to
have wrested this Office out of my Hands, and his to whom I had given it. This
was one of the basest, and most ungrateful parts, that ever any Man played me.
But he failed in his hopes, and his Petition was cast out of the Lords House,
to try his Right at Law; which was all that was asked by Dr: Merricke. Yet upon
the earnestness of the then Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and now Archbishop of
York, the Lords Sequestered my Jurisdiction, and put it into the Hands of my
Inferior Officers; and added in the Order, that I should dispose of neither
Benefice, nor any other thing, but I should first acquaint them with it. The
Order follows, in haec verba.

Die Sab. 23. October. 1641. October. 23. 1641

IT is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that the Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Canterbury shall be Sequestered, until he shall be Convicted or
Acquitted of the Charge of High Treason against him; and the same in the mean
time to be Executed by his Inferior Officers. And farther, concerning those
Ecclesiastical Benefices, Promotions, or Dignities, that are in his disposing,
he shall present to this House the Names of such Persons, as shall be Nominated
by him for the same, to be Approved of first by this House, before they be
Collated or Instituted.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliam. etc.

For my Jurisdiction (I Thank God) I never knowingly abused it. And of the
other Restraint about the giving of my Benefices, I cannot but think it very
hard in two respects: The one is, that I should be put to Name to them, before
I give that, which by Law is mine to give. In the mean time they cry out of the
violation of the Propriety which each Subject has in his Goods; and yet I must
not give my own: So also they condemn Arbitrary Government, and yet press upon
me an Arbitrary Order against Law. The other is, that if in Obedience to this
Order I shall Nominate any Man to them, be he never so worthy for Life and
Learning; yet if upon Misinformation, or otherwise, the House should refuse
him, I should not only, not do him the good I intended, but blast him for all
the remainder of his Life: And whenever he shall seek for any other
Preferment, that shall be Objected.
laid unto him, that he was thought unworthy by the High Court of Parliament.
Yet how to ease my self against this Order, I know not.

This day, November. 1. News came to the Parliament of the Nov. 1. 1641.
Rebellion in Ireland; The King being then in Scotland, where there were
Troubles enough also. The Irish pretended the Scots Example, and hoped they
should get their Liberties, and the Freedom of their Religion, as well as they.
But that Rebellion is grown fierce and strong; and what end that War will have,
God knows: A happy one God of his Mercy send. For this Nation is in many
difficulties at once; and we have drawn them all upon our selves. But this
belongs not to my Story. Only this I shall add (which is the Judgment of all
Prudent Men that I speak with, both of Ireland and England) that if the Earl of
Strafford had Lived, and not been blasted in his Honor and Service, no
Rebellion had been stirring there. And if this be so, it is a soar Account must
be given for his Blood; If either that Kingdom be upon this occasion quite lost
from the Crown of England, or not recovered without great Expense, both of
Treasure and Blood.

On Thursday November. 25. the King returning from Scotland, entered Nov 25. 1641.
Vide Rushw. p. 429. etc.
into London, was received with great State and Joy, and Sumptuously
Entertained. This made diverse Men think, there would have been a Turn in the
present Business. And what it might have proved, if the King would have
presently and vigorously set himself to vindicate his own Just Power, and leave
them their Ancient and Just Privileges, is not I think hard to judge. But he
let it cool, and gave that which is truly the Malignant Faction (but call
others so) time to underwork him, and bring the City round, and all ran then
stronger in the same Current than ever it did. So God of his Mercy bless all.

On Thursday, December. 30. the Lord Archbishop of York, and Dec 30. 1641.
Eleven other Bishops, were sent to the (...) for High Treason; and two other
Bishops, Duresme, and Coventry and Litchfield, to Mr. See Rushw. p. 468.
Maxwell's; for setting their Hands to a Petition, and delivering of it with a
Protestation, that this was not a free Parliament; since they who had Ancient
Right there, could not come to give their Votes as they ought, without danger
of their Lives. For by this time it was grown common, that the Multitude came
down in heaps, if either the Lords or the King denied any thing which the House
of Commons affected. But how it came to pass that these Multitudes should come
down in The Address of the 12 Bishops here subjoyned, is not right. It should
be to the King. Quaere. W. S. A. C It was directed, To the King's most
Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers Assembled in Parliament: And was
intended to have been presented in the House of Lords, the King being present,
although it was presented in the absence of the King. See Life of Archbishop
Williams, par. 2. page 178. H W. It is also extant in Rushworth, p. 466. In
Heylin's Life of Laud, p. 490. In Hacket's (...) of Williams, p. 178.
such disorder, and yet be sent back and dissolved so easily, at a word or beck
of some Men, let the World judge. The Petition and Protestation, which the
Bishops delivered in, was as follows; and perchance it was unseasonably
delivered; and perhaps some Words in it might have been better spared; but the
Treason (and peradventure that is my Ignorance) I cannot find in it.

The Petition and Protestation of Twelve Bishops, for which they were Accused
of High Treason by the House of Commons, and Committed by the Lords to the
Black-Rod.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called up, Rushw.
upon, by several and respective Writs, under great Penalties, to Attend in
Parliament, and have a clear and indubitable Right to Vote in Bills, and all
other Matters whatsoever debatable, Rushw.
debated in Parliament, by the Ancient Customs, Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, and are to be protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend [ Rushw.
and prosecute] that great Service: They humbly remonstrate and protest before
God, your Majesty and the Noble Lords and Peers, Rushw.
Peers now Assembled in Parliament, that as they have an indubitable Right to
Sit and Vote in the House of Lords, so they, if they may be protected from
force and violence, are most ready and willing to perform their duties, Rushw.
that Duty accordingly; and that they do abominate all Actions and Opinions
tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof, Rush.
or any inclination to the Malignant Party, or any other side and Party
whatsoever, to the which their own Reasons and Consciences shall not move them
to adhere. Rushw.
adhere. But whereas, they have been at several times violently Menaced,
Affronted and Assaulted by multitudes of People, in coming to perform their
Service to that Honorable House, and lately chased away and put in danger of
their Lives, and can find, Rushw.
find no Redress or Protection, upon sundry Complaints made to both Houses in
these particulars, Rushw.
that particular: They likewise humbly, Rushw.
protest before your Majesty and that Noble House of Peers, that saving to
themselves all their Rights and Interests of Sitting and Voting in that, Rushw.
your House at other times, they dare not sit or, Rushw.
to Vote in the House of Peers, until, Rushw.
unless your Majesty shall further secure them from all Affronts, Indignities
and Danger in the Premises. Lastly, whereas their fears are not built upon
Fancies and Conceits, but upon such Grounds and Objects, as may well terrify
Men of good, Rushw.
great Resolution and much Constancy; they do in all Humility and Duty, protest
before your Majesty, and the Peers of that, Rushw.
this most Honorable House of Parliament, against all Laws, Orders, Votes,
Rushw.
Votes, Resolutions and Determinations; and that they are in themselves null,
and of no effect, which in their absence since the Twenty Seventh of [this
instant Month] December, 1641. have already passed, and likewise Rushw.
against all such, as shall hereafter pass in that most Honorable House, Rush.
Assembly, during the, Rushw.
such time of this their, Rushw.
their forced and violent, Rushw.
violented absence from the said most Honorable House: Not denying, but if
their absenting of themselves, were wilful and voluntary, that most Honorable,
Rushw.
Noble House might proceed in all these Premises, their absence and or this
their, Rushw.
Protestation notwithstanding. And humbly beseeches your Most Excellent
Majesty, to command the Clerk of the House of Peers, to enter this their
Petition and Protestation Amongst his, Rushw.
in their Records.

They will ever pray God to bless and preserve, etc.

Jo. Eborac. Williams.
Geo. Hereford, Coke.
Tho. Duresme, Moorton.
Rob. Oxon, Skinner.
Rob. Co. Lich. Wright.
Ma. Ely, Wren.
Jos. Norwich, Hall.
Godfr. Glouc. Goodman.
Jo. Asaphen, Owen.
Jo. Peterburg, Towers.
Guil. Ba. and Wells, Pearce.
Mor. Llandaff, Owen.

On Tuesday January 4. his Majesty went into the House of Commons; Jan. 4. 1641.
some number of Gentlemen accompanied him to the Door, but no farther. There he
demanded the Persons of Mr. Denzil Hollis, Sir Arthur Haselrigge, Mr. Jo. Pymm,
Mr. Jo. Hampden, and Mr. William Strode, whom together with the Lord Kimbolton,
Sir Ed. Herbert, his Majesty's Attorney General, had the day before charged
with High Treason, in the Upper House, upon seven Articles of great
consequence; It seems they had information of the King's coming, and were slipped
aside. This made a mighty noise on all hands. But the business was so carried,
that the House adjourned to sit in a Committee at Guild Hall, and after at the
Grocer's-Hall: Where things were so Ordered, that within two or three days,
these Men were with great salutes of the People, brought, and in a manner
guarded to the Committee, and after to the House at Westminster; and great stir
made to and fro, about the Accusation of these Men, and the breach of the
Privileges of Parliament, by his Majesty's coming thither in that manner.
Things were carried in a higher strain than ever before. The King left the
City, and withdrew privately, first to Hampton Court, after that to Windsor.
Many puttings on and puttings off, concerning this and other great Affairs,
between the King and the House: All which I leave to public Records, as not
concerning this poor History: Yet could not omit to say thus much in the
general; because much of the Church-business, as well as the States, and much
of mine, as well as the Churches, will depend upon it.

CAP. XII.
UPon Thursday, January 20. upon no Complaint that I know Jan. 20. 1641.
(for I am sure I never deserved any in that kind) there was an Order made in
the Lords House to take away my Arms. They stood me in above Three Hundred
Pounds. I provided them for the Service of the State, as Need might require; I
never employed any of them to any the least Disservice of it, nor ever had
thought to do. Yet the Order is as follows, both to my Disgrace to have them so
taken from me, and to my loss; for though the Sheriffs of London be to take
them upon Inventory, yet of whom shall I demand them when they are out of their
Office?

Die Jovis, 20. Jan. 1641.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That the Sheriffs of the
City of London, or either of them, shall receive by inventory, all such
Ordnance and other Arms, as belong to any private Persons, which are to be kept
to their Uses, remaining now at Fox-Hall, Canterbury-House, the Archbishop of
York's House in Westminster, and in the Bishop of Winchester's House (a fit
proportion of Arms being left at each Place for necessary Security thereof:)
The said Sheriffs being to receive their Directions from a Committee lately
appointed by the Parliament. But the Intents of the Lords are, and it is
farther Ordered, that such Ordnance and Arms as do belong to his Majesty, shall
be forthwith sent unto the King's Magazine in the Tower.

Upon Saturday, Feb. 6. the Bill passed, That the Bishops should have Feb. 6.
1641. Vide Rushw. par. 3. vol. 1. p. 276. (...). 280, 281, 282. 396, 397. 553.
He says it was Passed by the King (...) Monday Febr. 14.
no Votes in Parliament, nor have to do in Civil Affairs. This was mightily
strugled for, almost all this Session, and now obtained. The Bishops have ever
had this in Right and Possession ever since there was any use of Parliaments in
England, which the antientest Family of the Nobility, which now sit there, and
thrust them out, cannot say. There was great Joy upon the Passing of this Bill
in both Houses, and in some Parishes of London Ringing and Bonfires. The King
gave way to this Bill, and so that is settled: And if it after prove that the
King and Kingdom have Joy in it, it is well. But it may be, that the Effects of
this Eclipse may work farther than is yet thought on, and the Blackness of it
darken the Temporal Lords Power, more than is yet feared. And here I must tell
you two Things: The one, that for the compassing of their ends in this Bill,
the nowbecome-usual Art was pursued, and the People came in Multitudes, and
Clamoured for the outing of the Bishops and the Popish Lords Votes (so they
were still joined) out of the House. Insomuch, that not the People of London
only, but Petitioners were brought out of diverse Counties with Petitions either
sent unto them, or framed ready for them here against they came; and they in
every Petition for preservation of the Privileges of Parliament, desired the
taking away of the Bishops and the Popish Lords Votes out of the House, as if
it were a common Grievance: The other, That now the Bishops have their Votes
taken away by Act of Parliament, you shall not see in haste any Bill at all
Pass for taking away the Votes of the Popish Lords; which will infer this, as
well as some other things, That these were joined together, to make the Bishops
more odious to the People, as if they were Popishly affected themselves, and to
no other end.

The Court removed from Windsor to Hampton Court, and on Thurs-Day, Febr. 10.
The King and Queen came to Greenwich; and on Friday, Feb. 10. 1641. Feb. 11.
1641.
Febr. 11. they went from thence toward Dover, the Queen resolving to go into
Holland with her young Daughter the Princess Mary, who the Year before was
Married to the Prince of Aurange his Son. But the true Cause of this intended
Journey, was to be out of the Fears, Discontents and Dangers (as she conceived)
of the present Times. And doubtless her Discontents were many, and great; and
what her Dangers might have been by staying, or may be by going, God alone
knows.

His Majesty, while he was upon that Journey, sent a Message to both Houses.
This was Printed Febr. 14. By this the King puts all into Feb. 14. 1641.
the Hands of the Parliament. His Words are concerning the Government It may be
found entire in (...). p. 554.
and Liturgy of the Church, his Majesty is willing to declare, that he will
refer that whole Consideration to the Wisdom of his Parliament, which he
desires them to enter into speedily, that the present Distractions about the
same may be composed: But desires not to be pressed to any single Act on his
part, till the whole be so digested and settled by both Houses, that his Majesty
may clearly see, what is fit to be left, as well as what is fit to be taken
away.



So here they are made Masters of all, and in a time of great exasperation
against the Clergy and the Bishops, and their Votes being newly thrust out of
the House. So God bless the poor Church of England, for I very much fear this
can bode no good.

The same Day, being Monday, there came an Order from the Lords that the Twelve
Bishops which were Committed December. 30. might put in Bayl if they would; and
that they should have their Hearing upon Friday, Febr. 25. They were glad Men,
procured their Bayl, and went out of the Tower, on Wednesday, Febr. 16. This
Order of the Feb. 16. 1641.
Lords was known to the House of Commons well enough; yet they would take no
Notice of it, nor offer to stay the Bishops. But on See (...). p. p. 555.
Wednesday, after they were sure the Bishops were come forth and gone to their
several Lodgings, they sent a Message to the Lords, that they desired the
Bishops might be presently remanded to safe Custody, or else they might and
would Protest against their Lordships for Breach of the Privileges of their
House: Because being Impeached by them, the Lords had Bayled them, without
acquainting them first with it in a Parliamentary way. This Message was very
high, and so delivered by Mr. Denzil Hollis. The Lords yielded: And the poor
Bishops were brought back again to the Tower the next Morning, Febr. 17. Febr.
17.
But with an Order that they should not pay new Fees, and with a Promise that
their Cause should be heard on Saturday, Febr. 19. I Febr. 19.
will not so much as dispute any Privilege of the House of Commons, and I
presume the Lords were not willing to break any. This I am sure of, that as
this Business was carried, though the Bishops had a great Indignity and Scorn
put upon them; yet that which was put upon the Lords was far greater, and might
certainly have been carried in a smoother way on all Hands. On Saturday, Febr.
19. according Feb. 19. 1641.
to appointment, the Twelve Bishops were all at the House; and at the Bar Mr.
Glin pressed the Charge of High Treason against them in the Name of the House
of Commons. The Bishops said not much, but their Counsel were very earnest,
that they might be presently Heard: But they were not admitted to speak. And so
the Business was put off to Thursday, Febr. 24. That Night, when the Commons
were returned into their own House, there was a Motion made to proceed against
the Bishops by Bill, and not in the other Ordinary Way.

CAP. XIII.
ON Sunday, Feb. 20. there came a tall Gentleman, by the Name Feb. 20. 1641.
of Mr. Hunt, to my Lodging in the Tower to speak with me: I was then in my
Bedchamber speaking with Mr. Edward Hide, one of the House of Commons. I went
forth to speak with this Mr. Hunt. When I came, he professed, that though he
was unknown to me, yet he came to do me service in a great Particular: And
Prefaced it farther, that he was not set on to come to me by any Statesman, or
by any of the Parliament, nor did expect any Reward, but only was desirous to
serve me. I wondered what the matter should be. Then he drew a Paper out of his
Pocket, and gave it me to read. It contained four Articles fairly Written, and
drawn up against me to the Parliament. All of them were touching my near
Conversation with Priests, and my endeavor by them to subvert Religion in
England. He told me (when I had read them) that the Articles were not yet put
into the House. They were subscribed by one Willoughby, who he said was a
Priest, but now turned, and come away from them. I asked him what Service it
was that by this he could do to me? He said, he left me to think on that; but
professed he looked for no advantage to himself. I conceived hereupon, this was
some piece of Villainy, and bad him tell Willoughby from me, that he was a
Villain to subscribe such a Paper; and for the Articles, let him put them into
the Parliament when he pleased. Mr. Hunt desired me to take nothing ill from
him, for he meant me Service. I replied, that he came to me Civilly, and used
me in Speech like a Gentleman: But Willoughby was in this, as I had called him.
I left him and his Paper, and returned to Mr. Hide into my Bedchamber. There I
told him, and my Servant Mr. Richard Cobb, all that passed: And they were glad
I gave him so short and so harsh an Answer, and did think as I my self did,
that it was a Plot to entrap me. After they were gone, I sat thinking with my
self, and was very Sorry that my Indignation at this base Villainy had made me
so hasty to send Hunt away, and that I did not desire Mr. Lieutenant of the
Tower to seize on him, till he brought forth this Willoughby. I am since
informed, that this Hunt is a Gentleman that has spent all or most of his
Means; and I verily believe this was a Plot between him and Willoughby to draw
Money from me to conceal the Articles; in which way had I complied with him, I
had utterly undone my self. But I thank God for his Mercy to me, I am Innocent,
and defy in this Kind what any Man can truly say against me. On Friday, Mar. 4.
the two Bishops which were Mar. 4. 1641.
at Mr. Maxwell's, namely, Thomas Moreton Bishop of Duresme, and Robert Wright
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, having formerly Petitioned, were present in
the House of Commons to speak for themselves; and they did so. At the same time
the Petition of the other ten Bishops (which were in the Tower) which was sent
into that House upon the Example of the other two was read. After this a
Committee was named to draw up a Bill. But what it shall contain is not yet
known: So herein they departed not from their former Resolution.

On Sunday, Mar. 6. after I came from Sermon, I walked in a Mar. 6. 1641.
large Room, of which I had the use, before I went to Dinner: And after I had
walked a pretty while, expecting some Company, upon the sudden, as I walked on,
I heard a great Crack, as loud as the Report of a small Dag, to my thinking.
And the Noise being near me, I had a conceit that one of the Boards brake under
me; but it was a Tendon of my right Leg which brake asunder, God knows how. For
I was upon plain Boards, and had no uneven step nor slip, not so much as a
turning of my Foot aside upon any Chink. This Tendon, or part of the main Sinew
above my Heel, brake just in the same Place where I had unhappily broken it
before, Febr: 5: 1627. as I was waiting upon King Charles to Hampton Court.
Feb. 5. 1627.
But I recovered of it, and could go strongly upon plain Ground. God be
merciful unto me, now that he is pleased to humble me yet farther, and to take
from me the use of my Limbs, the only Comfort under him, in the midst of my
Afflictions. And this Lameness continued two whole Months, before I was able to
go down Stairs to take any Air to refresh my self; and long after, before I
received any competent Measure of Strength.

CAP. XIV.
ST: Leonards Foster-Lane, London, is in the Gift of the Dean and Chapter of
Westminster. Mr: William Ward the Incumbent had resigned, and besides was
Censured by a Committee in Parliament, for Innovations, and I know not what.
One Mr: George Smith was tendered (it seems) to the Dean and Chapter of
Westminster. How things were carried there, I know not; but they let their
Living fall in Lapse to the Lord Bishop of London. His six Months likewise were
suffered to slide over, and the Benesice was lapsed to me, as Archbishop of
Canterbury, about March the (...) In all this Mar. 3. 1641.
time Mr: Ward had not the Prudence.
Providence to seek to the King for remedy, or to the Original Patrons, whose
Presentation at any time before the Bishop had filled the Church, was (as I am
informed) good in Law. This Benefice being now in my dispose, the Precise part
of the Parish Petition the Parliament for the aforesaid Mr. George Smith; and
by the means of my Lord Kimbolton (a great Patron of such Men) obtain this
Order following.

Die Jovis, 17: Martij: 1641.
UPon the reading of the Petition of the Parishioners of St. Leonards
Foster-Lane, London, it is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that Mr: George
Smith, elected and approved by the Dean of Westminster, and the Parishioners of
(...) Leonards Foster-Lane, be especially recommended to the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury his Grace from this House, that the said Mr: Smith may be
forthwith Presented to the Parish Church of the said St: Lawrence.

John Brown Clericus Parliament.

This Order was brought me by the Churchwardens, and some Mar. 19. 1641.
of the Parish, on Saturday, March 19. I was sorry for the honest Incumbent's
sake, Mr: Ward; and troubled in my self to have such an Order sent me:
Especially, considering that the Lords former Order (though as I was informed
against all Law) yet was so moderate, as to suffer me to Nominate to Benefices,
so that the Men were without Exception. I put them off till Monday. In the mean
time I advised with my Learned Council, and other Friends. All of them agreed
in this; That it was a great and a violent Injustice put upon me; yet in regard
of the Time, and my Condition, they persuaded me to give way to their Power,
and Present their Clerk. On Monday, Mar. 21. they repaired to me again: I Mar.
21. 1641.
sent them to my Register, to draw a Presentation according to the Order of
Parliament, and advised them while that was in drawing, to send Mr. Smith to
me. One of them told me very boldly, that it was not in the Order of
Parliament, that Mr. Smith should come to me; and another told me that Mr.
Smith would not come to me. Upon this unworthy Usage of me, I dismissed them
again, having first in Obedience to the Order Sealed and set my Hand to the
Presentation, ready for delivery when Mr. Smith came for it. The next Morning
these men repair again to the Lords House, and on Wednesday, Mar. 23. procure
another Order, strictly commanding Mar. 23. 1641.
me forthwith to deliver the Presentation to the Parishioners.

This Order being settled, the Earl of Holland made a Motion, and put the Lords
in Mind that I lay under a heavy Charge, and had long lain so: That it would be
Honorable for the Parliament to bring my Cause to Hearing, that so I might
receive Punishment if I were found to deserve it, or otherwise have some end of
my Troubles: There was a great dispute among my Friends, Quo Animo, with what
Mind this Lord moved it, especially then, when almost all my Friends in both
Houses were absent. Howsoever I took it for the best, desiring nothing more
than an end; and therefore sent a Gentleman the next Day to give his Lordship
Thanks for his Nobleness in remembering me. And if he did it with an Ill Mind,
God forgive him, and preserve me. But whatsoever his Lordship's Intent was, his
Motion after some Debate, begat a Message to the House of Commons, to ripen my
Business; but it dyed again, and nothing done.

The Order last above written, concerning Mr. Smith, the Parishioners brought
to me the same Day in the Afternoon. It happened that the Lord Primate of
Armagh was then with me. I showed him the Order, and he blessed himself to see
it; yet advised me to obey, as my other Friends had done. I farther desired him
to stay and hear my Answer to them, which was this, That I knew not what Report
they had made of me and my Obedience to the Lords; and that therefore I would
give their Lordships in Writeing an Account of my Proceedings; but would
deliver the Presentation to Mr. Smith, when he came. The Lord Primate cried
shame of them to their Faces: So they went away. On Thursday, March Mar. 24.
1641.
24. in an humble Petition I informed the Lords how ready I was to obey: Only
desired that Mr. Smith might come to me, that I might see his Orders, and
examine his Sufficiency; to both which I stood bound both in Conscience, and by
Law. Upon reading of this Petition, some Lords said Mr. Smith was an unmannerly
Fellow, not to come to me: But the Lord Kimbolton told them he was a very
worthy Man, and that he might go to me afterward; but it was fit their Order
should be obeyed. And the Earl of Warwick added, that I desired Mr. Smith might
come to me, only that I might pick a Quarrel with him, to frustrate the Order
of the House. Upon this there followed Instantly a Peremptory Order, commanding
me to present Obedience. So Mr. Smith was left to come to me afterward, if he
pleased; and he came not at all, which was as good as if he had come, to have
his Sufficiency examined for that which he had already in possession. But how
worthy and fit he proved, I refer to all honest Men that heard him afterward.
Upon this Order (according to the former Advice of my Friends) I delivered the
Presentation to the Churchwardens and Parishioners; and if any thing proved
amiss in the Man (as after did in a high Measure) or hurtful in the thing it
self; I humbly besought God to have Mercy on me, and to call for an Account of
them who laid this pressure upon me.

CAP. XV.
BEfore this time the Rectory of Stisted in Essex was fallen void, and in my
Gift. The E: of Warwick was an earnest Suitor to me for it, for one Mr: Clark:
I delayed, having Six Months time by Law to dispose of my Benefices. During
this delay Mr: Richard Howlett, a Batchelour of Divinity, and a Man of very
good worth, a Dean in Ireland, was by the Rebels there turned out of all he
had, and forced, for safety of his Life, to come with his Wife and Children
into England: His Wife was my near Kinswoman. At their coming over I was forced
to relieve them, else they might have begged. Hereupon I resolved in my self to
give Stisted to Mr: Howlett, and to gratify Mr: Clark with something after.
Nothing doubting but that the Parliament would readily give way in such a case
of Necessity, for so worthy a Man as Mr: Howlett was known to be.

While these things were in my Thoughts, two other great Benefices fell into my
disposal, Bocking, and Lachingdon, both in Essex. Presently the Parishioners
Petition me; They of Bocking for Dr: Gawden, a Chaplain of the Earl of
Warwick's; They of Lachingdon, that they might choose their own Minister. I gave
a fair Answer to both, but reserved my self. Then I was pressed with Letters
from the Earl of Warwick, for Dr: Gawden. My Answer was, I could not gratify
Dr: Gawden with Bocking, and Mr: Clark with Stisted. Then Dr: Gawden brings me
a very earnest Letter, but very Honorable, from the Earl of Hertford. When I
saw my self thus pressed, I resolved to name fit Men to all three Benefices,
presently, and see how the Parliament would be pleased to deal with me. Before
I did this, I thought fit to make a fair Offer to the Earl of Warwick, who by
Dr: Gawden's entreaty came to me to the Tower. I freely told his Lordship my
Resolution, which was, that at the desire of his Lordship, and my Honorable
Friend the Lord Marquess of Hertford, I would give Bocking to Dr: Gawden;
Lachingdon to Mr: Howlett, in regard of his Alliance to me, and his present
Necessities; and Stisted to Mr: Newested, to whom I was pre-ingaged by Promise
to my Ancient worthy Friend Sir Tho: Row, whom Mr: Newested had served in his
Embassages seven Years; and for Mr: Clark, he should have the next Benefice
which fell in my Gift, for his Lordship's sake. His Lordship seemed to be very
much taken with this Offer of mine, and promised me, and gave me his Hand upon
it, that he would do me all the kindness he could, that these my Nominations
might pass with the Lords.

Upon this I rested, and according to my Promise, Petitioned the Mar. 31. 1642.
Lords, as is expressed. Upon the Reading of this Petition, the Lords Ordered
me presently to Collate Bocking upon Dr: Gawden; which I did, the Order being
brought unto me the next Day. But for the April 1. 1642.
other two the Lords took time to consider. The Earl of Warwick was then
present in the House, and (as I am informed) said little or nothing. This made
me fear the worst: And therefore I advised Mr: Howlett to get a full
Certificate of the Lord Primate of Armagh, both for Life and Learning, and
attend with it at the Parliament, to make the best Friends for himself. The
Business stuck still. At last he met with the Lord Kimbolton, who presently
made all Weather fair for him: And upon his Lordships motion to the House, Apr.
13. 1642.
an Order passed for Mr: Howlett to have Lachingdon. The Motive this; Mr:
Howlett was Fellow of Sidney College in Cambridge, and Tutor at that time to
two Sons of the Lord Mountague, the Lord Kimbolton's Uncle: At which time also
the Lord Kimbolton himself was a Student in the same College, and knew the
Person and worth of Mr: Howlett. This his Lordship Honorably now remembered;
else it might have gone hard with Mr: Howlett's Necessities. So upon the Order
thus obtained, I Collated Lachingdon upon him.

After this the Earl of Warwick went Lord Admiral to Sea, by appointment of the
Parliament: And forthwith I was served with another Apr. 20. 1642.
Order to give Stisted to Mr: Clark. Hereupon I Petitioned again, and set forth
my Resolutions and Engagements to Sir Tho: Row: And Dr: Gawden having told me,
that the Earl of Warwick had left that Business for me in trust with the Lord
Roberts, I made bold to write to his Lordship, and entreat his lawful Favor.
The Lord Roberts denied that any such Order or Care of that Business was left
with him, nor would he meddle in it; but referred me to the Lord Kimbolton, who
still followed the Business close for Mr: Clark. By all which it appeared to
me, that the Earl of Warwick had forgotten his Promise to me, to say no more.
Soon after I received another Order, to give Stisted to Mr: Clark. To this I
answered Apr. 25. 1642.
again by Petition, but with like Success: For another Order (...) 3. 1642.
came forth Peremptorily to Command me to give Stisted to Mr: Clark. But it so
fell out, that this Order was not brought to me till Ten Days after the Date; I
sent my Council to attend the Lords, that I might not fall into Contempt. The
Business was not then (...) 16. 1642.
called on, and by the Sixteenth of the same Month, Stisted fell in Lapse to
His Majesty: So I lost the giving of the Benefice, and some body else their
Ends upon me.

CAP. XVI.
ON May 15. Sunday, I made a shift between my Man and my Maij 15. 1642.
Staff, to go to Church. There Preached one Mr: (...).
Joslin. His Text, Judge 5: 23. Curse ye Meroz, etc. To pass over what was
strangely Evil thoroughout his Sermon, his Personal Abuse of me was so foul and
so palpable, that Women and Boys stood up in the Church, to see how I could
bear it: And this was my first Welcome into the Church, after my long Lameness.
But I humbly thank God for it, I bare his Virulence patiently, and so it
vanished: As did much other of like Nature, which I bare both before and after
this. God forgive them.

After this I had some quietness; most Particulars lying dead, out of several
respects unknown to me. But all things grew higher and higher between the King
and the Parliament, to the great Damage and Distraction of the Kingdom. God of
his Mercy send a speedy and a blessed Issue, and preserve his Majesty, the
Kingdom, and this poor Church from Ruin: But I much fear our Sins are ripe for
a very great, if not a final Judgment.

Friday, August the 19. Captain Royden and his Company, by Order Aug. 19. 1642.
of Parliament, came about seven of the Clock in the Evening to my House at
Lambeth, to take away my Arms. They stayed there all Night, and searched every
Room, and where any Key was not ready, brake open Doors: And the next Morning
they carried my Arms away in Carts to Guild Hall, London; and I was
sufficiently abused all the way by the People, as my Arms passed. They gave out
in London, there were Arms for Ten Thousand Men; whereas there was not enough
for Two Hundred. And the Arms I bought of my Predecessor's Executors; only some
I was forced to mend, the Fashion of Arms being changed. He left to defend that
large House, but six Swords, six Carbines, three Halberds, and two half Pikes:
Though the Order formerly made by the Lords, required necessary defense for the
House should be left. But it seems Captain Royden's Order now given was
stricter; for he was toward me and my House very Civil in all things.

This day, Sept. 1. 1642. the Bishops were Voted down in the House Sept. 1.
1642.
of Commons: And that Night there was great Ringing and Bonfires in the City;
which I conceive was cunningly ordered to be done by Alderman Pennington, the
new Lord Mayor, chosen in the room of Sir Richard Gurney, who was then in the
Tower, and put out of his Office by the Parliament. And my Mind gives me, that
if Bishops do go down, the City will not have cause to joy in it.

About this time the Cathedral Church of Canterbury was grossly Profaned; yet
far worse afterward.

All-Hallows Bredstreet was now fallen void, and in my Gift; and September 9.
there came an Order from the House of Peers for me to Sept. 9. 1642.
give it: But having Six Months Respite by Law, I delayed it for that time,
which created me much trouble from the Parishioners, who often solicited me.

About the Tenth of this Month, the Bishops were Voted down in Sept. 10. 1642.
the Upper House. So it seems I must live to see my Calling fall before me.
Upon Saturday, October. 15. it was Resolved upon the Question, October. 15.
That all Rents and Profits of all Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters,
and other Delinquents, should be Sequestered for the Use and Service of the
Commonwealth: According to which Ordinance, all the Profits of my
Archbishopric were taken away from me, and not one Penny allowed me for
Maintenance. Nay, whereas this Order was not made till a full Fortnight after
Michaelmas; yet so hard a hand was carried over me, as that my Rents, due at
Michaelmas, were seized on to the use of the Parliament: By which means my
Estate was as good as Sequestered almost from our Ladyday before; more It was so
then, though now (...).
than two parts of three of the Rents being payable only at Michaelmas.

An Order came from the House, October. 24. that no Prisoner should October. 24.
keep above two Servants, nor speak with any Man, but in the presence and
hearing of his Warder. My Case for the former Branch of this Order, differed
from all other Prisoners. For they lay in several Warders Houses, in which they
might be fitted by the Servants of the House for Ordering their Diet; but I was
in a Prison-lodging, void of all Comfort and Company. And therefore upon October.
27. October. 27.
(which was the very next day after the Order was showed to me) I humbly
besought the Lords for a Cook and Butler, beside the Two which were to attend
me in my f. Person.
Prison, by Reason of my Age and Infirmities; which, though with difficulty,
yet I humbly thank their Lordships, was granted me, October. 28. October. 28.


On Wednesday, November. 2. I Dreamed (that Night) that the Church November. 2.
was undone, and that I went to St: John's in Oxford, where I found the Roof off
from some part of the College, and the Walls ready to fall down. God be
merciful.

Upon Wednesday, November. 9. about Five of the Clock in the Morning, November. 9.
Captain Brown and his Company entered my House at Lambeth, to keep it for
Public Service. Hereupon I Petitioned the Lords the same day, for the safety
of the Library, of my own Study, and of such Goods as were in my House: All
which was very Honorably granted unto me by a full Order of the Lords that
very day; with a strict Charge, that they which were there employed in the
Public Service, should take special care that all the forenamed things should
be preserved in safety. Either this day, or the day before, Mr: Holland and Mr:
Ashurst, two of the House of Commons, came accompanied with some Musketeers,
and entered my House, and searched for Money; and took away Seventy and Eight
Pound, from my Receiver Mr: Walter Dobson, and said it was for the Maintenance
of the Kings Children. God of his Mercy look favorably upon the King, and
bless his Children from needing any such poor Maintenance.

November. 16. Wednesday, an Order forbidding the Prisoners Men to November. 16.
speak one with another, but in the presence of the Warder, and to bar them the
liberty of the Tower: Only this Order was so far enlarged, November. 22. that any
of them might go out of the Tower to November. 22.
buy Provision or other Necessaries.

On the 24th of this Month, the Soldiers at Lambeth-House brake November. 24.
open the Chappel-doors, and offered violence to the Organ; but before much
hurt was done, the Captain heard of it, and stayed them.

Upon the Death of Sir Charles Caesar, the Mastership of the Faculties fell
into my gift; but I could not dispose of it, by Reason of the Order of
Parliament, of October. 23. 1641. but with their Approbation. December. 7. 1642.
Therefore I Petitioned the Lords, that I might give it to (...) Aylet or Dr:
Heath, both then Attendants in that Honorable House; well knowing it would be
in vain to Name any other: And the Lords sent me an Order to give it to (...)
Aylet; and I did it accordingly. December. 8.


The Vicaridge of Horsham in Sussex was in my gift, and fell December. 19.
void. At the entreaty of Sir John Conniers then Lieutenant of the Tower, I
Petitioned the House that I might give it to Mr. Conniers the Lecturer at Bow.
But before my Petition came to be delivered, the House had made an Order
against him, upon complaint from Horsham of his disordered Life; so busy were
that Party of Men to complain of all Men, who were not theirs in Faction; and
such ready admittance had both they and their Complaints in both Houses. For my
part the Man was a Stranger to me, and inquiring after him (as well as a poor
Prisoner could) I heard no ill of him for his Life. Nevertheless, hearing how
the Lords were possessed against him, I forbear the sending of that Petition,
and sent another for my own Chaplain, (...) William Brackstone. But he was
refused; yet no exception taken against him, for Life or Learning; nor indeed
could any be.

Upon the (...) of the same Month, (...) Layton came with a Warrant December. 23.
from the Honorable House of Commons, for the Keys of my House at Lambeth to
be delivered to him, that Prisoners might be brought thither. I referred my
self to God, that nothing might trouble me: But then I saw it evident, that all
that could, should be done to break my patience. Had it not been so, some body
else might have been sent to Lambeth, and not Layton, who had been Censured in
the Star Chamber to lose his Ears, for a base and a most virulent Libel against
Bishops and the Church Government Established by Law: In which Book of his were
many things, which in some Times might have cost him dearer. The same day it
was Ordered by the Honorable House of Commons, that Mr: Glyn, Mr. Whitlock,
Mr. Hill, or any two of them, should take care for the securing of the Public
Library belonging to the Sea of Canterbury, the Books, Writings, Evidences, and
Goods in Lambeth-House, and to take the Keys into their Custody: And a
Reference to the Committee, to prepare an Ordinance for the regulating of
Lambeth-House for a Prison, in the manner as Winchester-House is regulated. And
upon Jan. 5. a final Order Jan. 5. 1642.
from both Houses came for the settling of Lambeth Prison: In which Order it was
included, that all my Wood and Coal then in the House, should remain there for
the use of the Soldiers. And when Motion was made, that I might have some to
the Tower for my own necessary use, it would not be hearkened to. There was then
in the House, above two hundred pounds worth of Wood and Coal which was mine.

The next day I received a Letter from the Earl of Manchester, commanding me,
in the Name of the House, to give All-Hallows-Bredstreet to (...) Seaman. This
I was no way moved at; because I had before expressed my self to my Lord of
Northumberland, that I would give this Benefice, out of my Respects to his
Lordship, to Mr. Seaman his Chaplain. Yet I cannot but observe, that though
this was made known to the Earl of Manchester, yet he would not forbear his
Letter, that the Benefice might be given by Order, and not seem to come from
any Courtesy of mine to that Honorable Person.

CAP. XVII.
ON Thursday, January 26. the Bill passed in the Lords House for Jan. 26.
abolishing of Episcopacy. God be merciful to this sinking Church.

By this time the Rectory of Chartham in Kent was fallen void, Feb. 3. 1642.
by the Death of the Dean of Canterbury, and in my Gift. It was a very good
Benefice, and I saw it would create me much trouble in the Collating of it. The
first onset upon me for it was by Dr. Heath; and it was to give it to Mr.
Edward Corbet of Merton-College, of which House Dr. Heath had formerly been.
Very earnest he was with me, and told me the Lord General was earnest for him,
and that it would be carried from me, if I did it not willingly; which I were
better do. My Answer was, I could not help that: But Mr. Corbet had many ways
disserved me in Oxford, and that certainly I would never give it him. So we
parted: And though I could not be jealous of Dr. Heath, yet neither could I
take it well. And on Tuesday, Feb. 14. I received a Letter from his Majesty,
bearing Feb. 14.
Date January 17. in which Letters the King Commands me to give Chartham to one
Mr. Reading, a Man of good Note in the Church; or if I were otherwise Commanded
by Parliament not to give, then to Lapse it to him, that he might give it. I
returned a present Answer by word of Mouth, and by the same Messenger, that I
would either give, or Lapse the Benefice, as his Majesty's Gracious Letters
required of me.

I was now in a fine Case between the King and the Parliament: One I was sure
to offend. Yet these Letters of the King's came happily in one respect: For
that very Afternoon, the Earl of Warwick came to me to the Tower, and after a
few fair words bestowed on me, drew out an Order of Parliament, to give
Chartham to one Mr. Culmer, who his Lordship said was a very worthy Man; and
perhaps I might have believed his Lordship, had I not known the contrary: But I
well knew him to be ignorant, and with his Ignorance, one of the most daring
Schismatics in all that Country. This Order of Parliament bare Date, Febr. 4.
but was not showed me till then. My Answer to my Lord was, that I had received
a Letter from his Majesty, which required me to give that Benefice to another
Man, or else Lapse it to him; and therefore humbly desired his Lordship to do
me good Offices in the Honorable House, considering in what difficulties I
was, and how many great Livings I had given by Orders of Parliament, and none
at the King's Command till now. So we parted.

After this, Mr. Culmer came to me about the Benefice, and protested his
Conformity to the Church. I think the Man forgot that I knew both him and his
ways. I told him I had given my Lord of Warwick my Answer. But Mr. Culmer
rested not so: But got a Servant of mine down the Stairs to him, and there was
very earnest with him to know, whether it were not possible to work me to give
him Chartham. And then out of the abundance of his honesty and worthiness
offered my Servant a Hundred and Fifty Pound to procure him the Benefice: And
added, that he should have no cause to distrust him, for he should have the
Money presently paid him. This is as worthy a piece of Symony as need to be:
And but that the Earl of Warwick is a Man of Honor, and unfit to stoop to such
base Courses, it is enough to make a Man think Mr. Culmer would have been very
thankful to his Lordship for so much pains, as to come to the Tower and solicit
for him. The Earl of Warwick at his next opportunity in the House, told the
Lords, that whereas they had made an Order, that the Archbishop of Canterbury
should give Chartham to Mr. Culmer, a very worthy Preacher; he had been with me
himself about it, and that I pretended Letters from the King, and refused to
obey their Order. This was like to have stirred great Heat against me, but that
a Lord stood up, and doubted of the Order; Putting them in Mind, that the Lord
General was engaged for this Benefice for Mr. Corbet, and had left the Care of
it upon himself, and some other Lords in his absence. Hereupon there was
inquiry made, when, and how, that Order passed for Culmer, and it was found to
be slipped out at a very empty House. So the Earl of Warwick excused the
Matter, that he knew not of the Lord General's purpose; and so the Business
slept, and never awaked more for Culmer.

The Lord Brook was now in Action. A bitter Enemy he was to the Church, and her
Government by Bishops. On March: 2: he Mar. 2. 1642.
was going to give Onset upon the Close of the Cathedral at Lichfield: And as
he was taking view of the place, from a Window in a House opposite to the
Close, and his Bever up, so that a Musket at such a distance could have done
him but little harm; yet was he Shot in the left Eye, and killed Dead in the
place without speaking one word. Whence I shall observe three things. First,
that this great and known Enemy to Cathedral-Churches died thus fearfully in
the Assault of a Cathedral. A fearful manner of Death in such a Quarrel!
Secondly, that this happened upon Saint Chads Day, of which Saint the Cathedral
bears the Name: Thirdly, that this Lord coming from Dinner about two Years
since, from the Lord Herbert's House in Lambeth, upon some Discourse of St.
Paul's Church, then in their Eye upon the Water, said to some young Lords that
were with him, that he hoped to live to see that one Stone of that Building
should not be left upon another. But that Church stands yet, and that Eye is
put out that hoped to see the Ruins of it. Many heavy Accidents have already
fallen out in these unnatural Wars; and God alone knows, how many more shall,
before they end: But I intend no History but of my own sad Misfortunes; nor
would I have mentioned this, but that it relates to the Church, which for my
Calling sake, I take as a part, and a near one of my self.

On Friday, March 24. one Mr. Ford came to me to the Tower, and Mar. 24. 1642.
told me, there was a Plot to send me, and my Lord of Ely Bishop Wren, as
Delinquents, to New England, within fourteen days: And that Mr. Wells, a
Minister that came thence, offered Wagers of it. The Meeting where he heard
this, was (he said) at Mr. Barnes, a Mercers House in Friday-Street, a Son in
Law of Mr. Fords. This Gentleman told me he was a Suffolk man; but I never saw
him before, and was doubtful of the Truth of his Relation: Partly, because I
knew no motive he had to take such care of me, being a Stranger to him; And
partly, because it could not sink into me, that the Honorable Houses, after so
long Imprisonment, would send me into such a Banishment, without hearing me or
my Cause. Yet he protested the truth of it very deeply, and wished me to
endeavor to prevent it. That I knew not how to do: For to Petition against it
upon such a private Information, might rather call it on, than keep it off,
seeing what an edge there was against me. Therefore I referred my self to God,
my constant Anchor, and so rested my Thoughts as well as I could.

It was now known in the House to the Lord General's Friends, that I had a
resolution not to give Chartham to Mr. Corbet: And it may be it was thought
also, that I did but pretend the Kings Letters about it; and that if some other
Man were named, against whom I had no Exception, it might be that I would give
it: And if I did give it, then they should discover, that either I had no
Letters from the King; Or that I could make bold to dispense with them, so Mr.
Corbet were not the Man. And if they could have gained this upon me, that
notwithstanding his Majesty's Letters, I would have given that Benefice to
another man, they would then have recalled their Order for Culmer.
from him, and commanded me for Mr. Corbet.

That this my Conjecture has Truth in it, seems evident to me by all the
future carriage of this Business. For one Mr. Hudson came and Preached at the
Tower, and gave all men very good content: And on Tuesday, March 28. he brought
me an Order from Mar. 28. (...)
the Lords, requiring me to give Chartham to him. And this Order was known in
the Tower: For some Prisoners of Note said, I might do well to give it him,
being so good a Preacher. My answer to him was fair; yet I told him truly, that
the King had written to me for another: That I had promised to give it, or
lapse it, as his Majesty required me: That the King never asked any of me till
now: That I hoped the Parliament would not take it ill, that I gave this one at
the Kings requisition, since I had already given as many Benefices upon their
Orders, as came to above Eight hundred Pounds a year, passing by my own Friends
and Chaplains, honest and able men: And for his particular, I might live to
pleasure him with another, so I were not over-pressed concerning this.

Hudson either mistook my Answer, or wilfully misreported it and me to the
House; and thereupon came another Order to me of April 11. to give him
Chartham. I was not willing to be mistaken again, April 11.
and therefore desired Mr. Lieutenant to deliver me a Petition to the House on
Thursday, Apr. 13. in which I set forth my true Answer, April 13.
as is above expressed, and in all Humility desired their Favor. That very day
another quick Order was made for Hudson, and brought to me the next day, April
14. I Petitioned the House again, the April 14.
same day, with all submission; yet professed, that I could not disobey the
King in so fair a Command. When all this would not serve, the Mask was pulled
off, and a peremptory Order, bearing date April 21. was brought to me on
Saturday April 22. to Collate April 21.
Chartham upon Mr. Edw. Corbet. And upon Monday April 24. April 24.
I humbly gave my Answer, as before; but in the softest Terms I could express
it, and in a Petition.

Monday, May 1. the Windows of my Chapel at Lambeth were May 1.
defaced, and the Steps to the Communion Table torn up. And on Tuesday, May 2.
the Cross in Cheapside was taken down, to cleanse May 2.
that great Street of Superstition. The same day in prosecution of the former
Plot, March 24. it was moved in the House of Commons, to send me to New
England; but it was rejected. The Plot was laid by Peter's, Wells, and others of
that Crew, that so they might insult over me.

Then followed an Exemplary piece of Justice, and another of May 9. 1643.
Mercy. Of Justice: For my Goods in Lambeth-House, and my Books were seized
upon, and my Goods set to Sale by Captain Guest, Dickins, and Layton. And my
Goods were sold, and scarce at a third part of their worth, all save what
Layton took to himself, who usually said, all was his, House, Land, Goods and
all. This was on Tuesday, May 9. And all this before any Proceedings had
against me. And of Mercy: For the same day there came out an Order, for my
farther Restraint, that I might not go out of my Lodging without my Keeper, so
much as to take Air.

Much about this time I received another Letter from his Majesty, in which he
requires me (as he had formerly done, for Chartham in particular) that as often
as any Benefice or other Spiritual Promotion whatsoever should fall void in my
Gift, I should dispose it only to such as his Majesty should name unto me; Or
if any Command lay otherwise upon me from either, or both Houses of Parliament,
I should then let them fall into Lapse, that he might dispose of them to Men of
worth.

Upon Tuesday, May 16. there came out an Ordinance of both Houses, May 16. May
17. The Ordinance may be found at large in Rushw. par. 3. vol. 2. p. (...)
(for now the Order was grown up into an Ordinance) requiring me to give no
Benefice, or Spiritual Promotion now void, or to be void at any time before my
Trial, but with leave and Order of both Houses of Parliament. This Ordinance
was delivered unto me the next day: And upon the reading of it I foresaw a
Cloud rising over me, about this Business of Chartham, for which I did assure
my self the Ordinance was made: And soon after came another Ordinance, May 20.
requiring me by virtue of the said Ordinance to give Chartham to Mr. Corbet.
This Order was not brought to me till Friday, May 26. Then it was brought unto
me by Mr. Corbet himself, May 26.
and Sir John Corbet a Parliament Man came with him. Now upon May 23.
the Tuesday before I had sent an humble Petition to the Lords for Maintenance:
The Prayer of which Petition was as follows: Humbly prays that your Lordships
will take his sad condition into your Honorable Consideration, that somewhat
may be allowed him out of his Estate to supply the Necessities of life;
assuring himself that in Honor and Justice you will not suffer him either to
beg or starve. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. The Answer which this
Petition had in the Lords House was, Let him give Chartham as is Ordered, and
then We will consider of Maintenance. So my Petition was sent down to the House
of Commons. To the last forenamed Order, I gave my former Answer, and humbly
Petitioned the Lords accordingly, May 27. following. So they departed, and as
they went down the Hill together, Sir John was overheard to say to Mr. Corbet
thus: The Archbishop has Petitioned the Lords for Maintenance, and they have
sent his Petition to the Commons; And since he will not give you the Benefice,
I Will warrant you he shall have no Maintenance. And so accordingly my Petition
was rejected in the House of Commons.

CAP. XVIII.
THis was Wednesday, the last of May: It was the Fast Day. May 31.
A Search came betimes in the Morning into the Tower upon all the Prisoners,
for Letters and other Papers. But I have some Reasons to think the Search had a
special aim at me. First, because following me thus close about Chartham as
they did, I conceive they (...) desirous to see whether I had any such Letter
from the King, as I pretended: If I had not, they had advantage against me for
my Falsehood; if I had, they meant to see what Secret passed from his Majesty to
me. Secondly, because I had lately Petitioned for Maintenance, and by this
Search they might see what I had by me. And he that searched my Chamber, told
me upon occasion, that he was to take all Papers which might discover
Delinquents Estates. Thirdly, because all other Prisoners had their Papers
re-delivered them before the Searchers went from the Tower; except some few
Verses of Sir Edward Hern's: But mine were carried to the Committee; yet with
promise, that I should have them again within two or three Days. Fourthly,
because as Layton was put into Lambeth-House, so my implacable Enemy, Mr. Pryn,
was picked out (as a Man whose Malice might be trusted) to make the search upon
me. And he did it exactly.

The manner of the Search upon me was thus. Mr. Pryn came into the Tower, with
other Searchers, so soon as the Gates were open. Other Men went to other
Prisoners; he made haste to my Lodging, Commanded the Warder to open my Doors,
left two Musketeers Sentinels below, that no Man might go in or out, and one at
the Stair-head; with three other, which had their Muskets ready Cocked, he came
into my Chamber, and found me in Bed (as were also my Servants in theirs.) I
presently thought upon my Blessed Savior, when Judas led in the Swords and
Staves about him. Mr. Pryn seeing me safe in Bed, falls first to my Pockets to
rifle them; and by that time my two Servants came running in, half ready. I
demanded the sight of his Warrant; he showed it me, and therein was Expressed,
that he should search my Pockets. The Warrant came from the Close Committee,
and the Hands that were to it, were The Warrant may be found in Pryn's Breviat
of the Life of the Archbishop. p. 28.
these. E. Manchester, W. Say and Seal, Wharton, H. Vane, Gilbert Gerard, and
John Pim. Did they remember when they gave this Warrant, how odious it was to
Parliaments, and (...) of themselves, to have the Pockets of Men searched? When
my Pockets had been sufficiently ransacked, I rose and got my Clothes about me,
and so half ready, with my Gown upon my Shoulders, he held me in the search
till past Nine of the Clock in the Morning. He took from me Twenty and One
Bundles of Papers, which I had prepared for my Defense; the two Letters before
named, which came to me from his Gracious Majesty about Chartham and my other
Benefices; the Scottish Service Book, with such Directions as accompanied it; a
little Book, or Diary, containing all the Occurrences of my Life; and my Book
of Private Devotions; both these last written through with my own Hand. Nor
could I get him to leave this last; but he must needs see what passed between
God and me: A thing, I think, scarce ever offered to any Christian. The last
place which he rifled, was a Trunk which stood by my Bedside. In that he found
nothing, but about Forty Pound in Money for my necessary Expenses (which he
meddled not with,) and a Bundle of some Gloves. This Bundle he was so careful
to open, as that he caused each Glove to be looked into; upon this I tendered
him one pair of the Gloves; which he refusing, I told him he might take them,
and fear no Bribe, for he had already done me all the Mischief he could, and I
asked no Favor of him: So he thanked me, took the Gloves, bound up my Papers,
left two Sentinels at my Door, (which were not dismissed till the next Day
Noon,) and went his way. I was somewhat troubled to see my self used in this
manner; but knew no help but in God, and the Patience which he had given me:
And how his Gracious Providence over me, and his Goodness to me, wrought upon
all this, I shall in the End discover, and will magnisie, however it succeed
with me.

CAP. XIX.
UPon my last Answer to the House concerning Chartham, there came out an
Ordinance against me, to take all my Temporalities into the Parliament's hands;
that so they might give not only Chartham, but all things else, which fell into
my Gift: And because it is an Ordinance of a great Power and Extent, I shall
set it down, as it was Printed and Published, Junij 10. being Saturday. Junij
10. 1643.


Whereas by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, in this present Parliament,
of the 17. of May, 1643. the Archbishop of Canterbury It may be found also in
Rushw. par. 3. vol. (...). p. 330.
is required, from time to time until his Trial, to Collate such fit Persons
unto any Ecclesiastical Preferment in his Patronage, as shall by both Houses be
Nominated unto him; and in pursuance of the said Ordinance, another Ordinance
of the Lords and Commons, past the 20th of the same Month, requiring the said
Archbishop to Collate upon Ed. Corbet, Fellow of Merton College in the
University of Oxford, the Rectory of Chartham in the County of Kent, void by
the Death of Dr. Bargrave, the last Incumbent; and whereas the said Archbishop
of Canterbury, Rushw.
refuses Obedience to the said Ordinance: It is therefore Ordered, and be it
so Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that all the Temporalities
of the Archbishop of Canterbury be hereby Sequestered, by, and unto the
Parliament; And William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury be Susp. Rush.
Suspended ab Officio and Beneficio, and omni, and omnimoda Jurisdictione
Archiepiscopali, until he be either Convicted or Acquitted of High Treason, for
which he stands now Accused; and whatsoever Livings, Dignities, or
Ecclesiastical Promotions, in the said Archbishop's Gift or Collation are, or
hereafter shall be void, shall henceforth be Instituted and Inducted unto by
the Archbishop's Vicar General, or any other having Authority in his Rushw.
this behalf, upon the Nomination and Recommendation of both Houses of
Parliament, during the time of the Suspension and Seque stration aforesaid. And
upon this Ordinance it is Ordered, and be it so Ordained by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, that the said Ed. Corbet be, and is hereby Nominated and
Recommended, forthwith upon sight hereof, to be Admitted, Instituted and
Inducted by the Vicar General aforesaid, or any other having Authority in his
Rushw.
this behalf, into the said Rectory of Chartham, Ratione suspensionis Domini
Gulielmi Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis Et Sequestrationis, Rush.
Temporalium Archiepiscopatus, in Manibus Supremae Curiae Parliamenti jam
existentium, the same belonging unto their Gift. And it is hereby farther
Ordained, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that during the Suspension
and Sequestration aforesaid, the Jurisdiction of the said Archbishop shall be
Executed and Exercised by his Vicar General, and other his inferior Judges and
Officers, as formerly the same has been.

This Ordinance was laid as a great Punishment upon me: But I humbly thank both
Houses for it, as for the greatest Benefit they have bestowed on me since my
Troubles; especially since the Sequestration of my Jurisdiction, November. 2.
1641. For it appears before in this History, how ever since that time I have
been troubled for every Benefice which has fallen in my Gift; disinabled to
prefer any Friend or Chaplain of my own, were he never so worthy: And (which is
worse by much) forced to admit such Men, how unworthy so-ever, as were by them
Nominated to me, or else fall under a Contempt of their Ordinances, and such
Arbitrary Punishment as they shall thereupon load me with: Whereas now, I am
freed both from the Trouble and the Sin of admitting unworthy Persons into the
Church Service, and leave them to the Business, and the Account for it.

On Sunday, Junij 11. One came and Preached at the Tower, (his (...) 11. 1643.
Name I could not learn.) In his Sermon, after he had liberally railed on me,
he told the Auditory, that Mr. Pryn had found a Book in my Pocket, which would
discover great things: This to inflame the People against me; Et si non satis
insanirent sua sponte, instigare. This is Zealous Preaching! God forgive their
Malice.

An Ordinance passed on Monday, Junij 12. that the Synod of Divines Junij 12.
formerly Named by both Houses (not chosen by the Clergy) should begin to sit
on the first of July following: And they did begin Julij 1.
to sit that day; Dr. Twiss in the Chair; and he made the Latin Sermon. The
Names of these Synodical Men, are to be seen in the Ordinance Printed Junij 12.
Where any Man that will, may see a great, if not the greater part of them,
Brownists, or Independents, or New-England-Ministers, if not worse, or at the
best refractory Persons to the Doctrine or Discipline, or both, of the Church
of England Established by Law, and now brought together to Reform it. An
excellent Conclave! But I pray God, that befall not them, which Tully Cicero. L.
1. Tuscul. Qu.
observes fell upon Epicurus, Si quae corrigere voluit, deteriora fecit; He
made every thing worse that he went about to mend. I shall for my part never
deny, but that the Liturgy of the Church of England may be made better; but I
am sure withal it may easily be made worse. And howsoever, it would become this
Synod well, to remember, that there is a Convocation of the English Prelates
and Clergy, lawfully Chosen and Summoned, and by no Supreme or Legal Authority
as yet dissolved: And can there be two National Synods at one time, but that
one must be irregular? Belike we shall fall to it in the Donatists way: They
set up Altar contra Altar in Africa; and these will set up Synodum contra
Synodum in England: And this, without God's Infinite Mercy, will bring forth a
Schism, fierce enough to rent and tear Religion out of this Kingdom: Which God
for the Merits and Mercies of Christ forbid.

A Committee of the House of Commons sent Mr. Dobson my Controwler to me to the
Tower, to require me to send them word under my Hand, what Originals I had of
the Articles of Religion Established, 1562, and 1571. This was on Wednesday,
July 12. And I returned by Julij 12.
him the same day this Answer in Writing, with my Name to it. The Original
Articles of 1571. I could never find in my Paper-Study at Lambeth, or any where
else: And whether any Copy of them were ever left there, I cannot tell. The
Original Articles of 1562. with many Hands to them, I did see, and peruse
there: But whether the Bishops Hands were to them or not, I cannot remember.

This Answer satisfied them; but what their Aim was I cannot tell, unless they
meant to make a search about the two first Lines in the twentieth Article,
concerning the Power of the Church; in these words: The Church has Power to
decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith: Which
words are left out in diverse printed Copies of the Articles, and are not in the
one and twentieth Article of Edw. 6. nor in the Latin Copy of the Articles
1571. But in the Original Articles of 1562. the words are plain and manifest,
without any Interlining at all. If this were their Aim, it is probable we shall
see somewhat, by what their Synod shall do concerning that Article.

On Tuesday, August 3. my Servant Mr. Edw. Lenthrop, came to me Aug. 3.
and told me, that the day before he met with Sir K. Digbye, who had the leave
to go out of Prison, (by the Suit of the French Queen) and to Travel into
France. But before he took his Journey, he was to come before a Committee, and
there (he said) he had been. It seems it was some Committee about my Business;
for he told Mr. Lenthrop, and wished him to tell it me, that the Committee took
special notice of his Acquaintance with me, and Examined him strictly
concerning me and my Religion, whether he did not know, that I was offered to
be made a Cardinal; and many other such like things. That he Answered them,
That he knew nothing of any Cardinal-ship offered me: And for my Religion he
had Reason to think, I was truly and really as I professed my self; for I had
labored with him against his return to the Church of Rome: (Which is true, and
I have some of my Papers yet to show.) But he farther sent me word, that their
Malice was great against me; though he saw plainly, they were like Men that
groped in the Dark, and were to seek what to lay to my Charge. But soon after
Mutterings arose, that Mr. Pryn in his Search had found great Matters against
me, and that now I should be brought to Trial out of Hand.

Some Men now it seems made Overture for Peace, and some good hopes of it began
to show themselves (as it was then said) in both Houses. This was on Saturday,
Aug. 5. But there wanted not those, Aug. 5. 1643. Aug. 6.
which made themselves ready for Battle: For on Sunday, Aug. 6. Printed Bills
were pasted up in London, to animate the People to go to Westminster against
Peace; and the like Bills were Read in some Churches. Excellent Church-work!
And on Monday, Aug. 7. some Aug. 7.
Thousands, Men and Women; went to the Parliament and clamorously Petitioned
against Peace; and the next day five or six Hundred Aug. 8.
Women, and these were as earnest for Peace: But ye may observe, it is but
Hundreds for Thousands that came against it. Yet on Wednesday, Aug. 9. the
number of Women increased, when it seems Aug. 9.
Men durst not appear. But their desire for Peace was answered by some Troops
of Horse which were sent for, by which some of the Women were killed, and
diverse of them shrewdly wounded. God of his Mercy set an end to these bloody
Distractions. In the midst of this Fury of the People, on Thursday, Aug. 10.
came out Rome's Masterpiece. Aug. 10.
This Book Mr. Pryn sets forth in print, upon occasion of some Papers which he
had in his search taken from me: And 'twas done to drive the People headlong
into mischief, whose Malice against me needed not his setting on. After this
the Diurnal and other Pamphlets began to mention me, and that now a Charge was
drawing up against me.

Upon Friday, Aug. 11. Sir Robert Harlowe was made Lieutenant of Aug. 11. Aug.
15.
the Tower, in the room of Sir Jo. Conniers. And on Tuesday, Aug. 15. he
removed Mr. Bray, who had been my Warder from my first Commitment to the Tower,
and put Mr. Cowes, another of the Warders, to be my Keeper. The cause of this
change I could never learn. The Nineteenth of Aug. after, being Saturday,
Alderman Pennington, Aug. 19.
then Lord Mayor of London, was made Lieutenant of the Tower, and took
possession of it. The next day being Sunday, in the Afternoon, Aug. 20.
one Preached in the Tower-Church, in a Buff-Coat and a Scarf, but had a Gown
on. He told the People, they were all Blessed that dyed in this Cause, with
much more such Stuff. His Name (as I then heard) was Kem, Parson or Vicar of
Low-Laighton.
Loe-Layton in Essex, and then Captain of a Troop of Horse. Quam been
convenient! But the next Sunday, Aug. 27. during the Afternoon Sermon, a
Letter, Subscribed Aug. 27.
John Brown, was thrust under the Door of my Prison. When I opened it, I found
it a most bitter Libel. God forgive the Author of it. On Monday, Septem. 11.
the new Lieutenant the Lord Mayor, September 11.
changed my Warder again, removed Mr. Cowes, and put Mr. Spencer to attend me.
And when I moved him, that I might not have such often change put upon me, as
no other Prisoner had; His Answer was, that if he did not remove Mr. Cowes, the
Committee would. So I knew not how to help my self, but by Patience.

Then came the Covenant, that excellent Piece of...... from Scotland, and was
Sworn by the Parliament and the Synod, in St. Margarets September 25.
Church in Westminster, on Monday, September 25. The Effects which followed,
were as strict as the Covenant: For on Monday, October. 3. the Order made that
time Twelvemonth, was renewed, and October. 3.
all Prisoners locked up, and no Man suffered to speak with them, but by leave
from the Lieutenant, and in the presence of their several Warders respectively.

CAP. XX.
BY this time Mr. Pryn's malice had hammered out something: October. 24. See the
Articles and Order of the Lords made thereupon, apud Rushworth, par. 3. vol. 2.
p. 817, 820. apud Pr. p. 38, -- 41. The A. B's (...) may be found in Rushpag.
820. Pryn p. 41.
And on Tuesday, October. 24. an Order was brought me from the Lords, Dated
October. 23. with a Copy of ten Additional Articles, brought up by the Commons
against me. This Order required me to make my Answer in Writing by the
Thirtieth of the same Month. These Articles charged me not with Treason only,
as the former did, but with Treason, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors. I
sent instantly by the same Messenger a Petition for longer time; for Means out
of my Estate to Fee my Council, and bear the necessary Charge of my Trial; for
Council, and for a Solicitor, and some Servants to attend my Business. The
Lords, I humbly thank them, gave me longer time, and assigned me Mr. Hearn, Mr.
Chute, Mr. Hales; and at my Petition, Hern and Chute were assigned by Order of
the Lords, October. 24. Hales added by their Order, October. 28. See both Orders
apud Rushworth, p. 821. Pryn, p. 41, 42. Gerrard added by their Order, Jan. 16.
See this Order also ibid. p. 825, and 46. The first Order apud Heylin's Life of
Laud, p. 513.
added Mr. Gerrard. For Money they referred me to the Committee of
Sequestrations; but delayed their Answer concerning my Servants, and the Papers
of my Defense, which Mr. Pryn took from me. For though he promised me a
faithful Restitution of them within three or four days, yet to this day (being
almost five Months after) I had received but three Bundles of the Twenty and
one, which he had from me.

Friday, October. 27. I Petitioned again, that the Papers of my Defense October. 27.
being (as I was informed) in the hands of the Close Committee, might be
delivered unto me; and sent my Petition with the Order of the Lords annexed to
the Committee for Sequestrations. There many were very favorable, till Mr.
Glyn was pleased to say, They were not to allow me Means, and there was a known
Course in Law, which was, that I might go on in Forma Pauperis; and so was left
without any Allowance out of my Estate, to Fee my Council, or supply other
Wants. This succeeding so ill with me, I Petitioned the Lords again on
Saturday, October. 28. and then Mr. Dell my Secretary October, 28. 1643.
was assigned me for my Solicitor; and I was allowed two See the Order of the
Lords, apud Rushw. p. 821. Pryn, p. 42.
Servants more to go about my Business: And the House of Commons by their Order
agreed to the Lords, that I should have Copies of any the Papers taken from me;
but it should be at my own Charge. Wonderful Favor this, and as much Justice!
My Estate all taken from me, and my Goods sold, before ever I came to Hearing:
And then I may take Copies of my Papers at my own Charge.

On Tuesday, October. 31. I humbly Petitioned the Lords for direction October, 31.
The Petition may be found, apud Rushw. p. 821. Pryn, p. 42.
of my Council, how to carry themselves toward me and my Defense: and that
they would Honorably be pleased, in regard the Articles Charged me with
Treason and Misdemeanour, and were intermixed one with another; to distinguish
which were for Treason, and which for Misdemeanour; as also for longer time to
put in my Answer. The Lords upon this gave an Order, that I should have time
till November. 13. but would declare no Opinion touching the distinguishment of
the Articles, See the Order of the Lords, Ibid. p. 822. 42.
but left me to my Council to advise as they pleased. My Council told me
plainly, I were as good have no Council, if the Articles were not
distinguished; for they were so woven one within another, and so knit up
together in the Conclusion, that they might refer all to Treason, and so they
be suffered to give me no Council at all in matter of Fact. Hereupon they drew
me another Petition to the same effect, which I caused to be delivered November.
6. But it received the November. 6. November. 7.
same Answer. Then November. 7. being Wednesday I Petitioned the House of Commons
to the same purpose: And November. 8. this my Petition November. 8.
was read in the House of Commons; and, after a short Debate, the Resolution
was, that they being my Accusers would not meddle with any thing, but left all
to the Order of the Lords, before whom the Business was, and my Councel's own
Judgment thereupon. This seemed very hard, not only to my self and my Council,
but to all indifferent Men, that heard it. In the mean time I could resort no
whither but to Patience and God's Mercy.

November. 13. I appeared in the Parliament House according to the November. 13.
See the Order apud Rushw. p. 822.
Order, and was at the Bar. That which I spoke to the Lords was this: That I
had no Skill to judge of the Streights into which I might fall by my Plea,
which I had resolved on, being left without all assistance of my Council, in
regard of the nature and form of the Impeachment, that was against me. That yet
my Innocence prompted me to a ready Obedience of their Lordships Order, casting
my self wholly upon God's Mercy, their Lordships Justice, and my own Innocence.
Then I humbly desired that their Lordships Order first, and the Impeachment
after might be read.

This done, I put in my Answer in Writing, as I was ordered to do, and humbly
prayed it might be Vide Rushworth, p. 822: Pryn, p. 43. This Answer is
otherwise worded in Pryn's Compl. Hist. p. 43. who took it (I suppose) from the
Parliament Records, W. S. A. C. It is thus worded, All advantages of Exception
to the said Articles of Impeachment to this Defendant saved and reserved, this
Defendant humbly says, that he is Not Guilty of all or any the Matters by the
said Impeachment Charged, in such manner and form (...) the same are by the
said Articles of Impeachment Charged.
entered. My Answer was: All Advantages of Law against this Impeachment saved
and reserved to this Defendant, he pleads, Not Guilty to all, and every part of
the Impeachment, in manner and form as it is Charged in the Articles: And to
this Answer I put my Hand. My Answer being thus put in, I humbly besought their
Lordships to take into their Honorable Consideration, my great Years, being
Threescore and ten complete, and my Memory, and other Faculties, by Age and
Affliction much decayed: My long Imprisonment, wanting very little of three
whole Years, and this last year little better than close Imprisonment: My want
of skill and knowledge in the Laws to defend my self: The Generality and
Incertainty of almost all the Articles, so that I cannot see any Particulars
against which I may provide my self. In the next place I did thankfully
acknowledge their Lordships Honorable Favor in assigning me such Council as I
desired: But I told their Lordships withal, that as my Council were most ready
to obey their Lordships in all the Commands laid upon them, so there were
certain Doubts arisen in them, how far they might advise me without Offense;
considering the Charges against me were so interwoven, and left without all
distinguishment, what is intended as a Charge of Treason, and what of Crime and
Misdemeanour: That to remove these Doubts, I had humbly besought their
Lordships twice for distinguishment, by several Petitions: That their Lordships
not thinking it fit to distinguish, I have without advice of Council put in my
Plea, as their Lordships see. But do most humbly pray, that their Lordships
will take me so far into Consideration, as that I may not lose the Benefit of
my Council for Law in all, or any; and for Law and Fact, in whatsoever is not
Charged as Treason, when it shall be distinguished: As still my Prayers were,
that by their Lordships Wisdom and Honorable Direction, some way might be
found to distinguish them: And that having (not without much difficulty)
prevailed with my Council to attend; their Lordships would be pleased to hear
them speak in this perplexed Business. While I was speaking this, the Lords
were very attentive, and two of them took Pen and Paper at the Table, and took
Notes: And it was unanimously granted, that my Council should See the Order
(...) Rushw. p. 822. Pryn, p. 43.
be heard; and so they were. And the Order then made upon their Hearing was,
that they should advise me, and be heard themselves in all things concerning
matter of Law, and in all things, whether of Law or Fact, that were.
was not Charged as Treason; and that they would think upon the distinguishment
in time convenient. This was all I could get, and my Council seemed somewhat
better content, that they had gotten so much. Not long after this, I heard from
good Hands, that some of the Lords confessed, I had much deceived their
expectation; for they found me in a Calm, but thought I would have been stormy.
And this being so, I believe the two Lords so careful at their Pen and Ink,
made ready to observe any Disadvantages to me, which they thought Choler and
Indignation might thrust forth. But I praise God the Giver, I am better
acquainted with Patience, than they think I am.

So this my main Business staid a while. In the mean time, that I might not
rust, I was warned, December. 8. to appear in Parliament Dec. 8. 1643.
the 18th. of that Month, as a Collateral Defendant in a Case of Smart against
Dr. Cousin, formerly heard in the High Commission. This Cause had been called
upon both in this and former Parliaments; but I never heard, that I was made a
Defendant till now: Nor do I know any thing of the Cause, but that in the High
Commission I gave my Vote according to my Conscience, and Law too, (for ought I
know) and must refer my self to the Acts of that Court. On Wednesday, December.
13. I Petitioned for Council in this December. 13. December. 18.
Cause, and had the same assigned me: And on the 18. day I appeared according
to my Summons, but I was not called in, and the Business put off to that day
three Weeks.

On Thursday, December. 28. which was Innocents day, one Mr. Wells, December. (...).
a New England Minister, came to me, and in a boisterous manner demanded to
know, whether I had Repented or not? I knew him not, till he told me he was
Suspended by me, when I was Bishop of London, and he then a Minister in Essex.
I told him, if he were Suspended, it was doubtless according to Law. Then upon
a little further Speech, I recalled the Man to my Remembrance, and what care I
took in Conference with him at London-House, to recall him from some of his
turbulent ways; but all in vain: And now he inferred out of the good words I
then gave him, that I Suspended him against my Conscience. In conclusion he
told me, I went about to bring Popery into the Kingdom, and he hoped I should
have my Reward for it. When I saw him at this height, I told him, he and his
Fellows, what by their Ignorance, and what by their Railing, and other
boisterous Carriage, would soon actually make more Papists by far, than ever I
intended; and that I was a better Protestant than he, or any of his Followers.
So I left him in his Heat. This Man was brought to my Chamber by Mr. Isaac
Pennington, Son to the Lieutenant.

By this time something was made ready again in my great Business: Jan. 3.
1643. See the Order apud Rushw. p. 823. Pryn, p. 43.
And Wednesday at Night, Januar. 3. I received an Order for my Appearance, and
to Answer to the Impeachment against me, on the Monday following, Januar. 8.
This Summons seemed sudden after so great an Intermission: Yet I could not
Petition for more time, till Saturday, Januar. 6. because (as the Messenger
told me) the House Januar. 6. The Petition may be found apud Rushw. p. 823. And
the Order of the Lords, p. 824. Both apud Pryn, p. 44. Januar. 7.
sat not again till then. Then I Petitioned for more time, in regard my Council
were not in Town: And I had time given till Tuesday, Januar. 16. and that Day
set peremptorily. Notwithstanding the shortness of this time, my Council being
out of Town, as not expecting it, I was on Sunday, Januar. 7. Ordered again to
appear in Mr. Smart's Suit the next day. The Warrant bare date a Fortnight
before; yet partly to Sanctify the Sabbath For so those Puritans styled and
accounted the Sunday, H. W.
, and partly to show his great Civility to me in giving me Warning, I was not
served with it till Sunday night at Seven of the Clock. The next Morning I went
to Westminster, as I was commanded: But I was sent back, and not so much as
Januar. 8.
called upon. So, beside the Charge I was at, that Day was lost and taken from
me and my Business, as short time as I had given me.

Then Tuesday came on, Januar. 16. And whereas I was Ordered to Januar. 16.
Vide the Order apud Rushw. p. 824. Pryn, p. 45. Mr. Maynard was then chief
Manager for the Commons. See his Speech made then to the Lords, apud Rushw. p
824 and Pryn, p. 45. See the Order apud Rushw. p. 825. Pryn, p. 46, 47. Jan.
22. 1643 See the Archbishop's Petition made herein, Jan. 19. apud Rushw. p.
825. Pryn. p. 46.
appear at the Lords House, at Nine in the Morning, I was by another Order put
off to One of the Clock in the Afternoon. Then I appeared. The Committee that
were to press the Evidence against me, began to proceed upon the former general
Articles, as well as upon the latter. But to the first Articles I had never
been called to Answer, nor ever joined Issue. Upon this, there was much looking
one upon another, as if they meant to ask where the Failure was: But by this
means there could not then be any Proceeding. So I was there peremptorily
Ordered to put in my Answer on Monday, Jan. 22. both to the Original and to the
Additional Articles, and in Writing.

At this day and time I appeared, as I was Ordered to do; but could not obtain
of the Lords, either to take my former Answer off from the File, if I must put
in another; nor to distinguish the Articles, which were Treason, and which
Misdemeanour: Nor leave for my Council to speak to the Generality and
Uncertainty of the Original Articles, which they professed were such, This
Answer was put in Jan. 22. being short, and in general Pleading Not Guilty, and
making only a short particular Plea to the 13th Article. The said Answer may be
found in Rush. p. 826. and Pryn, p. 47. I have Transcribed it from Pryn, and
caused it to be here inserted. H. W.
as no Man living could prepare Answer for. But I must put in my Answer
presently, or be taken Pro Confesso. So in these Streights I put in my Answer
to both Articles; which follows in haec verba.

THE Humble Answer of William Archbishop of Canterbury, to the first and
farther Articles of Impeachment brought up by the Honorable House of Commons
against him, and by Order of the Right Honorable the Lords in Parliament of
the 16th of this Instant, directed to be put in.

As to the 13th Article of the said first Articles, and the Matters therein
charged, and all Matters or Things in the same, or any of the rest of the said
Articles contained, which concern any Act of Hostility, whether between the
King and his Subjects, or between Subject and Subject, or which may be
conceived to arise upon the coming of any English Army against Scotland, or the
coming of the Scottish Army into England; or upon any Action, Attempt,
Assistance, Counsel or Device, having relation thereunto, and falling out by
the occasion of the late Troubles, preceding the late conclusion of the Treaty,
and return of the Scottish Army into Scotland: This Defendant says; That it is
Enacted by an Act made during the Sitting of this present Parliament, that the
same, and whatsoever has ensued thereupon, whether Trenching upon the Laws and
Liberties of the Church and Kingdom, or upon his Majesty's Honor and
Authority, in no time hereafter may be called in question, or resented as a
Wrong, National or Personal; and that no mention be made thereof in time
coming, neither in Judgment nor out of Judgment; but that it be held and
reputed, as though never such things had been thought or wrought; as by the
said Act may more at large appear: With this, that this Defendant does Aver,
that he is none of the Persons Excepted by the said Act, or the said Offenses
charged upon this Defendant, any of the Offenses excepted by the said Act.

And as to all the rest of the said first and farther Articles, this Defendant,
saving to himself all Advantages of Exception to the said Articles, Humbly
says; He is not Guilty of all, or any the Matters by the said Articles
charged, in such Manner and Form as the same are by the said Articles charged
against him.

This day the Thames was so full of Ice, that I could not go by Water. It was
Frost and Snow, and a most bitter day. I went therefore with the Lieutenant in
his Coach, and twelve Warders with Halberts went all along the Streets. I could
not obtain either the sending of them before, or the suffering them to come
behind, but with the Coach they must come; which was as good as to call the
People about me. So from the Tower-gate to Westminster, I was sufficiently
railed on, and reviled all the way. God of his Mercy forgive the misguided
People. My Answer being put in, I was for that time dismissed; and the Tide
serving me, I made a hard shift to return by Water.

And now, notwithstanding all this haste made to have my Answer in, Mr. Pryn
cannot make this broken Business ready against me. Therefore to fill up some
time, I was Ordered to be at the House again on Monday, Jan. 29. about Mr.
Smart's Business. But Jan. 29.
being put to this Trouble and Charge, and showed to the People for a farther
Scorn, I was sent back again, and had nothing said to me.

All February passed over, and Mr. Pryn not yet ready; he had not yet
sufficiently prepared his Witnesses. But on Monday, Mar. 4. an Mar. 4. See the
Order (...) Rushw. p. 827. Pryn, p. 48. Mar. 9.
Order passed to call me to the House, to answer my Charge of High Treason, on
Tuesday, March 12. following. And on Saturday, March 9. I received a Note from
the Committee, which were to press the Evidence against me, what Articles they
meant to begin with; which had a show of some fair Respect; but the Generality
and Uncertainty of the Articles was such, as rendered it a bare show only; no
Particular being charged, concerning which I might provide for any Witnesses or
Counter-proof.

CAP. XXI.
AND now being ready to enter upon the Hearing and the Trial it self, I hold it
necessary for me to acquaint the Reader with some General things before that
begin: Partly to the end he may see the course of this Trial, and the carriage
which has been in it; and partly to avoid the often and tedious Repetition,
which else must necessarily be of some of them; and especially that they may
not be mingled, either with the Evidence, or my Answers to it, to interrupt the
Current, or make any thing more obscure.

1. The Committee appointed by the House of Commons, to manage and press the
Evidence against me, were Sergeant Wild, Mr. Brown, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Nicolas,
Mr. Hill: But none spoke at the Bar, but the first four; Mr. Hill was
Consul-Bibulus; Mr. Pryn was trusted with the providing of all the Evidence,
and was Relater and Prompter, and all: Never weary of any thing, so he might do
me mischief. And I conceive in future times, it will not be the greatest Honor
to these Proceedings, that he, a Man twice Censured in the High Court of
Star Chamber, set in the Pillory twice; once for Libelling the Queen's Majesty,
and other Ladies of great Honor; and again for Libelling the Church, and the
Government and Governors of it, the Bishops, and that had his Ears there
cropped; should now be thought the only fit and indifferent Man to be trusted
with the Witnesses and the Evidence against me, an Archbishop, and sitting at
his Censure.

2. Mr. Pryn took to him two Young Men to help to turn his Papers, and assist
him; Mr. Grice, and Mr. Beck. Mr. Grice was Son to Mr. Tho. Grice, Fellow of
St. Jo. Bapt. College in my time, and after Beneficed near Stanes. I know not
what the matter was, but I could never get his Love: But he is Dead, and so let
him rest. And now his Son succeeds, and it seems he Inherits his Father's
Disposition toward me; for I hear his Tongue walks liberally over me in all
Places. For Mr. Beck, he has received some Courtesy from me, and needed not
in this kind to have expressed his Thankfulness. But I leave them both to do
the Office which they have undertaken, and to grow up under the shadow of Mr.
Pryn; God knows to what.

3. It was told me by a Man of good Credit, that was present and heard it, That
my Name coming in question among some Gentlemen, after diverse had spoken their
Thoughts of me, and not all one way, a Parliament Man being there, was pleased
to say, That I was now an Old Man, and it would be happy both for me and the
Parliament that God would be pleased to take me away: And yet I make no doubt,
but that if Age, or Grief, or Faintness of Spirit had ended my Days, many of
them would have done Scilicet (plus quam) (...) triennio (...) tempus (...)
judicium (...) seni. Tacit. L. 6. (...).
as Tiberius did in the case of Asinius Gallus; That is, Incusarent Casus, qui
reum abstulissent, antequam coram Convinceretur. They would have (...).
cry out against this hard Chance, that should take away so guilty a Person
from public Trial, when they were even ready for it. After this when a Friend
of mine bemoaned my Case to another Parliament Man (of whom I had deserved very
well) and said, he knew I was a good Man: The Parliament Man replied, Be he
never so Good, we must now make him Ill for our own Sakes. What the meaning of
these Speeches is, let understanding Men Judge. And even during my Trial, some
Citizens of London were heard to say, that indeed I answered many things very
well: But yet I must suffer somewhat for the Honor of the House.

4. So all my Hopes now, under God, lay wholly on the Honor and Justice of the
Lords. Yet seeing how fierce many of the People were against me, and how they
had Clamoured in other Cases, and that Mr. Pryn was set up at once to mischief
and to scorn me, and foreseeing how full of Reproaches my Trial was like to be;
I had a strong Tentation in me, rather to desert my Defense, and put my self
into the Hands of God's Mercy, than endure them: But when I considered what
Offense I should commit therein against the Course of Justice, that that might
not proceed in the ordinary way; what Offense against my own Innocence and my
good Name, which I was bound both in Nature and Conscience to maintain by all
good means, which by deserting my Cause could not be: But especially, what
Offense against God, as if he were not able to protect me, or not willing, in
Case it stood with my Eternal Happiness, and his blessed Will of Trial of me in
the mean time; I say when I considered this, I humbly besought God for Strength
and Patience, and resolved to undergo all Scorns, and whatsoever else might
happen to me, rather than betray my Innocence to the Malice of any.

5. And though my Hopes under God were upon the Lords, yet when my Trial came
on, it did somewhat trouble me, to see so few Lords in that great House. For at
the greatest Presence that was any day of my Hearing, there were not above
Fourteen, and usually not above Eleven or Twelve. Of these, one third part at
least, each day took, or had occasion to be gone, before the Charge of the day
was half given. I never had any one day the same Lords all present at my
Defense in the Afternoon, that were at my Charge in the Morning: Some leading
Lords scarce present at my Charge, four days of all my long Trial, nor three at
my Defense: And which is most, no one Lord present at my whole Trial, but the
Right Honorable the Lord Gray of Wark, the Speaker, without whose Presence it
could not be a House. In this Case I stood in regard of my Honorable Judges.

6. When my Hearing came on, usually my Charge was in giving till almost Two of
the Clock. Then I was commanded to withdraw; and upon my Humble Petition for
time to Answer, I had no more given me, than till Four the same Afternoon;
scarce time enough advisedly to peruse the Evidence: My Council not suffered to
come to me, till I had made my Answer, nor any Friend else, but my Solicitor
Mr. Dell, to help to turn my Papers; and my Warder of the Tower to sit by to
look to this. And this was not the least Cause, why I was at first Accused of
no less than Treason; Ne quis necessariorum Tacit. L. 3. (...).
juvaret periclitantem Majestatis Crimina subdebantur, as it fell out in
Silanus his Case, who had more Guilt about him (yet not of Treason) than (God
be thanked) I have; but was prosecuted with like Malice, as appears in that
Story. At Four a Clock, or after, the House sat again; and I made my Answer:
And if I produced any Witness, he was not suffered to be Sworn; so it was but
like a Testimony at large, which the Lords might the more freely believe or not
believe, as they pleased. After my Answer, one, or more of the Committee,
replied upon me. By that time all was done, it was usually half an Hour past
Seven. Then in the heat of the Year (when it overtook me) I was presently to go
by Water to the Tower, full of Weariness, and with a Shirt as wet to my Back
with Sweat, as the Water could have made it, had I fallen in: Yet I humbly
thank God for it, he so preserved my Health, as that though I were weary and
saint the day after, yet I never had so much as half an Hours Headache, or other
Infirmity, all the time of this Comfortless and Tedious Trial.

7. Now for the Method, which I shall hold in this History of my Trial, it
shall be this. I will set down the Evidence given on each day, by it self, and
my Answer to it. But whereas all the Evidence was given together, and so my
whole Answer after; to avoid all looking back, and trouble of turning Leaves to
compare the Answer with the Evidence, I will set down each particular Evidence,
and my Answer to it, and so all along, that the indifferent Reader, may without
farther trouble, see the force of the one, and the satisfaction given in the
other, and how far every Particular is from Treason. And if I add any thing to
my Answers in any place, either it is because in the shortness of time then
given me to make my Answer, it came not to my present Thoughts; or if it did,
yet I forbear to speak it with that sharpness; holding it neither fit nor safe
in my Condition, to provoke either my Accusers or my Judges. And whatsoever is
so added by me, in either of these respects, the Reader shall find it thus
marked in the Margent, as here it stands in this.

8. Nor did I wrong Mr. Pryn, where I say, Note, that where entire set Speeches
were made by the Archbishop, although spoken by him at the Bar, the same marks
are put to it. But wheresoever those marks are found in the History, from the
second to the last day of the Trial inclusive, the words to which they are
affixed were not spoken at the Bar at that time, but either added afterward by
the Archbishop at the Recapitulation of his Answer, or inserted in writing the
History. H. W.
that for all the haste to put in my Answer, Jan. 22. he could not make this
broken Business so soon ready against me: For it is well known, he kept a kind
of School of Instruction for such of the Witnesses as he durst trust, that they
might be sure to speak home to the purpose he would have them. And this an
Utter Barrister, a Man of good Credit knows; who in the hearing of Men beyond
Exception, said, The Archbishop is a Stranger to me, but Mr. Pryn's tampering
about the Witnesses, is so palpable and foul, that I cannot but pity him and
cry shame of it. When I heard this, I sent to this Gentleman, to know if he
tendered my Case so far, as to witness it before the Lords. The Answer I
received was; that the Thing was true, and that very Indignation of it made him
speak: But heartily prayed me, I would not produce him as a Witness; for if I
did, the Times were such, he should be utterly undone: And it is not hard to
guess by whom. Upon this I consulted some Friends; and upon regard of his
safety on the one side, and my own doubt, lest if forced to his undoing, he
might through Fear, blanch and mince the Truth to my own prejudice, who
produced him; I forbear the business, and left Mr. Pryn to the Bar of Christ,
whose Mercy give him Repentance, and amend him. But upon my Christianity this
Story is Truth.

CAP. XXII. The First Day of my Hearing.
AND now I come to Tuesday, March 12. the Day appointed Die Primo.
for my Trial to begin; and begin it did. When I was come, and settled at the
Bar, Sergeant Wild made a Solemn Speech Mar. 12. 1643.
for Introduction. I had a Character given me before of this Gentleman, which I
will forbear to express; but in this Speech of his, and his future Proceedings
with me, I found it exactly true. His Speech my decayed Memory cannot give you
at large; but a Skeleton of it I here present, according to such Limbs as my
brief See a Relation of what then passed, before Wild began his Speech, apud
Rushw. p. 827. and Wild's Speech entire, Ibid. p. 828, etc. and in Pryn's
Compl. Hist. p. 51, etc.
Notes then taken, can now call to my Memory.

He began, and told the Lords, That the Children, which I had traveled with,
were now come to the Birth; and that my Actions were so foul, and my Treason so
great, as that the like could not be read in any History; nay so great, as that
Nullus Poet a fingere, No Poet could ever fain the like: And that if all
Treason were lost, and not to be found in any Author what it is, it might be
recovered and found out in me and my Actions; with diverse Pieces of Latin
Sentences to this effect. [And though these high and loud Expressions troubled
me much at the present; yet I could not but think, that in this Canto of his he
was much like one of them which cry up and down the City, Have you any old Ends
of Gold and Silver?]

After this he proceeded to give Reasons why I was not sooner proceeded
against, having now lain by it above three years. The first Reason he gave, was
the Distractions of the Time. [And they indeed were now grown great; but the
Distractions which were now, can be no Argument why I was not proceeded against
at the beginning of the Parliament, when things were in some better quiet.] His
second Reason was the The Death and dispersion of our Witnesses, the (...) of
some of our Members, who have been employed and taken pains in (...) business.
So Wild's Speech apud Pryn, p. 51.
Death of some Persons. [But this could be no reason at all: For if the Persons
he speaks of were Witnesses against me, more might die, but the Dead could not
be made alive again by this delay; unless Mr. Sergeant had some hope, the
Resurrection might have been by this time, that so he might have produced them.
And if the Persons were Members of the House of Commons, as all Men know Mr.
Pym was in the Chair for Preparation of my Trial; Then this is known too, that
Mr. Pym came up to the Committee of Lords full of great hopes, to prove God
knows what against me. The Persons to be examined, were William Lord Bishop of
London, and Matthew Lord Bishop of Ely, my very Worthy Friends, and Men like to
know as much of me as any Men. A Lord then present told me, there were some
Eighteen or Nineteen Interrogatories, upon which these Bishops were to be
Examined against me, concerning my Intercourse with Rome; but all were built
upon the first, which was their knowledge of the Man, who (it seems) was
thought to be my Chief Agent in that Secret. But both the Bishops denying upon
their Oaths, that they, or either of them ever knew any such Man, all the rest
of the Interrogatories, what Relations he had to me, and the like, must needs
fall to nothing, as they did: And the Lord told me farther, he never saw Mr.
Pym, and the rest, so abashed at any thing in his Life. After this Mr. Pym (as
it is well known) gave over that Chair, despairing to do that against me, which
was desired.] His third Reason, was a good large one, and that was The
multitude of diversions, which we have had and have daily. So Wild's Speech,
Ibid.
other Impediments. [And that is true, some Impediments there were, no doubt, or
else I had come sooner to Hearing. And, as I conceive, a chief Impediment was,
that there was not a Man whose Malice would make him diligent enough to search
into such a forsaken Business, till Mr. Pryn offered himself to that Service:
For I think I may be confident, that that Honorable and Great House would not
seek any Man out of their own Body for any such Employment, had not Suit, some
way or other, been made for it.]

After these Reasons given for the delay of my Trial, he fell upon me again as
foul as at first; as that I was the Author of all the Extravagancies in the
Government, and of all the Concussions in the State: That the Quality of my
Person aggravated my Crime: That my Abilities and Gifts were great, but that I
perverted them all: And that I was guilty of Treason in the highest pitch and
altitude. So Wild's Speech, p. 52.
Treason in the highest Altitude. [These were the Liveries, which he liberally
gave me, but I had no mind to wear them: And yet I might not desire him to wear
this Cloth himself, considering where I then stood, and in what Condition.]

This Treason in the Altitude, he said, was in my Endeavor to alter the
Religion established by Law, and to subvert the Laws themselves: And that to
effect these I left no way unattempted. For Religion, he told the Lords, That I
labored a Reconciliation with Rome: That I maintained Popish and Arminian
Opinions: That I suffered Transubstantiation is not mentioned in Wild's Speech
apud Pryn, p. 52.
Transubstantiation, Justification by Merits, Purgatory, and what not to be
openly Preached all over the Kingdom: That I induced Superstitious Ceremonies,
as The particular Ceremonies, charged with Popery and Superstition, are not
named in Wild's Speech, Ibid.
Consecrations of Churches, and Chalices, and Pictures of Christ in
Glass-Windows: That I gave liberty to the Profanation of the Lord's Day: That I
held Intelligence with Cardinals and Priests, and endeavored to ascend to
Papal Dignity; Offers being made me to be a Cardinal. [And for the Laws, he was
altogether as Wild in his Assertions, as he was before for Religion: And if he
have no more true sense of Religion, than he has knowledge in the Law, (though
it be his Profession) I think he may offer both long enough to Sale, before he
find a Chapman for either.] And here he told the Lords, That I held the same
Method for this, which I did for Religion. [And surely that was to uphold both,
had the Kingdom been so happy as to believe me;] But he affirmed (with great
Confidence,) None of the Particulars, which follow to the end (save the
conclusive Sentence) are to be found in Wild's Speech apud Pryn; but only some
General (...) and Accusations to this purpose. H. W.
That I caused Sermons to be Preached in Court to set the Kings Prerogative
above the Law, and Books to be Printed to the same effect: That my Actions were
according to these: Then he fell upon the Canons, and discharged them upon me.
Then, that I might be guilty enough, [if his bare Word could make me so] he
Charged upon me the Benevolence, the Loan, the Ship Money, the Illegal pulling
down of Buildings, Enclosures; saying, that as Antichrist sets himself above
all that is called God, so I labored to set the King above all that is called
Law. And after a tedious stir, he concluded his Speech with this, That I was
like Naaman the Syrian, a great Person (he confessed) but a Leper. [So ended
this Noble Celeustes.]

I was much troubled to see my self, in such an Honorable Assembly made so
vile: Yet seeing all Men's Eyes upon me, I recollected my self, and humbly
desired of the Lords two things: One, that they would expect Proof, before they
give up their Belief to these loud, but loose Assertions: Especially, since it
is an easy thing for Men so resolved, to Conviciate, instead of Accusing; when
as the Rule given by Optatus holds firm, Quum intenditur Crimen, Optat. L. 6.
Cont. (...).
when a Crime is objected, (especially so high a Crime, as this Charged on me)
it is necessary that the Proof be manifest, which yet against me is none at all.
The other, that their Lordships would give me leave, not to Answer this
Gentleman's Particulars, (for that I shall defer till I hear his Proofs) but to
speak some few things concerning my self, and this grievous Impeachment brought
up against me.



Which being yielded unto me, I then spoke as follows.

My Lords, my being in this Place, and in this Condition, recalls This Speech
is extant also in Rushw. p. 830, etc. Heylin, p. 516, etc. Pryn, p. 53, etc.
to my memory that which I long since read in Seneca; Tormentum est, etiamsi
absolutus quis fuerit, Causam dixisse: It Is not a grief only, no, it is no less
than a Torment, for an ingenuous Man to plead Capitally or Criminally,
Rushworth and Pryn.
Criminally, much more Capitally, at such a Bar as this; yea, though it should
so fall out, that he be absolved. The great Sen L. 6. de Benef. c. 28.
truth of this I find at present in my self: And so much the more, because I am
a Christian; And not that only, but in Holy Orders; And not so only, but by
Gods Grace and Goodness preferred to the greatest Place this Church affords;
and yet now brought, Causam dicere, to Plead, and for no less than Life, at
this Great Bar. And whatsoever the World thinks of me, (and they have been
taught to think Much more, Rushw. and Pryn.
more ill, than, I humbly thank Christ for it, I was ever acquainted with;)
Yet, my Lords, this I find, Tormentum est, it is no less than Torment to me to
appear in this Place to such an Accusation. Nay, my Lords, give me leave, I
beseech you, to speak plain Truth: No Sentence, that can justly pass upon me,
(and other I will never fear from your Lordships) can go so near me as Causam
dixisse, to have pleaded for my self, upon this occasion, and in this Place.
For as for the Sentence (I thank God for it) I am at St. Paul's Ward: If I have
committed any thing worthy of death, I Act. 25. 11.
refuse not to die: For I bless God, I have so spent my time, as that I am
neither ashamed to live, nor afraid to die. Nor can the World be more weary of
me, than I am of it: For seeing the Malignity which has been raised against me
by some Men, I have carried my Life in my Hands these diverse years past. But
yet, my Lords, if none of these things, whereof these Men accuse me, merit
Death by Law; though I may not in this Case, and from this Bar appeal unto
Caesar; yet to your Lordships Justice and Integrity, I both may, and do Appeal;
not doubting, but that God of his Goodness will preserve my Innocence. And as
Job in the midst of his Affliction said to his mistaken Friends, so shall I to
my Accusers; God forbid, I should justify you; till I Job 27. (...).
Dye I will not remove my Integrity from me; I will hold it fast, and not let
it go; my Heart shall not reproach me, as long as I live.

My Lords, I see by the Articles, and have now heard from this Gentleman, that
the Charge against me is divided into two main Heads; An (...) to subvert,
Rush. and Pryn.
the Laws of the Land, and the Religion by those Laws established.

For the Laws first, I think I may safely say, I have been, to my
Understanding, as strict an Observer of them all the Days of my Life, so far as
they concern me, as any Man has; and since I came into Place, I have followed
them, and been as much guided by them, as any Man that sat where I had the
Honor to sit. And for this I am sorry I have lost the Testimony, Rush. and
Pryn.
Witness of the Lord Keeper Coventry, and of some other Persons of Honor,
since Dead. And the Learned Council at Law, which attended frequently at the
Council Table, can Witness (some of them here (...), Heylin, and Rush. and Pryn.
) that in References to that Board, and in Debates arising at the Board, I was
usually for that part of the Cause where I found Law to be: And if the Council
desired to have their Clyents Cause referred to the Law, (well I might move in
some Cases for Charity, or Conscience, to have admittance, but) to the Law I
left them, if thither they would go. And how such a Carriage as this through
the whole Course of my Life, in private and public, can stand with an
Intention, nay a Practice to overthrow the Law, and to introduce an Arbitrary
Government, which my Soul has always hated, I cannot yet see. And it is now
many Years since I learned of my great Master (In humanis) Aristotle, Arist. 2.
(...), c. 7, 8.
Periculosum esse; that it is a very dangerous thing to trust to the Will of
the Judge, rather than the written Law. And all Kingdoms and Commonwealths have
followed his Judgment ever since; and the School-Disputes have not dissented
from it. Nay more, Tho. 2. 2a. (...). 60. (...). 5.
I have ever been of Opinion, that Humane Laws bind the Conscience, and have
accordingly made Conscience of observing them. And this Doctrine I have
constantly Preached, as occasion has been offered me. And how is it possible I
should seek to overthrow those Laws, which I held my self bound in Conscience
to keep and observe? Especially, since an endeavor to overthrow Law, is a far
greater Crime than to break or disobey any particular Law whatsoever; all
Particulars being swept away in that General. And, my Lords, that this is my
Judgment, both of Parliaments and Laws; I beseech your Lordships that I may
read a short Passage in my Book against Fisher the Jesuit, which was Printed
and Published to the World, before these Troubles fell on me, and before I
could so much as suspect this Charge could come against me; and therefore could
not be purposely written to serve any Turn. [ I had leave, and did read it; but
for Brevities Confer with Fisher,. 26. Number. 14 p. 211.
sake refer the Reader to the Book it self.]

As for Religion, I was born and bred up in, and under the Church of England,
as it yet stands Established by Law. I have, by God's Blessing and the Favor
of my Prince, grown up in it to the Years which are now upon me, and to the
Place of Preferment which I now, Rush. and Pryn.
yet bear: And in this Church, by the Grace and Goodness of God, I resolve to
Dye. I have ever since I understood ought in Divinity, kept one constant Tenor
in this my Profession, without variation or shifting from one Opinion to
another, for any worldly Ends: And if my Conscience would have suffered me to
shift Tenets in Religion with Time and Occasion, I could easily have slid
through all the difficulties which have pressed upon me in this kind. But, of
all Diseases, I have ever (...) a (...). etc. (...) dangerous, Rushw.
hated a Palsy in Religion; well knowing, that too often a Dead-Palsie ends
that Difease, in the fearful forgetfulness of God and his Judgments. Ever since
I came in Place, I labored nothing more, than that the External Public
Worship of God ( so Rush. and Pryn.
too much slighted in most parts of this Kingdom) might be preserved, and that
with as much Decency and Uniformity, as might be; being still of Opinion, that
Unity cannot long continue in the Church, where Uniformity is shut out at the
Church-Door. And I evidently saw, that the Public neglect of God's Service in
the outward Face of it, and the nasty lying of many Places Dedicated to that
Service, had almost cast a Damp upon the true and inward Worship of God; which
while we live in the Body, needs External helps, and all little enough to keep
it in any vigor. And this I did to the uttermost of my Knowledge, according
both to Law and Canon, and with the consent and liking of the People: Nor did
any Command Issue out from me against the one, or without the other, that I
know of.

Farther, my Lords, give me leave, I beseech you, to (...) you with, Rush. and
Pryn.
tell you this also: That I have as little Acquaintance with Recusants of any
sort, as I believe any Man of my Place has or ever had since the (...), Rush.
and Pryn.
Place in England has: And for my Kindred, no one of them was ever a Recusant,
but Sir William Webb, Grandchild to my Uncle Sir William Webb, sometimes Lord
Mayor of London; and since which, Rush. and Pryn.
him, with some of his Children, I reduced back again to the Church of England,
as is well known, and I as able to prove.

One thing more I humbly desire may be thought on; it is this, I I am fallen
into a great deal of Obloquy in Matter of Religion, and that so far, as that
it is charged in the Articles, That I have endeavored to advance and bring in
Popery. Perhaps, my Lords, I am not ignorant, what Party of Men have raised
this Scandal upon me; nor for what End; nor perhaps by whom set on: But
howsoever, I would fain have a good Reason given me (if my Conscience (...),
Rush. and Pryn.
lead me that way, and that with my Conscience I could Subscribe to the Church
of Rome) what should have kept me here (before my Imprisonment) to endure the
Libelling, Rush. and Pryn.
Libels, and the Slanders, and the base usage in all kinds, which have been put
upon me, and these to end in this Question for my Life: I say, I would fain
know a good Reason of this.

For first, My Lords; Is it because of any Pledges I have in the World to sway
me against my Conscience? No sure. For I have nor Wife nor Children, to cry out
upon me to stay with them; and if I had, I hope the Call of my Conscience
should be heard above them. Or Secondly; Is it, because I was loath to leave the
Honor and the Profit of the Place I was risen unto? Surely no: For I desire
your Lordships, and all the World else should know, I do much scorn Honor and
Profit, both the one and the other, in comparison of my Conscience. Besides, it
cannot be imagined by any Reasonable Man, but that if I could have complied
with Rome, I should not have wanted either Honor or Profit. And suppose I
could not have so much of either, as here I had; yet sure, would my Conscience
have served me that way, less of either with my Conscience, would have
prevailed with me, more than greater against my Conscience.

Or Thirdly: Is it because I lived here at ease, and was loath to venture the
loss of that? Not so neither: For whatsoever the World may be pleased to think
of me, I have (...) very painful Life, and such as I could have been very well
content to change, had I well known how. And had my Conscience served, Rush.
and Pryn.
led me that way, I am sure I might have lived at far more ease; and either
have avoided the barbarous Libellings, and other bitter and grievous Scorns
which I have here endured, or at the least been out of the hearing of them.
Nay, my Lords, I am as Innocent in this business of Religion, as free from all
Practice, or so much as thought of Practice for any alteration to Popery, or
any way blemishing the True Protestant Religion Established in the Church of
England, as I was when my Mother first bare me into the World. And let nothing
be spoken against me but Truth, and I do here Challenge whatsoever is between
Heaven and Hell, to say their worst against me in point of my Religion: In
which by God's Grace I have ever hated Dissimulation; and had I not hated it,
perhaps it might have been better with me for worldly safety, than now it is.
But it can no way become a Christian Bishop to halt with God.

Lastly; If I had any purpose to blast the True Religion Established in the
Church of England, and to introduce Popery; sure I took a very wrong way to it.
For, my Lords, I have stayed more, Rush. and Pryn.
as many that were going to Rome, and reduced more, Rush. and Pryn.
as many that were already gone, as (I believe) any Bishop or other Minister in
this Kingdom has done; and some of them Men of great Abilities; and some of
them Men of great abilities, and some, Rush. and Pryn.
Persons of great Place. And is this the way, my Lords, to introduce Popery? I
beseech your Lordships consider it well. For surely, if I had blemished the
True Protestant Religion, I could not have settled such Men in it: And if I had
promised Rush. and Pryn. W. Pryn in his Popish Royal Favor. p. 71. Pryn in
Printing the Archbishop's Speech, (...) this whole Passage concerning himself.
H. W.
purposed to introduce Popery, I would never have reduced such Men from it. And
though it please the Author of the Popish Royal Favorite, to say, That scarce
one of the swaying Lord Prelates is able to say, that ever he Converted one
Papist to our Religion; yet how void of Charity this Speech of his is, and how
full of Falsehood, shall appear by the number of those Persons, whom by Gods
Blessing upon my Labors, I have settled in the True Protestant Religion
Established in England: And with your Lordships leave, I shall Name them, that
you may see both their Number and their Condition; though I cannot set them
down in that order of time, in which I either Converted or Settled them.

1. And first, Hen: Birk-head of Trinity Coll. in Oxford, was seduced by a
Jesuit, and brought up to London to be conveyed beyond the Seas. His Friends
complained to me: I had the happiness to find him out, and the blessing from
God to settle his Conscience. So he returned to Oxford, and there continued See
Rushworth, p. 832. who relates, that when some of the Lords, hearing the Name
of Birkenhead, and imagining him to be the Author of the Oxford Aulicus, smiled
at it; the Archbishop taking notice of it, stopped and assured the Lords, that
he meant not him, but another Person of like Name. Yet after all, Pryn in
publishing this Speech, has the Impudence to affirm in the Margin of his Book,
that this Convert of the Arch-(...), was the Author of all the Libellous Popish
Oxford Aulicus's, although he knew full well, that his Name was John
Birkenhead; and adds, that at the naming of this (...), most of the Lords and
(...) smiled; but says not one word of the Archbishop's correction of their
mistake. H. W.
.

2. 3. Two Daughters of Sir Rich: Lechford in Surrey, were sent to Sea to be
carried to a Nunnery. I heard of it, and caused them to be brought back, before
they were got out of the Thames. I settled their Consciences, and both of them
sent me great thanks, since I was a Prisoner in the Tower.

4. 5. Two Scholars of St: John's Coll. in Cambridge, Topping and Ashton, had
slipped away from the College, and here at London had got the French
Embassadour's Pass, (I have the Pass to show:) I found means to get them to me,
and I thank God settled both their Minds, sent them back to their College.
Afterward hearing of Topping's Wants, I allowed him Means till I procured him
a Fellowship in St. John's, Rush. and Pryn.
: And he is at this time a very hopeful Young Man, as most of his time in that
University, a Minister, and Chaplain in House at this Present, to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Westmerland.

6. 7. 8. Sir William Web my Kinsman, and two of his Daughters; and the better
to secure them in Religion, I was at the Charge (their Father being utterly
decayed) to Marry them to two Religious Protestants; and they both continued
very constant. And his Eldest Son I took from him, placed him with a careful 9.
Divine, maintained him diverse Years, and then settled him with a Gentleman of
Good Worth.

10. 11. The next, in my remembrance, was the Lord Maio of Ireland, who, with
another Gentleman (whose name I cannot recall) was brought to me to Fulham, by
Chesford, Rush. and Pryn.
Mr. Jefford, a Servant of his Majesty's, and well known to diverse of your
Lordships.

12. The Right Honorable the Lord Duke of Buckingham was almost lost from the
Church of England, between the continual cunning Labors of Fisher the Jesuit,
and the Persuasions of the Lady his Mother and Sister, Rush. and Pryn.
. After some Miscarriages, King James of ever Blessed Memory Commanded me to
that Service. I had God's Blessing upon me so far, as to settle my Lord Duke to
his Death. And I brought the Right Honorable the Countess of Buckingham, Rush.
and Pryn.
Lady his Mother to the Church 13.
again; but she was not so happy, as to continue with us.

14. The Lady Marchioness Hamilton was much solicited by some Priests, and much
troubled in Mind about it. My Lord spoke with me of it; and though at that
present I was so overlaid with Business, that I could not (as I much desired)
wait upon that Honorable Person my self; yet I told my Lord, I would send one
to his Lordship, that should diligently attend that Service, and that I would
give him the best direction I could. And this I did, and God be thanked, she
dyed very quietly, and very Religiously, and a good Protestant: And my Lord
Marquess told me, he had acknowledged this Service of mine to an Honorable
Lord, whom I now see present.

15. Mr. Chillingworth's A desperate Apostate-Papist, Mr. Cheynes's Sermon at
his Funeral, informs us how good a (...) be Lived and Died. Thus Godly Will.
Pryn in his Marginal Note on this place, p. 56.
Learning and Abilities are sufficiently known to all your Lordships. He was
gone, and settled at Dowaye. My Letters brought him back; and he Lived and Dyed
a Defender of the Church of England. And that this is so, your Lordships cannot
but know: For Mr. Pryn took away my Letters, and all the Papers which concerned
him, and they were Examined at the Committee.

16. 17. Mr. Digby was a Priest; and Mr. James (...) Gentleman, Rushw. and Pryn.
Gentleman, a Schoolmaster in a Recusant's House. This latter was brought to
me by a Minister (as far as I remember) in Buckinghamshire. I converted both of
them, and they remain settled.

18. Dr. Heart a Civilian, Son to a Neighbor of mine at Fulham. He was so far
gone, that he had written part of his Motives which wrought (as he said) that
Change in him. I got sight of them; showed him wherein he was deceived; had
God's Blessing to settle his Conscience; and then caused an able Divine to
Answer his Motives, and give him the Copy.

19. There were beside these, Mr. Christopher Seburne, a Gentleman of an
Ancient Family in Hereford-shire; and Sir William Spencer 20.
of Yarnton in Oxfordshire. The Sons and Heirs of Mr. Winchcomb, Rushw. and
Pryn.
Wintchome, 21.
and Mr. Wollescot, Rushw. and Pryn.
Williscot, whom I sent with their Friends good liking to Wadham-College in
Oxford; and I received a Certificate, Anno 1638. of their continuing in
conformity to the Church of England: Nor did ever any of these relapse again to
Rome, but only the Old Countess of Buckingham, and Sir William Spencer, that
ever I heard of It being only in God's Power, not mine, to preserve them from
relapse. Rushw. and Pryn. Note, that the (...) Copies of this Speech, Printed
in Rush. etc. are very different from this, being taken from the Archbishop's
Mouth as he spoke; this from the Original, as be wrote it. H. W.
. And if any of your Lordships doubt of the Truth of any of these Particulars,
I am able and ready to bring full proof of them all. And by this time I hope it
appears, that one of the swaying Prelates of the time is able to say, he has
Converted one Papist to the Protestant Religion. And let any Clergy Man of
England come forth, and give a better account of his Zeal to this present
Church.

And now, my Lords, with my most humble Thanks for your Lordships favor and
patience in hearing me; I shall cease to be farther troublesome for the present;
not doubting but I shall be able to Answer whatever shall be particularly
objected against me.

After I had ended this Speech, I was commanded to withdraw. As I went from the
Bar, there was Alderman Hoyle of York, and some other, which I knew not, very
Angry, and saying, it was a very strange Conversion that I was like to make of
them; with other Terms of Scorn. I went patiently into the little
Committee-Chamber at the entering into the House. Thither Mr. Peter's followed me
in great haste, and began to give me ill Language, and told me that he, and
other Ministers, were able to name Thousands Hundreds of real Converts to
Christ, for every one of his pretended ones, and that himself had Converted
above 120 Papists, Pryn, p. 56.
that they had Converted. I knew him not, as having never seen him (to my
remembrance) in my Life, though I had heard enough of him. And as I was going
to answer him, one of my Council, Mr. Hearn, seeing how violently he began,
stepped between us, and told him of his uncivil Carriage toward me in my
Affliction: And indeed he came as if he would have struck me. By this time,
some occasion brought the Earl of Essex into that Room, and Mr. Hearn
complained to him of Mr. Peter's his usage of me; who very Honorably checked
him for it, and sent him forth. Not long after, Mr. Hearn was set upon by
Alderman Hoyle, and used as coursly as Peter's had used me, and (as far as I
remember) only for being of Council with such a one as I; though he was
assigned to that Office by the Lords.

What put them into this Choler, I know not; unless they were Angry to hear me
say so much in my own Defense; especially for the Conversion of so many, which
I think they little expected. For the next day a great Lord met a Friend of
mine, and grew very Angry with him about me; not forbearing to ask what I
meant, to Name the Particulars, which I had mentioned in the end of my Speech,
saying, many Godly Ministers had done more. And not long after this, (the day I
now remember not) Mr. Peter's came and Preached at Lambeth, and there told them
in the Pulpit, that a great Prelat, their Neighbor, (or in words to that
effect) had bragged in the Parliament House, that he had Converted Two and
Twenty; but that he had Wisdom enough, not to tell how many Thousands he had
Perverted; with much more abuse. God of his Mercy relieve me from these
Reproaches, and lay not these Men's causeless Malice to their Charge.

After a little stay, I received my Dismission for that time, and a Command to
appear again the next day at Nine in the Morning: Which was my usual Hour to
attend, though I was seldom called into the House in two Hours after.

CAP. XXIII. The Second Day of my Hearing.
I Came as commanded. But here before the Charge begins, I shall set down the
Articles, upon which, according to the Order Die Secundo.
of March 9. they which were entrusted with the Evidence, Mar. 13. 1643.
meant this Day to proceed. They were the First and Second Original Articles,
and the Second Additional Article: which follow in these words.

1. That he has Traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of the Kingdom of England, and instead thereof, to introduce an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law; and to that end has wickedly
and traitorously advised his Majesty, that he might at his own Will and
Pleasure Levy and take Money of his Subjects, without their Consent in
Parliament; and this he affirmed was Warrantable by the Law of God.

2. He has for the better accomplishment of that his traitorous Design,
advised and procured diverse Sermons and other (...) to be Preached, Printed and
Published; in which the Authority of Parliaments, and the Force of the Laws of
the Kingdom are denied, and an Absolute and Unlimited Power over the Persons
and Estates of his Majesty's Subjects is maintained and defended, not only in
the King, but also in himself and other Bishops, above and against the Law; and
he has been a great Protector, Favourer and Promoter of the Publishers of such
false and Pernicious Opinions.

Second Additional Article,

2. That within the space of Ten Years last past, the said Archbishop has
Treacherously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws of this Realm; and to
that end has in like manner endeavored to advance the Power of the
Council Table, the Canons of the Church and the King's Prerogative, above the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm. And for manifestation thereof, about Six Years
last past, being then a Privy Counselor to his Majesty, and sitting at the
Council Table, he said, That as long as he sat there, they should know that an
Order of that Board, should be of equal Force with a Law or Act of Parliament.
And at another Time used these Words, That he hoped e're long, that the Canons
of the Church and the King's Prerogative, should be of as great Power as an Act
of Parliament. And at another Time said, That those which would not yield to
the King's Power, he would crush them to pieces.

These three Articles they begun with; and the first Man appointed to begin was
Mr. Maynard: And after some general things against me, as if I were the most
violent Man for all illegal Ways; The First Particular charged against me was
out of my Diary. I.
The Words these, The King Declared his Resolution for a Parliament in Case of
the Scottish Rebellion. The First Movers of it were my Lord Deputy of Ireland,
the Lord Marquess Hamilton, and my self: And a Resolution voted at the Board,
to Assist the King in Extraordinary Ways, if the Parliament should prove
peevish, and refuse, etc. The Time was December. 5. 1639. That which was enforced
from these Words, was, First, that I bestowed the Epithete Peevish upon the
Parliament: And the Second, that this Voting to Assist the King in
Extraordinary Ways, in Case the Parliament refused, proceeded from my Counsel.

1. To this I replied: And first I humbly desired once for all, that all things
concerning Law may be saved entire unto me, and my Council to be heard in every
such Particular.

2. Secondly, that the Epithete Peevish was a very Peevish Word, if written by
me. I say, If: For I know into whose Hands my Book is fallen; but what has
been done with it I know not. This is to be seen, some Passages in that Book
are half burnt out, whether Purposely, or by Chance, God knows: And some other
Papers taken by the same Hand from me, are now wanting.

Is it not possible therefore some Art may be used in this? Besides, if I did
use the Word Peevish, it was in my Private Pocket Book, which I well hoped
should never be made Public; and then no Disgrace thereby affixed to the
Parliament. And I hope, should a Man forget himself in such an Expression of
some Passage in some one Parliament, (and this was no more) it is far short of
any thing that can be called Treason. And yet farther, most manifest it is in
the very Words themselves, that I do not bestow the Title upon that Parliament,
in that Case; but say only, If it should prove Peevish; which is possible,
doubtless, that in some particulars a Parliament may: Though for the Happiness
of this Kingdom, I would to God it were impossible. But suppose the Word
Peevish had been absolutely spoken by me; is it Lawful upon Record to say the
Parliament An. 42. Hen. 3. was Insanum Parliamentum, Sir Ed. Cook Inst. p. 3.
c. 1.
a Mad Parliament; and that in the 6. Hen. 4. Indoctum, an Unlearned
Parliament; and that in the 4. Hen. 6. a Parliament of Clubbs? And shall it be
High Treason in me to say a Parliament in some one Particular was Peevish? or
but to suppose if it were? Canany Man think, that an Unlearned, or a Mad
Parliament, or one of Clubbs did not do something Peevishly? Might my
Precessor, Tho. Arundel, tell the Commons openly in Parliament, that Speed in
Hen. 4.. 42.
their Petitions were Sacrilegious? And may not I so much as suppose some one
Action of a Parliament to be Peevish, but it shall be Treason? May an ordinary
Historian say of that Unlearned Ibid.
Parliament, that the Commons were fit to enter Common with their Cattle, for
any Virtue they had more than Brute-Beasts? And may not I in my private Notes
write the Word Peevish of them, without Treason?



3. Thirdly, Whereas it is said, That the Voting at the Council Table to assist
the King in Extraordinary Ways, if, etc. was by my Counsel: There is no such
thing in my Diary. There is, that I with others advised a Parliament: But there
is not one Word, that the Voting mentioned at the Council Table proceeded from
any Advice of mine. So there is no Proof from my Diary; and other Proof beside
that, was not so much as urged; which was not in Favor, but because they had
it not. For had they had any other Proof, I see already, it should not have
been lost for want of urging.

Where, I desired their Lordships also to observe, in what a difficulty I have
lived with some Men, who will needs make me a great Enemy to Parliaments, and
yet are angry with me, that I was one with others who moved for that
Parliament. So it seems, nothing that I do can content some Men: For a
Parliament, or against it; nothing must be well, if the Counsel be mine.

4. Fourthly, For the Voting of Assistance in Extraordinary Ways, I was
included in the general Vote of the Table; and therefore that cannot be called
or accounted my Counsel.

5. Fifthly, It is expressed in my Diary, whence all this Proof is taken; that
it was in and for the Scottish Business, and so is within the Act of Oblivion.
And these Answers I gave to Mr. Brown, when, in the summing up of the Charge
against me in the Honorable House of Commons, he made this to be my Counsel to
the King: And he began with it, in his Charging of the Points against Law.



The Second Particular this Day (...) against me, was, That II.
after the Ending of the late Parliament, I did use these Words to the King,
That now he might use his own Power, or Words to that Effect. This was attested
by Sir Henry Vane the Elder, then a Counselor, and present.

1. To this my Answer was, That I spoke not these Words, either in Terms, or in
Sense, to the uttermost of my Knowledge.

2. Secondly, If I had spoken these Words, either they were ill advised Words,
but no Treason; and then they come not home to the Charge: Or they are
Treasonable, and then I ought by 1 Eliz. c. 6.. (...).
Law to have been tried within Six Months. Mr. Brown, in his Reply to me in the
House of Commons, said, That this Statute expired with the Queen, because it
concerned none but her, and the Heirs of her Body. I had here urged Part. 4.
(...). c. 74.
Sir Edward Coke, as urging this Statute, and commending the Moderation of it.
But I was therein mistaken for he speaks of 1. Eliz. c. 1. And that 1 Eliz. c.
1. and 1 Ed. 6. c, 12.
Statute is in force, and is for Trial within Six Months, for such Crimes as
are within that Statute. So it comes all to one for my Cause, so either of the
Statutes be in force. And to this Charge in general, I gave the same Answers
which are here.



3. Thirdly, Sir Henry Vane is in this a single Witness; whereas 1 Ed. 6. c.
12.. ult. and 1 Eliz. c. 6.. ult.
by Lav, he that is accused of Treason, must be convicted by two Witnesses, or
his own Confession without Violence; neither of which is in this Case: And
strange it is to me, that at such a full Table, no Person of Honor should
remember such a Speech, but Sir Henry Vane.

4. Fourthly, both this and the former Charge relate to the Scottish Business,
and so are within the Act of Oblivion, which I have Pleaded.

Besides, here is nothing expressed in the Words Charged, which savours of
Practice, Conspiracy, Combination or Force; and cannot therefore possibly be
adjudged Treason; especially since there is no Expression made in the Words
Witnessed, what Power is meant. For what should hinder the King to use his own
Power? But Legal still: Since nothing is so properly a King's own Power, as
that which is made or declared his own by Law. As for the Inference, That this
was called his own, in opposition to Law: First, Sir Henry Vane is a Witness to
the Words only, and not to any Inference: So the Words have but one Witness,
and the Inference none. And perhaps it were as well for themselves, as for
Persons questioned in great Courts, if they who are employed about the
Evidence, would be more sparing of their Inferences; The dreadful License of
Inferences among our English Pleaders in Cases of Death. Speed. in H. 7. S. 61.
many Men laying hold of them without Reason or Proof.

Lastly, For the Honor of Sir Henry Vane let me not forget this; he is a Man
of some Years, and Memory is one of the first Powers of Man, on which Age
works; and yet his Memory so good, so fresh, that he alone can remember Words
spoken at a full Council Table, which no Person of Honor remembers but
himself. Had any Man else remembered such Words, he could not have stood single
in this Testimony. But I would not have him brag of it: For I have read in St:
Augustine, That Quidam Pessimi, some, even the worst of Men, have great
Memories, and Aug. l. 7. de Civ. Dei. c. 3.
are Tanto Pejores, so much the worse for having them. God Bless Sir Henry.

I have stayed the longer upon these Two, because they were apprehended to be
of more weight than most which follow. The next was a Head containing my
Illegal Pressures for Money, under which the next Particular was, That in the
Case of Ship Money III.
I was very angry against one Samuel Sherman of Dedham in Essex. That I should
say Dedham was a Maritime Town: And that when the Sum demanded of him was
Named, I should say, a Proper Sum; whereas the Distress came to eleven
Subsidies.

To this I Answered: First, here was no Proof but Sherman; and in his own
Cause. Secondly, he himself says no more, than that he believes I was the
Instrument of his Oppression (as he called it;) whereas his Censure was laid
upon him by the Council Table, not by me: Nor was I in any other Fault, than
that I was present, and gave my Vote with the rest. So here is no Proof at all,
but his Belief. Lastly, here can be no Treason, but against Dedham, or Sherman,
that I can discover.



The next to Sherman comes in my great Friend, Alderman IV.
Atkins; and he Testifies, That when he was brought to the Council Table, about
the Ship Money, none was so violent against him as I was, and that this
Pressure for Ship Money was before the Judges had given Sentence for the King.
And that at another time I pressed him hard to lend Money, the King being
present: At which time he conceived that I favored Alderman Harrison for
Country sake; because himself was Committed, and not the other.

To this I must confess, I did use to be Serious and Zealous too in his
Majesty's Service; but not with any the least intention to violate Law. And if
this here instanced were before the Judgment given for the King, yet it was
long after the Judges had put the Legality of it under their Hands. And I for
my part could not conceive the Judges would put that under their Hands to be
Law, which should after be found unlawful. Therefore in this, as I Erred with
Honorable Company at the Council Table, so both they and I had, as we thought,
sufficient Guides to lead us.

As for the (...) which he puts upon me in preserving my Countryman, Alderman
Harrison, from Prison: First, he himself durst not affirm it upon his Oath, but
says only that he Conceives I favored him; but his Conceit is no Proof.
Secondly, if I had favored him, and done him that Office, it is far short of
Treason. But the Truth is, Alderman Harrison gave a modest and a civil Answer;
but this Man was Rough, even to Unmannerliness, and, so far as I remember, was
Committed for that.

And whereas he says, I Pressed him hard to lend Money, and that none was so
violent as I; he is much mistaken. For of all Men in that Fraternity, I durst
never Press him hard for any thing, least of all for Money. For I knew not what
Stuffing might fly out of so full a Cushion, as afterward it is said did, when
being a Colonel he was pressed, but not hard, in a little Skirmishing in
Finsbury-Fields.

Then it was urged, that I aggravated a Crime against Alderman V.
Chambers, and told him, that if the King had many such Chambers he would have
never a Chamber to Rest in: That in the Case of Tunnage and Poundage, he
labored to take Bread from the King: And that I Pressed upon him in the
Business of Coat and Conduct-Money.

To this I gave this Answer, That by the Affection Mr. Chambers then showed the
King, I had some Reason to think, he desired so many Chambers to his use, that
if the King had many such Subjects, he might want a Chamber for himself; or to
that effect: And the violence of his Carriage in that Honorable Assembly gave
just Occasion to other Men to think so. But as for the Business of Tunnage and
Poundage, and of Coat and Conduct-Money, I conceived both were Lawful on the
King's part. And I was led into this Opinion by the express Judgment of some
Lords present, and the Silence of others in that behalf; none of the great
Lawyers at the Table contradicting either: And no Witness to this, but Alderman
Chambers himself.

The sixth Particular was, That I urged the business of Ship Money VI,
upon Alderman Adams.

To this my Answer was; That I never pressed the Ship Money, but as other Lords
did at the Council Table, nor upon other grounds: Nor does Alderman Adams say
any more, than that he was pressed to this payment by me and others. And to me
it seems strange, and will I hope to all Men else, that this, and the like,
should be a common Act of the Lords at the Council Table, but should be
High Treason in no body but in me. And howsoever, if it be Treason, it is
against three Aldermen, Atkins, Chambers, and Adams.

The Seventh Particular was, that I was so violent about the slighting VII.
of the King's Proclamations, as that I said, A Proclamation was of as great
force, or equal to a Statute Law: And that I compared the King to the Stone
spoken of in the Gospel, That whosoever falls upon it, (...). Mat. 21. 44.
shall be broken; but upon whomsoever it falls, it will grind him to powder.
And for this they brought three Witnesses, Mr. Griffin, and Tho. Wood, and
Rich. Hayles.

1. This was in the Case of the Soap-business, and two of the.
the two Witnesses were Soap-boylers. They and their Company slighted all the
Proclamations which the King set out; and all the Lords in the Star Chamber
were much offended, (as I conceive they had great Reason to be) at the great
and open daring of that whole Company. And whatsoever Sentence passed upon them
in that whole Business, was given by the Court of Star Chamber, not by me.

For the Words; First, these Men have good Memories, that can punctually, being
plain ordinary Men, Swear Words spoken full Twelve Years since: And yet, as
good as their Memory is, they Swear doubtfully touching the time; as that the
Words were spoken in May 1632, or 33.

2. Secondly, my Lords, it is impossible these Words should be spoken by me. For
I think no Man in this Honorable Presence thinks me so ignorant, as that I
should not know the vast difference that is between an Act of Parliament and a
Proclamation. Neither can these Gentlemen, which press the Evidence, think me
so wilfully foolish so to speak, considering they accuse me here for a Cunning
Delinquent. So God forgive these Men the Falsehood and the Malice of this Oath.



3. For the Words spoken of the Stone in Scripture, it is so long since, I
cannot recall whether I said it or no: Nor have I any great Reason to believe
these Angry Witnesses in their own Cause. But if, by way of Allusion, I did
apply that place to the King and them, it is far enough from Treason. And let
them, and their like, take heed lest it prove true upon themselves: For seldom
do Subjects fall upon their King, but in the end they are broken; and if it so
happen, that he falls upon them, they are ground to powder.

And Solomon taught me this Answer, where he says, The Anger of a King Prove.
16. 14.
is Death. And yet I would not be mistaken. For I do not conceive this is
spoken of a King and his Natural Anger, (though it be good Wisdom to stir as
little Passion in Kings as may be;) but of his Legal Anger: According to which,
if the Stone roll strictly, few Men can so Live, but for something or other
they may be in danger of grinding.

4. And for these Soap-boylers, they have little cause to be so vehement
against me. For if the Sentence, passed against them in the Star Chamber, were
in any thing illegal, though it were done by that Court and not by me; yet I
alone, so soon as I heard but muttering of it, was the only means of resetling
them and their Trade, which none of all the Lords else took care of. And the
Sum of these Answers I gave to Mr. Brown, when he gave up the Sum of his
Charge against me.



The next Particular was about Depopulations. A Commission of Grace, to
compound with some Delinquents in that kind, was Issued VIII.
under the Broad Seal, to some Lords and other Persons of Honor of the
Council, of which I was one. One Mr. Talboys was called thither. And the Charge
about this was, that when he pleaded, that by Statute 39. Eliz. he might
convert some to Pasture, I should say, Do you plead Law here? Either abide the
Order, or take your Trial at the Star Chamber: And that he was Fined 50 l.

In this Particular Mr. Talboys is single, and in his own Cause; but I was
single at no sitting of that Commission: Nor did I ever sit, unless the Lord
Privy Seal, and Mr. Secretary Coke were present; that we might have direction
from their Knowledge and Experience.

And for the Words (if spoken) they were not to derogate from the Law; but to
show, that we sat not there as any Judges of the Law, but to offer his
Majesty's Grace to such as would accept it.

As for the Fine mentioned, we imposed none upon him or any other, but by the
consent of the Parties themselves. If any Man thought he was not faulty, and
would not accept of the Favor showed him, we left him to the Law. But the
plain truth is, this Gentleman, being Tenant to the Dean and Chapter of
Christ-Church in Oxford, offered them (as they conceived) great wrong in the
Land he held of them; in so much as they feared other their Tenants might
follow his Example, and therefore complained of him. And because I laid open
his usage of his Landlords before the Commissioners, he comes here to vent his
Spleen against me. And it is observable, that in all the business of
Depopulations, in which so many appeared, no one complained either against me
or any other Lord, but only this Talboys. Mr. Brown, when he pressed the Sum
of this Charge against me, added, That at the Council Table, I was for all
Illegal Projects, as well as for these Enclosures. But First, I was neither for
this nor any other, either longer or otherwise than I understood them to be
Lawful. And Secondly, I opposed there the business of Salt and the Base Money;
and I alone took off that of the Malt, and the Brewing: And three Gentlemen of
Hertfordshire (which County was principally concerned in the Case of the Malt)
came over to Lambeth to give me Thanks for it.



Then was charged upon me the Printing of Books, which asserted IX.
the King's Prerogative above Law, etc. The instance was in Dr. Cowell's Book,
Verbo, No such word there sure, it should be Prerogative Regis. W. S. A. C.
Rex: That this Book was decryed by Proclamation; that Complaint was made to
me, that this Book was Printing in a close House without License, and by
Hodgkinson, who was my Printer; that I referred them to Sir John Lamb; that
they came to me again, and a third time, and I still continued my Reference;
which Sir John Lamb slighting, the Book came forth. The Witnesses to this,
were Hunt and Wallye, if I mistook not their Names.

1. For this Book of Dr. Cowell's, I never knew of it, till it was Printed; or
so far gone on in Printing, that I could not stay it: And the Witnesses say, it
was in a close House, and without License; so neither I nor my Chaplains could
take notice of it.

2. They say, they informed me of it, but name no time, but only the Year 1638.
But they confess I was then at Croydon: So being out of Town (as were almost
all the High Commissioners) I required Sir John Lamb, who being a High
Commissioner, had in that business as much power as my self, to look to it
carefully, that the Book proceeded not; or if it were already Printed, that it
came not forth. If Sir John slighted his own Duty and my Command, (as
themselves say) he is Living, and may answer for himself; and I hope your
Lordships will not put his Neglect upon my Account.

3. As for Hodgkinson, he was never my Printer; but Badger was the Man whom I
employed, as is well known to all the Stationers. Nor was Hodgkinson ever
employed by me in that kind or any other: Upon just Complaint I turned him out
of a place, but never put him into any: And therefore those Terms which were
put upon me, of my Hodgkinson, and my Sir John Lamb, might have been spared.
Sir John was indeed Dean of the Arches, and I employed him, as other
Archbishops did the Deans which were in their Times; otherwise no way mine:
And Hodgkinson had his whole dependence on Sir Henry Martin, and was a mere
Stranger to me. And this Answer I gave to Mr. Brown, when he summed up the
Charge. Nor could any danger be in the Printing of that Book to mislead any
Man: Because it was generally made known by Proclamation, that it was a Book
Condemned, and in such Particulars: But for other things the Book very useful.



The next Charge was, That when Dr: Gill, Schoolmaster of Paul's X.
School in London, was warned out by the Mercers (to the Care of which Company
that School some way belongs) upon Dr: Gill's Petition to the King, there was a
Reference to some other Lords and my self to hear the Business. The Charge is,
that at this Hearing I should say, the Mercers might not put out Dr: Gill
without his Ordinary's Knowledge: And that upon mention made of an Act of
Parliament, I should reply, I see nothing will down with you but Acts of
Parliament; no regard at all of the Canons of the Church: And that I should
farther add, That I would rescind all Acts which were against the Canons; and
that I hoped shortly to see the Canons and the King's Prerogative of equal
force with an Act of Parliament.

To this I Answered; That if all this Charge were true, yet this is but the
single Testimony of Samuel Bland, an Officer belonging to the Company of the
Mercers, and no small Stickler against Dr. Gill, whose Aged Reverend Father had
done that Company great Service in that School for many Years together.

The Reference he grants was to me and others: So I neither thrust my self into
the Business, nor was alone in it.

And as there is a Canon of this Church, That no Man may be allowed Can. 77.
to (...) School, but by the Bishop of the Diocese; so a paritate rationis, it
stands good, They may not turn him out, without the said Bishops knowledge and
Approbation. And it is expressed in another Canon; That if any Schoolmaster
offend in any of the Premises (there spoken of) Can. 79.
he shall be (...) by his Ordinary; and if he do not amend upon that his (...),
he shall then be Suspended from Teaching: Which I think makes the Case plain,
that the Mercers might not turn out Dr. Gill, without so much as the Knowledge
of his Bishop.

And for the Words; That I saw nothing would down with them but an Act of
Parliament, and that no regard was had to the Canons; I humbly conceive there
was no offense in the Words. For though the Superiority by far in this Kingdom
belongs to the Acts of Parliament; yet some regard doubtless, is or ought to be
had to the Canons of the Church: And if nothing will down with Men but Acts of
Parliament, the Government cannot be held up in many Particulars.



For the other Words, God forgive this Witness: For I am well assured, I
neither did nor could speak them. For is it so much as probable, that I should
say, I would rescind all Acts that are against the Canons? What power have I or
any particular Man, to rescind Acts of Parliament? Nor do I think any Man that
knows me, will believe I could be such a Fool, as to say, That I hoped shortly
to see the Canons and the Kings Prerogative equal to Acts of Parliament; Since
I have lived to see (and that often) many Canons rejected, as contrary to the
Custom of the Place; as in choice of Parish-Clerks, and about the Reparation of
some Churches; and the King's Prerogative discussed and weighed by Law: Neither
of which has, or can be done by any Judges to an Act of Parliament. That there
is Malice in this Man against me, appears plainly; but upon what it is grounded
I cannot tell: Unless it be, that in this business of Dr. Gill, and in some
other about placing Lecturers, (which in some Cases this Company of the Mercers
took on them to do) I opposing it so far as Law and Canon would give me leave,
crossed some way, either his Opinion in Religion, or his Purse-profit. I was (I
confess) so much moved at the Unworthiness of this Man's Testimony, that I
thought to bind this Sin upon his Soul, not to be forgiven him till he did
publicly ask me Forgiveness for this Notorious Public Wrong done me. But by
God's Goodness I mastered my self; and I heartily desire God to give him a
sense of this Sin against me his poor Servant, and forgive him.

And if these words could possibly escape me, and be within the danger of that
Statute; then to that Statute, which requires my Trial within six Months, I
refer my self.

The Eleventh Charge of this day, was the Imprisonment of XI.
Mr. George f. Walker.
Waker, about a Sermon of his, Preached to prove (as he said) That it is Sin to
obey the greatest Monarchs in things which are against the Command of God: That
I had Notes of his Sermons for four or five Years together, of purpose to
entrap him; That I told his Majesty he was Factious; That Sir Dadly Carlton
writ to keep him close; That in this Affliction I protested to do him Kindness,
and yet did contrary.

My Answer was; That for the Scope of his Sermon, To Obey God rather than Man,
no Man doubts but it ought to be so, when the Commands are opposite. But his
Sermon was viewed, and many factious Passages, and of high Nature, found in it.
And yet I did not tell the King he was Factious, but that he was so complained
of to me; and this was openly at the Council Table.

And whereas he speaks of Notes of his Sermons for diverse Years, with a purpose
to entrap him; all that he says is, that he was told so, but produces not by
whom. And truly I never had any such Notes, nor ever used any such Art against
any Man in my Life. For his Commitment, it was done by the Council Table; and
after, upon some Carriage of his there, by the Court of Star Chamber, not by
me; nor can that be imputed to me, which is done there by the major part, and I
having no Negative. And if Sir Dudly Carlton writ to keep him close at his
Brother's House, contrary to the Lords Order, let him answer it: And if he
supposes that was done by me, why is not Sir Dudly examined to try that Truth?
As for the Protestation, which he says I made to his Wife and his Brother, that
I complained not against him; it was no Denial of my Complaint made against him
at the first, that I heard he was Factious; but that after the time, in which I
had seen the full Testimony of grave Ministers in London, that he was not
Factious, I made no Complaint after that, but did my best to free him. And the
Treason in these two Charges is against the Company of the Mercers, and Mr.
Waker.

The next Charge was, that Dr: Manwaring having been Censured XII.
by the Lords in Parliament for a Sermon of his against the Liberty and
Propriety of the Subject, was yet after this preferred by me, in Contempt of
the Parliament-Censure, both to the Deanery of Warcester, and the Bishopric of
St: David's; And my own Diary witnesses that I was complained of in Parliament
for it; And that yet after this I did consecrate him Bishop.

1. To this I answered, that he was not preferred by me to either of these; and
therefore that could not be done in contempt of the Parliament-Censure, which
was not done at all. For as for St: David's, it is confessed, Secretary Windebank
signified the King's Pleasure, not I. And whereas it was added, that this was
by my means; That is only said, but not proved. And for Worcester, there is no
Proof but the Docket-Book: Now, my Lords, it is well known in Court, that the
Docket does but signify the King's Pleasure for such a Bill to be drawn, it
never mentions who procured the Preferment: So that the Docket can be no Proof
at all against me; and other there is none.

2. For the Sermon, it is true, I was complained of in Parliament, that I had
been the Cause of Licensing it to the Press; and it is as true, that upon that
Complaint, I was narrowly sifted, and an Honorable Lord now present, and the
Lord Bishop of Lincoln, were sent to Bishop Mountain, who Licensed the Sermon,
to Examine, and see, whether any Warrant had come from me, or any Message: But
when nothing appeared, I was acquitted in open Parliament; To some Body's no
small Grief. God forgive them, and their Malice against me; for to my knowledge
my Ruin was then thirsted for. And as I answered Mr. Brown's Summary Charge,
when he pressed this against me, could this have been proved, I had been undone
long since; the Work had not been now to be done.



That he was after Consecrated by me, is true likewise; and I hope, it is not
expected I should ruin my self, and fall into a Praemunire, by refusing the
King's Royal Assent; and this for fear lest it 25 Hen. 8. c. 20.. ult.
might be thought I procured his Preferment. But the Truth is, his Majesty
commanded me to put him in mind of him when Preferments fell; and I did so: But
withal I told his Majesty of his Censure, and that I feared ill Construction
would be made of it.

To this it was replied, That I might have refused to Consecrate, the Cause why
being sufficient, and justifiable in Parliament, and excepted in that Law. But
how sufficient soever that Cause may be in Parliament, if I had been in a
Praemunire there-while, and lost my Liberty and all that I had beside, for
disobeying the Royal Assent; I believe I should have had but cold Comfort when
the next Parliament had been Summoned; no Exception against the Man being known
to me, either for Life or Learning, but only this Censure: Nor is there any
Exception which the Archbishop is by that Law allowed to make, if my Book be
truly Printed.



Then followed the Charge of Dr. Heylin's Book against Mr. Burton; XIII.
out of which it was urged, That an unlimited Power was pressed very far; and
out of p. 40. That a way was found to make the Subject Heylin Cont. Burton, p.
40;
free, and the King a Subject; that this Man was preferred by me; that Dr.
Heylin confessed to a Committee, that I commanded him to Answer Mr. Burton's
Book; and that my Chaplain Dr. Braye Licensed it.

I Answered as follows; I did not prefer Dr. Heylin to the King's Service; it
was the Earl of Danby, who had taken Honorable Care of him before in the
University. His Preferments I did not procure: For it appears by what has been
urged against me, that the Lord Viscount Dorchester procured him his Parsonage,
and Mr. Secretary Coke his Prebend in Westminster.

For his Answer to the Committee, that I commanded him to Write against Burton,
It was an Ingenuous and a True Answer, and became him and his Calling well; for
I did so. And neither I in Commanding, nor he in Obeying, did other than what
we had good Precedent for in the Primitive Church of Christ. For when some
Monks had troubled the Church at Carthage, but not with half that danger which
Mr. Burton's Book threatened to this; Aurelius, then Bishop, commanded St. Aug.
to Write against it; and he did so. Aug. 2. Retract. c. 21.
His Words are, Aurelius Scribere Jussit, and feci.

But though I did, as by my Place I might, Command him to Write and Answer; yet
I did neither Command nor Advise him, to insert any thing unsound or unfit. If
any such thing be found in it, he must Answer for himself, and the Licenser for
himself. For as for Licensing of Books, I held the same course which all my
Predecessors had done: And when any Chaplain came new into my House, I gave him
a strict Charge in that Particular. And in all my Predecessors Times, the
Chaplains suffered for faults committed, and not their Lords; though now all is
heaped on me.

As for the particular Words urged out of Dr. Heylin's Book, p. 40. there is
neither Expression by them, nor Intention in them, against either the Law, or
any Lawful Proceedings; but they are directed to Mr. Burton and his Doctrine
only. The words are: You have found out a way (not the Law, but you Mr. Burton)
to make the Subject free, and the King a Subject: Whereas it would well have
beseem'd Mr. Burton, to have carried his Pen even at the least, and left the
King his Freedom, as well as the Subject his.

From this they proceeded to another Charge: which was, That I XIV.
preferred Chaplains to be about the King and the Prince, which were
disaffected to the Public Welfare of the Kingdom. The Instance was in Dr:
Dove: And a Passage Read out of his Book against Mr: Burton: And it was added,
that the declaring of such disaffection, was the best Inducement or Bribe to
procure them Preferment.

To this I then said, and it is true; I did never knowingly prefer any Chaplain
to the King or Prince, that was ill-affected to the Public. And for Dr. Dove,
if he uttered by Tongue or by Pen, any such wild Speech concerning any Members
of the Honorable House of Commons, as is urged, thereby to show his
disaffection to the Public; he is Living, and I humbly desire he may answer
it. But whereas it was said, That this was the best Inducement or Bribe to get
Preferment; This might have been spared, had it so pleased the Gentleman which
spoke it: But I know my Condition, and where I am, and will not lose my
Patience for Language.

And whereas it is urged, That after this he was Named by me, to be a Chaplain
to the Prince his Highness; the Thing was thus, His Majesty had suit made to
him, that the Prince might have Sermons in his own Chapel for his Family.
Hereupon his Majesty, approving the Motion, commanded me to think upon the
Names of some fit Men for that Service. I did so: But before any thing was
done, I acquainted the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain, that then was,
with it; my Lord knew most of the Men, and approved the Note, and delivered it
to his Secretary Mr: Oldsworth, to Swear them. This was the Fact: And at this
time, when I put Dr: Dove's Name into the List, I did not know of any such
Passage in his Book, nor indeed ever heard of it till now. For I had not Read
his Book, but here and there by snatches.

I am now come (and it is time) to the last Particular of this XV.
day. And this Charge was, The giving of Subsidies to the King in the
Convocation, without consent in Parliament; That the Penalties for not paying
were strict, and without Appeal, as appears in the Act; where it is farther
said, that we do this according to the Duty which by Scripture we are bound
unto; which reflects upon the Liberties of Parliaments in that behalf. But it
was added, they would not meddle now with the late Canons for any thing else,
till they came to their due place.

1. My Answer to this was: That this was not my single Act, but the Act of the
whole Convocation, and could not be appliable to me only.

2. That this Grant was no other, nor in any other way, Mutatis Mutandis, than
was granted to Queen Elizabeth in Archbishop Whitgift's time. This Grant was
also put in Execution, as appeared by the Originals which we followed. These
Originals (among many other Records) were commanded away by the Honorable
House of Commons, and where they now are I know not: But for want of them my
Defense cannot be so full.

3. For the Circumstances; as that the Penalties are without Appeal, and the
like, it is usual in all such Grants. And that we did it according to our Duty
and the Rules of Scripture, we conceived was a fitting Expression for our
selves, and Men of our Calling, without giving Law to others, or any intention
to violate the Law in the least. For thus, I humbly conceive, lies the mutual
Relation between the King and his People, by Rules of Conscience. The Subjects
are to supply a full and Honorable Maintenance to the King: And the King (when
Necessities call upon him) is to ask of his People, in such a way as is, per
pacta, by Law and Covenant agreed upon between them, which in this Kingdom is
by Parliament; yet the Clergy ever granting their own at all times. And that
this was my Judgment long before this, appears by a Sermon of mine, appointed
to be Preached at the opening of the Parliament; in the Year 1625. My Words My
Sermon in Psalm. 75. 2, 3, p. 14.
are these. If you would have indeed a flourishing both State and Church; The
King must trust and indear his People; and the People must Honor, Obey, and
Support their King, etc. This, I hope, is far enough from derogating from any
Law: And if I should privately have spoken any thing to him contrary to this,
which I had both Preached and Printed, how could his Majesty have trusted me in
any thing?

CAP. XXIV.
THis brought this tedious Day to an End. And I had an Order Die Tertio.
the same Day to appear again on Saturday, March 16. 1643. with a Note also
from the Committee which were to Charge me, that they meant then to proceed
upon part of the Second Additional Article, and upon the Third Original, and
the Third and Fifth Additional Articles. The Second Additional Article is
written down before. And here follow the rest now mentioned to be next
proceeded upon.

3. The third Original is, He has by Letters, Messages, Threats, Promises, and
diverse other ways, to Judges and other Ministers of Justice, Interrupted and
Perverted, and at other Times by the means aforesaid, has endeavored to
Interrput and Pervert the Course of Justice in his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, and other Courts, to the Subversion of the Laws of this Kingdom;
whereby sundry of his Majesty's Subjects have been stopped in their just Suits,
and deprived of their Lawful Rights, and subjected to his Tyrannical Will, to
their utter Ruin and Destruction.

The Third and Fifth Additionals follow.

3. That the said Archbishop, to advance the Canons of the Church and Power
Ecclesiastical above the Law of the Land, and to Pervert and hinder the Course
of Justice, has at diverse Times within the said Time, by his Letters and other
undue Means and Solicitations used to Judges, opposed and (...) the granting of
his Majesty's Writs of Prohibition, where the same ought to have been Granted
for Stay of Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court, whereby Justice has been
delayed and hindered, and the Judges diverted from doing their Duties.

5. That the said Archbishop about Eight Years last past, being then also a
Privy-Counsellor to his Majesty, for the End and Purpose aforesaid, caused Sir
John Corbet of Stoak in the County of Salop Baronet, then a Justice of Peace of
the said County, to be Committed to the Prison of the Fleet, where he continued
Prisoner for the space of half a Year or more; for no other Cause but for
calling for the Petition of Right, and causing it to be Read at the Sessions of
the Peace for that County, upon a just and necessary Occasion. And during the
Time of his said Imprisonment, the said Archbishop, without any Color of
Right, by a Writing under the Seal of his Archbishopric, granted away Parcel
of the Glebe-Land of the Church of Adderly in the said County, whereof the said
Sir Jo. Corbet was then Patron, unto Robert Viscount Kilmurry, without the
consent of the said Sir John, or the then Incumbent of the said Church; which
said Viscount Kilmurry, Built a Chapel upon the said Parcel of Glebe-Land, to
the great prejudice of the said Sir John Corbet, which has caused great Suits
and (...), Rushw.
Dissentions between them. And whereas the said Sir John Corbet had a Judgment
against Sir James Stonehouse, Knight, in an Action of Waste in his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, which was afterward affirmed in a Writ of
Error in the King's Bench, and Execution thereupon Awarded; yet the said Sir
John, by means of the said Archbishop, could not have the Effect thereof, but
was committed to Prison by the said Archbishop and others at the Council
Table; until he had submitted himself unto the Order of the said Table, whereby
he lost the benefit of the said Judgment and Execution.

The Third Day of my Hearing.
In the Interim, between the 13th and this 16th of March, upon Saturday, Mar.
16. 1643.
some strict Charge to look to the Tower, my Solicitor was not suffered to come
in to me. Whereupon, so soon as I was settled at the Bar, before the Evidence
began to be opened, I spoke to the Lords as follows.

My Lords; I stand not here to complain of any thing, or any Man; but only am
enforced to acquaint your Lordships with my sad Condition. Your Lordships have
appointed my Secretary to be my Solicitor, and given him leave to assist me in
the turning of my Papers, and to warn in such Witnesses, and to fetch me the
Copies of such Records, as I shall have occasion to use. And I humbly desire
your Lordships to consider, that my self being Imprisoned, and so utterly
disinabled to do these things my self; it will be absolutely impossible for me
to make any Defense, if my Solicitor be denied to come to me, as now he is.
Here the Relation is imperfect. It seems he moved, that his Solicitor might
come to him, and in the mean time the Hearing put off.
This was granted, and the Hearing adjourned till Monday following; and I
humbly thanked their Lordships W. S. A. C.
for it.

CAP. XXV. The Fourth Day of my Hearing.
THE fourth Day of my Hearing was Monday, March 18. and Die Quarto.
was only my Answer to the third Day's Charge, and the only time in which I was
not put to answer the same Day. The first Charge of this Day was about St.
Paul's. And first out of my I.
Diary; (where I confess it one of my Projects to repair that Ancient Fabric:)
And three strict Orders of the Lords of the Council for the demolishing of the
Houses Built about that Church. One was November. 21. 1634. The demolishing of
the Houses commanded by this before Jan. 6. for one, and for the rest by
Midsummer. Another was Mar. 26. 1631. a Committee appointed with Power to
compound with the Tenants, and with Order to pull down, if they would not
Compound. The third was Mar. 2. 1631. which gives Power to the Sheriffs to pull
down, if Obedience be not yielded.

To this I confess I did, when I came first to be Bishop of London, Project the
Repair of that Ancient and famous Cathedral of St. Paul, ready to sink into its
own Ruins. And to this I held my self bound in general, as Bishop of the Place;
and in particular for the Body of the Church, the Repair of which is by the
Local Statutes laid upon the Bishop. And the Bishop was well able to do it,
while he enjoyed those Lands which he had, when that Burden was laid upon him.
But what Sacrilegious Hands despoiled that Bishopric of them, it is to no
purpose to tell.

And truly, my Lords, since I am in this present Condition, I humbly and
heartily thank God, that St. Paul's comes into my Sufferings; and that God is
pleased to think me worthy to suffer either for it, or with it any way: Though
I confess I little thought to meet that here, or as a Charge any where else.
And so God be pleased (as I hope in Christ he will) to Pardon my other Sins, I
hope I shall be able (Humane Frailties always set aside) to give an easy
Account for this. But whereas I said, the Repair of St. Paul's was a strange
piece of Treason. And they presently Replied, that they did not Charge the
Repair upon me, but the Manner of doing it, by demolishing of Men's Houses. To
that I Answered as follows; with this first, that the Work has cost me above
One Thousand and two Hundred Pounds out of my own Purse, besides all my Care
and Pains, and now this heavy Charge to boot: No one Man offering to prove,
that I have Misspent or diverted to other use, any one Penny given to that
work; or that I have done any thing about it, without the Knowledge,
Approbation and Order of his Majesty, or the Lords of the Council, or both.

To the Particulars then. For the three Orders taken out of the Council-Books,
I shall not need to repeat them. But what is the Mystery, that these Orders are
reckoned backward, the last first? Is it to aggravate, as if it rose by steps?
That cannot well be; because the first Order is the Sourest, if I conceive it
right. Besides, here was real Composition allotted for them, and that by a
Committee named by the Lords, not by me. And I think it was very real; for it
Cost Eight or Nine Thousand Pounds (as appears upon the Accounts) merely to
take down the Houses (which had no Right to stand there) before we could come
at the Church to Repair it.

And if any thing should be amiss in any of these (which is more than I either
know or believe;) they were the Council's Orders, not mine. And shall that be
urged as Treason against me, which is not Imputed to them so much as a
Misdemeanour? Besides, the Lords of the Council are in the ancient Constitution
of this Kingdom one Body; and whatsoever the Major Part of them concludes, is
reputed the Act of the whole, not any one Man's. And this I must often
Inculcate, because I see such Public Acts like to be heaped upon my Particular.

1. The first Witness about this Business of St. Paul's is Mich. Burton, and
it is charged that his House was pulled down in King James's time; That he was
Promised relief, but had none: That hereupon he got a Reference from his
Majesty that now is, and came with it to the Council, and was referred to the
Committee. That Sir Hen. Martin told him that the Archbishop was his
hinderance. That he resorted to me, and that I bid him go to King James for his
Recompense.

To this my Answer was, That this House, which he says was his, was (as is
confessed by himself) taken down in King James's Time, when an attempt was made
about the Repair of this Cathedral, but nothing done. If he desired
satisfaction, he was to seek it of them who took down his House, not of me. If
his Majesty that now is gave him a Reference, he was by the Lords of the
Council, or by me (if to me it were Referred) to be sent to the Sub-Committee,
because Satisfaction for each House was to be Ordered by them. Nor had I any
Reason to take it on my Care, which was done so long before. He says, that Sir
Henry Martin told him that I hindered him: But that is no Proof, that Sir Hen:
Martin told him so: For it is but his Report of Sir Henry Martin's Speech: And I
hope, Sir Henry neither did, nor would do me such apparent Wrong. He was the
third Man to whom I brake my Intentions touching the Repair, and the
Difficulties which I foresaw I was to meet with: And he gave me all
Encouragement. And it may be, when nothing would satisfy the eager Old Man, I
might bid him go to King James for Recompense; but it is more than I remember if
I did so. And this Man is single, and in his own Case; and where lies the
Treason that is in it? Besides, least Consideration was due to this House: For,
not many Years before the Demolishing of it, it was Built at the West End of
St. Paul's for a Lottery; (it was said to be the House of one Wheatly;) and
after the Lottery ended, finished up into a Dwelling House, to the great
annoyance of that Church: The Bishop, and Dean, and Chapter being asleep while
it was done.

2. The next Charge about St. Paul's was Witnessed by Mary Berry, That her
Husband was fain to set up his Trade elsewhere, and that every Man reported,
the Bishop was the Cause of it.

Her Husband was forced by this Remove to set up his Trade elsewhere; so she
says: And perhaps in a better Place, and with Satisfaction sufficient to make
him a better Stock: Where Is the Wrong? Beside, she is single, and in her own
Cause, and no Proof, but that every Man reported the Bishop was the means to
remove him. And it is Observable, that in King James his Time, when the
Commission issued out for the demolishing of these very Houses, the Work was
highly applauded; and yet no Care taken for Satisfaction of any Private Man's
Interest: That now great Care has been taken, and great Sums of Money Expended
about it, yet I must be a Traitor, and no less for doing it. This makes me
think, some Party of Men were heartily angry at the Repair it self; though for
very Shame it be turned off upon the demolishing of the Houses.



3. The next that came in, was Tho: Wheeler: He says that his House was pulled
down by the Committee, by my Direction, above Eleven Years ago: And that Word
was brought him of it.

His House was pulled down; but himself confesses it was by the Committee. It
was, he says, above eleven Years ago, and the time limited in that Article is
Sixteen. vide.
Six Years. He says, that Word was brought him that I was the Cause, or gave
the Direction. Word was brought him, but he Names not by whom, nor from whom;
so all this Proof is a single Hearsay of he knows not whom: Whereas I had the
Broad-Seal of England for all that was done. It was replied here, That for
demolishing of these Houses the King's Commission was no full and legal
Warrant; I should have procured Authority from Parliament. I replied to this
Interruption, That Houses more remote from the Church of St. Paul's were pulled
down by the King's Commission See this Record twice referred to afterward. In
the latter Place the useful Words of it are recited. So that, perhaps, it will
not be necessary to print the whole Patent; but if it be, I have a Copy of it.
W. S. A. C. This came not to my Hands. H. W.
only in K. Ed. 3. time; and humbly desired a Salvo might be entered for me,
till I might bring the Record; which was granted.

4. The last Instance for this Charge of St. Paul's, was the House of W: Wakern;
who Witnessed, that he had a Hundred Pound recompense for his House; but then
was after Fined in the High-Commission-Court 100 l. for Profanation, of which
he paid 30 l.

To this I gave this Answer; That his Charge is true; and that after he had
received 100 l. Composition, the Cry of the Profanation brought him into the
High Commission. It was thus: The Skulls of Dead-Men (perhaps better than
himself) were tumbled out of their Graves into his Draught, and part of the
Foundation of the Church (as appeared in the taking down of his House) was
broken, or pared away, to make room for the uncleanness to pass into the Vault:
And surely were I to sit again in the High Commission, I should give my Vote to
Censure this Profanation. But himself confesses, he paid but Thirty Pound of
it, which was too little for such an Offense. And besides, my Lords, this was
the Act of the High Commission, and cannot be charged singly upon me.

And I cannot forbear to add thus much more, That the Bishop, and Dean, and
Chapter, whoever they were, did ill to give way to these Buildings, and to
increase their Rents by a Sacrilegious Revenue: No Law that I know giving way
to Build upon Consecrated Ground, as that Churchyard is. But howsoever, the
present Tenants being not in Dolo, I ever thought fit they should have
Recompense for their Estates, and they had it.

The next Charge was about the Shops of the Goldsmiths in Cheapside II.
and Lumbard-street. An Order was made at the Council Table, November. 12. 1634.
That within Six Months the Goldsmiths should provide themselves Shops there,
and no where else, till all those Shops were furnished: And this under a
Penalty, and to give Bond.

These two were the ancient Places for Goldsmiths only, Time out of Mind: And
it was thought fit by the Lords, for the Beauty of the Place, and the Honor of
the City, to have these Places furnished as they were wont, and not to have
other Trades mixed among them. Beside, it concerned all Men's Safety: For if any
Plate were stolen, the enquiry after it might be made with more ease and speed:
Whereas if the Goldsmiths might dwell here and there, and keep their Shops in
every by-place of the City, stolen Plate might easily be made off, and never
heard of. But howsoever, if in this Order there were any thing amiss, it was
the Order of the Council Table, not mine: And far enough off from Treason, as I
conceive.

1. Upon this Charge there were two Instances. The first is Mr: Bartley; who
said, his House was taken from him, by Order to the Lord Mayor, 1637. That my
Hand was to the Order; That he was Imprisoned Six Months, and recovered 600. l.
Damages of Sir Ed. Bromfield; That after this he was Committed to Flamsted, a
Messenger belonging to the High Commission, about Dr. Bastwick's and Mr.
Burton's Books; That after this he was sent for to the Council, and there heard
my Voice only; That when he desired some help, Sir Tho. Ailsbury's Man told
him, he were as good take a Bear by the Tooth: That all this was for his
entertaining a Man that came out of Scotland; and lastly, That Dr. Haywood, my
Chaplain, had Licensed a Popish Book.

To which I gave this Answer: That if the Lord Mayor put him from his house, by
Order from the Lords (being a Stationer among the Goldsmiths) then it was not
done by me: And though my Hand were to the Order, yet not mine alone; and I
hope my Hand there subscribed no more Treason than other Lords Hands did: And
if he did recover 600 l. against Sir Ed. Bromfield, who (I think) was the Lord
Mayor spoken of, surely he was a Gainer by the Business. And whereas he says,
he was after seized again, and Committed to Flamsted about the Books Named: If
he were (as was informed) a great Vender of those, and such like Books, less
could not be done to him, than to call him to Answer. He says farther, that he
was sent for to the Council Table, and there he heard my Voice only against
him. It may be so, and without all fault of mine: For that heavy Office was
usually put upon me and the Lord Keeper, to deliver the Sense of the Board to
such as were called thither, and Examined there: And by this Means, if any sour
or displeasing Sentence passed (how just soever, it mattered not) it was taken
as our own, and the Envy of it fell on us. And that this was so, many Lords
here present know well. He adds what Sir Thomas Ailsbury's Man said, when he
would have Petitioned again: But since Mr. Bartley is single here, and in his
own Cause, why does he rest upon a Hearsay of Sir Thomas Ailsbury's Man? Why
was not this Man Examined to make out the Proof? And if this Man did so far
abuse me, as to speak such Words of me, shall I be Abused first, and then have
that Abuse made a Charge? That he was troubled thus for a Scotchman's coming to
him, is nothing so, nor is any Proof offered: Though then the Troubles were
begun in Scotland; and therefore if this had any relation to that Business, I
pleaded again the Act of Oblivion. For that of Dr. Haywood, I shall give my
Answer in a more proper Place; for it is objected again.

2. The second Instance was in Mr Manning's Case. He speaks also of the Order
of the Council, November. 12. 1634. That the Goldsmiths in their Book make an
Order upon it, June 15. 1635. That they which obey not, should be suspended, (I
think it is meant from use of their Trade;) That when some entreated them to
Obedience, I should say, This Board is not so Weak, but that it can Command; or
to that effect.

For the Council's Order, it was theirs, not mine. For the Order which the
Company of Goldsmiths made upon it, It was their own Act, I had nothing to do
with it. For the Words, If I did speak them (which is more than I remember) he
is single that Swears them, and in his own Cause. But, my Lords, I must needs
say, whether I spoke it then, or not, most true it is, that the Council Table
is very weak indeed, if it cannot Command in things of Decency, and for Safety
of the Subject, and where there is no Law to the contrary. And this was then my
Answer.

The Third Charge of this Day, was, That I forced Men to III.
lend Money to the Church of St: Paul's: And Mrs: Moore was called upon. But
this was deserted.

The next Charge was concerning a long and tedious Suit between IV.
Rich and Poole, about the Parsonage of North-Cerny in Glocestershire; That
Rich was turned out after three Years Possession, by a Reference procured by
Poole, to the Lord Keeper Coventry and my self; And that I did in a manner Act
the whole Business at the Reference; That Letters were sent from the Council to
Sir William Masters, one of the Patrons, to see Poole Instituted, and to
Imprison Rich if he refused Obedience: That after, by the Lord Marshal's
procurement, there was another Reference obtained to thirteen Lords; who
awarded for Rich.

I was never more weary of any Business in my Life, than I was of this
Reference: And I was so far from Acting the whole Business, as that I did
nothing, but as the Lord Keeper directed; the Cause was so entangled with Quare
Impedits, and many other Businesses of Law. Our Judgments upon full Hearing
went with Poole, and we certified accordingly: And upon this (it may be) the
Letters mentioned were sent down for Poole. And if the Lord Keeper that now is,
then his Majesty's Solicitor, could not, or durst not meddle, but gave back his
Fee (as was farther urged) his Lordship is living to tell the Cause himself;
for here was none set down, though it were urged, as if he did it because I was
a Referree: And in the mean time this is but a bare Report concerning him. If
the thirteen Lords, to whom it was after referred, were of another Opinion,
that was nothing to us, who without any touch of Corruption, did as our
Knowledge and Conscience guided us. And, my Lords, it seems this Title was very
doubtful; for after all this, it came into this Parliament, was referred to a
Committee, where Mr. Rich was very willing to compound the Business. And well
he might; for I was since certified by a Gentleman, a Lawyer, that understood
well, and was at the Hearing of that Cause, that it was one of the foulest
Causes on Rich's side, that ever he heard. And out of this I took the Sum of
my Answer, which I gave to Mr. Brown, when he Summed up my Charge.



The Witnesses to this Charge were Mr. Rich his Brother, and my good Friend Mr.
Talboys. But this latter witnesses nothing but that he heard me say, that
Poole's Behavior was unfit; so there I checked the one Party: And that upon
some words given me by Rich, I should say, do you throw dirt in my face? And
why might I not ask this Question, if his words deserved it? So upon the
Matter, here is Rich single in his Brother's Case; and nothing throughout that
looks like Treason.

Here I had a snap given me, that I slighted the Evidence, whereas they (as
'twas said) did not urge these Particulars as Treason, but as things tending to
the violation of Law, and should be found to make Treason in the Result. The
Truth is, I did then think within my self, that such Evidence might very well
be slighted in an Accusation of Treason.

But I thought better to forbear; and so, in my continued patience, expected
the next Charge.

Which was Mr: Foxlie's Imprisonment about Popish Books. That he V.
was tendered the Oath ex Officio; then brought before the Council, and
imprisoned again by a Warrant under my Hand and others; and my Hand first to
the Warrant; his Wife not suffered to come to him, till he was sick; that the
chief Cause of all this was the Impropriations, because he desired to Name the
Men for the Feoffment.

My Lords, This Man confesses, he was called in question about Popish-Books;
but expressing no more, I cannot tell what to make of it; nor can I tell how to
Accuse him of Popish Books. For I cannot tell which is least, his Understanding
of them, or his Love to them.

And for tendering him the Oath ex Officio, that was the usual proceeding in
that Court. When he was brought before the Lords of the Council, he says the
Warrant for his Imprisonment was under my Hand and others. This was according
to course: So the Commitment of him was by the Lords, not by me. But my Hand
was first; so was it in all things else, to which I was to set it. And the
restraint of his Wife from coming to him, was by the same Order of the Lords:
And upon her Petition, when her Husband was sick, both of them confess she had
admittance. But whereas he says, The chief Cause of his Commitment was the
Feoffment, he is much mistaken: Himself says before it was about Popish Books.
This I am sure of, the Feoffment was not so much as mentioned against him:
Though he freely confesses, that he got twelve Men to undertake that Feoffment,
which was a great deal more power than he could take to himself by Law. And his
Wife speaks not one word to the Cause of his Imprisonment. So he is single, and
in his own Cause; and no Treason, unless it be against Mr. Foxlye.

The next Charge of this day, was Mr: Vassall's Imprisonment: VI.
And to save Repetition, I shall weave all the circumstances of Aggravation and
my Answer together.

First, he is single in all, both Substance and Circumstance. Secondly, he says
that he conceives I was the cause of his Imprisonment. But his Conceit is no
proof. He says again, that I said at the Council Table (whither he was called,)
Why sit we here, if we be not able to Judge? It may be, my Lords, I said so; I
remember not now; but if I did say so, it was of such things only, as were fit
and proper for that Honorable Board to judge of. Then he Charged me, that I
should there say, That he did eat the Bread out of the King's Childrens Mouths;
and that if he were in another Country he would be Hanged for it. I doubt this
Gentleman has borrowed some of Sir Hen. Vane's Memory: But I remember no such
thing.

Yet if I did say it, it was no Treason: For if I did say he might be Hanged
for the like in some other Country; it was because the Laws and Customs of
other Countries, and this of ours, differ in many things. So that by this
Speech, he was to thank the Law of the Land for his preservation,
notwithstanding his opposition against Majesty; which, where the Laws were not
so favorable to the Subject, would not be endured.

He says, He was fain to deposite 300 l. into the Hand of Sir Abra. Dawes, and
that it was taken out the next day: But he says withal, it was done by a Decree
at the Council Board; and I hope I shall not be held Author of all Decrees
which passed there. He says, that I called him Sirrah: A high Crime, if I did
so! High Treason at least!

But sure this Gentleman's Spleen swelled up Sir into Sirrah: For that is no
Language of mine to meaner Men than Mr. Vassal is. The main of this Charge is
Words; and those (if uttered) hasty, not Treasonable: And as M. Lepidus spoke
in the Case of C. Lutorius Priscus, Tacit. L. 3. Annal.
Vana a scelestis, dicta a maleficiis differunt; vain things differ from
wicked, and words from malicious deeds; and let any Man else be sifted as I
have been for all the time I have been a Bishop, which is now upon the point of
Twenty and three Years, and I doubt not but as high Words as these will be
heard fallen from him upon less occasion, and of greater Personages than Mr.
Vassal is. Besides, Mr. Vassal, at the end of his Testimony, desired the Lords
he might have Reparation; which altogether in Law infirms that which he
Testified.



After this followed a Charge about a Grant passed from his Majesty VII.
to one Mr. Smith. The difference was between Mrs. Burrill and him. As far as I
can recall, it was thus. The King had made a Grant to Mr. Burrill, in his Life
time, of a Wharf or something else belonging to the Thames. Mr. Smith conceals
this, and gets a Grant from his Majesty, over the Head of the Widow and her
Children. And, as himself confesses, His Majesty being informed that Mrs.
Burrill was Sister to the Reverend Prelate Bishop Andrews, being then dead, did.
should say, that he would not have granted it to Mr. Smith, had he known so
much. This was an Honorable Memory of his faithful Servant, her Worthy
Brother. But whatsoever was done in this business, was by Order of the
Council Board, and not by me: As was also the 250 l. which (he says) was paid
in to Sir William Beecher, (by way of deposite, as I conceive;) In which if he
had any hard Measure, the Law was open for his Right. And in the whole business
he is single, and in his own Cause.

The next Charge was Sir Jo: Corbett's; which because it is expressed VIII.
at large in the Article before recited, I shall not here repeat, but apply the
Answer to it, which I then gave.

Sir John says, he was sent for about Reading the Petition of Right, at a
Sessions in the Country; and that the Earl of Bridgwater should say, he was
disaffected to the King. This concerns not me in any thing. He says, That for
this he was Committed, lay long in the Fleet, and was denied Bail: But he says
it was denied by the whole Board. So by his own Confession, this was the Act of
the Council, not mine. And this Answer I gave to Mr. Brown, when he put this
part of the Charge into his Sum.



In his Cause with Sir John Stonehouse about a Waste, I cannot recall the
Particulars: But whatever was done therein, himself confesses was by Order at
the Council Table, and His Majesty present, April 18. 1638.

For the I Will built by the Lord Viscount Kilmurrye; the Grant which I made was
no more, than is ordinary in all such Cases: And it is expressed in the Body of
the Grant, Quantum in nobis est, and de Jure possumus; so there is nothing at
all done to the prejudice of Sir John's Inheritance: For if we cannot Grant it
by Law, then the Grant is voided by its own words. And that the Grant was such,
and no other, I showed the Deeds ready Attested out of the Office. Besides, had
I wronged him, there was an ordinary Remedy open, by Appeal to the Delegates.
And this was well known to him; for he did so Appeal from a like Grant against
him, by the now Lord Bishop of Duresme, then of Lichfield, and Sir John's
Diocesan. And whereas it is alleged, That I made this Grant without the consent
of him the Patron, or the then Incumbent; Sir John acknowledges, like a
Gentleman, that I sent unto him for his consent, if it might have been had. And
this I foresaw also, that if I had denied the Lord Viscount that which was not
unusual; then the Complaint would have fallen more heavy on the other side,
that I made Persons of Quality in a manner Recusants, by denying them that
convenience which was in my power to grant. So I must be faulty, whatever I do.

Then the business of the Tithes of London was raised up in Judgment IX.
against me. And it was Read out of my Diary, that I projected to give the
Ministers assistance therein.

I had been much to blame, having been Bishop of London, should I have had
other thoughts. For their Case is very hard; all their Offerings being shrunk a
way into nothing, but a poor Easter-Book. The Ministers of London had often
petitioned about some Relief long before my time: And I did then, and do still
think it most just, they should have it. For they are now under the Taskmakers
of Egypt; the (...). 5. 7.
Tale of Brick must be made, they must Preach twice a Sunday, get Straw where
they can.

And yet I never thought of any thing contrary to Law, had all been done which
I desired. For that was no more, than that the Citizens would voluntarily yield
to some reasonable addition, where Right and Need appeared: And this, I am
sure, nor did nor could cross with the Act of Parliament concerning the Tithes
of London. And Mr. Moss, who is their only Witness in this particular, says no
more against me, but that I pressed this business much, and often: Which is
most true I did, and held it my Duty so to do; but still in the way before
mentioned.

After this came the great Charge (as it was accounted) concerning X.
the Censure of Mr: Pryn, and Burton, and Bastwick, in the Star Chamber, and
their Banishment (as it is called) upon it. The Witnesses produced in some
Circumstances of that Cause, were Mr: Cockshott, Tho: Edwards, William Wickens,
Mr: Burton, Mrs: Bastwicke, and Mr: Pryn himself. The Censure is known, and
urged to be against Law: But so far as any Particular is put upon me, my Answer
is present to it.

1. And first for Mr: Cockshott, he says, Mr. Attorney Bancks sent him (being
then his Servant) to give me an Account of that Business: Hence it is inferred,
That I took care of it. This might have had some show of Proof, if I had sent
to Mr. Attorney to give me an account of it. But there is no word of any such
Proof. And yet, considering what relation their Cause had to the Church, if I
had sent and desired some Account of the Proceedings; I humbly conceive (my
Place in the Church considered) it could have been no great Crime.

2. Then were Read certain Warrants: One Febr. 1. 1632. for Commitment; another
of Febr. 2. 1636. to bar access to them. These were Acts of the Lords sitting
in Star Chamber, not mine. Then was Read a third Order after Sentence given, of
May 13. 1634. for the seizing of his Books. But this, as the former, was an Act
of the Court; not mine: And it is expressed in the Order (as the Charge it self
lays it down) for the disposal of the Books according to Law. Then the Warrant
of their Commitment to the Islands, Aug. 27. 1637. This Commitment was no
Device of mine; nor did I ever hear of it, till it was spoken by others in the
Star Chamber: Nor do any one of these Warrants prove any thing, that can be
called my Act: And I humbly conceive, that I ought not by Law, nor can by Usage
of Parliamentary-Proceedings, be charged single for those things which were
done in Public Courts. The last Order was, November 12. 1637. about the
Aldermen of Coventry, and the Quo Warranto resolved upon against the Charter of
that City, only for supposed Favors showed to Mr. Pryn in his passage that
way. First, it is confessed in the Charge, that this was an Act of the Lords.
Secondly, that it was made at a full Board. Thirdly, it is not urged that any
one Man disliked it. Fourthly, the Complaint which caused it, was, that both
Aldermen and their Wives, and other Citizens, were not content to show Mr. Pryn
kindness; but they both did, and spoke that which was disgraceful to the
Star-Chamber-Sentence. But howsoever, there is no Particular in that Order,
that is, or can be Charged upon me.

3. This for the Warrants. The next Witness concerning this Charge was Tho.
Edwards. He says, That three Hampers of Mr. Pryn's Books were taken out of his
House (whither it seems, they were conveyed for Safety,) and no Warrant showed
to take them. The weaker Man he, to let his Friends Books go so. But this
Witness has not one Word of me.

4. The next Witness, was William Wickens; he says, he knew of no Warrant
neither; but that License was given by the Sheriffs about Six Years since.
Here Is never a Word concerning me; nor am I to Answer for the Sheriffs Act. And
whereas it is an Aggravation in the Charge, That all Mr. Pryn's Books were
sold: Tho. Edwards says there were but Three Hampers of them; and this Witness
says he bought them for Two and Thirty Pounds: And these neither by Number nor
Price, could be half of Mr. Pryn's Books, if I have heard Truth of his Library.

5. After this Man's Testimony comes Mr. Pryn himself in his own Cause. He made
a long relation of the Business, and full of Bitterness against me. This I
doubt not was purposely done, to represent me as Odious as he could, to the
Lords and the Hearers. But I shall assume nothing to my self, that was done by
Order of the Court of Star Chamber: Whatsoever was done there by Common
Consent, was their Act, not mine; and if any Treason be in it, they are as
guilty as I; for Treason admits no Accessories. Nor will I meddle with the
Language: God forgive him that, and what ever else he has done against me:
Only I shall answer to all such particulars of his, as seem to touch upon my
self.

(1) First then he says, he brought a Prohibition, An. 1629. and that was the
Ground of my Hatred against him. For Prohibitions, I shall Answer when they are
Charged: But as I remember not this, so I bare him no Hatred; and bearing him
none, it could not be for that Cause: Nor does he so much as offer to prove it
was.

(2) Next he says, I gave Direction to Mr. Attorney Noy, and that Dr. Heylin
drew some Informations for him. Dr. Heylin was well acquainted with Mr.
Attorney; but how long, or upon what grounds I know not: Nor did I give Mr.
Attorney any direction. What Dr. Heylin did, if he did any thing, is nothing to
me, unless I set him on; which is not Proved, nor Sworn.

(3) He farther says, That Mr. Attorney read his Book twice over, and said that
he found nothing amiss in it. I know not what Mr. Attorney said to him; nor
what he may say of Mr. Attorney, now he is dead: This I am sure of, and it is
well known to some of your Lordships, he said far otherwise in open Court.

(4) He says, That his Book was Licensed to the Press, and after that seized,
and that the Messenger told him it was done by me. This was done by Warrant of
the High Commission, not by me: Nor does he offer any Proof against me, but
that the Messenger told him so; which is a bare Hearsay, and no Proof.

(5) Then he says, That there was another Order given about his Business, and
that I did it. But he brings no Proof for this, but that Mr. Ingram, the then
Keeper of the Fleet, told him so. But this is as bare a Hearsay as the former,
and Mr. Ingram not produced to make out the Proof.

(6) Then he says, He writ me a Letter, and that I sent it to Mr. Attorney, to
have him yet farther proceeded against. It Is true, my Lords, he did Write unto
me; but whether it were a Letter, or a Libel, I leave other Men to Judge. This
Letter I did send to Mr. Attorney; but only to let him see how I was used, not
to have any farther proceeding against him. But Mr. Attorney was so moved at the
sight of it, that when he saw me next, he told me he would call him Ore tenus
for it. Therefore it seems, somewhat was very much amiss in it, call the
Writing what you will.

(7) He says, Mr. Attorney thought he had not kept the Letter; but he was
deceived, for he had it. But how was Mr. Attorney deceived? I Will tell your
Lordships what himself told me. When Mr. Attorney saw that I would not agree to
any farther Prosecution, he sent for Mr. Pryn, showed him the Letter, and
thought after he had Read it to give him some good Counsel, to desist from that
Libelling Humor of his. But Mr. Pryn, after he had got the Letter into his
Hands, went to the Window, as if he meant to read it, and while Mr. Attorney
was otherwise busied, he tare it into small Pieces, and threw it out at the
Window, and then said unto him, This shall never rise in Judgment against me.
Now he confesses he has the Letter still, and that Mr. Attorney was deceived:
Belike he tare some other Paper for it, and put the Letter in his Pocket. But
that you may see the Honesty of this Man, and what Conscience he makes of that
which he speaks upon his Oath; Here he says he had the Letter still, and that
Mr. Attorney was deceived: And yet after this, when he sets out his Breviate of
my Life; he confesses, W. Pryn's Breviate of the Archbishop's Life. p. 19.
in an unsavory Marginal Note, That he Tare it, Mr. Attorney having need of
such a Paper. And for this Breviate of his, if God lend me Life and Strength to
end this first, I shall discover to the World the Base and Malicious Slanders
with which it is fraught.



(8) He went on, and said, There was an Order made against him when Term was
done, so that he could have no Remedy. This is directly against the Court and
their Order, not against me.

(9) Then he cites out of the Epistle before my Speech in the Star Chamber,
Paulo post medium.
that I Censured him for having his Hand in the Pamphlets of those times, and
yet was doubtful of it. The Words are; For I doubt his Pen is in all the
Pamphlets. But first, it is acknowledged I gave no Vote at all in his Censure:
And if I did not Judicially Censure him, then sure I was not doubtful, and yet
Censured. Secondly, he was Censured upon his own Pamphlet: And his Hand was
certainly in his own, what doubt soever I might make of it is being in theirs.
And Thirdly, if the Words be extended to their Pamphlets also, that is nothing
to prove I doubted of the Justness of the Sentence. For the Words are not, I
doubt his Pen is in all those Pamphlets of Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bastwick; but in
all the Pamphlets, whether their Libels, or any others; so I might be doubtful
of the one, and yet certain enough of the other.

(10) And whereas he adds, That he was jointly Charged with Dr. Bastwick and
Mr. Burton, yet could not be suffered to speak together for a joint Answer; and
that his Cross Bill was refused. All this was done by the Court of
Star Chamber; not by me. And your Lordships know well the Lord Keeper managed
the Affairs of that Court, not I.

(11) Then he says, That at last, Mr. Holt came to him, but was threatened that
very Afternoon for it. But he does not tell your Lordships by whom; and for my
part more than civil giving him the time of the Day, I never spoke with him in
all my Life.

(12) He tells your Lordships next, how he passed through Coventry, (to which I
have spoken already) and how through Chester, and how some Chester men were
used concerning him, and his entertainment. But, my Lords, whatsoever was done
in this, was by the High Commission at York; and if any thing be therein amiss,
they must answer that did it.

(13) Lastly, he spoke of sending Sir William Balfore to me, and some other
like Particulars. Of all which there is no Proof, but a bare Relation, what Mr.
Hungerford, Mr. Ingram and Sir William Balfore said; which is all Hearsay, and
makes no Evidence, unless they were present to Witness what is said. And here
give me leave to observe, that Mr. Pryn has in this Charge woven together all
that he could say concerning both Causes, for which he was Censured: For in the
third Particular he speaks of his Book, for which he was first Censured; and in
the Ninth and Tenth of his Cross-Bill, and the like, which were in his second
Cause.



6. The sixth Witness was Mr. Burton, a Party too. For that which he said
agreeable to Mr. Pryn, it received the same Answer. And he added nothing new,
but that his Wife was kept from him by Warrant from the Lords: And if it was by
the Lords Order, then was it not by me. And when it was replied, that till he
was Sentenced to Garnsey, his Wife had access to him: Mr. Burton answered, Yea;
but, my Lords, she was not suffered to be with me at Nights. At which the Lords
fell a Laughing, and there ended his Charge.

7. The last Witness was Mrs. Bastwick: And she also said nothing different
from Mr. Pryn; but that she was kept from her Husband, and that she Petitioned
the Lords about it: But of me in particular, not one Word. And though Mr.
Brown, in his last Reply upon me, said, The Time of these Men's Censure was the
noted Time of the Oppression of the Subjects Liberty; yet I shall crave leave
to say of these Men, as S. Augustine once said of two great Donatists in his
time, who (it seems) had received some Sentence, and afterward a return, not
altogether unlike these Men: (They were Felicianus and Pretextatus;) of those
thus S. Augustine, If these Men were Si (...) erant, quare (...) damnati (...)
si scelerati, quare sic (...)? Aug. Epist. 172.
Innocent, why were they so Condemned? And if they were Guilty, why were they
with such Honor returned, and received? This applies it self. And here I am
willing to put the Reader in Mind too, that Mr. Brown drawing up an exact Sum
of my Charge, and pressing it hard against me, to my Remembrance (and I think
my Notes could not have slipped it) passed by this Charge concerning Mr. Pryn;
and I cannot but think, he had some Reason for it.



This tedious Charge being over, the World ran round, and XI.
I was brought back again to another Charge about demolishing the Houses at St:
Paul's; and here three Witnesses more came against me.

1. The first was Mr. Bently. He said, there were above Sixty Houses pulled
down. I Answered, I know not the number; but if there were so many, the
Recompense given was sufficient for more. He said farther, That there was
Twenty Yards between the Church and some of the Houses. There were very few, if
any such (let him look to his Oath;) but then some were close upon the Wall of
the Church. And suppose all had been Twenty Yards distant; that was not room
enough to bring in, and Lodge Materials for the Repair, and to turn the
Carriages. And here again I made mention of my Salvo, before desired, for the
Record of Ed. 3. touching the like Buildings, and their Demolition.

2. The second Witness was Mr. Goare. For the Sixty Houses as was before
testified; I gave the same Answer; as also, that the Act of the Council Table
cannot be said to be my Act. For St. Gregory's Church, they were not left
without a Place for Divine Service, (as he would fain have it thought:) For
they were assigned to a part of Christ-Church, till another Church might be
built for them. And for the pulling down of St. Gregory's, it is well known to
diverse of that Parish, that I was not so much as one of the Referees, to whose
view and consideration it was referred. But the Truth is, this Man Rented the
Parsonage-House, and had a good Penniworth of it to gain by his Under-Tenant.
The going down of that House troubles him, and not the Church.

3. The Third Witness, Walter Biggs, says nothing different from the two
former; but that I said I was opposed for the pulling down of the Houses.
Whence it was inferred, that it was my Act; because I was opposed. But, my
Lords, I hope I might say [ I was Opposed] without any Offense, or without
taking the Order of the Council Table to my self: For it is well known, the Work
of that Repair, under God, was mine; and I took no indirect, no oppressing Way
to it; nor can I now be ashamed of that, which in future times, in despite of
the present Malice, will be my Honor. So that the Care of the Work lying upon
me, I might well say I was opposed, though the Opposition went higher, against
the Orders of the Lords.

The last Charge of this Day, was about the putting down of two XII.
Brewers in Westminster, because the Excessive and Noysom Smoke from thence
much annoyed the King's House, Gardens and Park at St. James. These two were
Mr: Bond, and Mr: Arnold.

1. For Mr. Bond, he begins with somewhat that I should say at the
Council Table: As Namely, that he must Seal a Bond of two Thousand Pounds, to
Brew no more with Sea-Coal. Now this argues, if I did so speak, that it was in
delivering to him the Sense of the Board; which Office (as I have before
expressed, and is well known) was usually put upon me, if I were present. And
your Lordships may here again see, what Envy has followed me upon that, which
I could not decline. He says farther, that upon this Mr. Attorney Banks
proceeded against him in the Exchequer; That there, upon some occasion, the
Lord Chief Baron should say, ye are wise Witnesses for the King; That his
Council were forbid to Plead; and so a Verdict passed for the King. All this is
nothing to me; I was neither Chief Baron nor Witness, nor one of the Jury that
gave the Verdict. He says, he was informed, that there was an Order of Council
made, that no Man should put up a Petition for him. But himself does not so
much as mention, that this Order was procured by me: And it is but a Report
that no Petition might be delivered for him; and none of them that told him so,
produced for proof: So he scandalizes the Lords by Hearsay.

Next he says, that the King graciously sent him with a Reference to the
Council for satisfaction. First, I must believe, if he were so sent, the Wrong
being only the Kings, and he willing he should have satisfaction however for
his Loss; that the Lords would never refuse in such a Case, whatsoever is here
said to the contrary. Secondly, it may be observed, how Gracious the King was
to the Subject; that though the Annoyance was great to that House of his
Recreation and retiring near the City; yet he would not have Mr. Bond suffer
without satisfaction: Notwithstanding which Goodness of the King, he comes into
this great Court; and so he may have a Blow at me, blasts (as much in him lies)
all the King's Proceedings, under the Name of Oppression, and that in a high
degree.

He says also, That a Friend of his persuaded him to come to me, and offer me
somewhat to St. Paul's; and that he did come to me accordingly, and that I said
I must have of him a Thousand Pounds to St. Paul's; That he was not unwilling to
give it, because his Brewing was worth twice as much to him. My Lords, I humbly
desire your Lordships to consider this part of the Charge well. First, what
Friend of his this was, that came so to him, he says not, nor do I know, and so
have no possibility to Examine. Secondly, he says, not that I sent this Friend
of his to him, thus to advise him; and then his coming no way concerns me.
Thirdly, when he was come upon this Friend's persuasion, if he were willing to
give a Thousand Pounds to St. Paul's, in regard of his double gain from his
Brew House, as himself confesses; I do not see (under Favor) what Crime or
Oppression is in it. Lastly, I remember none of this, and let him well weigh
his Oath with himself: For I cannot call to mind one Penny that he gave to St.
Paul's: Nor yet shall I ever think it a Sin, to take a Thousand Pounds to such a
work, from any Rich and Able Man that shall voluntarily offer it; especially
upon hope of gaining twice as much.

To make this Charge the heavier, He says, I sent him to the Queen Mother, who
lay then at St. James's; and that there he was labored by some about her to
change his Religion, and then he should have all Favor. This is a bold Oath;
let him look to it, for I sent him not. It may be I might tell him, that if the
Queen Mother were offended with the Annoyance from his House, it would not be
in my power to help him; which was true. And that about his Religion, was
added, to make your Lordships think, that I sent him thither for that purpose:
But God be thanked, this Witness says not any one word tending that way. And
for the Queen Mother, since she is thus mentioned, I shall crave leave to say
two things: The one, that I did both in open Council, and privately, oppose her
coming into England, with all the strength I had; though little to my own ease,
as I after found: The other, that after she was come, the Lords of the Council
went in a Body to do their Duty to her: That time I could not but go; but never
either before or after was I with her.

Then he concludes, that there was a Capias out for him, and that he was fain
to make an Escape by Night, which he did to Alderman Pennington, who very Nobly
Succored him privately in his House. All which concerns me nothing.

2. The other Witness is Mr. Arnold; who told as long a Tale as this, to as
little purpose. He speaks of three Brew-Houses in Westminster, all to be put
down, or not brew with Sea-Coal; That Secretary Windebanck gave the Order. Thus
far it concerns not me. He added, that I told him they burnt Sea-Coal: I said
indeed, I was informed they did; and that I hope was no Offense. He says, that
upon Sir John Banks his new Information, four Lords were appointed to view the
Brew-Houses, and what they burnt. But I was none of the four, nor did I make
any Report, for or against. He says, Mr. Attorney Banks came one day over to
him, and told him that his House annoyed Lambeth, and that I sent him over. The
Truth is this; Mr. Attorney came one-day over to Dine with me at Lambeth, and
walking in the Garden before Dinner, we were very sufficiently annoyed from a
Brew House; the Wind bringing over so much Smoke, as made us leave the place.
Upon this Mr. Attorney asked me, why I would not show my self more against
those Brew-Houses, being more annoyed by them than any other? I replied, I
would never be a means to undo any Man, or put him from his Trade, to free my
self from Smoke. And this Witness does after confess, that I said the same
words to himself. Mr. Attorney at our parting said, he would call in at the
Brew House: I left him to do as he pleased, but sent him not: And I humbly
desire Mr. Attorney may be Examined of the Truth of this.

He farther says, that he came over to me to Lambeth, and confesses the words
before mentioned; and that he offered me Ten Pound Yearly to St. Paul's, and
that I said he might give Twenty. He says, that I sent him to Mr. Attorney; but
withal told him, that if he found not such favor as I wished him, it was a
sign he had more powerful Adversaries than my Friendship could take off. In all
this I cannot see what Fault I have committed. And I foretold him Truth: For
though the Business were after referred to Mr. Attorney and my self, (as
himself says;) yet we were not able to end it. Then he says, I would not suffer
Sir Edw. Powell, Master of the Requests, to deliver his Petition to the King.
But first, this is but Sir Edw. Powell's Report, and so no Proof, unless he
were produced to justify it. Secondly, the World knows I had no power in Sir
Edward: He would then willingly have delivered Petition, or any thing else,
that he thought might hurt me: And the Cause is known.

Lastly, He says, Mr. Attorney sent out a Capias for him; that the Sheriff came
by force to take him, and what hard shift he made to escape: That after upon
his Petition, the Lords gave him six Months time to provide himself elsewhere;
and that he was fain to give Five-Hundred-Pound-Bond not to Brew there. To all
this I then said, and say still: First, here is no one thing Charged upon me in
particular. Secondly, here is not a word of my Advice or Endeavor to set on Mr.
Attorney, or to move the Lords to any thing against him. And whereas it has
been urged, that my Power was such, that I swayed the Lords to go my way: This
cannot be said, without laying an Imputation upon the Lords, as if they could
so easily be over-wrought by any one Man, and that against Law; which is a most
unworthy Aspersion upon Men of Honor. And if all this were true, it is but
Treason against a Brew House. Nor yet may this be called slighting of any
Evidence, which is but to Answer home in my own just Defense. And out of this I
gave my Answer to Mr. Brown's summary Charge against me in the House of
Commons, for that which concerned these two Brewers.



And here, before I close this day, give me leave, I beseech your Lordships, to
observe two things. First, that here have been thirteen Witnesses at least
produced in their own Cause. Secondly, that whereas here have been so many
things urged this day about the Star Chamber and the Council Table; the Act
made this Parliament, for the Regulating of the one, and the taking away of the
other, takes no notice of any thing past; and yet Acts past (and those
Joynt-Acts of the Council, and not mine) are urged as Treasonable, or conducing
to Treason, against me. Nay, the Act is so far from looking back, or making
such Offenses Treason, as that if any offend in future, and that several times,
yet the Act makes it but Misdemeanour, and prescribes Punishments accordingly.

CAP. XXVI. The Fifth Day of my Hearing.
THE first Charge of this Day was concerning the Indictment I.
of Mr: Newcommin, a Minister at Colchester, for refusing to Mar. 22. 1643.
Friday.
Administer the Sacrament, but at the Rails; and the Prosecution, which
followed against Burrowes for this. The two Witnesses of the Die Quinto.
Particulars, are Burrowes and Mr. Ask.

1. The Testimony which Burrowes gave, was; That Mr. Newcommin would not
Administer the Communion, but at the Rail; That he Indicted him for receiving
it there; That the Foreman threw it out, etc. If Mr. Newcommin did this,
Complaint might have been made of him; but howsoever here is no one word of any
Command from me. And it seems the Factious Malice of Burrowes was seen, that
the Foreman at first threw away the Indictment. He says, that upon this he was
called into the High Commission; A Warrant from me; His House beset; Stockdall
left the Warrant with the Mayor; A Habeas Corpus not obeyed. The Warrant, by
which he was detained, was from the High Commission, not from me: And himself
says, there were six or seven Hands to the Warrant. But then he says, my Hand
alone was to another Warrant; which is impossible, for there must be three
Hands at the least, or no Warrant can issue out: And all his Proof of this
latter is, that he saw my Hand; which I hope he may do, though other Hands
besides mine were to it. For the Habeas Corpus, if the Mayor said (for so
Burrowes adds) he would obey my Warrant, rather than the King's Writ, because
it came first; he was extremely ill advised: But if a Mayor of a Town give an
undiscreet, or a worse Answer, I hope that shall not be imputed to me. And if
there be any thing in this Business, why is not (...) the Messenger produced,
that knows those Proceedings? Lastly, he speaks of a Letter sent to Judge
Crawlye, and showed to Judge Hutton. But first, he says not, that Letter was
sent by me, or by my means. Secondly, he names not the Contents of the Letter;
without which, no Man can tell, whether it Charge any thing upon me or not. And
until the Letter be produced, or sufficiently witnessed, (neither of which is
offered) it is but like a written Hearsay. And I humbly pray you to observe from
himself, that the two Reverend Judges looking into the Business, said, it was a
mere Cheat for Money, and returned him back to Colchester: Which is a Proof
too, that the Habeas Corpus was obeyed; for if he were not brought up before
them, how could he be returned by them?

2. Then Mr. Ask, the second Witness, was produced. He said there came Players
to Town, and that some, which said they came from me, were taken in a Tavern
upon Easter-Eve at unseasonable Hours. I know not of any that were sent from
me: But if any were, and kept any disorder in the Town, especially at such a
time, Mr. Ask did very well to question them. He says, that upon the Matter I
referred him twice to Sir John Lamb, and that at the second time he found the
Plot was to make him an instrument about the Rails, which he absolutely
refused. I did refer him (and it may be twice) to Sir John Lamb; but if Sir
John spoke to him about the Rails, he had no Commission from me so to do. I
understood Mr: Ask too well, to offer to make Frigidius dictum. W: S: (...) C.
him an instrument in such a Business. His Zeal would have set the Rails on
fire, so soon as ever he had come near them.



Next he says, that Mr. Newcommin was indicted, as is aforesaid, and that
Indictment found: That Letters missive were sent for him and his Wife, by
Stockdall. If Letters Missive by Stockdall, then they were sent by the High
Commission, whose Joint Act cannot be Charged upon me: And if any thing can be
proved, why is not Stockdall produced? He says, that he went into Holland to
avoid the Oath Ex Officio. The Oath Ex Officio was then the Common, and for
ought I yet know, then the Legal Course of that Court: So I could not help the
Tender of that Oath unto them, had they stayed and appeared. But the Truth is,
he was too guilty to appear; for his Wife was a Separatist, and himself
confesses, that she came not to the Prayers of the Church. And as for him, I
ever found him the great maintainer of all wilful opposition against the
Church. He farther says, he came to me to Croyden; and that there I told him he
might have put the Indictment against Mr. Newcommin in his Pocket. Indeed, my
Lords, if I did say so, I think I spoke it truly. For if he had born any
respect to the Reputation of the Clergy, I think he might have Pocketted it for
one Sessions, without any prejudice at all to the Law, or any thing else. God
knows, this is often done. And if thereupon I added (as Mr. Ask says I did,)
That if he were so strictly set against Churchmen in the Temporal Courts, he
must look for as strict Proceedings in the High Commission; I see no great
Crime in it: For we are as strictly bound to Prosecute in the one, as he was in
the other. And if his Clerk (as he says) was attached, who Read the Indictment;
yet it is not said by himself, that he was Attached for reading it. And if it
were so, that some Jurors were Attached, and not Mr. Aske's Clerk only, (as Mr.
Brown pressed it in the Sum of his Charge) yet the Answer comes all to one.
For no Witness says, these Jurors were called into the High Commission, for
being Jurors, or discharging that Legal Duty. And then I hope a Man's being of
a Jury shall not excuse him from.
for answering any Crime in any Court, that has Power to call him: Provided he
be not called off at the time of his Service, or while he is under the
Privilege of that Court, in which he is a Juror. And according to this I gave
Mr. Brown my Answer. And howsoever, the Attachment goes of Course out from the
Commission, and not from me.



The second Charge of this Day was about the Censure which fell II.
on the Inhabitants of Beckington in Sommersetshire, about their refusing to
remove the Communion Table according to the Order of their Diocesan: About
which were produced three Witnesses, to whose Evidence I shall Answer in order.

1. The first was William Long, who says he was Foreman of the Jury, when
these Men were Indicted for a Riot; and that as he conceives, the Parson spoke
with the Judge about it, which caused a sudden Verdict. The Parson of the Place
spoke with the Judge, and he conceives that produced a sudden Verdict: First,
he does but conceive so, and that can make no Proof. If it did make Proof, it is
only against the Parson, not against me. And if the Parson speaking of it, did
say, (as Mr. Long affirms he did) That this Riot was like a Waldensian, or
Swisserland Commotion; He must answer for his own Distempered Language; me it
cannot concern.

2. The second Witness was George Long. He says, The Bishop of Bath Commanded
the Communion Table to be removed, and set at the upper end of the Chancel;
that the Churchwardens refusing, were Excommunicated: But he says withal, that
they Appealed to the Arches, and had remedy. Then he adds farther, that the
Bishop proceeded again, but the Churchwardens would not remove it, saying it
was an Innovation, and against Law. But, my Lords, it is neither: And therefore
these Churchwardens were in a great Contempt against their Bishop, to the ill
Example of all that Country. And that it is no Innovation against Law, appears
by the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, where it is Commanded Expressly to be set
there. The Words are: The Holy Injunct. of Q. Eliz. (...).
Table in every Church (not Cathedrals only) shall be decently made, and set in
the place where the Altar stood. Now all Men know, that with us in England the
Altar stood North and South, at the upper end of the Chancel: And to set it
East, and West, had been cross the place where the Altar stood, and not in it.
And this being Law in the beginning of the Reformation, cannot now be an
Innovation.

When they came to me again (as they say they did) if I then told them, they
deserved to be laid by the Heels for the Contempt of their Bishop; under
Favor, my Lords, I spoke Truth. And give me leave, I beseech you, to tell you
this: It began to be a General Complaint, not of the Bishop of Bath only, but
of other Bishops also, that they could do little or no Service in their several
Countries, by reason of the Inhibitions which issued out of my Courts to stay
their Proceedings. And I wanted no good Friends in Court to tell the King as
much, when any thing was complained of. By this I was brought into great
straights: Deny Appeals I might not: Frequent granting in my Courts destroyed
in a manner the Bishops Jurisdictions. In this difficulty, seeing the
wilfulness of these Men, and knowing they had received full benefit by their
Appeal once already in the same Case; I did refuse to hear any more of it
(unless there were new Matter;) but yet left them free to Appeal to the
Delegats.

For Mr. Hughes, the Parson there, if he gave ill Words, or laid violent Hands
on any of his Neighbors, it concerns not me: Let him answer for what he has
said, or done. It Is farther said, That Mr. Hughes was with me at Windsor, and
had Letters from me to the Lord Chief Justice Finch. But this Witness delivers
not this upon his own knowledge; I sent no Letter by him, nor did he see me
send by any other: So this is merely a Report, and he does not so much as tell
from whom. Yea, but then he says, that Mr. Morgan (a Man inward with the Judge)
told him, that the Judge told him, that the little Man had put a spoke in their
Cart; and thereupon (as he conceives) the Petty-Jury was Changed. Here are, if
your Lordships mark them, two great Proofs. The one is the Witnesses Report of
Mr. Morgan's Report, that the Judge had said so of me: But why is not Mr.
Morgan produced to clear this? The other is not the Knowledge, but the Conceit
only of the Witness: He conceives, which I am Confident cannot sway with your
Lordships for a Proof. Besides, were Mr. Morgan never so inward with that
Judge, yet it follows not, that he must know all. And if that Judge did mean me
(for Name me he did not,) he did me the more wrong. For I never desired any
thing of any Judge, him, or other, but what was according to Law. Nay, I so
expressed my self, as that, if by mistake or misinformation I had desired any
thing which was not according to Law; I humbly desired my Motion might be, as
if it had never been made.



3. The third Witness is Mr. Jo. Ash. That which this Gentleman says, is, That
Sir John Lamb told, that the Man which came about that Business, could have no
Appeal admitted without me; and that if he would be so troublesome, he should
be laid by the Heels. I have given your Lordships an Account, why he could not
have an Appeal without me: He had had the benefit of an Appeal before in the
same Cause. And for this Witness, he delivers no knowledge of his own; but only
he says, the Man employed, related it to him: So it is a Relation, no Proof. He
says, the Penance was enjoined them in three Churches. And truly, my Lords,
their Disobedience to their Bishop was great; but if the Penance enjoined were
too heavy, it was the Act of their own Bishop, not mine. Then he says, that the
Lord Finch told him, another powerful Hand was upon him, intimating me. First,
this is no knowledge of the Witness, but a Speech of the Lord Finch. Secondly,
if the Lord Finch did say so, of a powerful Hand, he wronged me much, but
himself more, to confess he could be drawn awry in Judgment. Thirdly, this
Witness says not that he named me, but that he Intimated me: I pray your
Lordships Judgment, what a forward Witness this Man is, that can upon Oath
deliver what is Intimated, and of whom.

He says farther, That upon Petition to Sir William Portman, for some
Assistance, the Bishop of Bath laid all upon me; and that when himself came to
me at the Tower, since my Restraint, I told him the Bishop of Bath did like an
Obedient Bishop to his Metropolitan. For this, my Lords, here is no Proof, that
the Bishop laid this Business upon me, but Sir William Portman's Report. Sir
William is a worthy Gentleman; why is not he produced? Why is not the Bishop,
that is said to lay all upon me, brought into the Court, that he may clear
himself and me, if he said it not; or that I may make him ashamed, if he said
it? For it is confessed, that in the first Business, the Churchwardens had
Remedy by their Appeal to me; but that then the Bishop began again, as the
former Witness declared: Nor knew I any thing of this Business till the Appeal
came. As for my Answer to himself, that, under Favor, is quite mistaken: For I
did not say, That in this Particular, but that in his General Proceedings in
his Diocese, the Bishop of Bath carried himself like an Obedient Bishop to his
Metropolitan. Nor can my Words be drawn to mean this Particular: For how could
I say, that in this Particular he carried himself like an Obedient Bishop to
me, when after Remedy given to these Men by their first Appeal into my Court,
he began with them again upon the same Cause? Besides, my Lords, this is not
the first time Mr. Ash has mistaken me. Mr. Brown in summing up this Charge
against me, falls twice very heavily upon this Business of Beckington. First,
for the point of Religion: And there he Quoted a passage out of my Speech in
the Star Chamber, where I do reserve the indifferency of the standing of the
Communion Table either way; and yet (says he) they were thus heavily Sentenced
for that, which I my self hold indifferent. But first, this Sentence was laid
upon them by their own Bishop, not by me. Secondly, the more indifferent the
thing was, the greater was their Contumacy to disobey their Ordinary: And had
it not been a thing so indifferent, and without danger of advancing Popery,
would Queen Elizabeth, who banished Popery out of the Kingdom, have endured it
in her own Chapel all her time? Thirdly, the heaviness of the Sentence so much
complained of, was but to confess their Contumacy in three Churches of the
Diocese, to Example other Men's Obedience. Secondly, for the same Point, as it
contained Matter against Law, I answered Mr. Brown, as I had before answered
the Lords.



The third Charge was about certain Houses given to S. Edmunds III.
Lumbard-street, where old Mr. Pagett is Parson. The Witnesses are Two.

1. The first is Mr. Symms; who says, that after a Verdict, Mr. Pagett the
Incumbent, upon a pretenc, that these Tenements were Church-Land, got a
Reference to the Lord Bishop of London, then Lord Treasurer, and my self. My
Lords, we procured not the Reference: But when it was brought to us under the
King's Hand, we could not refuse to sit upon it. Upon full Hearing we were
satisfied, that the Cause was not rightly stated, and therefore we referred
them to the Law again for another Trial; and for Costs to the Barons of that
Court. And this was the Answer which I gave to Mr. Brown, when he instanced in
this Case.

He says, the Houses were given to Superstitious Uses. But Possessions are not
to be carried away for saying so. If Men may get Land from others, by saying it
was given to Superstitious Uses, they may get an easy Purchase. And Mr. Symms
is here in his own Case: But whether the Houses were given to Superstitious
Uses, or not, is the thing to be tried in Law, and not to be Pleaded to us. He
complains, that I would not hear his Petition alone: And surely, my Lords, I
had no reason, since it was referred to another with me. And yet I see, though
I was not in the Reference alone, nor would hear it alone, yet I must be alone
in the Treason. And here I desired that Mr. Pagett, the Incumbent, might be
heard.

2. The other Witness, was Mr. Barnard. He says, he was present at the Hearing,
and that Mr. Symms said he was undone, if he must go to a new Trial. But, my
Lords, so many Men say, that by their troublesomness in Lawsuits go about to
undo others. He says, that Mr. Pagett named his own Referees. If that be so,
it is no fault of mine. He says, the Reference was made to us only to Certify,
not to make any Order in it. If this be so, here is no Proof so much as offered,
that we did not Certify, as we were required; and then had Power given to
order it, which we did. And he confesses the Council on both sides had full
Hearing, before ought was done.

The Fourth Charge of this Day was concerning the Imprisonment IV.
of one Grafton, an Upholster in London. The Witnesses Three. Of which,

1. The first is Grafton, in his own Cause; and it is much if he cannot tell a
plausible Tale for himself. He says first, That twelve Years ago he was
Committed, and Fined Fifty Pounds by other Commissioners. By others ( my
Lords,) therefore not by me: And an Act of the High Commission, by his own
Words it appears to be. He says, He was continued in Prison by my procurement,
as he verily believes. First, (as he verily believes) is no Proof. And the
ground of his Belief is as weak: For he gives no reason of it, but this, That
Dr. Ryves, the King's Advocate, spoke with the Barons; But he does not say
about what, or from whom. He adds farther, that Mr. Ingram, Keeper of the
Fleet, would not give way to his Release, notwithstanding the Barons Orders,
till he heard from me. Here Is no Man produced, that heard Mr. Ingram say so:
Nor is Mr. Ingram himself brought to Testify. Lastly, he says, that he then
made Means in Court, and so repaired to the Barons again; but all in vain: And
that Baron Trevor cried out, O the Bishop! O the Bishop! First, here is a
Confession of Means in Court made to the Judges: So belike, they may have Means
made to them, so it be not by me. For the Particular, I did humbly desire, the
Baron, being then present, might be asked. He was asked; he blushed and
fumbled, the Lords laughed, and I could not hear what he said.

2. The second Witness was Mr. Lenthall: But he said nothing, but that there
was an Order for Grafton's Liberty; which is not denied.

3. The third was Mr: Rivett. He says, that Mr. Ingram said, that Grafton was a
Brownist, and must be brought into the Fleet again, because he did much hurt
among the King's Subjects. This is a bare Report of a Speech of Mr. Ingram; it
no way concerns me. And a Separatist he is from the Church of England; but
whether a Brownist, or no, I cannot tell, there are so many Sects (God help
us.) And much harm he has done among weak People: For most true it is, Cyril
Hierosol. Cateche. 15.
which S. Cyril observes, (...). That the Devil prepares these Schismatical
Separations, that so much the more easily the Enemy may be received.

As for this Man, he was in his way cunning enough; for under pretense that he
suffered by me, he got Madam Vantlett, and other of the French, to Negotiate
with the Queens Majesty in his behalf. And this I found, that sometimes, when
her Majesty knew not of it, they sent to the Barons for Favor for him. And yet
I never heard, that Baron Trevor ever cried out, O the French! O the French!
Nor can I tell what stopped his Mouth in this Cry, and opened it so wide in the
other, when we moved to defend our selves and our Proceedings. Where, I humbly
desire, this Passage of the Law may be considered. In the Case of depraving the
Common Prayer Book (so much Scorned and Vilified at this Day) and for not
coming to Church. The Words of the Law are; For due Execution hereof, the
Queens most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Temporal, and all the Commons in this
present Parliament 1 Eliz. c. 2.
Assembled, do in God's Name earnestly require, and Charge all the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor to
the uttermost of their Knowledge, that the due and true Execution hereof may be
had throughout their Diocesses and Charges, as they will answer before God,
etc. Now, if I do not this, here is an apparent Breach of the Law: And if I do
it against this common and great Depraver of this Book, then the Judge, who by
this Law should assist me, Cries, O the Bishop! and this Answer I gave Mr.
Brown, when he Summed his Charge against me.



The Fifth Charge of this Day, was Mr. John Ward's Case, in a V.
Suit about Symony in the High Commission.

He says (for he also is in his own Cause;) That upon a pretense of a Lapse by
Symony, I procured a Presentation from the King to the Church of Dinnington.
His Majesty trusted me with the Titles, which did accrue to him in that kind;
and because Symony had been so rife, Commanded me to be careful I might not
betray this Trust; and therefore the Symony being offered to be proved, I
procured his Majesty's Presentation for Trial of the Title. And this I conceive
was no Offense: Though this be that, which he calls, the heaviness of my Hand
upon him. He farther says, That I sent to the Bishop of Norwich, to admit the
King's Clerk, the Church being void, 7. Junij. 1638. Nor do I yet see, my
Lords, what Crime it is in me, trusted especially as before, to send to the
Bishop to admit, when the Church is void: Many Lay Patrons do that upon
Allegation of Symony, before Proof: And Mr. Bland, produced as a Witness also,
says, that the Lord Goring prevailed with the Lord Bishop of Norwich, not to
admit. And I hope, an Archbishop, and trusted therein by his Majesty, may as
lawfully write to the Ordinary for Admission of the King's Clerk, as any
Lay-Lord may write against it. But Mr. Ward says nothing to this of the Lord
Goring;

but adds, That Sir John Rowse prevented this Admission by a Ne admittas,
Junij. 12. And that thereupon I said, it was to no purpose for us to sit there,
if after a long Trial, and Judgment given, all might be stopped. If I did say
so, I think it is a manifest Truth that I spoke: For it were far better not to
have Symony tried at all in Ecclesiastical Courts, than after a long Trial to
have it called off into Westminster Hall, to the double Charge and trouble of
the Subject. But if the Law will have it otherwise, we cannot help that. Nor is
this Expression of mine any Violation of the Law.



Then he says, a Letter was directed from the Court of the High Commission, to
the Judges, to revoke the Ne admittas; and that I was forward to have the
Letter sent. How forward soever I was, yet it is confessed the Letter was sent
by the Court, not by me: And let the Letter be produced, it shall therein
appear, that it was not to revoke the Ne Admittas, but to desire the Judges to
consider, whether it were not fit to be revoked, considering the Church was not
void till Junij 14. And it has been usual in that Court, to Write or send some
of their Body to the Temporal Judges, where they conceive there has been a
Misinformation, or a mistake in the Cause; the Judges being still free to judge
according to Law, both for the one and the other. And here he confesses the
Writ of Ne admittas was revoked by three Judges, and therefore I think Legally.

But here he hopes he has found me in a Contradiction. For when I writ to the
Bishop of Norwich, Junij 7. 1638. I there said the Church was void; whereas
this Letter to the Judges says, it was not void till Junij 14. But here is no
Contradiction at all. For after the Trial past, and the Symony proved, the
Church is void to so much as the Bishop's giving of Institution; and so I writ
Junij 7. But till the Sentence was pronounced in open Court, and Read, the
Church was not void, as touching those Legalities, which (as I humbly conceive)
do not till then take place in Westminster Hall: And the Reading of the
Sentence was not till Junij 14. However, if I were mistaken in my own private
Letter to the Bishop; yet that was better thought on, in the Letter from the
High Commission to the Judges. He says lastly, That upon a Quare Impedit after
taken forth, it was found that the King had no Right. Why, my Lords, if
different Courts judge differently of Symony, I hope that shall not be imputed
to me. In the Court, where I sat, I judged according to my Conscience, and the
Law, and the Proof, as it appeared to me. And for Dr. Ryve's his Letter, which
he says was sent to the Cursitor to stop the Ne admittas; Let Dr. Ryves answer
it: The Witness himself confesses, that Dr. Ryves says, the Command to the
Cursitor, was from the Lord Keeper, not from me.

And here ends the Treason against Mr. Ward; and till now I did not think any
could have been committed against a Minister.

Then followed the Case of Ferdinando Adams his Excommunication, VI.
and the Suits which followed it: As it will appear by.
in the Witnesses following, which were four.

1. The first was Mr: Hen. Dade, the Commissary then, before whom the Cause
began: And he confesses, He did Excommunicate Adams for not blotting out a
Sentence of Scripture, which the said Adams had caused to be written upon the
Church-Wall, as in many Churches Sentences of (...) are written. But he tells
your Lordships too, that this Sentence was, My House shall be called the House
of Prayer; but ye have St: Mat: 21. 13.
made it a Den of Thieves. The Commissary's Court was kept (as usually it is)
at, or toward the West End of the Church: And just over the Court Adams had
written this Sentence upon the Wall, merely to put a scorn and a scandal
(though I hope an unjust one) upon that Court. He was commanded to blot it out.
He would not, because it was Scripture; as if a Man might not Revile and
Slander, nay speak Treason too (if he will be so wicked) and all in
Scripture Phrase: Witness that lewd Speech lately uttered, To your Tents 1 Reg.
12. 16.
O Israel, etc.

Upon this he was Excommunicated, and I cannot but think he well deserved it.
For the Suit which followed against Mr. Dade in the Star Chamber; the Motion,
that Mr. Attorney would leave him to the common Prosecutor, and not follow it
in his own Name, himself confesses was made in open Court by Mr. Bierly, and
that from me he had no Instructions at all.

2. The second Witness, is Adams in his own Cause. To the place of Scripture I
have spoken already. And the next that he says, is, That Sir Nath. Brent, in my
Visitation, commanded the setting of the Communion Table at the upper end of
the Chancel; That upon his not blotting out the passage of Scripture, he had an
Action, and that his Solicitor was Committed by J. Jones, till he relinquished
his Suit. In all this, there is not one word of any thing that I did. And for
that which Sir Nath. Brent did about placing the Communion Table, it is In the
second (...) of this (...).
answered before. He says also, that when he saw that he must Prosecute his
Suit against Commissary Dade in his own Name, he left the Kingdom. And surely,
my Lords, if he would leave the Kingdom rather than Prosecute his Cause in his
own Name, it is more than a sign, that his Cause was not very good.

3. The third Witness was Mr. Cockshot, one of Mr. Attorney Banks his Servants.
He says, that Adams moved him, and he Mr. Attorney, and that thereupon Mr.
Attorney gave his Warrant against Dade. By which your Lordships may see, how
active Mr. Cockshot was against a Church Officer, and in so foul a Scandal. He
says also, that Mr. Dade came to Mr. Attorney, and told him, that I did not
think it fit, a Prosecution in such a Cause should be followed in Mr.
Attorney's Name. First, it is true, I did not think it fit; nor did Mr. Attorney
himself, when upon Mr. Bierlye's Motion he fully understood it. Secondly, the
Cause being so scandalous to a Church Officer, I conceive I might so say to Mr.
Dade, or any other, without offense. But then thirdly, here is not one word that
I sent Mr. Dade to Mr. Attorney about it: He came and used my Name, so Mr.
Cockshot says; but not one word that I sent him. Lastly, he says, That Mr.
Attorney told him, that I blamed him for the business, and that thereupon he
chid this Witness, and sent him to me, and that I rebuked him for it; but he
particularly remembers not what I said. Nor truly, my Lords, do I remember any
of this. But if I did blame Mr. Attorney for lending his Name in such a
Scandalous Cause as this, I did (as I conceive) what became me: And if he chid
his Man, he did what became him: And if I rebuked Mr. Cockshot, when he was
sent to me, sure he deserved it; and it seems it was with no great sharpness,
that he cannot remember any thing of it. And so I answered Mr. Brown, when he
instanced in this.



4. The last Witness was Mr. Pryn; who says, no Appeal was left him. But that,
under Favor, cannot be: For if my Courts refused him (which is more than I
know,) he might have Appealed to the Delegats. He says, That he advised Adams
to an Action of the Case; that he blamed Lechford for deserting the Suit; and
that he advised him to go to Mr. Attorney. So here is no assistance wanting to
Adams, but the Church Officer Mr. Dade must have none. Yet I blame not Mr.
Pryn, because he says he did it as his Council. He says farther, That when
Adams was put to prefer his Bill in his own Name, that then the
Excommunication was pleaded in Bar: But he does not say it was pleaded by me,
or my Advice; nor do I hear him say, it was unjustly pleaded. And had not Adams
been wilful, he might have taken off the Excommunication, and then proceeded as
it had pleased him.

Then the Charge went on against me, about the stop of Mr. Bagshawe VII.
the Reader of the Middle Temple. The Witnesses are two Lawyers, which
accompanied Mr. Bagshawe to Lambeth, Mr. White and Mr. Pepys. They say, that
Mr. Bagshawe insisted upon these two points: First, that a Parliament might be
held without Bishops; and Secondly, that Bishops might not meddle in Civil
affairs. My Lords, these things are now settled by an Act of this Parliament;
but then they were not. And I conceive, under Favor, that Mr. Bagshawe (the
Crasiness of these Times considered) might have bestowed his time better upon
some other Argument: And sure, no Man can think that either my self, or any
Church-Governour, could approve his Judgment in that Particular. And whereas
they say, that the Lord Keeper Finch, and the Lord Privy Seal told them, that I
was the Man that complained of it to the King and the Lords. It Is most true I
did so; and I think I had been much to blame if I had not done it. And if when
they came over to Lambeth about it, they heard me tell Mr. Bagshawe (as they
also say they did) that he should answer it in the High Commission Court next
Term; I humbly conceive this no great Offense; but out of all Question no
Treason, to threaten the High Commission to a Reader of the Inns of Court.

The last Charge of this Day was concerning the Lord Chief VIII.
Justice Richardson, and what he suffered for putting down Wakes and other
disorderly Meetings, in Sommersetshire, at the Assizes there holden.

The single Witness to this is Edward Richardson, (a Kinsman of the Judges, as
I suppose.) He says, That Complaints were made to the Judge of Wakes and Feasts
of Dedication; that his Majesty writ Letters about it to Sir Robert Philips,
and others: They Certify a Command comes by the Lord Keeper to revoke the Order
next Assizes. First, it is not done. Then by Command from the Lords of the
Council, the Judge upon that second Command revokes it; but as it is Certified,
not fitly. In all this here is not one Word that concerns me. Then he says, That
upon this last Certificate, the business was referred to the Lord Marshal and
my self, and the Judge put from that Circuit. I cannot now remember, what
Report we made: But what e're it was, the Lord Marshal agreed to it as well as
I. Then a Letter of mine was produced of October. 4. 1633. But the Letter being
openly read, nothing was found amiss in it. And, under your Lordships Favor, I
am still of Opinion, that there is no Reason the Feasts should be taken away
for some Abuses in them; and those such as every Justice of Peace is able by
Law to remedy, if he will do his Duty. Else by this kind of proceeding, we may
go back to the old Cure, and Remedy Drunkenness by rooting out all the Vines;
the Wine of whose Fruit causes it.

As for the Pretenses, which this Witness spoke of; they were none of mine, as
appears Evidently by the Letter it self.

As an Appendix to these, was added a Letter of my Secretary Mr. Dell, to Sir
John Bridgman, Chief Justice of Chester, in a Cause of one XI.
Ed. Morris. It was (as I think it appears) upon an Incroachment made in the
Marches Court upon the Church: In which Case I conceive by my Place I may write
to any Judge for Information: And there is nothing Peremptory in the Letter.
The Words are ( If things be rightly suggested.) But howsoever, the Letter is
Dell's; and if he have done amiss in it, he is here present to Answer. And it
will be a hard business with Men of Honor, if, when any Lord shall Command his
Secretary to Write, and give him Directions for the Matter, he shall afterward
be answerable for every slip of his Secretary's Pen; especially in so high a
way, as it is Charged on me. But the best is, here is nothing amiss, that I know.

CAP. XXVII. The Sixth Day of my Hearing.
THE First Charge of this Day concerned the Censure, Deprivation I.
and Imprisonment of Mr: Huntly. The Witnesses produced Thursday, Mar. 28. 1644.
are Four.

1. Mr. Merifield comes on first. He says, That himself was Committed Die Sexto.
by the Lords of the Council; and that there I said, that he the said Merifield
deserved to be laid by the Heels, and to be called into the Star Chamber. This
Man was (as I take it) Mr: Huntly's Attorney; and if I did speak those Words
concerning him, surely his Words and Carriage deserved it: Else I am confident
the Lords would not have Committed him for a naked, and an orderly following of
his Clyent's Cause; especially in the presence of two Judges, Justice Jones,
and Justice Crook; who he says himself were present. And this Answer I gave Mr:
Brown; who in the Sum of his Charge against me omitted not this Case of Mr:
Merifield, for so was this Attorney's Name.



2. The next Witness is Mr: Huntly himself. He says, That I said unto him, that
he being an Ecclesiastical Person, and in an Ecclesiastical Cause, ought not to
decline the Church-Censure: Then followed his Imprisonment, and his Action for
false Imprisonment, and the rest of his proceedings. In all which the
High Commission proceeded against him, and he proceeded against the
High-Commissioners; nothing done by me, or against me, in particular. So
nothing of this Charge falls upon me, but the Words; and for them, they are
very far from offering to Exclude from the Benefit.
Exempt any Clergyman, him or other, from the Temporal Laws, it things
cognizable by them. But I humbly conceive, his Oath of Canonical Obedience
considered, that he ought not to decline the Ecclesiastical Judicature, in
things merely Ecclesiastical. And if in this my Judgment I do Err, yet it is
Error without Crime: And surely, my Lords, no Treason.

3. The Third Witness is John Dillingham. He says, That Mr: Huntly moved before
the Lord Chief Justice Richardson, and that the Judge replied, By his Faith he
durst not do him Justice. To this, my Lords, I answer: Here Is never a Word,
that he durst not do him Justice for fear of me; that is not said by the
Witness, and ought not by Conjectures be enforced against me. But howsoever, if
he spoke those Words, the more shame for him. He is Dead, and I will not rake
into his Grave; but if he so spoke, it seems he was none of those Judges, which
Jethro advised Moses to make for (...). (...). 21.
the ease of himself, and the good of the People. Mr: Brown, in summing up of
his Charge, pressed this Speech of the Judge hard upon me; which inforces me to
add thus much more, That this (...) lays it hard upon the Judge, not upon me:
For no Proof is offered, that I did Solicit him in that Cause: And if he wanted
Courage to do Justice, why sat he there?



4. The Fourth Witness was Mr: Pit, a sworn Officer; he says, The Order
concerning Mr: Huntly was from the Council, and that there was then a full
Board. So this was no single Act of mine. He says farther, That he was not
simply Prohibited, but only till he had acquainted the Lord Keeper with it, or
those Judges, whose Courts it concerned. And this was so Ordered (as I
concelve) to remedy the tedious and troublesome Interpositions of Mr: Huntly.
Where it is not unfit for me to inform your Lordships, that this Cause of Mr:
Huntly's was in my Predecessor Archbishop Abbot his time; I had nothing to do
in it, but as any other ordinary Commissioner then present had.

And here, at the entering upon my Answers this Day, I did in general put the
Lords in mind, that nothing of late times was done, either in Star Chamber, or
at Council Table, which was not done in King James and Queen Elizabeth's Times,
before I was born; and that many Parliaments have been since, and no Man
accused of Misdemeanour for things done there, much less of Treason: Nor is
there any one Witness, that has charged me, That that which I did, was to
overthrow the Laws, or to introduce Arbitrary Government:

That Is only the Construction made on it at the Bar; which, as it is without all
Proof for any such Intention, so I am confident they shall answer for it at
another Bar, and for something else in these Proceedings.

Then followed the Charge about Prohibitions: In which are many II.
Particulars, which I shall take in Order, as the several Witnesses Charge them
upon me.

1. The First is Mr: Pryn. He says, That An: 4: Caroli he brought a
Prohibition, and that thereupon I should say, Does the King give us Power, and
then are we prohibited? Let us go and Complain. First, If this were An: 4:
Caroli, it was long before the Article; so that I could neither expect the
Charge, nor provide the Answer. Secondly, I humbly conceive, there is no Offense
in the Words. For if a Prohibition be unjustly granted upon Misinformation or
otherwise; or if we do probably conceive it is ill grounded, I hope it is no Sin
to complain of it to the King, the Fountain of Justice in both Courts. Yea; but
he says farther, That I said I would lay him by the Heels that 2.
brought the next. And this Mr: Burton witnesses with him. First, if I did say
so, they were but a few hasty Words: For upon second thoughts it was not done.
Next I desire your Lordships to consider what manner of Witness Mr: Burton is;
who confesses here before your Lordships, that he brought the next with a
purpose to tempt me: You know whose Office that is; and so Mr: Burton has
abundantly showed himself, and proclaimed his Religion.

3. As for Mr: f. (...).
Comes; he says just the same with Mr: Pryn, and I give the same Answer.

Then about taking down of a Pew in a Church in London, (my Notes are uncertain
for the Name) which Pew was set above the Communion Table; That I required to
have it pulled down; That they came to me to have an Order for it; and that
thereupon I should say, You desire an Order of Court, that you may have it to
show, and get a Prohibition; But I will break the Back of Prohibitions, or they
shall break mine. And this is jointly Witnessed by Mr: Pocock, and 4.
Mr: Langham: And this they say was Thirteen or Fourteen Years 5.
ago. Excellent Memories, that can punctually swear Words so long after. But,
my Lords, I confess to your Lordships, I could never like, that Seats should be
set above the Communion Table: If that be any Error in me, be it so. For the
Words, I did not speak them of Prohibitions in general, but of such as I did
conceive very Illegal; as, for ought I yet know, this must have been. And this
was the Answer which I gave Mr: Brown, when in Summing up the Charge he
instanced in this against me.

To these Rouland Tomson adds new Words; That I wondered who durst grant a
Prohibition, 6.
the High Commission Court being above all. But he confesses, he knows not the
time when this was spoken. Let him look to his Oath, for I am as Confident, he
knows not the thing. And I farther believe, that neither he, nor any the rest
of my Accusers think me so Ignorant, as to say, the High Commission Court was
above all.

7. Francis Nicolas says, that about Four Years since he delivered a
Prohibition, and was committed for it. To this, Quaterman comes in, and 8.
says more than Nicolas himself: For he says, he delivered it in upon a Stick,
and was Committed for it. First, if he were Committed, it was not for bringing
the Prohibition, but for his unmannerly delivery of it; and to reach it into
the Court upon a Stick to call the People to see it, was no Handsome way of
Delivery. And one that brought a Prohibition (whether this Man or no, I cannot
certainly say) threw it with that violent Scorn into the Court, that it bounded
on the Table, and hit me on the Breast, as I sat in Court. Howsoever, his
Commitment was the Act of the Court, not mine: And for Quaterman, he is an
Exasperated Man against me and that Court; as has appeared to the World many
ways.

9. Mr: Edwards was called up next; and he says, it was a common thing to lay
them by the Heels, which brought Prohibitions. And they were commonly brought
by bold impudent Men, picked out of purpose to affront the Court. And then if
the Court made their Imprisonment as common as they their Rudeness, where is the
Fault? And I pray mark, this is still the Act of the Court, not mine.

10. Mr. Welden says, That there was a Command given to lay hold of a Man,
which brought a Prohibition: But more he says not. Nor did he offer to make
himself Judge of the Justice of the Court in that behalf. And considering what
Affronts have been put upon the Court of High Commission, by the bringers of
Prohibitions, I hope it shall not be accounted a Crime to stay him that brings
it, till the Prohibition be seen, and considered.

11. The next Witness is Mr. Ward: And he is an angry Witness, for his Cause
beforementioned about Symony.

That which he says is, That An. 1638, He that brought a Prohibition in a Cause
of Mr. Foetroughts, was laid by the Heels: But he himself confesses, the Court
then declared, that they were affronted by him: And then he was Punished for
that Misdemeanour in his Carriage, not for bringing the Prohibition. He says
farther, that I directed some Commissioners to attend the Judges about it, and
that the Party had no benefit by his Prohibition. For my directing Attendance
upon the Judges, I think I did what well became me: For there came a Rule
before the Prohibition, which required the Court so to do; And Mr. Pryn
objected, because this was not done; and now I am Accused, because I gave
direction to do it.

And if the Party had no benefit by his Prohibition; it must needs follow, that
either the Judges were satisfied by our Information of the Cause; or, if not,
that they did Mr. Foetrought the wrong, and not we.

12. The last Witness about Prohibitions, was Mr. Wheeler. He says, that in a
Sermon of mine long since, I used these Words: They which grant Prohibitions to
the Disturbance of the Churches Right; God will prohibit their entrance into
the Kingdom of Heaven: And he says he writ down the Words, that he might
remember them. If this Gentleman will tell me, what Text I then Preached on, I
will look upon my Sermon (if that with my other Papers be not taken from me;)
and show the place. In the mean time, with that Limitation with which he
confesses I spoke them, I conceive there is no fault at all in the Words. For
it will be found no small fault in Judges to grant Prohibitions to the
Disturbance of the Rights of the Church, which no Law of God or Man warrants
them to do. So the words I spoke, must needs be understood of illegal
Prohibitions. For they which are Legal, do only stop the Church from doing
wrong, but do no wrong to the Church by disturbing her Rights. Mr. Brown
charged this Sermon Note upon me also, and I gave him this Answer.
Nevertheless, I cannot but be sorry to hear it from Mr. Wheeler's own Mouth;
that he was so careful to write this Passage, and so ready to come to witness
it against me; considering how many Years I have known him, and how freely he
has often come to my Table, and been welcome to me; yet never told me, this
Passage in my Sermon troubled him. It seems some Malignity or other laid it up
against this wet Day.



Here, having thus answered all Particulars; I humbly craved leave of their
Lordships, to inform them some few things concerning Prohibitions. As first,
that there was a great Contestation about them, 1.
between my Predecessor, Archbishop Bancroft, and the then Judges, and this
before King James and the Lords of the Council; and Mr. Attorney Hobart Pleaded
for the Church against them. Sir Henry Martin gave me Copies of all those
Papers on both sides. No final End made, that I could ever hear of. This
calling them all in Question, was far more than ever was done by me, or in my
time; and yet no Accusation at all, much less any of Treason, put up against
Archbishop Bancroft for this. Secondly, I have here Papers 2.
Attested of all the Prohibitions, which have been admitted in my Courts of
Arches, and Audience: And I find, there are as many (if not more) admitted in
my Seven Years time, as in any Seven Sir Timothy Baldwin has these Papers. W.
S. A. C.
Years of my Predecessor Archbishop Abbot. And these Papers I delivered into
the Court. As for the High Commission, the Records are all taken from us; else
I make no doubt, but it would soon appear by them, that as many have been
admitted there also. Thirdly, 3.
There is a great difference touching Prohibitions, and the sending of them,
since the Times of Reformation, and before. For before, the Bishops Courts were
kept under a foreign Power, and there were then weighty Reasons for
Prohibitions, both in regard of the King's Power, and the Subjects Indemnity.
But since the Reformation, all Power Exercised in the Spiritual Courts, is from
the King, as well as the Temporal; so that now there neither is, nor can be so
much Cause, as formerly was. And yet, all that I did humbly and earnestly
desire, was, that some known Bounds might be set to each Court, that the
Subject might not, to his great Trouble and Expense, be hurried, as now he was,
from one Court to another. And here I desired a Salvo, till I might bring
Archbishop Parker's Ma. Parkeri Antiqu. Britan. in vita Joh. Stafford. p. 326,
327.
Book, to show his Judgment in this Point, in the beginning of the Reformation,
if it shall be thought needful: According to whose Judgment (and he proves it
at large) there is open Wrong done to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
Prohibitions.



The next Charge is about my undue taking of Gifts: A Charge, III.
which I confess I did not think to meet here. And I must, and do humbly desire
your Lordships to remember, that till this Day I have not been Accused, in the
least, for doing any thing Corruptly: And if I would have had any thing to do
in the base dirty Business of Bribery, I needed not have been in such Want as
now I am. But my Innocence is far more to my Comfort, than any Wealth so gotten
could have been. For I cannot forget that of Job, That Fire Job (...). 34.
shall consume the Tabernacles of Bribery. And in the Roman Story, when P.
Rutilius, a Man Summa Innocentia, of greatest Integrity, (...). Chro. (...) 251.
was Accused, Condemned and Banished; it is observed by the Story, that he
suffered all this, not for Bribery, of which he was not Guilty, but Ob
Invidiam, for Envy; against which, when it Rages, no Innocence, no Worth of any
Man is able to stand.



1. But to come to the Particulars; the first is the Case of Sir Edward
Gresham's Son, unhappily Married against his Father's will; a Suit in the High
Commission about it; and that there he had but Fifty Pounds Damages given him.
That was no fault of mine; my Vote gave him more, but it was carried against
me. The Bond of two Hundred Pounds, which was taken according to ^ 101.
Course in the Court, was demanded of me by Sir Edward, to help himself that
way; and it is confessed I granted it: But then it is Charged, that in my
Reference to Sir John Lamb, to deliver him the Bond, I required him to demand
one half of the Forfeiture of the Bond, toward the Repair of St. Paul's. It Is
true, I did so. But First, I desire it may be considered, that it was wholly in
my Power, whether I would have delivered him the Bond, or not. Secondly, That
upon this gross Abuse, I might have sued the Bond in my own Name, and bestowed
the Money upon what Charitable Uses I had thought fit. Thirdly, That I did
nothing herein, but what the Letters-Patent for Repair of St. Paul's give me
power to do. Fourthly, That this is the third time St. Paul's is urged against
me: Which I am not sorry for, because I desire (since it is once moved) it may
be sifted (...) the uttermost. And whereas, to make all Ecclesiastical
Proceedings the more odious, it was urged, that the Rubric in the
Common Prayer Book mentions no License, but asking of Banes; That Rubric is to
be understood, Can. 62. Ec. (...).
where no License is granted: For else no License at all for Marriage without
Banes-asking can be good; which is against the Common, both Law, and Practice
of the Kingdom.

2. The second Particular was Charged by one Mr. Stone, of London, who said, he
sent into Lambeth two Butts of Sack, in a Cause of some Chester-Men, whom it
was then in my Power to relieve, and mitigate their Fine set upon them in the
High Commission at York, about Mr. Pryn's Entertainment, as he passed that way:
And that this Sack was sent in before my Composition with him, what should be
mitigated, and so before my return of the Fine mitigated into the Exchequer.
The Business, my Lords, was thus. His Majesty having taken the Repair of the
West End of St. Paul's to himself, granted me to that end all the Fines in the
High Commission Court, both here, and at York, and left the Power of Mitigation
in me. The Chester-Men, which this Witness speaks of, were deeply Sentenced at
York, for some Misdemeanors about Mr. Pryn, then lately Sentenced in the
Star Chamber. One, or more of them were Debtors to this Mr. Stone, to the value
of near Three Thousand Pounds (as he said.) These Men, for fear of the
Sentence, kept themselves close, and gave Mr. Stone to know, how it was with
them; and that if he could not get me to moderate the Fine, they would away,
and save themselves; (for they had now heard the Power was in me.) Upon this,
Mr. Stone, to save his own Debt of three Thousand Pounds, sends his Son-in-Law,
Mr. Wheat, and Dr. Bailie, Men that were bred in the College of S. John, under
me, and had ever since good interest in me, to desire my Favor. I at first,
thought this a pretense, and was willing to preserve to St. Paul's as much as
fairly I might: But at last, upon their earnest pleading, that the Men were not
Rich, and that Mr. Stone was like (without any fault of his) to be so much
damnified; I mitigated their Fines, which were in all above a Thousand Pounds,
to two Hundred. I had great Thanks of all Hands; and was told from the
Chester-Men, that they heartily wished I had had the Hearing of their Cause
from the beginning. While Mr. Wheat and his Brother Dr. Bailie were Soliciting
me for Favor to Mr. Stone, He thinks upon sending Sack into my House, and
comes to my Steward about it. My Steward acquaints me with it. I gave him
absolute Command not to receive it, nor any thing from any Man that had
Business before me: So he refuses to admit of any. Mr. Stone presses him again,
and tells him, he had no Relation to the Chester-Men's Cause; but would give it
for the great Favor I had always showed to his Son-in-Law: But still I
Commanded my Steward to receive none. When Mr: Stone saw he could not fasten
it, he watches a time, when my Steward was out of Town, and my self at Court,
and brings in his Sack, and tells the Yeoman of my Wine-Cellar, he had leave to
lay it in. My Steward comes home; finds the Sack in the Cellar; tells me of it:
I Commanded it should be taken out, and carried back. Then Mr. Stone comes;
entreats he may not be so Disgraced; protests as before, that he did it merely
for my great Favor to his Son-in-Law; and that he had no Relation to the
Chester-Men's Business: And so after he protested to my self, meeting me in a
Morning, as I was going over to the Star Chamber. Yet afterward this Religious
Professor (for so he carries himself) goes Home, and puts the Price of the
Sack upon the Chester-Men's Account. Hereupon they complain to the House of
Commons, and Stone is their Witness.

This is the truth of this Business, as I shall answer it to God. And whether
this do not look like a thing Plotted by the Faction so much imbittered against
me, let understanding Men judge.

Mr. Wheat, his Son-in-Law, was present in Court, and there avowed, that he
Transacted the Business with me, and that he went not out of Town, till I had
agreed to the Mitigation; that in all that time there was no Tender of Sack, or
any thing else unto me; and he, and Dr. Bailie, the only Men with whom I
Transacted the whole Business. And so much could Dr. Bailie also witness, but
that (as the Times are) I could not bring him from Oxford.

With Mr. Stone himself, I never treated. For my Steward, he is dead three
Years since, who could have been my Witness clean thorough the Business. And
when I pressed Mr. Stone at the Bar with the Protestation, which he made to me,
that he had no Relation herein to the Chester-Men; he that remembered every
Circumstance else, said he remembered not that. Then I offered to take my
voluntary Oath of the Truth of it; but that was not admitted. Then it was
pressed, that this Bribe must needs be before the Agreement, for he says, the
Sack was sent in to my House,......... and the Mitigation of the Fine into the
Exchequer not till...... But that is nothing: For my Agreement was passed, and
I meddled no more with it. Yea, but he says, that Mr. Holford my Servant had
Forty Pound more than I agreed upon, before he would finish their Business. Mr.
Holford was the King's Officer for those Returns into the Exchequer: And if,
after my Agreement made, he either unduely delaid their Business, or Corruptly
took any Money from them, he is living, and must answer for his own Fault: Me
it cannot concern, who did not so much as know of it.

Mr. Wheat having thus testified in open Parliament, before the Lords, was
within a Day or two called before the Committee; there re-examined in private,
and very strictly, touching the time of my Agreement made; Then (not without
some Harshness) Commanded not to depart the Town, till he heard farther from
them. This himself afterward told me. Hereupon I resolved to call him again
for farther Evidence, and if I saw cause, to acquaint the Lords with this
usage. And I did call upon it diverse times after; but one Delay or other was
found, and I could never obtain it. And such a kind of calling my Witnesses to
a private afterreckning, is that, which was never offered any Man in
Parliament. And here Mr. Brown, in summing up my Charge, did me a great deal of
Right: For neither to the Lords, nor in the House of Commons, did he vouchsafe
so much as to name this false, base, and unworthy Charge; of which my greatest
Enemies are ready to acquit me.

3. The Third Particular was charged by one Mr. Delbridge; Who says, he was
oppressed at the Council Table by the Lord Keeper Finch: That he was advised by
Mr. Watkins, to give my Secretary Mr. Dell Money, to get my Hand to a Petition
to the Lord Keeper, who he said would not oppose me: That Dell took of him One
Hundred and Fifty Pounds, and procured my Hand to his Petition. I remember
nothing of this Business, and it lies wholly upon my Secretary; who being my
Solicitor, is here present in Court, and desires he may answer the Scandal.
There Is no touch at all upon me, but that (he says) my Secretary got my Hand to
his Petition to the Lord Keeper. This Petition of his was either just, or
unjust. If just, I committed no Fault in setting my Hand to it: If unjust, he
must confess himself a Dishonest Man, to offer to get my Hand, to help to
Boulster out his Injustice: And yet if the Injustice of it were Varnished over
with fair Pretenses, and so kept from my knowledge; the Crime is still his own,
and nothing mine, but an Error at most. As for Mr. Watkins, he did me much
wrong, if he sent any Man to my House on such an Errand.

Here my Secretary had leave to speak; denied the whole Business; and produced
Mr. Hollys, with whom it was said the Hundred and Fifty Pounds before named
should be deposited; who (to my remembrance) said, he knew of no such thing.

4. The Fourth Instance was A Bond for the Payment of Money as a Fine: The Bond
found in Sir Jo: Lamb's Chamber, with a Note upon the back of it, for One
Hundred Pound received, and Sir John by my direction was to call for the rest.
And here it was said, that I used the Name of St: Paul's in an illegal way to
get Money; which might well have been spared. For (as is aforesaid) I had a
Broad Seal, which gave me all Fines in the High Commission Court, to the
repairing of the West End of St: Paul's, and with Power to mitigate. And the
Fines are the Kings, and he may give them by Law. The Broad Seal is in the
Hands of Mr: Holford, who is thereby appointed Receiver of all such Fines: But
is upon Record to be seen; and if it be doubted, I humbly desire a Salvo till
the Record can be taken out, and showed. But I presume these Gentlemen have
seen it: And Commutations for such Crimes, as Sir James Price's was, are
according to Law, and the Ancient Custom and Practice in this Kingdom;
especially, where Men of Quality are the Offenders. And the Power of Commuting
is as Legal in that Court, as any other: And if that be doubted, I humbly
desire my Council may Argue it.

5. The Fifth Instance was a Charge concerning a Lease in Lancashire held in
three Lives by Sir Ralph Ashton. It Is said by his Son Mr. Ashton (the only
Witness in the Cause,) That I by Power at Chester, and York, and the
High Commission here, being Landlord in right of my Archbishopric, did
violently wrest this Lease of the Rectory of Whally in Lancashire, out of his
Hands against Law, and made him take a Lease for Years, and Pay a great Fine
besides, and other Fines besides toward the Repair of St: Paul's, and raised the
Rent Sixty Pound. Truly, my Lords, I am not any whit solicitous to answer this
Charge. I challenged this Lease as void, and had great Reason so to do, both
for the Invalidity of the Lease it self, and the unworthiness of the Tenant,
both to me and my See. If in the Preparations for Trial at Law, the Judge at
Chester (altogether unknown to me, and unlaboured by me,) did say (as Mr.
Ashton says he did) That for higher Powers above he durst not; he was the more
unworthy. And for York, I needed no Power there; for I resolved to have him
called into the High Commission here; which was after done.

This Gentleman his Son came to me about the Lease: I told him plainly, it was
void in Law, and that I meant to overthrow it; That if his Father would
surrender, I would renew it for Years at a reasonable rate; but if he put me to
Expense in Law, I would secure my self, as well as Legally I might. He replied,
That Mr. Solicitor Littleton (for so then he was) said, he durst not be against
me. And there was good Reason for it; he was my Council, and Feed in that
Particular. And what a poor Evasion was this? Were there no other Lawyers for
him, because Mr. Solicitor was for me? The Truth is, all that ever I did in
this Business, was not only with the Knowledge, but by the Advice of my
Council, which were Mr. Solicitor Littleton, and Mr. Herbert.

At last this Gentleman submitted himself and the Cause; and if (as he says)
Dr. Eden persuaded him to it, that is nothing to me. As for the Fine, I referred
the moderation of it wholly to my Council. They pitched upon Sixteen Hundred
Pounds, and gave such Days of Payment, as that a good part is yet unpaid: And
this Sum was little above one Years Rent: For the Parsonage is known to be
well worth Thirteen Hundred Pound a Year, if not more. And after the Business
was settled, my Lord Wimbleton came to me, and gave me great Thanks for
preserving this Gentleman, being (as he said) his Kinsman, whom he confessed it
was in my Power to ruin.

For the raising of the Rent Sixty Pounds; it was to add Means to the several
Curats to the Chapels of Ease: And I had no Reason to suffer Sir Ralph Ashton
to go away with so much Profit, and leave the Curats both upon my Conscience
and my Purse. And for his Fine to St: Paul's, I gave him all the Ease I could.
But since his Son will force it from me; he was accused of Adultery with diverse
Women, and confessed all: And whither that Fine went, and by what Authority, I
have already showed. And thus much more, my Lords, at Mr. Bridgman's Entreaty,
I turned this Lease into Lives again without Fine: But since I have this Reward
for it, I wish with all my Heart I had not done it. For I am confident in such
a Case of Right, your Lordships would have left me to the Law, and more I would
not have asked. And I think this (though entreated into it) was my greatest
Error in the Business.

6. The last Instance, was about the conversion of some Money to St. Paul's, out
of Administrations: By Name, Two Thousand Pounds taken out of Wimark's Estate,
and Five Hundred out of Mr. Gray's. First, whatsoever was done in this kind, I
have the Broad-Seal to Warrant it. And for Mr. Wimark's Estate, all was done
according to Law, and all care taken for his Kindred. And if I had not stired
in the Business; Four Men, all Strangers to his Kindred, would have made
themselves by a broken Will Executors, and swept all away from the Kindred.
Secondly, for Mr. Gray's Estate, after as Odious an expression of it as could
be made, and as void of Truth as need to be, the Proceedings were confessed to
be Orderly and Legal, and the Charge deserted.

Then there was a fling at Sir Charles Caesar's getting of the Mastership of
the Rolls for Money, and that I was his means for it: And so it was thence
inferred, That I sold Places of Judicature, or helped to sell them. For this
they produced a Paper under my Hand. But when they had thrown all the Dirt they
could upon me, they say they did only show what Probabilities they had for it,
and what Reason they had to lay it in the end of the Fourth Original Article;
and so deserted it. And well they might: For I never had more Hand in this
Business, than that when he came to me about it, I told him plainly, as things
then stood, that Place was not like to go without more Money, than I thought
any Wise Man would give for it: Nor does the Paper mentioned say any more, but
that I informed the Lord Treasurer what had passed between us.

CAP. XXVIII. Die Septimo.

THis day ended, I was Ordered to appear again, April 4. 1644. April. 4. 1644.
And received a Note from the Committee, under Sergeant Wild's Hand, dated
April 1. That they meant to proceed next upon the Fifth and Sixth Original
Articles, and upon the Ninth Additional; which follow in haec verba.

The Fifth Original. He has Traitorously caused a Book of Canons to be
Composed and Published, and those Canons to be put in Execution, without any
lawful Warrant and Authority in that behalf; in which pretended Canons many
Matters are contained contrary to the King's Prerogative, to the Fundamental
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to the Right of Parliament, to the Propriety
and Liberty of the Subjects, and Matters tending to Sedition, and of dangerous
Consequence, and to the Establishment of a vast, unlawful, and presumptus
Power, in himself and his Successors: Many of the which Canons, by the practice
of the said Archbishop, were surreptitiously passed in the late Convocation,
without due consideration and debate; others by fear and compulsion were
Subscribed unto by the Prelates and Clerks there assembled, which had never been
Voted and Passed in the Convocation, as they ought to have been. And the said
Archbishop has contrived and endeavored, to assure and confirm the Unlawful
and Exorbitant Power, which he has Usurped and Exercised over his Majesty's
Subjects, by a Wicked and Ungodly Oath in one of the said pretended Canons
enjoined to be taken by all the Clergy, and many of the Layety of this Kingdom.

The Sixth Original.

He has Traitorously assumed to himself a Papal and Tyrannical Power, both in
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Matters, over his Majesty's Subjects in this Realm
of England, and in other places, to the Disherison of the Crown, Dishonor of
his Majesty, and Derogation of his Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters.
And the said Archbishop claims the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as
incident to his Episcopal and Archiepiscopal Office in this Kingdom, and does
deny the same to be derived from the Crown of England, which he has
accordingly exercised, to the high contempt of his Royal Majesty, and to the
destruction of diverse of the King's Liege People, in their Persons and Estates.

The Ninth Additional Article.

That in or about the Month of May 1640. (...).
1641. presently after the dissolution of the last Parliament, the said
Archbishop, for the ends and purposes aforesaid, caused a Synod or Convocation
of the Clergy, to be held for the several Provinces of Canterbury and York;
wherein were made and established, by his Means and procurement, diverse Canons
and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, contrary to the Laws of this Realm, the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and Liberty and Property of the Subject;
tending also to Sedition, and of dangerous Consequence. And, amongst other
things, the said Archbishop caused a most Dangerous and Illegal Oath to be
therein made and contrived; the Tenor whereof follows in these words. That, I
A. B. do Swear, that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline, or Government
Established in the Church of England, as containing all things necessary to
Salvation: And that I will not endeavor, by my self or any other, directly or
indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which is so
Established: Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of this
Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now
Established, and as by right it ought to stand; nor yet ever to subject it to
the Usurpations and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome. And all these things I do
plainly and sincerely acknowledge and Swear, according to the plain and common
Sense and Understanding of the same Words, without any Equivocation or Mental
Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And this I do heartily, willingly,
and truly, upon the Faith of a Christian: So help me God in Jesus Christ. Which
Oath the said Archbishop himself did take, and caused diverse other Ministers
of the Church to take the same, upon pain of Suspension and Deprivation of
their Livings, and other severe Penalties; and did also cause Godfrey, then
Bishop of Gloucester, to be committed to Prison for refusing to Subscribe to
the said Canons, and to take the said Oath; and afterward the said Bishop
submitting himself to take the said Oath, he was set at Liberty.

On Thursday April 4. I was again brought to the House, made a April. 4. 1644.
sufficient scorn and gazing-stock to the People; and after I had waited some
hours, was sent back, by Reason of other Business, unheard: But Ordered to
appear again Monday April 8. Then I appeared again, and April 8.
was used by the basest of the People as before. I did not appear any day but
it cost me six or seven Pound: I grew into want. This made my Council, and
other Friends, to persuade me, the next time I had admittance to speak, to move
the Lords again for some necessary Allowance; notwithstanding my former
Petition had been rejected. This Advice I meant to have followed that day: But
after some Hours Attendance, I was sent back again unheard, and Ordered to come
again on Thursday April 11. This day I did not come to the House; April 11.
a Warrant being sent to the Tower, which stayed me till Tuesday April 16.

CAP. XXIX. The Seventh Day of my Hearing.
THen I appeared, and (as I remember) here Mr. Maynard left off April 16.
(save that now and then he interposed, both in the Reply Die Septimo.
and otherwise) and Mr. Nicolas, a Man of another Temper, undertook the
managing of the Evidence. And the first Charge was concerning I.
the late Canons, l. for the making of which he said it was against Law for the
(...).
which he said were against Law to sit, the Parliament being Dissolved. No, my
Lords, nothing against Law that I know. For we were called to Sit in
Convocation, by a different Writ from that which called us as Bishops to the
Parliament. And we could not rise, till his Majesty sent us another Writ to
discharge us; and this is well known to the Judges, and the other Lawyers here
present: So we continued sitting, though the Parliament rose. Nor was this
sitting continued by any Advice or Desire of mine. For I humbly desired a Writ
to dissolve us: But the best Council then present, both of Judges, and other
Lawyers, assured the King we Vide supra, post (...).
might Legally sit. And here is a Copy attested under their Hands.

Then he urged out of my Diary, at May 29. 1640. That I acknowledged there were
Seventeen Canons made, which I did hope would be useful to the Church. It Is
true, my Lords, I did hope so. And had I not hoped it, I would never have
passed my Consent unto them. And when I writ this, there was nothing done or
said against them. And if by any Inadvertency, or Humane Frailty, any thing
Erroneous or Unfit have slipped into those Canons, I humbly beseech your
Lordships to remember, it is an Article of the Church of Art. 21.
England, that General Councils may Err, and therefore this National Synod may
mistake. And that since (if any Error be) it is not Wilful; it may be
rectified, and in Charity passed by.

For the Bishop of Gloucester's refusing to Subscribe the Canons, and take the
Oath; Which is here said by the Council, but no Proof offered: The Truth is
this. He first pretended (to avoid his Subscription) that we could not sit, the
Parliament risen. He was Satisfied in this by the Judges Hands. Then he
pretended the Oath. But that which stuck in his Stomach, was the Canon about
the suppressing (...). 3.
of the growth of Popery. For, coming over to me to Lambeth about that
Business, he told me he would be torn with Wild Horses before he would
Subscribe that Canon. I gave him the best Advice I could; but his Carriage was
such, when he came into the Convocation, that I was forced to charge him openly
with it, and he as freely acknowledged it: As there is plentiful Proof of
Bishops and other Divines then present. And for his Lordship's being after put
to take the Oath (which was also urged;) it was thus. I took my self bound to
accquaint his Majesty with this Proceeding of my Lord of Gloucester's, and did
so. But all that was after done about his Commitment first, and his Release
after, when he had taken the Oath, was done openly at a full Council Table, and
his Majesty present, and can no way be charged upon me, as my Act. For it was
my Duty to let his Majesty know it, to prevent farther Danger then also
discovered. But I am here to defend my self, not to accuse any Man else.

Next he urged, that I had Interlined the Original Copy of the Canons with my
own Hand. But this is clearly a mistake, if not a wilful one. For perusing the
Place, I find the Interlining is not in my Hand, but my Hand is to it; as (I
humbly conceive) it was fit it should. And the Words are in the Ratification of
the Canons, and therefore were necessarily to be in the Original, howsoever
slipped in the writing of them.

As for the Oath so bitterly spoken of at the Bar, and in the Articles; either
it was made according to Law, or else we were wholly misled by President, and
that such as was never excepted against. For in the Canons made in King James
his Time, there was an Oath made against Can. 40.
Symonie, Can. 118.
and an Oath for Churchwardens, and an Oath about Can. 103.
Licenses for Marriages, and an Oath for Can. 127.
Judges in Ecclesiastical Courts: And some of these Oaths as dangerous as this
is acounted to be. And all these established by no other Authority than these
late were.

And yet neither those Canons nor those Oaths were ever declared Illegal by any
ensuing Parliament, nor the Makers of them accused of any Crime, much less of
Treason. So that we had in this Synod unblamed President for what we did, as
touching our Power of doing it.

But, after all this, he said he would pass these things by (that is, when he
had made them as Odious as he could) and would Charge nothing upon me but the
Votes of both Houses, namely, That these Canons contain Matters contrary to the
King's Prerogative, to the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, to the Rights of
Parliaments, to the Propriety and Liberty of the Subject, and Matters tending
to Sedition, and of dangerous Consequence. So these Votes of the Honorable
Houses made so long after (and therefore cannot well be an Evidence against the
making of that which was done so long before) is the Task lying now upon me to
answer; which, with your Lordships honorable Favor, I shall in all Humbleness
Address my self unto.

Before these Words were well out of my Mouth, Mr. Nicolas with much
earnestness interposed; That he hoped their Lordships would not endure that the
Solemn Votes of both Houses should be called into Question by any Delinquent,
and was sure the House of Commons would not endure it. Upon this the Lords
presently gave their Resolution, that I might not speak to any thing that was
declared by Votes; but was to answer only to the Fact, whether I made the
Canons or no. To this, with leave humbly asked, I replied, That if I might not
answer to the Votes, I must yield the Evidence; which I could not do: And that
if I might answer, I must dispute the Votes, which their Lordships resolved I
should not do: That then I was in a Perplexity, and must necessarily offend
either way. And therefore humbly besought them, to consider not my Case only,
but their own too. For I did conceive it would concern them in Honor, as much
as me in Safety: That no Charge might be brought against me in that great
Court, to which I should not be suffered to make answer: Or else that they in
Honor would not judge me for that, to which my Answer is not suffered to be
given. With this, that all these Canons were made in open and full Convocation,
and are Acts of that Body, and cannot be ascribed to me, though President of
that Synod, but are the Joint Acts of the whole Body: So by me they were not
made; which is my Answer.

And according to this I framed my Answer to Mr. Brown's Summary of my Charge,
both hinting the Canons in general, and concerning the Instance before given
about the Bishop of Gloucester.

But though I was not allowed there to make any farther Answer in defense of
these Canons: Nor can hold it fit to insert here so long an Answer, as these
Votes require: I humbly desire the Courteous Reader, if he please, to look upon
the Answer which I have made to a Speech Made December 14. 1640. and extant in
Rushworth, par. 3. vol. 1. p. 105.
of Mr. Nathaniel Fynes, in the House of Commons, against these Canons. In
which Answer, I humbly conceive, I have satisfied whatsoever these Votes
contain against them. Howsoever, I cannot but observe this in present. The
Words in the Sixth Original Article, are as they are above Cited: That the late
Canons contain Matters contrary to the King's Prerogative, the Laws, etc. But
in the Ninth Additional, all the rest of the Exceptions are in against them,
but these Words about the King's Prerogative are quite left out. I would fain
know, if I could, what is the Reason of this Omission in these added Articles.
Is it for Shame, because there was a purpose to Charge me (as Sergeant Et Art.
2. (...).
Wild did in his Speech the first Day) that I labored to advance the King's
Prerogative above the Law? To advance it, and yet made contrary Canons against
it; which is the way to destroy it? What pretty Nonsense is this? Or is it
because the framers of these Additionals (whom I conceive were some Committee,
with the help of Mr. Pryn) thought the time was come, or coming, in which the
King should have no more Prerogative? Or if there be a third Reason; let them
give it themselves.

This was all concerning the Canons. Then followed the sixth Original Article
about my assuming of Papal Power; where Mr. Brown, in Summing up of his Charge,
was pleased to say, that no Pope claimed so much as I had done. But he was
herein much mistaken. For never any Pope claimed so little. For he that claimed
least, claimed it in his own right, which was none; whereas I claimed nothing
but in the King's right, and by virtue of his Concession. Between which there
is a vast Latitude.

The first Proof upon this Article, was read out of certain Letters sent unto
me, by the University of Oxford, I being then their Chancellor. Which great
Titles were urged to prove my assuming of Papal Power, because I did not check
them in my Answers to those Letters. (1) The first Title was Sanctitas tua,
which Mr. Nicolas said, was the Pope's own Title. But he is deceived. For the
Title was commonly given to other Bishops also, clean through the Primitive
Church, both Greek and Latin. He replied in great heat (as his manner it seems
is) that it is Blasphemy to give that Title (Sanctitas) in the Abstract, to any
but God. And though by the Course of the Court I might not answer then to the
Reply, yet now I may. And must tell Mr. Nicolas, that it is a great Presumption
for him, a Lawyer, and no Studied Divine, to Charge Blasphemy upon all the
Fathers of the Primitive Church. It Is given to Apud Aug: Epist. 88. 98.
St. Augustine by Hilarious and Euodius, and in the Abstract. And (which is the
Charge laid to me) St. Augustine never checks at, or finds fault with the
Title, nor with them for writing it. And Aug. Ep. 102.
St. Augustine himself gives that Title to Euodius, answering his Letters,
which I was not to do to theirs. And after that to Aug. Ep. 103.
Quintianus. Neither is any thing more common, than this Style among the
Fathers; as all Learned Men know. And it is commonly given by Greg. Eulogio
Episcopo Alexandrino. Apud H. Spelman. in Council. p. 80. Et Episc. Arelatensi.
Ibid. p. 95.
St. Gregory the Great, to diverse Bishops: Who, being Pope himself, would not
certainly have given away his own Title (had it been peculiar to him) to any
other Bishop. Nor would any of the Fathers have given this Epithete to their
Brethren, had any savor of Blasphemy been about it.

But there is a twofold Holiness, the one Original, Absolute and Essential,
and that is in God only, and incommunicable to any Creature: The other
Derivative The Managers against the Archbishop in another place pretend, that
this Title was never given to any English Bishop at least. But herein they are
much mistaken. For (...) was often given to them. To produce but one Instance:
Pope Leo III. gave this Title to Ethelard Archbishop of Canterbury, and that
in a Letter wrote to Kenulphus King of Mercia. Angl. Sacr. par. 1. page 460. H.
W.
and Relative; and that is found in the Creatures, both Things and Persons: Or
else God should have no Saints, no Holy Ones. For no Man can be said to be
Sanctus, Holy, but he who in some degree has Sanctitatem, Holiness residing in
him. And this I answered at the present. But, according to Mr. Nicolas his
Divinity, we shall learn in time, to deny the Immortality of the Soul. For
Immortality in the Abstract is applied to God only. 1 Timothy 6. Who only has
Immortality. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Therefore, if it may not in an under and a qualified Sense, by Participation,
be applied to the Creature; the Soul of Man cannot be Immortal.



(2) The Second Title is, Spiritu Sancto effusissime plenus. My Lords, I had
sent them many Hundred Manuscripts, and in many Languages; upon this, in
Allusion to the gift of Tongues (and it was about Pentecost too that I sent
them) the Luxuriant Pen of the University Orator ran upon these Phrases, which
I could neither foresee before they were written, nor remedy after. And
finding fault could not remedy that which was past. Besides, all these Letters
were in Answer to mine, I was to answer none of theirs. That might have made me
work enough, had I wanted any.

(3) The Third Style is Summus Pontifex. But this was in my Lord of London's
Letters, and he must answer, if any thing be amiss. But Pontifex, and Summus
too, is no unusual Style to, and of the Chief Prelate in any Nation.

(4) The Fourth Style is Archangelus, and ne quid nimis. Yes sure, the meanest
of these Titles is Multum nimis, far too much, applied to my Person and
unworthiness: Yet a great sign it is, that I deserved very well of that
University, in the place I then bare; or else they would never have bestowed
such Titles upon me. And if they did offend, in giving such an unworthy Man
such high Language, why are not they called in Question for their own Fault?

(5) The last which I remember is, Quo rectior non stat Regula, etc. And this
is no more than an absolute Hyperbole; A high one I confess; yet as high are
found in all Rhetorical Authors: And what should make that Blasphemy in an
University Orator, which is every where common, and not only allowed, but
commendable, I know not. Especially since the Rule of the Interpretation of
them, is as well known as the Figure. Where the Words are not to be understood
in their Proper and Literal Sense, but as St. Augustine speaks, S. Aug. 16.
Civ. Dei, c. 21.
when that which is spoken, Long est amplius, is far larger than that which is
signified by it.

And if I had assumed any of these Titles to my self, which I am, and ever was,
far from doing; yet it is one thing to assume Papal Title; and another to assume
Papal Power (which is the thing Charged;) though I thank God I did neither. If
I have here omitted any Title, it is mere forgetfulness; for one part or other
of the Answers given will reach it, what-e're it be. And, as I told Mr. Brown,
when he Charged this on me, Dr. Strowd the University Orator, who writ those
Letters, and gave those Titles, was called up before a Committee of this
Parliament, examined about them, Acquitted, and Dismissed.



(6) These Titles from the Letters being past; He quoted another, which he
called a Blasphemous Speech too, out of my Book against Cont. Fisher.. 25. p.
171.
Fisher; where, he said, I approved of Anselme, an Enemy to the Crown; and took
on me to be Patriarch of this other World. Let any Man look into that place of
my Book; and he shall find that I make use of that Passage, only to prove that
the Pope could not be Appealed unto out of England, according to their own
Doctrine: Which I hope is no Blasphemy. And for St. Anselme, howsoever he was
swayed with the Corruptions of his time; yet was he in other things worthy the
Testimony which the Authors by me Cited give him. And if any Man be angry that
the Archbishop of Canterbury is called the Patriarch of this other World, he
may be pleased to remember, that St. Jerome gives St. Augustine, who was Bishop
of Hippo, and S. Hieron. (...) Aug. Epist. 11. 13. 14. 17. 18. etc.
no Archbishop, a greater Title than that. For he writes Beatissimo Papae
Augustino, more than once and again, as appears in his Epistles to St.
Augustine.



(7) To these Sir Nathaniel Brent's Testimony is produced: Who says, that he
overheard me say to another, that I would not so easily quit the Plenitude of
my Power; or to that Effect. He confesses he was coming in, and finding me
speaking with another, made stay, and stood a-far off, and knows not of what I
spoke, (for so he said) but overheard the Words. I beseech your Lordships,
observe this Witness. He confesses, he knows not of what I spoke, and yet comes
here upon his Oath, to testify of Plenitude of Power in Relation to my
assuming Papal Power. If he meant not this, his Testimony is nothing; for
Plenitude of Power may Extend to many other things; and I might justly say, (if
I said it) that I would not easily part with the Plenitude of my Power, in
Relation to other Bishops of my Province, who by Law have not so full Power as
I have. But if he did mean this; then his Testimony is worse than nothing;
Nothing in regard he confesses he knows not of what I was speaking. And worse
than nothing; That, not knowing, he would give such a Testimony upon Oath. [
These six Lines are inserted out of place, and belong clearly to his Defense of
making new (...) for the University, which follows afterward. W. S. A. C.
As for the Statutes themselves, there was scarce one urged against me; but it
was either a Statute, or a Prescription of that University, long before I was
born into the World; and could not therefore be of my new-making. And this was
my Answer to Mr. Brown in the House of Commons. And such Bannition, (...), and
the like, are well known to be.]



The next Charge of this Day, was, that I went about to Exempt II.
the Clergy from the Civil Magistrate.

1. The first Witness is Mr. Pincen; He says, he heard me say at the
High Commission, That the Clergy were now debased; that heretofore it was
otherwise, and I hope to see it so again. Truly, my Lords, if I did say thus
(which is more than I can call to Memory) I spoke truth; they were debased; and
I did hope to see it otherwise. For, the debasing of the Clergy will make their
Office and their Doctrine base, as well as their Persons. But here is not a
word of freeing them from Laws, or the Temporal Magistrate. It was replied, he
did mention the Civil Magistrate. If he did, he mentions no time, by which I
might be enabled to make Counterproof. He is single. They are words, and if
within the Statute, then triable by it within six Months. And I desire this
grave Gentleman to consider his Oath: For if I spoke of any such Exemption; I
must speak against my Conscience and Judgment, which I humbly thank God I use
not to do. Nor is it altogether impossible for the Civil Magistrate sometimes
to oppress poor Clergymen. But a little will be thought too much of this. And
therefore to Mr. Browne's Summary Charge, I gave the former Answer, that I
spoke of Exemption from Oppression, not from Law.



2. The Second Witness was Alderman Railton, about the carrying up of the Sword
in the Church, when he was Lord Mayor. He says, I once sent him word about it,
but knows not by whom, and after heard no more of it, but refers himself to Mr.
Marsh. He says, there was an Order of the Council Table, May 3. 1633.
concerning the submitting of the Sword in time and place of Divine Service. If
an Order of Council, then was it no Act of mine, as I have often Pleaded, and
must as often as it comes. He says farther, that I spoke these Words, or to
this Effect; That the Church had been low for these Hundred Years; but I hoped
it would Flourish again in another Hundred. But here is no one word of Exemption
from Civil Magistracy. And I hope your Lordships will take Witnesses as they
speak, not as Men shall infer, and descant upon them. And then, my Lords, under
Favor, I see no harm in the Words.

Only I shall recall my hope: For if I had then any hope to see it Flourish in
another Hundred Years, it is that which I cannot hope for now. He says, there
was a Reference to the Council on both sides, and that under that Reference the
Business dyed. And if it dyed then, what makes it here before the Resurrection?
Yea, but says Mr. Nicolas, here is Agitation about the submitting of the Sword,
which is the Emblem of Temporal Power. But neither to Foreign, nor Home Power,
but only to God; and that in the place, and at the performance of his Holy
Worship. At which time and place Christian Kings submit themselves, and
therefore cannot stand upon the Emblems of their Power. Nor would the Lords of
the Council have made either Order or Reference; had there been any thing of
danger, or against Law, in this kind of submitting. Mr. York was produced as
another Witness; but said just the same with Marsh; and so the same Answer
served him.

Then followed a Charge about the Charter of York to be renewed; III.
and that I did labor to have the Archbishop of York his Chancellor, and some
of the Residentiaries named in it to be Justices of Peace within the City. To
prove this, Alderman Hoyle is produced: Who says, There was an Order of the
Council about this, but cannot say that I procured it. So far then this Proof
reaches not me. For the Bishop his Chancellor, and some of the Residentiaries
to be Justices of Peace within the City. If I were of this Opinion (as then
advised) I am sure there is no Treason in it, and I believe no Crime. And, under
your Lordships Favor, I could not but think it would have made much Peace, and
done much Good in all the Cities of England where Cathedrals are. Lastly, he
says, There was a Debauched Man committed about breach of the Sabbath, and
being casually smothered, I should say, they deserved to be Hanged that Killed
him. Concerning this Man; he lost his Life, that is confessed. His Debauchery,
what it was, is not proved. And were he never so disorderly, I am sure he was
not without Legal Trial to be shut up into a House and smothered. That is
against both Law and Conscience. And the Officers then in being had reason to
smother the Business, as much as they could. And, it may be, deserved somewhat;
if not that which this Alderman says I said, to his best Remembrance. For so,
and with no more certainty he expressed it. This I am sure I said, That if the
Bishop, (...) any of the Church had been then in their Charter; the Poor Man's
Life had not been lost.

The Fourth Charge was just of the same Nature, concerning the IV.
Charge of Shrewsbury. For this there were produced two Witnesses, Mr. Lee and
Mr. Mackworth: But they make up but one between them. For Mr. Lee could say
nothing, but what he acknowledges he heard from Mr. Mackworth. And Mr.
Mackworth says first: That the Schoolmaster's Business was referred to other
Lords and my self. That Is no Crime; and to my knowledge, that has been a
troublesome business for these Thirty Years. He says, I caused that there should
go a Quo Warranto against the Town. This is but as Mr. Owen informed him, so no
proof. Beside, it is no Crime, being a Referee, if I gave legal Reason for it.
Nor is it any Crime, that the Bishop and his Chancellor should be Justices
within the Town; As is aforesaid in the Case of York: Considering especially,
that then many Clergymen bare that Office in diverse Counties of England. He
adds, that an Old Alderman gave Fifty Pound to St. Paul's. But out of what
Consideration I know not, nor does he speak: And if every Alderman in the Town
would have given me as much to that use; I would have taken it, and thanked
them for it. Then he says, There was an Order from all the Lords Referees, for
settling all things about their Charter. So, by his own Confession, the whole
Business was transacted publicly, and by Persons of great Honor; and nothing
charged upon my Particular. If Mr. Owen sent me in a Butt of Sack, and after
put it upon the Town Account, (for so he also says) Mr. Owen did ill in both;
but I knew of neither. And this the Council in their Reply said they urged not
in that kind. Lastly, the Charter it self was Read to both Points, of the
Bishops and his Chancellors being Justices of Peace within the Town, and the
not bearing up of the Sword. To both which I have answered already. And I hope
your Lordships cannot think his Majesty would have passed such a Charter: Or
that his Learned Council durst have put it to him, had this thing been such a
Crime as it is here made.

The next Charge was out of my Diary, at March 5: 1635. The V.
words are, William Juxon Lord Bishop of London, made Lord High Treasurer of
England. No Churchman had it since H: 7: time. I pray God bless him to carry
it so, that the Church may have Honor, and the King and the State Service and
Contentment by it. And now if the Church will not hold up themselves under God,
I can do no more. I can see no Treason in this, nor Crime neither. And though
that which I did to help on this Business, was very little; yet Aim I had none
in it, but the Service of the King, and the Good of the Church. And I am
confident it would have been both, had not such troublesome Times followed, as
did.

Then they instanced in the Case of Mr. Newcomen. But that Cause VI.
being handled before, they did only refer the Lords to their Notes: And so did
I to my former Answers.

Then followed the Case of Thorn and Middleton; which were Fined VII.
in the High Commission about some Clergy-Mens Business; Thorn being
Constable: The Witnesses in this Case are Three.

1. The first is Huntford (if I took his Name right:) And for the Censure of
these Men, he confesses, it was in and by the High Commission; and so no Act of
mine (as I have often pleaded:) But then he says, that I there spoke these
words, That no Man of their Rank should meddle with Men in Holy Orders. First,
he is in this part of the Charge single, and neither of the other Witnesses
comes in to him. Secondly, I humbly desire the Proceedings of the High
Commission may be seen (which are taken out of our hands.) For so far as I can
remember any thing of this Cause, the Minister, Mr. Lewis, had hard measure.
And perhaps thereupon I might say, that Men of their Rank should not in such
sort meddle with Men in Holy Orders. But to tax the proceedings of a violent
busy Constable, was not to exempt the Clergy from Civil Magistracy.

Upon this he falls just upon the same words, and says, that I uttered them
about their offering to turn out a Corrector from the Printing House. This
Corrector was a Minister, and a well deserving Man. The Trust of the Press was
referred to the High Commission Court. And I hope your Lordships will not
think, that not to suffer the Printers to turn out a deserving Man at their
pleasure, is to exempt the Clergy from the Civil Magistrate. The business, my
Lords, was this. This Corrector was principally entertained for the Latin and
Greek Press especially, which I had then not without great pains and some cost
Erected. They were desirous to keep only one for the English, and him at the
cheapest. Among them their negligence was such, as that there were found above
a Thousand faults in two Editions of the Bible and Common Prayer Book. And one
which caused this search was, that in Exodus 20. where they had shamefully
Printed, Thou shall commit Adultery. For this the Masters of the Printing House
were called into the High Commission, and Censured, as they well deserved it.
As for this Corrector whom they would have heaved out, they never did so much
as complain of him to any that had power over the Press, till this fell upon
themselves for so gross an Abuse. Nor did they after this proceed against him,
to make him appear faulty; and till that were done, we could not punish. And
for this Business of the Press, he is single too. And I have told your
Lordships that which is a known Truth. And Hunsford, being bit in his Credit
and Purse, and Friends, by that Censure, for so gross an abuse of the Church
and Religion, labors to fasten his Fangs upon me in this way.



2. The Second Witness is Mr. Bland. But all that he says is, that there was
once a dismission of this Cause out of the Court, and that though I disliked
it, yet I gave way to it, because all Parties were agreed. And no word of
proof, that I was any cause of bringing it back into the Court again. What Is my
fault in this?

3. The Third Witness was Thorn in his own Cause: And it is plain, by his own
words, that this Cause was depending in Court before my time. And I believe,
were the Records of the Court here, Mr. Lewis would not be found so great an
Offender as Mr. Thorn would make him. This I am sure of, both the
High Commission and my self have been quick enough against all Ministers which
have been proved to be debauched in their Life and Conversation. And he says
nothing against me, but that I sided with his Adversaries; which is easy to
say against any Judge that delivers his Sentence against any Man. But neither
of these come home to Hunsford.

The next Charge is in the Case of one Mr. Tomkins, about the VIII.
Taxing of a Minister in a Case of Robbery, and Repayment by the Country.

To this Mr. Newdigate is produced; who says, as he remembers, that I should
speak these words, That Ministers were free from such Taxes, and I hoped to see
the Times in which they might be free again. First, this Gentleman is single.
Secondly, he speaks not positively, but (as he remembers.) Thirdly, this Tax I
do humbly conceive is not by Law to be laid upon any Minister. For no Man is
subject to this Tax, but they which are to keep Watch and Ward; which Ministers
in that kind are not bound unto. And this I learned of the Lord Keeper Coventry
at the Council Table. So I might well then hope to see Ministers free from all
such Taxes, by the right understanding and due Execution of our own Laws,
without assuming any Papal Power.

The last Instance of this Day was the bringing of Sir Rich: Samuel IX.
into the High Commission, for doing his Office as Justice of the Peace upon
some Clergymen. First, for this, this Gentleman is single, and in his own
Case. Secondly, himself confesses, that his bringing into the High Commission
was long after the Fact. Therefore in all Probability not for that; nor does he
say that I caused his bringing in. He says farther, That one Article for which
he was called into the Commission, was, that he was an Enemy to the Clergy. But
he does not say, that I preferred these Articles against him: Nor does he tell,
or can I remember, what the other Articles were, which with this may be bad
enough to merit what was there laid against him: And whatsoever was done,
appears by his own Narration, to be the Act of the High Commission, or the
Council Table, and so not Chargeable upon me alone. And whereas he says, I
blamed him much at the Council Table: Let him tell why, and then I Will give him
a farther Answer: And sure if I did blame him; I had just Cause so to do.
Lastly, he says, I did use the Word Base to him when he came to me. Sure I
cannot believe I did: It was not my Language to meaner Men. If it did slip from
me, it was in Relation to his Enmity to the Clergy, not to his Person or
Quality. And I conceive it is no Gentile part, for a Man of Place and Power in
his Country, to oppress poor Clergymen which neighbor about him. In which
kind this Gentleman, Pessime Audiebat, heard extremely ill.



CAP. XXX.
THis Day thus ended, I was ordered to appear again on Monday, April 22. I
came, and my former Answers having taken April 22.
off the Edge of many Men, (for so I was told by good Hands) the Scorns put
upon me at my Landing and elsewhere were somewhat a bated, though when it was
at best I suffered enough. After I had attended the Pleasure of the House some
Hours, I was remitted without April 25.
Hearing, and commanded to attend again upon Thursday, April 25. But sent back
again then also, and ordered to appear on Tuesday, April 30. And when I came, I
was sent away once more unheard: No April 30.
Consideration had of my self, or the great Charge which this frequent coming
put me to. I was then ordered to appear again, on Saturday, May 4. Then I was
heard again: And the Day proceeded as follows.

My Eighth Day of Hearing.
To raise up Envy against me, Mr. Nicolas falls first to repeating Maij 4.
1644. Saturday.
the Titles which were given me in Letters from Oxford; to which I gave answer
the Day before. From thence he fell again upon the Die Octavo.
former Charge, My Endeavor to exempt the Clergy from the Civil Power. And
very loud he was, and full of sour Language upon me. To this General I answered
with another more true; That I never did attempt to bring the Temporal Power
under the Clergy, nor to free the Clergy from being under it: But I do freely
confess, I did labor all I could to preserve poor Clergymen from some
Laymens Oppression, which lay heavy on them. And de Vi Laica has been an old,
and a great, and too Just a Complaint. And this I took to be my Duty, doing it
without Wrong to any Man; as sincerely I did to the best of my Knowledge. And
assuring my self, that God did not raise me to that Place of Eminency, to sit
still, see his Service neglected, and his Ministers discountenanced; nay,
sometimes little better than trampled on. And my standing thus to the Clergy,
and their just Grievances, is not the least Cause of my present Condition. In
which my Case (though not my Abilities) is somewhat like Cicero's. For having
now for many Years defended the Public State of the Church, and the Private of
many Churchmen; as he had done many Citizens; when he by prevailing Factions
came into danger himself, ejus Salutem defendit nemo, no Man took care to
defend him Paterc. L. 2. (...).
that had defended so many; which yet I speak not to impute any thing to Men of
my own Calling, who, I presume, would have lent me their just Defense, to their
Power; had not the same Storm which drove against my Life, driven them into
Corners to preserve themselves.



The First Instance was in Mr. Shervil's Case; in which Mr. John Steevens tells
what I said to the Council Pleading in the Star Chamber, I.
which was, that they should take care, not to cause the Laws of the Church and
the Kingdom to clash one against another. I see, my Lords, nothing that I spoke
was let fall, nor can I remember every Speech that passed from me; he may be
happy that can. But if I did speak these Words, I know no Crime in them: It was
a good Caveat to the Council, for ought I know. For surely the Laws of Church
and State in England would agree well enough together, if some did not set them
at Odds. And if I did farther say, to the then Lord Keeper, (as it is Charged)
that some Clergymen had sat as high as he, and might again; which I do not
believe I said; yet if I did, it is a known Truth: For the Lord Coventry, then
Lord Keeper, did immediately succeed the Lord Bishop of Lincoln in that Office.
But though I dare say, I said not thus to the Lord Keeper, whose Moderation
gave me no Cause to be so round with him, yet to the Council at the Bar, I
remember well, upon just occasion given, that I spoke to this Effect; That they
would forbear too much depressing of the Clergy, either in their Reputation or
Maintenance; in regard it was not impossible that their Profession, now as high
as ours once was, may fall to be as low as ours now is; If the Professors set
themselves against the Church, as some of late are known to have done: And that
the sinking of the Church would be found the ready way to it.



The Second Instance was about calling some Justices of the Peace II.
into the High Commission, about a Sessions kept at (...).

1. The First Witness for this (for Three were produced) was Mr. Jo. Steevens.
He says, That the Isle where the Sessions were kept, was joined to the Church.
If it were not now a part of the Chuch, yet doubtless, being within the
Churchyard, it was Consecrated Ground. He says, That Sessions were kept there
heretofore. And I say the more often the worse. He says, That I procured the
calling of them into the High Commission. But he proves no one of these Things,
but by the Report of Sir Rob: Cook of Gloucestershire, a Party in this Cause.
He says again, that They had the Bishop's License to keep Sessions there. But
the Proof of this also is no more than that Sir Rob. Cook told him so: So all
this hitherto is Hearsay. Then he says the 88. Canon Can. 88. (...). Aug.
of the Church of England ( was urged in the Commission Court) which seems to
give leave in the close of the Canon, that Temporal Courts or Leets may be kept
in Church or Churchyard. First, that Clause in the end of the Canon, is
referred to the Ringing of Bells, not to the Profanations mentioned in the
former part of that Canon. Nor is it probable, the Minister and Churchwardens
should have Power to give such leave, when no Canon gives such Power to the
Bishop himself. And were it so, here is no Proof offered, that the Minister and
Churchwardens did give leave: And suppose some Temporal Courts might upon
urgent Occasion be kept in the Church with leave, yet that is no Warrant for
Sessions, where there may be Trial for Blood. He says farther, That the
Civilians quoted an Old Canon of the Pope's, and that that prevailed against
the Canon of Our Church, 25 Hen. 8. (...) 19.. ult.
and Sentence given against them. All those Canons which the Civilians urged,
are Law in England, where nothing is contrary to the Law of God, or the Law of
the Land, or the King's Prerogative Royal: And to keep off Profanation from
Churches is none of these. Besides, were all this true which is urged, the Act
was the High-Commissions, not mine. Nor is there any thing in it that looks
toward Treason.

2. The Second Witness is Mr. Edward Steevens. He confesses that the Sentence
was given by the High Commission, and that I had but my single Vote in it. And
for the Place it self, he says, The Place where the Sessions were kept, was
separated from the Isle of the Church by a Wall Breast-high; which is an
evident Proof that it was formerly a Part of that Church, and continued yet
under the same Roof.

3. The Third Witness is Mr. Talboyes (who, it seems, will not be out of any
thing which may seem to hurt me.) He says, The Parish held it no part of the
Church. Why are not some of them examined, but this Man's Report from them
admitted? They thought no harm (he says) and got a License. But why did they
get a License, if their own Conscience did not prompt them that something was
Irregular in that Business? He says, he was informed the Sessions had been
twice kept there before. And I say, under your Lordships Favor, the oftener the
worse. But why is not his Informer produced, that there might be Proof, and not
Hearsay? Upon this, I said (so he concludes) That I would make a President
against keeping it any more. If I did say so, the Cause deserved it; Men in
this Age growing so Bold with Churches, as if Profanation of them were no Fault
at all.

The Third Instance concerned Sir Tho. Dacres, a Justice of Peace in III.
Middlesex, and his Warrant for Punishing some disorderly Drinking. The
Witnesses the two Church Wardens, Colliar and Wilson; two plain Men, but of
great Memories: For this Business was when I was Bishop of London; and yet they
agree in every Circumstance, in every Word, though so many Years since. Well,
what say they? It seems Dr. Duck, then my Chancellor, had Cited these
Churchwardens into my Court, Therefore either there was, or at least, to his
Judgment there seemed to be somewhat done in that business against the
Jurisdiction of the Church. They say then, That the Court ended, Dr. Duck
brought them to me. And what then? Here is a Cause, by their own confession,
depending in the Ecclesiastical Court; Dr. Duck in the King's Quarters, where I
cannot fetch him to Testify; no means left me to know what the Proceedings
were; and I have good cause to think, that were all the Merits of the Cause
open before your Lordships, you would say, Sir Tho. Dacres did not all
according to Law. But what is the Heart of this Charge? It is, say they, That I
Commanded Dr. Duck to prosecute them: And what fault was in this? For if it
were Just, why should not Dr. Duck go on with his Prosecution? If Dr. Duck and
I were both mistaken in the Particular, 'twas easy getting a Prohibition: Yea,
but they say I said, If this must be so, Sir Thomas Dacres shall be Bishop of
London, and I Will be Sir Tho. Dacres. For ought I see in the Weight of it, this
whole Charge was but to bring in this Speech. And truly, my Lords, my old
decayed Memory is not such, as that I can recall a Speech, Thirteen or Fourteen
Years since. But if I did say it, I presume it is not High Treason for a Bishop
of London to say so much of Sir Tho. Dacres. Mr. Brown, in the summing up the
Charge against me, laid the weight of the Charge in this, That these
Churchwardens were Prosecuted for Executing the Warrant of a Justice of Peace,
upon an Ale-House-Keeper, for Tippling on the Sabbath Day, contrary to the
Statutes Jacobi 7. and Caro. 3. To which I Answered, That those Statutes did
concern the Ale-House-Keepers only; nor were the Churchwardens called in
question for that; but because being Church Officers, and a Churchman Tippling
there, they did not complain of that to the Chancellor of the Diocese. Mr.
Brown replied, there was no Clergyman there. I am glad I was so mistaken. But
that excuses not the Churchwardens, who being Church Officers, should have
been as ready to inform the Bishop, as to obey the Justice of Peace.



The Fourth Instance was about Marriages in the Tower, which IV.
I opposed against Law. The Witness Sir William Balfore, then Lieutenant of the
Tower. He says, that I did oppose those Marriages. And so say I. But I did it
for the Subject of England's sake. For many of their Sons and Daughters were
there undone. Nor Banes, nor License, nor any means of foreknowledge to
prevent it. Was this ill? He says, that when he spoke with me about it, I
desired him to speak with his Majesty about it, because it was the King's
House. What could I do with more moderation? He confesses he did so, and that
he moved the King that the Cause might be heard at the Council Table, not at
the High Commission: To this his Majesty inclined, and I opposed nothing; so
the general Abuse might be rectified. Then he says, Mr. Attorney Noye said at
the Council Table, it was the King's Free-Chappel, and that no Pope in those
times offered to inhibit there. First, if Mr. Attorney did so say, he must have
leave to speak freely in the King's Cause. Secondly, (as I humbly conceive) the
Chapel for ordinary use of Prisoners and Inhabitants of the Tower, where these
disorderly Marriages are made, is not that which is called the King's
Free-Chappel: But another in the side of the white Tower by the King's
Lodgings. Thirdly, if it be, yet I have herein not offended, for I did all that
was done by the King's leave, not by any assumption of Papal Power. Then he
tells the Lords, that in a Discourse of mine with him at Greenwich, about this
business, I let fall an Oath. I am sorry for it, if I did. But that is no
Treason. And I know whom the Deponent thinks to please by this Interposition.

For to the matter it belongs not. In conclusion, he says truly, that the King
committed the business to some Lords and Judges, that so an end might be put to
it: And in the mean time Ordered, that, till it were ended, there should be no
more Marriages in the Tower. How this business ended, I know not. It began I am
sure by Authority of his Majesty's Grant of the High Commission, to question
and punish all such Abuses, Tam in loois Exemptis, quam non Exemptis. And his
Majesty having Graciously taken this Care for the Indemnity of the Subject, I
troubled my self no more with it: My aim being not to cut off any Privileges
of that Place, but only to prevent the Abuses of that Lawless Custom. And if
cui bono be a considerable Circumstance, as it uses to be in all such
Businesses, then it may be thought on too, that this Gentleman the Lieutenant
had a considerable share for his part out of the Fee for every Marriage. Which
I believe was as dear to him as the Privilege.



The next Instance is broke out of the Tower, and got as far as Oxford. V.
The Witness Alderman Nixon. He says, the Mayor and the Watch set by him were
disturbed by the Proctors of the University, and a Constable Imprisoned. The
Night-Walk, and the keeping of the Watch, is the ancient, known, and constant
Privilege of the University, for some Hundred of Years; and so the Watch set
by the Town (purposely to pick a quarrel) was not according to Law. He adds,
That when the Right Honorable the Earl of Barkshire would have referred the
business to the King's Council Learned, I refused, and said I would maintain it
by my own Power, as Chancellor. If I did say this (which I neither remember nor
believe) I might better refuse Lawyers, (not the Law, but Lawyers) than they a
Sworn Judge of their own Nomination, which they did.

The Case was briefly this. There were some five or six Particulars which had,
for diverse Years, bred much trouble and disagreement between the University and
the City; of which (to my best remembrance) this about the Night-Watch, and
another about Felons Goods, were two of the chief. The University complained to
me. I was so far from going any by-way, that I was resolved upon a Trial at
Westminster Hall, thinking (as I after found) that nothing but a Legal Trial
would set those two Bodies at quiet. The Townsmen liked not this. Came some of
the Chief of them to London: Prevailed with their Honorable Steward my Lord
the Earl of Barkshire, to come to me to Lambeth, and by his Lordship offered to
have all ended without so great Charge at Law, by Reference to any of the
Judges. I said I had no mind to wrong the Town, or put them to Charge, but
thought they would fly off from all Awards, and therefore stuck to have a Legal
Trial. After this, some of the chief Aldermen came to me with my Lord, and
offered me, that if the University would do the like, they would go down and
bring it up under the Mayor and Aldermens Hands, that they would stand to such
end as Judge Jones, who rode that Circuit, should upon Hearing make. They did
so: And brought the Paper so Subscribed (and therefore I think Alderman Nixon's
Hand is to it as well as the rest) upon this I gave way; the University
accepted; the Judge heard and settled. And now when they saw my Troubles
threatening me, they brake all, whistled up their Recorder to come and complain
at the Council Table, his Majesty present. And I remember well, I told his
Lordship (then making the aforesaid Motion to refer to the King's Learned
Council) that his Lordship well knew what had passed, and that being so used as
I had been by the Townsmen, I would trouble my self with no more References to
Lawyers, or to that effect. And I appeal to the Honor of my Lord, whether this
be not a true Relation.

The Sixth Instance concerns the putting of one Mr. Grant out of VI.
his Right. He says, (but he is single and in his own Cause) That Mr. Bridges
was presented to an Impropriation, and that suing for Tithe, He (the said
Grant) got a Prohibition, and Mr. Bridges a Reference to the then Lord Keeper
Coventry, and my self; that we referred them to the Law, and that there Grant
was Nonsuited, and so outed of his Right. First, in all this there is nothing
said to be done by me alone. Secondly, the Lord Keeper, who well understood the
Law, thought it fittest to refer them to the Law; and so we did. If he were
there Nonsuited first, and outed after, it was the Law that put him out, not
we. Yet your Lordships see here was a Prohibition granted in a Case which the
Law it self after rejected.



Then follows the Instance, that I had a purpose to Abolish all Impropriations.
VII.
The first Proof alleged, was a passage out of Bishop 1.
Mountague's Book, p. 210. That Tithes were due by Divine Right, and then no
Impropriations might stand. And Mr. Pryn witnessed very carefully: That this
Book was found in my own Study, and given me by Bishop Mountague. And what of
this? Does any Bishop Print a Book, and not give the Archbishop one of them?
Or must I answer for every Proposition that is in every Book that is in my
Study? Or that any Author gives me? And if Bishop Mountague be of Opinion that
Tithes are due by Divine Right, what is that to me? Your Lordships know, many
Men are of different Opinions in that difficulty, and I am confident you will
not determine the Controversy by an Act of Parliament. They were nibling at my
Diary in this, to Diary, in fine. (...). 21.
show that it was one of my Projects to fetch in Impropriations; but it was not
fit for their purpose: For it is expressed, That if I Lived to see the Repair of
St. Paul's near an end, I would move his Majesty for the like Grant for the
buying in of Impropriations. And to buy them from the Owners, is neither
against Law, nor against any thing else that is good; nor is it any Usurpation
of Papal Power.

2. The Second Proof, was my procuring from the King such Impropriations in
Ireland, as were in the King's Power, to the Church of Ireland. Which Mr.
Nicolas (in his gentle Language) calls Robbing of the Crown.

My Lords, the Case was this. The Lord Primate of Armagh writ unto me, how ill
Conditioned the State of that Church was for want of Means, and besought me
that I would move his Majesty to give the Impropriations there, which yet
remained in the Crown, for the Maintenance and Encouragement of able Ministers
to Live among the People, and Instruct them: Assuring me, they were daily one
by one begged away by Private Men, to the great prejudice both of Crown and
Church. And the Truth of this, the Lord Primate is now in this Kingdom, and
will witness. I acquainted the King's great Officers, the Lord Treasurer and
the Chancellor of the Exchequer with it. And after long deliberation, the King
was pleased, at my humble Suit, to grant them in the way which I proposed.
Which was, that when they came into the Clergies Hands, they should pay all the
Rents respectively to the King; and some consideration for the several
Renewings. And the Truth of this appears in the Deeds. So here was no Robbing
of the Crown. For the King had all his set Rents reserved to a Penny, and
Consideration for his Casualties beside. And, my Lords, the increase of Popery
is complained of in Ireland. Is there a better way to hinder this growth, than
to place an Able Clergy among the Inhabitants? Can an Able Clergy be had
without Means? Is any Means fitter than Impropriations restored? My Lords, I
did this, as holding it the best Means to keep down Popery, and to advance the
Protestant Religion. And I wish with all my Heart, I had been able to do it
sooner, before so many Impropriations were gotten from the Crown into Private
Hands.

Next I was Charged with another Project in my Diary, which VIII.
was to settle some fixed Commendams upon all the smaller Bishoprics. Diary,
fine. (...) 8.
For this, I said their own Means were too small to live and keep any
Hospitality, little exceeding Four or Five Hundred Pound a Year. I considered
that the Commendams taken at large and far distant, caused a great dislike and
murmur among many Men. That they were in some Cases Materia Odiosa, and justly
complained of. And hereupon I thought it a good Church-work, to settle some
Temporal Lease, or some Benefice Sine Cura upon the lesser Bishoprics; but
nothing but such as was in their own Right and Patronage: That so no other
Man's Patronage might receive prejudice by the Bishop's Commendam: Which was
not the least Rock of Offense, against which Commendams endangered themselves.
And that this was my intent and endeavor, is expressed in my Diary: And I
cannot be sorry for it.

Then I was Accused for setting Old Popish Canons above the Laws. IX.
Mr. Burton is the sole Witness. He says, it was in a Case about a Pew, in
which those Canons did weigh down an Act of Parliament. I did never think till
now Mr. Burton would have made any Canons Pew-Fellows with an Act of Parliament.

But seriously, should not Mr. (...) Testimony for this have been produced at
the second Instance of this day? For in the end of that is just such another
Charge; and the Answer there given will satisfy this, and that 25 Hen. 8. cap.
19. (...) ult.
by Act of Parliament too.

After this came a Charge with a great outcry, that since my X.
coming to be Archbishop I had renewed the High Commission, and put in many
Illegal and Exorbitant Clauses, which were not in the former. Both the
Commissions were produced. Upon this I humbly desired, that the Dockett might
be Read; by which their Lordships might see all those Particulars which were
added in the New Commission, and so be able to Judge, how fit or unfit they
were to be added. The Dockett was Read. And there was no Particular found, but
such as highly deserved Punishment, and were of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, as
Blasphemy, Schism, and two or three more of like Nature.

1. In this Charge, the first Exorbitant Clause they insisted on, as added to
the new Commission, was the Power given in locis Exemptis, and non Exemptis, as
if it were thereby intended to destroy all Privileges. No, not to destroy any
Privilege, but not to suffer Enormous Sins to have any Privilege. Besides,
this Clause has ever been in all Commissions that ever were Granted. And I
then showed it to the Lords in the Old Commission there present, p. 28, 32, 35,
42. Nay more, this proceeding tam in locis Exemptis quam non Exemptis, is
allowed to the Governors of the Church, in the Exercise of their
Ecclesiastical 1 Eliz. c. 2.
Jurisdiction, by Act of Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's Time; which would
never have been allowed, had it then been thought such a dangerous Business, as
it is now made against me.



2. The Second Clause was Power to Censure, by Fine and Imprisonment. This also
I showed in the old Commission, Fol. 37. and is (as I conceive) in plain
pursuance of the Act of Parliament 1 Eliz. c. 1:. 8.
upon which the High Commission is grounded. For the King says there, Fol. 13.
(And so it is in the new) That he grants this Power, by Virtue of his Supreme
Authority, and Prerogative Royal, The Words of the Statute are By Virtue of
this Act.
and of the said Act. Nay farther, it is added in this latter Commission, and by
our Authority Ecclesiastical, which is not expressed in the former. And sure I
would never have caused Authority Ecclesiastical to be added, had I any Plot
(as it is urged) either to exalt the Clergy above the Laity, or to usurp Papal
Power; which all Men know is far enough from ascribing Ecclesiastical Authority
to the King. And as for Fine and Imprisonment; if that Power be not according
to Law, why was it first admitted, and after continued in all former
Commissions?

3. The Third Clause, was the Non Obstante, which he said was against all Law,
and of such a boundless Extent, as was never found in Commission or other Grant
in England. And he here desired the Lords, that he might read it, which he did,
with great Assurance of a Triumph. But after all this Noise, which Mr. Nicolas
had made, I showed the same Non Obstante in the Old Commission, (...). 62. Word
for Word, which I humbly desired might be read and compared: It was so. The
Lords looked strangely upon it: Mr. Nicolas was so startled, that he had not
Patience to stay till his Reply, (which he saw impossible to be made) but
interrupted me, and had the Face to say in that Honorable Assembly, that I
need not stand upon that, for he did but name that, without much regarding it.
And yet at the giving of the Charge, he insisted principally upon that Clause,
and in higher and louder Terms than are before expressed. Had such an Advantage
been found against me, I should have been accounted extremely Negligent if I
compared not the Commissions together; or Extremely Impudent, if I did.

4. The Fourth Exception was, That by this Commission I took greater Power than
ever any Court had, because both Temporal and Ecclesiastical. First, whatsoever
Power the High Commission had, was not taken by them, till given by his
Majesty, and that according to Use and Statue, (for ought has been yet
declared.) Secondly, they have not Power of Life or Limb, therefore not so
great Power as other Courts have. Thirdly, they may have more various Power in
some respects, but that cannot make it greater. As for the Expression in which
it is said, I took this Power; that is put most unworthily and unjustly too, to
derive the Envy as much as he could upon my Person only.

For he could not hold from comparing me to Pope Boniface 8. and saying, that I
took on me the Power of both Swords. But this was only ad Faciendum Populum.
For he knows well enough, that to take both the Swords, as the Pope takes them,
is to challenge them Originally as due to him and his Place: Not to take both,
as under the Prince, and given by his Authority; and so, not I alone, but all
the Commissioners take theirs.

5. Fifthly, To prove that this vast Commission (as it was called) was put in
execution, Mr. Burton is produced. He says, that when he was called into the
High Commission, he appealed to the King, and pleaded his Appeal; and that
thereupon I and the Bishop of London Writ to the King to have him submit to the
Court. He confesses he was dismissed upon his Appeal, till his Majesty's
Pleasure was farther known. And it was our Duty, considering what a Breach this
would make upon the Jurisdiction of the Court, to inform his Majesty of it; and
we did so. The King declared that he should submit to the Court, as is
confessed by himself. Then he says, because he would not submit to the Court,
he was Censured notwithstanding his Appeal. And he well deserved it, that would
not be ruled by his Majesty, to whom he had appealed. And the Commission had
Power to do what they did. Besides, himself confesses, all this was done by the
High Commission, not by me. Nor does he urge any Threat, Promise, or
Solicitation of mine, any way to particularize the Act upon me; and farther, he
is single, and in his own Cause.

Then followed the last Charge of this Day, which was the Patent XI.
granted for the Fines in the High Commission for Finishing the West End of St:
Paul's, cried out upon as Illegal, and Extorted from the King, and such as took
all Power from him for the space of the Ten Years, for which time it was
granted. This is the Fourth time that St: Paul's is struck at. My Lords, let it
come as often as it will, my Project and Endeavor in that Work was Honest and
Honorable, to both Church and Kingdom of England. No Man in all this Search
and Pursuit has been able to charge me with the turning of any one Penny, or
Pennyworth, to other use than was limited to me. I took a great deal of Care
and Pains about the Work, and cannot repent of any thing I did in that Service,
but of Humane Frailty. And whereas it is said, this Patent was extorted from his
Majesty; as there is no Proof offered for it, so is there no truth in it. For
his Majesty's Piety was so forward, that nothing needed to be extorted from
him. Thus went I on, Bona Fide, and took the Prime Direction of the Kingdom for
drawing the Patent: The Lord Keeper Coventry, Mr. Noy, and Sir Henry Martin.
And therefore if any thing be found against Law in it, it cannot be imputed to
me, who took all the care I could to have it beyond exception. And I marvel
what security any Man shall have, that adventures upon any great and public
Work in this Kingdom; if such Council cannot be trusted for drawing up of his
Warrant. And whereas it was said, this Patent for the Ten Years space took away
both Justice and Mercy from the King: That Is nothing so. For whatever the Words
be to enable me the better for that Work, yet these being inseparable from him,
may be used by him, notwithstanding this or any other Patent. And if these be
inseparable (as it is granted they are) no inseparable thing can be taken away;
or if it be taken, it is void in Law, and the King is where he was in the
Exercise of his Right, both for Justice and Mercy. And so I answered Mr.
Brown's summary Charge against me; and as for that which he farther urged
concerning S. Gregory's Church, Mr. Jingo Jones and others were trusted with
that whole Business, and were Censured for it in this present Parliament. In
all which Examination, no part of the Charge fell on me.

And because here are so many things urged about Free-Chappels, Lay-Fees,
Patents, Appeals, and the like, I humbly desire a Salvo may be entered for me,
and that my Council may be heard for matter of Law, if any Doubt stick with
your Lordships.

This Day ended, I did, according to my Resolution formerly taken, move the
Lords for Means, considering my Charge in coming, and how often I had Attended
and was not Heard. Their Lordships considered of my Motion, and sent me out
Word I should Petition them. I did humbly Petition their Lordships May 6. My
Maii 6.
Petition was presently sent down to the House of Commons, that so by both
Houses it might be recommended to the Committee for Sequestrations. But upon a
Speech in the House of Commons, that it was fit to see what would become of me,
before they troubled themselves with thinking of Means for me, my Petition was
cast aside.

CAP. XXXI.
AT my Parting from the House, I was ordered to appear again on Thursday, May
9. But then fairly put off by an Order Maii 9. Maii 13.
(sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower) to Monday, May 13. so the Scorn and
Charge of that Day was escaped. But then I appeared according to this Order, and
had Scorn plenty, for what I escaped the Day before. And, after long
attendance, was dismissed again unheard, and had Thursday, May 16. assigned
unto me. That Day held, and proceeded thus.

The Ninth Day of my Hearing.
The First Charge of this Day was about a Reversion of the Maii 16. 1644.
Town-Clerks Office of Shrewsbury to one Mr. Lee, which he desired Die Nono.
might be inserted into the new Charter. First, Mr. Lee is single here, and in
his own Case. Secondly, it appears by his own confession, I.
out of the Mouth of Mr. Barnard, that there was a Reference of this Business
to those Lords to whom Shrewsbury Charter was Referred. For he says, that Mr.
Barnard told him his Business was stayed, and he thought by me, but did not
know whether the Lord-Keeper's Hand were not in it: So it seems by himself,
this was done by the Lords Referees, and not by me. Thirdly, I did not then
think, nor do now, that the Reversion of a Place to be sold for three Hundred
Pound, (as he confesses that was) was fit to be put into a Town Charter: But
yet neither I, nor the Lord Keeper did any thing in that stop, but what we
acquainted his Majesty with, and had his Approbation of. And, whereas he says,
that he acquainted the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorset with the stay that
was made, and That thereupon his Lordship should say, Have we Two Kings? I
cannot believe that Honorable Lord would so say, unless he were much abused by
Mr. Lee's Information: Both in regard of his Love to me; And in regard it could
not proceed from a Man of so great a Judgment as that Lord is. For, I beseech
your Lordships consider, may not Lords, to whom a business is Referred, give
his Majesty good Reason to alter his Mind in some particulars which they have
Debated, and not he? And may not this be done, without any one of them taking
on him to be a Second King?

The Second Charge was laid on me by Sir Arthur Haselrigg: II.
(which should have come in the Day before (as Mr. Nicolas said) but that Sir
Arthur was absent in the necessary service of the State) Sir Arthur being
single, and in his own Case, says, That Sir John Lamb presented a Blind Parson
to a Living of his. If Sir John did that, or any unworthy thing else, AEtatem
habet, let him answer for himself. He says farther, That this Living is an
Impropriation, and so a Lay-Fee by Law; and that when he told me so much, I
made him this answer, That if I Lived, no Man should Name or stand upon his
Lay-Fee. I conceive, my Lords, here is a great mistake in the main. For I have
been Credibly informed, and do believe, that Benefice is Presentative, and so
no Lay-Fee. And then there is no Fault to present unto it, so the Clerk be fit.
Secondly, there is a main mistake in my Words, which I remember well, and where
it was that I spoke them. My Words, under this Gentleman's Favor, and your
Lordships, were these and no other, That I had good Information, that the
Benefice was Presentative, and that if I lived, I hoped to order it so, that no
Man should make a Presentative Benefice a Lay-Fee; there were too many of them
already. Thirdly, if I did speak the Words as they are Charged, if they come
within that Statute of Six Months, so often mentioned, to that I refer my Self.
Whatsoever the Bird at this time of the Year Sings; as Mr. Nicolas was pleased
to put it upon me. And truly, my Lords, I could easily return all his
Bitterness upon himself, could it befit my Person, my present Condition, or my
Calling.

The Third Charge was about the refusing of a Pardon, which III.
Mrs: Bastwick said she produced in the High Commission Court, some Nine or Ten
Years since: And she adds, that I should then say, it should not serve his
turn. But this was no rejecting of the Pardon; for she confesses I said, I
would move his Majesty about it. So that if it did not serve his turn, it was
from the King himself, upon Motion made and Reason given, not from any Power
assumed by the High Commission, or my self. And the Act, whatever it were, was
the Act of the whole Court, not mine. As for the Words (if mine) I give the
same Answer as before, notwithstanding Mr. Nicolas his Bird.

The Fourth Charge was, That whereas there was a Proclamation IV.
to be Printed about the Pacification with the Scots, it was suddenly stopped,
and an Order after for burning of the Pacification. First, Mr. Hunscot is
single in this Charge. Secondly, whatsoever was done in this, was by Order of
Council: And himself names an Order, which could not come from me. Thirdly, he
Charges me with nothing but that I sent word the Proclamation was to be stayed:
Which if I did, I did it by Command. Howsoever, this concerns the Scottish
business, and therefore to the Act of Oblivion I refer my self.

With this, that I see by this Testimony, Mr. Hunscourt (for I took his Name
uncertainly) has not yet forgotten, Thou shall commit Adultery.

So desirous he is to catch me at the Press.

The Fifth Charge, was about a Benefice in North-Hamptonshire, V.
in the Case of Mr: Fautrye, and Mr: Johnson, and Dr: Beal's succeeding them.
In which broken business (for such it was;) First, that business all along was
acted by the High Commission, not by me. Secondly, that though in the Case of
Simony the Benefice be lost, Ipso Facto; yet that must be proved before the
Incumbent can be thrust out, and another Instituted; else Churchmen were in a
miserable Condition for their Livelihood. Excommunication is in many Cases void
in Law, Ipso Facto, and yet, ante latam Sententiam, till Sentence be orderly
pronounced against it, no Man shall be subjected to those fearful Consequences
which follow upon it. And upon this ground of Natural Equity, that in the
Statute concerning the Uniformity of Common Prayer proceeds,

where it is said, that a party once Convicted for depraving the Common Prayer 1
Eliz, c. (...)
Book, and relapsing into the same Crime, shall be deprived of all his
Spiritual Promotions, Ipso Facto: But how? without any Legal Proceedings? No:
God forbid. For the Words preceding immediately in the Statute, are, that he
must be first Legally Convicted of that Criminal Relapse; and then follows Ipso
Facto, and not before: And therefore the superinstitution, before the Simony
tried and judged, was Illegal; beside the great danger to the Parishioners,
while two Parsons, and their several Friends are scambling for the Tithes.
Secondly, Fautrye was not Censured for the Original cause of Simony, but for an
Intruder, and Colluder too, with Jeames to Abuse the Kings grant of the
Benefice. Thirdly, it seems Fautrye had no better Opinion of his own Cause: for
he went to his Benefice in Jarsey, and set not his Title on Foot again till
after Seven Years, and that I think was when he heard that Mr. Johnson was a
Pretender to it. And his Bond upon the Sentence, was to make a final Peace. For
the Prohibition, which he says was refused, I have answered that before in the
Charge about Prohibitions. Besides, it appears by Law, that as Prohibitions may
be granted in some Cases, so in some 13 Ed. 1.
Cases they may be refused. For Dr. Beal, there is not the least show of Proof
offered, that I brought him in; if to do so be a Crime.

Thus far Mr. Fautrye went. As for Mr. Johnson's Title, He says, That the Lords
ordered it for him, and declared that we in the High Commission could put no
Man out of his Freehold. Where first, if your Lordships have Ordered this
Business, I must crave to know how far I shall have leave to speak to it! For
if there be any Errors Charged upon the Sentence given in the High Commission,
if they may not be spoken to, they cannot be satisfied. This I am sure of, the
Commission has Power to deprive. For the Statute gives it Power to use all
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Censures, of which 1 Eliz. c. 1. (...). 8.
Deprivation is known to be one. And that Power is expressly given, to deprive
some Offenders of all their Spiritual Promotions, by the Statute following.
Therefore I think it follows necessarily, either 1 Eliz. c. 2.
that we have Power over Freehold in that Case; or else that a Benefice is not
a Freehold. But I have no reason howsoever, to speak any thing (were I left
never so free) against your Lordships Order, which very honorably left Dr.
Beal to the Law; as it is confessed by Johnson.

Besides these two in their own Cause, one Mr. Jenkins is produced, but to what
end I know not, unless it be to bespatter Dr. Beal. He says, That Seven Years
since Dr. Beal was Vice Chancellor of Cambridge; that in his Sermon then he
inveighed bitterly against the Power of Parliaments, and named some unsavory
Speeches of his, both concerning their Persons and Proceedings. Surely, if Dr.
Beal did as is Testified, he was much to blame. But what is this to me? If it
be said, I did not punish him: How could I punish that I knew not? And I
profess I heard not of it till now at Bar. If it be said, I did Prefer him:
That I do absolutely deny; and neither Mr. Jenkins, nor any other, offers the
least Proof, that I knew the one, or did the other.

The Sixth Charge was concerning the Statutes of the University VI.
of Oxford, in which, and the Cathedrals of the New Erection, Mr. Nicolas says,
I took on me to be an Universal Lawgiver. Many such Offices he bestows upon
me, which God knows, and I believe he too, that I never affected: No, my Lords,
the great Necessities of that University called upon me for it: Their Statutes
lay in a miserable confused Heap: When any Difficulty arose, they knew not
where to look for Remedy, or Direction. Then into the Convocation-House, and
make a new Statute; and that many times proved contrary to an Old one
concerning the same business. Men in the mean time sworn to both, which could
not possibly be kept together. By this means Perjury was in a manner
unavoidable: And themselves confess in their Register (which is now in Court)
that till this was (...) Perjuri (...). (...). 69.
done, they did in a sort Swear, that they might be Forsworn.

Besides, my Lords, I did not abolish any the Old Books, in which the Statutes
lay so confused, some in one Book, and some in another; but left them all
entire in the University, in Case in any aftertimes any use might be made of
them. Nor did I with them, as some Ancient Philosophers are said to have done
with the Works of some that went before them: That is, make them away, to
advance their own Honor the more, as if without any help of former Pains, they
had done all themselves. Holding it Honor more than enough for me, that God
had so highly Blessed me in this Work, as to finish and settle those Statutes;
which the greatest Men in their times, Cardinal Wolsey first, and after him
Cardinal Pool assayed, but left as imperfect as they found them. Neither did I
any thing in this Work, but by the consent of the University, and according to
an Act, (and a Delegacy thereby appointed) of their own Convocation.

Mr. Nicolas says, There is a Rasure in one of the Acts, and supplied in other
Ink. I told your Lordships then presently, (being loath to lie never so little
under such an Imputation) that if there be any such, it must be Charged upon
the University, not upon me; for those Records were never in my Hands, nor is
it so much as said they were. And since I withdrew to make my Answer, I have
viewed the Record, and an Alteration or Addition there is; and it is a known
Hand. It Is Dr. Duppa's Hand, now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and then
Vice Chancellor, who, I doubt not but is able to give a good account of what he
did therein, and why. And for ought appears, it is nothing but the amendment of
some slip, which their Ignorant Register French had failed in, and the
Vice Chancellor thought it safest to mend with his own Hand. And for my own
part, if ever I did any thing worth Thanks from the Public in all my Life, I
did it in this Work for that University. And I wish with all my Heart, the
times were so open, as that I might have the Vniversity's Testimony, both of me
and it. Since I cannot, a great Lord present in the House, when this Charge was
laid against me, supplied in part their Absence. For he was overheard say to
another Lord, I think my Lord Archbishop has done no Good Work in all his
Life, but these Men will object it as a Crime against him before they have done.



With this Charge about the Statutes, it was let fall (and I well know why; It
was to heat a Noble Person then present) That I procured my self to be chosen
Chancellor of that University.

If I had so done, it might have been a great Ambition in me, but surely no
Treason. But, my Lords, I have Proof great store, might I be enabled to fetch
it from Oxford, that I was so far from endeavoring to procure this Honor to
my self, as that I labored by my Letters for another. And it is well known,
that when they had chosen me, I went instantly to his Majesty, so soon as ever
I heard it, and humbly besought him, that I might refuse it, as well foreseeing
the Envy that would follow me for it; and it did plentifully every way. But
this for some Reasons his Majesty would not suffer me to do.

Then were objected against me diverse Particulars contained in those Statutes.
As First, the making of new Oaths. The Charters of 1.
the University are not new, and they gave Power to make Statutes for
themselves, and they have ever been upon Oath. The next Illegality (...)
is, That Men are tied to obey the Proctors in Singing the Litany. This is
Ancient, and in use long before ever I came to the University, and it is
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England established by Law. Thirdly,
The Statute of Bannition from the University. 3.
But there is nothing more ancient in the University Statutes than this.
Fourthly, That nothing should be propased in Convocation, but 4.
what was consented unto among the Heads of Colleges first, which was said to
be against the Liberty of the Students. The young Masters of Arts, void of
Experience, were grown so tumultuous, that no Peace could be kept in the
University, till my worthy Predecessor, the Right Honorable William Earl of
Pembroke settled this Order among them. As he did also upon the same Grounds
settle the present way of the choice of their Proctors: In both which, I did
but follow, and confirm (for so much as lay in me) the Good and Peaceable
Grounds, which he had laid in those two Businesses. And Mr. Brown, who in the
summing up of my Charge, urged this against me, mainly mistook in two things.
The one was, that he said, this Inhibition of Proposals was in Congregations:
Whereas it was only in Convocations, where more weighty Businesses are handled.
The other was, that this stay of Proposals was made till I might be first
acquainted with them. No; it was but till the Heads of Colleges had met, and
considered of them, for avoiding of tumultuary Proceedings. And when my
Honorable Predecessor made that Order, it was highly commended every where;
and is it now degenerated into a Crime, because it is made up into a Statute?

Fifthly, 5.
That some things are referred to Arbitrary Penalties. And that some things are
so referred is usual in that University, and many Colleges have a particular
Statute for it. Nor is this any more Power, than Ordinary Schoolmasters have,
which have not a Statute Law for every Punishment they use in Schools. And in
diverse things, the old known Statute is, that the Vice Chancellor shall
proceed Grosso Modo, that is, without the regular Forms of Law, for the more
speedy ending of Differences among the Scholars. Sixthly, That the 6.
Statute made by me against Conventicles, is very strict. But for these (...).
15.. 12.
that Statute is express, De Illicitis Conventiculis, and I hope such as are
unlawful may be both forbid, and punished. Besides, it is according to the
Charter of Richard the Second to that University. The Seventh was the Power of
Discommoning. But this also has ever been 7.
in Power and in Usage in that University; as is commonly known to all
Oxford-Men. And no longer since than King James his time, Bishop King, then
Vice Chancellor, Discommuned Three or Four Townsmen together. Next, That
Students were bound to go to Prison 8.
upon the Vice-Chancellors or Proctors Command. This also was Ancient, and long
before my coming to the University. And your Lordships may be sure the
Delegacy, appointed by themselves, would not have admitted it, had it not been
Ancient and Usual. Lastly, about the stay 9.
of granting Graces, unless there were Testimony from the Bishop of the
Diocese. (...). 9.. 2.
This was for no Graces, but of such as Live not Resident in the University,
and so they could not judge of their Manners and Conversation. And for their
Conformity to the Church of England, none (as I conceive) can be a fitter
Witness than the Bishop of the Diocese in which they resided. And, my Lords,
for all these thus drawn up by some of their own Body, I obtained of his
Majesty his Broad Seal for Confirmation: And therefore no one thing in them is
by any Assumption of Papal Power, as it is urged, but by the King's Power only.

Then followed the Seventh Charge, about the Statutes of some VII.
Cathedral Churches. First, my Lords, for this I did it by Letters Patent from
the King, bearing Date Mar. 31. Decimo Caroli, and is extant upon Record. And
all that was done, was Per Juris Remedia, and so nothing intended against Law,
nor done, that I know. They had extreme need of Statutes, for all lay loose for
want of confirmation, and Men did what they listed: And I could not but observe
it, for I was Dean of Gloucester, where I found it so. In seeking to remedy
this, I had nothing but my Labor for my Pains, and now this Accusation to
Boot. The Particulars urged are, That I had Ordered that nothing should be done
in these Statutes, Me inconsulto. 1.
And I had great Reason for it. For since I was principally trusted in that
work by his Majesty, the King, if any Complaint were made, would expect the
account from me. And how could I give it, if other Men might do all, and I not
be so much as consulted before they passed?

2. That I made a Statute against letting Leases into three Lives. But first,
my Lords, the Statute which makes it lawful to let Leases for 13 Eliz. c. 10..
Penult.
One and Twenty Years, or three Lives, has this limitation in it, that they
shall not let for any more Years than are limited by the said Colleges or
Churches. Now in Winchester Church, and some other, the old local Statute is
most plain, that they shall let no Lease into Lives. Let the Dean and
Prebendaries Answer their own Acts and their Consciences as they can. And in
those Statutes which I did not find pregnant to that purpose, I did not make
the Statute absolute, but left them free to renew all such Leases as were
Anciently in Lives before. And this give me leave to say to your Lordships,
without offense; If but a few more Leases be granted into Lives, no Bishop nor
Cathedral Church shall be able to subsist. And this is considerable also, that,
as the state of the Church yet stands, the Laity have the benefit, by the
Leases which they hold, of more than five parts of all the Bishops, Deans and
Chapters, and College Revenues in England. And shall it be yet an Eyesore to
serve themselves with the rest of their own? This Evidence Mr. Brown, whose
part it was to sum up the Evidence against me at the end of the Charge, wholly
omitted: For what Cause he best knows.



The next Charge was about my Injunctions in my Visitation of Winton VIII.
and Sarum, for the taking down of some Houses. But they were such as were upon
Consecrated Ground, and ought not to have been built there; and yet with
caution sufficient to preserve the Lessees from overmuch damage. For it
appears apud Acta, that they were not to be pulled down till their several
Leases were expired. And that they were Houses not built long since, but by
them; and that all this was to be done, to the end that the Church might suffer
no damage by them: And that this demolition was to be made Juxta Decreta
Regni, according to the Statutes of the Kingdom. Therefore nothing enjoined
contrary to Law: Or if any thing were, the Injunction took not place, by the
very Tenor of that which was charged. Mr. Brown omitted this Charge also,
though he hung heavily upon the like at St. Paul's, though there was
satisfaction given, and not here.



The Ninth Charge was my intended Visitation of both the Universities, IX.
Oxford and Cambridge. For my Troubles began then to be foreseen by me, and I
Visited them not. This was urged as a thing 1.
directly against Law. But this I conceive cannot be, so long as it was with
the King's Knowledge, and by his Warrant. Secondly, 2.
because all Power of the King's Visitations was saved in the Warrant, and that
with consent of all parts. Thirdly, because nothing in this 3.
was surreptitiously gotten from the King, all being done at a most full
Council Table, and great Council at Law heard on both sides. Fourthly, because
it did there appear, that three of my Predecessors did actually Visit the
Universities, and that Jure Ecclesiae suae Metropoliticae. 4.
Fifthly, no Immunity pleaded, why the Archbishop 5.
should not Visit; for the instance against Cardinal Poole is nothing. For he
attempted to Visit, not only by the Right of his See, but by his power Legatin
The Archbishop had collected many Papers, Decrees, and Precedents, to assert
his Privilege of Visiting the Universities, in Right of (...) See, about the
Year 1635. Which being (...) on by Pryn, among his other Papers at Lambeth,
were by him, after the Archbishop's Death, published in his own Name, with
this title, The Plea of the University of Oxford (...), etc. London 1647. eight
sheets in 410. (...). W.
from the Pope; whereas the University Charters are Express, that such power of
Visitation cannot be granted per Bullas Papales. And yet now it is charged
against me, that I challenged this by Papal Power. Mr. Brown wholly neglected
this Charge also, which, making such a show, I think he would not have done,
had he found it well grounded.



The Tenth Charge was my Visitation of Merton College in Oxford. X.
The Witness Sir Nathaniel Brent, the Warden of the College, and principally
concerned in that business. He said, First, that no 1.
Visitation held so long. But if he consult his own Office, he may find one
much longer, held and continued at All Souls College by my worthy Predecessor
Archbishop Whitgift. Secondly, he urged that 2.
I should say I would be Warden for Seven Years: If I did so say, there was
much need I should make it good. Thirdly, That one Mr. Rich. 3.
Nevil, Fellow of that College, lay abroad in an Alehouse, that a Wench was
got with Child in that House, and he accused of it; and that this was
complained of to me, and Sir Nath. Brent accused for Conspiring with the
Ale-Wife against Nevil. I am not here to accuse the one or defend the other.
But the Case is this. This Cause between them was public, and came to Hearing
in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, Witnesses Examined, Mr. Nevil acquitted, and
the Ale-Wife punished. In all this I had no Hand. Then in my Visitation it was
again complained of to me. I liked not the business; but forbear to do any
thing in it, because it had been Legally Censured upon the place. This part of
the Charge Mr. Brown urged against me in the House of Commons, and I gave it
the same Answer.

Lastly, when I sat to hear the 4.
main Business of that College, Sir Nathaniel Brent was beholding to me that he
continued Warden. For in Archbishop Warham's time, a Predecessor of his was
expelled for less than was proved against him. And I found that true which one
of my Visitors had formerly told me, namely, That Sir Nathaniel Brent had so
carried himself in that College, as that if he were guilty of the like, he
would lay his Key under the Door, and be gone, rather than come to Answer it.
Yet I did not think it fit to proceed so rigidly. But while I was going to open
some of the Particulars against him, Mr. Nicolas cut me off, and told the
Lords, this was to scandalize their Witnesses. So I forbear.

Then followed the last Charge of this day, concerning a Book of XI.
Dr: Bastwick's, for which he was Censured in the High Commission. The
Witnesses in this Charge were three. Mr. Burton, a Mortal Enemy of mine, and so
he has showed himself. Mrs. Bastwick, a Woman and a Wife, and well Tutoured:
For she had a Paper, and all written which she had to say; though I saw it not
till 'twas too late. And Mr. Hunscot, a Man that comes in to serve all turns
against me, since the Sentence passed against the Printers, for, Thou shall
commit Adultery.

In the Particulars of this Charge, it is first said, That this Book was 1.
written Contra Episcopos Latiales. But how cunningly so-ever this was
pretended, it is more than manifest, it was purposely written and divulged
against the Bishops and Church of England. Secondly, that I 2.
said that Christian Bishops were before Christian Kings: So Burton and Mrs.
Bastwick. And with due Reverence to all Kingly Authority be it spoken, who can
doubt but that there were many Christian Bishops, before any King was
Christian? Thirdly, Mr. Burton says, 3.
that I applied those words in the Psalm, whom thou may make Princes Psalm.
45. 17.
in all Lands, to the Bishops. For this if I did err in it, many of the Fathers
of the Church misled me, who Interpret that place so. And if I be mistaken,
it is no Treason. But I shall ever follow their Comments 4.
before Mr. Burton's. Fourthly, Mrs. Bastwick says that I then said, no Bishop
and no King: If I did say so, I Learned it of a Wise and Experienced Author,
King James, who spoke it out and plainly Conf. at Hamps. Court. p. 84.
in the Conference at Hampton Court. And I hope it cannot be Treason in me to
repeat it. Fifthly, Mrs. Bastwick complained, that I 5.
committed her Husband close Prisoner. Not I, but the High Commission; not
close Prisoner to his Chamber, but to the Prison, not to go abroad with his
Keeper. Which is all the close Imprisonment which I ever knew that Court use.
Lastly, the pinch of this Charge is, that I said, 6.
I received my Jurisdiction from God, and from Christ, contrary to an Act 37 H.
8. c. 17.
of Parliament, which says Bishops, derive their Jurisdiction from the King:
This is Witnessed by all three, and that Dr. Bastwick read the Statute. That
Statute speaks plainly of Jurisdiction in foro Contentioso, and places of
Judicature, and no other. And all this forinsecal Jurisdiction, I and all
Bishops in England derive from the Crown. But my Order, my Calling, my
Jurisdiction in foro Conscientiae, that is from God, and from Christ, and by
Divine and Apostolical Right. And of this Jurisdiction it was that I then spoke
(if I named Jurisdiction at all, and not my Calling in general.) For I then
sat in the High Commission, and did Exercise the former Jurisdiction under the
Broad Seal, and could not be so simple to deny the Power by which I then sat.
Beside, the Canons of the Church of England, to which Can. 1.
I have Subscribed, are plain for it. Nay farther: The Use and Exercise of my
Jurisdiction in foro Conscientiae, may not be but by the Leave and Power of the
King within his Dominions. And if Bishops and Presbyters be all one Order (as
these Men contend for) then Bishops must be Jure Divino, for so they maintain
that Presbyters are. This part of the Charge Mr. Brown pressed in his Report
to the House of Commons: And when I gave this same Answer, he in his Reply said
nothing but the same over and over again, save that he said, I fled to he knew
not what inward Calling and Jurisdiction; which point as I expressed it, if he
understood not, he should not have undertaken to Judge me.



CAP. XXXII.
THE 16th of May, I had an Order from the Lords, for free access Maij 16.
of four of my Servants to me.

On Friday May 17. I received a Note from the Committee, that Maij 17.
they intended to proceed upon part of the Sixth Original Article remaining,
and upon the Seventh; which Seventh Article follows in haec Verba.

That he has Traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert God's True Religion
by Law Established in this Realm, and instead thereof to set up Popish
Superstition and Idolatry. And to that end has Declared and Maintained in
Speeches and Printed Books, diverse Popish Doctrins and Opinions, contrary to
the Articles of Religion Established. He has urged and enjoined diverse Popish
and Superstitious Ceremonies, without any Warrant of Law; and has cruelly
persecuted those who have opposed the same, by Corporal Punishment and
Imprisonment; and most unjustly vexed others who refused to Conform thereunto,
by Ecclesiastical Censures of Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, and
Degradation, contrary to the Law of this Kingdom.

The Tenth Day of my Hearing.
This day, May 20. Mr. Sergeant Wild undertook the Business against Maij 20.
1644. Monday.
me. And at his Entrance he made a Speech, being now to charge me with Matter
of Religion. In this Speech he spoke of a Tide Die Decimo.
which came not in all at once. And so he said it was in the intended
alteration of Religion. First a Connivence, then a Toleration, then a
Subversion. Nor this, nor that. But a Tide it seems he will have of Religion.
And I pray God his Truth, (the True Protestant Religion here Established) sink
not to so low an Ebb, that Men may with ease wade over to that side, which this
Gentleman seems most to hate. He fears both Ceremonies and Doctrine. But in
both he fears where no fear is; which I hope shall appear. He was pleased to
begin with Ceremonies.

In this he Charged first my Chapel at Lambeth, and Innovation in I.
Ceremonies there.

1. The First Witness for this was Dr. Featly; he says there were Alterations
since my Predecessor's time. And I say so too, or else my Chapel must lie more
undecently than is fit to express. He says, I turned the Table North and South.
The Injunction says it shall be so. Injunct. of Q. Eliz. fine.
And then the Innovation was theirs in going from, not mine in returning to
that way of placing it. Here Mr. Brown, in his last Reply in the House of
Commons, said, that I cut the Injunction short, because in the Words
immediately following, it is Ordered, That this Place of standing shall be
altered when the Communion is Administered. But first, the Charge against me is
only about the Place of it: Of which that Injunction is so careful, that it
Commands, That when the Communion is done, it be placed where it stood before.
Secondly, it was never Charged against me, that I did not remove it at the Time
of Communion; nor does the Reason expressed in the Injunction require it; which
is when the Number of Communicants is great, and that the Minister may be the
better heard of them. Neither of which was necessary in my Chapel, where my
Number was not great, and all might easily Hear.



(2) The second thing which Dr. Featly said, was in downright Terms, That the
Chapel lay nastily, all the time he served in that House. Was it one of my
Faults too to cleanse it?

(3) Thirdly, he says, The Windows were not made up with Colored Glass, till
my time. The Truth is, they were all shameful to look on, all diversely patched,
like a Poor Beggars Coat. Had they had all white Glass, I had not stirred them.
And for the Crucifix, he confesses it was standing in my Predecessors time,
though a little broken: So I did but mend it, I did not set it up (as was urged
against me.) And it was utterly mistaken by Mr. Brown, that I In his reply.
did repair the Story of those Windows, by their like in the Mass Book. No, but
I, and my Secretary made out the Story, as well as we could, by the Remains
that were unbroken. Nor was any Proof at all offered, that I did it by the
Pictures in the Mass Book; but only Mr. Pryn Testified, that such Pictures were
there; whereas this Argument is of no consequence: There are such Pictures in
the Missal, therefore I repaired my Windows by them. The Windows contain the
whole Story from the Creation to the Day of Judgment: Three Lights in a Window:
The two Side-Lights contain the Types in the Old Testament, and the middle
Light the Antitype and Verity of Christ in the New: And I believe the Types are
not in the Pictures in the Missal. In the mean time, I know no Crime, or
Superstition in this History: And though Calvin Calv. 1. Inflit. c. 11.. 12.
do not approve Images in Churches, yet he does approve very well of them which
contain a History; and says plainly, that these have their use, in Docendo and
Admonendo, in Teaching and Admonishing the People: And if they have that use,
why they may not instruct in the Church, as well as out, I know not. Nor do
Hom. of Idol. par. 2. To. 2. p. 27. Fine.
the Homilies in this particular differ much from Calvin.



But here the 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 10.
Statute of Ed. 6. was charged against me, which requires the Destruction of
all Images, as well in Glass-Windows, as elsewhere. And this was also earnestly
pressed by Mr. Brown, when he repeated the Sum of the Charge against me in the
House of Commons.

To which I answered at both times: First, that the Statute of Ed. 6. spoke of
other Images; and that Images in Glass-Windows, were neither mentioned, nor
meant in that Law: The Words of the Statute are, Any Images of Stone, Timber,
Alabaster or Earth; Graven, Carved or Painted, taken out of any Church, etc.
shall be Destroyed, etc. and not reserved to any Superstitious Use. So here is
not a Word of Glass-Windows, nor the Images that are in them. Secondly, that
the Contemporary Practice, (which is one of the best Expounders of the meaning
of any Law) did neither destroy all colored Windows, though Images were in
them, in the Queens time, nor abstain from setting up of new, both in her, and
King James his Time. And as the Body of this Statute is utterly mistaken, so is
the Penalty too; which for the First and Second Offense is but a small Fine;
and but Imprisonment at the King's Will for the Third. A great way short of
Punishment for Treason. And I could not but wonder that Mr. Brown should be so
earnest in this Point, considering he is of Lincoln's Inn, where Mr. Pryn's Zeal
has not yet beaten down the Images of the Apostles in the fair Windows of that
Chapel; which Windows also were set up new long since that Statute of Edward
6. And it is well known, that I was once resolved to have returned this upon Mr.
Brown in the House of Commons, but changed my Mind, lest thereby I might have
set some furious Spirit on Work to destroy those harmless, goodly Windows; to
the just dislike of that Worthy Society.



But to the Statute Mr. Brown added, That the Destruction of all Images, as
well in Windows, as elsewhere, were l. was Commended, or Commanded.
Condemned by the Homilies of the Church of England, and those Homilies
confirmed in the Articles of Religion, and the Articles by Act of Parliament.
This was also urged before; Art. 35.
and my Answer was, First, that though we Subscribed generally to the Doctrine
of the Homilies, as good: Yet we did not express, or mean thereby to justify
and maintain every particular Phrase or Sentence contained in them. And
Secondly, that the very Words of the Article to which we subscribe, are, That
the Homilies do contain a Godly and a wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for
those Times. Godly, and wholesome for all Times; but necessary for those, when
People were newly Weaned from the Worship of Images: Afterward, neither the
Danger, nor the Scandal alike. Mr. Brown in his Reply said, That since the
Doctrine contained in the Homilies was wholesome and good, it must needs be
necessary also for all Times. But this worthy Gentleman is herein much
mistaken. Strong Meat, as well Spiritual as Bodily, is good and wholesome; but
though it be so, yet if it had been Necessary at all Times, and for all Men,
the Apostle would never 1 (...) 3. 1, 2.
have fed the Corinthians with Milk, and not with Meat: The Meat always good in
it self, but not necessary for them which were not able to bear it.



(4) The Fourth thing which Dr. Featly Testifies, is, That there were Bowings
at the coming into the Chapel, and going up to the Commanion-Table. This was
usual in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and of Old, both among Jews, as appears in the
Story of Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 29. 2 Chronicles. 29. 28
28. and among Christians; as is evident in Rhenanus his Notes upon B. Rhenani
(...). in (...). de Coron. Mil. p. 40. Bp. (...) de Missa. L. 6. c. 5.
Tertullian:

And one of them, which have written against the late Canons, confesses it was
usual in the Queens Time; but then adds, That that was a Time of Ignorance.
What, a Time of such a Reformation, and yet still a Time of Ignorance? I pray
God the Opposite be not a Time of Profaneness, and all is well. Mr. Brown in
the Sum of his Charge given me in the House of Commons, instanced in this
also. I answered as before, with this Addition, Shall I Bow to Men in each
House of Parliament, and shall I not bow to God in his House, whither I do, or
ought to come to Worship him? Surely I must Worship God, and Bow to him, though
neither Altar, nor Communion Table be in the Church.



(5) For Organs, Candlesticks, a Picture of a History at the back of the Altar,
and Copes at Communions, and Consecrations, All which Dr. Featly named. First,
these things have been in use ever since the Reformation. And Secondly, Dr.
Featly himself did twice acknowledge that it was in my Chapel, as it was at
White Hall; no difference. And it is not to be thought, that Queen Elizabeth
and King James would have endured them all their Time in their own Chapel, had
they been introductions for Popery. And for Copes, they are allowed at Times of
Communion, by the Canons of the Church. So Can. Eccles. Aug. 24.
that these, all or any, are very poor Motives, from whence to argue an
Alteration of Religion.

2. The second Witness against my Chapel was Sir Nathaniel Brent: But he says
not so much as Dr. Featly: And in what he does say, he agrees with him, saving
that he cannot say whether the Picture at the Back of the Communion Table, were
not there before my time.

3. The third Witness for this Charge, was one Mr. Boreman, who came into my
Chapel at Prayers time, when I had some new Plate to Consecrate for use at the
Communion: And I think it was brought to me for that end by Dr. Featly. This
Man says first, he then saw me Bow, and wear a Cope. That Is answered. Secondly,
That he saw me Consecrate some Plate: That in that Consecration, I used some
part of Solomon's Prayer, at the Dedication of the Temple: And that in my
Prayer I did desire God to accept those Vessels. No fault in any of the Three.
For in all Ages of the Church, especially since Constantine's Time, that
Religion has had public allowance: There have been Consecrations of Sacred
Vessels, as well as of Churches themselves. Tho. p. 3. 9. 63. A. 6. (...)
And these Inanimate things are Holy, in that they are Deputed and Dedicated to
the Service of God. And we are said to Minister about Holy Things, 1 Cor. 9.
And the Altar is said to Sanctify the Gift, S. Matt. 1 Cor. 9. 13. (...) Mat.
23. 19.
23. which it could not do, if it self were not Holy. So then, if there be no
Dedication of these Things to God, no separation of them from common use,
there is neither Thing nor Place Holy. And then no Sacrilege; no difference
between Churches and common Houses; between Holy-Tables (so the Injunction
calls them) and ordinary Tables. Injunct. of Q. Eliz. in (...).
But I would have no Man deceive himself; Sacrilege is a grievous Sin, and was
severely Punished even among the Heathen. And S. Paul's Question puts it home,
would we consider of it, Thou which abhorrest Idols, Committest thou
Sacrilege? Romans 2. Thou Romans 2. 22.
which abhorrest Idols to the very defacing of Church Windows, do thou? Thou
of all other, Commit Sacrilege, which the very Worshippers of Idols punished?
And this being so, I hope my use of a part of Solomon's Prayer, or the Words of
my own Prayer, ( That God would be pleased to accept them) shall not be reputed
Faults.

But here stepped in Mr. Pryn, and said, This was according to the Form in
Missali Parvo. But it is well known I borrowed nothing thence. All that I used
was according to the Copy of the late Reverend Bishop of Winchester, Bishop
Andrews, which I have by me to be seen, and which himself used all his Time.

Then from my Chapel, he went to my Study. And there the Second Charge was,
That I had a Bible with the Five Wounds of Christ II.
fair upon the Cover of it. This was curiously wrought in Needle Work. 1.
The Bible was so sent me by a Lady, and she a Protestant; I was loath to deface
the Work; but the Bible I kept in my Study from any Man's Hand or Eye, that
might take Offense at it. Mr. Brown touched upon this, and my Answer was the
same, saving that I mentioned not the Lady. Secondly, That I had in my Study 2.
a Missal, and diverse other Books belonging to the Roman Liturgy.

My Lords, it is true, I had many; but I had more of the Greek Liturgies, than
the Roman. And I had as many of both, as I could get. And I would know, how we
shall answer their Errors if we may not have their Books? I had Liturgies, all
I could get, both Ancient and Modern. I had also the Alcoarn in diverse Copies:
If this be an Argument, why do they not accuse me to be a Turk? Thirdly, 3.
to this Charge was added my Private Prayer Book, which Mr. Pryn had taken from
me in his Search. Where first I observed, That the Secrets between God and my
Soul, were brought to be divulged in open Court. Nihil Gravius dicam. But see
whether it can be paralleled in Hetheanism.

But what Popery was found in these Prayers? Why, first they said, my Prayers
were in Canonical Hours, (...).
Hora Sexta, and Hora Nona, etc. I enjoined my self several hours of Prayer:
That I hope is no Sin: And if some of them were Church-Hours, that is no Sin
neither; Seven Times a Day will I praise thee, Psalm. 119.
was the Prophet David's, long before any Canonical Hours. And among Christians
they were in use before Popery got any Head. God grant this may be my greatest
Sin. Secondly, The Prayer which I 2.
made at the Consecration of the Chapel at Hammersmith. I desired that might
be read, or any other: No Offense found. Thirdly, the 3.
Word Prostratus, in my Private Devotions, before I came to the Eucharist. If I
did so to God, what is that to any Man? But I pray in all this curious Search,
(and Mr. Pryn here, and all along spared no pains)

why were no Prayers to the B. Virgin and the Saints found, if I were so
swallowed up in Popery?

From my Study, he went on to my Gallery. The Sergeant III.
would find out Popery ere he had done. Thence I was Charged with three
Pictures. The First of them was a Fair Picture of the Four (...).
Fathers of the Western Church, S: Ambrose, S: Jerome, S: Augustine and S:
Gregory. It was as Lawful to have this Picture as the Picture of any other Men.
Yea; but there was a Dove pictured over them, and that stood for the
Holy Ghost. That Is more than any Witness did, or durst depose. The Second was,
the Ecce Homo, as Pilate brought 2.
Christ forth, and showed him to the Jews. This Picture is Common, and I yet
know no hurt of it, so it be not Worshipped. And that I detest as much as any
Man, and have written as much against it as Cont. Fisher.. 33. p. 279.
any Protestant has: And it was then read in part. And for both these Pictures
I answered farther out of Calvin; That it is Lawful L. 1. (...). c. 11.. 12.
to make, and have the Picture of any things Quorum sint Capaces Oculi, which
may be seen: Now the Dove was visible and seen, S. John 1. That Is for the first
Picture. And for the Second, the S. Job. 1. 32, 33.
Ecce Homo; why did Pilat say Ecce, but that the Jews might and did see him?
St. Joh. 19. So both Pictures lawful by the Rule laid down, S. (...). 19. (...).
by Calvin.

Mr. Brown Charged against both these Pictures very warmly, And when I had
Answered as before, in his Reply he fell upon my Answer; and said it was in the
Homilies (but either he quoted not the place, or I else slipped it) That every
Picture of Christ was a Lie, because whole Christ cannot be Pictured. But by
this Argument it is unlawful to Picture any Man; for the whole Man cannot be
Pictured. Who ever drew a Picture of the Soul? And yet who so simple as to say
the Picture of a Man is a Lie? Besides, the Ecce Homo is a Picture of the
Humanity of Christ only, which may as lawfully be drawn as any other Man. And
it may be I may give farther Answer, when I see the place in the Homilies.

The Third Picture found in my Gallery, I marvel why it was 3.
produced. For it relates to that of our Savior, St. John. 10. Where S. Joh.
10. 1, 2.
he says, that the Shepherd enters into the Sheepfold by the door, but they
which climb up to enter another way, are Thieves and Robbers. And in that
Picture the Pope and the Friars are climbing up to get in at the Windows. So
it is as directly against Popery as can be. Besides, it was Witnessed before the
Lords by Mr. Walter Dobson, an Ancient Servant, both to Archbishop Bancroft
and Abbot, that both the Ecce Homo and this Picture, were in the Gallery when
he came first to Lambeth-House, which was about Forty Years since. So it was
not brought thither by me to countenance Popery. And I hope your Lordships do
not think me such All these Pictures were placed in the Gallery by Cardinal
Pole, when he built it, and continue there still, having not been defaced by
the Godly Party in the time of the Rebellion, at were the Windows of the
Chapel, and the Chapel it self converted to a Dancing-Room by them, having
first beat down Archbishop Parker's Tomb in the middle of it, and cast his
Bones upon the Dunghill. H. W.
a Fool, if I had an intention to alter Religion, I would hang the Profession
of it openly in my Gallery, thereby to bring present danger upon my self, and
destroy the work which themselves say I intended cunningly. And if there be any
Error in having and keeping such Pictures, yet that is no sufficient proof,
that I had any intention to alter the Religion Established, which I desire may
be taken notice of once for all.

From my Gallery the Sergeant crossed the Water to White Hall, IV.
(and sure in haste, for at that time he took no leave of Captain Guest, or his
Wife, before he left Lambeth:) At the Court he met Sir Henry Mildmay. This
Knight being produced by him against me, says, That in my time Bowings were
constantly used in the Chapel there. But first, (...).
Dr. Featly told your Lordships, there was nothingin my Chapel but as it was
in use at White Hall. So all the Popery I could bring, was there before. And
Secondly, if bowing to God in his own House be not amiss (as how it should I
yet know not) then there can be no fault in the constant doing of it: Quod
semel fecisse bonum est, non potest malum S. (...). Adversus Vigilantium.
esse si frequenter fiat. So St. Jerome Teaches. Thirdly, I am very sorry, that
any Reverence to God, in his House, and in the time of his Worship, should be
thought too much. I am sure the Homilies, so Tom. 2. Hom. 1. Princip.
often pressed against me, cry out against the neglect of Reverence in the
Church. This passage was read, and by this it seems, the Devil's Cunning was,
so soon as he saw Superstition thrust out of this Church, to bring Irreverence
and Profaneness in. Here Mr. Brown having pressed this Charge, Replies upon
me in his last, that I would admit no mean, but either there must be
Superstition or Profaneness; whereas my words can infer no such thing. I said
this was the Devil's Practice. I would have brought in the mean between them,
and preserved it too by God's Blessing, had I been let alone.



Sir Hen. says next, that he knew of no Bowings in that Chapel before 2
my time, but by the Right Honorable the Knights of the Garter at their
Solemnity. No time else? Did he never see the King his Master Offer before my
time? Or did he ever see him Offer, or the Lord Chamberlain attend him there
without Bowing and Kneeling too? And for the Knights of the Garter, if they
might do it without Superstition, I In (...). p. 65. It Is commonly called the
Black Book.
hope I and other Men might do so too. Especially since they were Ordered by
Hen. 5. to do it with great Reverence, ad modum Sacerdotum. Which proves the
Antiquity of this Ceremony in England.

He farther says, there was a fair Crucifix in a piece of Hangings hung 3.
up behind the Altar, which he thinks was not used before my time. But that he
thinks so is no proof. He says, This fair piece was hanged up in the Passion
Week, as they call it. As they call it? Which they? Will he shut out himself
from the Passion Week? All Christians have called it so for above a (...)
observabatur ab (...). Vedelius. (and he no way Superstitious) in Igna.
Epistola ad Philip. Exercit. 16. c. 3.
Thousand Years together; and is that become an Innovation too? As they call
it. Fifthly, He says the hanging up of this piece was a great scandal to Men
but indifferently affected to Religion. Here I humbly crave leave to observe
some few Particulars. First, that here is no proof so much as offered, that the
piece was hung up by me or my Command. Secondly, that this Gentleman came often
to me to Lambeth, and professed much Love to me, yet was never the 1.
Man that told me his Conscience, or any Man's else was troubled at 2.
it; which had he done, that should have been a scandal to no Man. Thirdly,
that if this were scandalous to any, it must be offensive in 3.
regard of the Workmanship; or Quatenus Tale, as it was a Crucifix. Not in
regard of the work certainly, for that was very exact. And then if it were
because it was a Crucifix, why did not the old one offend Sir Henry's
Conscience as much as the new? For the piece of Hangings which hung constantly
all the Year at the back of the Altar, thirty Years together upon my own
Knowledge, and somewhat above, long before, (as I offered proof by the Vestry
Men) and so all the time of Sir Henry's being in Court, had a Crucifix wrought
in it, and yet his Conscience never troubled at it. Fourthly, that he could 4.
not possibly think that I intended any Popery in it, considering how hateful
he knew me to be at Rome, beyond any my Predecessors since the Reformation. For
so he protested at his return from thence to my self. And I humbly desire a
Salvo, that I may have him called to Witness it. Which was granted.

When they had charged me thus far, there came up a Message from the House of
Commons. I was commanded to withdraw. But that Business requiring more haste, I
was dismissed with a Command to attend again on Wednesday May 22. But then I
was put off again Maij 22.
to Monday May 27. And after much pressing for some Maintenance, Maij 27.
considering how often I was made attend, and with no small Expense, on May 25. I
had an Order from the Committee of Sequestrations, Maij 25.
to have Two Hundred Pound allowed me out of my own now Sequestered Estate. It
was a Month before I could receive this. And this was all that ever was yet
allowed me, since the Sequestration of my Estate, being then of above Two Years
continuance.

CAP. XXXIII. The Eleventh Day of my Hearing.
THis day Mr. Sergeant Wild followed the Charge upon me. I.
And went back again to my Chapel Windows at Lambeth. Maij 27. 1644. Monday.
Three Witnesses against them. The first was one Pember a Glasier. He says,
there was in one of the Glass-Windows on the North side, the Die Undecimo.
Picture of an Old Man with a Glory, which he thinks was of God the 1.
Father. But his thinking so is no proof: Nor does he express in which of the
North Windows he saw it. And for the Glory, that is usual about the Head of
every Saint. And Mr. Brown, who was the Second Witness, and was trusted by me
for all the work of the 2.
Windows, both at Lambeth and Croydon, says expressly upon his Oath, that there
was no Picture of God the Father in the Windows at Lambeth. But he says, He
found a Picture of God the Father in a Window at Croydon, and Archbishop
Cranmer's Arms under it, and that he pulled it down. So it appears this Picture
was there before my time: And continued there in so Zealous an Archbishop's
time as Cranmer was well known to be, and it was pulled down in my time.
Neither did I know till now, that ever such a Picture was there; and the
Witness deposes, he never made me acquainted with it. The Third 3.
Witness was Mr. Pryn. He says, he had taken a survey of the Windows at
Lambeth. And I doubt not his diligence. He repeated the Story in each Window. I
have told this before, and shall not repeat it. He says, the Pictures of these
Stories are in the Mass Book. If it be so, yet they were not taken thence by
me. Archbishop Morton did that work, as appears by his Device in the Windows.
He says, the Story of the day of Judgment was in a Window in atrio, that must
not come into the Chapel. Good Lord, whither will Malice carry a Man? The
Story opposite is of the Creation; and what, must not that come into the
Chapel neither? The Chapel is divided into an inner and utter Chapel. In
this outward the two Windows mentioned are. And the Partition or Skreen of the
Chapel, which makes it two, was just in the same place where now it stands,
from the very building of the Chapel, for ought can be proved to the contrary.
So neither I nor any Man else did shut out the day of Judgment. He says, I had
Read the Mass Book diligently. How else should I be able really to confute what
is amiss in it? He says, I had also a Book of Pictures concerning the Life of
Christ in my Study. And it was fit for me to have it. For some things are to be
seen in their Pictures for the People, which their Writings do not, perhaps
dare not avow.

The Second Charge of this day, was about the Administration of II.
the Sacrament in my Chapel. The Witnesses two.

The first was Dr. Haywood, who had been my Chaplain in the 1.
House. They had got from others the Ceremonies there used, and then brought
him upon Oath. He confessed he Administered in a Cope. And the Canon warranted
it. He confesses (as it was urged) that he Can. Eccles. (...). 24.
fetched the Elements from the Credential (a little Side-Table as they called
it) and set them Reverently upon the Communion Table. Where Is the offense? For
first, the Communion Table was little, and there was hardly room for the
Elements to stand conveniently there, while the Service was in Administration.
And Secondly, I did not this without Example; for both Bishop Andrews and some
other Bishops, used it so all their time, and no exception taken. The Second
Witness was Rob. Cornwall, one of my Menial Servants. A very forward Witness he
showed himself. But said no more than is said and answered before. Both of them
confessing that I was sometimes present.

The Third Charge was about the Ceremonies at the Coronation of III.
his Majesty. And first out of my Diary, Feb: 2: 1625. It Is urged, 1.
that I carried back the Regalia, offered them on the Altar, and then laid them
up in their place of safety. I bare the place at the Coronation of the Dean of
Westminster, and I was to look to all those things, and their safe return into
Custody, by the place I then Executed. And the offering of them could be no
offense. For the King himself offers upon solemn days. And the Right Honorable
the Knights of the Garter offer at their Solemnity. And the Offertory is
Established by Law in the Common Prayer Book of this Church. And the
Prebendaries assured me it was the Custom for the Dean so to do. Secondly, 2.
they charged a Marginal Note in the Book upon me: That the Unction was in
forma Crucis. That Note does not say that it ought so to be done; but it only
relates the Practice, what was done. And if any fault were in Anointing the
King in that form, it was my Predecessors fault, not mine, for he so Anointed
him. They say, there was a 3.
Crucifix among the Regalia, and that it stood upon the Altar at the
Coronation, Heylin affirms, that the old Crucifix, being found among the
Regalia, (...) then placed upon the Altar. Life of Laud, p. 144.
and that I did not except against it. My Predecessor Executed at that time.
And I believe would have excepted against the Crucifix had it stood there. But
I remember not any there. Yet if there were, if my Predecessor approved the
standing of it, or were content to connive at it, it would have been made but a
Scorn had I quarreled it. They say one of the Prayers was taken out of the
Pontifical. 4.
And I say, if it were, it was not taken thence by me. And the Prayers are the
same that were used at King James his Coronation. And so the Prayer be good
(and here is no word in it, that is excepted against) it is no matter whence it is
taken.

Then leaving the Ceremonies, he charged me with two (...) 5.
(...) the Body of the King's Oath. One added, namely these Words ( (...) to
the King's Prerogative.) The other omitted, namely these words, ( Quae Populus
Elegerit, which the People have chosen, or shall choose.) For this latter, the
Clause omitted, that suddenly vanished. For it was omitted in the Oath of King
James, as is confessed by themselves in the p. 706.
Printed Votes of this present Parliament. But the other highly insisted on, as
taking off the total assurance which the Subjects have by the Oath of their
Prince for the performance of his Laws. First, I humbly conceive this Clause
takes off none of the Peoples Assurance; none at all. For the King's Just and
Legal Prerogative, and the Subjects Assurance for Liberty and Property may
stand well together, and have so stood for Hundreds of Years. Secondly, that
Alteration, what ever it be, was not made by me; nor is there any Interlining
or Alteration so much as of a Letter found in that Book. Thirdly, if any thing
be amiss therein, my Predecessor gave that Oath to the King, and not I. I was
merely Ministerial, both in the Preparation, and at the Coronation it self,
supplying the place of the Dean of Westminster.

After this days work was ended, it instantly spread all over the City, that I
had altered the King's Oath at his Coronation, and from thence into all parts
of the Kingdom; as if all must be true which was said at the Bar against me,
what Answer so-ever I made. The People and some of the Synod now crying out,
that this one thing was enough to take away my Life. And though this was all
that was Charged this day concerning this Oath, yet seeing how this fire took,
I thought fit the next day that I came to the Bar, to desire that the Books of
the Coronation of former Kings, especially those of Queen Elizabeth and King
James, might be seen and compared, and the Copies brought into the Court, both
from the Exchequer, and such as were in my Study at Lambeth: And a fuller
Inquisition made into the Business: In regard I was as Innocent from this
Crime, as when my Mother bare me into the World. A Salvo was entered for me upon
this. And every day that I after came to the Bar, I called upon this Business.
But somewhat or other was still pretended by them which managed the Evidence,
that I could not get the Books to be brought forth, nor any thing to be done,
till almost the last day of my Hearing. Then no Books could be found in the
Exchequer, nor in my Study, but only that of King James; whereas, when the Keys
were taken from me, there were diverse Books there, as is confessed in the
Printed Votes of this Parliament: And one of them with a Watchet p. 706.
Satin Cover, now missing. And whether this of King James (had not my
Secretary, who knew the Book, seen it drop out of Mr. Pryn's Bag) would not
have been concealed too, I cannot tell. At last, the Book of King James his
Coronation, and the other urged against me concerning King Charles, were seen
and compared openly in the Lords House, and found to be the same Oath in both,
and no Interlining or Alteration in the Book charged against me.

This Business was left by the Sergeant to Mr. Maynard, who made the most that
could be out of my Diary against me. And so did Mr. Brown, when he came to give
the Sum of the Charge against me, both before the Lords, and after in the
House of Commons. And therefore for the avoiding of all tedious Repetition: And
for that the Arguments which both used, are the same: And because I hold it not
fit to break a Charge of this moment into diverse pieces, or put them in
different places, I will (...) set down the whole Business together, and the
Answer which I then gave.

Mr. Brown in the Sum of the Charge against me in the Commons-House, when he
came to this Article, said, he was now come to the Business so much expected.
And I humbly besought that Honorable House, if it were a Matter of so great
Expectation, it might be of as great Attention too, while I should follow that
Worthy Gentleman, step after step, and Answer as I went.

1. And First, he went about to prove out of my Diary, that this Addition ( of
the King's Prerogative) to the Oath, was made by me. Thus he says, that December.
31. 1625. I went to Hampton Court. That Is true. He says, that there, Januar. 1.
I understood I was Named with other Bishops, to meet and consider of the
Ceremonies about the Coronation; and that, Januar. 4. we did meet at White Hall
accordingly; and that, Januar. 6. we gave his Majesty an Answer. Not I (as
'twas Charged) but We gave his Majesty Answer. So if the Oath, had been changed
by me, it must have been known to the Committee, and broken forth to my Ruin
long since. Then he says, that Januar. 16. I was appointed to serve at the
Coronation, in the room of the Dean of Westminster. That Is no Crime; and it is
added in the Diary, that this Charge was delivered unto me by my Predecessor.
So he knew that this Service to Attend at the Coronation was imposed upon me.
He says next, that Januar. 18. the Duke of Buckingham had me to the King, to
show his Majesty the Notes we had agreed on, if nothing offended him. These
were only Notes of the Ceremonies. And the other Bishops sent me, being Puny,
to give the Account. Then he says, Januar. 23. It is in my Diary, Librum habui
paratum, I had a Book ready. And it was time, after such meetings; and the
Coronation being to follow Feb. 2. and I designed to assist and attend that
Service, that I should have a Book ready. The Ceremonies were too long and
various to carry them in Memory. And whereas it is urged, that I prepared and
altered this Book; the words in my Diary, are only Paratum habui, I had the
Book ready for my own use in that Service. Nor can Paratum habui, signify
preparing or altering the Book. And Thirdly, it is added there, That the Book
which I had ready in my Hands, did agree per omnia cum Libro Regali: And if it
did agree in all things with the King's Recorded Book then brought out of the
Exchequer, where then is the Alteration so laboriously sought to be fastened on
me? I humbly beseech you to mark this.

Yet out of these Premises put together, Mr. Brown's Inference was, that I made
this Alteration of the Oath. But surely these Premises, neither single nor
together, can produce any such Conclusion; but rather the contrary. Beside,
Inference upon Evidence is not Evidence, unless it be absolutely necessary;
which all Men see that here it is not. But I pray observe. Why was such a
sudden stay made at Januar. 23. whereas it appears in my Diary at Januar. 31.
that the Bishops were not alone trusted with this Coronation Business; Sed alii
Proceres, but other Great and Noble Men also. And they did meet that Januar.
31. and sat in Council about it. So the Bishops Meetings were but Preparatory
to ease the Lords, most of the Ceremonies being in the Church Way. And then can
any Man think, that these great Lords, when they came to review all that was
done, would let the Oath be altered by me or any other, so materially, and not
check at it? It Is impossible.

2. Secondly, this Gentleman went on to charge this Addition upon me, Thus,
There were found in my Study at Lambeth two Books of King James his Coronation,
one of them had this Clause or Addition in it, and the other had it not; and we
cannot tell by which he was Crowned, therefore it must needs be some wilful
Error in me; to make choice of that Book which had this Addition in it; or some
great mistake. First, if it were a mistake only, then it is no Crime. And
wilful Error it could not be. For being Named one of them that were to consider
of the Ceremonies, I went to my Predecessor, and desired a Book, to see by it
what was formerly done. He delivered me this now in question; I knew not
whether he had more or no; nor did I know that any one of them differed from
other. Therefore no wilful Error. For I had no choice to make of this Book
which had the Addition, before that which had it not; but thankfully took that
which he gave me. But Secondly, If one Book of King James his Coronation, in
which I could have no Hand, had this Addition in it, (as is confessed) then was
not this a new Addition of my making. And Thirdly, it may easily be seen, that
King James was Crowned by the Book which has this Addition in it, this being
in a fair Carnation Satin Cover, the other in Paper without a Cover, and unfit
for a King's Hand, especially in such a great and public Solemnity.

3. In the Third place he said, There were in this Book twenty Alterations
more, and all or most in my Hand. Be it so, (for I was never suffered to have
the Book to consider of) they are confessed not to be material. The Truth is,
when we met in the Committee, we were fain to mend many slips of the Pen, to
make Sense in some places, and good English in other. And the Book being
trusted with me, I had Reason to do it with my own Hand, but openly at the
Committee all. Yet two Things as Matters of some moment Mr. Brown checked at.

1. The one was, that Confirm is changed into Perform. If it be so, Perform is
the greater and more advantageous to the Subject, because it includes
Execution, which the other word does not. Nor does this word hinder, but that
the Laws and Liberties are the Peoples already. For though they be their own,
yet the King by his place, may and ought to perform the keeping and maintaining
of them. I say (if it be so) for I was never suffered to have this Book in my
Hands thoroughly to peruse: Nor, under favor, do I believe this Alteration is
so made, as it is urged. [In the Book which I have by me, and was Transcribed
from the other, it is Confirm.]

2. The other is, that the King is said to Answer, I will for I do: But when
will he? Why all the days of his Life; which is much more than I do for the
present. So, if this change be made, it is still for the Peoples advantage. [And
there also it is I do grant.] And yet again I say ( if) for the Reason before
given. Besides, in all the Latin Copies, there is a latitude left for them that
are trusted, to add to those Interrogatories which are then put to the King,
any other that is just; In these Words, Adijciantur praedictis
Interrogationibus quae justa fuerint. And such are these two mentioned, if they
were made.

4. Mr. Brown's Fourth and last Objection was, that I made this Alteration of
the Oath, because it agrees (as he said) with my Judgment: For that in a Paper
of Bishop Harsnett's, there is a Marginal Note in my Hand, that Salvo Jure
Coronae, is understood in the Oaths of a King. But first, there is a great deal
of difference between Jus Regis and Praerogativa, between the Right and
Inheritance of the King and his Prerogative, though never so Legal. And with
Submission, and until I shall be convinced herein, I must believe; that no King
can Swear himself out of his Native Right. Secondly, If this were, and still be
an Error in my Judgment, that is no Argument at all to prove Malice in my Will:
That because that is my Judgment for Jus Regis, therefore I must thrust
Praerogativam Regis, which is not my Judgment, into a Public Oath which I had
no Power to alter. These were all the Proofs which Mr. Maynard at first, and
Mr. Brown at last, brought against me in this Particular. And they are all but
Conjectural, and the Conjectures weak. But that I did not alter this Oath by
adding the Prerogative, the Proofs I shall bring are Pregnant, and some of them
Necessary. They are these.

1. My Predecessor was one of the Grand Committee for these Ceremonies. That
was proved by his Servants to the Lords. Now his known Love to the Public was
such, as that he would never have suffered me or any other, to make such an
Alteration. Nor would he have concealed such a Crime in me, loving me so well
as he did.

2. Secondly, It Is Notoriously known, that he Crowned the King, and Administered
the Oath, (which was avowed also before the Lords by his Ancient Servants.) And
it cannot be rationally conceived he would ever have Administered such an
altered Oath to his Majesty.

3. Thirdly, It Is expressed in my Diary, at Januar. 31. 1625. (And that must be
good Evidence for me, having been so often produced against me,) that diverse
great Lords were in this Committee for the Ceremonies, and did that Day sit in
Council upon them. And can it be thought they would not so much as compare the
Books? Or that comparing of them, they would endure an Oath with such an
Alteration to be Tendered to the King? Especially, since it is before confessed,
that One Copy of King James his Coronation had this Alteration in it, and the
other had it not.

4. Fourthly, It Is expressed in my Diary, and made use of against me, at
Januar. 23. 1625. That this Book urged against me did agree per Omnia cum Libro
Regali, in all things with the King's Book brought out of the Exchequer. And if
the Book that I then had, and is now insisted upon, did agree with that Book
which came out of the Exchequer, and that in all things, how is it possible I
should make this Alteration?

5. Fifthly, with much Labor I got the Books to be compared in the Lords
House; That of King James his Coronation, and this of King Charles. And they
were found to agree in all things to a Syllable. Therefore it is impossible this
should be added by me. And this I conceive cuts off all Conjectural Proofs to
the contrary.

Lastly, In the Printed Book of the Votes of this present Parliament, p. 706.
it is acknowledged, that the Oath given to King James and King Charles was the
same. The same. Therefore unaltered. And this Passage of that Book I then
showed the Lords in my Defense. To this Mr. Maynard then replied. That the
Votes there mentioned, were upon the Word Elegerit, and the doubt whether it
should be, has chosen, or shall choose. I might not then Answer to the Reply,
but the Answer is plain. For, be the occasion which led on the Votes, what it
will; as long as the Oath is acknowledged the same, it is manifest it could not
be altered by me. And I doubt not, but these Reasons will give this Honorable
House Satisfaction, that I added not this Particular of the Prerogative to the
Oath.

Mr. Brown, in his last Reply, passed over the other Arguments I know not how.
But against this, he took Exception. He brought the Book with him, and Read the
Passage. And said (as far as I remember) that the Votes had Relation to the
Word Choose, and not to this Alteration. Which is in Effect the same which Mr.
Maynard urged before. I might not Reply by the Course of the Court, but I have
again considered of that Passage, and find it plain. Thus, p. 706.
First they say: They have considered of all the Alterations in the Form of
this Oath which they can find. Therefore of this Alteration also, if any such
were: Then they say, Excepting that Oath which was taken by his Majesty and his
Father King James. There it is confessed, that the Oath taken by them, was one
and the same, called there That Oath, which was taken by both. Where falls the
Exception then? For it is said, Excepting that Oath, etc. why it follows,
Excepting that the Word Choose is wholly left out, as well has Chosen as will
Choose. Which is a most manifest and evident Confession, that the Oath of King
James and King Charles was the same in all things, to the very leaving out of
the Word Choose. Therefore it was the same Oath all along. No difference at all.
For Exceptio firmat Regulam in non Exceptis; and here is no Exception at all of
this Clause of the Prerogative. Therefore the Oath of both the Kings was the
same in that, or else the Votes would have been sure to mention it. Where it
may be observed too, that Sergeant Wild, though he knew these Votes, and was
present both at the Debate and the Voting; and so must know that the Word
Choose, was omitted in both the Oaths, yet at the first he Charged it eagerly
upon me, that I had left this Clause of Choosing out of King Charles his Oath,
and added the other. God forgive him. But the World may see by this, and some
other Passages, with what Art my Life was sought for.

And yet before I quite leave this Oath, I may say it is not altogether
improbable, that this Clause ( And agreeing to the Prerogative of the King's
thereof) was added to the Oath in Edward 6. or Queen Elizabeth's time: And has
no Relation at all to the Laws of this Kingdom, absolutely mentioned before in
the beginning of this Oath; But only to the Words [ The Profession of the
Gospel Established in this Kingdom,] And then immediately follows, And agreeing
to the Prerogative of the Kings thereof. By which the King Swears to maintain
his Prerogative, according to God's Law, and the Gospel Established, against
all foreign Claims and Jurisdictions whatsoever. And if this be the meaning, he
that made the Alteration, whoever it were (for I did it not) deserves Thanks
for it, and not the Reward of a Traitor.



Now to return to the Day. The Fourth Charge went on IV.
with the Ceremonies still. But Mr. Sergeant was very nimble. For he leaped
from the Coronation at Westminster, to see what I did at Oxford. 1. There the
first Witness is Sir Nathaniel Brent. And he says, The standing of the
Communion Table at St. Mary's was altered. I have answered to this Situation of
the Communion Table already. And if it be lawful in one place, it is in another.
For the Chapel of Magdalen College, and Christ-Church Quire, he confesses he
knows of no Direction given by me to either: Nor does he know, whether I
reproved the things there done or no. So all this is no Evidence. For the
Picture of the Blessed Virgin at St. Mary's Door, as I knew nothing of it till
it was done, so never did I hear any Abuse or Dislike of it after it was done.
And here Sir Nathaniel confesses too, that he knows not of any Adoration of it,
as Men passed the Streets or otherwise. When this Witness came not home, they
urged the Statute of Merton College, or the University, where (if I took my
Notes right) they say, I enjoined Debitam (...). 11.
Reverentiam. And as I know no fault in that Injunction, or Statute; so neither
do I know what due Bodily Reverence can be given to God in his Church, without
some Bowing or Genuflection.

2. The Second Witness was Mr. Corbett. He says, that when decent Reverence was
required by my Visitors (...) one of my Articles, he gave Reasons against it,
but Sir Jo. Lamb urged it still. First, my Lords, if Mr. Corbett's Reasons
were sufficient, Sir Jo. Lamb was to blame in that; but Sir Jo. Lamb must
answer it, and not I. Secondly, it may be observed, that this Man, by his own
Confession, gave Reasons (such as they were) against due Reverence to God in
his own House. He says, that Dr. Frewen told him from me, That I wished he
should do as others did at St. Mary's, or let another Execute his place as
Proctor. This is but a Hearsay from Dr. Frewen, who being at Oxford, I cannot
produce him. And if I had sent such a Message, I know no Crime in it. He says,
that after this, he desired he might enjoy in this Particular the Liberty which
the King and the Church of England gave him. He did so: And from that Day he
heard no more of it, but enjoyed the Liberty which he asked. He says, Mr.
(...). Cheynell.
Channel desired the same Liberty as well as he. And Mr. Channel had it
granted as well as he. He confesses ingenuously, that the Bowing required, was
only Toward, not to the Altar. And And the third Witness agrees in this.
To the Picture at St. Mary's Door, he says, he never heard of any Reveverence
done to it: And does believe that all that was done at Christ-Church, was since
my Time. But it must be his Knowledge, not his Belief, that must make an
Evidence.

3. The Third Witness, was one Mr. Bendye. He says, There was a Crucifix in
Lincoln College Chapel since my time. If there be, it is more than I know. My
Lord of York that now is, when he was Bishop of Lincoln, worthily bestowed much
Cost upon that Chapel, and if he did set up a Crucifix, I think it was before
I had ought to do there. He says, there was Bowing at the Name of Jesus. And
God forbid but there should; and the Canon of the Church requires Can. (...).
it. He says, there were Latin Prayers in Lent, but he knows not who enjoined
it. And then he might have held his Peace. But there were Latin Sermons, and
Prayers on Ash Wednesday, when few came to Church, but the Lent Proceeders, who
understood them. And in diverse Colleges they have their Morning-Prayers in
Latin, and had so, long before I knew the University. The last Thing he says,
was, That there were Copes used in some Colleges, and that a Traveller should
say, upon the sight of them, that he saw just such a thing upon the Pope's
Back. This Wise Man might have said as much of a Gown: He saw a Gown on the
Pope's Back; therefore a Protestant may not wear one: or entering into S. Paul's,
he may cry, Down with it; for I saw the Pope in just such another Church in
Rome.

4. Then was urged the conclusion of a Letter of mine sent to that University.
The Words were to this Effect, I desire you to remember me a Sinner, Quoties
coram (...) Dei (...). The Charge lay upon the Word Procidatis; which is no
more, than that when they there fall on their Knees, or Prostrate to Prayer,
they would remember me. In which Desire of mine, or Expression of it, I can yet
see no Offense. No, nor in coram Altar, their Solemnest time of Prayer being
at the Communion. Here Mr. Brown Aggravated the things done in that University:
And fell upon the Titles given me in some Letters from thence; but because I
have answered those Titles already, I refer the Reader thither, and shall not
make here any tedious Repetition: Only this I shall add; That in the Civil Law
it is frequent to be seen, that not Bishops only one to another, but the great
Emperors of the World have commonly given that Title of Sanctitas vestra, to
Bishops of meaner place than my self; to say no more. But here Mr. Brown, in
his last Reply, was pleased to say, This Title was not given to any Bishop of
England. First, if I had my Books about me, perhaps this might be refuted.
Secondly, why should so Grave a Man as he so much Disparage his own Nation? Is
it impossible (be my Unworthiness what it will) for an English Bishop to
deserve as good a Title as another? Thirdly, be that as it may, if it were (as
certainly it was) Lawfully given to other Bishops, though they not English,
then is it neither Blasphemy, nor Assumption of Papal Power, as was Charged
upon it.



From Oxford Mr. Sergeant went to Cambridge. And I must be V.
Guilty, if ought were amiss there too. For this Fifth Charge were produced
three Witnesses, Mr. Wallis, Mr. Greece, and Mr. Seaman. Their Testimonies
agreed very near: So I will answer them together. First, they say, That at
Peter-House there were Copes and Candlesticks, and Pictures in the
Glass-Windows; and the like. But these things I have often answered already,
and shall not repeat. They say, the Chief Authors of these things, were Dr.
Wren and Dr. Cosens. They are both living, why are they not called to answer
their own Acts? For here is yet no show of Proof to bring any thing home to me.
For no one of them says, that I gave direction for any of these. No, (says Mr.
Sergeant) but why did I tolerate them? First, no Man complained to me.
Secondly, I was not Chancellor, and endured no small Envy for any little thing
that I had occasion to look upon in that place. And thirdly, this was not the
least Cause, why I followed my Right for Power to visit there. And though that
Power was confirmed to me, yet the Times have been such as that I did not then
think fit to use it. It would have but heaped more Envy on me, who bare too
much already. As for Mr. Greece, who has labored much against me in all this
Business, God forgive him; and while he Inherits his Father's ill Affections to
me, God preserve him from his Father's End.



From Cambridge he went to the Cathedrals, and first to Canterbury. VI.
Here the Charge is Bowing versus Altar; the two Witnesses, two Prebendaries
of that Church, Dr: Jackson, and Dr: Blechenden. And first, Dr: Jackson says,
the Bowing was versus Altar: So not to, but toward the Altar; and Dr:
Blechenden says, it was the Adoration of the High Majesty of God, to whom, if
no Altar were there, I should Bow. Dr: Jackson says, this Bowing was to his
Grief. Strange! I avow to your Lordships and the World, no Man did so much
approve all my Proceedings in that Church, as he: And for this Particular, he
never found the least fault with it to me; and if he conceal his Grief, I
cannot ease it. He says, this Bowing was not in use till within this Six or
Seven Years. Sure the Old Man's Memory fails him. For Dr. Blechenden says, the
Communion Table was railed about, and Bowings before it, when he came first to
be a Member of that Church; and says upon his Oath that is above Ten Years ago.
And that it was practiced before their new Statutes were made; and that in
those Statutes no Punishment is infticted for the Breach, or not Performance of
this Reverence. I could tell your Lordships how often Dr: Jackson has shifted
his Opinions in Religion, but that they tell me their Witnesses must not be
Scandalized. As for the Statutes, my Secretary Mr: Dell, who copied them out,
testified here to the Lords, that I left out diverse Superstitions which were in
the Old Book, and Ordained many Sermons in their rooms.

The next Cathedral he instanced in was Winchester. But there is nothing but the
old Objections, Copes. And the wearing of them is warranted by the Canon; and
Reverence at coming in, and going out of Can. 24.
the Church. And that, great Kings have not (in better Ages) thought much to
do. And they did well to instance in the College of Winchester as well as the
Church; for it is confessed, the Injunction sent thither requires, that the
Reverence used be such as is not dissonant from the Church of England. So, this
may be a Comment to the other Injunctions. But for the Copes in Cathedrals, Mr.
Brown in his last Reply was not satisfied. For he said, the Canon mentioned but
the wearing of one Cope. Be it so: But they must have that before they can wear
it. And if the Canon enjoin the wearing of one, my Injunction might require the
providing and using of one. Besides, if there be no Popery, no introduction to
Superstition in the having or using of one; then certainly, there can be none
in the having of more for the same use: The Superstition being lodged in the
misuse, not in the number.



From the Cathedrals, Mr. Sergeant went to view some Parish-Churches. VII.
And First, it is Charged, That in a Parish Church at Winchester two Seats were
removed to make way for Railing in of the Communion Table. But for ought I
know, this might have been concealed. For it was liked so well, that they to
whom the Seats belonged, removed them at their own Charges, that the other
might be done.

The next instance was in St: Gregory's Church, by S: Paul's. The Charge was,
the Placing of the Communion Table Altar-wise. To the Charge it self Answer is
given before. The Particulars which are new are these: The Witness Mr: Wyan. He
says, the Order for such placing of the Table was from the Dean and Chapter of
S: Paul's. And S: Gregory's is in their peculiar Jurisdiction. So the Holy-Table
was there placed by the Ordinary, not by me. He says next, That the
Parishioners appealed to the Arches, but received an Order to Command them and
the Cause to the Council Board: That it was a full Board when the Cause was
heard, and his Majesty present: And that there I maintained the Queens
Injunction, about placing the Communion Table. In Q. Eliz. Injunct. Fine.
all this, here is nothing Charged upon me, but maintenance of the Injunction:
And I had been much to blame if I should not have maintained it. He says, Sir
Henry Martin came and saw it, and said it would make a good Court Cupboard. If
Sir Henry did say so, the Scorn ill became either his Age, or Profession;
though a Court Cupboard be somewhat a better Phrase than a Dresser. God forgive
them who have in Print called it so. He says, That hereupon I did say, that he
which spoke that, had a Stigmatical Puritan in his Bosom. This Man's Memory
serves him long for Words: This was many Years since; and if I did speak any
thing sounding this way, it is more like I should say Schismatical, than
Stigmatical Puritan. But let him look to his Oath; and which Word soever I
used, if Sir Henry used the one, he might well hear the other. For a profane
Speech it was, and little becoming a Dean of the Arches. He says, that soon
after this, Sir Henry was put out of his Place. Not very soon after this; for I
was at the time of this Business (as far as I remember) Bishop of London, and
had nothing to do with the disposing of his Place. After, when I came to be
Archbishop I found his Patent was void, neither could Sir Henry himself deny
it. And being void, and in my Gift, I gave it to another.

He says farther, That it was urged that this way of Placing the Communion
Table was against the Word of God, in Bishop Jewel, and Mr: Fox his Judgment;
and that I replied, it were better they should not have these Books in
Churches, than so to abuse them. First, for ought I yet know (and in these
straights of time the Books I cannot come at) their Judgment, rightly
understood, is not so. Secondly, Though these two were very worthy Men in their
Time, yet every thing which they say is not by and by the Doctrine of the
Church of England. And I may upon good reason depart from their Judgment in
some Particulars, and yet not differ from the Church of England. As in this
very Particular, the Injunction for placing of the Table so, is the Act of the
Queen and the Church of England. And I concieve the Queen, then upon the Act of
Reformation, would not have enjoined it, nor the Church obeyed it, had it been
against the Word of God. Thirdly, if I did say, That if they could make no
better use of Jewel and the Book of Martyrs, it were better they had them not
in the Churches. They gave too great occasion for the Speech: For they had
picked diverse things out of those Books which they could not master, and with
them distempered both themselves and their Neighbors. And yet in hope other
more Modest Men might make better use of them, I never gave Counsel to have
those Books removed (nor is that so much as Charged) but said only thus, That
if no better use would be made of them, then that last Remedy; but never till
then. This last Passage Mr. Brown insisted upon: The taking of good Books from
the People. But as I have answered, there was no such thing done, or intended;
only a Word spoken to make busy Men see how they abused themselves and the
Church, by misunderstanding and misapplying that which was written for the good
of both.

Lastly, it was urged, He said, that the Communion Table must stand Altarwise,
that Strangers which come and look into these Churches, might not see such a
Disproportion: The Holy Table standing one way in the Mother Church, and quite
otherwise in the Parochial annexed. And truly, to see this, could be no
Commendation of the Discipline of the Church of England. But howsoever, Mr.
Clarke (the other Witness with Wyan, and agreeing with him in the most) says
plainly that it was the Lord of Arundel that spoke this, not I: And that he was
seconded in it by the Lord Weston, then Lord Treasurer, not by me.

The last Charge of this Day was a passage out of one Mr: Shelford's VIII.
Book, p. 20, 21. That they must take the Reverend Prelates for their Examples,
etc. And Mr. Pryn Witnessed, the like was in the Missal, p. 256. Mr. Shelford
is a mere Stranger to me; his Book I never read; if he have said any thing
Unjust or Untrue; let him answer for himself. As for the like to that, which he
says, being in the Missal, though that be but a weak Argument, yet let him
salve it.

Here this Day ending, I was put off to Saturday, June 1. And Junii 1.
then again put off to Thursday, June 6. which held. Junii 6.


CAP. XXXIV. My Twelfth Day of Hearing.
THis Day Sergeant Wild, instead of beginning with a new Charge, Thursday,
(...) 6. 1644.
made another long Reply to my Answers of the former Day. Whether he found that
his former Reply made at the time, was Die Duodecimo.
weak, and so reputed, I cannot tell. But another he made, as full of
premeditated Weakness, as the former was of sudden. Mr. Pryn I think perceived
it, and was often at his Ear; but Mr. Sergeant was little less than angry, and
would on.

I knew I was to make no Answer to any Reply, and so took no Notes: Indeed,
holding it all as it was, that is, either nothing, or nothing to the purpose.
This tedious Reply ended;

Then came on the First Charge about the Window of Colored I.
Glass set up in the New Chapel at Westminster. It was the History of the
coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. This was Charged to be done by
me, and at my Cost: The Witnesses, Mr. Brown, employed in setting up the
Window, and Mr: Sutton the Glasier.

These Men say, that Dr: Newell, Sub-Dean of Westminster, gave Order for the
Window and the setting of it up; but they know not at whose Cost, nor was any
Order given from me. So here is nothing Charged upon me. And if it were, I know
nothing amiss in the Window. As for the Kings Arms being taken down (as they
say) Let them answer that did it. Though I believe, that the King's Arms
standing alone in a white Window, was not taken down out of any ill meaning,
but only out of necessity to make way for the History.

The Second Charge was the Picture of the Blessed Virgin set upon II.
a New-Built Door at S: Marys in Oxford. Here Alderman Nixon says, That some
Passengers put off their Hats, and, as he supposes, to that Picture. But, my
Lords, his Supposal is no Proof. He says, that the next day he saw it. But what
did he see? Nothing, but the putting off the Hat; For he could not see why, or
to what; unless they which put off, told it. They might put off to some
Acquaintance that passed by. He farther says, he saw a Man in that Porch upon
his Knees, and he thinks praying; but he cannot say to that. But then (if the
Malice he has long born me, would have suffered him)

he might have stayed till he knew to whom he was Praying, for till then it is
no Evidence. He says, he thinks that I Countenanced the setting of it up,
because it was done by Bishop Owen. But Mr: Bromfeeld, who did that Work, gave
Testimony to the Lords, that I had nothing to do in it. He says, there was an
Image set up at Carfax Church, but pulled down again by Mr: Widows, Vicar
there. But this has no relation at all to me. This Picture of the Blessed
Virgin was twice mentioned before. And Sir Nath: Brent could say nothing to it
but Hearsay. And Mr: Corbet did not so much as hear of any Abuse. And now
Alderman Nixon says, he saw Hats put off; but the wise Man knows not to what.
Nor is there any show of Proof offered, that I had any Hand or Approbation in
the setting of it up. Or that ever any Complaint was made to me of any Abuse to
it, or dislike of it. And yet Mr. Brown, when he gave the Sum of the Charge
against me, insisted upon this also, as some great Fault of mine, which I
cannot yet see.



In the next Charge, Mr. Sergeant is gone back again to White Hall, III.
as in the former to Oxford. The Witnesses are Mrs. Charnock, and her Daughter.
They say, they went (being at Court) into the Chapel, and it seems a Woman
with them, that was a Papist: And that while they were there, Dr. Brown, one of
the King's Chaplains came in, Bowed toward the Communion Table, and then at the
Altar kneeled down to his Prayers. I do not know of any Fault Dr. Brown
committed, either in doing Reverence to God, or Praying, and there. And yet if
he had committed any Fault, I hope I shall not answer for him. I was not then
Dean of the Chapel, nor did any ever complain to me. They say, that two
Strangers came into the Chapel at the same time, and saw what Dr. Brown did,
and said thereupon, that sure we did not differ much, and should be of one
Religion shortly. And that the Woman which was with these Witnesses, told them
they were Priests. First, this can no way Relate to me; for neither did these
Women complain to me of it, nor any from them. Secondly, if these two Men were
Priests, and did say, as is Testified; are we ever a whit the nearer them in
Religion? Indeed, if all the difference between Rome and us, consisted in
outward Reverence, and no Points of Doctrine, some Argument might hence be
drawn; but the Points of Doctrine being so many and great, put stop enough to
that. Thirdly, if Recusants, Priests especially, did so speak, might it not be
said in Cunning to Discountenance all External Worship in the Service of God,
that so they may have opportunity to make more Proselytes? And it is no small
Advantage, to my knowledge, which they have this way made. And this was the
Answer which I gave Mr. Brown, when he Charged this upon me in the House of
Commons.



Here, before they went any farther, Mr. Sergeant Wild told the Lords, that
when Sir Nathaniel Brent was employed in my Visitation, he had Instructions for
particular Churches, of which some were Tacit Intimations, and some Express. I
know not to what end this was spoken; for no Coherent Charge followed upon it.
But sure, he thinks Sir Nathaniel Brent very skilful in me, that he can
understand my Tacit Intimations, and know to what Particular Church to apply
them. And as I said no more at the Bar, so neither did I think to say any more
after; yet now I cannot but a little bemoan my self. For ever since Mr. Maynard
left off, who Pleaded, though strongly, yet fairly, against me, I have been in
very ill Condition between the other two. For from Mr. Nicolas, I had some
Sense, but extreme virulent and foul Language. And from Sergeant Wild,
Language good enough sometimes, but little or no Sense. For let me answer what
I would, when he came to Reply, he repeated the Charge again, as if I had made
no Answer at all. Or as if all that I Expressed never so plainly, had been but
Tacit Intimations; which I think he understood as much as Sir Nathaniel Brent



In the Fourth Charge, he told the Lords he would not trouble IV.
them with repeating the Evidence, but only put them in mind of some things in
the Case of Ferdinando Adams, of Ipswich: Of the Men of Lewis suffering in the
High Commission: Of the Parishioners of Beckington, and some others heard
before, but would leave the Lords to their Memory and their Notes. Yet read
over the Sentences given in the High Commission, and made a Repetition of
whatsoever might but make a show to render me odious to the People. And this
has been their Art all along, to run over the same thing twice and again (as
they did here in the second Charge about the Picture of the Blessed Virgin:) To
the end, that as the Auditors changed, the more of them might hear it; and that
which wrought not upon some, might upon others. In all which I patiently
referred my self to my former Answers, having no other way to help my self; in
regard they pretended that they renewed the same Instances, but not the same
way; but in one place, as against Law; and in another, as against Religion. But
why then did they in both places run over all Circumstances appliable to both?

And on they went too with the Men of Lewis, where one 1.
Mr. Parnlye (they say) was Censured cruelly in the High Commission, for not
removing the Communion Table. The Business was but this. Sir Nathaniel Brent,
and his own Ordinary, Dr. Nevill, Ordered the remove of the Table: He would
not. For this Contumacy he was Censured, but enjoined only to make his
Submission to Dr. Nevill. Which I think was a Sentence far from any Barbarous
Cruelty, as it is called.

2. Another Instance, and the next, was Mr. Burket. He says, he was Censured
also about removing the Communion Table, and for that only. But first, this was
not simply for removing the Holy-Table; but it was for abetting the
Churchwardens to remove it back again from the place, where lawful Authority
had set it. And secondly, whereas he says, he was Censured for this only; the
very Charge it self confutes him. For there it is said, that this, about
removing of the Communion Table, appears in the Sixth Article that was against
him. Therefore there were Five other Articles at least more against him. And
therefore not this only.

3. The Third Instance was in Mr. Chancye: And he likewise is said to have
suffered very much only about Railing in of the Communion Table. But this is
not so neither. For he confesses that he spoke Reproachful Words against
Authority, and in Contempt of his Ordinary. That he said, the Rails were fit to
be set up in his Garden. That he came Fifty Miles from his own Church, on
purpose to Countenance this Business. And all this he acknowledges upon his
Oath in his Submission. And yet nothing laid upon him but Suspension, and that
no longer than till he submitted. And all this the Act of the High Commission,
not mine. And so I answered Mr. Brown, who urged this against me also.

And the Truth of all this appears apud Acta; though they were taken away, and
kept ever since from my use, yet many things done in that Court, have been
Charged against me. And here stepped in a Testimony of Mr. Genebrards, That I
threatened openly in the High Commission to suspend Dr. Merrick. And why might I
not do it, if he will be over-bold with the Proceeding of the whole Court? I
have known e're now, a very good Lawyer Committed from the Chancery Bar to the
Fleet. Though I shall spare Names.

4. The fourth Instance was in Mr. Workman's Case: Charged as if he were
Sentenced only for Preaching a Sermon to the Judges, against Images in
Churches. 1. The first Witness in the Cause was Mr. Langly: He says, Mr.
Workman was Censured for this Sermon, and other things. Therefore not for this
Sermon only: The High-Commissioners were no such Patrons of Images. He says,
that when I was Dean of Gloucester, I told them in the Chapel, that King James
had heard of many things amiss in that Church, and required me to take care of
them. It Is true, he did so. He says farther, that hereupon I placed the
Communion Table Altar-wise, and Commanded due Reverence at the coming into the
Church. This I did, and I have given my Reason often already for it, out of the
Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth. He says, that Bishop Smith took offense at
this, and would come no more to the Cathedral. First, my Lords, this Gentleman
was then Schoolmaster there, and had free Access unto me: He never discovered
this. Secondly, the Bishop himself never said a word to me about it: If he had,
I would either have satisfied his Lordship in that, or any thing else that I
did: Or if he had satisfied me, I would have forborne it: He says, that Mr.
Workman, after he was put from his Lecture, was not suffered to teach Children.
First, if he had been suffered, this Man had been like to make the first
Complaint for decay of his own School. But secondly, The Commission thought it
no way fit to trust him with the Education of Children, who had been Factious
among Men. Especially not in that place, where he had so showed himself. And
this Answer I gave to Mr. Brown, who in Summing the Evidence stood as much, and
inveighed as earnestly against this Cruel proceeding with Mr. Workman, as upon
any one thing in the Charge. At which time he added also, that he would not be
suffered to Practice Physic to get his Living. But First, no Witness
Evidenceth this, that he was denied to Practice Physic. And Secondly, he might
have taught a School, or Practiced Physic any where else. But he had done so
much Harm, and made such a Faction in Gloucester, as that the High Commission
thought it not fit to continue him there; and he was not willing to go from
thence, where he had made his Party.

He says farther, that some few of the Citizens of Gloucester were called into
the High Commission, for an Annuity of Twenty Pound a Year allowed Mr. Workman,
out of the Town-Stock. For the thing it self, it was a Gross Abuse and Scorn
put upon that Court; that when they had Censured a Schismatical Lecturer (for
such he was there proved) the Townsmen should make him an allowance of Twenty
Pound a Year. A thing (as I humbly conceive) not fit to be endured in any
settled Government. And whereas Clamor is made, that some few of the Citizens
were called to an account for it, that is as strange on the other side. For
where there are many Offenders, the Noise would be too great to call all. And
yet here is Noise enough made for calling a few. Here it was replied by Mr.
Maynard, That this was done by that Corporation, and yet a few singled out to
Answer; and that therefore I might be singled out to Answer for things done in
the High Commission. But, under Favor, this Learned and Worthy Gentleman is
mistaken. For here the Mayor and Magistrates of Gloucester, did that which was
no way warrantable by their Charter, in which Case they may be accountable, all
or some: But in the High Commission we meddled with no Cause not Cognoscible
there; or if by Misinformation we did, we were sure of a Prohibition to stop
us. And meddling with nothing but things proper to them, I conceive still, no
one Man can be singled out to suffer for that which was done by all. And this
may serve to Answer Mr. Brown also, who in his last Reply upon me, when I might
not Answer, made use of it:



2. The Second Witness was Mr. Purye of (...). He says, that Mr. Brewster and
Mr. Guies the Town-Clark, were called to the Council Table about this Annuity,
and that I (...) it might be (...) Examined at the High Commission. If this
were true, I know no Offense in it, to desire that such an Affront to
Government might be more thoroughly Examined than the Lords had leisure to do.
But the Witness does not give this in Evidence. For he says no more, than that
he heard so from Mr. Brewster. And his Hearsay is no Conviction. He says
farther, that the High Commission called upon this Business of the Annuity, as
informed that the Twenty Pound given to Mr. Workman, was taken out of the
Moneys for the Poor. And this I must still think was a good and a sufficient
ground, justly to call them in question. He says also, That these Men were
Fined, because that which they did was against Authority. So by their own
Witness it appears, that they were not Fined simply for allowing Means to Mr.
Workman, but for doing it in opposition to Authority. Lastly, he says, they
were Fined Ten Pound apiece, and that presently taken off again. So here was no
such great Persecution as is made in the Cause. And for the Cancelling of this
Deed of the Annuity, it was done by themselves, as Mr. Langlye Witnesses.

After these two Witnesses heard, the Sentence of the High-Commission-Court was
read, which I could not have come at, had not they produced it. And by that it
appeared evidently, that Mr: Workman was Censured, as well for other things as
for his Sermon about Images in Churches. As first, he said, so many Paces in
Dancing were so many to Hell. This was hard, if he meant the Measures in the
Inns of Court at Christmas; and he excepted none. Then he said, and was no way
able to prove it; that Drunkards, so they were Conformable, were preferred.
Which was a great and a notorious Slander upon the Governors of the Church,
and upon Orderly and Conformable Men. Then he said, that Election of Ministers
was in the People. And this is directly against the Laws of England, in the
Right of all Patrons. Then constantly in his Prayer before his Sermon, he
Prayed for the States and the King of Sweden, before his Majesty, which was the
Garb of that time, among that Party of Men. Then, that one of his common Themes
of Preaching to the People, was against the Government of the Church. And then,
that Images in Churches, were (...) better than Stews in the Commonwealth,
which at the best is a very unsavory Comparison. But here it was replied, That
Images were Idols, and so called in the Homilies, and that therefore the
Comparison might hold. Yea, (...). against the Peril of Idola. p. 3. p. 92.
but in the second Homily, against the Peril of Idolatry, Images or Pictures in
Glass or Hangings, are expressly and truly said not to be Idols, till they be
Worshipped. And therefore Mr. Workman should not have compared their setting
up, to Stews, till he could have proved them Worshipped. And in all this, were
the Act good or bad in the Censuring of him, it was the Act of the
High Commission, not mine.

After this followed the Fifth Charge, which was Mr: Sherfeild's V.
Case, his Sentence in the Star Chamber for defacing of a Church-Window in or
near Salisbury. The Witnesses produced were Two. The First 1.
was Mr: Carill. He said that Mr: Sherfeild defaced this Window, because there
was an Image in it, conceived to be the Picture of God the Father. But first,
this comes not home. For many a Picture may be conceived to be of God the
Father, which yet is not, nor was ever made for it. And then suppose it were
so, yet Mr: Sherfeild in a settled Government of a State, ought not to have done
it, but by Command of Authority. He says, that in my Speech there in the Court,
I justified the having of the Picture of God the Father, as he remembers, out
of Dan. 7. 22. This (as he remembers) came well in. For I never justified the
making or having that Picture. For Calvin's Rule, Calv. 1. (...). c. 11.. 12.
that we may picture that which may be seen, is grounded upon the Negative,
that no Picture may be made of that which was never, never can be seen. And to
ground this Negative, is the Command given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. Take good heed to
your selves. For what? That you Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16.
make not to your selves this Picture: Why? For that you saw no manner of
similitude, in the day that the Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the
fire. Out of the midst of the fire, and yet he still reserved himself in thick
darkness, Exodus 20. So no Picture of him, because no similitude (...). 20. 21.
ever seen. And this Rule having ever possessed me wholly, I could not justify
the having of it.

I said indeed, that some Men in later Superstitious Times, were so foolish as
to Picture God the Father, by occasion of that place in Daniel; but for my self
I ever rejected it. Nor can that place bear any show of it. For Daniel says
there, that the Ancient of days came. But in what shape or similitude he came,
no Man Living can tell. And he is called the Ancient of days from his Eternity,
not as if he appeared like an Old Man. The Text has no Warrant at all for that.

2. Yet the Second Witness Mr. Tomlyns says also, that I did justify this
Picture. God forgive him the Malice or Ignorance of this Oath, be it which it
will.

He might have been as wary as Mr. Caril, and added ( as he remembers;) For so
many Years since, as this Hearing was, he may easily mistake. But if I did say
any such thing; why are not my own Papers here produced against me? I had that
written which I then spoke, and the Paper was in my Study with the rest, and
came (for ought I know) into their Hands which follow the Charge against me. I
ask again, why is not this Paper produced? Out of all doubt it would, had there
appeared any such thing in it. He says also, that I said then, that if the Idol
of Jupiter were set up, yet it were not lawful to pull it down in a Popular
Tumult, but by Order and Authority. I did say so, or to that effect, indeed;
and must say it still. For I find in St. Augustine almost the very words. St.
Aug.
And Bishop Davenant, a Man very Learned, (...) this place of St. Augustine and
approves it. And they both prove this Doctrine from Deuteronomy. 12. Where the Command
given for destroying of the Idols, Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and 12. 2.
when they came into the Land of Canaan, was not left at large to the People,
but settled in Moses the chief Magistrate, and his Power. And according to this
Rule, the Temple of AEsculapius, though then grown very Scandalous, was not
pulled down but by Eusebius. 3. de vita Constan. c. 54.
(...) Command. Which place I then showed the Lords. But this Witness added,
that Mr: Sherfeild had. Authority to do this from the Vestry. If he had, that is
as good as none; for by the Laws of England there is yet no power given them
for that or any thing else. And all that Vestries do, is by usurpation or
consent of the Parish, but reaches not this. The Bishop of the Diocese had been
fitter to be consulted herein, than the Vestry.

Here, as if these Witnesses had not said enough, Mr: Nicolas offered himself
to be a Witness. And told the Lords he was present at the Hearing of this
Cause, and that four Witnesses came in clear, that the Picture broken down, was
the Picture of God the Father, and that yet the Sentence of the Court passed
against Mr: Sherfeild. First, if this be so, it concludes against the Sentence
given in the Star Chamber, not against me; and he calls it here the Sentence of
the Court. Secondly, be it, that it were undoubtedly the Picture of God the
Father; yet he ought to have taken Authority along with him, and not to go
about it with violence, which he did, and fell and brake his Leg in the
Business. Thirdly, by his own description of the Picture, it seems to me to be
some old Fabulous Picture out of a Legend, and not one of God the Father: For
he then told the Lords, it was a Picture of an Old Man with a Budget by his
side, out of which he was plucking Adam and Eve, And I believe no Man ever saw
God the Father so Pictured any where. Lastly, let me observe how Mr: Nicolas
takes all parts upon him wherein he may hope to do me mischief.



The Sixth Charge was concerning a Bible, that was Printed with UP.
Pictures, and sold. The Witness Mr: Walsal a Stationer. Who says, That this
Bible was Licensed by Dr: Weeks; my Lord of London's Chaplain, not mine; so
thus far it concerns not me. Yes, says Mr. Brown in his last Reply: For it
appears in a List of my Chaplains under my own Hand, that Dr: Weeks was one:
It Is true, when I was Bishop of Bath and Wells he was mine; but my Lord of
London had him from me, so soon as ever he was Bishop. And was his, not mine,
when he Licensed that Book. And Mr. Brown knew that I answered it thus to the
Lords.

He says, that I gave him direction that they should not be sold openly upon
the Stalls, but only to discreet Men that knew how to use them. The Case was
this. As I was at Prayers in the King's Chapel, I there saw one of them in
Mrs. Kirk's Hand. She was far enough from any affection to Rome. And this being
the first knowledge I had of it, many were vented and sold before I could
prevent it. Upon this I sent for one (whether to this Witness or another I
cannot say) and acquainted the Lords of the Council with it, and craved their
direction what should be done. It was there Ordered, that I should forbid the
open Sale of them upon their Stalls, but not otherwise to Learned and Discreet
Men. And when I would have had this Order stricter, no Man stuck to me but Mr:
Secretary Cook. So according to this Order I gave direction to Mr: Walsal, as
he witnesses.

Here Mr. Maynard replied, that I ought to have withstood this Order, in regard
it was every way faulty. For, said he, either these Pictures were good or bad.
And if they were good, why should they not be Sold openly upon the Stalls to
all that would buy? And if they were bad, why should they be Sold privately to
any? To this Reply I was not suffered to Answer: But when I heard Mr. Brown
charge this Bible with Pictures against me, then I answered the thing as
before, and took occasion thereby to answer this Dilemma thus. Namely, that
this kind of Argument concludes not, but in things Necessary, and where no
Medium can be given. For where a Medium can be given, the Horns of this
Argument are too weak to hurt. And so it is here. For Pictures in themselves are
things indifferent; not simply good, nor simply bad, but as they are used. And
therefore they were not to be sold to all comers, because they may be abused,
and become evil; and yet might be sold to Learned and Discreet Men, who might
turn them to good. And that Images are things indifferent of themselves, is
granted in the Homilies which are against the very Peril of (...). (...). 1. p.
11.
Idolatry.

He said, there was some inconvenient Pictures among them; as the Assumption,
and the Dove. Be it so, the Book was not Licensed by me or mine. And yet, as I
then showed the Lords, they were not so strict at Amsterdam against these
Pictures. For the Book which Mr. Walsal showed me, was Printed and sent thence,
before it was Printed here. Besides, our old English Bibles in the beginning of
the Queen were full of Pictures; and no fault found. As for that which is added
at the Bar, that one of these Bibles was found in Secretary Windebank's Trunk,
and another in Sir John Lambs. That Is nothing to me.

The last Charge of this day was, that something about Images was VII.
Expunged out of Dr: Featly's Sermons, by my Chaplain Dr: Bray, before they
could be suffered to be Printed. But first, he himself confesses, that I told
him he might Print them, so nothing were in them contrary to the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England. Secondly, he confesses, that when Dr. Bray
made stay of them, he never complained to me; and I cannot remedy that which I
do not know. Thirdly, he confesses, that all the time he was in Lambeth-House,
my Predecessor ever left that care of the Press upon his Chaplains; and why I
might not do it as well as my Predecessor, I do not yet know. But he said, that
he complained to Sir Edmund Scott, and desired to be advised by him what he
should do: And that he Answered, he thought I would not meddle with that
troublesome Business, more than my Predecessors had done. Be this so, yet Sir
Ed. Scott never told me this; nor is there any the least Proof offered that he
did. But because this and the like passages about Expunging some things out of
Books, makes such a great Noise, as if nothing concerning Popery might be
Printed: And because Mr. Brown in Summing up of the Charge in the House of
Commons, warmly insisted upon this Particular, I thought it necessary to Answer
as follows. That what moved my Chaplain to Expunge that large passage against
Images, I knew not; nor could I now know, my Chaplain being Dead. But that this
I was sure of, that elsewhere in those very Sermons, there was as plain a
passage, Dr. Featly's Sermons.
and full against p. 477.
Images left in. And in another place a whole Leaf together, spent to prove
them p. 791.
Idolaters; and that as gross as the Baalists, and so he terms them. Yea; and
that the p. 808.
Pope is Antichrist too, and not only called so, but proved by diverse
Arguments. And not so only, but in plain Terms, that he is the p. 810.
Whore of Babylon. And these passages I then Read out of the Book it self in
the House of Commons. And many other-like to these there are. So my Chaplain
might see good Cause to leave out some passages.

Where so many upon as good Cause were left in:

But to the Business of leaving the Care of these Books, and the overview of
them to my Chaplains, it was then urged, That the Commissary This was done long
before the Reformation; when the Patents of Chancellors and Commissaries were
revocable at the pleasure of the Bishop. H. W.
of John Lord Archbishop of York, had Excommunicated the Lord Bishop of
Durham, being then in the King's Service. And that the Archbishop himself was
deeply Fined for this Act of his Commissary. And that therefore I ought much
more to be answerable for my Chaplain's Act, whom I might put away when I
would, than he for his Commissary, who had a Patent, and could not be put out
at pleasure.

Mr. Brown also followed this Precedent close upon me. But first, there is a
great deal of difference in the thing it self: My Chaplain's Case being but the
leaving out of a passage in a Book to be Printed: But his Commissary's Case
being the Excommunicating of a great Bishop, and he in the King's Service, of
whose Honor the Laws of this Realm are very tender. And Secondly, the Bishop
and his Official, (call him Chancellor or Commissary, or what you will) make
but one Person in Law; and therefore the Act of the Commissary to the full
extent of his Patent, is the Act of the Bishop in legal Construction, and the
Bishop may be answerable for it. But the Bishop and his Chaplain are not one
Person in any Construction of Law. And say he may put away his Chaplain when he
will, yet that cannot help what is past, if ought have been done amiss by him.
And this was the Answer I insisted on to Mr. Brown.



Upon my entrance on this days Defense, I found my self aggrieved at the
Diurnal, and another Pamphlet of the Week, wherein they Print whatsoever is
Charged against me, as if it were fully proved; never so much as mentioning
what, or how I Answered. And that it troubled me the more, because (as I
conceived) the passages as there expressed, trenched deep upon the Justice and
Proceedings of that Honorable House. And could have no Aim but to incense the
Multitude against me. With some difficulty I got these Pamphlets received, but
there they dyed, and the Weekly abuse of me continued to keep my Patience in
Breath.

CAP. XXXV. The Thirteenth Day of my Hearing.
THE First Charge of this Day, was the Opinion which was I.
held of me beyond the Seas. The first Witness was Sir (...) 11. 1644.
Whitson-Tuesday.
Henry Mildmaye, who (as is before related) told me without asking; That I was
the most Hateful Man at Rome, that ever sat in my See since the Reformation.
Now he denied not this, but being Die Decimotertio.
helped on by good Preparation, a Flexible Conscience, and a fair leading
Interrogatory by Mr. Nicolas,

(Mr. Sergeant Wild was Sick, and came no more till the last day when I made
my Recapitulation) he minced it. And now he says, that there were two Factions
at Rome, and that one of them did indeed speak very ill of me, because they
thought I aimed at too great a Power here in England: But the other Faction
spoke as well of me, because they thought I endeavored to bring us in England
nearer to the Church of Rome. But first, my Lords, this Gentleman's Words to me
were Round and General. That I was hated at Rome; not of a Party, or Faction
there. And my Servants heard him at the same time, and are here ready to
witness it, that he then said the Pope was a goodly Gentleman, and did use to
ride two or three great Horses in a Morning, and, but that he was something
taller, he was as like Auditor Philips ( who was then at Dinner with me) as
could be. But I pray mark what Wise Men he makes them at Rome: One Faction
hates me, because I aim at too much Power: And the other loves me, because I
would draw England nearer Rome; Why, if I went about to draw England nearer
Rome, can any among them be such Fools as to think my Power too great? For if I
used my Power for them; why should any there Condemn me? And if I used it
against them, why should any here Accuse me? Non sunt haec been divisa
temporibus. These things suit not with the Times, or the Dispositions of Rome:
But the plain Truth is, I do not think that ever he was at Rome; I after heard
a whisper, that he only stepped into France for another Cure, not to Rome for
Curiosity, which was the only cause he gave the Lords of his going thither.



2. The second Witness was Mr. Challoner. He says not much of his own
knowledge, but of Fame, that tatling Gossip; yet he told the Lords, I was a
very Obscure Man, till within these Fifteen Years. Be it so, if he please. Yet
I have been a Bishop above Three and Twenty Years: And it is Eighteen Years
since I was first Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal. He says, that after this
time there was a strong Opinion of Reconciliation to Rome. A strong Opinion,
but a weak Proof. For it was an Opinion of Enemies, and such as could easily
believe, what they overmuch desired. He farther said, that some of them were
of Opinion, that I was a good Roman Catholic, and that I wrought cunningly to
introduce that Religion by Inches: And that they Prayed for me. First, my
Lords, the Opinion of Enemies is no Proof at all, that I am such as they think
me. And secondly, this is a Notable, and no unusual piece of Cunning, for an
Enemy to destroy by commending. For this was the ready way, and I doubt not,
but it has been Practiced, to raise a Jealousy against me at home, thereby
either to work the Ruin of my Person, or utterly to weaken and disable me from
doing harm to them, or good for the Church of England. Besides, if the
Commendation of Enemies may in this kind go for Proof; it shall be in the power
of two or three Practicing Jesuits, to destroy any Bishop or other Churchman
of England when they please. At last, he told a Story of one Father John, a
Benedictin; that he asked him how Church Livings were disposed in England, and
whether I had not the disposing of those which were in the King's Gift. And
concluded, that he was not out of hope to see England reduced to Rome. Why, my
Lords, this is not Father John's hope alone; for there is no The Archbishop
calls the English Papists Roman Catholics; not as allowing them to be such;
but referring to that Name, which some of them were before said to have affixed
to him. H: W:
Roman Catholic but has some hope alive in him to see this day. And were it
not for that hope, there would not have been so many, some desperate, all
dangerous Practices upon this Kingdom to Effect it, both in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and since. But if this, I know not what Father John hope so, what is that
to me?

3. The third Witness was Mr. Anthony Mildmaye. A Man not thought on for a
Witness, till I called for his Brother Sir Henry. But now he comes laden with
his Brother's Language. He says just as Sir Henry did before, that there were
two Factions in Rome, the Jesuits, and they abhorred me; but the other, the
Secular Priests, they wished me well, as he was informed. First, this is so one
and the same Testimony; that any Man that will may see, that either he informed
his Brother, or his Brother him. Secondly, here is nothing affirmed; for it is
but as he was informed. And he does not tell you by whom. It may be my Lords,
it was by his Brother. Then he says, This was to make my self Great, and tells
a Tale of Father Fitton, as much to the purpose as that which Mr. Challoner
told of Father John. But whatsoever either of these Fathers said, it was but
their own Opinion of me, or Hearsay; neither of which can prove me guilty of
any thing. Thus much Mr. Anthony made a shift to say by Five of the Clock at
Afternoon; when I came to make my Answer. And this (as I have sufficient Cause
to think) only to help to shore up his Brother's Testimony. But in the Morning,
when he should have come, as his Brother did, he was by Nine in the Morning so
Drunk, that he was not able to come to the Bar, nor to speak Common Sense, had
he been brought thither.

Nobile par Fratrum.

The Second Charge was the Consecration of two Churches in II.
London: St: Catharin Cree-Church, and St: Giles in the Fields. The Witnesses
two.

1. The first Witness was one Mr: Willingham. And he says, (...) I came to
these Churches in a Pompous manner: But all the Pomp that he mentions, is, that
Sir Henry Martin, Dr: Duck, and some other of the Arches attended me, as they
usually do their Diocesans in such Solemnities. He says, he did curiously
observe what was done, thinking it would one Day be called to an Account, as
now it is. So this Man (himself being Judge) looked upon that Work with
Malevolent Eye, and God preserve him from being a malicious Witness. He says,
That at my approach to the Church Door, was read, Lift up your Heads, O ye
Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come
in. Psalm: 24. And this was urged Psalm. 24. 7.
over and over as a jeer upon my Person. But this Place of Scripture has been
anciently used in Consecrations. And it relates not to the Bishop, but to God
Almighty, the true King of Glory, who at the Dedication enters by his Servant
to take Possession of the House, then to be made his. He says, that I kneeled
down at my coming in, and after used many Bowings and Cringings. For my
kneeling down at my entranee, to begin with Prayer, and after to proceed with
Reverence, I did but my Duty in that, let him scoffingly call it Cringing, or
Ducking, or what he please.

He says farther, That at the beginning I took up Dust, and threw it in the
Air, and after used diverse Curses. And here Mr: Pryn put Mr: Nicolas in mind to
add, that Spargere Cinerem is in the Form of Consecration used in the
Pontifical. And Mr: Brown, in his summary Account of my Charge, laid the very
Consecration of these Churches, as a Crime upon me; and insisted on this
particular.

But here my answer to all was the same: That this Witness had need look well
to his Oath; for there was no throwing up of Dust, no Curses used throughout
the whole Action: Nor did I follow the Pontifical, but a Copy of Learned and
Reverend Bishop Andrews, by which he Consecrated diverse Churches in his time;
and that this is so, I have the Copy by me to Witness, and offered them to show
it. Nor can this howsoever savor any way of Treason. No; said Mr: Brown, but
the Treason is, To seek, by these Ceremonies, to overthrow the Religion
Established. Nor was that ever sought by me: And God of his Mercy Preserve the
true Protestant Religion amongst us, till the Consecration of Churches, and
Reverence in the Church, can overthrow it; and then I doubt not, but by God's
Blessing, it shall continue safe to the Worlds End.

He says also, That I did pronounce the Place Holy. I did so: And that was in
the Solemn Act it self of the Consecration, according to the usual Form in that
behalf. And no Man will deny, but that there is a Derivative, and (...) and
(...), Jo. Prideaux. Concie, in S. Luc. 19. 46 1 (...). 9. 13.
a Relative Holiness in Places, as well as in Vessels, and other Things
Dedicated to the Honor and Service of God. Nor is any thing more common in the
Old Testament; and it is express in the New, both for Place and Things. 1: Cor:
9.

Then it was urged at the Bar, That a Prayer which I used, was like one that is
in the Pontifical. So in the Missal are many Prayers like to the Collects used
in our English Liturgy, so like, that some are the very same, Translated only
into English; and yet these confirmed by Law. And for that of Psalm. 95. Venite
Procidamus, etc. Psalm. 95. 6.
then also excepted against, that has been of very ancient use in the
Liturgies of the Church. From which Rejecimus Paleam, numquid and Grana? We
have separated the Chaff, shall we cast away the Corn too? If it come to that
let us take heed we fall not upon the Devil's Winnowing, who labors to beat
down the Corn; it is not the Chaff that Troubles him, S: Luc: 22. Then they
urged my Predecessor Archbishop Parker, That he found Fault with the
Consecration of New Churches. I answered then upon Memory, that he did not find
S. Lue. 22. 31. In Antiq. (...), p. 85.
fault simply with Consecrations of Churches, but only with the Superstitious
Ceremonies used therein. And this since upon perusal of the Place, I find to be
true. For after he had in some sort Commended the Popes for taking away some
gross and superstitious Purgations, he adds, that yet for want of Piety, or
Prudence, their later Pontifical and Missal-Books did outgo the Ancient In
Multitudine Ceremoniarum, and peragendi Difficultate, and Taedio, and (...)
amentia. So these were the things he found fault with, not the Consecration it
self; which he could not well do, himself being then a Consecrated Bishop.



2. The Second Witness was Mr. Hope. He says, That he agrees with the former
Witness, and saw all, and the throwing up of the Dust, etc. Since he agrees
with the former Witness, I give him the same Answer. Yet with this Observation
upon him and his Oath. The former Witness says, that at the beginning of this
Action, I took Dust and threw it up: This Man agrees with him, and saw all; and
almost in the very next Words confesses, he was not there at the beginning. Not
there: Yet he saw it. My Lords; if you mark it, this is a wholesome Oath. He
says, That then the Churchyard was Consecrated by it self. It was ever so; the
one Act must follow the other, though both done the same Day: For the Places
being different, the Act could not pass upon them at the same time. Then he
said, there were Fees required, and a good Eye had to the Money. This is a poor
Objection against me: If the Officers did exact any Money without Rule, or
beyond President; let them answer for it. But for that which was said to belong
to me, I presently gave it to the Poor of the Parish. And this Mr. Dell my
Secretary then present attested to the Lords. Lastly, he said, they were not
New Churches. Let him look to his Oath again; for it is notoriously known, they
were both New Built from the Ground; and St. Giles not wholly upon the Old
Foundation.

The Third Charge was laid on me, only by Mr. Nieolas, and without III.
any Witness. It was, That I out-went Popery Here in England, both before and
since the Reformation, Chapels (...) erected, were always solemnly
Consecrated, as well as Churches. I could produce (...) of the Time preceding,
many of the (...) succeeding the (...). H. W.
it self; for the Papists Consecrated Churches only, but I had been so
Ceremonious, that I had Consecrated Chapels too. My Lords, the use of Chapels
and of Churches in regard of God's Service is the same. Therefore if
Consecration be fit for the one; it must needs be for the other. And the
Consecrations of Chapels was long before Popery came into the World. For even
Oratories Newly Built were Consecrated in or before Eusebius his Time. And he
Flourished about the (...) L. 10. Hist. c. 3.
Year of Christ 310. So ancient they are in the course of Christianity; and for
any Prohibition of them, there is neither Law nor Canon in the State or Church
of England that does it.

The Chapels they instance in are Three. First, they say, I Consecrated a
Chapel of the Right Honorable the Lord Treasurer Weston's. I did so, and did
no harm therein. As for the touch given by the way upon that Honorable Person,
he is gone to God, I have nothing to do with it. Secondly, they Instanced in a
Chapel of Sir John Worstenham's Building. It Is true I Consecrated that too, 2.
but that was a Parish Church, Built in the Place where he was born, and it was
in my Diocese, and so the Work proper for me. The Third Instance was in my own
Chapel, in my House at Aberguilly, 3.
when I was Bishop of St. David's; the Room lay waste and out of Repair, and I
fitted it at my own Cost, and Consecrated it into a Chapel, that House having
no Oratory before. Here they farther aggravated many circumstances: As First,
that I named it at the Dedication, (...).
The Chapel of S. John the Baptist. I did so Name that Chapel, in Memory of
the College where I was Bred, which bears the same Name; but I dedicated it to
God and his Service. And to give the Names of Angels and Saints to Churches,
for distinction sake, and for the Honor of their Memory, is very Ancient and
Usual in the Church, as appears in S. Augustine, and diverse The. 2. 2ae. q. 85.
A. 2. ad 3.
others of the Fathers; but Dedicated only to God: Which in the midst of
Superstitious times, the School it self confesses:

So yet no Offense. Secondly, That I did it upon the 29th. of August. And (...).
why might I not do it that Day, as well as upon any other? But resolving to
Name the Chapel as I did, I the rather made choice of that Day, both because
it was the Day of the Decollation of S: John the Baptist; and because, as upon
that Day God had wonderfully Blessed me, in the Hearing of my Cause concerning
the Presidentship of S. John's College in Oxford, by King James of ever blessed
Memory: So yet no Offense. Thirdly, there was a Paper read, and 3.
Avowed to be mine, in which was a fair description of Chapel Furniture, and
Rich Plate, and the Ceremonies in use in that Chapel, and Wafers for the
Communion. At the reading of this Paper, I was a little troubled. I knew I was
not then so Rich, as to have such Plate, or Furniture; and therefore I humbly
desired sight of the Paper. So soon as I saw it, I found there was nothing in
it in my Hand, but the Indorsement, which told the Reader plainly, that it was
the Model of Reverend Bishop Andrews his Chapel, with the Furniture, Plate,
Ceremonies therein used, and all Things else. And this Copy was sent me by the
Household Chaplain to that Famous Bishop. This I laid open to the Lords, and it
would have made any Man ashamed, but Mr. Pryn, who had delivered upon Oath,
that it was a Paper of my Chapel Furniture at Aberguilly, contrary to his
Conscience, and his own Eyesight of the Paper.

And for (...), I never either gave, or received the Communion, but in Ordinary
Bread. At Westminster I knew it was sometimes used, but as a thing indifferent.
As for the Slur here given to that Reverend Dead Bishop of Winchester, it might
well have been spared; he deserved far better usage for his Service to the
Church of England, and the Protestant Cause.

The Fourth Charge, was the Publishing the Book of Recreations: IV.
And it was ushered in with this Scorn upon me, That I labored to put a Badge
of Holiness, by my Breath, upon Places; and to take it away from Days. But I
did neither; the King commanded the Printing of it, as is therein attested, and
the Warrant which the King gave me, they have: And though at Consecrations I
read the Prayers, yet it was God's Blessing, not my Breath, that gave the
Holiness. And for the Day, I ever labored it might be kept Holy, but yet free
from a Superstitious Holiness. And First, it was said, That this was done of
purpose to take away Preaching. But First, there is no Proof offered for this.
And Secondly, it is impossible: For till the Afternoon Service and Sermon were
done; no Recreation is allowed by that Book; nor then to any but such as have
been at both. Therefore it could not be done to take it away. Thirdly, the Book
names none but Lawful Recreations: Therefore if any unlawful be used, the Book
gives them no Warrant. And that some are Lawful (after the Public Service of
God is ended) appears by the Practice of Geneva, where after Evening Prayer,
the Elder Men Bowl, and the Younger Train. And Calvin says in express Terms,
That one Cause of the Institution of the Sabbath Tertio Servis, and ijs qui sub
aliorum degerent Imperio, quietis Diem indulgendum censuit, (...) aliquam
haberent a labor remissionem. Gal. L. 2. Inst. c. 8. (...). 28.
was, that Servants might have a Day of rest and remission from their Labor:
And what time of the Day fit, if not after Evening Prayer? And what Rest is
there for able Young Men, if they may use no Recreation? Then it was urged,
That there was great Riot and Disorder at Wakes kept on the Lords Day. That is
a very sufficient Cause to regulate and order those Feasts, but not quite to
take them away. I make no doubt for my part, but that the Feast of the
Dedication was abused by some among the Jews; and yet Christ was so far from
taking it away for that, as that he honored it with his own Presence. S. John
10. As for the Paper which was read containing S. John 10. 22.
three Causes why that Book was Published, that was a Note taken for my own
Private Use and Memory.

Then came in Mr. Pryn, who said, that the Lord Chief Justice Richardson had
made an Order in his Circuit against these Wakes, and was forced to revoke it.
This was done by Authority, as is before answered; to which I refer my self.
Here it is added, to help fill up the Noise: But Mr. Pryn says, That all the
Gentlemen in the Country Petitioned on the Judges behalf. No; there was a great
Faction in Sommersetshire at that time, and Sir Robert Philips and all his
Party writ up against the Judge and the Order he made, as was apparent by the
Certificates which he returned. And Sir Robert was well known in his time to be
neither Popish, nor Profane. He says farther, That William then Earl of
Pembrooke was out of Town, and the Book Printed in the Interim by my
Procurement. But for this last, here is not one Word of Proof offered, and so I
leave it.

The Fifth Charge was, that some Ministers were punished for not V.
reading this Book. Witnesses for this were produced.

1. The First was Sir Nathaniel Brent; who says, he had Charge from me to call
for an account of not reading this Book, both in my Province at my Visitation,
and in my Diocese. His Majesty having Commanded this, I could do little, if I
had not so much as inquired what was done: And he confesses, that for my
Province he gave time to them which had not read it, and then never asked more
after it. So here was no eager Prosecution. But then he says, that three in my
Diocese stood out, and asked time. And confesses that I granted it: But adds,
that when he asked more time for them, I denied; and that they were then
suspended ab Officio only. I thought I had reason to deny, when I saw they did
but dally by asking time. And it was then evident, that in the Diocese of other
Bishops far more than Three were punished, and their Punishment greater.
However, this my proceeding was far from Rigor. And this was the Answer that I
gave Mr. Brown, who in the Sum of his Charge, instanced in this Particular
against me.



2. The Second witness was Mr. Culmer, one of the Three Ministers that was
suspended. He says, That he was suspended by Sir Nathaniel Brent, and that when
he came to me about it, I said, If you know not how to Obey, I know not how to
Grant your Petition. Truly, my Lords, finding him both Wilful and Ignorant, I
cannot tell what I could say less. He says, that his Patron took away his
Benefice. Why, my Lords, he had none; he was only a (...), and, God knows,
unfit for that. So being Suspended from his Office, this must needs be done. He
says, he was not absolved till the Scots came in, and that he was Conformable
in all things else. For the time of his Absolution, I leave that to the Record:
But for his Conformity in other This Mr: Culmer not only Pissed in the Church
of Canterbury, but also demolished the Noble Glass-Windows of it with his own
Hands. The like he did in the Parish Church of Minster in Thanet; which
Benefice he usurped during the Rebellion. I have had more particular
Opportunities to be informed concerning him from many yet alive, who knew him
well; and upon the whole, think him to have been one of the greatest Villains
in the Three Kingdoms. H:
things, it is more than ever I heard of any. This I can say for him, he is good
at Purchasing a Benefice: For he offered a Servant of mine One Hundred and
Fifty Pound, so he could procure me but to Name him to the Parliament for
Chartham in Kent. Since, I have heard he is as good at doing Reverence in the
Church: For he (...) in the Body of the Cathedral Antidatum (...) 11.
at Canterbury at Noonday, as will be Justified by Oath. And for this very
Particular, the Book of Recreations, he informed at the Council Table against a
Gentleman of Quality, for saying, Ibid: p: 35.
it was unfit such Books should be sent, for Ministers to read in the Church.
And was himself laid by the Heels for the Falsehood of this Information. So he
is very good at the point of Conscience too, that can refuse to read the Book,
as being unfit, and complain to have another Punished for saying it is so.



3. The Third Witness is Mr. Wilson. He says, That I sent to Sir Nath. Brent to
Suspend him. That is true, but it was when he would neither Obey, nor keep in
his Tongue. He says, his Living was Sequestered for almost Four Years. But it
was not for Not Reading this Book. For himself confesses it was done in the
High Commission; and that for Dilapidations, in Not Repairing his House.

4. The Fourth Witness was one Mr. Snelling, a Minister in the Diocese of
Rochester. All that was done against this Man was openly in the High Commission
Court. And there he was Censured for other things, as well as for this. Himself
confesses his open refusing to Bow at the Name of Jesus, though the Canon of
the Church Command it. I kept him off from being Sentenced a long time, and
when he was Sentenced he confesses I was not present. He says, somewhat was
expunged out of his Brief. If it were, it was with the consent of his Council;
which in that Court was ordinary. Howsoever it cannot touch me: For those
things were done at Informations, where I was not present. He says, that when I
heard of the Nature of his Defense, I said, If any such Defense were put in, it
should be burnt. This was upon just Complaint of the Judge then present at
Informations, affirming it was against all the course of that Court. He says,
there is no Penalty mentioned in that Declaration. And I say his Obedience and
other Men's should have been the more free and cheerful. Well, I pray God keep
us in the mean, in this business of the Sabbath, as well as in other things,
that we run not into a Jewish Superstition, while we seek to shun Profaneness.
This, Calvin has in the mean time assured me, That ^ que Sabbatismi (...) ter
(...) superant. Call. 2. Inst. c. 8. (...): 34.
those Men who stand so strictly upon the Morality of the Sabbath, do by a
gross and carnal Sabbatization, three times out-go the Superstition of the Jew.

Here it was inferred, that there was a Combination for the doing of this in
other Dioceses. But no proof at all was offered. Then Bishop Mountague's
Articles, and Bishop Wrenn's were Read, to show that Inquiry was made about the
Reading of this Book. And the Bishop of London's Articles Named, but not Read.
But if I were in this Combination, why were not my Articles Read? Because no
such thing appears in them; and because my Articles gave so good content, that
while the Convocation was sitting, Dr. Brownrigg and Dr. Holdsworth came to me,
and desired me to have my Book confirmed in Convocation, to be general for all
Bishops in future, it was so moderate and according to Law. But why then (say
they) were other Articles thought on, and a Clause that none should pass
without the Approbation of the Archbishop? Why; other were thought on, because
I could not in Modesty press the Confirmation of my own, though solicited to
it. And that Clause was added, till a standing Book for all Dioceses might be
perfected, that no Quaere in the Interim might be put to any, but such as were
according to Law.

The Sixth Charge was about Reversing of a Decree in Chancery (as VI.
it is said) about Houses in Dr: Walton's Parish, given, as was said, to
Superstitious Uses.

1. The First Witness was Sergeant Turner. He says, He had a Rule in the King's
Bench for a Prohibition in this Cause. But by Reason of some defect (what; is
not mentioned) he confesses he could not get his Prohibition. Here Is nothing
that reflects upon me. And if a Prohibition were moved for; that could not be
personally to me, but to my Judge in some Spiritual (...) where it seems this
Cause depended, and to which the Decree in Chancery was directed. And indeed
this Act which they call a Reversing, was the Act and Seal of Sir Nath. Brent
my Vicar General. And if he violated the Lord Keeper's Decree, he must Answer
it. But the Instrument being then produced, it appeared concurrent in all
things with the Decree. The Words are, Juxta scopum Decreti hac in part in
Curia (...) factum, etc.

2. The Second Witness was Mr. Edwards. And wherein (...) concurs with Sergeant
Turner, I give him the same Answer. For that which he adds, that Dr. Walton did
let Leases of these Houses at an undervalue, and called none of the
Parishioners to it: If he did in this any thing contrary to Justice, or the
Will of the Donor, or the Decree; he is Living to Answer for himself; me it
concerns not. For his Exception taken to my Grant, (of Confirmation I think he
means) and to the Words therein, Omnis and Omnimoda, etc. It Is the Ancient
Style of such Grants, for I know not how many Hundred Years; no Syllable
innovated or altered by me.

Then followed the Charge of Mr. Burton and Mr. Pryn, about VII.
their Answer, and their not being suffered to put it into the Star Chamber.
Which though Mr. Pryn pressed at large before, yet here it must come again, to
help fill the World with Clamor. Yet to that which shall but seem new I shall
Answer. Two things are said. (1.) The one, That they were not suffered to put
in their defense, Modo and Forma, as it was laid. There was an Order made
openly in Court to the Judges, to Expunge Scandalous Matter. And the two Chief
Justices did Order the Expunging of all that which was Expunged, be it more or
less: As appears in the Acts of that Court. (2.) The other is, that I procured
this Expunging. The Proofs that I procured it were these. 1. First, because Mr.
Cockshot gave me an Account of the business from Mr. Attorney. I had Reason to
look after the business, the whole Church of England being scandalized in that
Bill, as well as my self. But this is no Proof, that I either gave direction or
used any solicitation to the Reverend Judges, to whom it was referred. 2.
Secondly, because I gave the Lords thanks for it: It was openly in Court: It
was after the Expunging was agreed unto. And what could I do less in such a
Cause of the Church, though I had not been personally concerned in it? 3.
Thirdly, because I had a Copy of their Answer found in my Study. I conceive it
was not only fit, but necessary for me to have one, the Nature of the Cause
considered. But who interlined any passages in it with black Lead, I know not.
For I ever used Ink, and no black Lead all my Life. These be strange Proofs
that I procured any thing.

Then Mr. Pryn added, That the Justice and Favor which was afforded Dr.
Leighton, was denied unto him: As far as I remember, it was for the putting in
of his Answer under his own Hand. This, if so, was done by Order of the Court,
it was not my Act.

The last Charge followed. And that was taken out of the Preface VIII.
to my Speech in Star Chamber. The Words are, That one way of Government My
Speech in the Star Chamber, Praefat. versus (...).
is not always either fit or safe, when the Humors of the People are in a
continual Change, etc. From whence they inferred, I labored to reduce all to
an Arbitrary Government. But I do humbly conceive, no construction can force
these Words against me for an Arbitrary Government. For the meaning is, and can
be no other, for sometimes a stricter, and sometimes a remisser holding and
ordering the Reins of Government; yet both according to the same Laws, by a
different use and application of Mercy and Justice to Offenders. And so I
Answered to Mr. Brown, who charged this against me as one of my ill Counsels to
his Majesty. But my Answer given is Truth. For it is not said, That there
should not be One Law for Government, but not One way in the Ordering and
Execution of that Law. And the Observator upon my Speech (an English Author,
Divine and Politic Observations upon my Speech, p. 78.
and well enough known, though he pretend it is a Translation out of Dutch)
though he spares nothing that may be but carped at, yet to this passage he says
it is a good Maxim, and wishes the King would follow it. And truly, for my part,
I Learned it of a very wise and an able Governor, and he a King of England
too, it was of Hen. 7. of Speed in Hen. 7. 5. 16.
whom the Story says, that in the difficulties of his Time and Cause, he used
both ways of Government, Severity and Clemency, yet both these were still
within the compass of the Law. He far too Wise, and I never yet such a Fool, as
to embrace Arbitrary Government.



CAP. XXXVI.
THis day I received a Note from the Committee, that they intended (...) 14.
1644.
to proceed next upon the remainder of the Seventh, and upon the Eighth and
Ninth Original Articles. Which follow in haec Verba.

The Eighth Article.

8. That for the better advancing of his Traiterous Purpose and Design, he did
abuse the great Power and Trust his Majesty reposed in him; and did intrude
upon the Places of diverse great Officers, and upon the Right of other his
Majesty's Subjects; whereby he did procure to himself the Nomination of sundry
Persons to Ecclesiastical Dignities, Promotions and Benefices belonging to his
Majesty and diverse of the Nobility, Clergy and others; and has taken upon him
the commendation of Chaplains to the King; by which means, he has preferred to
his Majesty's Service, and to other great Promotions in the Church, such as
have been Popishly affected, or otherwise Unsound and Corrupt both in Doctrine
and Manners.

The Ninth Article.

9. He has for the same Traiterous and Wicked intent, chosen and employed such
Men to be his Chaplains, whom he knew to be Notoriously disaffected to the
Reformed Religion, grosty addicted to Popish Superstition, and Erroneous and
Unsound both in Judgment and Practice; and to them, or some of them, he has
committed the Licensing of Books to be Printed, by which means, diverse False
and Superstitious Books have been Published, to the great Scandal of Religion,
and to the (...) of many of his Majesty's Subjects.

The Fourteenth Day of my Hearing.
At the ending of the former days Charge, I was put off to this (...) 17. 1644.
(...).
day, which held. The First Charge was concerning Mr. Damport's leaving his
Benefice in London, and going into Holland. I.


1. The First Witness for this was Quaterman, a bitter Enemy of Die (...).
mine; God forgive him. He speaks, as if he had fled from his Ministry here for
fear of me. But the Second Witness Mr. Dukeswell says, that he went away upon a
Warrant that came to Summon him into the High Commission. The Truth is, my
Lords, and it is well known, and to some of his best Friends, that I preserved
him once before, and my Lord Veer came and gave me Thanks for it. If after this
he fell into danger again, Majus Peccatum habet; I cannot preserve Men that
will continue in dangerous courses. He says farther (and in this the other
Witness agrees with him) That when I heard he was gone into New England, I
should say my Arm should reach him there. The Words I remember not. But for the
thing, I cannot think it fit that any Plantation should secure any Offender
against the Church of England. And therefore if I did say my Arm should reach
him, or them so offending, I know no Crime in it; so long as my Arm reached no
Man but by the Law.

2. The Second Witness Mr. Dukeswell adds nothing to this, but that he says,
Sir Maurice Abbot kept him in before. For which Testimony I thank him. For by
this it appears, that Mr. Damport was a dangerous Factious Man, and so
accounted in my Predecessor's Time, and it seems Prosecuted then too, that his
Brother Sir Maurice Abbot was fain, (being then a Parishioner of his) to labor
hard to keep him in.

The Second Charge was concerning Nathaniel Wickens, a Servant II.
of Mr. Pryns.

1. The First Witness in this Cause was William Wickens, Father to Nathaniel.
He says, his Son was Nine Weeks in diverse Prisons, and for no Cause but for
that he was Mr. Pryn's Servant. But it appears apud Acta, that there were many
Articles of great Misdemeanour against him. And afterward himself adds, That
he knew no Cause but his refusing to take the Oath Ex Officio. Why, but if he
knew that, then he knew another Cause, beside his being Mr. Pryn's Servant.
Unless he will say all Mr. Pryn's Servants refuse that Oath, and all that
refuse that Oath are Mr. Pryn's Servants. As for the Sentence which was laid
upon him and the Imprisonment, that was the Act of the High Commission, not
mine. Then he says, That my Hand was first in the Warrant for his Commitment.
And so it was to be of course.

2. The Second Witness was Sarah Wayman. She says, that he refused to take the
Oath. Therefore he was not committed for being Mr. Pryn's Servant. She says,
that for refusing the Oath, he was threatened he should be taken pro Confesso:
And that when one of the Doctors replied, that could not be done by the Order
of the Court, I should say, I would have an Order by the next Court Day. It Is
manifest in the Course of that Court, that any Man may be taken pro Confesso,
that will not take the Oath, and answer. Yet seeing how that party of Men
prevailed, and that one Doctors doubting might breed more Difference, to the
great Scandal and Weakening of that Court, I publicly acquainted his Majesty
and the Lords with it. Who were all of Opinion, that if such Refusers might not
be taken pro Confesso, the whole Power of the Court was shaken. And hereupon
his Majesty sent his Letter under his Signet, to command us to uphold the Power
of the Court, and to proceed. She says farther, that he desired the sight of
his Articles, which was denied him. It was the constant and known Course of
that Court, that he might not see the Articles till he had taken the Oath,
which he refused to do.

3. The Third Witness was one Flower. He agrees about the business of taking
him pro Confesso. But that is answered. He adds, that there was nothing laid to
his Charge, and yet confesses that Wickens desired to see the Articles that
were against him. This is a pretty Oath. There were Articles against him, which
he desired to see, and yet there was nothing laid to his Charge.

4. Then was produced his Majesty's Letter sent unto us. And herein the King
requires us by his Supreme Power Ecclesiastical to proceed, etc. We had been in
a fine case, had we disobeyed this Command. Besides, my Lords, I pray mark it;
we are enjoined to proceed by the King's Supreme Power Ecclesiastical; and yet
it is here urged against me, that this was done to bring in Popery. An
Excellent new way of bringing in Popery by the King's Supremacy. Yea, but they
say, I should not have procured this Letter. Why? I hope I may by all Lawful
ways preserve the Honor, and just Power of the Court in which I sat. And it is
expressed in the Letter, that no (...) was done, than was agreeable to the Laws
and Customs of the Realm. And it is known that both an Oath, and a taking pro
Confesso in point of refusal, are used both in the Star Chamber, and in the
Chancery.

5. The last Witness was Mr. Pryn, who says, That his Man was not suffered to
come to him, during his Soarness when his ears were Cropped. This Favor should
have been asked of the Court of Star Chamber, not of me. And yet here is no
Proof that I denied him this, but the bare Report of him, whom he says, he
employed. Nor do I remember any Man's coming to me about it.

The Third Charge followed, it was concerning stopping of Book III.
from the Press, both Old and New, and expunging some things out of them.

1. The first Instance was about the English Bibles with the Geneva Notes. The
Bibles with those Notes were tolerated indeed both in Queen Elizabeth's and King
James his Time; but allowed by Authority in neither. And King James said
plainly, That he thought the Confer. at Ham. (...), p. 47.
Geneva Translation was the worst, and many of the Notes very Partial, Untrue,
Seditious, and savouring too much of Dangerous and Traitorous Conceits. And
gave Instance. This passage I then read to the Lords: And withal told them,
that now of late these Notes were more commonly used to ill purposes, than
formerly, and that that was the Cause why the High Commission was more careful
and strict against them than before.

Here Michael Sparks the Elder came in as Witness, and said, he was called into
the High Commission about these Books: But he confesses, it was not only for
them. He says, the restraint of those Bibles was for the Notes. But he adds, as
he supposes. And his Supposal is no Proof. Besides, he might have added here
also, that the restraint was not for the Notes only: For by the numerous coming
over of Bibles, both with and without Notes from Amsterdam, there was a great
and a just fear conceived, that by little and little, Printing would quite be
carried out of the Kingdom. For the Books which came thence, were better Print,
better Bound, better Paper, and for all the Charges of bringing, sold better
Cheap. And would any Man Buy a worse Bible Dearer, that might have a better
more Cheap? And to preserve Printing here at home, as well as the Notes, was
the Cause of stricter looking to those Bibles. And this appears by a Letter of
Sir William Boswell's his Majesty's Agent in the Low Countries; the Letter
written to me, and now produced against me: But makes for me, as I conceive.
For therein he sends me word of two Impressions of the Bible in English, one
with Notes, and the other without: And desires me to take care to regulate this
business at home. What should I do? Should I sleep upon such Advertisements as
these, and from such a hand? Especially since he sends word also, that Dr.
Amyes was then Printing of a Book wholly against the Church of England. So my
Care was against all underminings, both at home and abroad, of the Established
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, for which I am now like to
suffer. And I pray God that point of Arminianism, Libertas Prophetandi, do not
more Mischief in short time, than is expressible by me.

2. The Second Instance was about the New Decree of the (...), concerning
Printing. Four Articles of this Decree were read, namely, the 1, 2, 18, 24.
What these are, may be seen in the Deecree: And as I think that whole Decree
made Anno 1637. useful and necessary: So, under your Lordships Favor, I think
those Four Articles as necessary as any.

Mr. Waly and Mr. Downs, two Stationers, Witnesses in this Particular, say,
That they desired some Mitigation of the Decree, and that Judge Bramston said,
he could not do it without me. I saw my Lord Chief Justice Bramston here in the
Court but the other Day; why was not he examined, but these Men only, who
oppose all Regulating of the Press, that opposes their Profit? And sure that
grave Judge meant, he could not do it alone without the consent of the Court.
Or if he would have me Consulted, it was out of his Judicious Care for the
Peace of this Church, almost Pressed to Death (...) dictum. W. S. A. C.
by the Liberty of Printing. The Chief Grievance they Expressed against the new
Licensing of Books, was only for matter of Charges. But that is provided for in
the Eighteenth Article. And Mr. Downs takes a fine Oath, which was, that he
makes no doubt, but that all was done by my Direction; and yet adds, that he
cannot say it. So he swears that, which himself confesses he cannot say. And
manifest it is in the Preface, that this Decree was Printed by Order of the
Court, and so by their Command sent to the Stationers Hall: And the end of it
was to suppress Seditious, Schismatical and Mutinous Books; as appears in the
First Article.

3. The Third Instance was, That I used my Power to suppress Books in Holland.
This was drawn out of a Letter which John le Mare, one of the Prime Preachers
in Amsterdam, writ to me; expressing therein, that since the Proclamation made
by the States, no Man durst meddle with Printing any Seditious Libels, against
either the State or Church of England. Where Is the Fault? For this Gentleman
did a very good Office to this Kingdom and Church, in procuring that
Proclamation: For till this was done, every discontented Spirit could Print
what he pleased at Amsterdam, against either: And if he had any Direction from
me about it (which is not proved) I neither am, nor can be sorry for it. And
the Fear which kept Men in from Printing, proceeded from the Proclamation of
the States, not from any Power of mine.

4. The Fourth Instance was in the Book of Martyrs. But that was but named, to
Credit a base Business, an Almanac made by one Mr. His Name was Gellibrand. W.
S. A. C.
Genebrand: In which he had left out all the Saints, Apostles and all; and put
in those which are named in Mr. Fox: And yet not all them neither; for he had
left out the Solemn Days, which are in Fox, as Feb. 2. Feb. 25. Mar. 25. And
Cranmer Translated to Mar. 23.

In this Particular Mr. Genebrand, Brother to this Almanack-maker, witnesses,
that the Queen sent to me about this New Almanac. If her Majesty did send to
me about it (as it is probable she would disdain the Book) is that any Crime in
me? Could I prevent her Majestys sending, who could not know so much as that
she would send? He says, his Brother was acquitted in the High Commission, but
charged by me that he made a Faction in the Court. If I did say so, surely, my
Lords, I saw some practicing by him in this newfound way. He says, the Papists
bought up a great number of these Almanacks, and burnt them. It seems he could
not hinder that, nor I neither; unless it shall not be Lawful for a Papist to
buy an Almanac. For when he has bought him, he may burn him if he please.

But since the Book of Martyrs was named, I shall tell your Lordships how
careful I was of it. It is well known, how easily Abridgments, by their Brevity
and their Cheapness, in short time work out the Authors themselves. Mr. Young
the Printer labored me earnestly and often for an Abridgment of the Book of
Martyrs. But I still withstood it (as my Secretary here present can Testify)
upon these two Grounds. The one, lest it should bring the large Book it self
into disuse. And the other, lest if any Material thing should be left out, that
should have been charged as done of purpose by me; as now I see it is in other
Books. And I humbly pray your Lordships cast your Eyes upon the Frontispiece of
the Book of Martyrs, Printed An: 1642. since this Parliament began, and when I
was safe enough from having any Hand in the Business; and there you shall see
as dangerous Pictures as have been charged upon me, or any my Chapel Windows.

Upon Occasion of Mr. Genebrand's Calendar, Mr. Pryn took occasion to tell the
Lords, that I had made Notes upon the Calendar in the Missal. I desired they
might be read: It was thought too tedious. They were nothing but some Additions
of my own reading to the Occurrences on some Days. And because the Calendar in
the Missal was open and large, I thought fit to Write them there.

5. The Fifth Instance is in Dr. Pocklinton his Censure of I believe (...) Name
here (...) is Mr. Fox the (...). W. S. A. C.
....... and of Flaccius Illyricus. And that this Book was Licensed by my
Chaplain Dr. Bray. And he was Censured in this Honorable House for that and
like slips of his. Then it was inferred at the Bar, That it must be taken as my
Act, if it were done by my Chaplain. But Inferences are no sworn Proof: And, I
conceive, no Man can by Law be punished criminally for his Servants Fact;
Unless there be Proof that he had a hand in it. Then it was urged, but without
any Proof too, that Dr. Pocklinton was preferred by me. To which I shall answer
when Proof is made: And if I had, it is far enough from Treason.

6. The next Instance was, about the calling in of Thomas Beacons Disputation
of the Mass. The Witness Mr. Pryn. He says, the Book 1.
was Licensed, and that a Papist thereupon said, does my Lord of Canterbury
License such Books? That I was informed of these Words, and the Book called in
the next Day. First, Mr. Pryn is single in this part of the Testimony for the
Words. Secondly, if any Papist did say so, it was not in my Power to stop his
Mouth; and they which License Books, must endure many and various Censures, as
the Readers of them stand affected. Thirdly, if any Papist did so speak, I have
reason to think it was to do me a Mischief, as much as in him lay. Fourthly,
this is a very bold Oath; For he swears, that I was Informed of these Words. He
was not present to hear it, and then he can have it but by Hearsay, and no
Religion teaches him to swear that for Truth, which he does but hear. Lastly,
the Book was called in, because it was slipped out contrary to the late Decree
for Printing. Yea, but Mr. Pryn Swears, and so does Michael Sparks the other
Witness, 2.
that the Book was sent to the Printer before the Decree. But first, Sparks his
Oath is uncertain; for he says Mr. Pryn sent him the Book before the Decree,
and then by and by after, says, it was about that time. Now the Book is somewhat
large, so that it might be sent him before the Decree, and yet not be Printed
till after, and that a good space too. And Secondly, Mr. Pryn himself
confesses, the Book was sent when the Decree was in agitation.

7. The Seventh Instance was about Arminianism, as maintained by me against the
Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, and of King James, concerning
Vorstius and Bertius. First, I have nothing to do to defend Arminianism, no Man
having yet charged me with the abetting any point of it. Secondly, King James
his Declaration is very Learned: But under Favor, he puts a great deal of
difference between Vorstius and Bertius: And his Majesty's Opinion is clear
with the Article of the Church of England, and so Expressed by himself: And to
which I ever Consented. And the Passage in the Conference at Hampton Court
(...). at Ham. Court. p. 29, 30.
was then read to the Lords, and yet for the Peace of Christendom, and the
strengthening of the Reformed Religion, I do heartily wish these Differences
were not pursued with such Heat and Animosity, in regard that all the Lutheran
Protestants are of the very same Opinions, or with very little difference from
those which are now called Arminianism.

And here comes in Michael Sparks; who says, He was called into the
High Commission about a Book of Bishop Carletons. I cannot punctually remember
all Particulars so long since. But he confesses the Business was in the
High Commission. And so not singly chargable against me. Besides, he is single
in this Business. He says, he was Eleven Years in the High Commission, and
never Sentenced. This is more than I know. But if it be so, he had better luck
than some Honester Men. For a bitterer Enemy to his power, the
Church Government never had.

He was Mr. Pryn's Printer. He says, I was a Dean then, and he thinks of
Hereford. I was never Dean of Hereford. But howsoever, this is a dangerous
Oath; let him think of it. He Swears that I was a Dean then; and a
High-Commissioner; or else what had I to do in the Business? Now it is well
known I was never a High-Commissioner, till I had been a Bishop some Years. For
the Book it self, Sparks says nothing what was the Argument of it: But (so far
as I remember) it was expressly against the King's Declaration. And so I
Answered Mr. Brown, when he summed up the Evidence against me in the House of
Commons. And though in his Reply he seemed to deny this, yet I remember no
Proof he brought for it.



8. The last Instance was pregnant, and brought forth many Particulars. As
First, Dr: Featly's Parallels against Bishop Mountague. 1.
But this was Still-born; at least it says nothing of me. Secondly, 2.
Mr. Pryn's Perpetuity, and against Dr: Cosens, both burnt. But he does not say
absolutely burnt, but as he is informed, and he may be informed amiss. And
howsoever he says, it was done by the High Commission, not by me. Thirdly, some
Sheets of Dr. Succliff's Book 3.
Prohibited the Press at Oxford. I hope Oxford is able to give an Account for
it self. And whereas it was here said at the Bar: They hoped I would show some
repressing of the contrary part. I would satisfy their Hopes abundantly, could
I bring Witnesses from Oxford, how even and steady a Hand I carried to both
parts, Fourthly, Mr. (...)
Burton questioned about his Book called The seven Vials. But himself
confesses, that upon Sir Henry Martin's Information, that, as that Cause was
laid, the High Commission had no power in it, he was dismissed. Fifthly, That
about his Book, Entitled Babel no Bethel; he was questioned 5.
at a Court out of Term. This was very usual, whenever the Court was full of
Business, to hold one Court-day out of Term. This is Warranted by the
Commission. And warning of it was always publicly given the Court-day before,
that all, whom it concerned, might take notice of it, and provide themselves.
Sixthly, he says, he was there 6.
railed at by Bishop Harsnet. It Is more than I know that Bishop Harsnet railed
at him; but if he did, I hope I am not brought hither to Answer all Men's
faults. Seventhly, he says, he claimed the Petition 7.
of Right, yet was Committed. This is more than I know or believe; yet if it
were so, it was done by the High Commission Court, not by me. He says next,
that he could never be quiet. But I am sure, my 8.
Lords, the Church for diverse Years could never be in quiet, for him and his
Associates. Lastly, they say, some Passages against Arminianism 9.
were left out of two Letters, one of Bishop Davenants, and the other of Bishop
Halls, sent to be Printed. First, here is no Proof at all offered, that I
differed in any thing from the Doctrine expressed in those Letters. And
Secondly, for the leaving out of those passages, it was (it seems) done to
avoid kindling of new flames in the Church of England. And it appeared on the
other side of the Paper, which was produced against me, and so Read to the
Lords; that these Passages were left out by the express Order from those
Bishops themselves, under Bishop Hall's own Hand, and with Thanks to Dr:
Turner, then my Chaplain, for his Letter to them. And here this days Business
ended. And I received Command to attend again the Twentieth of the same Month.

CAP. XXXVII. The Fifteenth Day of my Hearing.
THis day I came again to the House. A day or two before, as Junij (...). 1644.
Thursday.
now also, the Landing place at Westminster was not so full of People; and they
which were there, much more civil toward me Die (...).
than formerly. My Friends were willing to persuade me, that my Answer had much
abated the edge of the People, saving from the violent and factious Leaders of
the Multitude, whom it seems nothing would satisfy but my Life (for so I was
after told in plain terms, by a Man deeply interessed in them;) when I
presently saw Quaterman coming toward me, who, so soon as he came, fell to his
wonted Railing, and asked aloud, what the Lords meant, to be troubled so long
and so often, with such a base Fellow as I was, they should do well to Hang me
out of the way. I heard the Words with grief enough, and so left them and him
in the Hands of God. My Servants were earness to have me complain to the Lords.
I remembered my late Complaint about the Pamphlets had no redress; and so
forbear it. They notwithstanding, out of their Zeal, complained to Mr.
Lieutenant of the Tower; who presently went forth, and said he would school
him. But I hearkened no more after it.

When I came to the Bar, Mr: Nicolas began with great violence, and told the
Lords, the business grew higher and higher against me. What the Business did,
will after appear; but I am sure he grew higher and higher, and from this time
forward, besides the violence of Expression, gave me such Language, as no
Christian would give a Jew. But God, I humbly thank him, blessed me with
Patience; and so I made my Ears Obedient. That which made him say the Business
grew higher and higher, was this. Upon my often calling to have the Oaths at
the Coronation of King James and King Charles compared, some of them repaired
again to my Study at Lambeth, to search for all such Copies of Coronation-Books
as could there be found. In this diligent and curious search (For Mr. Pryn's
Malice made it)

they found some Papers concerning Parliaments, no other (I praise God for it)
than such, as with indifferent construction might (I hope) well pass,
especially considering what occasion led me, and what Command was upon me. And
as I have been told by Able and Experienced Men, they would have been nothing,
had they been found in any, but this troublesome and distracted time about the
Rights of Parliaments, (as it is said.) Howsoever, I was most unfortunate they
should be now found, and I had not left them a Being, but that I verily thought
I had destroyed them long since. But they were unhappily found among the heaps
of my Papers. And so

An Answer to the Remonstrance made June: 17: 1628. (which is I.
Sixteen Years since) was made the First Charge against me.

And the Second Charge was, A Paper concerning a Declaration, Jan: II.
28: 1628. To both which I then Answered; but because these are urged more than
once, to help fill the People with new Clamor, and because they are more
closely pressed against me at the last day of my Hearing; and because Mr. Brown
in his Summary Charge, laid and charged all these Papers together; to avoid
tedious repetition, I will also make my whole and entire Answer together, when
that time comes.

The Third Charge of this day was, A Letter of a Jesuit to his Superior, III.
found in my Study, dated Mar: 1628. Let the Letter be dated when it will, I
hope the Archbishop may get and keep the Letters of any Jesuits or others. How
shall I be able to know or prevent their Plots upon the Religion by Law
Established, if this may not be done? Yet this I desire all Men to take notice
of, that this Letter was not directed to me. I was then Bishop of London: The
Letter was found in a search. But when by all possible care taken by the
High Commission the Author could not be found, I had (as I humbly conceive)
great Reason to keep it. And I then humbly desired, the whole Letter might be
Read. There was in it, that Arminianism (as 'twas urged) was their Drug, and
their Plot against us, etc. The Jesuit seeing a Fire kindling about these
Opinions, might write what he pleased to help on his Cause. Yet this Drug,
which he says is theirs, is the received Opinion of all the Lutherans, and they
too Learned Protestants to use their Drugs. And if it be their Drug, why do the
Dominicans so Condemn it? Nay, why does the Master of the Sentences, and the
School after him, for the most, determine rigidly against it? And whereas it is
said, That these Men had Instruments at the Duke's Chamber Door. That belongs
not to me, I was not Porter there. As for that Power which I had (called by Mr.
Nicolas the Command of his Ear) I used it as much as I could to shut such
Instruments thence. Beside, it is barely said, no Proof at all offered, that
such Instruments were about the Duke's Chamber Door. Other Papers were found in
my Study, above sixty at the least, expressing my continued Labors for some
Years together, to Reconcile the divided Protestants in Germany, that so they
might go with united Forces against the Romanists. Why are not these produced
too? Would not Christianity and Justice have my Innocence cleared, as well as
my Faults accused?



The Fourth Charge was Bishop Mountagues Preferment. The Parliament (they say)
called him in Question, and the King called in his Book; yet, in Affront to the
Parliament, that he was preferred by me. IV.
No: It was then publicly known in Court (whether now remembered or no, I
cannot tell) that he was preferred by my Lord Duke; but being a Church
Business, the King Commanded me to signify his Pleasure to the Signet Office.
And the Docket (which is all the Proof here made) mentions him only by whom the
Kings Pleasure is signified, not him that procures the Preferment. So the
Docket in this Case no Proof at all.

The Fifth Charge was a Paper Entitled, Considerations for the V.
Church. Three Exceptions against them. The Observation of the King's
Declaration, Art 3. The Lecturers, Art 5. And the High Commission and
Prohibitions, Art 10, 11. The Paper I desired might be all Read. Nothing in
them against either Law or Religion. And for Lecturers a better care taken, and
with more Ease to the People, and more Peace to the Church, by a Combination of
Conformable Neighboring Ministers, in their turns, and not by some one
Humorous Man, who too often mis-leads the People. Secondly, my Copy of I
suppose these Considerations are those Published in Pryn's Compl. Hist. p. 287.
W. S. A. C.
Considerations came from Archbishop Harsnet, in which was some sour
Expression concerning Emanuel and Sidney Colleges in Cambridge, which the King
in his Wisdom thought fit to leave out. The King's Instructions upon these
Considerations, are under Mr. Baker's Hand, who was Secretary to my
Predecessor. And they were sent to me to make Exceptions to them, if I knew
any, in regard of the Ministers of London, whereof I was then Bishop. And by
this, that they were thus sent unto me by my Predecessor, it is manifest, that
this account from the several Dioceses to the Archbishop, and from him to his
Majesty once a Year, was begun before my time. Howsoever, if it had not, I
should have been glad of the Honor of it, had it begun in mine. For I humbly
conceive, there cannot be a better or a safer way to preserve Truth and Peace
in the Church, than that once a Year every Bishop should give an account of all
greater Occurrences in the Church to his Metropolitan, and he to the King.
Without which, the King, who is the Supreme, is like to be a great Stranger to
all Church Proceedings.

The Sixth Charge was about Dr: Sibthorp's Sermon, that my Predecessor VI.
opposed the Printing of it, and that I opposed him to Affront the Parliament.
Nothing so, my Lords. Nothing done by me to oppose, or affront, the One or the
Other. This Sermon came forth when the Loan was not yet settled in Parliament.
The Lords, and the Judges, and the Bishops, were some for, some against it. And
if my Judgment were Erroneous in that Point, it was misled by Lords of great
Honor and Experience, and by Judges of great knowledge in the Law. But I did
nothing to affront any. It Is said, that I inserted into the Sermon, that the
People may not refuse any Tax that is not unjustly laid. I conceive nothing is
justly laid in that kind but according to Law; Gods and Man's. And I dare not
say, the People may refuse any thing so laid. For Jus Regis, the Right of a
King, (which is urged against me too) I never went farther than the Scriptures
lead me; Nor did I ever think, that Jus Regis, mentioned, 1: Sam: 8: is meant
of the Ordinary and just Right of Kings, but of that Power which, such as Saul
would be, would assume unto themselves, and make it right by Power. 1 Samuel 8.
12.


Then they say, I expunged some things out of it. As first, The Sabbath, and
put instead of it the Lords Day. What Is my Offense? Sabbath is the Jews Word,
and the Lord's Day the Christians. Secondly, about Evil Counseilors to be used
as Haman. The Passage (as there Expressed) was very Scandalous, and without
just Cause, upon the Lords of the Council. And they might justly have thought I
had wanted Discretion, should I have left it in. Thirdly, that I expunged this,
that Popery is against the first and the second Commandment. If I did it, it
was because it is much doubted by Learned Men, whether any thing in Popery is
against the first Commandment, or denies the Unity of the Godhead. And Mr.
Perkins (who Charges very home Perkins Opera, fol. p. 34.
against Popery) lays not the Breach of the first Commandment upon them. And
when I gave Mr. Brown this Answer. In his last Reply, he asked why I left out
both? Why, I did it because its being against the second is common and obvious,
and I did not think it worthy the standing in such a Sermon, when it could not
be made good against the first.



But they demanded, why I should make any Animadversions at all upon the
Sermon? It was thus. The Sermon being presented to his Majesty, and the
Argument not common, he committed the Care of Printing it to Bishop Mountain,
the Bishop of London, and four other; of which I was one. And this was the
Reason of the Animadversions now called mine. As also of the Answer to my
Predecessors Exceptions (now Charged also) and called mine. But it was the
Joint Answer of the Committee. And so is that other Particular also, In which
the whole Business is left to the Learned in the Laws. For though the
Animadversions be in my Hand, yet they were done at and by the Committee, only
I being puny Bishop, was put to write them in my Hand.

The Seventh Charge was Dr: Manwaring's Business and Preferment. VII.
It was handled before, only resumed here to make a Noise, and so passed it
over.

The Eighth Charge was concerning some Alterations in the Prayers VIII.
made for the Fifth of November, and in the Book for the Fast, which was
Published An: 1636. And the Prayers on Coronation Day.

1. First for the Fast-Book: The Prayer mentioned was altered, as is Expressed;
but it was by him that had the Ordering of that Book to the Press, not by me.
Yet I cannot but approve the Reason given for it, and that without any the
least approbation of Merit. For the Abuse of Fasting, by thinking it
Meritorious, is the thing left out; whereas in this Age and Kingdom, when, and
where, set Fastings of the Church are cried down, there can be little fear of
that Erroneous Opinion of placing any Merit in Fasting.

2 Secondly, for the Prayers Published for the Fifth of November, and
Coronation Day. The Alterations were made either by the King himself, or some
about him when I was not in Court. And the Books sent me with a Command for the
Printing, as there altered. I made stay, till I might wait upon his Majesty. I
found him resolved upon the alterations; nor in my judgment could I justly
except against them. His Majesty then gave Warrant to the Books themselves with
the alterations in them, and so by his Warrant I commanded the Printing. And I
then showed both the Books to the Lords, who Viewed them, and acknowledged his
Ma jesty' Hand, with which, not his Name only, but the whole Warrant was
written.

And here I humbly desired three things might be observed, and I still desire
it. First, with what Conscience this passage out of my Speech in the p. 32.
Star Chamber was urged against me (for so it was, and fiercely by Mr. Nicolas)
to prove that I had altered the Oath at the King's Coronation, because the
Prayers appointed for the Anniversary of the Coronation were altered.

Which is absolute Nonsense.

Secondly, he Charged me that the Word Antichristian was left out. But that is
visibly untrue, for it is left in. Thirdly, that though it be in, yet that the
Alteration takes it off from the Papist, as also their Rebellion. Neither: For
the Change is this, That Antichristian Sect; altered into The Antichristian
Sect of them which, etc. and, whose Religion is Rebellion; altered into who
turn Religion into Rebellion. By which it is manifest that the alteration takes
off neither Imputation from the Papist, but moderates both. And for ought I yet
know, it is necessary it should. For if their Religion be Rebellion, see what it
will produce. Is not this the Syllogism? The Religion of the Papist is
Rebellion: But Christianity is the Religion of the Papist: Therefore
Christianity is Rebellion. I may not enlarge; but you may see more, if you
please, in my Speech in the p. 36.
Star Chamber. And when Mr. Brown in the Sum of his Charge pressed these
Alterations hard against me, he did not so much as mention, that I had the
King's both Warrant and Command to all that I did in that Particular: And
besides, urged this as a great Innovation, because the Prayers mentioned had
continued unaltered for the space of above Thirty Years. Not remembering
therewhile, that the Liturgy of the Church Established by Act of Parliament,
must be taken away, or altered, though it has continued above Fourscore. Nay,
and Episcopacy must be quite abolished, though it have continued in the Church
of Christ above Sixteen Hundred.



The Ninth Charge was from Sir Edward Hungerford, who came to IX.
Lambeth to have a little Book Licensed to the (...). The Author was Sir
Anthony Hungerford, whether Sir Edward's Grandfather or his Uncle, I remember
not the Relation. He says, he came to my Chaplain Dr: Bray to License it. And
that Dr: Bray told him there were some harsh Phrases in it, which were better
left out, because we were upon a way of winning the Papists. First, I hope I
shall not be made answerable for my Chaplains Words too. And Secondly, I hope
there is no harm in winning the Papists to the Church of England: Especially if
so easy a Cure, as avoiding harsh Language would do it. He says, my Chaplain
expressed a dislike of Guicciardin's Censure of Pope Alexander the Sixth. Sure
if the Censure be false, he had reason to except against it; if true, yet to
Publish such an unsavory Business to the Common People........ He says, he
came and complained to me, and that I told him I was not at leisure, but left
it to my Chaplain. So the Charge upon me was, That my Chaplain was in an Error
concerning this Book, and I would not Redress it. To this I answered: First,
that my Chaplain was Dead, and I not knowing the Reasons which moved him to
refuse Licensing this Book, can neither confess him to be in an Error, nor yet
justify him. Secondly, for my own refusing to meddle with it. Sir Edward took
me in a time of business, when I could not attend it. Thirdly, if I had
absolutely refused it, and left it to my Chaplain, I had done no more than all
my Predecessors did before me. And Dr. Featly then witnessed to the Lords, that
Archbishop Abbot, my immediate Predecessor, and to whom the Doctor was
Household Chaplain, would never meddle with Licensing Books, but ever referred
them to his Chaplains: And Dr. Mocket, another of his Chaplains (well known to
Dr. Featly) suffered for a Book sharply; yet not one Word said to my
Predecessor about it. Fourthly, as the Liberty of the Press is in England, and
of the Books which are tendered to the Press, the Archbishop had better Grind,
than take that Work to his own Hands, especially considering his many and
necessary Avocations. Lastly, no Man ever complained to me in this kind, but
this Gentleman only. So it is one only single Offense, if it be any. But how
this or the rest should be Treason against Sir Edward Hungerford, I cannot yet
see. And so I answered Mr. Brown; who in his Summary Charge forgot not this:
But Mr. Nicolas laid load upon me in his Reply, in such Language as I am
willing to forget.



The Tenth Charge was out of a Paper of Considerations to Dr. X.
Potter, about some few passages in his Answer to a Book Entitled Charity
mistaken. The Business this. Dr: Potter writ to me for my Advice: I used not to
be Peremptory; but put some few things back to his farther consideration. Of
which, three were now Charged upon me. The first was, he used this phrase
Believe in 1.
the Pope. I desired him to consider of ( In) And in this I yet know not
wherein I offend. The Second, was this Phrase, The Idol of 2.
Rome. I advised him to consider this Phrase too, that Men might not be to seek
what that Idol was. And here Mr: Nicolas cried out with vehemence, That every
Boy in the Street could tell the Pope was the Idol. I had not Dr: Potter's Book
now at hand; and so could not be certain in what Sense the Doctor used it; but
else, as many at least, think the Mass the Idol of Rome, as the Pope: Unless
Mr: Nicolas his Boys in the Streets think otherwise, and then I cannot blame
him for following such mature Judgments.

The Third was, That I bid him consider whether the Passage p. 27. (as 3.
I remember) did not give as much Power to the Parliament in matter of
Doctrine, as the Church. But my Answer to this I shall put off to the Charge
against me concerning Parliaments, because there Mr. Brown began with this. The
two former he Charged also, and I answered them as before. But he omitted, that
I obtained of the Lords the reading of Dr. Potter's Letter to me, by which he
drew from me those Things which I determined not, but only put to his Second
Thoughts and Consideration. In which way (I humbly conceive) I cannot be in
Crime, though I were in Error. Here ended the Business of this Day, and I was
Ordered to attend again June 27.



CAP. XXXVIII. The Sixteenth Day of my Hearing.
THis day I appeared again; And the first Charge laid against me, (...) 27.
1644. Thursday.
was my Chaplain Dr: Bray's Expungings out of Dr: Featly's Sermons. The same
Charge ad Verbum which was before, and I give it I.
the same Answer. These Repetitions of the same things, being only Die
Decimosexto.
to increase Clamor, and to fill more Men's Ears with it.

The Second Charge, was certain Expunctions of some things II.
against the Papists in Dr: Clark's Sermons. The Witness which Swore to the
passages left out, was one Mr: White a Minister, and it seems some near
Acquaintance of Dr: Clark's. But First, this Witness is single. Secondly, he
brought only a Paper, in which he had written down what was Expunged; but Dr:
Clark's Sermons he brought not with it: So it is not impossible he might be
mistaken: Howsoever, I not having the Book, could not possibly make an absolute
and a perfect Answer. Thirdly, this Witness confesses, that Dr: Weeks, then
Chaplain to my Lord of London, had the view of Dr: Clark's Sermons, and took
Exceptions against some passages, as well as my Chaplain Dr: Haywood did. So it
seems there was cause for it. Fourthly, I Answer, that for this, and for all
other of like Nature, my Chaplain must Answer for his own Act, and not I. He is
Living, and an Able Man; I humbly desire he may be called to his Account. For
it is not possible for me to tell your Lordships, upon what grounds he did
Expunge these many and different passages, which are instanced against me.
Lastly, in all the passages of Dr: Clark's Sermons, it is not any where
distinguished, which were Expunged by my Chaplain, and which by Dr: Weeks: So
that the Charge in that behalf, is left very uncertain.

For the passages themselves, as they are many, so they are such as may easily
be mistaken, the most of them. And whether Dr: Clark handled them in such
manner as was not justifiable, either against Arminius or the Papists, cannot
possibly be known, till each place in the Book be Examined for the Thing, and
my Chaplain Dr: Haywood for the Meaning. This made a great noise in Mr: Brown's
Summary Charge against me, he alleging, that two and twenty Passages about
Points of Popery were dashed out of Dr: Clark's Sermons. To which I Answered,
that I conceived my Chaplain would be able to make it good, there were two
hundred left in for two and twenty left out. And that they which were left out,
were not some way or other justifiable against the Papists, as set down and
expressed by him. And if so, they are better out than in. For we gain nothing
by urging that against the Papists, which, when it comes to the Touch, cannot
be made good against them.



One Passage is here added out of Dr. Featly's Sermons, p. 225. Where he
inveighs against too much imbellishing and beautifying the Church, and not the
Souls of Men, etc. First, if there be not a care to beautify the Soul, let Men
profess what Religion they will, it is a just Exception, and I believe no fault
found with that. But Secondly, for the overmuch beautifying of the Church,
it is a Point that might well be left out. Little necessity, God knows, to
Preach or Print against too much adorning of Churches among us, where yet so
many Churches lie very nastily in many places of the Kingdom, and no one too
much adorned to be found. Nay, the very Consecration of Churches cried down (as
is before expressed.) And this Opinion, that no Place is Holy but during the
Service in it, made Mr. Culmer, though a Minister, to piss in the Cathedral
Church of Canterbury: And diverse others to do so, and more, against the Pillars
in St: Paul's nearer hand, as may daily be both seen and smelt, to the shame of
that which is called Religion. Here Mr: Nicolas would fain have shovell'd it to
the outside of the Church (which had been bad enough) but it was the inside I
spoke of, and the thing is known.



Then an Instance was made in a Book of Dr: Jones. The Witness that any thing
was Expunged out of this, was only Mr: Chetwin. And he confesses that this Book
was Licensed by Dr: Baker, and he my Lord of London's Chaplain, not mine. Here
my Friends at the Bar infer, that Dr: Baker was preferred by me. First, that is
not so, he was preferred by his own Lord. Secondly, if he had been preferred by
me, it could have made no Charge, unless proof had been made that I preferred
him for abusing Dr. Jones his Book. And for the Docket, which is the only Proof
offered that I preferred him, I have already showed, that that is no Proof.
Yea, but they say, Dr: Baker was employed by me as one of my Visitors. And what
then? Must I be answerable for every fault that is committed by every Man that
I employ in my Visitation, though it be a fault committed at another time and
place, though I humbly desire Dr. Baker may Answer for himself, before I
acknowledge any fault committed by him? And though I conceive this Answer
abundantly satisfactory for any thing that may concern me, yet Mr. Brown
omitted not this Instance against me.



The Third Charge was personally against my self, and taken III.
out of my p. 47.
Speech in the Star Chamber. The words these. The Altar is the greatest place
of God's Residence upon Earth, greater than the Pulpit; for there it is Hoc est
Corpus meum, this is my Body; but in the other it is at most, but Hoc est
Verbum meum, this is my Word: And a greater Reverence is due to the Body, than
the Word of the Lord. Out of this place, Mr: Nicolas would needs enforce, that
I maintained Transubstantiation; because I say There, it is Hoc est Corpus meum.
First, I perceive by him, he confounds (as too many else do) Transubstantiation
with the Real Presence, whereas these have a wide difference. And Calvin grants
a Real and True Presence, yea, and he grants Realiter too; and yet no Man a
greater Enemy to Transubstantiation than he. As I have proved at large in my
Book against Fisher, Contr. Fisher. p. 292.
and had leave to Read the Passage therein to the Lords. And Mr. Perkins avows
as much. And Secondly, the Word ( There) makes nothing against this. For after
the Words of Consecration are past, be the Minister never so Unworthy, yet it is
infallibly Hoc Perkin's Opera in fol. p. 590.
est Corpus meum to every worthy Receiver. So is it not Hoc est Verbum meum,
from the Pulpit to the best of Hearers, nor by the best of Preachers since the
Apostles Time. And as Preaching goes now, scarce is any thing heard from many
in two long Hours, that savours of the Word of God.

And St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11. of 1 Cor. 11. 92.
a great Sin committed in his Time, of not discerning the Lord's Body, when
Unworthy Communicants received it. Where was this? Why it was There, at the
Holy Table or Altar, where they Received, yet did not discern. I hope for all
this St. Paul did not maintain Transubstantiation. Mr. Brown in his Summary
Charge pressed this also upon me. I answered as before, and added, that in all
Ages of the Church, the Touchstone of Religion was not to Hear the Word
Preached, but to Communicate. And at this day, many will come and hear Sermons,
who yet will not receive the Communion together. And as I call the Holy Table
the greatest place of God's Residence upon Earth; so does a late Learned Divine
of this Thorndike of Assemblies. c. 8. p. 260.
Church, call the Celebration of the Eucharist, the Crown of Public Service;
and the most solemn and chief work of Christian Assemblies; and he a Man known
to be far from affecting Popery in the least. And all Divines agree in this,
which our Savior himself Teaches. St. (...). 26. (...). Idem est effectus
Passionis (...) and (...). Thorn. p. 3. q. 79. A. 1. c.
St. Mat. 26. That there is the same effect of the Passion of Christ, and of
this Blessed Sacrament Worthily Received.



Another passage taken out of my p. 49.
Speech was; That due Reverence be given to God and to his Altar. Hence Mr.
Nicolas infers again: This Reverence is one joint Act, therefore it is Divine to
the Altar, as well as to God, and so Idolatry. First, the very next words in my
Speech are, that this Reverence to the Altar comes far short of Divine Worship.
What can prevent an Objection, if such plain words cannot? Secondly, having
thus plainly expressed it; he may infer too if he will, that I do not then
Worship God. For this Reverence is one joint Act; but it is confessed, that it is
not Divine Worship to the Altar, and therefore not to God. But Thirdly, this
Gentleman, by his Favor, understands not the Mysteries which lie hid in many
parts of Divinity.

In this for one. For when this Reverence is performed, it is to God as to the
Creator, and so Divine: But it is only toward, not to the Altar, and so far
short. And though in outward performance it be one joint Act, yet that which is
not separated, is, and must be distinguished one from the other. To make a good
Work acceptable to God, there must In bono opere (...) acceptabili, Fides and
Charitas (...), non separantur. Qui loquitur, simul facit vocem and verbum. St.
Aug. L. 1. de Genesis ad Lit. c. 15.
be both Faith and Charity: They cannot be separated one from the other; what,
shall they not therefore be distinguished? He that speaks (says St. Aug.) by
one joint Act sends out his Voice and his Word; separated they cannot be, shall
not they be distinguished therefore? But I have lived long enough, and taken
pains to small purpose, if Mr. Nicolas or any Layman else, at his by and
leisure Hours, from a busy Profession, shall be able to Teach me in that which
I have labored all my Life. And God bless the poor Bishops and Clergy of
England, if falling into a Storm (as I now am) they must have such Judges as
Mr. Nicolas.



The Fourth Charge, Is the Licensing of Sales, and other Books which IV.
had Popery in them, by my Chaplain Dr. Haywood. 1. To this Mr. Pryn (who is
the single witness) says, That he tendered a Bill to the then Lord Keeper
against my Chaplain for Licensing this Book, and that his Lordship refused it.
If the Lord Keeper Coventry refused his Bill, I believe, were he living, he
would assign just Cause why he did it. But whatever Cause he had, it concerns
not me, that he rejected the Bill. Mr. Pryn says farther, That this Book of
Sales was Printed heretofore, but purged first by Dr. James; but Licensed now
by Dr. Haywood, not according to that Purgation, but with all the Points of
Popery in. For this he produces Mr. Oaks, whose Son printed it. And says
farther, That his Correcter at the Press found fault with some passages, and
thereupon he was sent to Dr. Haywood, who returned answer (as they say) That if
he Licensed it, he would justify it. And that his Son told him this. First, My
Lords, this Under-Testimony of Mr. Oaks produced by Mr. Pryn, is nothing but a
Hearsay from his Son, who is now dead, and cannot be Examined, and while he was
living ran away and would not be Examined. Secondly, this was a most notable
piece of Villainy practiced against my Chaplain, and thorough his sides against
me. It was thus, My Lords. Whether the Bill were rejected or no, I cannot tell;
but the Complaint of Printing this Book came publicly into the Star Chamber.
And then was the first time that ever I heard of it. I then humbly desired
their Lordships that Dr. Haywood might answer whatever he had done amiss,
either there or where they pleased. The Court presently commanded Mr. Atturny
Banks to call all Parties before him, examine them thoroughly, and then give
his Account what he found; that the Court might proceed farther according to
Justice. Dr. Haywood appeared, and showed Mr. Attorney how he had Corrected
Sales in all Popish Points before he Licensed it. But young Oaks, and he which
brought Sales to be Licensed (who was then thought to be some Jesuited
Recusant, and, as I remember, Lodged for that time of Printing, in Oaks his
House) ran both away, or hid their Heads, and would not be found. And this was
a mere Plot of this Recusant, if not Priest, to have Sales Printed, with all
his Points of Popery in him, to work mischief to my Chaplain and my self. And
young Oaks was in all likelihood well paid for his pains. This Account Mr.
Attorney brought into that Court, and this Relation Dr. Haywood (who I obtained
might be after sent for) attested at this Bar.

One Circumstance my old decayed Memory mistook. For I thought, and so at first
told the Lords, that for this Clamor raised upon him in this way, I did soon
after dismiss him my House. But after, I found that he was gone out of my House
before. Howsoever I left him, without any Mediation, to the Justice of the
Court. And here I may not forget that which I then observed to the Lords, that
whereas it is urged, that many Points of Popery have passed the Press; it is no
wonder, if such Art be used as was here to get out Sales. And this farther is
observable, that all these Quotations of Popish Opinions, mentioned here to
fill up the noise, are out of four or five Books at the most, of which more are
out of this Sales than all the rest. And called in he was, as soon as known.
Which Mr. Brown in the Sum of his Charge acknowledges.



2. After Sales, the next Instance was in a Book Entitled, Christ's Epistle to
the Devout Reader. Four particular Points were urged out of this: But neither
I, nor my Chaplains had ought to do with it. For it was Licensed at London
House by Dr. Weeks. Nor was there ever any complaint brought to me to have it
called in: Nor was any such Proof so much as offered.

3. The Third Instance was of a Book called the Female Glory, where Mr. Pryn
(who is single again) said that Dr. Heylin answered Mr. Burton, and justified
all the Passages in this Book. And added, that this was by my direction. But
upon my Motion at the Bar concerning the boldness of this Oath, Mr. Pryn
recalled himself, and said that I appointed him to answer Mr. Burton. But it is
one thing to appoint him to answer Mr. Burton: And another to direct him to
justify all passages in the Female Glory.

4. The Fourth Instance was in a Letter sent to me from one Croxton, a young
Divine in Ireland. He was bred in St. John's College in Oxford. At the Lord
Mount-Norris his Entreaty I sent Croxton into Ireland to be his Chaplain. If he
miscarried there, I could not help it, nor hinder his writing of a Letter to
me, nor preseribe what he should write in it. But, to my remembrance, I never
heard of any Miscarriage of his in matter of Religion. And whether he be living
or dead, I know not. That Letter indeed has a Cross at the top of it. But then
was another Letter of his showed without a Cross, in which he calls Rome
Monstrum Abominandum. Howsoever I conceive all this is nothing to me.

5. The Fifth Instance was a Book, which they said was Licensed by Dr. Weeks.
And if so, then not by my Chaplain. But upon perusal, I find no License Printed
to it, nor to any of the other, but only to Sales, which is answered.

6. The Sixth Instance was in Bishop Mountague's Books, the Gagg, and the
Appeal. Here they said, that Dr. White told Dr. Featly, that five or six
Bishops did allow these Books. But he did not name me to be one of them. Then
Mr. Pryn urged upon his Oath, that these Books were found in my Study. And I
cannot but bless my self at this Argument. For I have Bellarmine in my Study;
Therefore I am a Papist: Or I have the Alcaron in my Study; Therefore I am a
Turk, is as good an Argument as this; I have Bishop Mountague's Books in my
Study; Therefore I am an Arminian. May Mr. Pryn have Books in all kinds in his
Study, and may not the Archbishop of Canterbury have them in his? Yea, but he
says, there is a Letter of the Bishops to me, submitting his Books to my
Censure. This Letter has no date, and so belike Mr. Pryn thought he might be
bold both with it and his Oath, and apply it to what Books he pleased. But as
God would have it, there are Circumstances in it as good as a Date. For it is
therein expressed, that he was now ready to remove from Chichester to Norwich.
Therefore he must needs speak of submitting those his Books to me, which were
then ready to be set out, which were his Origines Ecclesiasticae, not the Gagg,
nor the Appeal, which are the Books Charged, and which were Printed diverse
Years before he was made a Bishop; and my Receipt indorsed upon it is Mar. 29.
1638. And I hope Mr. Nicolas will not call this the Color of an Answer, as he
has called many of the rest given by me.

7. The Seventh Instance was in a Book Licensed by Dr. Martin, then my Chaplain
in London-House. This Book Mr. Pryn says, was purposely set out to Countenance
Arminianism, as if it had been some Work of Moment, whereas it was answered
twice in the Queens Time. If Dr: Martin did this, it is more than I remember;
nor can I so long after give any Account of it. But Dr: Martin is Living and in
Town, and I humbly desired he might be called to answer. He was called the next
Day, and gave this Account.

The Account is wanting; a Space left for it, but not filled up.

Mr. Pryn says farther, that after this he Preached Arminianism at S. Paul's
Cross. Why did not Mr. Pryn come then to me, and acquaint me with it? Which
neither he nor any Man else did. And I was in Attendance at Court, whither I
could not hear him. And the Charge which came against him upon the next Days
Hearing, was this and no more; That one then Preached at the Cross Universal
Redemption; but he that gave Testimony, knew him not; only he says, one told
him 'twas Dr: Martin.

8. The last Instance was of a Bible commonly Sold, with a Popish Table at the
end of it. This is more than I know, or ever heard till now; nor was any
Complaint ever brought to me of it. And I cannot know all things that are done
abroad for Gain; for that will teach them to conceal, as well as move them to
act. Yet one of the Popish Heads mentioned in that Table, was Confirmation,
which is commanded in our Church Liturgy, and ratified by Law.

Here this day ended, and I was ordered to appear again July 4. Julij 4.
That Day I received a Note, under Mr. Nicolas his Hand, that they meant to
proceed upon the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 14th. Original Articles, and the Sixth
and Seventh Additionals. The last Warrant for other Articles, came under
Sergeant Wild's Hand, and Mr. Nicolas signing this, it seems, mistook. For the
Eighth and Ninth Original Articles are in part proceeded on before. Now they go
forward with these, and then on to the rest, which I will write down severally
as they come to them.

The same Day, being Thursday, all my Books at Lambeth were by Order of the
House of Commons taken away by Mr........ Secretary to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Warwick, and carried I know not whither, but are (as it is commonly
said) for the use of Mr: Peter's. Before this time, some good Number of my Books
were delivered to the use of the Synod, the Ministers which had them giving no
Catalogue under their Hands, which or how many they had. And all this was done
contrary to an Order of the Lords, bearing Date November. 9. 1642. for the safe
keeping of my Books there: And before I was Convicted off any Crime. This Day
also I received an Order, which put off my Hearing to the next Day.

CAP. XXXIX. The Seventeenth Day of my Hearing.
THis Day I appeared again: And the First Charge against me Julij 5. 1644.
Friday.
was, that I had preferred none to Bishoprics, Deaneries, prebends, and
Benefices, but Men Popishly affected, or otherwise unworthy. And I.
some they named. Die Diceimoseptimo.


1. As First, Dr: Manwaring, Disabled by the Parliament.

2. Secondly, Mr: Mountague, Excepted against by Parliament. But for these, no
Proof was now brought. They referred themselves to what was said before, and so
do I. And where they go to prove only by Dockets, I desire it may still be
remembered that the Docket is a full Proof who gave Order for drawing the Bill
at the Signet Office: But no Proof at all who procured the Preferment.

3. Thirdly, Bishop Corbet. But the Earl of Dorset got my Lord Duke of
Buckingham to prefer him, to make way for Dr. Duppa, his deserving Chaplain
into Christ-Church. Nor was any thing Charged against Dr: Corbet, but that he
was preferred by me.

4. Fourthly, Bishop Pierce: Against whom there was no Proof offered neither.
And he is living to answer it, if any be.

5. Nor was there now any Proof offered against Bishop Wren, who was named
also; at the least not till he was made a Bishop. So if I did prefer him, it
seems I did it when nothing was laid against him. And if after he had his
Preferment, he did any thing unworthily, that could not I foresee; and he is
living to answer it.

6. The Sixth was Bishop Lindsy, a Man known to be of great and universal
Learning, but preferred by the then Lord Treasurer Portland, not by me. Him
they Charged with Arminianism. The Witnesses two: The First, Mr. Smart; he is
positive: He was his Fellow Prebendary at Durham. There was Animosity between
them. And Smart, not able to Judge of Arminianism.

Secondly, Mr. Walker, who could say nothing, but that he heard so much from
some Ministers, and Dr. Bastwick. So here is as Learned a Man as Christendom
had any of his time, Debased in this great and Honorable Court, by Ignorance,
and a Hearsay. And that, when the Man is gone to that which should be his
Quiet, the Grave.



7. The Seventh was Archbishop Neile, a Man well known to be as true to, and
as stout for the Church of England established by Law, as any Man that came to
Preferment in it. Nor could his great Enemy Mr. Smart say any thing now against
him, but a Hearsay from one Dr. Moor of Winchester. And I cannot but profess,
it grieves me much, to hear so many Honest and Worthy Men so used, when the
Grave has shut up their Mouths from answering for themselves.

8. The next was Dr: Cousin, to be Dean of Peterborough. I named Four of his
Majesty's Chaplains to him, as he had Commanded me. And the King pitched upon
Dr. Cosens, in regard all the Means he then had, lay in, and about Duresm, and
was then in the Scots Hands; so that he had nothing but Forty Pound a Year by
his Headship in Peter-House to maintain himself, his Wife and Children.

9. The Ninth was Dr. Potter, a known Arminian, to the Deanery of Worcester.
What Proof of this? Nothing but the Docket. And what of the Crime? Nothing but
Dr. Featly's Testimony; who says no more but this, That Dr. Potter was at first
against Arminianism, (that is Absolute) But afterward he defended it, as he
has heard: (there is a Hearsay.)

10. The Tenth was Dr: Baker.

11. The Eleventh Dr: Weeks. Both very Honest and Able Men; but Preferred by
their own Lord, the Lord Bishop of London.

12. The Twelfth was Dr: Bray. He had been my Chaplain above Ten Years in my
House; I found him a very Able and an Honest Man, and had reason to Prefer him
to be able to Live well; and I did so. Here is nothing objected against him,
but his Expungings, and not Expungings of some Books; which if he were Living,
I well hope he would be able to give good Account for.

13. The Thirteenth Dr: Heylin. He is known to be a Learned and an Able Man;
but for his Preferment, both to be his Majesty's Chaplain, and for that which
he got in that Service, he owes it under God to the Memory of the Earl of
Danby, who took care of him in the University.

14. After these, they named some, whom they said I preferred to be the King's
Chaplains. The Witness here Mr. Oldsworth, the Lord Chamberlain's Secretary. He
says, the Power and Practice of naming Chaplains was in the Lord Chamberlain
for these 25. Years. And I say, it is so still, for ought I know. He says, that
in all things concerning which the Lord Chamberlain's Warrant went in this
Form; These are to will and require you, etc. that there his Lordship did it
without consulting the King; and that the Warrant for Chaplains run all in this
Form. First, this is more than I know or ever heard of till now. Secondly, be
it so; yet it is hard to deny the King to hear Men Preach before they be sworn
his Chaplains, if his Majesty desire it, since it argues a great care in the
King, especially in such a Factious time, as began to overlay this Church.

Thirdly, he confesses, that he knows not who put the King upon this way; but
believes that I did it. He is single, and his belief only is no Evidence. And
whosoever gave the King that Advice, deserved very well both of his Majesty and
the Church of England: That none might be put about him in that Service, but
such as himself should approve of. But that which troubled this Witness, was
another thing. He had not Money for every one that was made Chaplain; nor Money
to get them a Month to wait in; nor Money to change their Month, if it were
inconvenient for their other Occasions; nor Money for sparing their Attendance,
when they pleased. In which, and other things, I would he had been as careful
of his Lord's Honor, as I have been in all things. For it is well known in
Court, I observed his Lordship as much as any Man.



The Men which are instanced in, are Dr: Heylin. But he was preferred to that
Service by my Lord the Earl of Danby. Then Dr. Potter. But the Lord Keeper
Coventry was his means. Dr. Cosens was preferred by Bishop Neile, whose
Chaplain he had been many Years, and he moved the Lord Chamberlain for it. Dr:
Lawrence was my Lord Chamberlain's own Chaplain, and preferred by himself; and
in all likelihood, by Mr. Oldsworth's means: For he was Fellow of Magdalen
College in Oxford, as Mr. Oldsworth himself was, and he once (to my Knowledge)
had a great Opinion of him. Dr. Haywood indeed was my Chaplain; but I preferred
him not to his Majesty, till he had Preached diverse times in Court with great
Approbation; nor then, but with my Lord Chamberlain's Love and Liking. As for
Dr. Pocklington, I know not who recommended him; nor is there any Proof offered
that I did it.

15. Then they proceeded to my own Chaplains. They name Four of them: First Dr.
Weeks. But he was never in my House, never meddled with the Licensing of any
Books, till he was gone from me to the Bishop of London: So he is charged with
no Fault, so long as he was mine. The Second, Dr: Haywood. But he is charged
with nothing but Sales, which was a most desperate Plot against him, as is
before showed. The Third was Dr. Martin. Against him came Mr. Pryn, for his
Arminian Sermon at S. Paul's Cross. But that is answered before. And Mr. Walker,
who said, he proposed Arminian Questions to diverse Ministers. Belike, such as
were to be examined by him. But he adds, as these Ministers told him. So it is
but a Hearsay. And say he did propose such Questions; may it not be fit enough
to try how able they were to answer them? The Fourth was Dr. Bray. Against him
Dr. Featly was again produced, for that which he had expunged out of his
Sermons. But when I saw this so often inculcated to make a noise, I humbly
desired of the Lords, that I might ask Dr. Featly one Question: Upon leave
granted, I asked him, Whether nothing were of late expunged out of a Book of
his written against a Priest? and desired him to speak upon the Oath he had
taken. He answered roundly, that diverse passages against the Anabaptists, and
some in defense of the Liturgy of the Church of England were expunged: I asked,
by whom? He said, by Mr. Rouse and the Committee, or, by Mr. Rouse or the
Committee. Be it which it will, I observed to the Lords, that Mr. Rouse and the
Committee might expunge Passages against the Anabaptists, nay, for the Liturgy
established by Law; but my Chaplains may not expunge any thing against the
Papists, though perhaps mistaken.

From thence, they fell upon Men, whom they said I had preferred to Benefices.
They named but Two. Dr: Heylin was one again, whom I preferred not. The other
was Dr: Jackson, the late President of Corpus Christi College in Oxford. Dr:
Featly being produced, said, Dr: Jackson was a known Arminian. If so to him,
it is well: The Man is Dead, and cannot answer for himself. Thus far I can for
him, without meddling with any his Opinions. He was very Honest, and very
Learned, and at those Years he was of, might deserve more than a Poor Benefice.

16. Here Mr: Pryn came in again, and Testified very boldly, that I gave many
Benefices, which were in the Gift of the Master of the Wards: And all
Preferments, only to such Men as were for Ceremonies, Popery and Arminianism.
For the First of these two, the Business was thus: There arose a Difference
between the then Lord Keeper Coventry, and the Lord Cottington, then Master of
the Wards, about the disposing of those Benefices. It grew somewhat high, and
came to Hearing by the King himself: His Majesty, upon Hearing, gave the right
of Sealing to the Lord Keeper, but for the time, till more might appear,
reserved the Giving to himself; that he might have some of those lesser
Preferments to bestow on such Ministers as attended upon his Navy then at Sea.
I never gave any one of these Benefices in my Life. And that this Story is of
Truth, the Lord Cottington is yet living, and can Witness it. And this very
Answer I gave to Mr. Brown, who in summing up the Charge laid this also upon
me, and without mentioning what Answer I gave to it.

For the Second, that I preferred none but such Men. It Is known I preferred
Bishop Hall to Exeter; Dr. Potter to Carlisle; Dr. Cook to Bristol first, and
then to Hereford; That I gave Dr. Westfield the Archdeaconry of S. Albans; that
I was Dr. Fells means for Christ-Church; and Dr. Higgs his for the Deanery of
Litchfield; that I settled Dr. Downing at Hackney; and Mr. Herrick at
Manchester, when the Broad Seal formerly given him was questioned: That I gave
two of my own Benefices to Mr. Palmer, and Mr. Tailor, two of the now Synod; an
Hospital to Dr: Jackson of Canterbury; and a Benefice to his Son in Law, at his
Suit: I could not Name all these upon the sudden, yet some I did; and no one of
them guilty of this Charge in the least. Mr. Brown in his Summary said, I could
name but one or two. And when in my Answer made in the House of Commons, I
specified more, among which Mr: Palmer was one: Mr. Brown said in his Reply,
that Mr: Palmer had indeed his Benesice of my giving, so himself told him; but
it was at the Entreaty of a great Nobleman. Say it were; Mr. Palmer was then a
stranger to me: Some body must speak, and assure me of his Wants and Worth, or
I cannot give. But if upon this I give it freely, is it worth no thanks from
him, because a Nobleman spoke to me? Let Mr. Palmer rank this Gratitude among
his other Virtues.



17. From hence they stepped over into Ireland, and objected my preferring of
Dr: Chapel to be Master of the College at Dublin. Here the first Witness is
Mr. Walker. He says, that all his Scholars were Arminians. This is a great
sign, but not full Proof. He says, that Dr. Chapel was at First fierce against
them, but afterward changed his Mind. Dr. Featly said the like of Dr. Potter.
Some say Arminius himself was at first Zealous against those Opinions, but
studying hard to confute them, changed his own Mind. Take heed, Mr. Walker, do
not Study these Points too hard.

For my own part, Dr. Chapel was a Cambridge Man, altogether unknown to me,
save that I received from thence great Testimony of his Abilities, and fitness
for Government, which that College then extremely wanted: And no Man ever
complained to me, that he favored Arminianism.

The other Witness was Dr. Hoyle, a Fellow of the College in Dublin. He says,
that the Doctor did maintain in that College Justification by Works; and in
Christ-Church Arminianism. In this he is single: But if it be true, why did not
the Lord Primate of Armagh Punish him? for he says he knew it. That he opposed
some things in the Synod. And it may be there was just Cause for it. Lastly, he
says, the late Lord Deputy liked not the Irish Articles; but gave them an
Honorable Burial, as (he says) the Lord Primate himself confessed. I am a
stranger to all this; nor does Dr. Hoyle charge any thing against me; but says,
that they which did this, were supposed to have some Friend in England. And
surely their Carriage was very ill, if they had none.

18. Then were Letters read of my Lord Primate's to me, in which is Testified
my Care of the Patrimony of that Church. And then a Paper of Instructions given
by me to the Lord Deputy at his first going into that Kingdom. For the First;
though it be thrust in here, among matters of Religion, yet I pray your
Lordships to consider, it is about the Patrimony of that Church only. And I
thank them heartily for producing it. For in this Letter is a full confession
of my Lord Primate's, that the motion of getting the Impropriations from his
Majesty (formerly objected against me) proceeded from him, as I then pleaded:
And the Letter was read. For the Second; my Lord Deputy, a little before his
first going into Ireland, asked me what Service I would command him for the
Church there? I humbly thanked him, as I had reason, and told him I would
bethink my self, and give him my Thoughts in Writing: These are they which are
called Instructions. They are only for the good of that poor Church, as your
Lordships have heard them. This was all; and herein my Lord showed his Honor,
and I did but my Duty. Though I very well understand, why this Paper is
produced against me.



After this they proceeded to the Eleventh Original Article, which follows in
haec Verba.

11. He in his own Person, and his Suffragans, Visitors, Surrogates,
Chancellors, or other Officers by his Command, have caused diverse Learned,
Pious and Orthodox Preachers of God's Word, to be Silenced, Suspended,
Deprived, Degraded, Excommunicated, or otherwise Grieved and Vexed, without any
just and lawful Cause; whereby, and by diverse other means, he has hindered the
Preaching of God's Word, caused diverse of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects to
forsake the Kingdom, and Increased and Cherished Ignorance and Profaneness
among the People, that so he might the better facilitate the way to the
effecting of his own Wicked and Traitorous Design of Altering and Corrupting
the true Religion here Established.

1. The First Instance to make good this Article, was a Repetition of some
Lecturers before-named. But when they thought they had made Noise enough, they
referred the Lords to their Notes; and so did I to my former Answers.

2. The Second Instance was out of some Articles of Bishop Mountague and Bishop
Wrenn, and their Account given to me. Bishop Wrenn, Art: 16: Speaks of the
Afternoon Sermons being turned into Catechizing. And Art: 5: (of his Account I
take it) that no Lecture in his Diocese after, etc. It was made plain to the
Lords, that this was spoken of some single and factious Lecturers, and that
they had their Lectures Read by a Company of Learned and Orthodox Ministers by
turns. As appeared by the Monday Sermon at Burye, during that Learned Bishop's
time. Nor were any forbid to Preach in the Afternoon, so the Catechizing were
not omitted, before it, or with it. And the Bishop is Living to Answer it, if
ought were then done amiss by him. In all which he did nothing, as any Deputy
or Surrogate of mine, but as Diocesan of the Place. As for the Yearly Account
to the King, according to his Royal Instructions in that behalf; though it were
pressed here again to multiply noise, yet nothing being new, I gave my Answer
as before, and to that I refer my self.

3. The Third Answer was concerning Mr. Lee of Wolverhampton. The Evidence was
a Letter of my Secretary Mr. Dell, written by my Command, to my Visitors there,
to this Effect, That whether there were Cause or no, they should either punish
Mr. Lee, or bring him into the High Commission. Had the Words or the Sense been
thus, they might well say, It was hard for the Judge before whom the Party was
to Answer, to write thus. But I called to have the Letter read again, and the
Words were these, If there were found against him that which might justly be
Censured, then they should punish, etc. And the Reason why this strict care was
taken, was because the Dean of Windsor his Ordinary complained unto me, that
Mr. Lee's Carriage was so Factious there, that he could contain him in no
Order. If he were a Man after this approved at Shrewsbury (as Mr: Walker
witnesses) I hope the Proceedings at Wolverhampton did him good. But, my Lords,
had it so fallen out, that my Secretary had forgotten my Instructions, and
himself too, and expressed himself amiss, shall that slip of his, (had it been
such) be imputed to me? I believe your Lordships would not willingly answer for
every Phrase of your Secretaries Letters, which yet you command them to write.

4. The last Instance, was the Sentence in the High Commission against Mr:
Barnard, for Words about Pelagian Errors and Popery. First, if he were
Sentenced in the High Commission, it was the Act of the Court, and not mine; as
has been often said. Secondly, no Proof is offered that he was Sentenced for
those Words only. Thirdly, the Recantation (howsoever refused by him, as Mr.
Pryn says it was) makes mention of four Points for which he was Censured, of
which these words are one. But not the words themselves, but his Unjust and
Scandalous Application of them to me, which deserved them not. And lastly, Dr:
Cumber, Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, was Prosecutor against him;
which Office, so Grave and Worthy a Man would not (I suppose) have undertaken,
had there not been great and just Cause for it.

Hence they proceeded to the Sixth Additional Article, which follows in these
Words,

That whereas diverse Gifts and Dispositions of diverse Sums of Money were
heretofore made by diverse Charitable and well disposed Persons, for the buying
in of diverse Impropriations, for the Maintenance of Preaching the Word of God
in several Churches; the said Archbishop about Eight Years last past, wilfully
and maliciously caused the said Gifts, Feoffments, and Conveyances, made to the
uses aforesaid, to be overthrown in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, contrary
to Law, as things dangerous to the Church and State, under the specious
pretense of buying in Appropriations; whereby that Pious Work was suppressed
and trodden down, to the great Dishonor of God, and Scandal of Religion.

This Article is only about the Feoffments. That which I did was this. I was
(as then advised upon such Information as was given me) clearly of Opinion,
that this was a cunning way, under a Glorious pretense, to overthrow the
Church Government, by getting into their power more dependency of the Clergy,
than the King, and all the Peers, and all the Bishops in all the Kingdom had.
And I did conceive the Plot the more dangerous for the fairness of the
pretense; and that to the State, as well as the Church. Hereupon not
maliciously (as it is charged in the Article) but Conscientiously I resolved to
suppress it, if by Law it might be done. Upon this, I acquainted his Majesty
with the thing, and the danger which I conceived would in few Years spring out
of it. The King referred me to his Attorney and the Law. Mr. Attorney Noye,
after some pause upon it, proceeded in the Exchequer, and there it was by
Judicial Proceeding and Sentence overthrown. If this Sentence were according to
Law and Justice; then there is no fault at all committed: If it were against
Law, the fault, what e're it be, was the Judges, not mine; for I solicited none
of them. And here I humbly desired, that the Lords Sir Leolin Jenkins has a
Copy of it out of the Records of the Exchequer. W. S. A. C.
would at their leisure read over the Sentence given in the Exchequer, which I
then delivered in; but by Reason of the length it was not then read: Whether
after it were, I cannot tell. I desired likewise, that my Council might be
heard in this, and all other points of Law.

1. The First Witness was Mr. Kendall: He says, that speaking with me about
Presteen, I thanked God that I had overthrown this Feoffment.

2. The Second Witness Mr. Miller says, he heard me say, They would have undone
the Church, but I have overthrown their Feoffment. These two Witnesses prove no
more than I confess: For in the manner aforesaid, I deny not but I did my best
in a Legal way to overthrow it. And if I did Thank God for it, it was my Duty
to do so, the thing being in my Judgment so pernicious as it was.

3. The Third Witness was Mr. White, one of the Feoffees. He says, that coming
as Council in a Cause before me; when that Business was done, I fell bitterly
on him as an underminer of the Church. I remember well his coming to me as
Council about a Benefice. And it is very likely I spoke my Conscience to him, as
freely as he did his to me; but the Particulars I remember not; nor do I
remember his coming afterward to me to Fulham; nor his offer to change the Men
or the Course, so the thing might stand. For to this I should have been as
willing as he was; and if I remember right, there was order taken for this in
the Decree of the Exchequer. And his Majesty's Pleasure declared, that no Penny
so given should be turned to other use. And I have been, and shall ever be as
ready to get in Impropriations, by any Good and Legal way, as any Man (as may
appear by my Labors about the Impropriations in Ireland.) But this way did not
stand either with my Judgment or Conscience.

1. First, because little or nothing was given by them to the present
Incumbent, to whom the Tithes were due, if to any; that the Parishioners which
paid them, might have the more cheerful Instruction, the better Hospitality,
and more full Relief for their Poor.

2. Secondly, because most of the Men they put in, were Persons disaffected to
the Discipline, if not the Doctrine too of the Church of England.

3. Thirdly, because no small part was given to Schoolmasters, to Season Youth
ab Ovo, for their Party: And to Young Students in the Universities, to purchase
them and their Judgments to their side, against their coming abroad into the
Church.

4. Fourthly, because all this Power to breed and maintain a Faction, was in
the Hands of Twelve Men, who were they never so Honest, and free from Thoughts
of abusing this Power, to fill the Church with Schism, yet who should be
Successors, and what use should be made of this Power, was out of Humane reach
to know.

5. Because this Power was assumed by, and to themselves, without any Legal
Authority, as Mr. Attorney assured me.

He farther said, that the Impropriation of Presteen in Radnorshire, was
specially given to St: Antolins in London: I say the more the pity, considering
the poorness of that Country, and the little Preaching that was among that poor
People; and the plenty which is in London. Yet because it was so given, there
was care taken after the Decree, that they of St: Antolins had consideration,
and I think to the full. He says, that indeed they did not give any thing to
the present Incumbents, till Good Men came to be in their Places. Scarce one
Incumbent was bettered by them. And what then? In so many places not one Good
Man found? Not one Factious enough against the Church, for Mr: White to account
him Good?

Yet he thinks I disposed these things afterward to Unworthy Men. Truly, had
they been at my disposal, I should not wittingly have given them to Mr. White's
Worthies.

But his Majesty laid his Command upon his Attorney, and nothing was done or to
be done in these things, but by his direction. For Dr. Heylin, if he spoke any
thing amiss concerning this Feoffment, in any Sermon of his, he is Living to
Answer it; me it concerns not. Mr. Brown in the Sum of the Charge omitted not
this. And I Answered as before. And in his Reply he turned again upon it, that
it must be a Crime in me, because I projected to overthrow it. But, under
favor, this follows not. For to project (though the word Projector sound ill
in England) is no more than to forecast, and forelay any Business. Now as it is
lawful for me, by all good and fit Means, to project the Settlement of any
thing that is good; so is it as lawful by good and Legal means, to project the
overthrow of any thing that is cunningly or apparently Evil. And such did this
Feoffment appear to my Understanding, and does still.

As for reducing of Impropriations to their proper use, they may see (if they
please) in my Diary (whence they had this) another Project to buy them into the
Churches use: For given they will not be. But Mr. Pryn would show nothing, nor
Mr. Nicolas see any thing, but what they thought would make against me.

Here this day ended, and I was Commanded to Attend again, July 15. But was
then put off to July 17. which day held. Julij 15.


CAP. XL. The Eighteenth Day of my Hearing.
THis day they charged upon me the Twelfth Original Article; Junij 17.1644.
Wednesday.
which follows in these words, Die Decimooctavo.


He has Traitorously endeavored to cause Division and Discord between the
Church of England and other Reformed Churches; and, to that end, has
Suppressed and Abrogated the Privileges and Immunities, which have been by his
Majesty and his Royal Ancestors granted to the French and Dutch Churches in
this Kingdom; and diverse other ways has expressed his Malice and Disaffection
to those Churches; that so by such disunion, the Papists might have more
advantage for the overthrow and extirpation of both.

The First Charge is, That I deny them to be a Church: For they say, that I I.
say plainly in my Book against Fisher, that No Bishop, no Church. Now Cont.
Fisher.. 25. p. 176.
it is well known, they have no Bishops, and therefore no Church. The Passage in
my Book is an Inference of (...) Jerome's Opinion, no Declaration of my own. And
if they or any other be agrieved at St. Jerome for writing so, they may Answer
him. Mr. Nicolas added, that this was seconded by Bishop Mountague's Book,
which Mr. Pryn (carefully) Mounta. Origi. Eccles. p. 464.
witnessed was found in my Study, and Licensed by Dr. Braye: Is this Argument
come again, that Bishop Mountague's Book was in my Study? Leave it for shame.

But they have now left me never a Book in my Study; so I cannot make them any
fuller Answer, without viewing the place, than themselves help me to by their
own Confession. Which is, that he adds this Exception, that none but a Bishop
can Ordain, but in Casu Necessitatis, which is the Opinion of many Learned and
Moderate Divines. Yet this is very considerable in the Business, whether an
inevitable Necessity be cast upon them, or they pluck a kind of Necessity upon
themselves.



The Second Charge is out of a Letter of mine to Bishop Hall, II.
upon a Letter which he had formerly sent me. In which it seems, is something
about the Case of Necessity in point of Ordination, which ( they say) I
disliked. And it seems I disliked upon good ground. For he had given me power
under his Hand, to alter what I would in that which he sent unto me. I would
not take that power, but writ back to him what passages I thought might be
better expressed, if it could agree with his Judgment also. Hereupon he sent me
another Letter of Jan. 18. 1639. In which he altered those things which I put
to his farther Consideration. Could any thing be more fairly carried? And this
Letter was read to the Lords. Yea, but they say, I disliked the giving of this
Title Antichrist to the Pope. No, I did not simply dislike it, but I advised
Bishop Hall, if he thought it good, not to affirm it so positively. And the
Reason I gave was this. That King James being pressed upon a great occasion,
that he had maintained that the Pope was Antichrist, which might much trouble,
if not quite cross some Proceedings much desired by that Prudent King: His
Majesty made Answer: I maintain it not as a point of Faith, but as a probable
Opinion: And for which I have more grounds than the Pope has for his Challenge
of Temporal Power over Princes. Let him recall this Opinion, and I Will recall
that. This I writ to the Bishop, but left him free to do what he pleased.

Here Mr. Nicolas fell extreme foul upon me, in so much, that I could not but
wonder at their patience which heard him. Among other Titles bestowed upon me,
many and gross, he called me over and over again, Pander to the Whore of
Babylon. I was much moved; and humbly desired the Lords, that if my Crimes were
such, as that I might not be used like an Archbishop, yet I might be used like
a Christian: And that were it not for the Duty which I owe to God and my own
Innocence, I would desert my Defense, before I would endure such Language in
such an Honorable Presence. Hereupon some Lords showed their dislike, and
wished him to leave, and pursue the Evidence.

Mr. Brown in summing up the Charge made this a great matter, The denial of the
Pope to be Antichrist. But I did not deny it, nor declare any Opinion of my
own: And many Protestants, and those very Learned, are of Opinion that he is
not. It Is true I did not, I cannot approve foul Language in Controversies. Nor
do I think Tam certo scio Papam esse magnum illum Antichristum, quam Deum ipsum
esse in (...) Creatorem, and (...) verum Messiam. Gab. Pow. de Antichristo. E.
pist. ad Lectorem. Dr. Featly's Sermon. p. 808.
that the calling of the Pope Antichrist, did ever yet Convert an Understanding
Papist. And sure I am, Gabriel Powel's Peremptoriness (to say no worse) in this
Point, did the Church of England no Good, no Honor in Foreign parts: For there
he affirms, That he is as certain that the Pope is Antichrist, as that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God and Redeemer of the World. As for the thing it self, I
left it free to all Men to think as their Judgment guided them: As appears by
the Licensing of Dr. Featly's Sermons, where he proves the Pope, in his
Opinion, to be Antichrist. Where he calls him also the p. 810.
Whore of Babylon: Which surely I should never have suffered to be Printed, had
I been her Pander. And for Bishop Hall, I only told him what King James had
said, and left him to make what use he pleased of it.

The Third Charge was out of a Paper, which Bishop Hall, about III.
the time when he wrote his Book in defense of Episcopacy, sent unto me,
containing diverse Propositions concerning Episcopal Government: In which,
either he or I, or both say, (for that Circumstance I remember not) That
Church Government by Bishops is not alterable by Humane Law. To this I
answered, that Bishops might be regulated and limited by Human Laws, in those
things which are but Incidents to their Calling. But their Calling, so far as
it is Jure Divino, by Divine Right, cannot be taken away. They charge farther,
that I say this is the Doctrine of the Church of England. And so I think it is.
For Bishop Bilson set out a Book in the Queen's time, Entitled, The Perpetual
Bishop Bilson's Perpetual Government.
Government. And if the Government by Bishops be Perpetual, as he there very
Learnedly proves thorough the whole Book, it will be hard for any Christian
Nation to out it. Nor is this his Judgment alone, but of the whole Church of
England. For in the Preface to the Book of Ordination, Preface.
Book of Ordination, are these words. From the Apostles time, there have been
three Orders of Ministers in the Church of Christ, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons. Where it is evident, that in the Judgment of the Church of England,
Episcopacy is a different, not Degree only, but Order, from Priesthood, and so
has been reputed from the Apostles times. And this was then Read to the Lords.
And the Law of England is as full for it, as the Church. For the Statute in the
eighth of the Queen, absolutely 8 Eliz. c. 1.
confirms all and every part of this Book of Ordination. Where also the Law
calls it, The high Estate of Prelacy. And Calvin (if my S. John 20. 21. Calvin
Ibid.
old Memory do not fail me) upon those words of St. John, As my Father sent me,
so send I you, etc. says thus upon that place, Eandem illis imponit Personam ac
idem Juris assignat. And if our Savior Christ, put the same Person upon the
Apostles, and assigned to them the same Right, which his Father gave him; it
will prove a sour work to throw their Successors the Bishops out of the Church
after Sixteen Hundred Years continuance. And in the mean time cry out against
Innovation.

For either Christ gave this Power to his Apostles only; and that will make the
Gospel a Thing Temporary, and confined to the Apostles Times: Or else he gave
the same Power, though not with such Eminent Gifts, to their Successors also,
to propagate the same Gospel to the end of the World, as St. Paul tells us he
did, Ephesians. 4. Now all the Primitive Church all along, gives Bishops Ephesians. 4.
11.
to be the Apostles Successors, and then it would be well thought on, what
Right any Christian State has (be their Absolute Power what it will) to turn
Bishops out of that Right in the Church which Christ has given them.

The Fourth Charge was an Alteration made in a Brief, for a third IV.
Collection for the distressed Ministers and others in the Palatinat. The Queen
of Bohemia was pleased to do me the Honor to write to me about this; and
because two Collections had been before, her Majesty desired, that this third
might be only in London, and some few Shires about it. I out of my desire to
relieve those distressed Protestants, and to express my Duty to the Queen,
became an humble Suitor to his Majesty, that this Collection also might go
thorough England, as the rest had done. And it is acknowledged by all, that this
I did. Now the Witnesses which Accuse me for some Circumstances in this
business, are two.

1. The First is Mr. Wakerly. He says, that Mr. Ruly (who was employed by the
Queen of Bohemia about this Collection) was roughly used by me upon occasion of
this Clause put into the Brief, and which he says I caused to be altered. This
first is a bold Oath; for Mr. Wakerly was not present, but Swears upon Hearsay.
Secondly, what kindness I showed him and the Business, is mentioned before; and
if for this kindness he had been practicing with Mr. Wakerly about the Brief
(as I had probable Reason to suspect) I cannot much be blamed, if I altered my
Countenance toward him, and my Speech too; which yet these Witnesses (for the
other agrees in this) have no Reason to call rough Carriage, only upon Mr.
Ruly's unthankful Report.

He says, That these words, the Antichristian Yoke, were (...) out. First, this
is more than I remember; and the Briefs I had not to compare; nor is there any
necessity, that two Briefs coming for the same thing, with some Years distance
between, should agree in every Phrase or Circumstance. Secondly, if I did
except against this passage, it was partly because of the fore-recited Judgment
of King James, of which I thought his Son King Charles ought to be tender: And
partly, because it could move nothing but Scorn in the common Adversary, that
we should offer to determine such a Controversy by a Broad Seal. I remember
well, since I had the Honor to sit in this House, the naming of Tithes to be
due Jure Divino, cast out the Bill; A Prudent Lord asking the Peers, whether
they meant to determine that question by an Act of Parliament? The other part
of the Clause which they say was altered, was the Religion which we with them
profess: Whence they infer, because (with them) was left out, that I would not
acknowledge them of the same Religion; which follows not. For we may be, and
are of the same Religion; and yet (agree) not with them in those Opinions, in
which we differ from them. And Mr. Wakerly confesses, that the Words as
altered, are, That they are Persecuted for their Religion; and their Religion
is the Protestant Religion, and so is ours. And therefore I could have no
intention to make the Religions different, but the Opinions under the same
Religion.

For Mr: Wakerly, he is a Dutchman born; and how far the Testimony of an Alien
may be of force by the Law, I know not: And a bitter Enemy to me he has ever
showed himself, since I complained to the King and the Lords, that a Stranger
born and bred, should be so near a Secretary of State, and all his Papers and
Ciphers, as he was known to be to Mr. Secretary Coke: A thing which few States
would endure: And how far the Testimony of such a Cankered Enemy should be
admitted, let the World judge. Admitted he was.

2. The Second Witness was Mr: (...). He acknowledges my improvement of the
Collection, and my great readiness therein; which doubtless I should not have
showed, had I accounted them of another Religion. He says, there was no
Alteration but in that Clause, and that implies a manifest difference. But that
is but in his Judgment, in which I have already showed that Wakerly is
mistaken, and so is he. Beside, he comes here as a Witness of the Fact, not as
a Judge of my Intentions or Thoughts. He adds, That, if he remember well, the
Alteration was drawn by me. But, if he do not remember well, what then? Surely
here is no Evidence to be grounded upon Ifs. Here upon the point of Antichrist,
Mr. Nicolas styled me as before, and was furious till he foamed again; but I
saw a necessity of Patience. Mr. Brown also in his Summary Ch followed this
Business close. But I gave it the same Answer.



The Fifth Charge, and the last under this Article, was the calling V.
in of a Book, An. 1637. showing the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church in
the Palatinat; but called in only because against Arminianism. The single
Witness Michael Sparks. He says, this Book was called in, but he knows not by
whom, nor mentions he for what. But he says, The Pursevants which searched for
it, were mine. He means such as belonged to the High Commission; for other than
such I had none. And there was cause enough for calling in the Book, without
thinking of Arminianism. But what is the Reason, why here is nothing urged
against me, about Abrogating the Immunities and Privileges of the French and
Dutch Churches, which fill the Body of this Article? Why, I conceive there may
be two Reasons of it. One, because there was taken by Mr. Pryn, among other
Papers for my Defense, a Letter See the Letter above, in the Answer to the
Scotch Articles.
under Queen Elizabeth's own Hand, to the Lord Pawlet Marquess of Winchester,
then Lord Treasurer, in which she expresses her willingness, that those
Strangers, distressed in and for point of Conscience, should have Succor and
free Entertainment; but should conform themselves to the English Liturgy, and
have that Translated into their own Language. And they knew, I would call to
have this Letter produced, proved, and read. And had this Letter been stood
unto, they had never been able to do the Church of England half the harm they
have since done. The other was, because they found by their own search against
me, that all which I did concerning those Churches, was with this Moderation,
that all those of their several Congregations, in London, Canterbury, Sandwich,
Norwich, or elsewhere, which were of the second Descent, and born in England,
should repair to their several Parish Churches, and Conform themselves to the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Liturgy of the Church of England, and not live
continually in an open Separation, as if they were an Israel in Egypt, to the
great distraction of the Natives of this Kingdom, and the assisting of that
Schism which is now broke forth. And as this was with great Moderation, so was
it with the joint Approbation of his Majesty and the Lords of his Council, upon
the Reasons openly given and debated: And all this before I proceeded to do any
thing. As appears apud Acta.



Then they went to the Thirteenth Original Article; which here follows.

He has Traitorously and Wickedly endeavored to reconcile the Church of
England with the Church of Rome, and for the effecting thereof, has Consorted
and Confederated with diverse Popish Priests and Jesuits, and has kept secret
Intelligence with the Pope of Rome, and by himself, his Agents or Instruments,
Treated with such as have from thence received Authority and Instruction: He
has permitted and countenanced a Popish Hierarchy, or Ecclesiastical
Government, to be Established in this Kingdom. By all which Traiterous and
Malicious Practices, this Church and Kingdom have been exceedingly endangered,
and like to fall under the Tyranny of the Roman See.

The Seventh Additional Article.

That the said Archbishop at several times within these Ten Years last past,
at Westminster, and elsewhere within this Realm, contrary to the known Laws of
this Land, has endeavored to advance Popery and Superstition within the
Realm. And for that End and Purpose has wittingly and willingly received,
harbored and relieved diverse Popish Priests and Jesuits, namely one called
Sancta Clara, alias Damport, a dangerous Person, and Franciscan Friar, who
having written a Popish and Seditious Book Entitled Deus, Natura, Gratia,
wherein the Thirty nine Articles of the Church of England established by Act of
Parliament, were much Traduced and Scandalized; the said Archbishop had diverse
Conferences with him, while he was in writing the said Book, and did also
provide Maintenance and Entertainment for one Monsieur S. Giles, a Popish
Priest, at Oxford; knowing him to be a Popish Priest.

The First Charge (they say) was to be laid as a Foundation, and it I.
was, That I was generally reputed a Papist in Heart, both in Oxford, and since
I came thence.

1. The first Witness for this was Dr. Featly. He says, There was such an
Opinion of me Thirty Years since there. But he says, he never heard any Popish
Opinion maintained by me. So here is nothing of Knowledge: And if I should say,
that above Thirty Years ago, there was an Opinion, that Dr. Featly then in
Oxford, was a Puritan; this could make no Proof against him; nor can his saying
that I was reputed a Papist, make any Proof against me. He says farther, That
one Mr. Russel, who had been bred in S. John's College, told him, in Paris,
That I maintained some Catholic Opinions. First, Mr. Nicolas would have it,
that this Mr. Russel was my Scholar: But that the whole College can witness it
is not so; nor had he ever any relation to me, in the least Degree. After his
Father's Death, he left the College, and went beyond Sea; where the Weak Man,
(for such he was) lost his Religion. Secondly, Dr. Featly says expressly, that
Mr. Russel said, I was no Papist; which, for the Countenance of his own Change,
he would never have said, had he thought me one. Thirdly, if he did say that I
maintained some Catholic Opinions; yet he named none, by which there might be
Trial and Judgment, whether they were such or no, in the Sense he meant them.
Lastly, Mr. Perkins, in his Reformed Catholic, sets down diverse Opinions in
which they of Rome and we agree: Shall he be a Papist for this? Or shall not
that which is Lawful for him, be as Lawful for me?

2. The Second Witness was one Harris. He says, that Mr. Ireland, (who was some
time Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, and after Schoolmaster at
Westminster) told him that I would leave the Church of England. This is a bare
Report from Mr. Ireland, with whom I never had any Acquaintance, nor was scarce
in his Company twice in all my Life. Nor is it in my Power to hinder what Mr.
Ireland will say, or Mr. Harris from him. He says, That one that called himself
Leander, came over on purpose to make this Reconciliation. If he did (which is
more than I know, or believe) I think he would hardly make such a one, as
Harris is reported to be, acquainted with it. But howsoever, if he did come
with that purpose, was it in my Power to hinder his coming? And here is no
Proof offered that I did help on his Purpose, or so much as know of it. He
says, he often Petitioned me for Relief, but had none. It may be, I well knew
he deserved none: And your Lordships know that by Law I might not afford him
any. Had I given him any, I should now have heard it with both Ears. For I am
informed he is a Priest, and Condemned in a Praemunire, and was let out of
Prison, on purpose to be a Witness against me. And having set that which is
aforesaid, under his Hand, is now slipped away, and gone. Who got him out of
Prison for this good purpose, I know not; but fure somewhat there is in it, for
your Lordships see his Testimony is now read, but he appears not.

3. The Third Witness was Sir Nathaniel Brent (now absent, but came in the next
Day) He says, I was esteemed Popishly Affected in Oxford; and he gave Three
Instances very carefully, to prove it. The First was, That in the Divinity
School there, I maintained the Necessity of Baptism. I did so; and my
Predecessor Archbishop Abbot was then Vice Chancellor, and present, and
approved my Opinion; and my Grace passed for my Degree to be Batchellour of
Divinity without any one Man's Opposition. He says, That Mr. Dale of Merton
College, then showed him all my Supposition taken out of Bellarmin. This is a
bold and a dangerous Oath: He might Swear that Mr. Dale showed him in
Bellarmin, that which he said was my Supposition: But that he showed him all my
Supposition there, is a strange Oath for a Man of Learning and Law to make, and
in such a Presence. Besides, I have my Supposition, which I then made, yet by
me; and if my Tenet of that Question be the same with Bellarmin's, or that
there be any Line taken out of him, but what I cite for my own advantage
against him, I will utterly forfeit my Reputation of any Learning to your
Lordships. His Second Instance was, That I was acquainted with one Mr: Brown,
Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, who was suspected to be a Papist,
and after his Death proved to be one by a Book that was found in his Study,
proving that a Man might be a Roman Catholic, and yet go to Church and Conform
in England. I was acquainted with this Man; he was a very good Scholar and an
Honest man, and a good Protestant, for ought I know. For the Tract found after
his Death among his Papers, that is no Proof: For Scholars get all the Papers
they can, especially such as belong to their own Profession. And the more
strange the Opininions are, the more do they labor to get them. Nor is it any
Proof that the Tract was of his making, because written in his own Hand, as
it is urged. For the Argument being so foul and dangerous, it could not be safe
for him, nor any way fit, to commit it to any other to write for him. Nor is
there any Proof that I knew he had such a Tract by him; neither indeed did I.
The Opinion is very base and unworthy, and was first broached by the Jesuit
Azorius, (...). (...). p. 1. L. 8. c. 27.
and it seems some of his Fellows had enlarged him, and made this Tract out of
his Principles. His Third Instance was, That I Petitioned King James in this
Business. I was complained of to King James by a great Person, That I had
inward Acquaintance with this Man. Hereupon, my waiting Month being June, and
not long after the Complaint made, I took Occasion in my first Sermon to
confute this Opinion, and then Petitioned his Majesty that it might be
examined, that such an Imputation might not lie upon me. His Majesty referred
it to the Lords Archbishop of (...), King, Montague, Neale.
Canterbury, Bishops of London, Winchester and Duresm; where after full
examination I was Acquitted.

The Second Charge was, that the same Opinion was held of II.
me beyond the Seas, That I was a cunning Promoter of the Roman Cause. And here
the Witnesses are the same, which were produced before; Mr. Challoner, who told
over his old Tale again of I know not what Plot he heard from a Jesuit: Nothing
but Hearsay at the best. And it savours like an Almanac de Post Facto, or
rather of somewhat else, which I will spare to name, because he is upon his Oath.

The other Witness is Mr. Anthony Mildmay, who also tells over his Old Tale of
his Father Fitton. But he was out of the way again, and appeared not till the
next Day, with Sir Nathaniel Brent. So here is a Repetition again of the same
Witnesses, and the same things, to multiply the Noise. Only Noble Sir Henry
Mildmay appeared not the Second time; but whether it were because he had enough
at his first appearance; or whether his Face was scratched then (as since Men
say it was) I cannot tell.



The Third Charge was, That I had a damnable Plot, to reconcile the III.
Church of England with the Church of Rome. If to reconcile them with the
maintenance of Idolatry, it were a damnable Plot indeed. But if Christian Truth
and Peace might meet and unite together, all Christendom over; were that a Sin
too? Were I able to Plot and effect such a Reconciliation, I would think my
self most Happy, whatever I suffered for it. But how is this damnable Plot
proved? Pope Gregory writ a Letter to his Nuncio in Spain, and a Letter also to
King Charles; which Letter is Printed: Copies of these Letters were found in my
Study. Could I hinder the Pope from writing to whom he pleased? Shall not I get
Copies of any Letters I can, to see what practicing is abroad for private
Interest? Shall it be Lawful for all my Predecessors to get and keep Copies of
such Letters by them, and shall it be Unlawful for me only? And here I produced
Mr. Dobson, an ancient Servant to my Predecessors, who witnessed that
Archbishop Bancroft had store of them, and kept them all his Time. Nor do I
know, how this Charge can fall upon me: For there is no one Word in any of the
Letters produced, that Reflects upon me, or any Plot of mine. Nor indeed had I
ever any such to Reflect upon.

The Fourth Charge is, That I had a Hand in the Plot for sending IV.
the King, when he was Prince, into Spain, to be perverted in his Religion.
They follow their Proof of this out of my Diary: And they begin with my
Friendship with the Lord Duke of Buckingham, who waited on the Prince in this
Journey. And first they urged my Diary at June 9. 1622. where I mention, that
there were then Particulars, which are not for Paper. But the Words, which lead
these in, were his entrance upon a near Respect to me, the particular
Expressions whereof were not for Paper: Nor Word, nor Thought, of either Plot
or Popery. Then they urged June 15. 1622. where it is said, that I became C.
that is, Confessor to the Lord Duke. First, if my Lord Duke would Honor me so
much as to make me his Confessor, as I know no Sin in it, so is it abundantly
Proof, that the Passages before mentioned were not for Paper. Should I venture
them so, there is never a Person of Honor present, but would think me most
unworthy of that Trust. Next, they pressed June 13. 1623. where I confess, that
I received Letters from my Lord Duke out of Spain. I did so; and I then held it
great Honor to me, and do so still. But then, and long before, it was known to
all Men whither he was gone, and with whom: Nay, it was commonly known to all
Men of Quality hereabout within three or four Days: And till it was so commonly
known, I knew it not. Yea, but then they enforced out of Feb. 17. 1622/3. That
the Prince and the Marquess of Buckingham set forward very Secretly for Spain.
And Feb. 21. that I writ to his Lordship into Spain. It Is true, they went away
that Day, and very secretly; but I neither did, nor could set it down, till
afterward that I came to know it. And then so soon as I came to know it, which
was about the 21th. I did write. To these was Cunningly (how Honestly let all
the World Judge) pieced a Passage out of a Letter of mine to Bishop Hall. But
that Letter was read, at my humble motion to the Lords, and the Date of it was
in 1634. So, many Years after this Business of Spain. And the Passage
mentioned, was only about King James his manner of defending the Pope to be
Antichrist, and how he salved it while the Prince was in Spain. But King James
related it after. Nor could any Words of that Letter be drawn to the King's
going thither, much less to any knowledge I had of it.

The Fifth Charge was concerning his Majesty's Match with France. V.
And here again they urge my Diary at Mar. 11. 1625. That the Duke of
Buckingham was then and there employed. And at May 19. and 29. that I then writ
Letters to him. First, my Lords, I hold it my great Honor, that my Lord Duke
would write to me, and give me leave to write to him. Secondly, I have
committed some Error in these Letters, or none. If none, why are they Charged?
If any, why are they not produced, that I may see what it is, and answer it?

The Sixth Charge was, That I was an Instrument of the Queens. VI.
This they endeavored to prove by my Diary in Three Places. First, at Aug. 30.
1634. Upon occasion of some Service done, she was graciously pleased to give me
leave to have immediate Access unto her, when I had Occasion. This is true, and
I most humbly Thanked her Majesty for it: For I very well knew what belonged to
Addresses at Second Hand in Court. But what Crime is in this, that the Queen
was pleased to give me Access unto her, when I had Occasion? Here Is no Word of
Religion. Secondly, at May 18. 1635. Where it is said, that I gave her Majesty
an account of some thing committed to me. If her Majesty sent or spoke to me to
do any thing, as it seems she did, shall I want so much Duty as to give her an
Account of it? So belike I must be unmannerly with her Majesty, or lie open to
no less than a Charge of high Treason. Thirdly, at April 3. 1639. It Is made a
great matter, that I should then dispatch a great business for the Queen, which
I understood she would not move for her self: And that for this her Majesty
gave me great Thanks. Mr. Nicolas his Inference upon this, was, that they
conceive wherefore. But his Conceit makes no Evidence: He must not only
conceive, but prove wherefore, before it can work any thing against me. As for
Religion, as there is no Word of it in my Diary, so neither was it at this time
thought on. Her Majesty would therein have moved for her self. But it seems it
must be a Crime if I be but Civil and Dutiful toward the Queen, though it be
but thrice mentioned in so many Years.

The Seventh Charge was, that I forbad Ministers Praying for the VII.
Queens Conversion, and punished others. The First Witness, Mr. Ratcliff, says,
that Sir Nath. Brent gave it in Charge at Bow Church in my Visitation. The more
to blame he, if so he did. Yea, but he says it was by my Command delivered unto
him by Sir John Lamb. Was it so? How does Mr. Ratcliff know that? He does not
express. He was not present, when I spoke with Sir John Lamb. And if Sir Nath.
Brent told him of it, it is but Hearsay. And Sir Nath. having been so ready a
Witness against me, why is he not examined to this Particular? And as for the
Paper which was showed, it appears plainly there, that it was no Paper of
Instructions sent to my Visitors by me, but of particular Informations to me:
Of which one was, that the Queen was prayed for in a very Factious and
Scandalous Way. And this appeared, when that Paper was read. And this I
referred to my Visitors, as I not only might, but ought: Not forbidding the
Prayers, but the Scandalous manner of them. The Second Witness was Mr. Pryn.
Who says, That one Mr. Jones was punished for praying for the Queen. He was
punished in the High Commission for scandalous Abusing the Queen, under a Form
of Praying for her, and for diverse other Articles that were against him. And
this Answer I gave to Mr. Brown, who forgot not this in summing up my Charge.



The Eighth Charge was, That I punished Men for Praying to preserve VIII.
the Prince. No, God forbid. The High Commission Book was showed, and that
there in the Year 1634. one Mr. How was Censured for it. I got this Act of the
High Commission to be read to the Lords: His Prayer went thus, That God would
preserve the Prince in the true Religion, of which there was cause to fear.
Could this Prayer have any other Operation upon the People, than to make them
think his Majesty was careless in the Education of the Prince, especially in
point of Religion? And this was so Grievous and Graceless a Scandal cast upon a
Religious King, as nothing could be greater. Upon the matter, it was the show
of a Prayer for the Prince, but was indeed to destroy the King in the Hearts of
his People. And had I not there consented to his Punishment, I had deserved to
be punished my self. Mr. Brown, when he repeated the Sum of the Evidence, laid
this Charge upon me, but spoke not one Word (to my Remembrance) of this Answer
given to it.



The Ninth Charge, That I did Extol Queen Mary's Days. The Proof IX.
for it was taken out of the Preface to the Statutes of the University of
Oxford. I took a great deal of pains about those Statutes, and might justly
have expected Thanks for it, not such an Accusation. But as for the Preface, it
was made and Printed at Oxford: I meddled not with it. I could trust the
University with little, if not with the making of a Preface. If they have done
any thing amiss in it, let them answer it. The Passage was about certain Offers
made to amend those Confused Old Statutes, both in Ed. 6. and Queen Mary's
Days; but no Effect came of the pains then taken, Recruduit Labor, says the
Preface. So that this I can answer for them: There Is not a Word spoken of
Religion, but of Manners only, and that as much in relation to the Times of
Princes following, as Hers. For the Words, to my remembrance, are Interim
optanda Temporum Foelicitate, etc. And that Interim cannot be restrained to
Queen Mary's Days only, but must include the whole Interim, or middle distance
of Time to that present in which I settled the Body of their Statutes, that is,
all Queen Elizabeth's and King James his Days; which I think no Man can deny
was, Optanda Temporum Foelicitas.

Here Mr. Nicolas confessed there was no downright Proof against X.
me. That was his Phrase: But he added, that was not to be expected in such a
Work of Darkness. Then he produced a Paper found in my Study, Printed at Rome.
So were diverse of my Books Printed there: What of this? They may Print what
they will at Rome, I cannot hinder it: And I may have and keep whatever they
Print, no Law forbidding it. Then he showed a Letter sent unto me from Mr.
Graves. The Gentleman is at this present Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, a
great Traveller, and a Man of great Worth. As far as I remember, his Letter
came to me from Alexandria. It was fit to be sent, and kindly received; as by
me it was. I desired it might be read. Then were mentioned Sir William
Boswell's Letters, and the Papers sent by Andreas ab Habernfeld, about a great
Plot to destroy the King and Religion, and that I concealed these Papers. I
might have been amazed at the Impudence of this Charge above all the rest.
Diaboli Impudentia, the Devils Impudence, and no less, as S. Augustine speaks in
another Case.

Did I conceal these Papers? S. Aug. Epist. 167.
First, the same Day that I received them, I sent them by an Express to his
Majesty. I had a speedy Answer from his Majesty, and that I returned with equal
speed to his Majesty's Agent Sir William Boswell, as I was commanded. This Book
was Published by Pryn in the Year 1643. in 5. Sheets in Quarto. A Copy whereof
being by his Endeavors conveyed to the Archbishop, then a Prisoner in the
Tower, the Archbishop wrote Notes in the Margin of it, so far, and so much, as
to vindicate himself from the Aspersions laid upon him therein. This Copy with
the said Notes is now in the Hands of that knowing and learned Antiquary Mr.
Anthony Wood; which having been by him Communicated to me, I have, with his
Leave, Transcribed the Archbishops Notes, and caused them to be adjoined to
these Papers concerning the Plot discovered by Andrew ab Habernfeld, reprinted
in the following Collection. H:
And this Mr. Pryn, and Mr. Nicolas knew. For Mr. Pryn took all these Letters
and Papers from me, when he searched me at the Tower; and out of them made his
Book called Rome's Masterpiece: Excepting the Slanders, which he has Jugled in
of his own. So soon as his Majesty came home, I humbly besought him, that he
would be pleased to appoint a time, and call some Lords to him to hear and
examine the Business, and this Examination continued till I was Committed. What
was after done, I cannot account for. Besides, my Lords, it appears by those
Paprs, that my Life was sought for, because I would not give way to the Change
of Religion; and Mr. Pryn himself has Printed this; and yet now Mr. Nicolas,
from his Testimony, presses these Papers against me. But the King, and the
Lords, and both Secretaries of State then present, can witness, that I took all
the Care and Pains abovementioned, to have it sifted to the Bottom.
Notwithstanding all this, Mr. Nicolas falls upon this Plot again upon the next
Day of my Hearing, as if nothing had been said unto it: And was so shameless,
as to say, that I followed this Business so long as I thought the Plot was
against the Puritans: But so soon as I found it was against the Papists, I kept
it secret, till Mr. Pryn discovered it in his search of my Papers. Where,
First, there is no one Word in all the Papers to make me, or any Man think the
Puritans were concerned in it. And Secondly, I did not sleep upon the Receipt
of these Papers, till I had sent them to his Majesty. But I had reason to keep
the Papers as safe as I could, considering how much they justify me against
these foul Calumnies put upon me.



Then followed the Charge of Sancta Clara's Book, alias Monsieur St: XI.
Giles: So they expressed it; and I must follow the way they lead me. First
then, they Charge that I had often Conference with him, 1.
while he was writing his Book Entitled Deus, Natura, Gratia. No, he never
came to me, till he was ready to Print that Book. Then some Friends of his
brought him to me. His Suit then was, That he might Print that Book here. Upon
Speech with him, I found the Scope of his Book to be such, as that the Church
of England would have little Cause to thank him for it: And so absolutely
denied it. Nor did he ever come more at me after this, but twice or thrice at
most, when he made great Friends to me, that he might Print another Book, to
prove that Bishops are by Divine Right. My Answer then was, that I did not like
the way which the Church of Rome went, in the Case of Episcopacy. And
howsoever, that I would never give way, that any such Book should be Printed
here from the Pen of a Romanist; and that the Bishops of England were able to
defend their own Cause and Calling, without calling in Aid from Rome; and would
in due time. Maintenance he never had any from me, nor did I then know him to
be a Priest. Nor was there any Proof so much as offered in contrary to any of
this.

2. Secondly, they did specially except against a Passage in the Licenser, and
another at the end of the Book. The Book was Printed at Lions, where I could
not hinder the Printing, either of the whole, or any part. This might have been
something, had I Licensed it here: But that I constantly denied.

3. Thirdly, They produced a Letter written to me from Venice, by one Mr:
Middleton, Chaplain there to the Right Honorable the now Earl of Denbigh, his
Majesty's Ambassador. Therein he writes, That S: Clara was Homo nequissimus,
and that one Monsieur S: Giles was the Author of that Book. That Clara and S:
Giles were the same Person, is but Mr: Middleton's Opinion. Such News as he
there heard, some true, some false, he thought fit to write unto me: And he
being absent, here is no Proof upon Oath, that they are one and the same Person.
And I hope a young Man's Letter from Venice, or any other place, signifying
only such things as he hears, shall not stand for good Evidence in a Case of
Life. And he was mainly deceived in this Particular, as appears: First, Because
what Clara is, I know not: But Monsieur S. Giles is a great Scholar, and a
Sober Man; and one that gave the late L. Brook so good Content, that he
allowed him One Hundred Pound a Year during his Life. Secondly, Because it is
commonly known that Clara is an English man, and S. Giles a French man born and
bred. Thirdly, Because their own Article, upon which (...) 7th Additional.
they bring this Charge, acknowledges them two distinct Persons. Fourthly,
Because both Mr. Pryn and Mr. Nicolas had Monsieur S. Giles before them in
Examination, and could not but know him to be a French man. As appears by a
Warrant given to him by Mr. Pryn to secure him after his Examination. Which
Warrant follows in these words:

These are to Certify those whom it may concern, That the Committee of the
House of Commons, appointed to prosecute the Archbishop of Canterbury, have
examined and received Satisfaction from Monsieur S. Giles, a Domestic Servant
to the Resident of Venice; and therefore he is no farther to be examined or
molested concerning the same

This License came to my Hands since my Answering was past; so I could not then
show it. Monsieur S: Giles was never the Man that gave me notice of any of
this; not so much as that he had been Examined: But my Secretary Mr: Dell came
to hear of it by chance, and went to him, and had this Copy (with some labor)
from him, and will make Oath it is a true Copy. This is not the thankfullest
part at ever S. Giles played, considering my Carriage toward him.



4. Then they charged upon Monsieur S. Giles directly, That I knew him to be a
Priest, and yet maintained him at Oxford. The Case was this: Mr: S: Giles was
The Archbishop related this Case more at large, and therewith defended himself
in a written Paper; which being seized by Pryn in the Tower, was now produced
and read before the Lords. It may be found in Pryn's Compl. Hist. p. 428. H. W.
in good Place about the Queen's Majesty at her first coming: Here he did so
good Services to this State, that he lost himself in France, and durst not go
thither when the French were sent away. All this while the Man was unknown to
me, till his Majesty one day at St. James's told me this, and that he was a
Priest, and that it lay upon him in Honor to allow him some Maintenance; and
prescribed me a way how to order it, that he might receive One Hundred Marks a
Year as from him: And gave me Charge, if the Pension were at any time behind, I
should acquaint him with it. After this Mr. S: Giles by his Friends Petitioned
his Majesty, that being a Stranger, he might live in Oxford, to have the use of
the Library there, being resolved to meddle no more with the Controversies of
the Time; but to apply himself to Metaphysical Learning. His Majesty was
desirous to have him placed in some College, to save Charges: But this I most
humbly deprecated, because it might be dangerous to the Youth there, and
scandalous to his Majesty, the Church, and the University; and dangerous to my
self, being Chancellor. To the rest I submitted: So he was left to place
himself in some Townhouse, as he could. And for this his Majesty gave me his
Warrant, which Mr. Pryn in his Search took from me. But here follows the true
Copy of it.

Charles Rex.

CAnterbury, Mr: S: Giles by serving us and this State, has lost all his hopes
in France, and desires to spend his time here at his private Studies. I would
have you think upon some way for his Maintenance, and to place him in Oxford,
that he may have use of that Library, which he much desires. And you may so
order it, that his Profession in Religion may do no harm.

And according to this direction of his Majesty I did take Order; but with
assurance from himself, and with Spies upon him there, beside the special care
of the Vice Chancellor, that he should not Converse with young Students, nor
Exercise his Priestly Office, nor do any thing against the Laws. Nor did I ever
hear, that he failed in any of these Assumptions.

5. Then they produced one Mr. Broad, who testified, that while S: Giles lived
at Oxford, some Doctors came to him. Doctors were able to deal well enough with
him; but all resort of young Scholars was forbidden. He says farther, that Mr:
S: Giles should say, that the Bishops of England were Cordially of his
Religion, but that he feared their Rigidness would spoil all. First, this is
but a Report of his Speech. Secondly, why was not S: Giles at his Examination
asked, whether he said it or no? And if he did, what ground he had for it? At
the most, 'twas but his Opinion of the Bishops, who were never the more Cordial
to Popery, for his thinking so. And Thirdly, I doubt it appears by this time,
that all is overthrown, or near it, not by the Rigidness, but by the
over-remisness of some Bishops, who never would believe any danger could come
from the Godly, as they were called.



6. Lastly, What Is the Reason of this great Endeavor, upon nothing but News in
a Letter, to make S: Clara, and Mr. S: Giles, to be one and the same Man?
Doubtless, nothing but an Hydropical Thirst after my Blood.

For resort of Priests to Lambeth, was usual in both my last Predecessors
Times, Bancroft's and Abbot's. And some lay in the House and had Relief. This
was proved to the Lords by two Ancient Servants of that House. Neither of which
have been done in my Time. Archbishop Abbot made a Warrant (this Warrant was
showed) to secure Mr. Preston an English Priest, upon a Confer. at Hamp. Court.
p. 51.
Command of King James: Why may not I a French one, by the Warrant of King
Charles? King James justified Bishop Bancroft for doing this, when he was
Bishop of London, and no Privy Counselor: And may not I do it, being
Archbishop and Privy Counselor, with as much Privity of the King and the
State, as he did? But to let these pass, why should I say, here was a Thirst
for Blood? I Will tell you why? The Statute of 27 Eliz. makes it Felony without
Benefit of 27 Eliz. c. 2.. 3.
Clergy, to Maintain or Relieve any Romish Priest Born in England, or any other
of her Majesty's Dominions, knowing him to be such. Now they had laid their
Article, that I had given Maintenance to one Mounsieur Art. 7. Addit,
S. Giles, a Popish Priest at Oxford, knowing him to be such. But when upon
Examination of S. Giles, they found him to be a French Man, and so not within
the Statute. (As the words of that Statute are most plain, and so is Sir Edw.
Coke's Judgment upon them, both L. 3. (...). c. 37.
which I then read to the Lords) I say when they saw this, then they cast about
how to make S. Clara and Mr. S. Giles to be one Man. And though After all, Pryn
would insinuate, that (...): Giles (...) the same Man with Sancta Clara, and
wrote the Book Entitled, Deus, Naturs, and Gratia, (...) be fully knew the
contrary, Compl: Hist: p: 427. 429. Nay he (...) the Considence at last (p:
430.) to add, that it is most apparent. H.
they could find no shadow of Proof of a thing that is not, but a Letter of
News from Venice, yet against their own Knowledge and Conscience, they give
that in Evidence to reach my Life any way.

Here Mr: Nicolas, so soon as he discovered whither I tended, would have broken
me off, saying, they did not urge it for that now, they were not yet come to
it. I Replied, if they came to it after, I would be at the pains to Answer
again: But since it concerned my Life, I would not slip it now, nor leave it
unanswered in any Circumstance. So I went on, but they never mentioned it
after; and by this way meant certainly to have involved me within the Law,
Clara being an English Man Born. God of his Mercy grant, that this Thirst after
my Blood lie not too heavy another day upon their Souls. Mr. Brown in Summing
up the Charge, fell upon this also. I made a brief Answer out of that which is
aforesaid: Yet after, in his Reply, he fell upon this Letter of Mr.
Middleton's, and cites his News for Evidence, that S. Clara and Mr. S. Giles
were the same Man. Which I much wonder, so Able and Grave a Man as he is,
should swallow from Mr. Pryn, who doubtless (being present) was angry to see
himself so laid open in the House of Commons.



At last came in the last Charge of this Day: That a Cardinal's Hat XII.
was offered unto me. My Diary quoted for this, at Aug. 4. and 21. 1633. I
could hinder no Offer, unless I could Prophecy what each Man came about, and
so shun them. But why is not my Answer there set down, expressed too? My Answer
was, That somewhat divelt in me, which would not suffer me to accept that, till
Rome were other than now it is. Besides, I went presently to his Majesty, and
acquainted him with it: Which is all that Sir Ed. Coke. (...). 3. Instit. c. 3.
the Law requires at my Hands. And his Majesty very Prudently and Religiously
(yet in a calm way, the Persons offering it, having Relation to some
Ambassador) freed me speedily of that, both Trouble and Danger. They urged
further out of the Papers of Andreas ab Habernfield (which Mr. Pryn took from
me in his search) That Signior Con had power to offer me a Cardinal's Hat. The
words which they cite, are (for I could never get sight of those Papers since)
Mandatum habuit offerre, sed non obtulit. What Power he had to make me such an
Offer, I know not; but themselves confess he did not offer it. Nor had I ever
any Speech with him, during all the time he stayed here. I was solicited as
much by Honorable Friends to give him Admittance to me at Lambeth, with
Assurance he should speak nothing about Religion, as ever I had about any thing
in my Life. I still refused, and could not persuade my self to do other; and
yet could not but inwardly ( In Verbo Sacerdotis, this is true) condemn my self
of gross Incivility for refusing. For which yet now I see I am much bound to
God for that Unmannerliness. Had I held a Correspondence with him, though never
so Innocent, where had I now been? Besides, I would not have it forgotten, that
if to offer a Cardinal's Hat, or any like thing, shall be a sufficient Cause to
make a Man guilty of Treason, it shall be in the power of any Romanist, to make
any English Bishop a Traitor when he pleases: A Mischief not to be endured. And
thus this long and tedious Day ended; and I had order to Attend again on July
24. which I did accordingly.

CAP. XLI. The Nineteenth Day of my Hearing.
THis day they went on with the same Article. And the (...) (...) 24. 1644.
Monday.
Charge was, My denying the Pope to be Antichrist: The I.
Proofs; The Alteration of the Clause in the Letters Patents, for the
Palatinat; and the Letters between Bishop Hall and me. These Proofs Die
Decimonono:
are Answered before, and repeated here only to make a Noise. Nor did I in any
of these deny the Pope to be Antichrist. For, to forbear that word, for some
both Temporal and (...) Respects, is one thing; and to deny the thing it self
is another.

The Second consists of a great many Particulars, and most of II.
them urged before, repeated only to help to make the Ignorant clamorous and
wild against me. God forgive them this Practice.

1. The First Particular was Shelford's Book: The whole Book. And Mr. Pryn very
gravely said, that this Book and the other two following, were found in my
Study. Is he not yet ashamed of this Argument? May I have no Book in my Study,
but I must be of the same Judgment with the Author in all things? The Author is
altogether unknown to me. The Book was Licensed at Cambridge. So nothing faulty
in me, but the having of the Book in my Study.

2. The Second was, Dr. Heylin's Book against Mr. Burton. This Book was Printed
by my Command (they say) And in it is a Passage for Absolute Obedience to
Kings. p. 229. This was before also. And Heylin (...). Burton p. 229.
I did Command the Printing of the Book; but gave no (...) to put any thing
unjustifiable into it. This Passage I caused to be read to the Lords, and the
Doctor there says no more than what he Learned of King James in the Conference
at Hampton Court. But if any thing be amiss, he is ready to Answer it. But I
find not one word in him, that this Absolute Obedience ought to be in any thing
that is against Law. That Is one of Mr. Nicolas his Stretches.



3. The third Particular is Bishop Mountague's Appeal, p. 141. But nothing
hence charged upon me, but only, that the Book was found in my Study. I would
Mr. Pryn could find any Books there now.

4. The Fourth was, That diverse Books of like nature were Licensed by my
Chaplains. But none was of all they then named, but Dr. Heylin's, and Sales; of
which your Lordships have heard the Plot how it came to be Licensed. And for
Dr. Heylin, he is ready to make all good, which he has therein done.

5. The Fifth Particular is, That the Homilies which are Authorized in the
Church of England, make the Pope Antichrist, p. 216. And the Babylonish Beast
of Rome, p. 316. But First, This is nothing against me, till it be proved,
(which yet is not done) That I have positively denied the Pope to be
Antichrist. And Secondly, I do not conceive, that the Article of the Church of
England, which confirms the Art. 35. Eccl. Ang.
Homilies, does also confirm every Phrase that is in them. Nor, Thirdly, Do I
conceive that the Homilies in those places which are cited, do make the Pope
the great Antichrist. For, in the first place, the Words are, To the beating
down of Sin, Death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist:
Which Words cannot possibly imply, that the Pope is that Antichrist. In the
second place, he is only called the Babylonical Beast of Rome; which Phrase
does not necessarily signify The Great Antichrist. For the Beast so often
mentioned in the Cap. 11. 7.
Revelation, is no where called the Babylonical Beast of Rome. And if that
Beast do stand for the Great Antichrist, (I say If, because those Scriptures
are very dark) then Annot. in Apoc. 17. 8.
the Beast is primarily the Roman Empire in the Judgment of the Geneva Noters.
And that there should be two great Antichrists, is more than any man has yet
said. Here Mr. Nicolas was up again with Pander to the Whore of Babylon, and
his other foul Language; not remembering all this while, (which yet I was loath
to mind him of) that one of his zealous Witnesses against the Whore of Babylon,
and all her Superstitions, got all his Means (which are great) by being a
Pander to other lewd Women; and loved the business it self so well, as that he
was (not long since, men say) taken in Bed with one of his Wife's Maids. Good
Mr. Nicolas, do not dispense with all Whores, save the Whore of Babylon.



6. The Sixth Particular was, the Articles of Ireland, which call the Pope the
Man of Sin. But the Articles of Ireland bind neither this Church, nor me. And
some Learned Protestants do not understand that noted place of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. as meant of Antichrist, or 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the Pope.

7. The Seventh and Last Particular is, a Repetition of Sancta Clara and Mr. S.
Giles; and the Letter of News, (which were News indeed) to make them one Man;
though this were Answered at large but the last Day; and Sir Ed. Hungerford's
Testimony brought up again. It Is a sign Mr. Nicolas has indeed no downright
right Proof (as he said before) that so tumbles up and down in repeating the
same things.

The Third Charge is, that I say in my Book, That the Religion of III.
the Church of Rome and ours is all one. This is spoken only in opposition My
Book cont. Fisher, p. 376.
to other Religions, in regard of Christianity. The Words are, Nor do the
Church of Rome and the Protestants set up a different Religion; for the
Christian Religion is the same to both, etc. And the like passage to this is in
my Page 36.
Speech in the Star Chamber. And these Passages were read to the Lords. So that
either Papists must be denied to be Christians, or else this Charge can work
nothing against me.

The Fourth Charge is out of Chouneus his Book, p. 45, and 46. Licensed by my
Chaplain Dr. Braye, where (they say) it is said, That Rome is a True IV.
Church, and differs not in Fundamentals. And that at the High Commission, when
this Book was questioned by some, I did say that the Church of Rome and the
Protestants did not differ in Fundamentals, but in Circumstances. And this
latter part was testified by Mr. Burton and one Mr. Lane, who said they were
present. First, Suppose this be false, and that they do differ in Fundamentals;
yet this then is but my Error in Divinity, no Practice to overthrow Religion.
Secondly, I suppose, if I did so say, I did not Err: For the Foundations of
Christian Religion are the Articles of the Creed, and the Church of Rome denies
no one of them: Therefore there is no difference in the Fundamentals. If they
of Rome differ in Exposition of some of these, that must needs be a
Superstructure upon, or beside the Article, not the Article or Foundation it
self. Nor did I follow my own Judgment herein, but Quemadmodum sape (...)
aedificia, ut fundamenta and ruinae maneant; ita non passus est Ecclesiam suam
ab Antichristo vel a fundamento subverti, vel solo aequari, etc. sed (...)
quaque vastatione semirutum adificium superesse voluit. Call. L. 4. Inst. c. 2.
11.
Calvin's; who says expressly, That in despite of Antichrist, the Foundations
of the Church remained in the Papacy it self, that the Church might not wholly
perish. And this Passage was then read to the Lords. Thirdly, These two Learned
Witnesses, (as they would be reputed) are quite mistaken in their very Terms.
For they report me, as if I said, Not in Fundamentals, but in Circumstantials;
whereas these are not Membra opposita, Cont. Fisher, 3. p. 11.
but Fundamentals and Superstructures, which may sway quite beside the
Foundation. And this though not the only, yet is a main Failing in the Roman
Fabric; in which many things are built upon unwarrantable Tradition, as is
expressed in my Cont. Fisher, p. 377.
Book at large, and their many Superstitions named; and that Passage read also
to the Lords. For though they differ not in the prime Foundations, Cont.
Fisher, 37. (...). 6. p. 320.
yet they in many things grate close upon them, and in some things fall beside
them, to no small Hazard of their own Souls. As for Circumstantials, it seems
these Men have forgotten, or never knew, that many times Circumstantials in
Religion do quite destroy the Foundation. For Example: The Circumstances are
these: Quis? Quid? Vbi? Quibus Auxiliis? Quomodo? Quando?

1. Quid? What a Man believes? And that contains Fundamentals, and in the first
place.

2. Vbi? Place, a mere Circumstance; yet to deny that Christ took our Flesh of
the B. Virgin, and that in Judaea, denies the Foundation, and is flat Judaism.

3. Quibus Auxiliis, By what Helps a Man believes, and in some measure obeys as
he is commanded? For to believe that a Man does this by the strength of Nature
only, and not by Aid and Assistance of Grace, is with the Pelagian to deny the
Foundation, and to overthrow the Grace of Christ.

4. Quando? When? That Is Time, a mere Circumstance: Yet to deny that Christ is
already come in the Flesh, denies the Foundation utterly, and is flat Judaism,
and an inseparable Badge of the great Antichrist, 1 John 4. And in the Case of
the Resurrection, to say 1 S. Joh. 4. 3.
it is past already, (which is Time) St. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 2. is no less 2 Timothy 2. 18.
than the Overthrow of the Faith. And the Rule is general, That some
Circumstances Dant Speciem, give the very Kind and Form to a Moral Action. This
for their Ignorance; but for the Malice of their Oath, Aliqua Circumstantia dat
speciem Actui morali. Tho. 1. secundae, q. 73. A. 7. ad primum
I leave them to God's Mercy. Here Mr. Brown, when he summed up the Evidence
against me, fell upon this, and said, that when I gave diverse Instances what
dangerous Errors Circumstances did sometimes breed in Religion, I gave no
Instance in any point of Popery. But to this I Answered, First, That it was not
material what Instances I made, so I was able to make some. Secondly, That it
was not possible for me, or perhaps a readier Man, to have all Instances so
present with his Memory. Thirdly, If an Instance in Popery, rank Popery will
serve the turn, you may take it in Transubstantiation: That is either a
Fundamental Point, or it is not: If it be not Fundamental, why did the Papist
put the Protestant to Death for it? And why did the Protestant suffer Death? If
it be Fundamental (as it seems by both sides it was accounted) it is upon the
bare Circumstance of Quomodo? How Christ is present in the Sacrament.



As for that which was said in the beginning of this Charge, That Rome is a
True Church: I ever did, and ever must grant it, that such it is Veritate
Entis, in the Truth of it is Entity and Being. For as I have said against
Fisher, Ens and Verum, Being and True are convertible (...) 20. p. 128.
one with another. And every thing that has a Being, is truly that Being which
it is in truth of Substance; but a Right or an Orthodox Church I never said it
was, either in Doctrine or Manners. As a Thief is a true Man in Verity of his
Essence, that is, he is a Creature endued with Reason; but it does not
therefore follow that he is a true Man Veritate Moris, in his Life and
Conversation. And this I answered first to the Lords, and after to Mr. Brown's
Summary Charge, who in his last Reply said two things: First, That when I said
Rome was a True Church, I spoke it generally without this Distinction. But this
is quite beyond the Proof; for no Witness says so. Besides, it is manifest by
distinction of Fundamentals from other Doctrines, (acknowledged by both the
Witnesses) that I did not speak it absolutely, but plain enough to any ordinary
Understanding. Secondly, (which I was very sorry to hear from so grave a Man)
he added, That there was no Truth of a Church, but in the Verity of Doctrine
and Manners; and that in Veritate Entis a Company of Turks were a True Church.
Now God be merciful to us, whither are we posting? It Is known that the Greek
Word (...), which signifies Church, signifies also in Heathen Authors, any kind
of Company or Congregation of Men, Turks if you will. But in Ecclesiastical
Writers, and among all Christians the Word Church is used only (and so (...)
too) for a Company of Men which profess the Faith of Christ, and are Baptized
into his Name. And will any Man say that a Company of Turks are such a Church
in Veritate Entis, in the Verity of this Being; as all the World knows Papists
are? Or if he will not speak de Ente tali, but change the Suppositum, he may
say what he please. But I was very much troubled to hear this, and from him.

I had almost forgot that (...). Par. 2. p. 213.
Mr. Nicolas here pressed the Authority of the Homilies upon me again, where
it is said, That the Bishop of Rome and their Adherents are not the true Church.
But the Answer is easy: For I say as the Homily does, and as it means too in
that place. Namely, that the Church of Rome is not the true, that is, not the
Catholic Church, nor the Head thereof. But there is a great deal of difference
between the Church, and a Church: The one is the General, the other a
Particular. The Church it cannot be; A Church it is, and a true one too, in the
Sense before specified. Upon occasion of this Mr. Nicolas his Mouth was open
again, and said, That at the beginning I reckoned up some that I had Converted:
But if this were my Opinion, and that if this might stand for good, I might
Convert the Devil and all. My Ears had been so beaten with his Language, that I
was patient, and left him to insult. And to help on this business, while he was
in these loud Expressions, the E. of Pembrook came to Mr. Burton to the Bar,
and in my hearing desired him to repeat the Testimony he had given; which Mr.
Burton did, and his Lordship seemed to be much pleased with it. Not long
before, when the News was come hot to the House, that York was taken; when I
came at Five in the Afternoon to make my Answer, I was no sooner come to the
Bar, but the same Lord came and sat just before me, and there with much Joy
told Mr. Lieutenant the News. I presume he did it in favor to me, because he
thought it would put me in very good Heart, being then instantly to begin to
make my Answer. God forgive this Lord; for I have deserved in my time far
better of him, if he understood himself, or any Man else.

The next Charge was out of Dr. Packlinton's Altar Christianum, V.
p. 49, 50. where he speaks (they say, for I now have not his Book) of a
Happiness that the Bishops of England can derive their Succession from St.
Peter; which in great Scorn Mr. Nicolas called the Archbishop's Pedigree.
First, If there be any Crime in this, Dr. Pocklinton is to Answer it, not I.
Secondly, He may scorn what he will; but Wise Men know, it is a great Honor to
the Church of England, and a great Stopple in the Mouths of the Romanists, that
her Bishops can derive their Calling successively from St: Peter; especially
considering, how much they stand upon personal Succession. Thirdly, Dr.
Pocklinton in this says no more for me and the Bishops than Petro successit
Linus, Lino (...), etc. Et sic usque ad Anastasium, qui (...) sedet. Et in hoc
ordine successionis (...) Donatista Episcopus invenitur. S. Aug. Epist. 165.
St. Augustine urged for himself and his Brethren against the Donatists in the
same words, save that St. Aug. begins at St. Peter, and descends to his own
time; and the Dr. begins at his own time, and ascends to St. Peter. But it
seems an Upstart Clergy without a Calling will serve Mr. Nicolas well enough.



The Sixth Charge was, That Books were written of purpose to maintain VI.
these Opinions; and such Men as writ them only preferred. He named Mr.
Shelford, Mr. Butterfield, Dr. Cosins and Dr. Pocklinton. This has been
Clamoured upon already; if any have set out unworthy Books, they may be called
to account for it: I hope I shall not answer for all the Divines in the
Kingdom. They whom I preferred, were Worthy and Able Men, and it will not be in
the Power of Mr. White's Centuries, to Blast a Man of them among any that know
them.

For these that are named, Mr. Shelford I know not; Mr. Butterfield I saw
punished in the High Commission: Neither of them preferred, that I know. The
two last, by whomsoever they were preferred, deserved all the Preferment they
had, and more.



The Seventh Charge is out of my Diary at June: 15: 1632. where VII.
it is said, that I preferred Mr: Secretary Windebank, my old Friend. And here
Mr. Nicolas laid all the Correspondency open, which (he said) that Gentleman
had with the Popes Agents, with Priests and Jesuits, and when he had made him
this way as foul as he could, then I must be guilty of all, for preferring such
a Man to the King. This Gentleman was indeed my ancient Friend: In my many
Years Acquaintance with him, I saw nothing in him, but Honesty and Worth: If
when he was preferred, he deceived my Opinion, he is living to answer for
himself. Many, in all Ages have been preferred to Princes, which do not answer
the Hopes and Desires of them which prefer them; and yet they not made
answerable for them neither: But whether he did fail in any Public Trust or
no, I am not his Judge. Yea; but some Letters were found from his Son Thomas,
what Entertainment be had in Foreign parts for his Father's sake. But these
Letters were read to the Lords, and there is not one Word in them, that relates
to me: And it is both likely and fit, the Son of a Secretary of State, should be
worthily used in his Travels. Yea; but his Son Christopher was Qui se (...),
cum (...).
at Rome, and sent thither to Insinuate himself with the Pope: So Andreas ab
Habernfeld writes in the Papers which Sir William Boswell sent over to me. If
he did send his Son to that end, then I discovered his Plot, for I caused those
Papers to be examined by the King and the Lords, as is before related. Besides,
in my Poor Judgment the Pope must be a very simple Man, (it may be Mr. Nicolas
thinks him so, compared with himself)

that a Youth of Seventeen at the most, should insinuate himself to Fish any
thing out of him for his Fathers Service. Lastly, he pressed, that my Interest
continued with Mr. Secretary in all these Courses of his. It Is well known in
Court the old Interest did not continue between us; but for old Friendships
sake, I will not be drawn to say more. As for his releasing of any Priests, he
must give an account of that himself. But for my self, I was so careful in this
Particular, that I never put my Hand, though Public at Council Table, or
Star Chamber, to any Release in all my time. I might be named as present, when
such Release was made (which I could not avoid) but act in any I did not. Nay,
I was so careful that I refused to set my Hand to any License to Travel, lest
if any Young Man should be perverted abroad in his Travels, any thing might be
imputed to me. And this all the Clerks of the Council can Witness. But I see no
Wariness, no Care, can prevent the Envy and the Malice of the Many, and the
Mighty.



The Eighth Charge was, my Correspondence with Popish Priests. And VIII.
for Proof of this, they produced diverse Witnesses.

1. The First Witness was one Wadsworth, one of the Common Messengers used to
attach such Persons. He says, that Smith, alias Fludd, bragged to him, that he
had acquaintance with me. Here Is nothing but a Bragging Report of Smith, who
what he is I know not. So here is no Proof. He says, that Four Pound was sent to
himself to free him out of Prison, and that Davis told him it came from me.
This is but a Hearsay from Davis, as the former was from Smith. But say, my
Lords, if I did send him Four Pound to free him out of Prison, does he not now
very thankfully reward me for it? The Truth is, my Lords, I did send him Four
Pound: And the Motive that made me send it, was because I heard he was a
Convert from Popery to be a Protestant, and that his Imprisonment was as much
for that as for any thing else. And this was attested to the Lords, by my
Servant Mr. (...), who was one of them that moved me for him.

2. The Second Witness was Francis Newton, another Messenger. He says, that
when he had taken Henry Mors a Priest, he should have been carried to a private
Committee; that he disliked it, and Complained to Mr. Secretary Cook, who (he
says) sent him to me; and that when he came to Lambeth, Mr. Dell told him, I
was in my Garden with Sir Toby Matthew. My Servant Mr. Dell being appointed my
Solicitor was now present in Court, and denied all this. And well he might, for
Sir Toby was never in my Garden with me in all his Life. And if Mr. Dell told
him, that I would not meddle in the Business, (as he says he did) Mr. Dell must
give the Account for it, not I. Yet if there were a Reference of this Mors to a
private Committee, the hindering of that was more proper to Mr. Secretary, than
to me. Howsoever, here was no hurt done. For he confesses that Mors was sent
back to Newgate. And if (as he farther says) he was discharged by Mr. Secretary
Windebank, that is nothing to me. He says, he was informed by Stukely, that
Smith alias Fludd, was acquainted with me. But if he were but informed so
himself, that is no Proof to inform your Lordships. He says, that Brown a Priest
was dismissed out of the High Commission. Thus it was, He was called in
thither, for very foul Uncleanness. In process of this Business, he there
openly confessed himself a Priest. Hereupon that Court sent him to Newgate.
What became of him after, I know not, save that I know he was strictly examined
by Mr. Pym and others concerning me.

This Newton, upon what Grudge I know not, calls me Rogue, and all to naught,
in all Companies; and with so much I acquainted the Lords.

3. The Third Witness was Tho. Mayo, a Messenger also. He says, that Sir Toby
Matthew was accounted a Priest when he was in parts beyond the Seas, and that
he saw him in Coach with me, and that he went over with me in my Barge. First I
gave in Two Exceptions against this Witness. One that he was a Man of no
Conscience, for he had shifted his Religion from Protestant to Papist, and back
again three or four times: Which was a thing known. The other was, that he kept
a Brothel House at this present: And that his Fellow Wadsworth knew this, and
called him Pimping Knave, saying, he kept a Brace of Wenches at this time in
his House. And these Words he spoke of him but the Fifth of this present July,
in the Bull Tavern in the Palace-Yard. So I thought him no fit Witness. But he
was heard for all this. And afterward, Wadsworth meeting my Servant Mr. Snath,
he told him, that he did say so to Mayo, and wondered how I should come to hear
it.

Being admitted, and saying as he did, I told the Lords, that he began with a
very bold Oath, and like a shifter of his Religion. For I had Four of my
Servants there, Three of which usually attended me, when I went and returned
from Court, Mr. Dell, Mr. Snath, Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Dobson, and they all
attested the contrary; and I never went, but one of these at least was with me.
Besides, he is single in this Testimony. He says, that he saw Sir Toby several
times in my House. But he confesses withal, that he never saw him near me. For
my own part I cannot say, that ever he was within my Doors. But if he, or
others of his Quality, do come to pry out any thing in my House, how is it
possible for me to hinder it? My Porter could not see it written in their
Foreheads, who they were. He says, That one Price was often seen at my House.
But he does not say, he was seen with me, or there with my Knowledge. He says,
That one Leander was Reported to have been my Chamber-Fellow in Oxford. First,
this is but a Report, and so no Evidence. Secondly, if he were my
Chamber-Fellow in Oxford, when we were Boys together, I am sure he was then no
Priest, and he was but a Boy when he left the College. He confesses, that I
gave Order to observe who, and how many resorted to Ambassadors Houses, and
Signior Conn's, and says, he thought I could prove it. But I believe he would
never have confessed it, but that he knew I could prove it. And thereupon I
showed the Lords many Papers certifying me what Numbers were found resorting to
each place respectively. And Thomas Mayo's Hand to many of those Papers. He
says, he took one Peter Wilford and brought him to me to Whitehall, while Sir
Jo. Lamb was with me. But he confesses withal that Wilford then showed Mr.
Secretary Windebank's Warrant to Discharge him: And then what could I do to
him? Nay, I have some Cause to think he would never have apprehended him, had
he not known he had that Warrant. Lastly, he says, that once at the
Star Chamber I told him he was too quick and nimble for me. And I hope it is no
Treason if I did say so. Nor could I mean he was too quick in apprehending
Priests, for I found both him, and his Fellows after Crosse's Death slow enough
at that: But if I said so, it was because I could not tell how to trust his
Shifting and his Wyliness.

4. The Fourth Witness was Elizabeth Graye, Wife to another Messenger. And this
is a very fine Witness. For first, she says, Her Husband was committed by my
Means. And then with a Breath she says, She does not know by whom he was
committed, but she thinks by Secretary Windebank and me. But since she does not
know, but think only; I hope her Thinking can be no Evidence. She says, that
she delivered me a Petition, and that I flung it away, saying, I would not
meddle with any Priest-catching Knave. The Witness single, and I doubt doting,
and the Words far from Treason.

5. The Fifth Witness was John Cook, a Messenger too, and one that for his
Misdemeanour had stood in the Pillory. This I urged against him, as unfit to
witness against me: My Witness that saw him in the Pillory, was so threatened,
that he sent me word he durst not come.

I may not say from whom this Threatening came. But the thing was so true, that
Cook himself confessed it, but excused the Cause; And his Testimony received.
He told how Fisher the Jesuit was taken by Graye: That when he was brought to
the Council Table, Secretary Cook and I went to the King to know his Pleasure
about him: That we brought back word from his Majesty to the Lords, that he
should be Banished. All this while here is no hurt done. Then he says, that
notwithstanding this Order of his Majesty, Graye and he met Fisher at Liberty,
by a Warrant from Secretary Windebank: That hereupon Graye repaired to
Secretary Cook, and to me, and that Dell told him I would not meddle with it.
My Secretary must answer this, I remember it not. But if Mr. Dell received any
such Answer from me, that I would not meddle with it; there were two apparent
Reasons for it. One, that I would not meddle with it alone, his Majesty's Order
being to all the Lords. The other, that Fisher was the Man I had written
against, and Men would have been apt to say, that when I could not answer, I
sought means to destroy: So I no way fit (alone at least) to meddle with him of
all Men. He says, that Graye was committed to the Fleet, for Railing on me in
my own House. Yet he confesses, that he was not committed by me. And I presume
your Lordships will think there was Cause of his Commitment, if he did Rail
upon me. And it is confessed by Mr. Pryn The Pop. Roy. Favourit. p. 31.
(though he had then received no Answer from my self) that he said he saw now
how the Game went, and hoped e're long to see better Days, etc. He says, that
Smith, alias Fludd, desired Sir Kenelm Digbye, as he was going to Lambeth, to
tell me that he could not Dine with me that Day, but desired his Business might
be remembered. No such Man ever Dined at my Table, to my knowledge. And if any
Priest would say so to Sir Kenelm, how could I possibly hinder it? And Sir
Kenelm, when this Cook was Examined, was a Prisoner in Winchester-House; why
was not he Examined to sift out this Truth? If Truth be in it.

6. The Sixth Witness was John Thresher, a Messenger too: He says, that he took
Mors and Goodwin, two Priests; and that Secretary Windebank took away his
Warrant, and dismissed them, saying, he would speak with me about it. And that
when he came to me, I was angry with him about the Warrant. Mr. Secretary
Windebank will, I hope, be able to answer for his own Actions. Why he dismissed
the Priests I know not; But he had great Reason to take away his Warrant: And I
a greater Reason to be angry with him for it. For no Warrant can issue from the
High Commission Court, but under three of their Hands at least. Now Thresher
having gotten my Hand to the Warrant, never goes for more Hands, but proceeds
in his Office, upon this unwarrantable Warrant. Had not I Reason to be offended
at this? He says, that at the same time I said that Graye was an ill-tongued
Fellow, and that if he kept him Company, I should not regard him. I had good
Cause to say this and more, considering how Graye had used me. And I believe no
Archbishop would have born his Words. Lastly, he says, that by a Warrant from
me he Arrested Sir Toby Matthewe, and that the Earl of Strafford stayed him
from going to Prison, saying, he should answer it before the Lords. Here by the
Witness himself it appears that I did my Duty. And Sir Toby did appear before
the Lords, as was assured.
assumed he should. In the mean time, I was complained of to the Queen: And a
great Lady (who perhaps made the Complaint) stood by, and made her self Merry
to hear me chid: The Queen was pleased to send to the Lords, and Sir Toby was
released. Where my Fault was in all this, I do not yet see.

7. The last of these famous Witnesses was Goldsmith. Who says nothing, but
that one Day before the High Commission Court began, I forewarned the
Messengers of that Court of Graye, in regard he was openly spoken against at
the Council Table. Which, all things considered, I had great Reason to do. He
says likewise, that then Graye's Wife tendered me a Petition, which I rejected,
saying, I would meddle with no Priest-catching Knaves. I think his Carriage
deserved no better of me, than to reject his Petition: But as for the Words I
cannot own them; let the Goldsmith look to it that he have not Forged them. And
I Frigidc dictum. W. S. A. C.
would very willingly know whether when the Apostle required, that an
Accusation should not be received against an Elder, but under two or three
Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. he had any meaning they should be such 1 Timothy 5: 19:
as these?

The Ninth Charge was about the ordering of Popish Books that were IX.
seized, and the disposing of them. The sole Witness here is John Egerton. He
says, These Books were delivered to Mr. Mattershead, Register to the
High Commission. And I say so too; it was the constant Course of the
High Commission, to send them thither, and have them kept in that Office, till
there was a sufficient number of them, and then to burn them. Yea, but he adds,
that Mattershead told him they were re-delivered to the Owners: This is but a
Report, and Mattershead is dead, who should make it good. And though this be
but a single Witness, and of a dead Man's Report; yet Mr. Brown thought fit to
Sum it up with the rest. But surely if any Books were redelivered to the
Owners; it was so ordered by the High Commission, in regard the Books were not
found dangerous: From me, Mattershead had never any such Command.

Lastly, he says, he met Sir Toby Matthew twice at Lambeth. But he confesses,
he never saw him with me; and then me it cannot concern.

The Tenth Charge was concerning the Priests in Newgate; the X.
Witnesses are Mr. Deuxel, and Francis Newton. They both agree, and they say,
that the Priests there had the best Chambers, and Liberty to go abroad without
Keepers. I hope these Men do not mean to make the Archbishop of Canterbury
Keeper of Newgate. If any Man gave them this Liberty, he is to be blamed for
it, not I, who never knew it till now. Nor do either of these Witnesses say,
that they called on me for remedy, or ever did so much as acquaint me with it.
And they say this was Twelve Years since; and I had been Archbishop but Seven
Years when I was Committed.

The Eleventh Charge was about words in my Epistle Dedicatory before XI.
my Book against Mr. Fisher. The Words these, For, to my remembrance, I have
not given him, or his, so much as course Language. So the Charge is because I
have not given ill Words. And here Mr. Nicolas fell foul upon me again for
taking such care, that the Whore of Babylon may have nothing but good Words,
etc. But First, my Lords, I have always thought, and do still, that ill
Language is no Proof against an Adversary: All the good it can do is, it may
bring Scorn upon the Author, and work hardness of Heart in the Adversary, whom
he does, or should labor to Convert. And this I learned of two eminent Fathers
in the Church, Non (...) docemus, nec Adversarios (...) incessimus, (...)
plerique faciunt, etc. Greg. Naz. Orat. 32.
Gregory Nazienzen, Abstineamus nos a conviciis, ne tempus (...) impendamus,
etc. Aug. Epist. 177.
and S. Augustine. The First would not use it, no not against the Arrians, who
(as he says) made open War against the Deity of Christ. Nor would the other
against the same Adversaries. The one accounts it Ignorance, though a Fashion
taken up by many; and the other loss of time. And here I desired the Lords,
that I might read what immediately followed this Passage, which was granted:
And there, as their Lordships did, so may the Reader see, if he please, that
though my Words were not uncivil, yet in the Matter I favored neither him, nor
his. And to avoid Tediousness, thither I refer the Reader. With this, that
sometimes Men apt enough to accuse me, can plead for this Moderation in their
own Cases, and tell each other that In the Antiquaeries to Mr. Pryn. p. 12.
Christ will not own bitterness in maintaining any way, though consonant to his
Word. And Sid. Simpson's Anatomist, p. 2. and 6.
another finds just Fault both with Papists, and Martin Marr-Prelat, for this
reproachful Language. And yet it must be a Crime in me not to use it.

The Last Charge was the Commitment of one Ann Hussy to the XII.
Sheriff of London. The Business was this. She sent one Philip Bambridge to
tell me of I know not what Plot against the King (nor I think she neither.)
Bambridge came to White Hall toward the Evening, and could make nothing of this
dangerous Plot. Yet because it pretended so high, I sent him presently to Mr:
Secretary Windebank; I being the next Morning to go out of Town. The Business
was called to the Council Table. When I came back, I was present there.
Bambridge produced Ann Hussy, but she could make nothing appear. She says, I
thought she was out of her Wits. Not so, my Lords; but I did not think she was
well in them; nor do I yet. And whereas she complains of her Imprisonment, it
was her own desire she might be committed to the Sheriff; and Mr. Hearn (my
Council here present) was assigned by the Lords to take her Examination.
Therefore if any Particular in this Charge stick with your Lordships, I humbly
desire Mr. Hearn may supply my want of Memory. But it passed over, as well it
might. Here this Day ended, and I was ordered to attend again, July 29.

CAP. XLII. The Twentieth, and the Last Day of my Hearing.
THis Day I appeared again, and they proceeded upon the Fourteenth Julii 29.
1644. Monday.
Original Article, which Follows in these Words. Die Vicesimo.
Art. 14. That to preserve himself from being questioned for these, and other
his Traitorous Courses; he has labored to subvert the Rights of Parliaments,
and the ancient Course of Parliamentary Proceedings, and by false and malicious
Slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments. By which Words, Councels
and Actions, he has Traitorously, and contrary to his Allegiance, labored to
alienate the Hearts of the King's Liege People from his Majesty, to set a
Division between them, and to ruin and destroy his Majesty's Kingdoms. For
which they do Impeach him of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and Dignity.



The First Charge of this Day was Prefaced with a Note out I.
of my Diary, at May 8. 1626. That the Duke of Buckingham was that Day
impeached to the Lords by the House of Commons. And at May 25. The difference
arising in the House of Peers about the Earl of Arundel's Commitment to the
Tower without a Cause declared. No use made of these, but that I then Bishop of
S. David's took notice of these things. See Heylin's Life of Archbishop Laud,
p. 152.
Then the Charge followed; and the First of it was, That I then being of the
Lords House, and so to be one of the Duke's Judges, made a Speech for him, and
Corrected his Speech in some particulars; and of a Judge made my self an
Advocate. Which Mr. Nicolas said was a great Offense. I saw not these Papers,
and therefore can say nothing, what is, or is not under my Hand. But to the
thing it self, I say first, that if in that Speech any particular Fault had
been found, impeaching any Right or Power of Parliament, that I must have
answered; but none is charged, but only the bare making of one Speech, and the
mending of another. And this is a very poor Argument of any Enmity against
Parliaments. Secondly, seeing no Fault is charged upon me in particular, it was
but the Office of a poor Friend, to a great one, to whom being so much bound as
I was, I could not refuse so much Service, being entreated to it. And Thirdly,
I do humbly conceive, that so long as there was nothing done against Law, any
Friend may privately assist another in his Difficulties. And I am persuaded,
many Friends in either House, do what they justly may, when such sad Occasions
happen. And this Answer I gave to Mr. Brown, when he Summed up my Charge in the
House of Commons.

But Mr. Brown did not begin with this, but with another, here omitted by Mr.
Nicolas; though he had pressed it before in the Fifteenth day of my Hearing,
Dr. Potter writ unto me for my advice in some Passages of a Book writ by him,
(as I remember against a Book Entitled Charity mistaken.) I did not think it
fit to amend any thing with my own Pen; but put some few things back to his
Second Thoughts, of which this was one, That if he express himself so, he will
give as much Power to the Parliament in Matters of Doctrine, as to the Church.
This, Mr. Brown said, took away all Authority from Parliaments, in that kind.
But, under Favor, this takes away nor all, nor any that is due unto them. Not
all, for my Words are about giving so much Power: Now he that would not have so
much given to the one, as the other, does not take away all from either. Not
any that is due to them: For my Words not meddling simply with Parliamentary
Power (as appears by the Comparative Words so much) my Intention must needs be
to have Dr. Potter so to consider of his Words, as that, that which is proper
to the Church, might not be ascribed to Parliaments. And this I conceive is
plain in the very Letter of the Law. The Words of the 1 Eliz. c. 1:
Statute are, Or such as shall hereafter be Ordered, Judged, or determined to
be Heresy, by the High Court of Parliament in this Realm, with the Assent of
the Clergy in their Convocation. Where it is manifest, that the Judging and
Determining Part, for the Truth or Falsehood of the Doctrine, is in the Church.
For the Assent of the Church or Clergy cannot be given but in Convocation, and
so the Law requires it. Now Assent in Convocation cannot be given, but there
must preceed a Debate, a Judging, a Voting, and a Determining. Therefore the
Determining Power for the Truth or Falsehood of the Doctrine, Heresy, or no
Heresy, is in the Church: But the Judging and determining Power for binding to
Obedience, and for Punishment, is in the Parliament, with this Assent of the
Clergy. Therefore I humbly conceive, the Parliament cannot by Law, that is,
till this Law be first altered, Determine the Truth of Doctrine without this
Assent of the Church in Convocation. And that such a Synod and Convocation as
is Chosen and Assembled as the Laws and Customs of this Realm require.

To this Mr. Brown, in his Reply upon me in the House of Commons, said Two
Things. The one, that this Branch of the Statute of one Eliz. was for Heresy
only, and the Adjudging of that; but meddled not with the Parliaments Power in
other matters of Religion. If it be for Heresy only, that the Church alone
shall not so Determine Heresy, as to bring those grievous Punishments which
the Law lays upon it, upon the Neck of any Subject, without Determination in
Parliament; then is the Church in Convocation left free also in other matters
of Religion, according to the First Clause in Magna Charta, which establishes
the Church in all her Rights. And her main and constant Right, when that
Charter was made and confirmed, was Power of Determining in matters of Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church. And this Right of the Clergy is not bounded or
limited by any Law, but this Clause of 1. Eliz. that ever I heard of.

The other was, that if this were so, that the Parliament might not meddle with
Religion, but with the Assent of the Clergy in Convocation, we should have had
no Reformation. For the Bishops and the Clergy dissented. First, it is not (as
I conceive) to be denied, that the King and his High Court of Parliament may
make any Law what they please, and by their Absolute Power may change Religion,
Christianity into Turcism if they please (which God forbid.) And the Subjects,
whose Consciences cannot obey, must fly or endure the Penalty of the Law. But
both King and Parliament, are sub graviori Regno, and must Answer God for all
such abuse of Power. But beside this Absolute, there is a Limited Power,
Limited, I say, by Natural Justice and Equity, by which, no Man, no Court, can
do Id possumus quod Jure possumus.
more, than what he can by Right. And according to this Power, the Church's
Interest must be considered, and that indifferently, as well as the
Parliaments. To apply this to the Particular of the Reformation. The Parliament
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth would not endure Popish Superstition, and
by Absolute Power Abolished it, By the Advice of her Honorable Council.
Prefat. to the Injunctions.
without any Assent of the Clergy in Convocation. And then in her first Year,
An. 1559. She had a Visitation, and set out her Injunctions, to direct and
order such of the Clergy as could conform their Judgments to the Reformation.

But then so soon as the Clergy was settled, and that a Form of Doctrine was to
be agreed upon, to show the difference from the Roman Superstition, a Synod was
called, and in the Year 1562. the Articles of Religion were agreed upon, and
they were determined and confirmed by Parliament, with the Assent of the Clergy
in Convocation; and that by a just and orderly Power. Nor is the Absolute Power
of King and Parliament any way unjust in it self, but may many ways be made
such, by Misinformation, or otherwise. And this gives the King and the
Parliament their full Power, and yet preserves this Church in her just Right.
Just and acknowledged by some that loved her not over well. For the Discourse,
Sect. 1. c 9. p. 51.
Lord Brook tells us, That what a Church will take for true Doctrine, lies only
in that Church. Nay, the very Heathen saw clearly the Justice of this: For
Religionis Judices Pontifices sunt Legis Senatut. Cic. L. 4. Epist. ad At. Ep.
2.
M. Lucullus was able to say in Tully, That the Priests were Judges of
Religion, and the Senate of Law.



The Second Proof is, That I made two Speeches for the King, to be spoken or
sent to the Parliament that then was; and that they had some sour and ill
Passages in them. These Speeches were read to the Lords; II.
and had I now the Copies, I would insert them here, and make the World Judge
of them. First, I might shuffle here, and deny the Sea the Diary, at March 26,
29. May 11. Anno 1626. H. W.
making of them:

For no Proof is offered, but that they are in my Hand; and that is no
necessary Proof: For I had then many Papers by me written in my own Hand, which
were not my making, though I transcribed them, as not thinking it fit to trust
them in other Hands. But, Secondly, I did make them, and I followed the
Instructions which were given me as close as I could to the very Phrases; and
being commanded to the Service, I hope it shall not now be made my Crime that I
was trusted by my Sovereign. Thirdly, As I did never endeavor to imbitter the
King this way; so the smart Passages which Mr. Nicolas says are there, I hope
will not be thought such, when it is considered whose Mouth was to utter them,
and upon what occasion: Yet if such they shall be thought, I am heartily sorry
for them, and humbly desire they may be passed by: However, they can make no
Proof that I am an Enemy to Parliaments. And this Answer I gave Mr. Brown in
the House of Commons, for he there omitted it not.



The Third Proof that I am an Enemy to Parliaments, is the Testimony III.
of one Mr. Bland. A forward Witness he has been against me in other
Particulars. Here he says, That Sir Sackvil Crow showed him a Paper, in which
were fifteen or sixteen Passages concerning Parliaments, with some sour
Aspersions to boot; and that this Paper was Subscribed W. Laud. First, my
Lords, This Man is but a single Witness. Secondly, he says, he had this Paper
from Sir Sackvil Crow; and he is now in Turkey, and cannot be produced, that
the Truth may be known. Thirdly, As I never gave Sir Sackvil any such Paper, so
had he come by any such, it is more than probable some body else might have seen
it beside Mr. Bland, to make a second Witness. Fourthly, This is a very bold
Oath; for he Swears, The Paper was Subscribed with my own Hand, W. Laud:
Whereas I being then Bishop of S. David's, never writ my Name to any thing other
than Guil. Meneven. Let him bethink himself of this Oath, Ne quid gravius
dicam. Besides, it may be considered too, that this, with some Particulars
mentioned by Mr. Bland, was charged in the First Additional Article, and now
brought in upon the Fourteenth Original; partly to confound me, that I might
not see how, or against what to defend my self; and partly to make me secure,
because they had quite passed over the first Additional. But especially, Artic.
1. Additional.
because they had therein charged me, that these Propositions of mine had
caused that Parliament to be Dissolved: And yet in the same Article, and within
three Lines, it is said expressly, that my Propositions were delivered to my
(...). Duke of Buckingham after that Parliament was Dissolved. So this Article
hangs as well together as Mr. Bland's Testimony concerning it. Mr. Brown
pressed this also hand against me; but I answered according to the Sum of that
which is abovewritten.

And as for the Particular said to be in that Paper, (were it mine, as it is
not) or were the Words thought Treasonable, (as well they cannot be) yet the
Statute of Queen Mary makes it, that no 1 Maria, c 1. 3.
Words, nor Writings, nor Cipherings, nor Deeds, shall be Treason, but only
such as are within the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. and no other. And this Statute I
then read to the Lords, though I conceive there was no need of it.

The Fourth Proof was out of my Diary, at June 15. 1626. The IV.
Words these: Post multas agitationes privata Malitia in Ducem Buckinhamiae
superavit and suffocavit omnia publica negotia; nihil actum est, sed
Parliamentum solutum. And this was applied first by Mr. Nicolas, and after by
Mr. Brown, as if I had charged this private Malice upon the Parliament. But
this is utterly mistaken: For I spoke not this of the Parliament, but of some
few particular Men, some of the House, Men well enough known to the World;

and more, not of the House, but Sticklers at large, who went between, and did
very ill Offices, and so wronged both the King and the Parliament; which is no
new thing in England. That my Words there cannot be meant of the Parliament, is
two ways apparent. First, in that I say, Privata Malitia. Private Malice did
it; but name not the Parliament, nor charge any thing upon it. Secondly,
Because had I spoken this of the Parliament, it could not have been called
Private, but Public Malice; nothing being more public in this Kingdom, than
what is done in and by the Parliament.

The Fifth Proof was, That a Proclamation for calling in of the Remonstrance V.
was found in my Study: And Mr. Nicolas said, they conceived I had a Hand in
it. It was as lawful for me to have and keep this Proclamation, as for any
other Subject. And their Conceit that I had a Hand in it, is no Proof. Mr.
Nicolas says, That my Preferments followed very quick upon this; and infers,
that I was preferred for my ill Services in this kind. But all the Proof that
he brings for this his uncharitable Inference, is the comparing of the Times;
and I shall be content to be tried by that. For by his own acknowledgment this
Proclamation came out June 16. 1622. I being then Bishop of S. David's: And he
confesses I was not made Bishop of Bath and Wells till June 20. 1626. full Four
Years after; nor a Privy-Counsellor till April 29. 1627. which was Five Years
after. Whereas Rewards for such Services are found to come much quicker. And
Mr. Brown, when he made his Summary Charge, slighted this, and passed it over.



The Sixth Proof of my Enmity to Parliaments, was a Paper of VI.
Reasons, Mr. Nicolas said, against Parliaments. But First, when this Paper was
showed and read to the Lords, it was found otherwise, and was but a Paper of
Hopes and Fears, which were conceived of a Parliament: Not Reasons against
them. Secondly, these Fears and Hopes, were not of a Parliament then in being,
but of one in deliberation, whether it should be or not at that time; which all
Men know is often disputed, and without offense. And any considering Man may
privately do it, for his own use and trial of his Judgment. Thirdly, in this
deliberation, I was not the Author of these Fears and Hopes, but an Amanuensis
to higher Powers, in regard their Hands were slower; though Commanded also to
set down my own Opinion, which I did. Fourthly, I was then either a Counselor,
or a Sworn Servant to the King, and required upon my Oath, to deliver truly,
both my Fears and my Hopes; and I durst not Perjure my self. And I hope the
keeping of my Oath, and doing my Duty in that kind, shall not now prejudice my
Life. Fifthly, these Fears and Hopes whatever they contain, did relate to the
being or not being of that one Parliament only, as appears in the very Paper it
self; and the Hopes prevailed, and that Parliament sat. And this Answer I gave
to Mr. Brown, who made all the use of this Paper that could be against me.



Here Mr. Nicolas brings in Mr. Bland again, who says, that the four last Heads
in this Paper, were in that Paper also which was showed him. This single
Witness has an Excellent Memory, that can remember four Heads of a Paper
punctually Sixteen Years ago. I asked why he did not complain of me then, when
his Memory was fresher, and his Witness Sir Sackvill Crow nearer? 'Twas
replied, He durst not for my Greatness. Why, but he knows well enough, that
Parliaments, when they have a just Cause of Proceeding, do neither fear nor
spare any Man's Greatness. And is it probable, that they which spared not the
Duke of Buckingham's Greatness, would have feared mine, being then a poor
Bishop of Bath and Wells? And a Parliament was held again in the very next
Year, 1627. So that he wanted not opportunity to complain. Nor can I believe
any Opinion of my supposed Greatness stopped him. Let him look into himself.

Then Mr. Nicolas told the Lords with great vehemence, what Venom there was in
this Paper, which he said was in every Particular. A right Spider I see now he
is, Venom out of any thing. Here is a void space left, I suppose with design to
have the Paper (here mentioned) to be inserted. Which was not done.



The Seventh Proof was out of my Diary at March, 1628. Where VII.
the words are, that the Parliament which was dissolved March 10: 1628. sought
my Ruin. This had been a better Argument to prove Parliaments an Enemy to me,
than me to them.

But nothing can be meant by this, but that my Ruin was sought in that
Parliament by some particular Men, whose Edge was too keen against me. And this
appears in my Diary at June 14. preceding; at which time I was put into a
Remonstrance, which had I been found any way guilty, must needs have ruined me.
But by God's Blessing, the very same day I did clearly acquit my self in open
Parliament, of all the Aspersions cast upon me about Dr. Manwaring's Sermons.
This Particular Mr. Brown charged upon me, and I Answered as before. But Mr.
Nicolas did not touch upon it this day.



The Eighth Proof, that I was an Enemy to Parliaments, was VIII.
taken from some Marginal Notes, which I had made upon a printed Speech of Sir
Benjamin Rudyards, which he spoke in the Parliament held An. 1627. Mr. Nicolas
named Four; but Mr. Brown in Summing up my Charge, insisted only upon Two. The
Word Reducing: And the Aim of Gaining from the King. Sir Benjamin Rudyard is my
old Acquaintance, and a very worthy Member of that House, both now and then.
But be a Man never so Worthy, may he not use some Phrase amiss? Or if he do,
may not I or another observe, yea check at it, but by and by I must be an Enemy
to Parliaments? Is there any Argument in this, I said a Gentleman in the House
of Commons used an ill Phrase in a Speech of his in that House, therefore I am
an Enemy to the Parliament in which he spoke it? Say I am mistaken, and not he,
and that the Phrase is without Exception; yet this is but my Error in Judgment,
no Proof of Enmity, either to the Parliament, or him that spoke it. That which
I said was this. First, that the word Reducing, as there placed, was a hard
Phrase. Let any Man view that Speech considerately, and tell me whether it be
not so: Secondly, that I disliked the word Gaining, being between the King and
his People in Parliament. For (as I humbly conceive) there will always be work
enough for both to join for the Public Good; and well it can never be, if they
which should so join, do labor only to gain one from another. For if the King
shall labor to gain upon the Liberty or Property of the Subject; or the
Subjects in Parliament, labor to gain from the just Power and Prerogative of
the King, can any Prudent Man think the Public can thrive there-while? Yea,
but they say, that my Marginal Note upon this Phrase was, that this Gaining was
the Aim of the lower House. If my Note be so, yet that cannot be otherwise
understood, than that according to this Expression, this must be their Aim. And
the Reason why I found fault with the Phrase was, because I saw this must
follow out of it. So, under Favor,

I was not so bold with this Gentleman, as he was with the House in using this
Speech.

The next Proof was, that I found fault with Eight Bills that were then IX.
in the House. This is a very poor Proof of my Enmity to Parliaments, that I
disliked some Bills proposed in them: Though there be no Proof of this urged at
all, save only, that I writ the time May 27. 1628. upon the Paper where the
Bills were mentioned. And I hope to mention the time when any Bills were
proposed, is not to dislike the Bills. But say I did dislike them, what then?
It is lawful for any Member of the House (and such was I then) to take
Exceptions which he thinks are just against any Bill, before it pass. And shall
not that which is Lawful for any Man to do, be Lawful for me? Beside, almost
all Bills are put in by private Persons. The House is not interessed in them,
till they are Passed and Voted by them: So that till then, any Man may spend
his Judgment upon the Bill, without any wrong at all to the Parliament.

Mr. Brown saw this well enough, and therefore vouchsafed not so much as to
name it.

The Tenth Proof was, that I made an Answer to the Remonstrance X.
set out by Parliament, An. 1628. This was pressed before, and here it is laid
hold of on all Hands; to make as full a Cry as it can against me. Mr. Nicolas
presses it here aloud (as he does all things) and Mr. Brown lays it close in
Summing up the Charge.

My Answer the same to both. First, they charge me, that I made 1:
that Answer to the Remonstrance which came forth, An. 1628. I did this by the
King's Command, and upon such Instructions as were given me. And as I obeyed
the Command, so did I closely pursue my Instructions. And I durst do no other,
for I was then upon my Oath as a Sworn Counselor, and so employed in that
Service. And I hope no Man will conceive, that I would without such a Command
have undertaken such a kind of Service. Yea, but they 2.
say, it does not appear that I had any such Command: Yes, that appears as
plainly as that I made it. For they bring no Proof that I made it, but because
the Indorsement upon that Paper is in my Hand, and calls it my Answer: And the
same Indorsement says, I made it by his Majesty's Command. So either the
Indorsement is no sufficient Proof for the one, or if it be, it is sufficient
for both; And must needs witness the one for me, with the same strength that it
does the other against me. For a kind of Confession that Indorsement is, and
must therefore not be broken, but be taken with all its Qualities. Thirdly, 3.
they say, there are some sour and bitter Passages in the Answer. It Is more
than I perceived, if it be so. Nor was any Sourness intended. And I hope no
such Passages found in it, the Person considered, in whose Name the Answer was
made. The Expressions indeed might have been too big for a Subject's Mouth.
Fourthly, they 4:
say, I was displeased that this Answer was not Printed; but all the Proof they
brought for it is, that it is written upon the Paper, that there was an
Intention to Print it, but that I know not what hindered it. But this Argument
can never conclude: John a Nokes knows not who hindered the Printing of a Jewish
Catechism in England; therefore he was displeased the Catechism was not
Printed. But I see every Foot can help trample him that is down.

Yea, but they Instanced in three Particulars, which they charged severally
upon me. The first Particular 1.
was, That by this Remonstrance, they sought to fill our Peoples Hearts more
than our Ears. A second was, that they swelled to that bigness, 2.
till they brake themselves. But neither of these strike at any Right or
Privilege of Parliaments; they only Tax some Abuses, which were conceived to
be in the Miscarriage of that one Parliament. And both these Particulars were
in my Instructions. And though I have ever Honored Parliaments, and ever
shall, yet I cannot think them Infallible. General Councils have greater
Promises than they, yet they may Err. And when a Parliament, by what ill
Accident so-ever, comes to Err, may not their King tell them of it? Or must
every Passage in his Answer be sour, that pleases not?

And for that Remonstrance, whither it tended let the World judge, the Office
is too dangerous for me. The third Particular, was the Excusing 3.
of Ireland, and the growth of Popery there, of which that Remonstrance, An.
1628. complained. This was in the Instructions too. And I had Reason to think,
the King and his Council understood the State of Ireland, for Religion and
other Affairs, as well as other Men. And I was the more easily led into the
belief, that Religion was much at one State in Ireland, in Queen Elizabeth's
and King James his time, and now; because ever since I understood any thing of
those Irish Affairs, I still heard the same Complaints that were now made. For
in all these times they had their Romish Hierarchy: Submitted to their
Government: Paid them Tithes: Came not to the Protestant Churches: And
Rebelled under Tyrone under pretense of Religion. And I do not conceive they
have gone beyond this now. If they have, let them Answer it, who have
occasioned it.

But to prove this great new growth of Popery there, they produced, first a
Proclamation from the State in Ireland, dated April 1. 1629. Then a Letter of
the Bishop of Kilmore's to my self, dated April 1. 1630. Thirdly, a Complaint
made to the State there, An. 1633. of this growth, so that I could not but know
it. Most true, when these Informations came I could not but know it: But look
upon their Date, and you shall find that all of them came after this Answer was
made to the Remonstrance, and therefore could not possibly be foreseen by me,
without the Gift of Prophecy. Then they produced a Letter of the Earl of
Straffords, in which he Communicated to me, Mar. 1633. that to mould the Lower
House there, and to rule them the better, he had got them to be chosen of an
equal number of Protestants and Papists. And here Mr. Maynard, who pressed this
point of Religion hard upon me, began to fall foul upon this Policy of the Earl
of Strafford, and himself yet brake off with this, But he is gone.

Then he fell upon me as a Man likely to approve those ways, because he desired
the Letter might be communicated to me. This Letter was not written to me, as
appears by the Charge it self: For if it had, no Man else needed to communicate
it to me. And I would fain know, how I could help any of this? If that Lord
would write any thing to me himself, or communicate any thing to another that
should acquaint me with it, was it in my power to hinder either of these? And
there were other Passages in this Letter, for which, I conceive, his Lordship
desired the Communication of that Letter to me, much more than the Particular
urged, which could no way relate unto me. And Mr. Brown in his Sum said very
little, if any thing, to this Business of Ireland.



After this Mr. Nicolas, who would have nothing forgotten, that XI.
might help to multiply Clamor against me, fell upon five Particulars, which
he did but name, and left the Lords to their Notes. Four of these Five were
handled before. As First, the words, If the Parliament prove peevish. Secondly,
that the King might use his own Power. Thirdly, the violation of the Petition
of Right. Fourthly, the Canons. Fifthly, that I set Spies about the Election of
Parliament Men in Gloucestershire; and for this last, they produced a Letter of
one Allibon to Dr. Heylin. To the four first, I referred the Lords to their
Notes of my Answers, as they did. To this last, that Mr. Allibon is a mere
Stranger to me, I know not the Man. And it is not likely I should employ a
Stranger in such a Business. The Letter was sent to Dr. Heylin, and if there
were any discovery in it of Juglings there in those Elections, (as too often
there are;) and if Dr. Heylin sent me those Letters, as desirous I should see
what Practices are abroad; what fault is there in him or me for this?

Then Mr. Nicolas would not omit that which he thought XII.
might disgrace and discontent me, though it could no way be drawn to be any
Accusation: 'Twas out of my Diary, at Oct: 27. 1640. this Parliament being then
ready to begin. The Passage there is, That going into my upper Study to send
away some Manuscripts to Oxford, I found my Picture which hung there privately,
fallen down upon the Face, and lying on the Floor; I am almost every day
threatened with my Ruin, God grant this be no Omen of it. The Accident is true;
and having so many Libels causelessly thrown out against me; and hearing so many
ways as I did, that my Ruin was Plotted, I had Reason to apprehend it. But I
apprehended it without Passion, and with looking up to God, that it might not
be Ominous to me. What is this Man Angry at? Or why is this produced?



But though I cannot tell why this was produced, yet the next XIII.
was urged only to Incense your Lordships against me: It Is in my Diary again,
at Feb. 11. 1640. Where Mr. Nicolas says confidently I did Abuse your
Lordships, and Accuse you of Injustice. My Lords, what I said in my Diary
appears not; if it did appear whole and altogether, I doubt not but it alone
would abundantly satisfy your Lordships. But that Passage is more than half
burnt out (as is It was viewed.
to be seen) whether of purpose by Mr. Pryn, or casually, I cannot tell; yet
the Passage as confidently made up, and read to your Lordships, as if nothing
were wanting. For the thing it self, the close of my words is this: So I see
what Justice I may expect, since here is a Resolution taken, not only before my
Answer, but before my Charge is brought up against me. Which Words can traduce
no Man's Justice. First, because they depend upon an If: If the Parliament Man
there mentioned told me Truth, that such a Resolution was taken. And Secondly,
because it can be no Justice in any Men, be the Sentence never so moderate in
it self, to take up a Resolution what Sentence shall pass, before Answer given,
or Charge put in: For else a Man may be punished first, and tried after, which
is contrary Potentia sequi debet Justitiam, non praeire, Aug. L. 13. de Trin,
c. 13.
to all Rules of Justice. And therefore if such a Resolution were taken (as I
believe not) I might well say that which followed after.

Then was produced a Paper concerning the Subsidies or Aids XIV.
which had been given in diverse Parliaments, in which it is said, at the
beginning of it, that Magna Charta had an obscure Birth, and was Fostered by an
Ill Nurse. I believe that no Man that knows Mr. Nicolas, thinks that he spakes
softly upon this.

No, he spoke loud enough; What Laws would I spare, that spoke thus of Magna
Charta? First, here is no Proof offered that this Paper is my Collection, but
only that it is in my Hand: By which Argument (as is said before) I may be made
the Author of any thing: And so may any Scholar that is able and willing to
inform himself. Secondly, the main Draught of that Paper is not in my Hand,
though some Notes upon it be. Thirdly, there are Littleton, and other Lawyers
quoted in that Paper, Authors which I never read. Nor is this now any disgrace
to Magna Charta, that it had an obscure Birth: For say the Difficulties of the
times brought it obscurely forth; that is no blemish to the Credit and Honor to
which it has for many Ages attained. Not only their Laws, but the greatest
Empires that have been in the World, some of them have had obscure beginnings.
Witness the Roman Empire. Fourthly, what if our Stories agree upon it, that it
had an obscure Birth, and a worse Nurse? What if some Law Books (which Mr.
Nicolas never read) and those of good account, use almost the same Words of
Magna Charta, which are in that Paper? Shall the same Words be History and Law
in them, and Treason in me? And somewhat Here is a void space left in the
Margin, with design (I suppose) to insert therein some Passages out of
Law Books concerning the obscure Birth of Margna Charta: Which space was not
filled up. H:
certainly there is in it, that Mr. Brown, when he gave his Summary Charge
against me, First to the Lords, and after in the House of Commons, quite
omitted this Particular. Sure I believe he found nothing was in the Paper, but
known Truth, and so passed it over, else he would never have denied a
Vindicaton to Magna Charta.



After all this Mr. Nicolas concludes with a Dream, which he XV.
says was mine. The Dream (he says) was, that I should come to greater
Preferment in the Church, and Power in the State, than any Man of my Birth and
Calling had done before me, but that in the end I should be Hanged. First, my
Lords, if I had had any such Dream, it is no Proof of any thing against me.
Dreams are not in the Power of him that has them, but in the unruliness of the
Fancy, which in broken sleeps Number. 11.
wanders which way it pleases, and shapes what it pleases. But this Dream is
brought in as the Fall of my Picture was, to make me a Scorn to your Lordships
and the People. And to try whether any thing will yet at last break my
Patience. This Dream is Reported here according to Mr. Pryn's Edition of my
Diary, somewhat different from that which Mr. Pryn Printed in a former Book of
his; but the beginning and the end agree. From Mr. Pryn, Culmer has taken and
Printed it. And Mr. Pryn confessed before the Lords, that one Mr. Badger an
Attorney at Law, a Kinsman of mine, told it him. The Truth, my Lords, is this.
This Badger Married a near Kinswoman of mine; he was a notorious Separatist,
and so nearer in Affection to Mr. Pryn, than to me in Alliance. This Man came
one day to me to Lambeth, and told me privately (which was more Manners than
usually the Bold Man had) that he heard I had such a Dream when I was Young, in
Oxford: I protested to him there was no such thing, and that some Malicious
Fellow or other had set him on work to come and Abuse me to my Face. He seemed
satisfied; but going to Visit Mr. Pryn then in the Tower, he told it him; and
Mr. Pryn, without further Proof, Prints it in the next Book he set out. When I
saw it in Print, and found that some in Court took notice of it, I resolved to
acquaint his Majesty how I was used; and meeting with the Earl of Pembroke,
then Lord Chamberlain, and my great Friend as he pretended (the King being not
then come forth of his Chamber) I told his Lordship how I was used; and when
the King came forth I told it him also. But the Earl of Pembroke, then present
in the House, and called up by them for a Witness, forgetting the
Circumstances, but remembering the thing, took it upon his Honor, that I said
nothing of Mr. Pryn's Printing it, but that I told him absolutely I had this
Dream. Now God forgive his Lordship. I was much troubled in my self to hear him
take it upon his Dishonor, (for so it was) and yet unwilling (knowing his
Violence) to contest with him in that place, and in my Condition; and observing
what Spleen he has lately showed against me, I stood a little still to gather
up my self. When Mr. Nicolas, before I could make any reply, fell on with great
earnestness, and told the Lords, that the forepart of my Dream was found true,
to the great hurt both of Church and State; and that he hoped they would now
make good the latter: That I might be Hanged. To which I Answered, That I had
not forgotten our Savior's Prediction, St. John 16. That in the World we
should St. John 16.33.
be sure to meet with affliction. Nor his Prayer: Father forgive these Men, for
they know not what they do, St. Luke 23. No, nor is that out of my St. Luke 23.
34. 1 Cor. 4. 3.
Memory which St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 4. De Humano Die. But for the Public,
with this I shall conclude. God of his Infinite Mercy Bless the King and his
People with Love, and Peace, and Piety, and Plenty, which is the worst I ever
wished or endeavored, whatsoever it shall please God shall become of me, to
whose Blessed Will and Pleasure, in all Humility I submit my self. And here
ended this last day of my Trial. But before I went from the Bar, I made three
Motions to the Lords: The one, That I might have a day to make a Recapitulation
of this long and various Charge, or of the chief Heads of it, that it might
appear in a Body together. The other, That after this, my Council might have a
day to speak to all Points of Law, incident to my Cause. The third, That they
would be pleased to remember that I had pleaded the Act of Oblivion to the
Thirteenth Original Article. Mr. Nicolas said, they would acquaint their House
with it. And the Lords promised to take all into Consideration. And so I was
dismissed Sine Die. But here I may not go off from this Dream so, since Mr.
Pryn has Printed it at the end of my Diary. Where he shamelesly says, This
Dream was Attested from my own Mouth, at my Trial in the Lords House. For I
have set down all that passed exactly. Nor did I then give any Attestation to
it; only before I could gather up my self, to Answer the Earl of Pembroke in a
fitting manner, and not to hurt my self, Mr. Nicolas fell upon me with that
Unchristian bitterness, as diverted me from the Earl, to Answer him. But once
for all, and to satisfy any Man that desires it, That is all true which I have
here set down concerning this Dream, and upon my Christianity and hope of
future Salvation, I never had this Dream nor any like it, nor did I ever tell
it this Lord, or any other, any other way, than in Relation to Badger and Pryn,
as is before related. And surely if I had had such a Dream, I should not have
had so little Discretion, as to tell it any Man, least of all, to pour it into
that Sieve the Earl of Pembroke. For that which follows, and wherein his
Charity and Words are almost the same with those of Mr. Nicolas, I give him the
same Answer, and (forgiving him all his most Unchristian and Insatiable Malice
against me) leave my self in the Hands of God, not in his.



I Received an Order from the Lords, that if I had a mind to make a Aug.
23.1644.
Recapitulation (as I had formerly desired) of my long and various Charge, I
should provide my self for it against Monday next (this Order came upon Friday)
and that I should give in my Answer the next Morning what I meant to do. The
next day, in Obedience to Aug. 24.
this Order, I gave in my Answer; which was, Humble Thanks that I might have
liberty to make it, referring the day to their Honorable Consideration; with
this, that Monday next was a very short time for such a Collection. Upon this
Answer, an Order was presently made, that I should provide to make my
Recapitulation upon Monday September the Second. And about this time, (the
certain day I know not) it was Resolved in the House of Commons, that according
to my Plea I should enjoy the benefit of the Act of Oblivion, and not be put to
Answer the Thirteenth Original Article, concerning the Scottish Business. And
truly, I bless God for it, I did not desire the benefit of that Act, for any
Sense of Guiltiness which I had in my self; but, in Consideration of the Times,
and the Malice of the now Potent Faction, which being implacable toward me, I
could not think it Wisdom, to lay by any such Power as might help to secure me.
Yet in the former part of this History, when I had good Reason to think I
should not be called to Answer such General Articles, I have set down my Answer
to each of them, as much as Generals can be Answered. And thereby I hope my
Innocence will appear to this Thirteenth Article also.

Then came Monday, Sept. 2. and, according to the Order of the September 2.
1644.
Lords, I made the Recapitulation of my whole Cause, in matters of greatest
Moment, in this form following. But so soon as I came to the Bar, I saw every
Lord present with a New Thin Book in Folio in a blue Coat. I heard that Morning
that Mr. Pryn had Printed my Diary, and Published it to the World to disgrace
me. Some Notes of his own are made upon it. The first and the last are two
desperate Untruths, beside some others. This was the Book then in the Lords
Hands, and I assure my self, that time picked for it, that the sight of it
might damp me, and disinable me to speak: I confess I was a little troubled at
it. But after I had gathered up my self, and looked up to God, I went on to the
Business of the Day, and thus I spoke.

CAP. XLIII. My Recapitulation.
Mr. Lords, my Hearing began March 12. 1643/4. and continued to the end of
July. In this time I was heard before your Lordships, with much Honor and
Patience, Twenty Days; and sent back without Hearing, by reason of your
Lordships greater Employments, Twelve Days. The rest were taken up with
providing the Charge against me.

And now, my Lords, being come near an end, I am, by your Grace and Favor, and
the leave of these Gentlemen of the Honorable House of Commons, to represent
to your Lordships and your Memories, a brief Sum of my Answers to this long
and various Charge: In which I shall not only endeavor, but perform also all
possible Brevity. And as with much Thankfulness I acknowledge my self bound to
your Lordships for your Patience: So I cannot doubt, but that I shall be as
much obliged for your Justice, in what I am innocent from Crime; and for your
Clemency, in what the common Frailty of Mankind has made me Err. And I Humbly
desire your Lordships, to look upon the whole Business with Honorable Care of
my Calling; of my Age; of my long Imprisonment; of my Sufferings in my Estate;
and of my Patience in and through this whole Affliction: The Sequestration
having been upon my Estate above Two Years. In which notwithstanding, I may not
omit to give Thanks for the Relief which my Petitions found, for my present
necessities in this time of my Hearing, at your Honorable Hands.

1. First then, I humbly desire your Lordships to remember the generality, and
by occasion of that, the incertainty of almost every Article charged upon me,
which has cast me into great streights all along in making my Defense.

2. Next, That your Lordships will be pleased to consider, what a short space,
upon each Days Hearing, has been allowed me to make my Answer, to the many
Charges in each several Day laid against me. Indeed, some Days scarce time
enough to peruse the Evidence, much less to make, and then to review and weigh
my Answers. Especially considering (to my greatest Grief) that such a Charge
should be brought up against me, from so Great and Honorable a Body as the
Commons of England. In regard of which, and all other sad Occasions, I at first
did, and do still in all Humility desire, that in all Particulars concerning
Law, my Council may be heard before your Lordships proceed to Sentence, and
that a Day may be assigned for my Council accordingly.

3. Thirdly, I heartily pray also, that it may be taken into your Honorable
Consideration, how I have all manner of ways been sifted to the very Bran, for
that (what e're it amounts to) which stands in Charge against me.

(1) The Key and use of my Study at Lambeth, Books and Papers taken from me.

(2) A Search upon me at the Tower, made by Mr. Pryn, and One and Twenty
Bundles of Papers, prepared for my Defense, taken from me, and not Three
Bundles restored to me again. This Search made before any Particular Articles
were brought up against me. My very Pockets searched; and my Diary, nay, my
very Prayer Book taken from me, and after used against me: And that in some
Cases, not to prove, but to make a Charge: Yet I am thus far glad, even for
this sad Accident. For by my Diary your Lordships have seen the Passages of my
Life: And by my Prayer Book the greatest Secrets between God and my Soul: So
that you may be sure you have me at the very bottom: Yet blessed be God, no
Disloyalty is found in the one; no Popery in the other.

(3) That all Books of Council Table, Star Chamber, High Commission,
Signet-Office, my own Registeries, and the Registeries of Oxford and Cambridge,
have been most exquisitely searched for matter against me, and kept from me and
my use, and so affording me no help toward my Defense.

4. I humbly desire your Lordships to remember in the Fourth Place, That the
things wherein I took great Pains, and all for the Public Good and Honor of
this Kingdom and Church, without any the least Eye to my own Particular, nay,
with my own great and large Expenses, have been objected against me as Crimes.
As namely, the Repair of S. Paul's, and the Settling of the Statutes of the
University of Oxford.

(1) For S. Paul's, not the Repair it self, they say (no, for very shame they
dare not say that, though that be it which Galls the Faction) but the
Demolishing of the Houses which stood about it. Yea, but without taking down of
these Houses, it was not possible to come at the Church to repair it, which is
a known Truth. And they were taken down by Commission under the Broad Seal. And
the Tenants had Valuable Consideration for their several Interests, according
to the number of their Years remaining: And according to the Judgment of
Commissioners named for that purpose, and named by his Majesty and the Lords,
not by me. Nor did I ever so much as sit with them about this Business. And if
the Commission it self were any way Illegal (as they urge it is) that must
reflect upon them, whose Office was to Draw and Seal it; not on me, who
understood not the Legality or Illegality of such Commissions; nor did I desire
that any one circumstance against Law should be put into it, nor is any such
thing so much as offered in Proof against me. And because it was pressed, that
these Houses could not be pulled down but by Order of Parliament, and not by
the King's Commission alone: I did here first read in part, and afterward,
according to a Salvo granted me, deliver into the Court Three Records, two in
Ed. 1. Time, and one in 1 Pars Pat. de An 45. Ed. 3. m. 34.
Ed. 3. Time, in which are these Words; Authoritate nostra Regali, prout opus
fuerit, cessantibus quibuscunque Appellationum and Reclamationum diffugiis,
Juris, Scripti, aut Patriae strepitu procedatis, Nova AEdificia quae, etc.
amoveri, and divelli penitus faciatis, etc. And a little after, Quousque per
nos cum deliberatione and avisamento nostri Consilii super hoc aliter fuerit
Ordinatum, etc. Here Is no staying for a Parliament; here is no Recompense given;
here is Barring of all Appeal, nay all remedy of Law, though written. And all
this by the King's own Authority, with the Advice of his Council. And is a far
more moderate way taken by me, yet under the same Authority, and for the
removal of far greater Abuses, and for a more noble End, become Treason?

(2) As for the Statutes of Oxford, the Circumstances charged against me are
many, and therefore I craved leave to refer my self to what I had already
answered therein.

5. Fifthly, Many of the Witnesses brought against me in this Business are more
than suspected Sectaries and Separatists from the Church, which by my place I
was to punish, and that exasperated them against me, whereas by Cod. L. 1. Tit.
5. L. 12, and 21. Conser. at Hamp. Court, p. 26.
Law no Schismatic ought to be received against his Bishop. And many of these
are Witnesses in their own Causes, and pre-examined before they come in Court.
At which pre-examination I was not present, nor any for me, to
cross-interrogate. Nay, many Causes which took up diverse Days of Hearing in
Star Chamber, High Commission, and at Council Table, are now upon the sudden
easily overthrown, by the Depositions of the Parties themselves. And upon what
Law this is grounded, I humbly submit to your Lordships. And such as these, are
the Causes of Mr. Pryn, Mr. Burton, Mr. Wilson, Alderman Chambers, Mr. Vassal,
Mr. Waker, Mr. Huntly, Mr. Foxlye, and many other. Where I humbly represent
also, how impossible it is for any Man, that sits as a Judge, to give an
account of all the several Motives which directed his Conscience in so diverse
Causes, and so many Years past, as these have been; and where so many Witnesses
have been Examined, as have been here produced against me: My Lords, above a
Hundred and Fifty Witnesses, and some of them, Three, Four, Six Times over, and
Mr. Pryn I know not how often. Whereas the Civil Law says expressly, that the
Judices (...), etc. ne (...) ad vexandos Homires superflua multitudo (...)
protrabatur. H. L. 21. Tit. 5. Add and (...) rationem, quod qui praedicta
licentia abutuntur, veniunt in suspitionem, quod non (...). Gloss. Ibid.
Judges should moderate things so, that no Man should be oppressed by the
multitude of Witnesses, which is a kind of Proof too, that they which so do,
distrust the truth and goodness of their Cause. Besides, my Lords, in all
matters which came before me, I have done nothing to the uttermost of my
Understanding, but what might conduce to the Peace and Welfare of this Kingdom,
and the maintenance of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church established
by Law; and under which God has blessed this State, with so great Peace and
Plenty, as other Neighboring Nations have looked upon with Admiration. And
what Miseries the overthrow of it (which God in Mercy forbid) may produce, he
alone knows.

6. Sixthly, my Lords, there have been many and different Charges laid upon me
about Words. But many of them (if spoken) were only passionate, and hasty: And
such, upon what occasion soever drawn from me (and I have had all manner of
Provocations put upon me) may among humane Errors, be pardoned unto me, if so
it please your Lordships. But for such as may seem to be of a higher Nature, as
those witnessed by Sir Henry Vane the Elder, I gave my Answer again now fully
to the Lords, but shall not need to repeat it here.

7. Then, my Lords, for my Actions; not only my own, but other Men's have been
heavily Charged against me in many Particulars, and that Criminally, and I hope
your Lordships will think Illegally. As Secretary Windebank's, Bishop
Montague's, my Chaplains, Dr. Heilyn's, Dr. Cosens, Dr. Pocklinton's, Dr.
Dove's, Mr. Shelford's, and diverse others: And many of these Charges look back
into many Years past. Whereas the Act made this present Parliament, takes no
notice of, nor punishes any Man, for any thing done and past at the
Council Table, Sar-Chamber, or High Commission; much less does it make any
thing Treason. And out of this Act I am no way Excepted. Besides, (as I have
often Pleaded) all Acts done in in the Star Chamber, at Council Table, High
Commission, or Convocation; are all Joint Acts of that Body, in and by which
they were done; and cannot by any Law be singly put upon me, it being a known
Rule of the Law, Refertur ad universos quod public fit per Majorem Partem. And
Pryn in his Independency Examined p 4.
Mr. Pryn himself can stand upon this Rule against the Independents, and tell
us, that the Major Voice, or Party, ought to overruled and bind the less. And
he quotes 1 Chronicles. 13. 4, 5 Acts. 15. 22.
Scripture for it too. In which place, that which is done by the Major part, is
ascribed to all; not laid upon any one, as here upon me. And in some of these
Courts, Star Chamber especially, and Council Table, I was accompanied with
Persons of great Honor, Knowledge and Experience, Judges, and others; and it is
to me strange, and will seem so to Future Ages, that one and the same Act shall
be Treason in me, and not the least Crime, nay, nor Misdemeanour in any other.
And yet no Proof has been offered that I Solicited any Man to concur with me,
and almost all the Votes given preceeded mine, so that mine could lead no Man.

8. After this I answered to diverse others Particulars, as namely to the
Canons, both as they concerned Aid to the King, and as they looked upon matters
of the Church and Religion.

9. To the Charge about Prohibitions.

10. To the base Charge about Bribery. But pass them over here as being
answered before; whither I may refer the Reader now, though I could not the
Lords then.

11. My Lords, after this came in the long, and various Charge of my Usurping
Papal Power, and no less than a design to bring in all the Corruptions of
Popery, to the utter overthrow of the Protestant Religion established in
England: And this they went about to prove.

(1) By my Windows in the Chapel: An Argument as brittle as the Glass in which
the Pictures are.

(2) By Pictures in my Gallery; which were there before the House was mine, and
so proved to your Lordships.

(3) By Reverence done in my Chapel: As if it were not due to God, ospecially
in his Church: And done it was not to any other Person or Thing.

(4) By Consecration of Churches: Which was long before Popery came into the
World. As was also the care of safe laying up of all Hallowed and Sacred
things. For which, I desire your Lordships I may read a short Passage out of
Sir Walter Rawley's History. The rather because written by a Layman, and since
the Times of Sir Wall. Rawley Hist. of the World. L: 2: c: 5: (...): (...):
Reformation.

But this Mr. Maynard excepted against, both as new Matter, and because I had
not the Book present, though the Paper thence transcribed was offered to be
attested by Oath, to be a true Copy. But though I could not be suffered to read
it then, yet here it follows. So Sacred was the moveable Temple of God, and
with such Reverence guarded and transported, as 22000 Persons were Dedicated to
the Service and Attendance thereof, of which 8580 had the peculiar Charge,
according to their several Offices and Functions, the Particulars whereof are
in the Third and Fourth of Numbers. The Reverend care which Moses the Prophet
and chosen Servant of God Numb. 3, and 4.
had, in all that belonged even to the outward and least Parts of the
Tabernacle, Ark and Sanctuary, witnessed well the inward and most humble Zeal
born toward God himself. The Industry used in the Framing thereof, and every
and the least part thereof, the curious Workmanship thereon bestowed, the
exceeding Charge and Expense in the Provisions, the Dutiful Observance in
laying up and preserving the Holy Vessels, the Solemn removing thereof, the
Vigilant Attendance thereon, and the Provident Defense of the same, which All
Ages have in some Degree imitated, is now so forgotten and cast away in this
superfine Age, by those of the Family, by the Anabaptists, Brownists, and other
Sectaries; as all Cost and Care bestowed and had of the Church, wherein God is
to be Served and Worshipped, is accounted a kind of Popery, and as proceeding
from an Idolatrous Disposition. Insomuch as Time would soon bring to pass (if
it were not resisted) that God would be turned out of Churches into Barns, and
from thence again into the Fields and Mountains, and under the Hedges; and the
Office of the Ministry (robbed of all Dignity and respect) be as contemptible
as those Places; all Order, Discipline and Church Government, left to newness
of Opinion and Men's Fancies: Yea, and soon after as many kinds of Religions
would spring up, as there are Parish-Churches, etc.

Do ye not think some body set Mr. Maynard on to prohibit the Reading out of
this Passage, as foreseeing whither it tended? For I had read one third part of
it, before I had the stop put upon me.

(5) But they went on with their Proof, By my Censuring of Good Men; that is,
Separatists and Refractory Persons.

(6) By my Chaplains Expunging some things out of Books, which made against the
Papists. It may be, if my Chaplains (whom it concerns) had Liberty to answer,
they were such Passages as could not be made good against the Papists; and then
it is far better they should be out than in. For as S. Quid Molesliae and
Tristitiae (...) Fratribus, temerarii Assertores (...) dici non potest. Aug. 1.
de Genesis ad Lit. C. 19.
Augustine observed in his, and we find it true in our time, the Inconvenience
is great, which comes to the Church and Religion by bold Affirmers. Nay, he is
at a satis dici non potest, the Mischief is so great as cannot be expressed.

(7.) Then by altering some things in a Sermon of Dr: Sybthorp's. But my Answer
formerly given will show I had cause.

(8.) By my preferment of unworthy Men: So unworthy, as that they would be
famous both for Life and Learning, were they in any other Protestant Church in
Christendom. And they are so Popishly affected, as that having suffered much
both in State and Reputation (since this Persecution of the Clergy began; for
less it has not been) no one of them is altered in Judgment, or fallen into
any liking with the Church of Rome.

(9.) By the Overthrow of the Feoffment: But that was done by Judgment in the
Exchequer, to which I referred my self. And if the Judgment there given be
right, there is no fault in any Man: If it were wrong, the fault was in the
Judges; not in me: I solicited none of them.

(10.) By a Passage in my Book, where I say, The Religion of the Papists Cont.
Fish. p. 376.
and Ours is one: But that is expressed at large, only because both are
Christianity; and no Man I hope will deny that Papists are Christians. As for
their notorious Failings in Christianity, I have in the same Book said enough
to them.

(11.) By a Testimony of Mr. Burton's and Mr. Lane's, that I should say, We and
the Church of Rome did not differ in Fundamentals, but in Circumstantials.
[This I here followed at large; but, to avoid tedious repetition, refer my
Reader to the place where it is anaswered.]

(12.) By my making the Dutch Churches to be of another Religion. But this is
mistaken (as my Answer will show the Reader;) And if they do not make
themselves of another Religion, I shall never endeavor to make them.

(13.) By a Pack of such Witnesses, as were never produced against any Man of
my Place and Calling; Messengers and Pursevants, and such as have shifted their
Religion to and again; Pillory-men and Bawds: And these the Men that must prove
my Correspondence with Priests.

12. In the midst of these, upon occasion of the Ceremonies at the Coronation,
it was pressed against me, That I had altered the King's Oath.

(14.) And last of all, That I had showed my felf an Enemy to Parliaments.
[Upon both these, I did very much enlarge my self: But here also, that I may
not be a burden in repeating the same thing, I desire the Reader to look upon
them in their proper places, where I doubt not but my Answer will give him full
satisfaction, that I did not the one, nor am the other.]

But, my Lords, there are other strange Arguments produced against me, to prove
my Compliance with Rome, which I most humbly desire your Lordships may not be
forgotten.

1. As first, my Lords, it has been Charged upon me, That I made the Oath
recited in the first of the late Canons, one Clause whereof is this: That I
will never give my Consent to subject this Church to the Usurpations and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome. Whence the Argument drawn against me must
be this, and can be no other: That I did endeavor: to bring in Popery, because
I made and took a solemn Oath, never to give my Consent to subject this Church
of England to the Usurpations and Superstitions of the Church of Rome. I
beseech your Lordships mark the force of this Argument: And they which follow
are as pregnant against me.

2. Secondly, My Book against Fisher has been charged against me; where the
Argument must lie thus: I have endeavored to advance Popery, because I have
written against it: And with what strength I have written, I leave to Posterity
to judge, when the Envy which now over-loads me, shall be buried with me. This
I will say with St. Gregory Nazianzen (whose Success at Constantinople was not
much unlike mine here, save that his Life was not sought) I Non (...) in (...)
doctrine (...), Greg. Naz. Orat. 32.
never labored for Peace to the Wrong and Detriment of Christian Verity, nor I
hope ever shall. [And let the Church of England look to it; for in great
Humility I crave to write this (though then was no time to speak it) That the
Church of England must leave the way it is now going, and come back to that way
of Defense which I have followed in my Book, or She shall never be able to
justify Her Separation from the Church of Rome.]

3. Thirdly, All the late Canons have been charged against me; and the Argument
which is drawn from thence, must lie thus: The Third of these Canons for
suppressing the Growth of Popery, is the most full and strict Canon that ever
was made against it in the Church of England: Therefore I that made this Canon
to keep it out, am guilty of endeavoring to bring it in.

4. Fourthly, I have by my Industry, and God's great Blessing upon my Labors,
stayed as many from going, and reduced to the Church of England as many that
were gone to Rome, as I believe any Minister in England can truly say he has
done: I named them before, and had Scorn enough put upon me for it, as your
Lordships could not but both see and hear; where the Argument lies thus: I
converted many from Popery, and settled them in the Religion established in
England: Therefore I labored to bring in Popery; which out of all doubt can be
no sober Man's way.

5. Fifthly, The Plot discovered to Sir William Boswell and my self, by Andreas
ab Habernfield, has been charged against me: That Plot for altering of
Religion, and by what ways, your Lordships have heard already, and is to be
seen at full in Rome's Masterpiece. Now Mr. Pryn's Rome's Masterpiece.
if this Plot in the Issue proved nothing but a confused Information, and no
Proof of any Particular, as indeed it did; What Is become of Rome's
Masterpiece? But if it had any reality in it, as it appeared to be a sad Plot,
not only to me, but to all Men that saw the short Propositions which were first
sent, with an absolute Undertaking to prove them; then it appears expressly,
that I was in danger of my Life, for stiffly opposing the bringing in of
Popery; and that there was no hope to alter Religion in England, 'till I was
taken out of the way. And though in conclusion the Proofs failed, yet what was
consulted, and it seems resolved concerning me, is plain enough. And then the
Argument against me lies thus: There Is no hope to bring in Popery, 'till I am
taken out of the way; therefore I did labor to bring it in. Do not these
things, my Lords, hang handsomely together?

6. Lastly, There have been above Threescore Letters and other Papers, brought
out of my Study into this Honorable House; they are all about composing the
Differences between the Lutherans and the Calvinists in Germany. Why they
should be brought hither, but in hope to charge them upon me, I know not; and
then the Argument will be this: I labored to reconcile the Protestants in
Germany, that they might unanimously set themselves against the Papists;
therefore I labored to bring Popery into England.

Now that your Lordships have heard the Arguments, and what Proof they make
against me, I must be bold to put you in Mind of that which was said here at
the Bar, April 16. 1644. That they did not urge any of these particular
Actions as Treason against me; but the Result of them all together amounted to
Treason. For answer to which, I must be bold to tell your Lordships, That if no
Particular which is charged upon me be Treason, the Result from them cannot be
Treason, which will appear by these Reasons following:

1. First, The Result must be of the same Nature and Species with the
Particulars from which it rises. But it is confessed no one of the Particulars
are Treason: Therefore neither is the Result that rises from them. And this
holds in Nature, in Morality, and in Law.

In Nature, and that both for Integral and Essential Parts; for neither can the
Body of a Bear, and the Soul of a Lion result into a Fox; nor the Legs of a
Bull, the Body of a Horse, and the Head of an Ass, result into a Man.

In Morality, and that is seen both in Virtues and Vices: For neither can many
Actions of Liberality, Meekness and Sobriety, rise up into a Result of
Fortitude; neither can many Actions of Malice, Drunkenness and Covetousness,
result into Treason.

In Law it is so too: For be there never so many particular Crimes, yet there is
no Law in this Kingdom, nor any where else that I know, that makes a Result of
different Crimes to be Treason, where none of the Particulars are Treason by
Law. So this imaginary Result is a Monster in Nature, in Morality, and in Law;
and if it be nourished, will devour all the Safety of the Subject of England,
which now stands so well fenced by the known Law of the Land. And therefore I
humbly desire your Lordships, not for mine, but for the Publick's sake, to
weigh this Business well, before this Gap be made so wide, as there will hardly
be Power left again to shut it.

2. My Second Reason is joined to the Answer of an Objection: For when this
Result was spoken of, it was added, That the Particulars charged against me,
are of the same kind, and do all tend to the Subversion of Law and Religion,
and so become Treason. But, first, suppose that all the Particulars charged do
tend to the subversion of Law, yet that cannot make them to be all of one kind:
For all Crimes tend more or less to the Overthrow of Virtue; yet no Man can
say, that all Crimes are of the same kind. Secondly, be they of the same, or
different kinds; yet neither all, nor any of these charged against me, do tend
to the subversion of the Law: For it is one thing to break, dislike, or speak
against some particular Laws, and quite another to labor the Subversion of the
whole Body of the Law and the Frame of Government. And that I have done this by
Conspiracy, or Force, or any overt Action, is not so much as offered in proof.
And for the breach of any particular Law, if I be guilty, I am to be punished
by the Sanction of that Law which I have broken.

3. Thirdly, Whereas it has been said, That many Actions of the same kind make
a Habit. That Is true. But what then? For first, the Actions urged against me,
are not of the same kind, but exceeding different. Secondly, if the Habit be
Treasonable, then all those particular Actions which bred that Habit, must be
several Treasons, as well as the Result or Habit it self; whereas it has been
granted all along, that my particular Actions are not Treasons. And, thirdly, a
Habit in it self, neither is nor can be Treason; for all Treason is either
Thought, Word, or Overt Act; but no Habit is either of these: Therefore not
Treason. For a (...). 1. 2(...). q. 50. A. 5.
Habit is that in the Soul which enclines the Powers of it, and makes a Man apt
and ready to think, speak, or do that to which he is habituated. So an ill
Habit against Sovereign Power, may make a Man apt and forward to fall into
Treason; but Treason it is not.

4. Fourthly, Nor can this Result be Treason at the Common Law, by which alone,
I conceive, there is no Treason at all at this day in England: For the main end
of that excellent Statute of 25 Edw. 3. was for the Safety of the Subject,
against the manifold Treasons which variously fell upon them by the Common Law,
and bounded all Treasons, and limited them to the things expressed to be
Treason in and by that Statute. And in all times of difficulty since, recourse
has still been had to that Statute. And to that Statute I refer my self, with
this: That this Result must be something within this Statute, or some other
known Statute, or else it cannot be Treason. And no Proof at all has been so
much as offered, that this Result is Treason by any Law.

My Lords, I do with all humble submission desire, That when the Reply is made
to this matter of Fact, a Day may be assigned for my Council to be heard in
matter of Law, in all and every Particular which they shall find necessary for
my just Defense.

And now, my Lords, I do in all Humility lay my self low at God's Mercy-seat,
to do with me as he pleases; and, under God, I shall rely upon your Lordships
Justice, Honor and Clemency, of which I cannot doubt. And without being
farther tedious to your Lordships (who have with very Honorable Patience heard
me through this long and tedious Trial) I shall conclude with that which St.
Augustine said to Romanianus, a Man that had tried both Fortunes as well as I:
S. Aug. l. 1. Cont. Academ. c. 1.
If the Providence of God reaches down to us (as most certain it does) Sic
tecum agi oportet sicut agitur. It must so be done with thee (and so with me
also) as it is done. And under S. Mat. 10 29. Romans 8. 28.
that Providence, which will, I doubt not, work to the best to my Soul that
loves God, I repose my self.

Here ended my Recapitulation, and with it the Work of that Day: And I was
ordered to appear again the Saturday following, to hear Mr: Brown Sum up the
whole Charge against me. But upon Tuesday, September: 3: this was put off, to
give Mr: Brown more time, to Wednesday, September 3. 1644.
September: 11.

On Wednesday, September: 4. as I was washing my Face, my Nose September. 4.
bled, and something plentifully, which it had not done, to my remembrance, in
forty Years before, save only once, and that was just the same Day and Hour,
when my most Honorable Friend the Lord Duke of Buckingham was killed at
Portsmouth, my self being then at Westminster. And upon Friday, as I was
washing after Dinner, my September. 6.
Nose bled again. I thank God I make no superstitious Observation of this or
any thing else; yet I have ever used to mark what and how any thing of note
falls to me. And here I after came to know, that upon both these Days in which
I bled, there was great agitation in the House of Commons, to have me Sentenced
by Ordinance; but both times put off, in regard very few of that House had
heard either my Charge or Defense.

CAP. XLIV.
ON Wednesday September 11. Mr. Brown made in the Lords House, September. 11.
a Sum or Brief of the Charge which was brought against me, and touched by the
way at some things in my Recapitulation. But in regard I might not Answer him,
I took no perfect Notes, but stood still, and possessed my Soul in Patience;
yet wondering at the bold, free, frequent, and most false Swearing that had been
against me. When Mr. Brown had ended, I humbly desired again, that my Council
might be heard in Point of Law. And they were hereupon Ordered to deliver in
Writing under their Hands, what Points of Law they would insist upon, and that
by Saturday September 14. September. (...).


This day my Council, according as they were Ordered, delivered into the Lords
House, these two Points following, by way of Question. First, Whether in all,
or any the Articles charged against me, I.
there be contained any Treason by the Established Laws of this Kingdom?
Secondly, Whether the Charge of the said Impeachment II.
and Articles, did contain such Certainty and Particularity, as is required by
Law, in a Case where Treason is charged? This day I Petitioned the Lords, that
my Council might have access to, and take Copies of all such Records as they
thought necessary for my Defense, which was Granted and Ordered accordingly.

My Councel's Quaeries having been formerly sent down to the House of Commons,
they were there referred to a Committee of Lawyers to consider of; and on
September 27. Friday, they were earnestly called September. 27.
upon to hasten their Report. And on Friday October. 4. Mr. Nicolas October. 4.
made a great noise about me in the House, and would have had me presently
Censured in the House; and no less would serve his turn, but that I must be
Hanged, and was at Sus. per Coll. till upon the Reasons before given, that if
they went on this way, they must Condemn me unheard; this violent Clamor
ceased for that time. And a Message was sent up to the Lords for my Council to
be heard, as touching the first Question concerning Treason; but not concerning
any Exception that they shall take against the Articles in point of certainty.
This Message the Lords took into present Consideration, and Ordered it
accordingly. And appointed the Friday following, being October. 11. for my
Council to be Heard, and my Self to be present. October. 11.


This day according to this Order of the Lords, I and my Council attended. My
Council were Mr. Hern, and Mr. Hales of Lincoln's Inn, and Mr. Gerrard of
Gray's Inn. When we were called into the House, and the Lords settled in their
places, Mr. John Hern (who was the Man that spoke what all had resolved on)
delivered his Argument very freely The Lord Chancellor Finch told me, that this
Argument was not Mr. Herns, (though he pronounced it) for he could not Argue;
but it was Mr. Hales, afterward Lord Chief Justice. And he said farther, that
being then a Young Lawyer, he stood behind Mr. Hern, when he spoke at the Bar
of the Lords House, and took Notes of it; and that it will be (...) among his
Reports. W. S. A. C.
and stoutly, proving that nothing which I have either said or done according
to this Charge, is Treason, by any known Established Law of this Kingdom. The
Argument follows in these words, according to the Copy which Mr. Hern himself
delivered me.

My Lords,

THE Work of this Day, we humbly conceive, is in many A short Introduction.
respects of very great and high Concernment.

1. In that it concerns Matter of Life, a Thing of the highest Consequence. 2.
The Life of an Archbishop, a Person who had attained the highest Dignity
conferred in the Church of England. 3. Those Happy Laws, many Years since
Enacted and Confirmed by several Parliaments, to be the Boundaries what was
Treason; a Crime before so various, as it had no Bounds; and so Odious, that
the punishment of it was an Infamous Death, a total Confiscation, with a Brand
of Infamy to all Posterity. 4. In that the Charge against him moves from no
less a Body than the whole Commons of England, which presents him now a
Prisoner at this Bar before your Lordships, in the High and Supreme Court of
Judicature in Parliament.
And if any thing shall fall from us, subject to any doubtful Construction, we
shall humbly crave your Lordships Pardon, and Leave to make our Explication:
For as there is upon us a Duty to be wary, not to offer any thing which may
minister just Offense; so neither may we be unfaithful to omit what may justly
tend to our Client's Defense.

The Charge against him, we find to be made up of two several The Charge, upon
what it consists.
parcels of Articles, Exhibited by the Honorable House of Commons.

1. The First, in Maintenance of their Accusation, whereby he The Titles of the
several parcels of the Articles upon which the Charge against the Archbishop
was made up.
stands charged with High Treason. 2. The latter, Entitled farther Articles of
Impeachment of High Treason, and diverse high Crimes and Misdemeanors, for all
which Matters and Things they have Impeached him of High Treason and other high
Crimes and Misdemeanors, tending to the Subversion of Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and to the utter Ruin of this Church and Commonwealth.
Concerning this Charge, and the Archbishop's Defense, he hitherto The (...)
upon his Council, by Reason of the mixed Charge, without distinguishing what was
intended to (...) a Treason, what a (...).
made before your Lordships, (we by your Lordships Command Assigned his
Council) neither have nor could (by Reason of the mixed Charge, without
distinguishing what was thereby intended to be a Charge of Treason, and what of
Misdemeanour only) be farther useful to him, than to Advise the Form of his
Plea and Answer, which we received from him, as to all the Matters of Fact, to
be a Not Guilty.

We have not in all or any the Facts Charged or Evidenced against him, in any
sort intermedled. But the same, (how proved and how appliable to the Charges,
without mention of any of them) shall wholly leave to your Lordships Notes and
Memories.

What Defense he has offered hitherto, has been wholly his own: He without us
in that; and we without consulting him in the work of this day.

Wherein, having received your Lordships Commands, we did present in writing
the Points in Law we then humbly conceived fit for us to insist upon. I.
Whether in all, or any the Articles charged against him, there The two Points
presented by Council in writing, to be (...) upon for his Defense in point of
Law.
was contained any Treason by the Established Laws of this Kingdom? II. Whether
the Charge of the said Impeachment and Articles, did contain such certainty and
particularity, as is required by Law in a Case where Treason is charged?


But being enjoined by your Honorable Order, to speak only to The first only
admitted.
the former: We shall, as in Duty becomes, conform thereunto.

For our Method herein shall follow the course holden in the Reply, The Method
proposed.
made upon the whole Articles, whereby we conceived the Charges contained in
them, were reduced to these three Generals.

1. A Traiterous Endeavor to Subvert the Fundamental Laws of The three General
Charges.
the Realm; and instead thereof, to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law; contained in the first Original and first Additional
Articles.

2. Secondly, A Traiterous Endeavor to Subvert God's True Religion by Law
Established; and instead thereof, to set up Popish Superstition and Idolatry;
this contained in the seventh Original and seventh Additional Articles.

3. Thirdly, That he labored to Subvert the Rights of Parliament, and the
Ancient course of Parliamentary Proceedings, and by False and Malicious
Slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments. And this contained in the
fourteenth Original and tenth Additional Articles.

All other the Articles, we humbly conceive to be but Instances, conducing and
applied to some of those Generals.

Concerning those three General Heads of the Charge, we shall crave leave to
propose two Questions to be debated.

1. Whether there be at this day any other Treason, than what is Two General
Questions to be insisted upon.
Declared by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. Cap. 2. or Enacted by some subsequent
particular Statute; which we humbly conceive, and shall endeavor to satisfy
your Lordships, there is not any.

2. Whether any the Matters in any of the Articles charged, contain any of the
Treasons declared by that Law, or Enacted by any subsequent Law; which we
likewise conceive they do not. And for the clearing of both these shall humbly
insist; That,

1. An endeavor to Subvert the Laws, An endeavor to Subvert Religion, A
laboring to Subvert the Rights of Parliaments,

Are not Treasons, either within the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. or by any other
particular Statute.

2. That not any of the Particulars, instanced in any other the Articles, is a
Treason within the Statute 25 Ed. 3. or any other Statute.

And to make good our Tenet upon our first Question, shall humbly In
maintenance of our first (...) upon the first Question.
offer,

That before this Statute of 25 Ed. 3. Treasons at the Common Law were so
general and uncertain, that almost any Crime, by Inferences and Constructions,
might be, and was often extended to be a Treason; in so much, as we find in
22o. of the Book of Assize, Killing the King's Messenger was Treason. And in
the Parliament Roll, 21 Ed. 3. Numero 15. accroaching the Royal Power (wherein
every Excess was subject to a Construction of Treason) was Treason; for which
diverse having suffered, the Commons in Parliament, finding how mischievous and
destructive it was to the Subject, Petitioned it might be bounded and declared.
And this, not to give any Liberty, but to give Bounds to it; one while it being
The uncertainty of what was, or was not Treason, produced the Law of 25 Ed. 3.
construed an Accroachment of Royal Power, as in the Case of the Earl of
Lancaster temp. Ed. 2. for being over Popular with the People; and in the same
King's Reign to Spencer, for being over Gracious with the King.

The sense of these and other Mischiefs by the uncertainty of Treason, brought
on this The Parliament of 25 Ed. 3. by Reason of that Law called Parliamentum
Benedictum, and that no Law had deservedly more Honor than Magna Charta.
Law of 25 Ed. 3. and the benefit of it to the Subject, says Sir Ed. Coke upon
his Collections of the Pleas of the Crown, begot that Parliament the Name of
Parliamentum Benedictum, and that, except Magna Charta, no other Act of
Parliament had more Honor given it by the King, Lords, and Commons. And this
Law has been in all Times the Rule to Judge Treasons by, The Act of 25 Ed. 3.
the Rule in Parliament to judge Treasons by.
even in Parliament; and therefore in the Parliament Roll 1 H. 4. Number. 144. the
Trial Parliament Roll 1 H. 4. number. 144. the Prayer of the Commons.
and Judgment in Cases of Impeachment of Treason is prayed by the Commons,
might be according to the Ancient Laws; and in Parliament Roll, 5 H. 4. number.
12. Case Earl of Northumberland.
the Parliament Roll 5 H. 4. Number. 12. in the Case of the then Earl of
Northumberland, this Statute of 25 Ed. 3. was the Guide and Rule by which the
Lords Judged in a Case endeavored to have been extended to be a Treason, the
same to be no Treason.


And it is, as we conceive, very observable; That if at any time the Treasons
particularly Enacted after 25 Ed. 3. still reduced to that Law. Treasons made
in the divided time of R. 2. reduced per Stat. 1 H. 4 cap. 10. Made in the time
of H. 8. reduced 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. Made in the time of Ed. 6. reduced by the
Act of 1 Mariae, cap. 10.
Necessity or Excess of the Times produced any particular Laws in Parliament,
for making of Treasons not contained in that Law of 25 Ed. 3. yet they returned
and fixed in that Law.

Witness the Statute of 1 H. 4. Cap. 10. whereby all those Facts which were
made Treasons mean between in the divided time of R. 2. were reduced to this of
Ed. 3.

In the time of H. 8. wherein several Offenses were Enacted to be Treasons; not
contained in the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. the same were all swept away by the
Statute of 1. Ed. 6. Cap. 12.

And again, wherein the time of Ed. 6. several Treasons were Enacted, they were
all Repealed, and by Act made 1 Mariae 1. none other Offense left to be
Treason, than what was contained and declared by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.

And from 1 H. 4. to Queen Mary, and from thence downward, we
find not any Judgment has been given in Parliament, for any Treason not
declared From 1 H. 4. to this day, no Judgment in Parliament given of any
Treason not contained in that Law.
and contained in that Law, but by Bill.

Thus in succession of all Times, this Statute of 25 Ed. 3. in the This Law in
all times the Standard to Judge Treasons by.
Wisdom of former Parliaments, has stood and been the constant fixed Rule for
all Judgments in Cases of Treason.

We shall now observe, what Offenses are in and by that Law declared to be
Treasons; whereby your Lordships will Examine, whether you find any of them in
the Charge of these Articles: For which purpose we shall desire this Statute of
25. Ed. 3. be Read.

The Treasons by that Act declared; are, 1. Compassing and Imagining the Death
of the King, Queen, or Treasons declared per Stat. 25 Ed. 3. cap. 2.
Prince, and declaring the same by some Overt Act. 2. Murdering the Chancellor,
Treasurer, etc. 3. Violating the Queen, the King's Eldest Daughter, or the
Prince's Wife. 4. Levying War against the King. 5. Or Adhering to the King's
Enemies, within the Realm or without, and declaring the same by some Overt Act.
6. Counterfeiting the Seals and Coin. 7. Bringing in Counterfeit Coin.


Next, we shall lay for a ground; that this Act ought not be Construed
by Equity or Inference.

1. For that it is a declarative Law, and no Declaration ought to Stat. 25 Ed.
3. may admit no construction by Equity or Inference to make other Treason than
thereby declared.
be upon a Declaration. 2. It was a Law provided to secure the Subject, for his
Life, Liberty, and Estate; and to admit Constructions and Inferences upon it,
were to destroy the Security provided for, by it. 3. It has been the constant
Opinion in all Times, both in Parliament Reasons why not.
and upon Judicial Debates; that this Act must be literally construed, and not
by Inference or Illation: Nor would it be admitted in a Particular declared by
this Law to be Treason; which a Man would have thought might have been
consistent with it.
Counterfeiting the Coin of the Kingdom, is by this Law declared Viz.
Treason.

Washing, Filing and Clipping the Coin, is an abuse, an abasing, Instances
where it would not.
and not making it Current: Yet in 3 H. 5. when the Question was in Parliament,
whether that Offense was Treason within the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. It is declared
by a special Act then made, 3 H. 5. Stat. 3 H. 5. cap. 6.
cap. 6. That forasmuch as before that time, great doubt and ambiguity had
been; whether those Offenses ought to be adjudged Treason, or not, in as much
as mention is not thereof made in the Declaration of the Articles of Treason by
that Statute of 25 Ed. 3. the same was by that particular Act made Treason,
which before was none, and counterfeiting of Foreign Coin made Current here, an
equal mischief with counterfeiting of the Coin of this Realm; yet because the
words of the Statute are his Money, this not Treason until the Act 1 M cap. 6.
Cok. Collections (...) of the (...).
of 1 Mariae cap. 6. made it so. And Sir Ed. Coke in his Book before mentioned,
says, a compassing to Levy War, is not a Treason within that Law, unless it
proceed into Act; but only to Compass the Death of the King: Yet if a
Constructive Treason should be admitted, it might happily without any great
straining be inferred, that compassing to Levy War, is in some sort a
compassing of the King's Death; and of this Kind many more Instances may be
given.

So that the result of all this is, that whatsoever is not declared
to be a Treason within the Letter of this Law; may not be adjudged a Treason,
by Inference, Construction, or otherwise.

Having done with this First, we now shall come to our Second Question.

Whether any the Matters in all, or any the Articles Charged, 2. Question.
contain any the Treasons declared by that Law, or Enacted by any subsequent
Law; wherein, although the Charges may appear to be Great and Enormous Crimes;
yet we shall endeavor, and hope to satisfy your Lordships, the same nor any
of them, are Treasons by any established Law of the Kingdom: For clearing
whereof, we shall pursue the Order first proposed.

First, that an Endeavor to subvert Fundamental Laws, is not Treason by any
Law in this Kingdom Established; and particular Act to make it Treason there is
none; so as we must then return to apply those former general Observations of
that Act of 25. Ed. 3. to this Particular; and shall add for Reasons, 1. That
it is not comprised within any the Words of that Law, nor may by any
Construction or Inference be brought within it, for the Reasons formerly
alleged. 2. Because an Endeavor to subvert Laws, is of so great a Latitude
and Uncertainty, that every Action not Warranted by Law, may be thereby
extended to be a Treason.


In the Sixth Report, in Mildmays Case Fol. 42. where a Conveyance Mildmay's
case 6. Report Coke fol. 42.
was made in Tail, with a Proviso, if he did go about or attempt to discontinue
the Entail, the same should be void: It was resolved the Proviso was void; and
the principal Reason was, that these Words attempt or go about, are Words
uncertain and void in Law.
And the Words of the Book are very observable; viz. God defend that
Inheritances and Estates of Men should depend upon such incertainties; for that
Misera est Servitus ubi Jus est vagum, and quod non definitur in Jure quid fit
conatus; and therefore the Rule of the Law does decide this point. Non efficit
conatus nisi sequitur effectus; and the Law does reject Conations and goings
about, as things uncertain which cannot be put in issue: These are the Words of
the Book. And if so considerable in Estates, your Lordships, we conceive, will
hold it far more considerable in a Case of Life, which is of highest
Consequence.

And if it should be said this Law of 25. Ed. 3. takes notice of Objection.
Answer.
Compassing and Imagining: We answer, it is in a Particular declared by that
Law to be Treason, in Compassing the death of the King. But this of
Endeavoring to subvert Laws, not declared by that or any other Law to be a
Treason.

And if it should be granted, that this Law might in any Case admit any other
Fact to be Treason by Inference or Construction; other than is therein
particularly declared; which we conceive it cannot.

Yet it is not Imaginable, that a Law introduced purposely to limit and
ascertain Crimes of so high Consequence, should by Construction or Inference be
subject to a Construction of admitting so
uncertain and indefinite a thing, as an endeavor to subvert the Law is, it
being not comprised within the Letter of that Law.

3. That the Subversion of the Law is an impossible thing; therefore an
Endeavor to do an act which cannot be effected, cannot be Treason 4. That in
all times the Endeavoring to subvert the Laws has been conceived no
determinate Crime, but rather an Aggravation only of a Crime, than otherwise.
And therefore has been usually joined as an Aggravation or result of Crimes
below Treason.
As appears in the Parliament Roll, 28 H. 6. number. 28. to number. 47. Parliament
Roll, 28 H. 6. number. 28. to 47. In the Case of the Duke of Suffolk.
in the Case of the Duke of Suffolk, where the Commons, having in Parliament
preferred Articles of Treason against him, did not make that any part of their
Charge. Yet in the same Parliament, and within few Days after; the First being
in February, the latter in March: Exhibiting other Articles against him, they
therein Charged all the Misprisions, Offenses and Deeds therein mentioned, to
have been the cause of the Subversion of Laws and Justice, and the Execution
thereof; and nigh likely to tend to the Destruction of the Realm: So as it
appears, it was then conceived an Offense of another Nature, and not a Treason.

And it appears as well by the Articles exhibited in Parliament, Articles
Cardinal Woolsey in Parliament, 21 H. 8. Indictment K. Bench Ligham, 23 H. 8.
21 H. 8. against Cardinal Woolsey, as by Indictment in the Kings Bench against
Ligham 23 H. 8. Rot. 25. That the Cardinal did Endeavor to subvert
Antiquissimas Leges hujus Regni, Vniversumque hoc Regnum Angliae Legibus
Imperialibus Subjugare; which although it be a Charge of subverting the ancient
Laws of the Kingdom, and to introduce new and Arbitrary Laws; yet neither upon
the Articles or Indictment, was the same imputed to be Treason; but ended in a
Charge of a Praemunire.

And if it shall be said that Empson 1 H. 8. had Judgment, and Died for it,
upon an Indictment in London; We answer, Empson, 1 H. 8.
1. This was not the Substance of the Indictment, but only an
Aggravation. 2. And if Charged, it is with an actual subverting, not with an
Endeavor to subvert the Laws; and is joined with diverse other Offenses. 3.
Which is a full Answer; The Indictment upon which he was Tried, was Paschae 2
H. 8. at Northampton, and was for Levying War against the King, a Treason
declared by the Law of 25 Ed. 3. upon which he was Convicted and Suffered; and
no proceeding upon the other Indictment ever had.


And as to the second General Charge, of Endeavoring to subvert Answer to the
second General Charge, of endeavoring to subvert Religion.
Religion:

This no more than that former of subverting the Laws is any Treason, within
any Law established in this Kingdom.

And herein, as to the Charge of the Endeavor, we shall rely upon what has
been already said upon the former.

With this further:

That until that happy Reformation, begun in the time of King Edward VI. there
was another Frame of Religion established by Law; which was conceived until
then to have been the True Religion; and any Endeavor to Change or Alter it,
prosecuted with great Extremities. Yet was not any Attempt to alter it,
conceived to be a Treason; but several especial Acts of Parliaments were made
for particular Punishments, against Persons who should attempt Stat. 5. R. 2.
C. 5. 2 H. 5. C. 7.
the Alteration thereof; Witness the Statute of 5 R. 2. Cap. 5. and 2 H. 5.
Cap. 7.

In which latter, although mention is made of endeavoring to
destroy and subvert the Christian Faith; yet was not the Offense made or
declared to be Treason. And at this day, Heresy, of what kind soever, is not
punishable, but according to the old course of the Law. Stat. 1 Ed. 6. C. 12. 1
Mar. C. 12. Answer to the third general Charge, laboring to subvert and
incense the King against Parliaments. Articles against the Duke of Ireland, and
others, 11 R. 2.


And we may add the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. Cap. 12. that of 1 Mariae 12. which
makes it but Felony to attempt an Alteration of Religion by force: The worst
kind of Attempt certainly.

To the third and last general Charge, Laboring to subvert the Rights of
Parliaments. To the Laboring to do it, we shall add nothing to what has been
said to the Charge of Endeavor, in the two former; only thus much we shall
observe:

That in the Parliament of 11 R. 2. amongst the many Articles preferred against
the Duke of Ireland, and others, the 14th Article contains a Charge much of
this Nature; viz. That when the Lords and others in diverse Parliaments, had
moved to have a good Government
in the Realm, they had so far incensed the King, that he caused diverse to 14
Article.
depart from his Parliament; so that they durst not, for fear of Death, advise
for the good of the Kingdom. Yet when the Lords came to single out the
Articles, what was, or was not Treason, That, although a Charge transcending
this, was none of the Articles by them declared to be Treason.

My Lords,

Having done with these Generals, it remains only that we apply Answer to the
particular Articles insisted upon (...) in the Charge.
our selves to those other Articles which we conceive were insisted upon, as
Instances conducing, and applied to some of the Generals we have handled.

Wherein if the Generals be not Treason, the Particular Instances cannot be;
and on the other side, if the Instances fall short of Treasons, the application
to those Generals cannot make them Treasons.

We shall only single out Two Particulars, and in those be very brief, in that
most which has been said to the former Generals, is appliable to them,
inasmuch as none of them is declared to be a Treason, by the Statute of 25 Ed.
3. or by any other Law enacted.

1. The first of these in the 10th Original Article, viz. That he The first
Particular.
has Traitorously endeavored to reconcile the Church of England with the
Church of Rome. Which if it be any Treason, must be a Treason within the
Statute of 5 Jac. Cap. 4. whereby is provided, That if any Man shall put in
practice to Reconcile any of his Majesty's Subjects to the Pope, or See of
Rome, the same is enacted to be Treason; which we conceive clearly is none of
this Charge.

1. First, For that here only is Charged an Endeavor; there a Differences
between the Matters charged, and the Fact made Treason by the Statute 3 Jac. C.
4.
Putting in Practice. 2. Here a Reconciling of the Church of England with the
Church of Rome; there a Reconciling some of his Majesty's Subjects to the Sea
of Rome: And a Reconciling with, may as well be a Reducing of that of Rome to
England, as England to Rome.
The Second, in the 7th additional Article, for wittingly and The second
Particular.
willingly Receiving and Harboring diverse Popish Priests and Jesuits, namely,
Sancta Clara and Monsieur St. Gyles.

Which Offense, as to the Harboring Priests and Jesuits born within his
Majesty's Dominions, by the Statute of 27 Eliz. Cap. 2. is made Felony, not
Treason; and extends only to Priests English born, which these are not charged
to be.

My Lords,

We have now gone through those Articles, wherein, we conceive, the Treasons
Charged were intended; and have endeavored to make it appear. That none of the
Matters in any of the Articles Charged, are Treason within the Letter of any
Law.

And if not so; then they cannot, by Inference or Parity of Reason, be
heightened to a Treason.

It is true, the Crimes, as they are laid in the Charge, are great and many.

Yet if the Laws of this Realm, which have distinguished Crimes, and
accordingly given them several Names, and inflicted Punishments, raise none of
these to a Treason;

That we humbly conceive will be worthy of your Lordships Consideration Number
of Crimes below Treason or Felony, cannot make a Treason.
in this Case; and that their Number cannot make them exceed their Nature: And
if they be but Crimes and Misdemeanors apart, below Treason or Felony, they
cannot make a Treason by putting them together.

Otherwise, the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. which we have so much insisted upon, had
been fruitless and vain; if after all that exactness, any Number of
Misdemeanors (in themselves no Treason) should by complication produce a
Treason, and yet no mention made of it in that Law; much less any Determination
thereby, that any Number, or what Number, and of what Nature of Crimes, below
Treason, should make a Treason.

It is true, my Lords,

That by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. there is a Clause in these Words:

It is accorded, That if any other Case, supposed Treason, which is not Power
(...) declare (...), per Stat. 25. (...) 3. c. 2. Wherein we conceive there is
no power to declare an Offense below a Felony to be a Treason.
therein specified, does happen before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry
without any going to Judgment of the Treason, until the Cause be showed and
declared before the King and his Parliament, Whether it ought to be judged
Treason, or Felony.

And that hereby might seem to be inferred, That there should be some other
Treasons than are mentioned in that Law, which may be declared in Parliament.

But, my Lords, we shall observe,

1. If such Declaration look only forward, then the Law making
it Treason preceeds the Offense, and is no more than an Enacting Law.

If it look backward to the Offense past, then it appears by the
very Clause it self, of 25 Edw. 3. it should be at the least a Felony at the
Common Law; and that a Crime, or Crimes, below a Felony, were never intended to
be by this Law to be declared, or to be heightened to a Treason. And we find not
any Crime declared Treason with a Retrospect, unless it were a Felony before:
And in the late Case of Earl Strafford.
the Earl of Strafford, Attainted by Bill, there is a Treason within
this Law charged, and declared by the Bill of his Attainder to have been
proved.

2. Secondly, We are not now in case of a Declaration of a Treason; but before
your Lordships only upon an Impeachment; and in such case, we Whatsoever has
been hitherto placed in the Margin of this Argument, was transcribed from Mr.
Hern's own Copy: But this which follows, I transcribed from a loose Note,
wrote by an unknown hand, and affixed to this place. H. W.
humbly conceive, the Law already established, as it has been, so it will be
the Rule.

Thus, my Lords, we have gone through Concerning the Proviso in 25 Ed. 3. (last
mentioned) it is observable, That Mr. Lane, in the Lord Strafford's Trial,
says, That that Clause of Provision 25 Ed. 3. is quite taken away by 6 Hen. 8.
Cap. 4. and 20. So that no Treason is now to be reckoned, but what is literally
contained in 25 Ed. 3. See for this, Whitlock's Memoirs, page 43. See also
Burnet's Hist. Reform. Part II. page 253. about the Repeal of Treasons.
that Part which belongs to us, directed us by your Lordships; viz.

Whether in all or any the Articles exhibited before your Lordships, there is
contained any Treason, by any established Law of this Kingdom; without meddling
at all with the Facts, or Proof made of them; which, together with our weak
Endeavors, we humbly submit to your Lordships great Judgment: And for any
Authorities cited by us, are ready (if so Commanded) to produce them.

Here this Day ended; and I had a few Days rest. But on Tuesday, October 22.
being a Day made Solemn for Humiliation, my October. 22. 1644.
Chamber at the Tower was searched again for Letters and Papers: But nothing
found.

After this, there went up and down, all about London and the Suburbs, a
Petition for the bringing of Delinquents to Justice; and some Preachers
exhorted the People to be zealous in it, telling them it was for the Glory of
God, and the Good of the Church. By this means, they got many Hands of Men
which little thought what they went about. In this Petition, none were named
but my self and the Bishop of Ely; so their Drift was known to none but their
own Party; and was undoubtedly set on foot to do me mischief. Whose Design this
was, God knows; but I have cause to suspect Mr. Pryn's Hand in it. This
barbarous way of the Peoples clamouring upon great Courts of Justice, as if
they knew not how to govern themselves and the Causes brought before them, is a
most unchristian Course, and not to be endured in any well-governed State. This
Petition, with a Multitude of Hands to it, was delivered to the House of
Commons, on Monday, October. 28. Concerning which, I shall observe this, That
October. 28.
neither the Lord Mayor nor the Sheriffs made any stop of this Illegal and
Blood-thirsty Course, though it were publicly known, and the People exhorted
to set Hands to it in the Parish-Churches. What this, and suchlike Courses as
these, may bring upon this City, God alone knows, whom I humbly pray to show it
Mercy.

CAP. XLV.
THis Day, being All-hallan-day, a Warrant came to the Lieutenant, (...). 1.
from the House of Commons, to bring me to their Bar, to hear the Evidence
formerly summed up, and given against me in the Lords House. I knew no Law nor
Custom for this; for though our Votes, by a late Act of Parliament, be taken
away, yet our Baronies are not: And so long as we remain Barons, we belong to
the Lords House, and not to the Commons. Yet how to help my self I knew not;
for when the Warrant came to me, the Lords House was risen; and I was commanded
to the House of Commons the next Morning, before the Lords came to Sit: So I
could not Petition them for any Privilege. And had I done it, I doubt it would
have been interpreted for an Endeavor to make a Breach between the Houses. And
should I have under any Pretense refused to go, Mr. Lieutenant would have
carried me.

Therefore, on Saturday, November. 2. I went, according to the Warrant, November. 2.
to the House of Commons. So soon as ever I was come to the Bar, Mr. Speaker
told me, There was an Ordinance drawn up, to Attaint me of High Treason; but,
that they would not pass it, 'till they had heard a Summary of the Charge which
was laid against me; and, that I was sent for to hear it also. I humbly
besought them, that my Council and my Solicitor (who were always present with
me in the Lords House) might stand now by me: But it would not be granted. Then
Mr. Brown, by Order from the Speaker, delivered the Collection and Sum of the
Charge against me; much at one with that which he formerly made in the Lords
House. Now I took Notes of it as exactly as I could. He had no sooner done, but
Mr. Speaker pressed me to make Answer presently. I humbly besought the House I
might not be put to that, the Charge being long and various; but that I might
have Time; and, that my Council might be heard for Matter of Law: I was
commanded to withdraw. And when I was called in again, I received an Order
peremptory, to Answer the Monday sev'n-night after, To such Things as the
Reporter was mistaken in. But not a word of Hearing my Council. I returned to
my Prison.

This Wednesday, November. 6. I got my Prayer Book, by the help of November. 6.
Mr. Hern and Mr. Brown, out of Mr. Pryn's hands, where it had been ever since
the last of May, 1643.

Monday, November. 11. I came to the House of Commons again; and November. 11.
according to their peremptory Order, made my Answer to the Summary Charge
which Mr. Brown made against me. But here I shall advertise the Reader, That to
avoid troublesome and tedious Repetition, I shall not set down my Answer at
large, as there I spoke it; because there is nothing in it but what is in my
former Answers, the Beginning and the End only excepted. But it was necessary
for me then to make a whole and an entire Answer, because the House of Commons
had then heard no Part of my Defense. But, I presume, the Charitable Reader
will look upon my Answers in their proper place, rather than be troubled a
second time with the same thing. Yet because Mr. Brown went a different way in
his Summary, from the Charge largely given, I shall represent a Skeleton of my
Answer, with all the Limbs of it entire, that it may be seen, as it were,
together; though I report nothing which has been already said. And thus I
began:

Mr. Speaker, I was here November. 2. It was the first time that ever My Defense
in the House of Commons.
I came within these Doors: And here then you gave me the most uncomfortable
Breakfast that ever I came to; namely, That this Honorable House had drawn up
an Ordinance against me of High Treason; but that before they would proceed
farther, I should hear the Sum of the Charge which was against me; which was
the cause I was sent for then. And to give my Answer to that which was then
said, or rather mistaken in saying and inferring, is the cause of my coming now.

1. And first, Mr. Speaker, I give Thanks to this Honorable House, that they
have given me leave to speak for my self. 2. Secondly, I do humbly desire, if
any Word or Thing should be mistaken, or unadvisedly expressed by me (which
shall be sore against my Will) I may have liberty to re-call and expound my
self. 3. Thirdly, That you will favorably consider into what Straits I am
cast, that after a long and tedious Hearing, I must now come to answer to a
Sum, or an Epitome of the same Charge; which how dangerous it may be for me,
all Men that know Epitomes, cannot but understand.

Mr. Speaker, I am come hither to make a Brief of my Answer to a Sum of my
Charge; wherein I may receive as much Detriment by my own Brief, for want of
larger Expression; as by the other of my Charge, by omission or mistake. Yet
since your Command is upon me, I shall, without farther Preface (which I
conceive would be as tedious to you, as to me troublesome) address my self, and
with as much Brevity as the many Heads of the Charge will bear. And that my
Answer may be the clearer, both to this Honorable House, and to the Gentleman
who reported the Charge, I shall follow every thing in the same order he
proceeded in. So far forth at least, as an old slow Hand could take them, a
heavy Heart observe them, and an old decayed Memory retain them.

This worthy Gentleman has pressed all things as hardly against me, as the
Cause can any way bear: That was his Duty to this Honorable House, and it
troubles me not. But his Carriage and Expressions were civil toward me, in
this my great Affliction: And for this I render him humble and hearty Thanks;
having from other Hands pledged my Savior in Gall and Vinegar, and drunk up
the Cup of the Scornings of the People to the very bottom.

This Gentleman began with four Generals, which he said I complained of, and I
say I had cause so to do. The first Complaint was, 1.
That I had lain three Years in Prison before I was heard. And this, he said,
was my own fault, because I delayed the putting in of my full Answer when I was
called. But herein he is quite mistaken. For I could not answer till I was
called, and I was not called in three Years: Nor then could I plead to more
Articles than were put to me. [Nor did this delay Three Months, of the Three
Year. Yet this Gentleman in his Reply, said still, it was my Fault, because I
did not Petition to be brought to Hearing. But this, under Favor, is a Weaker
Reason than the former. For the condition of the Times considered, neither my
Council, nor my other Friends, nor my self; could think that a fit or a
discreet way. Besides, it is well known, that had I Petitioned, I could not
have been Heard, my Business being in a manner cast aside, till Mr. Pryn's
Malice, actuated by a Search into my own Papers, undertook it.] The Gentleman
said, my Second Complaint 2.
was, That my Papers were Seized: But he said that was done by Authority. And I
never denied that. But that which he added is much mistaken, namely, that I
ever Seized any Man's Papers without Authority, or by my own Power; but what
was done in that kind, was by the Joint Authority of that Court, in which I
then sat. Nor was my Complaint general, that my Papers were Seized; but that
the Papers prepared for my Defense were taken from me, and not restored when I
needed them, and Petitioned for them. He said, my Third Complaint was, That
many of the Witnesses 3.
produced against me were Separatists. I did indeed complain of this, and I had
abundant Cause so to do. For there was scarce an active Separatist in England,
but some way or other his Influence was into this Business against me. And
whereas, the Gentleman said, the Witnesses were some Aldermen, and some
Gentlemen, and Men of Quality. That Is nothing; for both Gentlemen, and
Aldermen, and Men of all Conditions, (the more's the pity) as the Times now go,
are Separatists from the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England
Established by Law. And I would to God some of my Judges were not. My Fourth
Complaint he said was, of the excessive Number 4.
of the Witnesses. And he added, that if I would not have so many Witnesses, I
should not have given occasion for it, by Committing so many Crimes. But First,
whether I have committed so many Crimes as are urged against me, is yet in
Question. And Secondly, it is one thing to give Cause, and another thing to give
Occasion: For an Occasion may be taken, when it is pretended as given. And so I
hope it will be found in my Case. But the thing here mistaken is, That these
are all said to be Legal Witnesses, whereas almost all of them have, at some
time or other, been before me as their Judge, either at Star Chamber, or
Council Table, or High Commission, or as Referee. And then I humbly desire it
may be considered. First how impossible it is for a Judge to please all Men.
Secondly, how improbable it is, that Witnesses displeased should be indifferent
in their Testimony. And Thirdly, how hard it is to convince a Man by such
interessed Witnesses, now (upon the matter) becoming Judges of him that Judged
them. And (as Quomodo potest malus litigator landare (...) Aug. Epist. 166.
S. Augustine speaks) Quomodo potest, how is it possible for one that is
Contentious and Evil, to speak well of his Judge?

From these Generals the Gentleman passed to the Particulars of the Charge; and
he caused the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Original Articles, and the 7. Additional to be
read. That done, he divided the Charge into two main Heads: The one, an
Endeavor in me to subvert the Laws of the Kingdom: And the other, a like
Endeavor to alter the true Protestant Religion into Popery. The Evidence given
in the Lords House began at the Laws, and ended in Religion; but this Gentleman
in his Sum, both there and here, began with Religion, and ended with the Laws.

The Charge concerning Religion, he said, would bear two Parts, I.
the Ceremonial and the Substantial part of Religion.

(1) And he professed he would begin at the Ceremonial, where having First
charged in general, the Statute of the 3 and 4 of Ed. 6. 6. 10. for the
destruction of Images; he gave these particular Instances following, to show my
Intention to alter Religion.

1. The setting up of Colored Glass with Pictures in the Windows of my
Chapel; the Communion Table Altar-wise; Candlesticks thereon, with Reverence
and Bowings.

2. A Bible in my Study with the Five Wounds of Christ wrought upon the Cover
in Needle Work.

3. Three Pictures in my Gallery: The Ecce Homo, the Four Latin Fathers, and
the History (S: John: 10.) of the True Shepherd entering in by the Door, and the
Thief by the Window.

4. The Crucifix hung up in the Chapel at White Hall on Good Friday: And what
happened there upon Dr: Brown's coming in, and doing Reverence.

5. The Copes and Bowings used in Cathedral Churches since my time.

6. The Ceremonies used at his Majesty's Coronation.

7. The Abuses in the Universities, especially Oxford. 1. The Titles given me
from thence. 2. Diverse Particulars in the new Statutes. 3. Images countenanced
there, by me, in diverse Chapels. 4. The Picture of the Virgin Mary, at S:
Mary's Church-Door. 5. Nothing to be done without me in Congregations.


8. The Ceremonies in some Parish-Churches; and some punished for neglect of
them. Instances in some of Beckinton, some of Lewis, and in Mr: Chancy of Ware.

9. That I preferred no Men, but such as were active for the Ceremonies.

10. Passages expunged out of Books, if contrary to these Courses; as that in
Dr. Featly's Sermons concerning Images.

11. Bibles with Pictures in them.

12. The severe Punishment of Mr. Workman of Gloucester; only for a Sermon
against Images.

13. Words spoken to take Bishop Jewell's Works and the Book of Martyrs out of
some Parish-Churches.

14. The Consecration of Cree-Church, and S. Giles in the Fields. In all which,
as I humbly conceive, here is nothing (especially my Answers being taken to
them) that can cooperate to any alteration of Religion. Nor is there any
Treason, were all that is urged true.

(2) From hence, Mr. Speaker, this worthy Gentleman passed over from the
Ceremonies, to those things which he said concerned the Substance of Religion.
In which, the Particulars which he Charged were these:

1. A doubtfulness, if not a denial of the Pope's being Antichrist.

2. Dislike of the Name, the Idol of Rome.

3. The alteration of some passages in the Public Prayers appointed for
November. 5. and the Coronation Day.

4. The Antichristian Yoke left out of the Brief for the Palatinat, with an
expression, as if we and those Reformed Churches were not of the same Religion.

5. That Men were punished for Praying for the Queen, and the Prince.

6. That the Church of Rome is a true Church.

7. That the Communion Table or Altar is the Chief Place: For there is Hoc est
Corpus meum.

8. Restraint of all Books against Popery. Instances in a Book of Bishop
Carleton's. One tendered by Sir Edward Hungerford. Dr. Clarke's Sermons. Dr.
Jones. None called in but Sales. That I my self did expunge some Passages out
of a Sermon of Dr. Sibthorp's. Popish Books seized, re-delivered to the Owners.
That for these I must answer for my Chaplains, since John Archbishop of York
was fined for his Commissary's Act against the Bishop of Durham; who having a
Patent, could not so easily be put out of his Place, as I might change my
Chaplains.

9. Three Ministers in my Diocese suspended for not reading the Book of
Recreations on the Lord's Day.

10. The Feoffment for buying in of Impropriations overthrown, to the hindrance
of Preaching, and Scandal to Religion.

11. Incroachment upon the Lord Chamberlain, for naming of Chaplains to the
King; and upon the Master of the Wards for giving of Benefices.

12 Familiarity with Priests and Jesuits, S. Clara and Monsieur S. Giles.

13. The Testimonies of Mr. Challonor, Sir Henry Mildmay, and his Brother Mr.
Anthony; what Opinion was held of me beyond the Seas, for my cunning
introducing of Popery.

14. That an Offer was made unto me to be a Cardinal. And thus far this
Gentleman proceeded in points of Religion.

But because there has passed diverse things done at and by the Council Table,
the Courts of Star Chamber, and High Commission, and in Convocation; and
because many more things so done, are to come in the next Head concerning the
Law; I humbly crave leave, for avoiding tedious Repetition, to say it once for
all, That no act done by any of these, either by full Consent or major Part,
which involves the rest, ought to be charged singly against me. And that for
these Reasons following:

1. First, because this is not Peccare cum Multis: For they meet not there in a
Relation as Multi; but as Vnum Aggregatum; as Bodies made one by Law. And
therefore the Acts done by them, are Acts of those Bodies, not of any one Man
sitting in them. And in this Sense a Parliament is one Body consisting of many;
and the Acts done by it are Acts of Parliament. For which (should any of them
prove amiss) no one Man is answerable, though many times one Man brings in the
Bill.

2. Secondly, because I could sway no Man's Vote in any of those Places,
(though this has been often urged against me, as an Over Potent Member) for my
Vote was either last, or last save one, in all these Places. So I could not
lead. Nor is there any so much as show of Proof offered, that I moved, or
prepared any Man to a Sentence one way or other, in any one of these Courts or
Places.

3. Thirdly, because in those Courts of Judicature, there was the Assistance of
able Judges, Lawyers, and Divines for direction. And how can that be a Treason
in me, which is not made so much as a Misdemeanour in any of the rest?

4. Fourthly, because the Act of this present Parliament, which has taken away
the Star Chamber, and the High Commission, and bounded the Council Table, looks
forward only, and punishes no Man for any Act past; much less does it make any
Man's Actions done in them to be Treason: And I am no way excluded from the
Benefit of that Act.

5. Lastly, because in all my Proceedings, both in the High Commission and
elsewhere, I kept strictly to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England Established by Law, against both Papist and other Sectaries. And under
this Government, and Doctrine of this Church, it has pleased God, now for
above Fourscore Years together, to Bless this Kingdom and People above other
Nations. And I pray God if we forsake the one, it prove not a Cause to deprive
us of the other.

And now, Mr. Speaker, I shall follow this worthy Gentleman, as II.
he went on to the Second General Head, the Subversion of the Laws. And here,
when he had caused the 1, 2, 3, 5, and 14. Original Articles to be read, as
also the 2, 9, and 10. Additionals; He then said, that I had labored this
Subversion by my Counsels and by my Actions.

(1.) By my Counsels First; Of which he gave Three Instances.

1. The Vote of the Council Table to Assist the King in Extraordinary ways; if
the Parliament should prove peevish and refuse. And this out of my Diary, at
December. 5. 1639.

2. The Passage in the Epistle before my Speech in Star Chamber, Not one Way of
Government, since the Humors of the People were in continual Change.

3. A Speech at Council Table, That now the King might use his own Power, etc.
Witnessed only by Sir Henry Vane the Elder.

(2.) From my Counsels, proceed was made to my Actions: Where the Particulars
were,

1. That I attempted to set Proclamations above the Law.

2. That I was for all Illegal Projects at the Council Table: Instanced in
Enclosures, in the Ship Money, and Sir John Corbett's Commitment.

3. The taking down of the Houses about St. Paul's, with the large Commission
for the Repair of the West End.

4. The stopping of Two Brewers in their Trade, being in Westminster, and
pretended to annoy the Court.

5. Things done by me as Referee: Instanced in a Case between Rich and Pool,
and another of one Symmes.

6. Obstructing the Course of Law, by sending to Judges: Instanced in the
Parishioners of Beckington; in the Case of Ferdinando Adams; in Sir Henry
Martyn's Case, about an Attorney at Law; Judge Richardson's Words, in Mr.
Huntley's Case; and Baron Trevers Words, in Grafton's Case.

7. The punishing Men that came in a Legal Way: Instanced in the Case of
New-comin and Burrowes; that I said in the High Commission, I hoped to see the
Clergy exempt again the next hundred Years; the two Churchwardens of Chesham,
with Words concerning Sir Thomas Dacres.

8. The Case of Prohibitions; and Mr. Wheeler's Note out of a Sermon of mine
concerning them.

9. That no Pope ever claimed so much Jurisdiction; not from the King.

10. The Canons; and I the main Man; the overgrown Member again.

11. The Statutes of Oxford enforced a second time; Nevill's Case of
Merton-College instanced in.

12. Books Printed that are against the Law: Instanced in Cowell's Interpreter,
and Dr. Manwaring's Sermons.

13. The Alteration of the King's Oath at his Coronation.

14. My Enmity to Parliaments. To all which, as I then gave sufficient Answers,
so I hope the Courteous Reader has found them at large in their several
Places. And for this last concerning Parliaments, I humbly and heartily desire,
that this may be taken notice of, and remembered, That there is not, in any one
of these Paper-Proofs produced against me, any one thing that offers to take
away any Rights of Parliaments, rightly understood; much less any that offers
to take away Parliaments themselves: Which is a continued Mistake all along
this particular Charge. And if any rash or unweighed Words have fallen from me,
yet these cannot be extended to the disannulling of Parliaments, or their
Privileges in any kind, which I defended in Print long since, before I could
foresee any of this Danger threatening me: It is in my Book Cont. Fisher, p. 211.
against Fisher. It was read in the Lords House, and I humbly desire I may read
it here. And it was read.

After this, it was inferred by this worthy Gentleman, what a great Offender I
was, and greater than Cardinal Woolsey. Mr. Speaker, I have seen the Articles
against the Cardinal, and sure some body is mistaken; for some of them are far
greater than any thing that is proved against me. In which (I thank Christ for
it) my Conscience is at peace, whereas the Cardinal confessed himself guilty of
them all; and yet no thought of Treason committed: And a Praemunire was all that
was laid upon him.

Then he gave a touch, That An. 45. Ed. 3.
in Edward III.'s time, there was a Complaint, That too much of the Civil
Government was in the hands of the Bishops; and that in the 45th Year of his
Reign, they were put out, and Laymen put in. But first, this concerns not me.
Secondly, the late Act of this Parliament has taken sufficient Order with that
Calling, for meddling in Civil Affairs. Thirdly, the time is memorable when this
was done: It was in the Forty and fifth Year of Edward III. That Is enough.

Mr. Speaker, I shall draw toward an end. Yet not forgetting what Ordinance
you told me was drawn up against me; If that which I have now said may any way
satisfy this Honorable House to make stay of it, or to mitigate it, I shall
bless God and you for it. And I humbly desire you to take into consideration,
my Calling, my Age, my former Life, my Fall, my Imprisonment, long and strict;
That these Considerations may move with you. In my Prosperity (I bless God for
it) I was never puffed up into Vanity, whatever the World may think of me. And
in these last full four Years durance, I thank the same God, Tacit. L. 6. Annal.
Gravem Fortunam constanter tuli, I have with decent Constancy born the weight
of a pressing Fortune: And I hope God will strengthen me unto, and in the end
of it.

Mr. Speaker, I am very Annum jam agens septuagesimum secundum.
aged, considering the Turmoils of my Life; and I daily find in my self more
Decays than I make show of; and the Period of my Life, in the Course of Nature,
cannot be far off. It cannot but be a great Grief unto me, to stand at these
Years thus Charged before ye: Yet give me leave to say thus much without
Offense, Whatsoever Errors or Faults I may have committed by the way, in any
my Proceedings, through Human Infirmity; as who is He that has not offended,
and broken some Statute-Laws too by Ignorance, or Misapprehension, or
Forgetfulness, at some sudden time of Action? Yet if God Bless me with so much
Memory, I will die with these Words in my Mouth: That I never intended, much
less endeavored the subversion of the Laws of the Kingdom; nor the bringing in
of Popish Superstition upon the true Protestant Religion, Established by Law in
this Kingdom.

And now, Mr. Speaker, having done with the Fact, I have but this one thing to
put to the Consideration of this Honorable House. My Charge has been
repeated, I confess, by a very worthy and a very able Gentleman. But Ability is
not absolute in any. The Evidence given against me before the Lords, was (as by
the Law it ought to be) given in upon Oath: But the Evidence now summed up, and
presented to this Honorable House, is but upon the Collection and Judgment of
one Man, how able or entire soever; and what he conceived is proved against me,
is but according to his Judgment and Memory; which perhaps may differ much from
the Opinion and Judgment of the Judges themselves, who heard the Evidence at
large: Nor was this Gentleman himself present every Day of my Hearing; and then
for those Days in which he was absent, he can report no more here, than what
others have reported to him. So for so much, his Repetition here is but a
Report of a Report of Evidence given: And at the best but a Report of Evidence,
and not upon Oath. And, I suppose, never any Jurors, who are Tryers of the Fact
in any Case, Civil or Criminal, did ever ground their Verdict upon an Evidence
only Reported before them, and which themselves heard not.

And if this manner of Proceeding shall be thought less considerable in my
Person; yet I humbly desire it may be thoroughly weighed in the prudent
Judgment of this Honorable House, the great Preserver of the Laws and
Liberties of the Subject of England, how far it does or may trench upon these
in future Consequences, if these great Boundaries be laid loose and open.

And because my Infirmities are many and great, which Age and Grief have added
to those which are naturally in me, I most humbly desire again, That my Council
may be heard for point of Law, according to the former Concession of this
Honorable House: For I assure my self, upon that which has been pleaded to
the Lords, That no one, nor all of the things together which are charged
against me, if proved (which I conceive they are not) can make me guilty of
High Treason, by any known Established Law of this Kingdom.

The Sum of all is this: Upon an Impeachment arising from this House, I have
pleaded Not Guilty. Thereupon Issue has been joined, and Evidence given in
upon Oath. And now I must humbly leave it to you, your Wisdom and Justice,
Whether it shall be thought Fit, and Just, and Honorable, to Judge me here,
only upon a Report, or a Hearsay, and that not upon Oath.

CAP. XLVI.
HEre ended the heavy Business of this Day. I was exceeding faint with speaking
so long; and I had great pain and soreness in my Breast for almost a Fortnight
after; then, I thank God, it wore away. I was commanded to withdraw, and to
attend the November. 13. 1644.
House again on Wednesday, November. 13. which I did. Then Mr. Brown made a Reply
to my Answer: The Reply had some great Mistakes in it; but else was for the
most part but a more earnest Affirming of what he had delivered. And I
conceived I was not to Answer to his Reply, but that he was to have the last
Speech: For so it was always carried, during my Hearing in the Lords House.
Therefore being dismissed, I went away: And I was no sooner gone, but the House
called for the Ordinance which was drawn up against me, and without Hearing my
Council, or any more ado, Voted me Guilty of High Treason. And yet, when I came
that Day to the House, all Men, and many of the House themselves did much
magnify my Answer before given: I will forbear to set down in what Language,
because it was high; and as no time can be fit for Vanity, so least of all was
this time for me: And Vain I must needs be thought, should I here relate what
was told me from many and good Hands. But it seems the Clamor prevailed
against me.

On Saturday, November. 16. this Ordinance was passed the House of November. 16.
Commons suddenly, and with so great deliberation, as you have heard, was
transmitted to the Lords; and by them the Debate concerning it put off to
Friday, November. 22. Then the Earl of Pembroke began more November. 22.
fully to show his cankered Humor against me; how provoked, I protest I know
not, unless by my serving him far beyond his Desert. There, among other course
Language, he bestowed (as I am informed) the Rascal and the Villain upon me.
And told the Lords, they would put off giving their Consent to the Ordinance,
till the Citizens would come down, and call for Justice, as they did in my Lord
Strafford's Case. Was there not Justice and Wisdom in this Speech? November. 23:
November. 29. November. 28.
Hereupon the Business was put off to Saturday, November. 23. and then to Friday,
November. 29. But then upon Thursday, November. 28. Mr. Strowd came up with a
Message from the Commons, to quicken the Lords in this Business: And at the end
of his Message, he let fall, That they should do well to agree to the
Ordinance, or else the Multitude would come down and force them to it. At this,
some Lords very honorably took Exception; and Mr. Strowd durst not bide it,
that this was any part of the Message delivered him by the House of Commons.
But the matter was passed over, and Mr. Strowd not so much as checked. This, it
may be, was thought seasonable by some, to hearten on the Violence of the Earl
of Pembroke.

The Business not long heard on Friday, was put off again to Monday December. 2.
and the House of Lords put into a Committee, to examine December. (...).
Particulars by their Notes: The Earl of Northumberland on the Wool-Sack during
the Debate, which continued, more or less, some Days. Where their own Notes
failed, they called to Mr. Brown, Clerk of their House, for his. But at last,
finding him very ready and quick for any thing that was Charged against me, but
loath to be known what Answer I gave to any Point, some Lords observed it. And
it did after appear, that the Notes which he put to the Lords, were not the
Notes which himself took, but that he had a Copy given him, (whether by Mr.
Pryn or any other, I know not) and I was informed that the Earl of Warwick had
another Copy of the very same. This is mavelous Just and Honorable in that
Earl: And most Christian-like in Mr. Brown. It may be, he learned it out of the
Notes which his Father-in-Law takes at Sermons.

Upon Monday December 16. there was (the Times considered) a December. 16. 1644.
very full House of Lords; about Twenty present, and my Business largely
debated, and ready to come to the Question. I wish with all my Heart it had,
while the House was so full. But the Earl of Pembroke fell again into his
wonted violence: And asked the Lords what they stuck at? And added; what, shall
we think the House of Commons had no Conscience in passing this Ordinance? Yes,
they knew well enough what they did. One of the Wits hearing this Excellent
Passage of the Earl's; Protested, If ever he lived to see a Parliament in
Bedlam, this Prudent Earl should be Speaker, if he were able to procure him the
Place.

In the mean time this Unhappy Clamor of his, put the Business December. 17.
off again to the next day, being Tuesday; Then there were but fourteen Lords
in the House. My Business was assumed, and proposed in three Questions, and I
was Voted Guilty of the Fact in all three. Namely, Guilty of endeavoring to
Subvert the Laws: To Overthrow the Protestant Religion: And that I was an Enemy
to Parliaments. Then it being put to the Judges, whether this were Treason or
no; the Judges unanimously declared, that nothing which was charged against me
was Treason, by any known and established Law of the Land, with many things to
and fro concerning this Business.

On Tuesday Christmas-Eve, the Lords had a Conference with the December. 24.
Commons about it. In which they declared, that they had diligently weighed all
things that were charged against me, but could not by any one of them, or all,
find me guilty of Treason. And therefore desired that the Argument made by my
Council might be Answered. And if it could be made appear unto them by any Law,
to be Treason, they would then proceed farther, as in Honor and Justice they
should find fit. Then came Christmas Day, the last Wednesday in the Month,
December. 25.
and a most Solemn Fast kept on it, with as Solemn an Ordinance for the due
observance of this Fast, and against the manner of keeping of that day in
former Superstitious Times. A Fast never before heard of in Christendom.

After this Conference, Mr. Sergeant Wild speaking freely to some Friends about
this Business, told them, he wondered the Lords should so much distrust their
Judgments, as to desire a Conference about it. To see how good Wits agree!
Surely, I believe he was of the Earl of Pembroke's Council, or the Earl of his,
they jump so together. It seems in these Men's Opinions, the House of Commons
can neither Err in Conscience nor Judgment. Howsoever, that House thought it
fit the Lords should be satisfied, that I was by Law guilty of High Treason.
And to that end sent up a Committee, Jan: 2. 1644. to make Jan. 2. (...).
proof of it to their Lordships. At this Meeting two Judges were present,
Justice Reeves, and Judge Bacon. The Managers of the business against me, were
three Lawyers, Mr: Brown, Sergeant Wild, and Mr: Nicolas. Neither my self nor
any of my Council there. What this will effect upon the Lords, Time must
discover, as it does the effects of other Eclipses. And thus far I had
proceeded in this sad History by Jan: 3: 1644. The rest shall follow as it
comes to my Knowledge. Jan: 3.


H: W: Next day, the Archbishop receiving the News, that the Bill of Attainder
had passed in the House of Lords, broke off his History, and prepared himself
for Death. I shall therefore supply the History from the Accounts of Mr:
Rushworth, and Dr: Heylin.

A short Supplement to the preceding History, taken from the Historical
Collections of John Rushworth, par: 3: vol: 2: p: 834.
THE Reasons of the Commons for the Attainder of the Archbishop, were at a
Conference Jan. 2. by Sergeant Wild, Mr. Brown, and Mr. Nicolas, communicated
to the Lords; who thereupon, on the 4th of January, passed the Ordinance of
Attainder; whereby it was Ordained, that he should suffer Death, as in Cases of
High Treason. And on the 6th of January it was Ordered by both Houses; that he
should suffer accordingly on Friday the 10th. But on the 7th, the Lords at a
Conference, acquainted the Commons, with a Letter and Petition from the
Archbishop, and a Pardon to him from the King, dated the 12th of April 19 Car.
of which he desired the benefit; but the same was overruled and rejected. His
Petition was, that in case he must Die, Dr: Stern, Dr: Heywood, and Dr: Martin,
might be permitted to be with him, before and at his Death, to Administer
Comfort to his Soul; and that the manner of his Execution might be altered to
Beheading. To which the Lords agreed; but the Commons then refused both; only
granted, that Dr. Stern, and Mr. Marshal, and Mr. Palmer, should go to him; and
one or both of the latter, to be constantly present, whilst Dr. Stern was with
him. But the next day, upon another Petition of his, setting forth Reasons,
from his being a Divine, a Bishop, one that had had the Honor to sit in the
House of Peers, and of the King's Most Honorable Privy Council, etc. Praying
in those regards, not to be exposed to such an Ignominious Death; the Commons
consented to remit the rest of the Sentence, and that he should suffer Death by
being Beheaded. Accordingly on the 10th of January, he was conducted from the
Tower to the Scaffold on Tower Hill; where being arrived, holding a Paper in
his Hand, he spoke to the People as follows.

Then follows the Archbishop's Speech and Prayer, and other Circumstances of
his Execution, verbatim, as they were Printed in a Pamphlet of three Sheets in
4to, London, 1644.

A Larger Supplement to the preceding History, taken out of Dr: Heylin's
Cyprianus Anglicus,: or, his Life of Archbishop Laud. Page: 527, etc.
THE Bill of Attainder of the Archbishop, passed in the House of Commons
November 13. 1644. But yet the Business was not done; for the Lords stuck at
it: Some of which, having not extinguished all the Sparks of Humanity, began to
find themselves Compassionate of his Condition, not knowing how soon it should
or might be made their own, if once disfavoured by the Grandees of that Potent
Faction. For the Ordinance having been Transmitted to the House of Peers, and
the House of Peers deliberating somewhat long upon it, it was Voted on December
4. That all Books, Writings, and Evidences, which concerned the Trial, should
be brought before the Lords in Parliament; to the end, that they might
seriously and distinctly consider of all Particulars amongst themselves, as
they came before them. But meaning to make sure work of it, they had in the
mean time (after no small Evaporations of Heat and Passion) prepared an
Ordinance, which they sent up unto the Lords, importing the displacing of them
from all those Places of Power and Command which they had in the Army. Which
being found too weak to hold, they fall upon another and a likelier Project,
which was to bring the Lords to sit in the Commons House, where they were sure
they should be inconsiderable both for Power and Number. And to effect the same
with more speed and certainty, they had recourse to their Old Arts, drawing
down Watkins with his General Muster of Subscriptions, and putting a Petition
into his Hands, to be tendered by him to the Houses, that is, themselves:
Wherein it was required amongst other things, That they should vigorously
proceed unto the Punishment of all Delinquents; and that for the more quick
dispatch of Public Business of State, the Lords would please to Vote and Sit
together with the Commons. On such uncertain Terms, such a ticklish Tenure, did
they then hold their Place and Power in Parliament, who so officiously complied
with the House of Commons, in depriving the Bishops of their Vote, and the
Church's Birthright. And this was it which helped them in that time of need.
And yet not thinking this device sufficient to fright their Lordships to a
present compliance, Strowd was sent up with a Message from the House of
Commons, to let them know, That the Londoners would shortly bring a Petition,
with 20000 Hands to obtain that Ordinance. By which stale and common Stratagem,
they wrought so far on some weak Spirits, the rest withdrawing themselves, (as
formerly in the Case of the Earl of Strafford) that in a thin and slender
House, not above six or seven in number, it was passed at last. The day before
they passed the Ordinance for Establishing their New Directory; which in
effect, was nothing but a total Abolition of the Common Prayer Book; and
thereby showed unto the World, how little hopes they had of settling their new
Form of Worship, if the Foundation of it were not laid in the Blood of this
Famous Prelate, who had so stoutly stood up for it, against all Novellism and
Faction, in the whole course of his Life. It was certified by some Letters to
Oxon, and so reported in the Mercurius Aulicus of the following Week, That the
Lord Bruce (but better known by the Name of the Earl of Elgin) was one of the
Number of those few Lords, which had Voted to the Sentence of his Condemnation:
The others which concurred in that fatal Sentence, being the Earls of Kent,
Pembroke, Salisbury, and Bullingbrook, together with the Lord North, and the
Lord Gray of Wark. But whatsoever may be said of the other six, I have been
advertised lately from a very good Hand, that the said Lord Bruce has
frequently disclaimed that Action, and solemnly professed his detestation of
the whole Proceedings, as most abhorrent from his Nature, and contrary to his
known Affections, as well unto his Majesty's Service, as the Peace and
Preservation of the Church of England.

This Ordinance was no sooner passed, but it revived many of those Discourses
which had before been made on the like occasion, in the Business of the Earl of
Strafford. -- Here we have a newfound Treason, never known before, nor
declared such by any of his Majesty's Justices, nor ever brought to be
considered of by the King and his Parliament; but only Voted to be such, by
some of those Members which sat at Westminster, who were resolved to have it
so for their private Ends. The first Example of this kind, the first that ever
suffered Death by the Shot of an Ordinance, as himself very well observed in
his Dying Speech upon the Scaffold, (though purposely omitted in Hind's Printed
Copy) to which now he hastneth.

For the passing of the Ordinance being signified to him by the then Lieutenant
of the Tower; he neither entertained the News with a Stoical Apathy, nor wailed
his Fate with weak and Womanish Lamentations, (to which Extremes most Men are
carried in this Case) but heard it with so even and so smooth a Temper, as
showed, he neither was ashamed to Live, nor afraid to Die. The time between the
Sentence and Execution, he spent in Prayers and Applications to the Lord his
God, having obtained, though not without some difficulty, a Chaplain of his own
to Attend upon him, and to assist him in the work of his Preparation; though
little Preparation needed to receive that Blow, which could not but be welcome,
because long expected. -- On the Evening before his Passover, the Night before
the dismal Combat betwixt him and Death, after he had refreshed his Spirits
with a moderate Supper, he betook himself unto his Rest, and Slept very
soundly, till the time came, in which his Servants were appointed to Attend his
Rising. A most assured sign of a Soul prepared.

The fatal Morning being come, he first applied himself to his private Prayers,
and so continued, till Pennington and others of their Public Officers, came to
conduct him to the Scaffold; which he ascended with so brave a Courage, such a
cheerful Countenance, as if he had mounted, rather to behold a Triumph, than be
made a Sacrifice; and came not there to Die, but to be Translated. And though
some Rude and Uncivil People, Reviled him as he passed along, with opprobrious
Language, as loath to let him go to the Grave in Peace, yet it never discomposed
his Thoughts, nor disturbed his Patience. For he had profited so well in the
School of Christ, that when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
but committed his Cause to him that Judges Righteously. And as he did not
fear the Frowns, so neither did he covet the Applause of the Vulgar Herd; and
therefore rather chose to read what he had to speak unto the People, than to
affect the ostentation, either of Memory or Wit, in that dreadful Agony:
Whether with greater Magnanimity than Prudence, I can hardly say. As for the
matter of his Speech, besides what did concern himself and his own Purgation,
his great care was to clear his Majesty and the Church of England, from any
inclination to Popery; with a persuasion of the which, the Authors of the then
present Miseries had abused the People, and made them take up Arms against
their Sovereign. A Faithful Servant to the last: By means whereof, as it is
said of Sampson in the Book of Judges, That the Men which he slew at his Death,
were more than they which he Judge. 16. 30.
slew in his Life: So may it be affirmed of this Famous Prelate, That he gave a
greater Blow unto the Enemies of the Church and the King, at the Hour of his
Death, than he had given them in his whole Life before. But this you will more
clearly see by the Speech it self, which follows here according to the best
and most perfect Copy, delivered by his own Hands unto one of his Chaplains,
and in his Name presented to the King by the Lord John Bellasis at the Court in
Oxon.

The Speech of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, spoken at his Death, upon
the Scaffold on the Tower Hill, Jan. 10. 1644.
Good People,

THIS is an uncomfortable Time to Preach; yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb. 12. 2. Let us run with Patience the Race which is set before
us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set
down at the right Hand of the Throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the Author and
Finisher of my Faith, he best knows. I am now come to the End of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a Death of Shame. But the Shame must be despised, or no
coming to the Right Hand of God. Jesus despised the Shame for me, and God
forbid but that I should despise the Shame for him. I am going apace (as you
see) toward the Red Sea, and my Feet are now upon the very Brink of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me into the Land of Promise; for that
was the way through which he led his People. But before they came to it, he
instituted a Passover for them, Exodus 12. (...)
a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with Sour Herbs. I shall obey, and labor
to digest the Sour Herbs, as well as the Lamb. And I shall remember it is the
Lord's Passover: I shall not think of the Herbs, nor be angry with the Hand
that gathers them, but look up only unto him, who instituted that, and
governs these. For Men can have no more Power over me, than what is given them
from above. John 19. 11.
I am not in Love with this Passage through the Red Sea, for I have the
Weakness and Infirmities of Flesh and Blood plentifully in me; and I have
prayed with my Savior, Vt transiret Calix iste, That this Cup of Red Wine
might pass from me; but if not, God's Will (not mine) be done: And I shall most
willingly drink of this Cup, as deep as he pleases, and enter into this Sea;
yea, and pass through it in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good People) that when God's Servants were in
this Boisterous Sea, and Aaron amongst them, the Egyptians which persecuted
them, (and did in a manner drive them into the Sea) were Drowned in the same
Waters, while they were in pursuit of them. I know my God, whom I serve, is as
able to deliver Dan. 3.
me from This Sea, (...) Copy.
the Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver the Three Children from the Furnace;
and (I humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now as theirs was then;
they would not Worship the Image the King had set up, nor will I the
Imaginations which the People are setting up; nor will I forsake the Temple and
the Truth of God, to follow the Bleating of Jeroboam's Calves in Dan and
Bethel. And as for this People, they are at this Day miserably misled, (God of
his Mercy open their Eyes that they may see the right way) for at this Day, the
Blind lead the Blind, and if they go on, both will certainly Luke 6. 39.
fall into the Ditch. For my self, I am (and I acknowledge it in all Humility)
a most grievous Sinner many ways, by Thought, Word and Deed: I cannot doubt but
God has Mercy in store for me (a poor Penitent) as well as for other Sinners.
I have now, and upon this sad Occasion, ransacked every corner of my Heart; and
yet (I thank God) I have not found (among the many) any one Sin, which deserves
Death by any known Law of this Kingdom: And yet hereby I charge nothing upon my
Judges; for if they proceed upon Proof (by valuable Witnesses) I, or any other
Innocent, may be justly Condemned. And (I thank God) though the weight of my
Sentence be heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I was in my Life. And
though I am not only the First Archbishop, but the First Man that ever died In
this way, Hind's Copy.
by an Ordinance in Parliament; yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way,
though not by this means. For Elphegus was hurried away, and lost his Head by
the Danes, and Simon Sudbury in the Fury of Wat Tiler and his Fellows. Before
these, St. John Baptist had his Head Danced off by a lewd Woman; and St.
Cyprian, Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his Head to a persecuting Sword.
Many Examples, (Great and Good) and they teach me Patience; for I hope my Cause
in Heaven will look of another Dye than the Color that is put upon it here.
And some Comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these Great Men in
their several Generations; but also that my Charge (as foul as it is made)
looks like that of the Jews against St. Paul, Act. 25. 8. for he was Accused
for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion: And like that of S. Stephen, Act.
6. 14. for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and Religion,
the Holy Place and the Temple, ver. 13. But you will then say, Do I then
compare my self with the Integrity of St. Paul and St. Stephen? No, far be that
from me. I only raise a Comfort to my self, that these great Saints and
Servants of God, were laid at in their Time, as I am now. And it is memorable,
that St. Paul, who helped on this Accusation against St. Stephen, did after
fall under the very same himself. Yea; but here is a great Clamor, that I
would have brought in Popery: I shall answer that more fully by and by. In the
mean time, you know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself; if we let
him Job. 11. 48.
alone, all men will believe in him, and venient Romani, and the Romans will
come, and take away both our Place and Nation. Here was a causeless cry against
Christ, that the Romans would come: And see how just the Judgment was; they
Crucified Christ for fear lest the Romans should come; and his Death was it
which brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing them with that which they
most feared. And I pray God, this Clamor of venient Romani, (of which I have
given no cause) help not to bring them in. For the Pope never had such an
Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and
Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time, by Honor and Dishonor, by
good Report and evil Report, as Deceivers and yet true; am I passing through
this World, 2 Cor. 6. 8. Some Particulars also I think it not amiss to speak of.

And First, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our Gracious Sovereign.
He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery; but in my Conscience
(of which I shall give God a very present Account) I know him to be as free
from this Charge as any Man living; and I hold him to be as sound a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law Established) as any Man in this Kingdom; and
that he will venture his Life as far and as freely for it. And I think I do, or
should know, both his Affection to Religion, and his Grounds for it, as fully
as any Man in England.

The Second Particular, is concerning this great and Populous City (which God
bless.) Here has been of late a Fashion taken up to gather Hands, and then go
to the great Court of this Kingdom, (the Parliament) and Clamor for Justice;
as if that Great and Wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which are
unknown to many) could not, or would not do Justice but at their appointment. A
way which may endanger many an Innocent Man, and pluck his Blood upon their own
Heads, and perhaps upon the City's also: and this has been lately practiced
against my self, the Magistrates standing still, and suffering them openly to
proceed from Parish to Parish, without any Check. God forgive the Setters of
this, (with all my Heart I beg it) but many well-meaning People are caught by
it. In St. Stephen's Case, when nothing else would serve, they stirred Act. 6.
12.
up the People against him. And Herod went the same way when he had killed St.
James: Yet he would not venture on St. Peter, till he found how the other
Pleased the People. But take heed of having Act. 12. 3.
your Hands full of Blood; for there is a time, (best known to himself) Esa. 1.
15.
when God (above other Sins) makes Inquisition for Blood; and when that
Inquisition is on foot the Psalmist tells us, that God remembers, Psalm. 9. 12.
(that is not all) he remembers and forgets not the Complaint of the Poor. That
is, whose Blood is shed by Oppression, ver. 9. Take heed of this: It is a
fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living Heb. 10. 31.
God; but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for Blood. And (with
my Prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the
Prophecy that is expressed, Jer. 26. 15.

The Third Particular is the Poor Church of England. It has Flourished, and
been a shelter to other Neighboring Churches, when Storms have Driven upon
them. But, alas! now it is in a Storm it self; and God only knows whether, or
how it shall get out. And (which is worse than the Storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft to Shivers with Wedges made out of it is own Body, and
at every Cleft Profaneness and Irreligion is entering in, while (as Prosper
speaks in his Second Book de Contemptu Vitae, cap. 4.) Men that introduce
Profaneness, are Cloaked over with the Name, Religionis imaginariae, of
Imaginary Religion. For we have lost the Substance, and dwell too much in
Opinion: And that Church, which all the Jesuits Machinations could not Ruin,
is fallen into Danger by her own.

The last Particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self. I was
Born and Baptized in the Bosom of the Church of England Established by Law; in
that profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to Die. This is
no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matters of Religion: And
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion established in England, and in that I come now to Die. What Clamours
and Slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformity in the external
Service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, all Men
know, and I have abundantly felt.

Now at last I am Accused of High Treason in Parliament, a Crime which my Soul
ever abhorred. This Treason was Charged to consist of two Parts, An Endeavor
to subvert the Laws of the Land, and a like Endeavor to overthrow the true
Protestant Religion Established by Law. Besides my Answers to the several
Charges, I protested my Innocence in both Houses. It was said, Prisoners
Protestations at the Bar, must not be taken. I can bring no Witness of my
Heart, and the Intentions thereof; therefore I must come to my Protestation,
not at the Bar; but my Protestation at this Hour and Instant of my Death; in
which I hope all Men will be such Charitable Christians, as not to think I
would Die and Dissemble, being Instantly to give God an Account for the Truth
of it. I do therefore here in the Presence of God and his Holy Angels take it
upon my Death, that I never Endeavored the subversion of Law or Religion: And
I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine for my Innocence in this, and
from all Treasons whatsoever. I have been Accused likewise as an Enemy to
Parliaments: No; I understand them, and the Benefit that comes by them too well
to be so. But I did mislike the Misgovernments of some Parliaments, many ways,
and I had good Reason for it. For Corruption Optimi est Pessima, there is no
Corruption in the World, so bad as that which is of the Best Thing within it
self; for the better the thing is in Nature, the worse it is Corrupted. And
that being the Highest Court, over which no other has Jurisdiction, when it is
misinformed or misgoverned, the Subject is left without all Remedy. But I have
done: I forgive all the World, all and every of those Bitter Enemies which have
persecuted me; and humbly desire to be forgiven of God First, and then of every
Man, whether I have offended him or not; if he do but conceive that I have.
Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him. And so I heartily desire
you to join in Prayer with me.

Which said, with a distinct and audible Voice he Prayed as follows.

O Eternal God and Merciful Father, look down upon me in Mercy, in the Riches
and fullness of all thy Mercies look down upon me: But not till thou have nailed
my Sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the Blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the Wounds of Christ, that so the
Punishment due unto my Sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to try
me to the utmost, I humbly beseech thee, give me now in this great Instant,
full Patience, proportionable Comfort, and a Heart ready to Die for thine
Honor, the King's Happiness, and the Churches Preservation. And my Zeal to
this (far from Arrogance be it spoken) is all the Sin (Humane Frailty excepted,
and all the Incidents thereunto) which is yet known to me in this Particular
for which I now come to suffer; I say in this Particular of Treason. But
otherwise my Sins are many and great: Lord Pardon them all, and those
especially (whatever they are) which have drawn down this present Judgment upon
me. And when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with me as seems best
in thine own Eyes: And carry me through Death, that I may look upon it in what
Visage soever it shall appear to me. Amen. And that there may be a stop of this
Issue of Blood in this more than miserable Kingdom, (I shall desire that I may
Pray for the People too, as well as for my self) O Lord I beseech thee give
Grace of Repentance to all Blood-Thirsty People; but if they will not Repent, O
Lord confound all their Devices, defeat and frustrate all their Designs and
Endeavors upon them, which are, or shall be contrary to the Glory of thy Great
Name, the Truth and Sincerity of Religion, the Establishment of the King and
his Posterity after him in their just Rights and Privileges, the Honor and
Conservation of Parliaments in their just Power, the Preservation of this poor
Church in her Truth, Peace and Patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted
and distressed People under their Ancient Laws, and in their Native Liberty.
And when thou have done all this in mere Mercy to them, O Lord fill their
Hearts with Thankfulness, and with Religious Dutiful Obedience to thee and thy
Commandments all their Days. Amen, Lord Jesu, Amen. And receive my Soul into
thy Bosom, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The Speech and Prayer being ended, he gave the Paper which he read into the
Hands of Stern his Chaplain, permitted to Attend him in his last Extremity:
Whom he desired to Communicate it to his other Chaplains, that they might see
in what manner he left this World; and so Prayed God to show his Blessings and
Mercies on them. And taking notice that one Hind had employed himself in
writing the Words of his Speech as it came from his Mouth, he desired him not
to do him wrong in Publishing a False or Imperfect Copy. This done, he next
applied himself to the Fatal Block, as to the Haven of his Rest. But finding
the way full of People, who had placed themselves upon the Theater to behold
the Tragedy, he desired he might have room to Die, beseeching them to let him
have an end of his Miseries which he had endured very long. All which he did
with so serene and calm a Mind, as if he rather had been taking order for a
Noble-Man's Funeral, than making way for his own. Being come near the Block, he
put off his Doublet, and used some Words to this Effect, God's Will be done; I
am willing to go out of this World, none can be more willing to send me. And
seeing through the Chinks of the Boards, that some People were got under the
Scaffold about the very Place where the Block was seated, he called to the
Officer for some Dust to stop them, or to remove the People thence, saying, It
was no part of his Desires that his Blood should fall upon the Heads of the
People. Never did Man put off Mortality with a Better Courage, nor look upon
his Bloody and Malicious Enemies with more Christian Charity. And thus far he
was on his way toward Paradise, with such a Primitive Magnanimity, as Equalled
if not Exceeded the Example of the Ancient Martyrs, when he was somewhat
interrupted by one of those who had placed himself on the Scaffold, not
otherwise worthy to be Named, but as a Firebrand brought from Ireland to
inflame this Sir John Clotworthy.
Kingdom. Who finding that the Mockings and Revilings of Malicious People, had
no power to move him, or sharpen him into any discontent or show of Passion,
would needs put in and try what he could do with his Sponge and Vinegar; and
stepping to him near the Block, he would needs propound unto him some
impertinent Questions, not so much out of a desire to learn any thing of him,
but with the same purpose as was found in the Scribes and Pharisees in
propounding Questions to our Savior; that is to say, either to entrap him in
his Answers, or otherwise, to expose him to some disadvantage with the standers
by. Two of the Questions he made Answer to, with all Christian Meekness. The
first Question was, What was the Comfortablest Saying which a Dying Man would
have in his Mouth? To which he Meekly made Answer, Cupio dissolvi and esse cum
Christo. Being asked again, What was the fittest Speech a Man could use to
express his Confidence and Assurance? He answered with the same Spirit of
Meekness, That such Assurance was to be found within, and that no words were
able to express it rightly. But this not satisfying this Busy Man, (who aimed
at something else, as is probable, than such satisfaction) unless he gave some
Word or Place of Scripture, whereupon such Assurance might be truly founded; he
used some words to this effect, That it was the Word of God concerning Christ,
and his dying for us. But then finding that there was like to be no end of the
Troublesome Gentleman, he turned away from him, applying himself directly to the
Executioner, as the Gentler and Discreeter Person. Putting some Money into his
Hand, he said unto him, without the least distemper or change of Countenance,
Here, Honest Friend, God forgive thee and I do, and do thy Office upon me with
Mercy. And having given him a Sign when the Blow should come, he kneeled down
upon his Knees, and Prayed as follows; viz.

Lord I am coming as fast as I can; I know I must pass through the shadow of
Death, before I can come to see thee; but it is but Umbra Mortis, a mere shadow
of Death, a little darkness upon Nature; but thou by thy Merits and Passion
have broke through the Jaws of Death. So Lord, Hind's Copy.
The Lord receive my Soul, and have Mercy upon me, and bless this Kingdom with
Peace and Plenty, and with Brotherly Love and Charity, that there may not be
this effusion of Christian Blood amongst them, for Jesus Christ his sake, if it
be thy will.

Then laying his Head upon the Block, and praying silently to himself, he said
aloud, Lord receive my Soul; which was the Signal given to the Executioner; who
very dexterously did his Office, and took off his Head at a blow, his Soul
ascending on the Wings of Angels into Abraham's Bosom, and leaving his Body on
the Scaffold to the care of Men. And if the Bodies of us Men be capable of any
Happiness in the Grave, he had as great a share therein as he could desire, his
Body being accompanied to the Earth with great Multitudes of People, whom Love,
or Curiosity, or remorse of Conscience, had drawn together purposely to perform
that Office, and decently Interred in the Church of Alhallow Barking, (a Church
of his own Patronage and Jurisdiction) according to the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of England. In which it may be noted as a thing remarkable, That
being whilst he Lived, the greatest Champion of the Common Prayer Book here by
Law Established, he had the Honor being Dead, to be Buried by the Form therein
prescribed, after it had been long disused, and almost reprobated in most
Churches of London.

Hitherto Dr. Heylin.

[The same day that the House of Lords passed the Ordinance of Attainder
against the Archbishop of Canterbury, (viz. Jan. 4.) they likewise passed an
Ordinance, that the Book of Common Prayer should be laid aside, and for
Establishing the Directory for Public Worship, which had been framed by the
Assembly of Divines. Rushworth, par. 3. vol. 2. page 839.]

H. W. On the Archbishop's Coffin was nailed a little Brass-Plate, with his
Arms, and this Inscription Engraven thereon.

In hac Cistuli conduntur Exuviae Gulielmi Laud Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis;
qui Securi percussus, Immortalitatem adiit Die X. Januarij, AEtatis suae LXXII.
Archiepiscopatus XII.

In the Year 1663 his Body was removed from All-Hallows Church in London, and,
being carried to Oxford, was there Solemnly deposited July 24. in a little
brick Vault, near to the Altar of the Chapel in St. John Baptist's College.

The Archbishop's Last Will and Testament.
In Dei Nomine, Amen.
I William Laud, by God's great Mercy and Goodness, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, being in perfect Health, (though at this time a Prisoner in the Tower
of London, God knows for what) in due and serious Consideration of Humane
Frailty, do hereby Make, Ordain and Declare, this my Last Will and Testament,
in Manner and Form following.

And First, in all Humility and Devotion of a contrite Heart, I (...) beg of
God Pardon and Remission of all my Sins, for and through the Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ my alone Savior. And though I have been a most
Prodigal Son; yet my hope is in Christ, that for his sake, God (my most
merciful Creator) will not cast off the Bowels of Compassion of a Father. Amen,
Lord Jesus. In this Hope and Confidence I render up my Soul with Comfort, into
the Mercies of God the Father, through the Merits of God the Son, in the Love
of God the Holy Ghost: And I humbly pray that most Blessed and Glorious
Trinity, One God, to prepare me in that Hour of Dissolution, and to make me
wait every Moment when my Changing shall come, and in my Change, to receive me
to that Rest which he has.
prepared for all them that Love and Fear his Name. So, Amen: Lord Jesu, Amen.

Whomsoever I have in the least degree Offended, I heartily ask God and him
Forgiveness. And whosoever has Offended me, I pray God forgive them, and I do.
And I hope and pray, that God will forgive me my many Great and Grievous
Transgressions against him. Amen.

For my Faith, I Die as I have Lived, in the True Orthodox Profession of the
Catholic Faith of Christ, foreshewed by the Prophets, and Preached to the
World by Christ himself, his Blessed Apostles and their Successors; and a True
Member of his Catholic Church, within the Communion of a Living part thereof,
the present Church of England, as it stands Established by Law.

Secondly, I leave my Body to the Earth, whence it was taken, in full assurance
of the Resurrection of it from the Grave at the last day. This Resurrection I
constantly believe my Dear Savior Jesus Christ will make happy unto me his
poor and weary Servant. And for my Burial, though I stand not much upon the
place, yet if it conveniently may be, I desire to be Buried in the Chapel of
St. John Baptist's College in Oxford, underneath the Altar or Communion Table
there. And should I be so unhappy as to die a Prisoner; yet my earnest desire
is, I may not be buried in the Tower. But wheresoever my Burial shall be, I
will have it private, that it may not waste any of the poor Means which I leave
behind me to better Uses.

Thirdly, For my Worldly Estate, I Will, that my Debts be presently paid, which
at this time I praise God are very small. Then for St: Paul's Church, it
grieves me to see it at such a stand. And though I have, besides my pains, given
largely toward it, and the Repairs thereof; yet I leave it a Blessing of 800
l. which will be truly paid in for that Work, if ever it go on, while the Party
trusted with it lives. But my Executors are not charged with this; it is in
safe, but other Hands.

Item, I take the boldness to give to my Dread and Dear Sovereign King Charles
(whom God bless) 1000 l. and I do forgive him the Debt, which he owes me, being
2000 l. and require, that the Tallies for it be delivered up.

Item, I give to St: John's College in Oxford, where I was bred, all my
Chappel-Plate, gilt or party-gilt: All my Chappel-Furniture, all such Books as
I have in my Study at the time of my Death, which they have not in their
Library, and 500 l. in Money, to be laid out upon Lands. And I Will, that the
Rent of it shall be equally divided to every Fellow and Scholar alike, upon the
17th: day of October,: every fourth Year. Something else I have done for them
already, according to my Ability: And God's everlasting Blessing be upon that
Place and that Society for ever -- I give to the Right Honorable George Lord
Duke of Buckingham his Grace, my Chalice and Patin of Gold; and these I desire
the young Duke to accept, and use in his Chapel, as the Memorial of him who
had a Faithful Heart to love, and the Honor to be beloved of his Father. So
God bless him with wise and good Counsels, and a Heart to follow them.

By Father and Mother, I never had Brother nor Sister; but by my Mother many.
They were all Ancient to me, and are Dead; but I give to their Children as
follows.

Legacies -- To his Brother Dr: Robinson's Children, Scil: The shorter Lines
both here and afterward, are Abbreviations of so many several parts of the
Will, made by W. S. A. C.
Henry and John, and Lucie, and Elizabeth Wife to Dr: Baily. To Dr: Cotsford,
Son of his Sister Amie. To Dr: Edward Layfield, Son of his Sister Bridget. To
Eliz: Holt, Daughter of his Sister Bennet. To William Bole, Son of his Sister
Elizabeth. To his Sister Briget's Daughter, Wife to Mr: Snow. To his Chaplains.
Rings f. each.
rich, or Watches. To the Poor of several places he had reference to, 5 l.
each. To Canterbury, Lambeth, and Croydon, 10 l. each.

To the University of Oxford, where I was Bred, and to the Town of Reading,
where I was Born, I have already -- in perpetuity, as God has made me able.

Item, I give to so many of my Servants, as did continue my Servants till the
time that the Storm fell on me, as follows.

-- Among the rest, to Mr: Cobb my Organ that is at Croydon, my Harp, my Chest
of Viols, and the Harpsichon that is at Lambeth.

The remainder of my Estate, above that which is given, or shall be added to
this my Will, I charge my Executor (as he will Answer me at the Bar of Christ)
that he lay out upon Land, as far as it will go; and then settle it by some
sure course in Law to such Uses, and under the same Conditions, as I have
settled my Land at Bray upon the Town of Reading.

Of which, 50 l. per Annum, to be settled on the Town of Ockingham, 50 l. on
Henly upon Thames, 50 l. on Wallingford, and 50 l. on Windsor, to the Uses
aforesaid for ever. If it rise to less; that there be an even abatement to all
these places. But if it purchase more, (as, says he, it needs must, if I be
well dealt with) all above 200 l. per Annum, he gives to Dr: Baily, and his Son
William after him, and his Heirs for ever. -- He held a Lease of Barton-Farm
(near Winchester) of the Cathedral Church of Winchester, taken in his Servant
Richard Cobb's Name, Rent 370 l. per Annum, of which, he gives (during the
Lease) 50 l. per Annum to the City of Winchester, for the binding out of
Apprentices; the rest to several Nephews and Servants. And if ( says he) the
Cathedral Church of Winchester be: suffered to enjoy its Lands, I leave the
power of renewing this Lease to Dr: Richard Baily, he paying Mr: Rich. Cobb 100
l. for his pains taken for me in this Purchase, etc.

Item, I give to my Successor (if the present Troubles in the State leave me
any) my Organ in the Chapel at Lambeth; Provided, that he leave it to the Sea
for ever. Likewise, I give him my Barge, and Furniture to it. As for the
Pictures in the Gallery at Lambeth, I leave them to Succession; as well those
that I found there, as those which I have added. But in case the
Archbishopric be dissolved, (as it is threatened) then I Will, that my Executor
add the Organ, the Barge, and such Pictures as are mine, to my Estate; that is,
if they escape Plundering.

Item, I give to my Servant f Rich. Cobb.
Mr: R: C: (besides what already) 50 l. if he deal truly with my Estate.

By this Will I do revoke all former Wills; and do charge my Executor (as he
will Answer me before Christ) that he perform my Will punctually in all
Particulars, which the Rapine of the Time shall not have Plundered from him, or
the Violence of the Time overruled him.

Item, I do lay upon Dr: Baily above Named, the charge of all my Papers and
Paper-Books, if they can escape the Violence of the Time. And I give him an
English Bible in 4to, covered with Murry-leather, in which are some brief Notes
upon the Liturgy; and a Note-Book in Folio, in which is my Catalogue of Books
in relation to my course of Study, and my Directory to almost all my other
Papers and Books: All which Papers and Paper-Books I give him also. But with
this Proviso, that he burn all that he thinks not fit to use himself, that my
Weakness (whatever it be) be not any Man's Scorn; and my Diligence, I am sure,
cannot.

Then he makes Dr: Baily his sole Executor, and gives him 200 l. for his pains.
But adds, -- If he shall not be Living at the time of my Death, or shall die
before he make due Probat of this my Will, then Mr: John Robinson of London,
Merchant. And if he die, then Mr: Edward Layfeild. And if he die, then Dr: Tho:
Walker, Master of University College.

And my express Will is; that whatsoever my Estate amounts unto, my Executor
shall have no more of it, than is particularly and by Name given him in this my
Will.

And I do heartily pray my Executor to take care, that my Book written against
Mr: Fisher the Jesuit, may be Translated into Latin, and sent abroad; that the
Christian World may know, see and judge of my Religion. And I give unto him
that Translates it, 100 l.

He makes the Bishops, Juxon, Curle, Wren and Duppa, Overseers of his Will, and
gives them for their pains 10 l. apiece.

Thus I forgive all the World, and heartily desire forgiveness of God and the
World: And so again commend and commit my Soul into the Hands of God the Father
who gave it, in the Merits and Mercies of my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ who
Redeemed it, and in the Peace and Comfort of the Holy Ghost who Blessed it; and
in the Truth and Unity of his Holy Catholic Church, and in the Communion of
the Church of England, as it yet stands Established by Law.

I most willingly leave the World, being weary at the very Heart of the
Vanities of it, and of my own Sins, many and great, and of the grievous
Distractions of the Church of Christ almost in all parts of Christendom: Which
Distractions God in his good time make up, who well knows upon what many of
them are grounded.

For the Money to bear the Charge of those Legacies expressed in my Will, and
other Intendments; I have, for fear of the present Storm, committed it to
honest, and (I trust in God) safe Hands. And I doubt not, but they will deliver
the Money in their several Custodies to my Executor for the Uses expressed. But
I forbear to Name them; lest the same Storm should fall on them, which has
driven me out of all I have considerable in my own Possession, etc. Jan: 13:
Anno: 1643.

Probat: 8: Jan: 1661. by Dr: Baily.

Several Passages of Archbishop Laud's Conference with Fisher the Jesuit,
(...) Londin. 1639. Fol. referred to in the preceding History.
I.
Page 211.

IN some Kingdoms there are diverse Businesses of greatest Consequence, which
cannot be finally and bindingly ordered, but in and by Parliament. And
particularly the Statute-Laws, which must bind all the Subjects, cannot be made
and ratified, but there. -- And again, as the Supreme Magistrate in the State
Civil, may not abrogate the Laws made in Parliament, though he may dispense
with the Sanction, or Penalty of the Law, quoad hic and nunc, as the Lawyers
speak.

II.
Page 171.

John Capgrave, one of your own, and Learned for those Times; and long before
him William of Malmesbury tells us, that Pope Urban the Second, at the Council
(...) cunctis liberalium Artium Disciplinis eruditum pro Magistro teneamus, and
quasi Comparem, velut alterius Orbis Apostolicum and (...) Capgr. in vit. S.
Anselmi, and Gu. (...) de Gestis Pontific. Anglor. p. 223. (...) prima Seeds
Archiepiscopi habetur, qui est totius Angliae Primas and (...). Id. Ibid. p.
195.
held at Bari in Apulia, accounted my worthy Predecessor S. Anselm, as his own
Compeer, and said, he was as the Apostolic and Patriarch of the other World.
(So he then termed this Island.) Now the Britains having a Primate of their
own, (which is greater than a Metropolitan) yea a Patriarch if you will, he
could not be appealed from, to Rome, by S. Gregory's own Doctrine.

III.
Page 278.

The Doctrine it self is so full of Danger, that it works strongly, both upon
the Learned and Unlearned, to the Scandal of Religion, and the Perverting of
Truth. For the unlearned First, how it works upon them by whole Countries
together, you may see by what happened in Asturia, Cantabria, Galaecia; no
small parts of Spain. For there the People (so he Hieron. Lamas, in Summa, p.
3. c. 3.
tells me that was an Eyewitness, and that since the Council of Trent) are so
addicted to their Worm-eaten and Deformed Images, that when the Bishops
commanded New, and Handsomer Images to be set up in their rooms, the poor
People cried for their Old, would not look up to their New, as if they did not
represent the same thing. And it works upon the Learned too, more than it
should. For it wrought so far upon Lamas himself, who bemoaned the former
passage, as that he delivers this Doctrine, That the Images of Christ, the
Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, are not to be Worshipped, as if there were any
Divinity in the Images, as they are Material things made by Art; But only as
they represent Christ and the Saints; for else it were Idolatry. So then
belike, according to the Divinity of this Casuist, a Man may Worship Images,
and ask of them, and put his Trust in them, as they represent Christ and the
Saints: For so there is Divinity in them, though not as things, yet as
Representers. And what I pray did, or could any Pagan-Priest say more than
this? For the Proposition resolved is this; The Images of Christ and the
Saints, as they represent their Exemplars, have Deity or Divinity in them. And
now I pray, A. C. do you be Judge, whether this Proposition do not teach
Idolatry? And whether the Modern Church of Rome be not grown too like to
Paganism in this Point? For my own part, I heartily wish it were not. And that
Men of Learning would not strain their Wits to spoil the Truth, and rent the
Peace of the Church of Christ, by such Dangerous, such Superstitious Vanities.
For better they are not; but they may be worse. Nay, these and their like have
given so great a Scandal among us, to some ignorant, though (I presume)
well-meaning Men, that they are afraid to Testify their Duty to God, even in
his own House, by any outward Gesture at all. Insomuch, that those very
Ceremonies, which by the Judgment of Godly and Learned Men, have now long
continued in the Practice of the Church, suffer hard Measure for the Romish
Superstitions sake.

IV.
Page 292.

And for the Calvinists, if they might be rightly understood, they also
maintain a most True and Real Presence, though they cannot permit their
Judgment to be Transubstantiated. And they are Protestants too. And this is so
known a Truth, that Bellarmin confesses it. lib. 1. de Euchar. cap. 2. s.
quinto dicit. -- For the Calvinists, at least they which follow Calvin himself,
do not only believe, that the true and real Body of Christ is received in the
Eucharist; but that it is there, and that we partake of it Vere and Realiter,
(which are Calvin's in 1 Cor. 10. 3. and in 1 Cor. (...) 24.
own Words;) And yet Bellarmin boldly affirms, that to his reading, no one
Protestant did ever affirm it. And I, for my part, cannot believe but (...) had
read Calvin, and very carefully, he does so frequently and so mainly oppose
him. Nor can that place by any Art be shifted, or by any Violence wrested from
Calvin's true meaning of the Presence of Christ in and at the Blessed Sacrament
of the Eucharist, to any Supper in Heaven whatsoever. But most manifest it is,
that quod legerim, for ought I have read, will not serve Bellarmin to excuse
him. For he himself, but in the very Chapter going before, quotes four places
out of Calvin, in which he says expressly, That we receive in the Sacrament the
Body and the Blood of Christ vere, truly. So Calvin says it four times, and
Bellarmin quotes the places; and yet he says in the very next Chapter, That
never any Protestants said so, to his Reading. And for the Church of England,
nothing is more plain, than that it believes and teaches the true and real
presence of Christ in the Eucharist.

V.
Page 376.

Secondly, if the Religion of the Protestants be in Conscience a known false
Religion, then the Romanists Religion is so too; for their Religion is the
same. Nor do the Church of Rome and the Protestants set up a different
Religion, (for the Christian Religion is the same to both) but they differ in
the same Religion; and the difference is in certain gross Corruptions, to the
very endangering of Salvation, which each side says the other is guilty of.

VI.
Page 377.

After these Reasons thus given by him, A. C. tells me, That I neither do, nor
can prove any Superstition or Error to be in the Roman Religion. What, none at
all? Now truly, I would to God from my Heart this were true, and that the
Church of Rome were so happy, and the whole Catholic Church thereby blessed
with Truth and Peace. For I am confident such Truth as that, would soon either
command Peace, or confound Peace-Breakers. But is there no Superstition in
Adoration of Images? None in Invocation of Saints? None in Adoration of the
Sacrament? Is there no Error in breaking Christ's own Institution of the
Sacrament, by giving it but in one kind? None about Purgatory? About
Common Prayer in an unknown Tongue none? These and many more, are in the Roman
Religion, (if you will needs call it so) and it is no hard work to prove every
of these to be Error, or Superstition, or both.

VII.
Page 320.

For a Church may hold the Fundamental Point Literally, and as long as it stays
there, be without control; and yet Err grossly, dangerously, nay, damnably, in
the Exposition of it. And this is the Church of Rome's Case. For most true it
is, it has in all Ages maintained the Faith unchanged in the expression of the
Articles themselves: But it has in the Exposition both of Creeds and Councils,
quite changed and lost the Sense and the Meaning of some of them. So the Faith
is in many things changed, both for Life and Belief, and yet seems the same.
Now that which deceives the World is, that because the Bark is the same, Men
think this old decayed Tree is as sound as it was at first, and not
weather-beaten in any Age. But when they can make me believe that Painting is
true Beauty, I Will believe too, that Rome is not only Sound, but Beautiful.

VIII.
Page 128.

For the Church may import in our Language, The only True Church; and perhaps,
(as some of you seem to make it) the Root and the Ground of the Catholic. And
this I never did grant of the Roman Church, nor ever mean to do. But a Church
can imply no more, than that it is a Member of the whole. And this I never did,
nor ever will deny, if it fall not absolutely away from Christ. That it is a
True Church, I granted also; but not a Right, as you impose upon me. For Ens
and Verum, Being and True, are convertible one with another; and every thing
that has a Being, is truly that Being which it is, in truth of Substance. But
this Word Right is not so used; but it is referred more properly to perfection
in Conditions: And in this Sense, every thing that has a true and real Being,
is not by and by Right in the Conditions of it. A Man that is most Dishonest,
and Unworthy the Name, a very Thief (if you will) is a True Man, in the Verity
of his Essence, as he is a Creature Endued with Reason; for this none can steal
from him, nor he from himself; but Death. But he is not therefore a Right, or
an Upright Man. And a Church that is exceeding Corrupt, both in Manners and
Doctrine, and so a Dishonor to the Name, is yet a True Church in the verity of
Essence, as a Church is a Company of Men, which profess the Faith of Christ,
and are Baptized into his Name; but yet it is not therefore a Right Church,
either in Doctrine or Manners. It may be you meant cunningly to slip in this
Word Right, that I might at unawares grant it Orthodox: But I was not so to be
caught. For I know well, that Orthodox Christians are Keepers of Integrity, (so
St. Augustine) and Integritatis Custodes, and Recta sectantes. De vera Relig. c.
5.
Followers of right Things; of which the Church of Rome at this Day is neither.
In this Sense then no Right, that is, no Orthodox Church at Rome.

IX.
Epist. Dedicat. circa med.

For, to my remembrance, I have not given him, or his, so much as Course
Language. But on the other side, God forbid too, that your Majesty should let
both Laws and Discipline sleep, for fear of the Name of Persecution, and in the
mean time, let Mr. Fisher and his Fellows, Angle in all parts of your Dominions
for your Subjects. If in your Grace and Goodness you will spare their Persons,
yet I humbly beseech you see to it, That they be not suffered to lay either
their Weels, or Bait their Hooks, or cast their Nets in every Stream, lest that
Tentation grow both too general, and too strong. I know they have many Devices
to work their Ends; but if they will needs be Fishing, let them use none but
Lawful Nets: Let Us have no dissolving of Oaths of Allegiance, no Deposing, no
Killing of Kings, no blowing up of States to settle Quod Volumus, That which
fain they would have in the Church; with many other Nets, as dangerous as
these. For if their Profession of Religion were as good as they pretend it is,
if they cannot compass it by good means, I am sure they ought not to attempt it
by bad: For if they will do evil that good may come thereof, the Apostle tells
me, Their Damnation's just, Romans 3. 8.

Now, as I would humbly beseech your Majesty to keep a serious Watch upon these
Fishermen, which pretend S. Peter; but Fish not with his Net. So, etc.

X.
A Passage out of the Conference at Hampton Court, referred to in the preceding
History.

Page 28.

Upon the first Motion, concerning falling from Grace, the Bishop of London
took occasion to signify to his Majesty, how very many in these days,
neglecting Holiness of Life, presumed too much of persisting of Grace, laying
all their Religion upon Predestination, if I shall Saved, I shall be Saved;
which he termed a desperate Doctrine, showing it to be contrary to good
Divinity, and the True Doctrine of Predestination, wherein, we should Reason
rather ascendendo, than descendendo; thus; I Live in Obedience to God, in Love
with my Neighbor, I follow my Vocation, etc. therefore I trust that God has
Elected me, and Predestined me to Salvation: Not thus, which is the usual
course of Argument; God has Predestined and chosen me to Life; therefore
though I sin never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned: For whom he once
loves, he loves to the End. Whereupon, he showed his Majesty out of the next
Article, what was the Doctrine of the Church of England, touching
Predestination, in the very last Paragraph, Scil. We must receive God's
Promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture,
and in our doings, that the Will of God is to be followed, which we have
expressly declared unto us in the Word of God. Which part of the Article his
Majesty very well approved. And after he had, after his manner, very singularly
discoursed on that place of Paul, Work out your (...). 2. 12.
Salvation with fear and trembling; he left it to be considered, whether any
thing were meet to be added, for the clearing of the Doctor his doubt, by
putting in the Word often, or the like; as thus, We may often depart from
Grace: But in the mean time wished that the Doctrine of Predestination might be
very tenderly handled, and with great discretion; lest on the one side God's
Omnipotency might be called in question, by impeaching the Doctrine of his
eternal Predestination; or on the other side a desperate Presumption might be
arreared, by inferring the necessary certainty of standing and persisting in
Grace.

XI.
A Passage out of the Archbishop's Speech in Star Chamber, at the Censure of
Pryn, Burton, and Bastwick, referred to in the Preceding History.

Page 36.

The Learned make but Three Religions to have been of old in the World,
Paganism, Judaism, and Christianity; and now they have added a Fourth, which is
Turcism, and is an absurd mixture of the other three. Now if this ground of
theirs be true (as it is generally received) perhaps it will be of dangerous
consequence, sadly to avow, that the Popish Religion is Rebellion. That some
Opinions of theirs teach Rebellion, that is apparently True; the other would be
thought on; to say no more.

XII.
A Passage out of the New Statutes of the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church
of Christ in Canterbury, drawn by the Archbishop, and prescribed to that
Church by the King, 1636.

Cap. 34. de Celebratione Divinorum.

Statuimus etiam; ut nullus Canonicorum and aliorum in Choro Ministrantium,
Divinorum Officiorum tempore, absque Insignibus Choro and Gradui
convenientibus, Chorum ingrediatur. Singuli vero, cujuscunque fuerint Gradus
aut Ordinis, in ingressu Chori Divinam Majestatem devota mente adorantes,
humiliter se inclinabunt versus Altar (prout antiquis quarundam Ecclesiarum
Statutis cautum novimus) and dein conversi, Decano quoque debitam Reverentiam
exhibebunt. Quod si contigerit aliquem ex quacunque causa de loco in locum
transire in Choro; Reverentiam similiter in medio Chori, tam versus Altar,
quam versus stallum Decani (si praesens fuerit) exhibebit, tum in eundo, tum in
redeundo, toties quoties.

XIII.
A Passage out of Archbishop Parker's Antiquitates Britannicae, concerning
Prohibitions, referred to in the preceding History.

Page 326, 327. edit. Londin.

Jamque Juris Regni periti, ut sui commodi Causa Regia for a multitudine Anno
1445.
litium and Infinitate replerent, plerasque Causas and Controversias ab
Archiepiscopali and Episcopali Audientia ad sua Judicia vocabant; and
Ecclesiasticam Jurisdictionem decimarum, Matrimoniorum and Testamentorum atque
ultimarum Voluntatum, finibus and cancellis concludere volebant; in quibus
etiam saepe ejus potestatem Prohibitionibus Regiis coercebant and impediebant.
Tum illa Provisionum Statuta and Brevia de Praemunire, si Praelati ac Judices
ecclesiastici digitum (ut aiunt) latum praescriptos a se jurisdictionis fines
transilirent, multis minis vibrabant. Ea Poena Praelatis valde terribilis fuit.
Nam si a laicis Judicibus rei pronuntiarentur, and bonis omnibus mulctandi and
aeternis carcerum tenebris involvendi erant. Hujus Poenae atrocitate Episcopi
and Praelati jurisdictione praediti ita perplexi and perturbati sunt; ut quia
Leguleiorum minantia Tela vix vitare poterant, Anno. 1446.
consilium sine Mora ineundem putarunt, and Londini in Synodo convenerunt. In
ea supplicationem totius Anglicani Cleri Nomine conceptam Regi tradiderunt; in
qua de laicis judicibus oppido semperque clericis infestis graviter conquesti
sunt. Nullam esse Causam dixerunt, cur pro Regis Regnique incolumitate ac
Salute major Fides consuetudinum quam Legum peritis sibique Ecclesiasticae
Jurisdictionis Praelatis haberetur. Se enim jure certo haerere ac insistere;
illos arbitrio vagari, ac jura pro causis quotidianis quotidiana suo aeri
insculpere, eademque in causis eisdem figere, tollere ac refigere. Tum quod in
aliis Statutis Parliamenti Authoritate edantur (quo quidem jure nescitur)
interpretationem sibi peculiariter arrogare and leges condentium intentiones
atque mentes (quae sola lex omnibus humanis legibus imperitat) incertis motivis
and decretis impudenter and imperite, quocunque vellent, deducere. Non esse
autem aliam Regi causam, cur Praelatorum fides sibi in dubium veniret, quam
quod prioribus seculis Clerus a Rege defecit, and Romano Pontifici adhaesit.
Nunc autem eadem ista lata jura, quae Praelatis ipsis in Parliamento contra
Romanum Pontificem deprecantibus pro jure Regio sancita sunt, in Praelatos
Regni iniqua Juridicorum and Leguleiorum calumnia censuraque torqueri. Id quod
ex uno inani verbo, ab aliquo litigioso calumniatore perperam interpretato,
perspici facile possit. Nam Lex his disertis verbis sancita est. That Anno, 16.
Rich. 2. cap. 5.
if any purchase or pursue, or do to be purchased or pursued, in the Court of
Rome, or elsewhere; any such Translations, Processes, and Sentences of
Excommunications, Bulls, Instruments, or any other things, which touch the
King, against him, his Regality, or his Realm, etc. Si quis impetret aut
persequatur, seu impetrari vel persequi procuret, in Curia Romana, seu alibi,
aliquas ejusmodi Translationes, Processus and Sententias excommunicationum,
Bullas, Instrumenta, vel aliam rem quamcunque, quae Regem tangat, contra eum,
ejus regalem dignitatem vel regnum. Ex his verbis Causidici, qui Praelatos
Sanctionum periculis involvere vellent, cavillantur hac tam gravi poena
ecclesiasticos Judices teneri, si quantulumcunque in jurisdictionem (...), aut
quovismodo titubaverint. Quo terrore proposito, perdifficilis and periculosa
erit ecclesiasticae jurisdictionis tam arctis coercitae sinibus tractatio. Quod
eo est (...), quia Statutum illud in Praelatorum gratiam latum est. Cum enim
indignissimi antea quique ad Papam promiscue confugissent, ab eoque nummis
intervenientibus opulentissima beneficia and maximas dignitates Ecclesiasticas
impetrassent; nec Praelati ea ambitione and cupiditate Romana impediti
Ecclesias, quarum essent Patron, libere confer poterant, proscriptione
sancitum est: Ne Regis deinceps subditi (...) provisiones a Papa peterent; aut
citationes, processus, excommunicationes, vel ecclesiasticas censuras a Papa
Romae, seu alibi, ratione hujusmodi Provisionum decretas, interpositas, aut
fulminatas, in Anglia vel alibi, contra Regem aut Regis subditos exequeretur,
denunciaret, aut promulgaret. Quod verbum alibi calumniosi Legulei malitiosa
interpretatione convertunt in Praelatos; ejusque sensum esse call de fingunt,
si de causa civili non modo Romae, sed in ecclesiasticis foris and consisto
ijs, quae Curias Christianitatis appellant, etiam in regno, lis forte
interveniat. At long alium fuisse illorum sensum, quorum consensu conditum tum
Statutum fuit, certum est, qui illud verbum in curia Romana vel alibi,
interposuerunt. Quia Papa ipse saepe ab urbe Romana Lugduni, Pisis, Avinione,
aliisque locis, Roma long lateque disjunctis, abfuit, in quibus illa (...)
jura non minus quam Romae usurpavit. Tum (...) Papae eadem ipso Papae Nomine
frequenter facere; quibus perinde illa saluberrima sanctione occurrendum fuit,
quam his quae Romae siunt. Itaque contra omnem juris and aequitatis rationem
esse; ut quae salubriter in Praelatorum utilitatem constituta sunt,
iniquissimis interpretantium cavillis in eorum perniciem torqueantur. Praeterea
quis existimare queat, tam insanos tum fuisse Episcopos; ut tam duris and
saevis, si modo ita accipiantur, in se Legibus vellent consentire? Nam si
causas forte civiles in suis foris tractent, pedemque in Regis jurisdictionem
intulerint; an eadem poena afficiendi censerentur, qua Papae provisores? Etenim
omni aequo and rationabili jure (...) convenit esse delicto parem. Itaque si
jurisdictionis sibi (...) sines exeant; non ipso jure tam graves poenas
incurrant; sed Prohibitionibus coerceantur, quas si contempserint, vindicentur
de contemptu. Legum enim poenas verborum ambiguitate ad casus non expressos
nullo jure referendas; sed si verbum ullum in condenda lege ambiguum
interveniat, etiam si de condentium mente non appareat, tamen id in benigniorem
significationem interpretatione deducendum. Ad extremum addiderunt, inique
secum agi, quod laicorum Judicum, qui ut ecclesiastica jurisd ctio pen tus
(...), and contemptui vulgo siat, quidlibet statuere vellent, tanquam
inimicorum censuras and judicia patiantur. Summa petitionis hujus fuit; ut
Parliamenti interpretatione illa vox alibi, quae tam perplexam difficultatem
induxit, declaretur; tum ut Ecclesiastici Judices, nisi Prohibitiones regias
spreverint (...) tam atroci contra Provisores poena non teneantur: Postremo, ut
hi, qui de jurisdictionis finibus totis viribus contra Praelatos tam hostiliter
semper dimicare solent, a concedendis Prohibitionibus, and cognoscendis
hujusmodi causis exercendisque in Ecclesiasticos Judices judiciis supersedeant:
Alijque statuantur, qui cum de jurisdictionis utriusque finibus agatur, aut
illae causae in controversiam venirent, sine omni suspicione and interpretari
controversa jura aequius, and sine invidia judicare, rectius velint. In hac
autem re Polidorus Virgilius falsus est. Quod Martinum Papam, qui diu Lib. XIX.
An. 1374.
ante obijt, cum Henrico Sexto Rege de rescindendis illis juribus and
actionibus egisse, and illa statuta, quae contra Papae Provisiones lata sunt, a
poenis provisis and praemonitis nuncupata esse scribat. Sed ut omisso (...)
peregrino and a nostrae historiae sensu veritateque aliena, ad hanc Praesulum
atque Praelatorum supplicationem revertamur: Si tum, cum Papa authoritatem
regiam in omni jurisdictione exerceret, cumque vis ejus etiam Regibus esset
formidabilis, tamen contra tam immanem and violentam juris regni peritorum
interpretationem deprecari Praelati coacti sunt; quid nunc facient, cum
Ecclesiasticae jurisdictionis gubernaculis Principi delatis, and Papali
usurpatione exclusa, nec illa Causidicorum turba neque quisquam (...) hominum
ordo majore fide, religione, doctrina, prudentia and facundia Papalem
oppugnent, and Principis jurisdictionem tueantur, quam Praelati: Vt graviori
supplicio digni sint hi, qui Ecclesiastica judicia jam contra Papam, eaque
Principis nomine exercitata, obsoletis illorum Statuorum calumnijs nunc
impediant, and Praelatos a munere suo pie recteque gerendo deterreant; quam qui
priscis illis temporibus Papales Provisiones Romae vel alibi impetrarent. Quod
si tam iniqui calumniatores duriores esse volunt, and vetera ob alias causas
lata jura non ad Principis aut Reipublicae; sed ad suam utilitatem atque
quaestum, and ad integerrimi religiosissimique Praelatorum ordinis perniciem
refricare volunt; saltem ipsi simili Lege lata patiantur legem talionis:
eademque poena plectantur; si in Ecclesiasticae jurisdictionis limits
incurrant, qua Praelatos, si suas causas vel minimo digito attigerint, affici
volunt.

XIV.
A Passage out of Archbishop Parker's Antiquitates Britannicae, concerning
Ceremonies used in Consecration of Churches, referred to in the Preceding
History.

Page 85.

Etsi enim assentior recte ac secundum Deum egisse Pontifices [Romanos] quod
hujusmodi nugis ac praestigijs, quae multis ante eos saeculis in summo usu and
existimatione a veteribus culta and observata fuerunt, fidem omnem ac
authoritatem detraxerint; in hoc tamen desidero illorum (...) Pietatem, sive
Prudentiam, quod quae in eo genere corrigere volebant, in alio deteriora
effecerunt; ut immutata magis and ad novas superstitiones traducta, quam
penitus deleta and extincta cernantur. Legate enim qui volet recentiores, and
nostro praesertim aevo editos, Pontificales ac Missales Libros; reperiet eos
and Ceremoniarum multitudine and peragendi difficultate atque taedio, and
exorcisationis amentia, priores illos long superare. Quibus enim, non dicam
verbis, sed portentes, haec and hujusmodi a Pontificijs adhuc adjurantur?
Primarius Lapis, and Caementum pro Ecclesia aedificanda, Sal and Aqua, Panis
Benedictus, Dedicatio recentis Ecclesiae, Altaria, Vasa, Indumenta, Linteamina,
and Ornamenta Ecclesiastica, Altar Portatile, Calix cum Patena, Crux Nova,
Sanctorum Imagines, Campane atque Signa, Cineres, Incensus, tum in Militum (ut
vocant) Regularium erectione, Arma, Enses and Vexilla Beilica. Haec omnia, quam
solenni ritu, Sanctarum Scripturarum Sententijs ad suas Decantationes perperam
adhibitis, Pontificij peragunt, paucis videamus, etc. -- Sed quid hujus generis
infinita exempla persequar? Cui enim dubium est, hujusmodi Exorcismis Papales
Ritus and Ceremonias abundare; qui ab his, quos in ordinatione Ordalii
vulgarisque purgationis antiquitus secuta est, quam sero damnabant, aut nihil
differunt, aut pluribus magisque stupendis praestigijs referti sunt. At Sanctus
Augustinus, qui suo tempore de Caeremoniarum multitudine quaestus est, si jam
viveret, quid de hoc immenso numero, and prolixo earum celebrandarum modo,
existimare poterat?

XV.
A Passage out of a Pamphlet, entitled Antidotum Culmerianum. Printed at
Oxford, 1644. (...). referred to in the preceding History.

Page 11.

Who but he (Richard Culmer, then demolishing the painted Glass and other
Ornaments of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury) made the place his Refectory,
his Dining Room, the place of his Repast at that time? Being so sedulous, hot
and intent upon the Work, that to lose no time in following it, he took his
Bottle and Bag with him to victual himself upon the place. If all this amount
not to Impudence, as perhaps with too many Judges in these Days it will not; I
shall tell you now of Impudence with a Witness: And I term it so, because I
have it from an Eyewitness of good Credit, that, not without just Scandal, saw
the deed done, and will be ready, if lawfully required, to attest and justify
the Report with his Corporal Oath. What do you think then of Pissing in the
open Church, and at Noonday, in Public view? -- This is he that did the deed
in the Body of that Cathedral, etc.

XVI.
A Passage out of the same Pamphlet, referred to in the preceding History,
being part of Richard Culmer's Information against Mr. E. B. a Gentleman of
Quality of Goodneston in Kent, his Parishioner, Exhibited at the Council Table.

Page 35.

And I heard the said Mr. B. say, having read over the Book of
Sabbath-Recreations, and delivering it to me before Evensong in the Church, I
asked him, if he had read it; he replied, yes; it will make a good Privy Seal.
And my Wife and I heard him in our own House say of the said Book, that it was,
as if a Schoolmaster should say; it is a good Boy, ply thy Book, and thou
shall go to play in the Afternoon. And I and my Servant heard him say, that it
was unfit such Books should be sent for Ministers to read in the Church. Yet,
after he had a Project to get my Benefice, he to collogue for it, said in my
Hearing that it was a good Book; and if it were read, the Sabbath would be
better kept than ever it was. Dated July 31. 1635.

Per me Rich. Culmer.

XVII.
A third Passage out of the same Pamphlet, referred to in the preceding
History, being the Order of Council Table, made against Richard Culmer, after
he had Exhibited the said Information.

Page 19.

At White Hall, October. 9. 1635.

Present.

Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace.

Lord Keeper

Lord Privy Seal

Earl Marshal.

Lord Cottington.

Mr. Secretary Windebank.

Whereas upon an Information given by R. C. Clerk, against E. B. of B. in the
County of Kent, Gent. the said E. B. was sent for by Warrant, and bound to
Appear and Answer the same before their Lordships, Friday the 9th of this
present; this day, both the said Parties having been called and heard before
the Board: Their Lordships finding the said Information and Complaint against
Mr. B. to have been Causeless and Unjust, did think fit and order, that he
should be forthwith discharged from any further Attendance concerning the same,
and that the Bonds by him entered into for his Appearance, should be delivered
up unto him. Lastly, that the said R. C. should, for such his Misinformation
and Abuse, stand committed Prisoner to the Fleet.

XVIII.
A Passage out of a Sermon, Preached by Dr. Heylin at Oxford, 1630. against the
Feoffment for buying in Impropriations, referred to in the preceding History.

Life of Archbishop Laud, page 199.

Planting also many Pensionary Lecturers in so many places where it need not;
and upon days of common Labor, will at the best bringing forth of Fruit,
appear to be a Tare indeed, though now no Wheat be counted Tares, etc. We
proceed a little on further in the proposal of some things to be considered.
The Corporation of Feoffees for buying in of Impropriations to the Church; does
it not seem in the appearance to be an excellent piece of Wheat? A Noble and
Gracious point of Piety? Is not this Templum Domini, Templum Domini? But,
blessed God, that Men should thus draw near unto thee with their Mouths, and
yet be far from thee in their Hearts! For what are those entrusted in the
managing of this great Business? Are they not the most of them the most Active,
and the best Affected Men in the whole Cause, and Magna Partium Momenta, chief
Patrons of the Faction? And what are those whom they prefer? Are they not most
of them such as must be serviceable to their dangerous Innovations? And will
they not in time have more Preferments to bestow, and therefore more
Dependencies, than all the Prelates in the Kingdom, etc. yet all this while we
sleep and slumber, and fold our Hands in Sloth; and see perhaps, but dare not
note it.

XIX.
A Passage out of the Statute of the 27th of Elizabeth, against Jesuits and
Seminary Priests, referred to in the preceding History.

27 Eliz. cap. 2. sect. 3.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; that it shall not be
Lawful to or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or
Religious Ecclesiastical Person whatsoever, being born within this Realm, or
any other Her Highness Dominions, and heretofore since the said Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist, in the First Year of Her Majesty's Reign, made,
ordained, or professed, or hereafter to be made, ordained, or professed, by any
Authority or Jurisdiction, derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of
Rome, by or of what Name, Title, or Degree so-ever, the same shall be called or
known, to come into, be, or remain in any part of this Realm, or any other Her
Highness Dominions, after the end of the same forty days, other than in such
special Cases, and upon such special Occasions only, and for such time only, as
is expressed in this Act; and if he do, then every such Offense shall be taken
and adjudged to be High Treason; and every Person so offending, shall for his
Offense be adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer, lose and forfeit, as in Case
of High Treason. And every Person, which after the end of the same forty days,
and after such time of departure, as is before limited and appointed, shall
wittingly, and willingly receive, relieve, comfort, aid, or maintain, any such
Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other Priest, Deacon, or Religious or
Ecclesiastical Person, as is aforesaid, being at Liberty, or out of hold,
knowing him to be a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or
Religious or Ecclesiastical Person, as is aforesaid, shall also for such
Offense be adjudged a Felon, without Benefit of Clergy, and suffer Death, lose
and forfeit, as in Case of one Attainted of Felony.

XX.
A Passage out of Sir Edward Coke's Institutes, being his Judgment upon the
said Statute, referred to in the preceding History.

Lib. 3. cap. 37.

The Cause of making this Statute of 27 Eliz. against Jesuits and Seminary
Priests and their Receivers, you may read at large lib. 5. fol. 38, 39. in the
Case De Jure Regis Ecclesiastico. [ Sir Edward Coke's Words in the place
referred to by himself, are here subjoined.]

And albeit many of Her Subjects, after the said Bull of Pius Quintus, adhering
to the Pope, did renounce their former Obedience to the Queen, in respect of
that Bull; yet all this time no Law was either made or attempted against them
for their Recusancy, etc. -- Then Jesuits and Romish Priests were sent over;
who in secret Corners whispered and infused into the Hearts of many of the
Unlearned Subjects of this Realm, that the Pope had Power to Excommunicate and
Depose Kings and Princes; that he had Excommunicated the late Queen, Deprived
Her of Her Kingdom, and discharged all Her Subjects of their Oaths, Duties, and
Allegiance to Her -- And thereupon Campian, Sherwin, and many other Romish
Priests were Apprehended, etc. -- But all this time there was no Act of
Parliament made, either against Recusants, or Jesuits, or Priests, etc. -- But
after these Jesuits and Romish Priests coming daily into, and swarming within
this Realm, instilling still this Poison into the Subjects Hearts, that by
Reason of the said Bull of Pius Quintus, Her Majesty was Excommunicated,
Deprived of Her Kingdom, etc. In the 27th Year of her Reign, by Authority of
Parliament, Her Statutum de An. 27 Eliz.
Majesty made it Treason, for any Jesuit or Romish Priest, being Her Natural
Born Subject, and made a Romish Priest or Jesuit since the beginning of Her
Reign, to come into any of her Dominions: Intending thereby to keep them out of
the same, to the end, that they should not infect any other Subjects, with such
Treasonable and Damnable Persuasions and Practices, as are aforesaid: Which
without Controversy were High Treason, by the Ancient and Common Laws of
England. Neither would ever Magnanimous King of England, sithence the first
Establishment of this Monarchy, have suffered any (especially being his own
Natural Born Subjects) to live, that persuaded his Subjects, that he was no
Lawful King, and practiced with them to withdraw them from their Allegiance,
etc.

XXI.
A Passage out of Bishop Montague's Origines (...), referred to in the
preceding History.

Tom. 1. par. 2. page 464.

Sancte credimus, accurate tuemur and defendimus, hoc ipsum Officium and munus
in Ecclesia, sive Apostolicum, seu (...), adeo esse de necessitate salutis
ordinaria; ut sine altero alterum esse nequeat. Non est Sacerdotium, nisi in
Ecclesia; non est Ecclesia sine Sacerdotio. Illud autem intelligo, per (...)
Episcopalem Ordinariam. Neque enim admittendam censemus extraordinariam aliquam
seu Vocationem seu (...), nisi miraculosam. Oportet omnino miraculis agant, and
suam confirment functionem signo aliquo; qui non ab Episcopis, derivata ab
Apostolis per Successionem Institutione, in Ecclesiam inducuntur; sed vel orti
a sese, vel nescio unde intrusi, sese ingerunt. Nam quod praetendunt,
ordinariam Vocationem retinendam, adhibendam, eique adhaerescendum, nisi in
casu (...), absurdum est; and suppositioni innititur impossibilitatis. Neque
enim talis casus aut extit it aliquando, aut contingere potest; nisi fallat nos
Dominus, qui promisit: Portae Inferorum non praevalebunt, etc.

THE ANSWER OF THE Most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, TO THE SPEECH OF THE Lord Say and Seal, touching the Liturgy.
The Speech begins thus,

MY Lords, I have waited to find you free from greater Businesses; that I might
crave leave to speak of something that concerns my self. And this I have the
more desired, since my Lord of Canterbury's last Speech; who expressing his
Troubles, and (...) the Misery of his Condition, and of the Condition of the
Church of England, (for he would needs join them together, which I think he
may, as the Cause and the Effect, for the Miseries of the Church have certainly
risen from him) he insisted much upon this: That these Troubles had befallen
him through the Malice of two Parties, the Papists and the Sectaries, and by
those he said the Church was greatly afflicted.

MY Lords, and all Christian Readers, those great Businesses which my Lord
speaks of, are now ended; and I hope as you are free from Business, so you will
be free from Prejudice, while I also crave leave to speak something concerning
my self. And this I also have the more desired, since I saw this Honorable
Lord had put his Speech in Print, which I find as much, if not more against me,
than for himself. This Speech was not put in Print, till near six Months after
it was Spoken; and I conceive was Printed then to renew the Business, and to
whet the Malice of those Sectaries against me. It Is true, that after I was
Impeached by the House of Commons for High Treason, there came no Articles up
against me, in full Ten Weeks after; then they came up in Generals only; and I
was called to the House to hear them, on Friday February the 26th (...). Now by
these Articles I found, that there was great, but (I humbly praise God for it)
causeless Jealousy of me in point of Religion. This made me labor more to
clear my self from that, than from any thing else objected against me, as ever
hating to seem other in Religion than what I truly and really am. For of all
Simulations or Dissimulations, that is the basest, when a Man for poor
Temporary fading ends, shall shift his Religion or his Judgment concerning it,
with the Time, if not with the Tide: As if at all times he had somewhat to seek
before he would express: Whereas it is most true, which St. Hilary speaks in
Matter of Religion, Non opus est intervallo aliquo inter Cor and Os; There Is no
need of a St. Hilary l. 10. de Trin. p. 165.
distance between the Heart and the Mouth; as if a Man were to bethink himself
of some faithless ambiguity, before he would speak that which belonged to the
Profession of his Faith.

Now, if seeing my self under so great a pressure, and the Church of England so
hard laid at, as then it was, I did bewail the Condition of both, I think I
did what became me. And I hope I offended no Man in joining our Conditions
together. And whereas this Honorable Lord thinks, that I might well join them,
as the Cause and the Effect: I think so too my self, but in another Sense.

For his Lordship says too peremptorily, that the Miseries of the Church have
certainly risen from me. No certainly: The Miseries of this Church have
proceeded from the Separatists, and from such as for private at least, if not
for worse ends, have countenanced them and their strange Proceedings against
the Government and Governors of the Church. And this so long, till they
brought the Church's Condition (which flourished before) to be the Cause of my
Condition, such as it now is. And I fell into this Condition, by laboring by
all good Means to uphold the Church of England from that Misery, into which I
fear it is now falling.

And I doubt not, but God will open the Eyes of all Good Men, to see clearly in
time, that this was the Cause which laid both me and this Church so low; and
not any Actions, much less Practices of mine. This being so, if I insisted much
upon this, that these Troubles have befallen me through the Malice of two
Parties, the Papists and the Sectaries (as this Honorable Lord says I did) I
had great Reason so to do. For certainly, the Church of England is greatly
afflicted by them; and I pray God, in the end it be not torn in pieces between
them. That which I then said in my sudden Speech to the Lords to this
Particular, was as follows: I am very Unfortunate in this Business, between the
Malignity of two Parties against me, the Papist and the Separatist. And shall I
suffer on both sides at once? Shall I be accounted a deadly Enemy to the
Papist, as I am reputed by them both at Home and Abroad; and in the mean time,
accused for no less than Treason, for favoring and complying with them? Well:
If I do suffer; it is but because Truth usually lies between two sides, and is
beaten on both sides (as the poor Church of England is at this day by these
Factions:) But in this and all things else, and in despite of Malice, Truth
shall either be my Protection from Suffering, or my Comfort while I suffer; and
by God's gracious Assistance, I shall never depart from it, but continue at the
Apostle's Ward; Nihil possum contra Cor. 13. 8.
veritatem: I can do nothing against the Truth; and for it, I hope God will
enable me patiently to suffer any thing.



This, or to this effect, I then spoke, and I hope, without any Offense; sure I
am, without reflecting upon any particular Person. Yet my Lord seems to think
otherwise: For he says,

How far this Man will extend this Word Sectary, and whom he will comprehend
under it, I know not; but I have some cause to fear, that I may lie under some
Misapprehension in respect of Matters of this nature; which how far it concerns
him, your Lordships will perceive by what I shall say.

My Lord it seems, knows not how far I will extend the Word Sectary: Truly, no
farther than the Church of Christ extended it, ever since Sects and Schisms
broke in upon it, to help dispoil it of Peace and Unity. And a Sectary is
he..... The Definition or Description of a Sectary is wanting in the Original.
H. W.


The next thing which my Lord knows not, is, Whom I will comprehend under that
Name; and that his Lordship may easily know. For I comprehend none under it,
but such as divide from the Church, and either make or follow a Breach, where
no just cause is given by the Church; or where though cause were given, Ways of
Division are preferred before Ways of Peace. But that which troubles my Lord
about these things, which he professes he knows not, is, That he has some
cause to fear (for so he confesses) that he may lie under some Misapprehensions
in respect of Matters of this nature. And this I think may trouble him indeed:
For there is cause enough, why he should fear, that he may lie under, not
Misapprehensions, but very just Apprehensions, in respect of Matters of this
nature; since it is manifest, that he separates himself, as Sectaries use to do,
from the Common Prayers of the Church: And those such, as were composed by such
Bishops and other Divines, as suffered, some of them to Martyrdom, for the
Truth of CHRIST: And those such also, as were a second time, under the
prosperous Reign of Queen Elizabeth, confirmed by Act of Parliament. So that
his Lordship separating himself from those Prayers, which were made by the One,
and confirmed by the Other, must needs be apprehended as a Sectary; whether you
look upon Church or State. But my Lord tells you, That you will perceive by
that which he shall say, how far this concerns me. And therefore I pray you
observe it diligently; for I cannot yet conceive how any thing else that
belongs to a Sectary, can concern me; or any thing else, much, which his
Lordship can say against me.

My Lord of Canterbury! A Man of mean Birth, Bred up in a College (and that too
frequently falls out to be in a Faction) whose narrow Comprehension extended it
self no farther, than to carry on a Side in a College, or canvas for a
Proctor's Place in the University.

This concerns me indeed, and very nearly; for I see his Lordship resolves to
rake me up from my very Birth; a way unusual for Men well-bred, and little
beseeming a Person of Honor; especially thus to insult upon a Fallen Fortune.
But yet it concerns me not in any relation to a Sectary, unless his Lordship
would possess the World that I was bred in Faction, and so like enough to prove
one. But how my Lord is mistaken in this, will plainly appear. First then, it is
true, I am a Man of ordinary, but very honest Birth; and the Memory of my
Parents savours very well to this day, in the Town in Reading, where I was
born. Nor was I so meanly born, as perhaps my Lord would insinuate; for my
Father had born all Offices in the Town, save the Mayoralty. And my immediate
Predecessor (whom I am sure my Lord himself accounted very worthy of his Place)
was as meanly born as my self, his Father being of the same Trade in Guilford,
that mine was of in Reading. But all this of my Birth might well have been
spared; for my Lord knows well enough, ^
-- Miserum est aliorum incumbere famae;
Ne collapsa ruant subductis tecta columnis.


And that which follows in the Satyrist. And had my Birth been meaner than it
was, that would not have impaired me among Men of Understanding. And howsoever,
this Advantage I have; I have done Honor to my Birth; which every Man has not
done, that has had an Honorable Descent. To my Birth his Lordship adds, That
I was bred up in a College. That Is true. But it is as true, that his Lordship
was bred up in a College also, and of the same University. And therefore so far
he speaks as much against Himself, as me. But I hope, he intends not to charge
being bred in a College as a Fault upon either of us. And though it too
frequently falls out, that Colleges be in a Faction (for that also is too truly
observed by his Lordship) yet that is no Fault in any Man, who neither Causes
nor Nourishes the Faction. But that which his Lordship charges next upon me, is
both a Weakness, and a Fault, if true. Weakness, That my Comprehensions are
narrow. And a Fault, because they extended no farther than to carry on a Side
in the College, or a canvas for a Proctor's Place in the University.

For the Weakness first: My Comprehensions, as narrow as they are, are yet as
large as God has been pleased to make them, and as large as my hard Study,
accompanied with his Grace, has been able to stretch them. And so large I am
sure they are; as that I have ever looked carefully upon the whole Catholic
Church of Christ, spread upon the Face of the whole Earth.

And therefore certainly my Comprehensions are not so narrow as theirs, whose
largest cannot, or will not, look upon one entire National Church; nay, a
Parochial is too big for them, and a Conventicle big enough. Nor did my narrow
Comprehensions ever reject that great Body, the Catholic Church, out of the
Creed, as some of late have done, whose Comprehensions are not, for all that,
censured by his Lordship for their Narrowness.

Next for the Fault: That Is twofold. First, My Comprehensions went no farther
(says my Lord) than to carry on a Side in a College. Here my Lord is either
utterly mistaken, or, which is worse, in a wilful Error. For while I was
Fellow of St. John Baptist's College, where I was bred, it is well known I
never made nor held up any Side. Indeed, when I was Chosen President of that
College, there was a bitter Faction both Raised and Countenanced against me (I
will forbear to relate how and by whom;) But this is certain, I made no Party
then: For Four being in Nomination for that Headship, I lay then so sick at
London, that I was neither able to go down, nor so much as write to my Friends
about it. yet after much Tumble, a major part of the Votes made choice of me.
Thus I was chosen President, May 10. 1611. After this, my Election was
quarrelled at, and great means made against me; insomuch that the most Gracious
King, King James, sat to hear the Cause Himself, for the space of full three
Hours, Aug. 28. at Tichburn in Hampshire, as he returned out of the Western
Progress. Upon this Hearing, his Majesty approved my Election, and commanded my
Settlement; which was done accordingly at Michaelmas following. But the Faction
in the College finding such Props above, as they had, continued very eager and
bitter against me. The Audit of the College for the Year's Accounts, and Choice
of New Officers, followed in November: There so God Blessed me with Patience
and Moderation in the Choice of all Offices, that I made all quiet in the
College. And for all the Narrowness of my Comprehensions, I Governed that
College in Peace, without so much as the show of a Faction, all my Time, which
was near upon Eleven Years. And the Truth of all this is notoriously known, and
many yet living of great Worth in the Church, able and ready to avow it. And
this, I hope, was not to lead on a Side.

Secondly, My Lord charges my narrow Comprehensions, as reaching no farther
than a canvas for a Proctor's Place. I was (with Thanks to their Love that
thought me Worthy) chose Proctor of the University, so soon as by Statute I was
capable of it. But I never meddled in the managing of the canvas for it for my
self: Nor afterward for any other, while I continued Fellow of the College.
When I was chosen President, I continued so for two Years, and meddled not in
that Business. And this I did, because in some things I did utterly dislike
that Canvas, and the Carriage of it. At last some of the Senior Fellows came to
me, and told me, That the College had been many Years without the Credit of a
Proctor; and, that the Fellows began to take it ill at my hands, that I would
not show my self, and try my Credit and my Friends in that Business. Upon this,
rather than I would lose the Love of my Companions, I did settle my self in an
honest and fair way, to right the College as much as I could. And by God's
Blessing, it succeeded beyond Expectation. But when we were at the strongest, I
made this fair Offer more than once and again, That if the greater Colleges
would submit to take their Turns in Order, and not seek to carry all from the
lesser, we would agree to any indifferent course in Convocation, and allow the
greater Colleges their full proportion according to their Number. This would
not be hearkened unto; whereupon things continued some Years.

After this, by his Majesty's Grace and Favor, I was made Bishop of St.
David's; and after that, of Bath and Wells. When I was thus gone out of the
University, the Election of the Proctors grew more and more Tumultuous, till at
the last the Peace of the University was like to be utterly broken; and the
divided Parties brought up a Complaint to the Council Table. The Lords were
much troubled at it, especially the Right Honorable William Earl of Pembroke,
Lord Steward, and their Honorable Chancellor. I had by that time, and by the
great Grace of his Now Majesty, the Honor to be a Councellor, and was present.
There I acquainted the Lords, what Offers I had made during my time in the
University, which I did conceive would settle all Differences, and make Peace
for ever. The Lords approved the way; and after the Council was risen, my very
Honorable Lord the Earl of Pembroke, desired me to put the whole Business in
Writing, that he might see and consider of it. I did so: His Lordship approved
of it, and sent it to the University, with all Freedom to accept or refuse, as
they saw Cause. The University approved all, only desired the addition of a
Year or two more to the Circle; which would add a turn or two more, to content
some of the greater Colleges. This that Honorable Lord yielded unto; and that
Form of Election of their Proctors, was by unanimous Consent, made a Statute in
Convocation, and has continued the University in Peace ever since. And this is
all the carrying on of a Canvas for a Proctor's place, which any Truth can
challenge me withal. And it may be, my Lord is pleased to impute narrow
Comprehensions to me, because my Advice enclosed the choice of the Proctors
within a Circle. I am heartily sorry, I should trouble the Reader with these
Passages concerning my self; but my Lord forces me to it, by imputing so much
Unworthiness to me. But my Lord leaves not here, but goes on, and says worse of
me: Being suddenly advanced to highest Places of Government in Church and
State, had not his Heart enlarged by the Enlargement of his Fortune; but still
the maintaining of his Party was that which filled all his Thoughts; which he
prosecuted with so much Violence and Inconsiderateness, that he had not an Eye
to see the Consequences thereof to the Church and State, until he had brought
both into those Distractions, Danger and Dishonor, which we (...) find our
selves (...) withal.



The next thing which my Lord charges me with, is, That I was suddenly advanced
to highest Places of Government in Church and State. This is like the rest. And
I dare say, when my Lord shall better consider of it, he will neither re-affirm
nor avouch such an Untruth. Suddenly advanced! What does my Lord call Suddenly?
I was Eleven Years his Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary, before I was made a
Bishop. I was a Bishop Twelve Years before I was preferred to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, that Highest Place my Lord mentions. When I was made Archbishop, I
was full Threescore Years of Age, within less than one Month. Whereas my
immediate Predecessor was not any one Month in his Majesty's Ordinary Service
as Chaplain, but far from that Honorable indeed, but yet Painful and
Chargeable Service, and was made Bishop of Lichfield, of London, and of
Canterbury, within the compass of two Years, he being at the time of his
Translation to Canterbury, but Forty nine Years of Age; and yet never Charged
as a Man suddenly advanced. But my Advancement, which it seems pleased not my
Lord so well as his did, was very sudden; which I leave to the impartial Reader
to judge.

Next being advanced to this High Place, as my Lord calls it; (but now made low
enough by his Lordship, and other of the same Feather;) he says, I had not my
Heart enlarged with the Enlargement of my Fortune. Sure my Lord is mistaken
again. For my Heart (I humbly thank God for it) was enlarged every way as much
as my Fortune, and in some things perhaps more. But it may be my Lord meant,
that my Heart was not sufficiently enlarged, because I could not receive those
Separatists into it (farther than to pray for them) which would not suffer the
open Bosom of the Church of England to receive them; but neglecting their
Father's Commandment, forsook also their Mother's Prove. 1. 8. and c. 6. 20.
Instruction.

Nor did I maintain any Party; but any Churchman, or any Man else that loved
Order and Peace in the Church, was very welcome to me. And I leave the World to
judge, by what they now see, whether I or this Lord, have practiced or studied
most the Maintenance and Advancement of a Party. And as I did not maintain a
Party; so much less did it fill all my Thoughts (as narrow as my Lord thinks
them.) Nor did I prosecute these or any other my Thoughts, either with
Violence, or Inconsiderateness. Not with Violence; for I can name many, of
whose Preferment, under God and the King, I was cause, who yet went not with
them, which my Lord will needs miscal my Party. Nor did I punish either more,
or more severely, any that were brought before me in the Commission, than were
punished for the like Offenses, in any the same number of Years in my late
Predecessor's Time: As will manifestly appear by the Acts of the Court. Nor
with Inconsiderateness. For I have many Witnesses that mine Eye was open, and
did plainly see, and as freely tell (where I then hoped there might have been
remedy) what was coming both upon Church and State, though not as Consequences
upon my Proceedings; and I wish with all my Heart, they were no more
Consequences upon my Lord's Proceedings, than they have been upon mine.

And my Lord is extremely mistaken, to say that I brought both into those
distractions, Danger and Dishonor, with which they are now encompassed. For
it is not I, that have troubled this Israel of God. For God is my Witness, I
labored nothing but the Settlement of the Decent External Worship of God among
us, which whatever some other Men think, I know was sunk very low; and if in
laboring this, I did err in any Circumstance (for in matter of Substance I am
sure I did not) that may be forgiven me for Humanity sake, which cannot free it
self from Error. But that which brought all these Distractions both upon Church
and State, was the bringing in of the Scots, and the keeping of them here at a
vast charge, only to serve Turns, and those very base ones: And to the debasing
and dishonor of this whole Nation, as well as the King. And how far this Lord
had his Hand or his Head in this Treacherous Business, he best knows. Sure I
am, his Lordship is thought one of the chief Moulders of this Leaven of the
Pharisees. But my Lord thinks himself safe enough; so he can cry me up among
the Rabble, to be the Author of all. And not content with this, he insults
farther upon me, as follows: Yet to magnify his Moderation, presently after
the breaking of the last Parliament, he told a Lord, who sits now in my sight,
that if he had been a Violent Man, he wanted no occasion to show it. For he
observed, that the Lord Say never came to Prayers; and added, that I was in his
knowledge, as great a Separatist as any was in England.



What ever it was I said, was not to magnify my Moderation. Nor do I remember,
that ever I spoke these words. Yet First, if any Lord will say, upon his
Honor, that I did say these very Words; I will bear him and the Peerage of the
Realm that Honor, as that I will submit and believe his Testimony, against my
own Old now and Weak Memory. Next, upon enquiry made by some Friends of mine, I
find that the Words I should speak are said to be these, that if I listed to
take any advantage against this Honorable Lord, I had as much exception to
him, as to any Separatist in England. These Words are neither so Bold, nor so
Uncivil, as those in the Charge; and perhaps I might speak these, though I
remember it not. For during the last Parliament, not so few as Ten or a Dozen
several Lords, came to me of themselves, as I sat there, and complained
grievously of this Lord's absenting himself from the Prayers of the Church; and
some of them wondered, he was not questioned for the Scandal he gave by it. And
if any of them would be so mean, as to urge me to speak by speaking Broad
themselves, and then carry the Tale to this Noble Lord; he did that, who ever
he were, which I hope was not the Noblest of his Actions; and if I did say
these latter Words of this great Lord, I must and do say them again; and I
heartily beseech God that this Sin be not laid to my Charge, that I questioned
him not, when the Times were calmer: For had I done that, I had done my Duty;
and if I had not cured him, perhaps I might have prevented so much common
danger to this Church, as his Lordship has procured since that time, both by
his Example, his Counsel, and his Countenance. And for the Words, I doubt not,
but he himself will be found to have made them good, before I have done
examining this Speech of his Lordship. In the mean time my Lord proceeds; My
Lords, how far he has spit this Venom of his against me, I am not certain; but
I may well fear, where it might do me greatest Prejudice. I shall therefore
entreat your Lordships Favor and Patience, that I may give you in these
things, which so nearly concern me, a true account of my self; which I shall do
with Ingenuity and Clearness, and so, as that if I satisfy not all Men, yet I
hope I shall make it appear, I am not such a one, as this Waspish Man was
willing to make the World believe.



I have spit no Venom against his Lordship, much less have I spit any thing
far. For this Report, which is here called Venom, is common through the
Kingdom. And I have already told you, what diverse Lords said to me during the
last Parliament. And that is no more, than has been avowed unto me by very
many others, and some of very good Quality; so the spreading was to me, not
from me. But yet, my Lord fears, I spread it where it might do him greatest
Prejudice. I know not what my Lord means by this, unless it be that I should
spread it to his Majesty. And if that be his meaning; I will tell his Lordship
truth, what I know therein. I was present, when I heard some Lords, more than
once, tell the King, that the Lord Say was a Separatist from the Church of
England, and would not come at her Common Prayers. And one of these Lords
afterward told me, he did conceive it was a great danger to this Kingdom, when
Noblemen should begin to separate in Religion; and that his Majesty had need
look to it. To this last, which was spoken to me in private (but I will depose
the Truth of it) I could not but assent. And to the former I then said, I had
heard as much as was then told his Majesty; but I was not certain of it. And I
doubt not, but these Lords sit in his Lordship's sight, as well as that Lord
who told him the other of me: And not in his Sight only, but in his Affections
also, as things go now. But however they carry it with him now, this they said
of him then. Nor will I here pick a Thanks, to tell this Lord what Service I
did him to his Majesty, when he was thought to be in danger enough, though I
was chidden by a Great one, that stood by, for my Labor. I shall therefore
entreat the Christian Reader's Favor and Patience, that having hitherto given
him a most true and clear Account of that which my Lord charges me with, and
does nearly concern me; So I may proceed to the rest, which I do with all
Ingenuity and Truth. And so, as that if I satisfy not all Men; yet I hope I
shall make it appear, that I am not such a Waspish Man, as my Lord would fain
render me to the World. But if I have been a Wasp in any Court, wherein I have
had the Honor to sit; yet his Lordship should not have called me so,
considering what a Hornet all men say he is in the Court of Wards, and in other
Places of Business: Where he pinches so deep, that discreet Men are in a doubt,
whether his Aim be to sting the Wards, or the Court it self, to Death first.
For no Man can believe, it is for the good of the King. And if I fail in this
endeavor of mine to clear my self; I must desire the Courteous Reader to
ascribe it, not to my Cause, which is very good against his Lordship, but to
the narrowness of my Comprehensions, and my Weakness compared with his
Lordships great Abilities. And now my Lord charges as hard as he can. Thus; For
the first of these, which he Charges upon me; it may be, he was willing to have
it thought, that I would not join in Prayer with your Lordships, but refused
such a Communion; which is altogether false. For I should most willingly join
in Prayers with you. And farther, I will add, that I do not think, but some set
Form of Prayers, by some Men in some Cases, may be lawfully used.



For this First; I was not willing to have any thing thought of this Lord which
is not true; and if it be altogether false, (as his Lordship says it is) that
he will not join in Prayers with the rest of the Lords in Parliament, but
refuses such a Communion; I would fain know why his Lordship does not join in
Prayer with them. For most undoubtedly he may if he will. And since it is most
true, that he has not come to Prayers in the House with the rest of the Lords,
not so much as once, either in the last Parliament, or this; I think it may
reasonably be concluded without any Falsehood, that his Lordship will not join,
no, not in such a Communion with them. Where it is to be observed, he says, he
refuses not such a Communion with them. He refuses not; yet he will not join:
And he refuses not such a Communion. A Communion I have cause to doubt he does
refuse; but not such a Communion as goes no farther than Prayers; yet to these
he comes not. At the Sacrament, I believe he will be more scrupulous, of whom,
or with whom, he receives that.

Indeed, his Lordship adds, that he would most willingly join in Prayers with
their Lordships. And though this be most strange, that he should never do that,
which he would most willingly do, an opportunity being offered him every Day:
Yet, my Lord is pleased to add farther, what his Judgment is of set Forms of
Prayer. And he tells you, that he thinks some set Forms, by some Men, in some
Occasions may be lawfully used. Surely, the Church of England is much beholding
to this Lord; very much, and the State too. For the set Forms of Prayer which
she enjoins, were compiled by some of those who suffered no less than
Martyrdom, for the Reformation of Religion: The same Form of Prayer was
established by Act of Parliament; and yet, as if Church and State were all at a
loss, this Noble Lord, who confesses some set Forms Lawful, condemns this Form,
by his Actions at least, in continual and professed abstaining from it. Some
Forms, but not this; by some Men, but not these; in some cases, but not in
God's Public Service in the Church, may be Lawfully used. And yet for all
these petty Somes of Restraint, I know his Lordship's Parts so great, that I
dare not say, (as he says of me) that his Lordship is of narrow Comprehensions.
But his Lordship will now tell us, what that is, in which he is not satisfied.

But this is that, which I am not satisfied in, that a certain number of Men
should usurp an Authority unto themselves, to frame certain Prayers, and Forms
of Divine Service; and when that is done, under the Name of the Church to
enjoin them upon all Persons, in all Times, and upon all Occasions, to be used,
and no other. And upon this Ground (which makes it the worse) because these
come from the public Spirit of the Church (when the Bishop or his Chaplain
shall frame them) and others proceed from the private Spirit of this or that
particular Man.

Now, truly, since my Lord does not think some set Forms of Prayer unlawful; I
am very sorry, his Lordship is not satisfied that a certain Number of Men
should frame these Forms of Divine Service. For all Churchmen cannot possibly
meet about that, or any other Church-Affair; nor can any Synod or Assembly be
called, but there must be some certain Number of them. Nor do these Men usurp
any Authority to themselves herein: For in all Ages of the Church, from Christ
downward, all set Forms of Prayer, used in any Church, have been either made by
a certain Number of Men, or approved by them, when some Eminent Servant of God
has Composed them first, and then tendered them to the Judgment of the Church.
And it is very necessary that it should be so. Nor would the Church of Old
admit any Prayers in the public Nec aliae Preces omnino dicantur in Ecclesia,
nisi quae a prudentioribus traditae vel (...) in Synodo (...); ne forte aliquid
(...) Fidem, vel per Ignorantiam, vel per minus Studium sit compositum. Council,
Milevita. 2 can. 12. 23.
Service and Worship of God; but such as were so made, and so approved; lest
through Ignorance, or want of Care and Circumspection, something might slip in,
that was contrary to the Faith. But I fear here is Anguis in Herba. And that my
Lord is not satisfied, not so much because these (...) Forms are made by a set
Number of Men, as because they are Churchmen, though he be (...) to express it.
And if that be his meaning, he must rest unsatisfied still. For Churchmen, and
none but Churchmen must actually do Public Church-Work, according to their
Calling, and their Warrant. And yet, I hope, Churchmen will never be so Proud,
but that if any Lay Religious Man, of larger Comprehensions than themselves,
will offer in private any help to them, they will lend an open Ear to it, and
after, with a prudent Consideration, do what is fit.

And as this Lord is not satisfied, that a certain Number of Men should make
these set Forms; so much less is he satisfied, that when this is done, they
should under the Name of the Church, enjoin them upon all Persons, in all
Times, and upon all Occasions, to be used, and no other. No set Forms, that I
know, are enjoined under the name of the Church, but such as the Church in
Synod has approved, or tolerated till a Synod may be called. And when any
National-Church in a Kingdom that is Christian, has approved a set Form; yet
that cannot be enjoined upon all Persons, till the Sovereign Power in that
State, has weighed, approved, and commanded it. But then, though Framed by a
certain Number of Men, that, and no other lays hold on all Persons, and in all
Times, and upon all Occasions, that are Public; if Men will live in Obedience
to the Church and State. I say Public, leaving all Persons at all Times, free
to use any Form of Prayer agreeable to the Foundations of Christian Religion,
which shall best serve their several private Occasions.

And therefore I conceive, my Lord is in a great Error in that which he adds
next; Namely, that this Ground makes it the worse, because these set Forms are
said to come from the Public Spirit of the Church.

I cannot think so hardly of my Lord, as if he could like a set Form of Prayer
the worse, because it comes from the Public Spirit of the Church. And
therefore I will take his Words in another Sense, (though they be in my
Judgment very obscurely set down) and perhaps that is his Lordship's meaning.
That it makes the matter the worse, because these Forms of Prayer come as from
the Public Spirit of the Church, when it is but the Bishop or his Chaplain, or
some private Spirit that frames them. If this be my Lord's meaning; far be it
from me, or any other to impose any Form of set Prayers upon the Church. But it
is one thing to Impose, and quite another to Compose a set Form of Prayer.
Impose, none can but Just Authority. Compose, all together cannot; but some one
or more must be singled out to take that pains. And all or most may approve,
what one or few have compiled. When it is so approved, then it can no more be
said to proceed from any private Spirit of this or that Man, be it the Bishop
or his Chaplain; but from the Spirit and Power of the Church. My Lord himself
being a Prudent Man, has had the Happiness to make Motions in Parliament,
which have taken the House, been approved, and Orders drawn up upon them: When
the Order is so agreed on, no Man may say, it is an Order of my Lord's private
Spirit, but the Order of the House, and approved by the public Spirit, and
imposed by the Public Authority of the State. And therefore to me it seems
strange, that my Lord, who understands these things so well, should neither
like of a set Form of Prayers, Composed by private Men, nor by a certain number
of Men, and after publicly Confirmed. Sure, this would make any Man think my
Lord likes none, however he minces it. But my Lord goes farther, and says, This
Injunction is an Usurpation of Power over the Churches of Christ, and over the
Gifts and Graces which Christ has given unto Men; which the Apostles never
exercised, nor would assume. And yet they might much better have done it. And
the same Reasons might have been alleged for it that are now. This turns such
Forms, instead of being Directions, into Superstition.



It seems by this (for I am most willing to take my Lord's Meaning at the
fairest) that my Lord can digest some set Forms of Prayer; but he would have no
Injunction upon them. So he that would use them might, and he that would not
might choose; and this in short time would bring mere confusion into the Church
of God, which I hope is not my Lord's Intention to do. Besides, my Lord cannot
but know that this Injunction for our set Form of Service, comes not from the
Churches Direction and Constitution (though her Wisdom and Piety framed it) but
from the Authority and Power of King and Parliament. So that all the Arguments
which his Lordship brings here against the Church, are equally, if not more,
set against the King and the Parliament. Well; Why then is not an Injunction of
set Form of Prayers fit? Why, my Lord tells you: First, because it is an
Usurpation of Power over the Churches of Christ. It Is indeed, an Act of Power,
but no Usurpation. The Church Directing and the Sovereign Enacting, ever had
this Power since States became Christian. And should I have called it an
Usurpation of Power, his Lordship, I fear, would have called it Treason against
the King's Supremacy. But I doubt my Lord would have the Churches free from
Regal Power having ought to do with them, durst he speak out.

Secondly, because it is an Usurpation of Power over the Gifts and Graces which
God has given unto Men. Not so neither. For whatsoever Gifts or Graces God
has given unto Men, they may all have time, place, and occasions enough, to
use them to God's Glory, and the Comfort of themselves and others; and yet in
the Public Service of God, submit to that set Form of God's Worship, which is
enjoined for Unity and Decency in that External Service. So this lays no
restraint upon the Gifts and Graces of pious and religious Men: But it keeps
off bold, ignorant, and audacious Men, from foming out their own shame, to the
great disorder and scandal of the Church of Christ. As we may see at this day,
now that Injunction begins to be but a little loosed, what Froth and base Stuff
is preached to the Consciences of Men. And yet these Men, which preach thus
scandalously, talk of Gifts and Graces; none more.

Thirdly, because the Apostles never Exercised, nor would Assume this Power of
enjoining a set Form, and yet they might better have done it. But how does my
Lord know, the Apostles never Exercised, nor would Assume this Power? Out of
all doubt the Apostles did Exercise and Assume many things, which are not come
down to our knowledge. And since the Apostles did enjoin a Form of Doctrine to
the Church of Rome, and delivered it too. And since St. Paul enjoined the
Church Romans 6. 17.
at Philippi, to walk by a set Rule, (for a Rule it cannot be, unless it be
set) that so they might learn to mind the same things, Phil. 3. And a Phil. 3.
16.
Form of Ordination by imposition of Hands, 1 Timothy 5. for such Persons 1 Timothy
5. 22.
as should instruct the People in these things. And this with a stiff
Injunction, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
v. 21. And a Form of wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. And since, St. John the
Baptist taught his Disciples to pray, St. Luke 11. and that it St. Luke 11. 1.
was by some set Form of Prayer, I have some Reason to think: First, because if
they did Pray by the Motion of the Spirit only, St. John could not teach them
that, but the Spirit only. So either St. John taught them not at all to pray,
which I hope this Lord will not say against a plain Text. Or else he taught
them some set Form, which was in his power and theirs, to teach and learn.
Secondly, because Christ's Disciples seem to intimate so much. For they desire
Christ to teach them to pray, as St. John taught his Disciples. And Christ v. 2.
instantly granting their Request, taught them a set Form of Prayer: Therefore
it is more than probable, that St. John taught his so too, though the Form be
not Recorded in Scripture. Upon all which laid together, it is probable enough
(by my Lord's leave) that the Apostles did Exercise some set Form, that at
least which Christ taught them. And Assumed Power to enjoin it upon their
Followers. But herein yet the Apostles are somewhat beholding to this Lord,
that he re-allows, they might better have done it, than any now-adays. Well; I
will not dispute what they might better have done; sure I am, it may and ought
to be done now.

Fourthly, because the same Reasons might then have been alleged for it, that
are now. The same might, but not all the same. In particular, the Church was
small then, and might with ease be Ordered, in comparison of the great
Congregations that are now. But especially the Apostles and Apostolical Men
were then present, and could in another manner, and with a greater Power than
Men now adays both Judge and Order the Gifts and Graces of other Men, to the
avoiding of confusion in the Church, which God by his Apostles would none of.

Besides, the Apostles and some others in those Times, had the Grace and the
Gift of Prayer, as well as other Graces. And there was then as peculiar a Gift
by Inspiration to pray, as to foretell things to come, or to do Miracles. As is
evident in St. Chrysostom, who says, that these St. Chrysostom. in Romans 8. 26.
Men made use of this Gift, and Prayed publicly in their Assemblies. But so
soon as this Gift with others ceased, there was a set Form from the beginning.
Neither is it hard to prove, that some parts of our Liturgy has been as
Ancient as the Church has any Records to show; and some both practiced and
prescribed by the Apostle St. Paul for the substance of them. And the true
Reason why we cannot show the exact Primitive Forms then in use, is, because
they were continually subject to Alterations, both in times and places. Now if
this Lord can furnish us with such Men, as shall be enabled to pray by the
immediate Inspiration of God's Spirit, we will bind them up to no Form: But
'till he can, I hope we shall be so happy, as to retain the set Prayers of the
Church.

Fifthly, because this ( enjoining) turns such Forms, instead of being
Directions, into Superstition. This is so wild a Conceit, that I wonder how it
fell into the Thought of so Wise a Man as my Lord is taken to be. For can a
Command or an Injunction alter the very Nature of a Thing so far, as to turn
that which is a Direction, into a Superstition? Then belike it is Superstition,
for any Christian to obey the Decrees and Injunctions, whether for Belief or
Practice, made by any the four first General Councils. And my Lord knows well
that it is Heretical, for any Man to profess against any of these Councils. And
this not only by the Church Law (which his Lordship so much slights) but by the
Laws of England. So by this Reason of my Lord's, it 1 Eliz. c. 1.
shall be Heretical to deny the Injunction, and Superstition to obey it.

If this will not serve; my Lord may be pleased to remember, that in the
Council held at Jerusalem by the Apostles themselves; they Acts 15. 24, 29.
gave a Command though no such Command, as might trouble the believing
Gentiles. And therefore Decreed, that they would lay no greater burden on
them. No more grievous Injunction, than that v. 28.
they abstain from things offered unto Idols, and from Blood, and from things
strangled, and from Fornication; where first, it is most evident, that the
Apostles did assume this power of enjoining, and exercise it too. And I hope,
my Lord, for very Reverence to the Scripture, (for as for the Church he valueth
it not) will not say this wholesome Direction to avoid Fornication, is made
Superstition by the Apostle's Injunction. If this Doctrine may hold, I doubt
very few will be Superstitious in this point. And many Men, that are very
strict and hate Superstition perfectly, will rather not abstain from
Fornication, than be Superstitious by abstaining. And no question can be made
by a Reasonable Man, but that the Church of Christ, had and has still as much
Power to enjoin a set Form of Prayers, as any of these things. But my Lord has
more Reasons than these; and truly they had need be better too. But such as
they are, they follow: This sets aside the Gifts and Graces which Christ has
given; and thrusts out the Exercise of them, to substitute in their places, and
introduce a Device of Man.



Sixthly, then this Injunction of a set Form is unlawful; because it sets aside
the Gifts and Graces, etc. This is upon the Matter all one with my Lord's
second Reason; and there it is answered. Yet truly I know no Gifts or Graces set
aside, much less thruss out, but such as are neither Gifts nor Graces of
Christ, but the Bold and Impudent Attempts of Weavers, Cobblers, and
Felt-Makers, taking on them to Preach without Knowledge, Warrant, or Calling.
Much like the Gifts, which Alexander the Copper-Smith had in St. Paul's Time.
And such Gifts and Graces as these, cannot be said to be thrust out. But my
Lord and his Adherents thrust them into the Church, to help cry down all Truth
and Order. Much less can they be said, to be thrust out to make room for a
Device of Man, meaning the set Form of Common Prayer. Now surely, I think, and
upon very good grounds, that they which Composed the Common Prayer Book, had as
good Gifts and Graces of Christ as these Men have. And that the conceived, and
oftentimes, Senseless Prayers of these Men, are as much or more the Device of
Man, than the set Form of Common Prayer is. Yea, but for all that, my Lord
says: This Injunction of such Forms upon all Men, turns that which in the
beginning Necessity brought in, for the help of Insufficiency, to be now the
continuance and maintenance of Insufficiency, and a bar to the Exercise of able
and sufficient Gifts and Graces. As if because some Men had need to make use of
Crutches, all Men should be prohibited the use of their Legs, and enjoined to
take up such Crutches, as have been prepared for those who had no Legs.



In the Seventh and last place, my Lord is pleased to tell us, this Injunction
of such Forms upon all Men, turns that, which in the beginning Necessity
brought in for the help of Insufficiency, to the Maintenance of it. My Lord
told us a little before, of a turning into Superstition: Now here is another
turning into the Maintenance of Insufficiency; two very bad turnings, were
either of them true: But God be thanked neither is. In the mean time my Lord
confesses, that Necessity brought in this Injunction of set Forms. And I
believe, there now is and ever will be, to the end of the World, as great a
Necessity to continue them. But I cannot agree with my Lord in this, that it
was a Necessity for the help of Insufficiency that brought them in. For when
these were first enjoined in the Church of Christ, Men were endued with as
great Gifts and Graces, as any now are; and perhaps greater. But Necessity
brought them in when Christianity multiplied, to preserve Unity and Order, and
to avoid Confusion, and Sects and Schisms in the Church: And that all sorts of
Men might be acquainted with that, which was used in the Public Worship and
Service of God.

Now that which follows, is an unjust and foul Scandal upon the Church. Namely,
that this Injunction is made the Continuance and Maintenance of Insufficiency.
For I believe few Churches in many Ages, have had more sufficient Preachers
than this of late has had. And therefore it is evident, this Injunction here,
has neither been the maintenance nor continuance of Insufficiency. This ground
failing, my Lord's fine Simile has neither Crutch nor Leg to stand on; but it
is as all such fine fetches are, when they have no Ground to rest on: Nor is
any thing more Poor in Learning, than a fine, handsome Similitude, such as this,
when it has no truth upon which to rest. For the best that can be said of it,
is, that it is a pretty fine thing, if it were to the purpose.

But to come nearer to the Business; I would have his Lordship remember, that
Christ taught his Apostles a set Form of Prayer St. St. Luc. 11. 2.
Luc. 11. And I believe, they were so religiously Dutiful, as that they would
not beg of Christ to teach them to Pray, and when he had taught them, then
neglect, or not practice the very Form he taught. If my Lord can think this of
the Apostles, he may; I cannot. Nor can I think, that Christ taught them this
Form, to be used as Crutches till their Legs were grown stronger. For our
Savior, does not say, till ye be stronger, and have better Gifts, Pray as I
teach you; but simply and absolutely, when you Pray, say, Our Father, etc. That
is, say these very Words, this very Form. And what? Will my Lord say that
Christ taught them this Form to maintain them in Insufficiency? Or did he make
Crutches for their Lameness? Or thereby prohibit the use of their Legs? This
Speech savours of more Profaneness, than well become such a Professor.

His Lordship speaks better of them in another place. There he In his Speech
against the Bishops Votes in Parliament, p. 3.
can say, there never were, nor ever will be Men of so great Abilities and
Gifts as they were Endued withal. And I think he dares not say, I am sure, nor
he, nor any Man living can prove, that the Apostles, when their Gifts were at
fullest, did neglect, or not use this Form of Prayer which Christ taught them.
Therefore, either to use a set Form of Prayer is not to use Crutches; or if it
be, it is to use the same, or the like Crutches, which Christ made, and his
Apostles used. And they will better beseem any good Christians to use, than his
own Legs, be they never so good. And for the set Prayers of the Church, this I
think I am sure of; That the Men which are cried up by my Lord to have such
excellent Gifts and Graces, are in as much need of these Crutches as other Men.
In the mean time, my Lord every way shows his Love to the set Liturgy of the
Church, that makes nothing of it but Crutches; which a Man, if the Bath cure
him, would gladly hang up, and leave behind him. I well hoped to have found,
that my Lord had entertained more moderate thoughts of things appertaining unto
Religion. But since he himself thus proclaims it otherwise; let us see how he
goes forward without these Crutches.

This I confess I am not satisfied in; yet will farther say thus much. Here are
with your Lordships some Bishops, Men of great Parts, able to Offer up this
Worship unto God, in the use of those (...) which God has endued them with.
And certainly they ought to serve him with the best of their Abilities which
they have received. Let them make use of their own Gifts; nay, let them but
profess, that they account not themselves bound to use Forms, nor to this Form
they use, more than any other; but that it is free for them to conceive Prayer,
or to help themselves by the use of any other Form, they please, as well as
this prescribed. And let them practice the same indifferently, that so it may
be manifest, the Fault rests in the person, and not in the Service: In the
negligence of him that may offer better if he will, not in the Injunction of
that which is offered. And I will not refuse to come to Prayers. For I take the
Sin then to be personal, and to reside in the Person Officiating only.

Now my Lord goes on farther, and tells us, That there are with your Lordships,
some Bishops; Men of great Parts, able to offer this Worship unto God, etc.
Indeed my Lord goes far here; and I am glad to hear that any Bishops can please
him. Are Bishops, even as such, Members of Antichrist (so I am sure my Lord,
and his Followers have accounted them, and their Libels Print them for such
every Day) and now can any Offer this Worship unto God, which his Lordship
would have? Why then, my Lord can be pleased, I see, that even in this Church,
God should be Worshipped by the Members of Antichrist. Or if not, then in this
Passage he grossly Dissembles.

But what is this Worship which his Lordship would have? Why, it is to Pray in
Public, and not by a set Form enjoined; but in the use of those Gifts which
God has Endued them with. And it is most undoubtedly true which follows, that
they ought to serve God with the best of the abilities they have received. But
it is as true, that Bishops, and all Ministers else, ought to serve God with the
best Abilities which the Church of Christ can furnish them with. And I presume,
I shall not wrong any my Brethren, not those of the greatest Parts, If I say,
(as I must) that those Bishops, and other Divines, which Composed the set Form
of our Service, and enjoined it too (as far as their Power reached) were Men of
as great Piety and Learning, and all other good Parts, as any now living. And
it can be no Disparagement; much less any fault or dulling of their own Gifts,
for the best of Bishops to use the set Forms ordered by them. And the Phrase,
which my Lord uses, is somewhat unusual. To offer this Worship unto God. We are
said indeed to offer up our Prayers unto God, and by so doing to Worship,
Honor, and Serve him; and him alone in that. But to offer Worship to God, I
think is an improper Phrase at least. And Psalm. 110. the People are said to
offer their Free-Will-Offerings Psalm. 110. 3.
with an Holy Worship, or in the Beauties of Holiness. And though perhaps his
Lordship will not allow of this Translation; yet so far he may, as to see the
use of the Phrase. And in the Beauties In decoribus Sanctitatis, Ar. Mant. Ibid.
of Holiness (which keeps close to the Original) will please him less: Since a
Barn with them, is as good as a Church. And no Church Holy with them; but that
which is Slovenly, even to Nastiness. But then, it is void of all Superstition.

Next, my Lord proposes some Conditions, which being observed, his Lordship
will not refuse to come to Common Prayer.

I Will examine these then. For I would have all just Demands of his granted,
that he may come.

The First is, Let these Bishops (and others I suppose he means) 1.
make use of their own Gifts. Well; let them on God's Name, in that Dutiful,
Peaceable, and Orderly Way, make use of their own Gifts, not crossing what the
Church justly prescribes.

Secondly, Let them but profess, that they account not themselves bound 2.
to use Forms. This Condition is somewhat hard. For if they shall acknowledge
they hold themselves bound to no Forms, they must be bound to no Order: And how
Bishops will keep the Church in Order, if they will be bound to observe none
themselves, I cannot tell. Besides, if they shall profess this, they must
profess against the constant and continued Practice of the whole Church of
Christ.

Thirdly, Let them profess they are not bound to this Form they use more 3.
than any other, but that it is free for them to conceive Prayer, etc. Harder
and harder. For they stand bound not only by Church-Ordinance, but by
Injunction, and Command of the State in Parliament, strictly to observe this
Form. And they are therefore bound to this Form more than any other. And
therefore so long as this Act of Parliament remains in force, with what Honor
or Conscience can this Lord (who seems to stand so much upon Law) ask this at
the Bishops Hands, that they should profess, that they are not bound to any
Forms? Nor, to this more than any other; when his Lordship must needs know,
they are bound to this, and no other, and that by an Act of Parliament.
Besides, What a Coil has been kept by some of this Lord's Favorites, against
Innovations of Religion, as contrary to Law? No Rails to fence the Holy Table
from Profanation? Though that be no Ceremony, nor forbidden by Law. No coming
up to it, or the steps of the Chancel, to receive the Communion, though most
decent, and in ancient usage, and forbidden by no Law that I know? No Reverence
to God himself at coming in, or going out of his Temple; though that of the
Psalmist began the ancient Liturgies of the Church, and is continued in our O
come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker, Psalm.
95. 6.
etc. Psalm. 95. The Communion Table must not stand North and South; though the
Queens Injunction commanded it to be set just in that Place, in which the Altar
then stood. So they innovate themselves; and then cry out of Innovation. And if
this Lord's Doctrine be good; let us have no Injunction for North and South, and
all is well: But then we must have no Injunction for East and West neither. For
if there be an Injunction; East and West is Superstition, as well as North and
South.

But then if my Lord would have all free; what would he have in this
Particular? Why, First, he would have it free for these Men to conceive Prayer.
Let them in due time and place conceive Prayer on God's Name: But let them not
make public Abortion in the Church. It Is an overhasty Mother, that brings
forth so soon as she has Conceived: And yet, Extemporary Men outrun these
Mothers; and Conceive and bring forth their unnatural Monsters, both at once.

Next, he would have these Men to help themselves by the use of any other
Forms, they please, as well as this which is prescribed. So then belike, these
great Men of Gifts in my Lord's Eye, are not so perfect in the Spirit, but that
they may need helps. And if my Lord be so indifferent, that these may help
themselves by the use of any other Forms, as well as this which is prescribed;
let him be as fair, at least, to the Church that made him a Christian, as to
others; and give Men leave to help themselves, by the use of this Form which is
prescribed, as well any other. And if it be the Injunction only that sticks in
his Stomach, I am sorry he should show himself so Guilty of the great Sin of
Disobedience.

Fourthly, Let them practice the same indifferently, that so it may be 4.
manifest the Fault rests in the Person, and not in the Service, etc. This is
his Lordship's last Condition. And either I am dulled with this Business; or
the Expression is somewhat obscure: But I will take it as right as I can. It
seems, my Lord would not refuse coming to the Prayers of the Church, for the
Personal Fault of him that Officiates: And that is well. It seems likewise, that
to manifest this, whether the Sin lies in the Person that offers; or in the
Service that is Offered up, his Lordship would have an indifferent practice of
that which is enjoined and other Forms. And that is stark naught. For by this,
we shall have no certain Service of God for the People. It shall (...), and
perhaps, more dangerously than is fit; not only in different Parishes; but in
the same Congregation, at different times. And were not this so, yet I cannot
assent to my Lord in this, that these Men he means, can so easily offer better
if they will; and that when they do not, it is their Negligence that is the
only Cause. And besides, it is useless: For it is known already to sober Minds,
that the Fault (when any arises in that Work) is neither in the Service, which
is very good; nor in the Injunction, which is very Lawful; but in the Person
which Officiates, if he do not his Duty: And so there is no need of a confused
practicing of diverse Forms indifferently, to manifest that, which is known
already. And if my Lord brings no worse Sins about him, when he comes to
Church, than he will find Faults in the Liturgy; he may safely come to Church,
and be a Happy Man, in so doing. And I might well doubt of my Lord's meaning
herein; for himself is jealous of his Auditors. Therefore he adds; I know not,
whether I express my self clearly, to be understood in this or not; and it may
seem to be a nice Scrupulosity: Give me leave therefore to endeavor to clear
it by an Instance or two.



Truly my Lord takes himself right. For neither has he expressed himself very
clearly; nor is the matter so material in it self, but that it may be, as it
seems, a very nice Scrupulosity, and altogether unable to warrant his
Lordship's Separation from the Prayers of the Church. Yet since my Lord desires
to clear it by an Instance or two; I shall be well content to hear and consider
of them. His First Instance is, In the time of the Law, when God appointed
himself to be Worshipped by Offerings and Sacrifices; the Shadows and Types of
those Truths which were to come: If a Poor Man, which had not Ability to bring
a Bullock, or a Ram, or a Lamb, had brought a pair of Turtle Doves, or two
Young Pigeons; it would have been in him an acceptable Service. But if a Man of
Ability, who had Herds and Flocks; should out of Negligence or Covetousness,
have spared the Cost of a Bullock or Ram, and brought Young Pigeons; his
Service would have been rejected, and himself punished. How much more would the
Service have been Abomination, if Men should have taken Authority to have
enjoined all, to bring no other but Turtles, or Young Pigeons; because some
were not able to do more? In one kind there might be a tolerable and lawful
[use] of that which otherways used, (especially if generally enjoined) would
have been most unlawful. God will be Worshipped with the Fat, and best of the
Inwards; the best of Men's Gifts and Abilities, which he that worships, or
officiates in Worshipping, is to do at his own Peril. And if it be left free
unto him, the Worship may be Lawful to him, that joyneth with him therein, in
it self, though performed in a negligent, and so in a sinful manner, by the
Minister. But if that manner be enjoined, the Service it self is to be refused.



This is my Lord's First Instance from the Services under the Law. And I must
needs say, he has made it clear what he would have. But then, he must give me
leave to say too, that this Instance differs so mainly from the thing in
question; that it helps my Lord and his Cause in nothing. Perhaps it makes it
worse than it was.

The difference is: God in the Law, did not only prescribe all the Sacrifices
and Offerings which he would have, and for what: But also when, and how he
would have them. And the Poor man which had not Ability to bring the greater
Sacrifice, might by the express Letter of the Law, bring Turtles or Pigeons.
Levit. 5. But if a Rich Levit. 5. 7.
Man had brought them, his Service would have been rejected, and himself
punished. So says my Lord: But the Law says not so. He that brought it, should
have born his Sin, and the Priest could have made no Atonement for him; which
was punishment enough. But that he should any other way be punished, I find not
in the Text of the Law. And this Lord, which will admit of nothing but Text,
should not presume to add any thing to it. Apud Ainsworth in Levit. 20. 3.
The Rabbis indeed, reckon up Six and Thirty kinds of Offenders, which for
their Sins are threatened to be cut off from their People; and some are
mentioned, Levit. 7. and 17. But none of these mentioned in Leviticus, or
Levit. 7. 25. and Levit. 17. 4. 9. 10.
by the Rabbis, is the Rich Man's offering Turtles or Pigeons, instead of a
Bullock or a Ram. Well, this was the strict prescription of Sacrifices and
Offerings in the Law. But in the Gospel, though Christ settled his Doctrine and
Sacraments; yet when, and how, with other Ceremonial Things, were left at large
to the Ordering of the Apostles, and the Church after them; always providing
for (...) and Order. And this Liberty was left as much, if not more, in
Preaching and Public Prayer, than in the Sacraments. And therefore my Lord's
Instance in this way, will not follow from the Law to the Gospel.

To give instance in his own Words. In the Law; The poor Man which had nor
Bullock, nor Lamb, might by the express Warrant of the Law bring Turtles or
Pigeons; but they were to be his own which he bought; and the Priest was to
make his Atonement accordingly. But in the Gospel Men do not bring to the
Priest or Minister their own Doctrins, or their Prayers; but he offers in
public the Sermon to them, and the Prayers for them. So here the Instance
comes not home neither.

As for my Lord's Aggravation; How much more would the Service have been
abomination, if Men should have taken Authority to themselves, and have
enjoined all to bring nothing but Turtles or Pigeons? Indeed it would have been
full of Abomination; because in this Injunction they would have gone quite
contrary to God's own Command. And let my Lord show in the Gospel any Precept,
that commands Men to use Extemporary, or Conceived Prayers, in the Public
Service or Worship of God; or that forbids the use of a Set Form of Prayer; and
then I will grant the Church's Injunction of such Forms to be in the highest
degree unlawful. But these cannot be showed.

Besides, there is a great deal of Pride in this Instance. For my Lord all
along the Instance, makes the Set Forms of the Church, Turtles and Pigeons, the
poor Man's Sacrifice; and the Conceived Prayers of his Party, to be the Rich
and able Men's Sacrifice, the Ram and the Bullock (the Calf I doubt it is.) So
a very little before, his Lordship tells us, of a Negligence in those his Men
of Gifts, which might offer better if they will. As if it were a most easy
thing for those Men to offer up far better Prayers to God, than the Set Liturgy
of the Church. Whereas my Lord must give me leave to doubt that, even of the
best of them. And so again a little after, his Lordship tells us, That God will
be worshipped with the Fat and the best of the Inwards, which he Interprets
with the best of Men's Gifts and Abilities; and of this there is no doubt. Nor
does the enjoning of a Set Form of Public Prayer hinder any Man from
worshipping God with the best Gifts and Abilities which he has. And who should
be served with the best, if not he that gave them all? But here is the Pride of
the Instance again: Their conceived, tedious, and oft-times senseless Prayers,
must be the Fat and the Inwards with which God is pleased; and the Set Forms of
the Church Lean Carrion, and not fit for the Altar. O, my Lord, that you would
in time lay your Hand on your Heart, and consider from what, and into what you
are fallen!

My Lord concludes this Instance with this, That if it be left free to him that
Officiates, it is his personal Sin if he be negligent; but it may be lawful for
another that joins with him in that Service: But if that manner be enjoined,
the Service it self is to be refused. And after this great Pride in, or of this
Opinion, my Lord ends with It Is Fallacia Accidentis: For it is not in, or of
the nature of Prayer, that it should be in a negligent Form set down, or
negligently performed; but a mere accident, and a bad one.
a Fallacy. For the Question is not, Whether a negligent Set Form of Prayer, or
a Good Form of Set Prayer, negligently and without Devotion offered up to God
(as too often they are, God help us) be better than other Prayers, carefully
composed and devoutly uttered? But simply, Whether a good Set Form of Prayer
(such as the Liturgy of England is) be made so evil, only by the enjoining of
it, as that therefore the Service it self ought to be refused? Now this my Lord
may say as boldly as he will; but neither he nor any man else shall ever be
able to prove it.

And in this very close, I cannot but observe, that which in me or another Man
would have been great Pride: But what it is in this Lord, let the Reader judge.
For he does not conclude, that this Form being enjoined, is the Cause why he
refuses to come to our Prayers. But absolutely, as if all Men were bound to do
as he does. He says peremptorily, that in this Case of Injunction of a set
Form, the Service it self ought to be refused. So that by this Doctrine, he is
a Sinner that refuses not the Prayers of the Church of England. My Lord in the
beginning, asked leave to speak a few Words, concerning himself; but I believe,
these will be found to concern some body else. Well, it is time to consider of
my Lord's second Instance; and so I will.

Now in the time of the Gospel, God has appointed the foolishness of
Preaching, (for so the World accounts it) to be the Means by which he will save
those that Believe. I conceive, where there are not Gifts enabling Men to
Preach, there might be a lawful and profitable use of Reading of Printed
Sermons and Homilies; and in such Cases they might very lawfully be heard. But
if some Men, upon pretense to prevent Extravagant Preaching, should take upon
them to set forth a Book of Public Common Sermons, fit for all Times and
Occasions; and should enjoin Ministers to conform to these, and use no other
Preaching at all, but the Reading of those Common Sermons or Homilies so
devised, for Public Worship; this would make it utterly Unlawful, and to be
Professed against, as that which were the bringing in of a Humane Device and
Injunction in the place, and instead of God's Ordinance, to the Exclusion
thereof. As the Pharisees, to establish Traditions of their own, made void the
Commandments of God.

I hope, my Lord will have no better success with this Instance under the
Gospel, than he had with that under the Law. And yet whatsoever is Truth in his
Instance, I shall most willingly grant. And therefore I do acknowledge, that in
the time of the Gospel, God appointed the foolishness of Preaching, 1 Cor. 1.
to be a Means; but not 1 Cor. 1. 21.
to be The Means (if it be meant the only Means) by which he will save those
that believe. I likewise confess, that in the World's Account it is made the
Foolishness of Preaching. And I would to God some Men, much magnified in these
Times, did not give too often very just Cause to the World to account it, not
only the Foolishness, but the Madness of Preaching; such Preaching as is far
from being a Means of Salvation. I conceive also, as well as my Lord, that
where there are no Gifts enabling Men to Preach, (as it falls out in too many
Parishes in England, and the true Cause is, the smallness of the Living, unable
to Feed and Cloth Men, and therefore cannot expect Men of Parts) there not
only might be, but is a lawful and profitable use of Reading of Printed Sermons
and Homilies; and that in such Cases, yes, and in other Cases too, they may
very lawfully be heard. And I think farther, that if some Men, not upon their
own private Authority, but lawfully meeting in a Synod or Convocation, shall,
not upon pretense, but truly to prevent Extravagant Preaching, such as of late
has been, and is too common in England, should take upon them to set forth a
Book of common Sermons, such as might be fit for all Times and all Occasions,
which is not impossible to be done, and should enjoin Ministers to conform to
these, and use no other Preaching at all, but the Reading of these common
Sermons or Homilies so devised for public Worship; I must needs say, it were a
Cure not to be used but in Extremity, to bar all other Preaching for the Abuse
of some, be it never so gross. Yet if the Distempers of the Pulpit, should grow
in any National Church so high, so Seditious, so Heretical and Blasphemous, so
Schismatical and Outrageous, as many of them have been of late in this
distracted Church of ours; I say, if such a Book of Sermons, should be so set
out, by the Church direction, and published by the Authority of King and
Parliament, as the Book of Common Prayer is: When the Comparison is made thus
even, and my Lords Instance so brought home: In the Church of Africa, when the
Arian Heresy began, the Church had suffered so much by the Preaching of Arius
the Presbyter, that they made a Law not to suffer any Presbyter (...) Preach at
all, at least not in the Mother Church, and in the Bishop's Presence. As may be
seen in Socrates, l. 5. Hist. c. 22. And though this may seem a (...) Cure, yet
when the Disease grew Masterful and (...), the Church did not refuse to use it.
I do then think, such a Book, not devised for public Worship, but for public
Instruction (for Sermons are not properly the Worship of God, but as to teach
us Faith and Obedience, and how we are to pray and give Worship to him) might
be used with great profit; yea, and with far more than many Sermons of the
present time, which do in a manner teach nothing but Disobedience to Princes
and all Authority, under a false pretense of Obedience to God.

And for the Injunction which sticks so much with my Lord; certainly in Cases
of such Extremity, as is abovementioned, and when nothing else will serve, I
conceive it might well and profitably be laid upon the Ministers; and yet that
such an Imposition, would be far from making it utterly unlawful, and to be
professed against, as that which were the bringing in of a Humane Device in the
place, and instead of God's Ordinance, to the Exclusion thereof. For it is
probable, these Sermons my Lord speaks of, would be Preached before they were
Printed. And the end of their being Preached, was to publish Christ and his
Gospel to the World. And that also, was or ought to be the end of Publishing
the same Sermons in Print, that the benefit of them might reach the farther,
and be of longer continuance. So that upon the Matter, the Printing of Sermons,
is but a large and more open Preaching of them still. And then if Preaching be
God's Ordinance; Printing of Sermons is the publishing of God's Ordinance. And
therefore, if there were an Injunction for a Book of Sermons, as is mentioned;
it were but a more public and durable divulging of God's Ordinance; and not
the bringing in of a Humane Device instead of it, and to the Exclusion thereof.

As for that which follows, that this is like the Pharisees, who, to establish
Traditions of their own, made void the Commandments of God. This is but a
Simile, and is Answered in the former. And you see, that should any Necessity
force the making of such an Injunction (which God forbid) it did help to
publish God's Ordinance, and not make void his Commandments. Howsoever, my Lord
may take this along with him: That that Party, which he governs in this
Kingdom, are as well seen in this Art of the Pharisees, as any Men in
Christendom; and will, if they be let alone, make void all the Service of God,
to bring in their Dreams, against all Reason, Religion and lawful Authority.
And this is most true, whatever they think of themselves. But my Lord desires
farther consideration of his Instance.

Let it be considered, what difference can be found between these, but only
this. Use and Custom has inured us to that of Prayer, not so in this of
Preaching; and therefore the Evil of it would easily appear unto us, if so
enjoined.

It is fit, my Lord should have his desire in this; that it be considered what
difference can be found between these: And out of all doubt my Lord
acknowledges, that some difference there is. And were it this only (as his
Lordship would have it.) That Use and Custom has inured us to that of Prayer,
and not so in this of Preaching; that might be Reason enough to continue our
public set Form of Prayer. For if the Service have not fault in it, but that
it is enjoined: And if the enjoining of a good Service of God Almighty, in which
Christian People may consent, and unanimously and uniformly worship him, be no
fault at all, as most certain it is not: It Is neither wisdom nor safety to cast
off such a Custom or Usage, and leave every Minister (and perhaps other Men
too) to make what Prayers they please in the Congregation, which doubtless
would be many times such, as no good understanding Christian could say Amen to.

Besides, with my Lord's leave, upon the Consideration which he desires me to
take, I think I have found other Differences. For, besides the Use and Custom
which we are inured to, I find, that to have some set Form of Prayer, when the
Congregation meets, is little less than * Traditio Vniversalis, It Is Universal
for Time. For it is testified by Dionysius the Areopagite (if those Works be
his) De Ecclesia Hierar: P: 77: Edit: Gr: Lat. and he was one of the
Contemporaries of the Apostles, that there were then set Forms of Prayer, to
which all the People said Amen. And if Dionysius were not the Author, yet the
Work is exceeding Ancient. And so some set Forms continued, till after St.
Augustin's Time, as appears by Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 97. Edit. Gr. Lat.
An. Christi. 150. By Tertull. Apologet. c. 39. An. Christi. 200. By St. Cyprian
de Orat. Domin. By Origin Hom. 5. in Number. An. Christi. 230. By the Council of
Laodicea, Can. 18. 19. An Christi. 316. By St. Basil Epist. ad Clericos
Naeocaesariensis Ecclesiae. By St. Chrysostom..... both about the same Year. As
also by St. Cyril of Jerusalem..... By the third Council of Carthage, can. 23.
An. Christi. 397. By St. Aug. Ep. 59. and 156. and de bono (...). c. 13. An.
Christi. 400. By the second Melevitan Council, can. 12. And by Prosper Aquitan.
L. q. de Vocat. Gent. c. 4. since which time no question can be made, but the
Public Prayers were always in a known and set Form. And that it was Universal
for place, appears by the concurrent Testimonies of the Fathers before recited,
and the Councils and the Practice, both of the Asian, African and European
Churches. As Justin Martyr, Basil and Chrysostom, for the Greek; and
Tertullian, Cyprian, St. Augustine and Prosper, testify for the West. Insomuch,
that St. (...) says expressly in that place, that for the Order of Singing the
Psalms in their Public Service, it was agreeable..... to all the Churches of
God: Which place is also cited by Whitaker ad Ration. 6. Campiani. And diverse
Particulars in their set Form of Prayer, remain to this day in the Liturgy of
the Church of England. As that there should be recited a General Confession of
the Faith. (...) Areopag. de Ecclesia Hierar. p. 88. Edit. Gr. Lat. That
Prayers were made for Emperors and Men in Authority; and for the Peace and
Quiet of the World. So Tertullian. That the Presbyter should (...) them to lift
up their Hearts; and the People Answer, we lift them up unto the Lord. So St.
Cyprian and St. Augustine. The Interrogations and Answers in (...). So Origin.
That Prayers should be made, not only for the Faithful, but for Insidels and
Enemies to the Cross of Christ. So Prosper. And it is preserved in our Collect
for Good Friday. And the Peoples Praying with, and Answering the Pastor, saying
Lord have Mercy upon us, with Christ have Mercy upon us, was before St.
Gregory's time, and continued down to ours, yet with difference from the
Mass Book too. As Dr. Rainolds proves, Conf. with Heart. c. D. Divi. 4. p. 511.
But howsoever set Forms they were, and such as in some Particulars, fere omnis
Ecclesia Dominica, almost all the Church of Christ used. So St. Augustine. And
there is nulla pars Mundi, scarce any part of the World, in which there is not
a Concordant, an Agreement in these Prayers: So Prosper. Which is (...) to be
but by a set Form. And so the Magdeburgians conclude upon due Examination:
Formulas denique precationum absque dubio habuerunt: Out of all doubt the
Ancients had set Forms of Prayer, Cent. 3. c. 6.
an Universal Tradition of the whole Church. And that it took beginning, while
some of the Apostles were yet living, and has continued from thence in all
Ages and Places of the Church to this day. Now, though particular Customs and
Traditions vary and may be varied in several Churches; yet I do not find there
is such a Power over Traditions that are General; but that next to the
Scripture it self, they are kept by all Sober Christians inviolable. And St.
Augustine says plainly [St. Aug. Epist. 118. c. 5.] it is Insolentissimae
insaniae; a trick of most insolent Madness, to dispute or doubt of that, quod
tota per Orbem frequentat Ecclesia, which the Church of Christ practices
throughout the whole World. And for my part I believe him; and I would my Lord
did so too, and then I think he would not refuse the Service for the
Injunction, nor fall into any fit of this insolent Madness. As for Preaching,
that was ever left free. And therefore the Church did ever put a difference.

And, I find upon this Consideration, another Difference yet, between Prayer
and Preaching. For Preaching is a Speech to Man for his Edification, and
Instruction in Faith and good Life. But Prayer is a Speech to God, to Honor
and Worship him, in the acknowledgment of his Dominion over, and his Bounty and
Goodness toward all Creatures; but Mankind especially. And therefore, though a
Man cannot take too much pains in that which he is to speak from God to Man,
lest he be proved a False Relater: Yet of the two, there should be more care
had, what Prayers he puts up for himself and the whole Congregation, unto God;
lest he be not only a false Worshipper; but also, lest he suddenly and
unadvisedly ask that, which may be hurtful unto all. And for ought he knows,
God may at that time, be angry with us for our Sins, and may hear in his anger,
and grant. And I believe, it will be found, a greater and more dangerous Sin,
for the Priest to make the People ask at God's Hands, those things which they
ought not. Besides, the Public Prayers of the Church, do teach and inform the
People, not only how to Pray, and so how to Worship; but in many things also,
what to believe, as well, nay, often times better than many Sermons. So that
ill Praying in Public, contains almost all the Mischiefs that ill Preaching
has in it, over and above all the Ill that is proper to it self: And so is the
more dangerous Sin: And therefore the Church cannot be too careful for a set
and known Form for Public Prayer; yea, and that enjoined too, so it be well
weighed beforehand; though for Preaching she leave a greater Latitude. So upon
consideration, I think there is more difference between a set Form of Prayer,
and a set Form of Preaching, than that we are invited to the one, and not to
the other. Yet, when I hear what Extravagant, nay Seditious Preaching there is
nowadays, I am strongly tempted to believe, that were the like Injunction for
Preaching, it were far better, than that such loose, dangerous and most
unchristian Preachings, as are in many places, should continue. It seems, my
Lord has now done with the First Part of the Waspish-Man's Charge against him
(for so he is pleased to call it.) And that is his Lordship's account why he
refuses to come to Common Prayer. And now he goes on to the next.

My Lords, let me presume upon your Patience, so far farther, as to give me
leave, to speak to the other Imputation laid upon me; that I am a Separatist,
and the greatest in England.

My Lords very Honorably afforded his Lordship Patience to speak to the other
Imputation laid upon him; and so shall I very freely. But how far, and in what
Language, and upon what Occasion I imputed any thing to his Lordship, I have
ingenuously declared already: And shall add no more, till my Lord has
proceeded farther, and expressed what he pleases; as follows.

And First I shall say of this Word Separatist, as that Learned Man, Mr. Hales
of Eaton says in a little Manuscript of his, which I have seen: That where it
may be rightly fixed, and deservedly charged, it is certainly a great Offense.
But in common use now among us, it is no other than a Theological Scarecrow;
wherewith the potent and prevalent Party uses to fright and enforce those who
are not of their Opinions, to subscribe to their Dictates, without daring to
question them, or bring them to any Rule of Examination, either of Scripture or
Reason.

And he observes, that this was too usual even in Ancient Times, as well as
now.

And First, my Lord begins with the Word Separatist: And he professes, he will
say of that, as Learned Mr. Hales says. And surely the first part of Mr. Hales
is very true; That where this Word, or the Crime signified by it, is rightly
fixed, and deservedly charged, it is a great Offense. But that which follows, by
my Lord's good leave, and Mr. Hales his too, is somewhat too hard a Censure
upon the Times, and the Persons living in them. The Truth is; some Men are too
apt to Accuse others of Schism and Separation; but yet I do not think the
Disease is so Epidemical, as it is here expressed. As Namely, That it is in
common use amongst us. Perhaps, nothing so Common at this Time, to call
Separatist as to be one. Or that it is a Theological Scarecrow, by which the
potent and prevalent Party uses to affright and enforce those who are not of
their Opinions, to subscribe to their Dictates. Or sure, if there be such
practice, the Fault is in the Persons that use it. But even that is no Excuse
at all, for Schism or Separation; because some, in an inconsiderate heat,
Charge that Crime upon such as are not Guilty. For, perhaps my Lord may say as
much as this, of Excommunication it self, that some are struck with it, who
deserve it not; and yet, I hope, my Lord has not proceeded so far, as to say,
that Excommunication is but a Theological Scarecrow.

And I farther think, there are as few at this Day of them, whom my Lord calls
the potent and prevalent Party, which refuse to be brought to any Rule of
Examination, either of Scripture or Reason; as have lived in this Church for
some Hundreds of Years past, how meanly soever this Lord Esteems them, and how
narrow soever he thinks their Comprehensions are.

To conclude this Passage; my Lord tells us, that Mr. Hales observes farther,
that this was too usual, even in Ancient Times, as well as now. That some
Faults, and some Degrees of this Fault, were in Ancient Times, as well as now,
may be true enough: And yet in those Ancient Times, none thought Schism or
Separation from the Church, howsoever charged, to be but a Theological
Scarecrow. But caused it to be examined to the bottom, as it is fit; nay,
necessary, that it should: For else, the most dangerous Separation, that can
be; may go away free with this. That it is but a trick of the prevalent Party,
to fright other Men into their Opinions, by charging them with Separation. Now,
the most dangerous Separation in a Church, is, where the Church it self has
little or no Power to punish Separatists. And where they of the Separation,
are, by the great Misfortune of the State, become the potent and prevalent
Party. And whether this be not, or at least were not the condition of the State
and Church of England, when my Lord Printed this Speech of his; I leave to the
indifferent Reader to judge.

My Lord has Printed no more than this; and therefore I will take notice of no
more. But yet, Iam told by a very good Hand, that his Lordship upon this
quotation of Mr. Hales his Manuscript, was pleased openly in that Honorable
House of Parliament, where he spoke it, to lend Mr. Hales one Wipe, and me
another. But since my Lord is pleased to pass it over at the Press, I shall do
so too. Yet with this, that if my Lord did give that Gird, I will make it
plainly appear, whenever he shall publish it, that there is no show of Truth in
it. But now that my Lord has done with Mr. Hales, he proceeds, and tells us
his own Judgment.

Secondly, I say that there is a twofold Separation; one from the Universal or
Catholic Church; which can no otherwise be made, but by denying the Faith;
(for Faith and Love are the Requisites to that Communion.)

And I say so too, that there is a twofold Separation; and that one of them is
from the Universal, or Catholic Church. But that this Separation can no
otherwise be made, but by denying the Faith, I doubt comes short of Truth.
First, because there is a great difference between Schism and Apostasy. And
every Apostasy is a Separation; but every Separation is not Apostasy. For a Man
is not an Apostate properly, till he fall away, by denying the whole Faith. But
a Man may be in Heresy, Schism and Separation; upon the denial of any one
Article of the Faith, received by the Catholic Church. Secondly, because
should a Man agree in all and every Article of the Faith, with the
Catholick-Church; yet he may maintain some false Opinion, and incongruous, both
to the Verity, and the Practice of Religion, and Judgment of the Universal
Church: And be so in Love with these, as that for these Opinions sake, he will
Separate from the whole Body.

Therefore Denial of the Faith is not the only Cause of Separation from the
Catholic Church; since this Separation can be otherways made. And, my Lord
within the space of Three Lines, crosses himself. For First, he says, that this
Separation can no otherwise be made, but by denying the Faith. And in the very
next Words, he tells us, that Faith and Love are the Requisites to that
Communion. Two Requisites to that Communion with the Universal Church;
therefore two Causes of Separation from it. Therefore, by my Lord's own
Confession, he that is so out of Charity, with the Universal Church, for some
Opinions or Practices which he dislikes, as that he will not Communicate with
it; is in Separation, though he do not deny the Faith.

The other (my Lord tells us) is, a Separation from this or that particular
Church, or Congregation. And that not in respect of difference with them, in
matter of Faith or Love: But in dislike only of such Corruptions, in their
external Worship and Liturgies, as they do admit of, and would enjoin upon
others.

In this other Particular Separation, I shall meddle with neither Congregation
nor Conventicle, Meeting allowed, or disallowed by Church or State; but that
Separation which is, or is not made by my Lord and his Followers, from the
National Church of England, as it stands Settled and Established by Law. Not as
her Service may be mangled, or otherwise abused in any particular Parish, or
Congregation, whatsoever. And if this Lord dislike any the Service as it is used
in some one Parish or other, and yet will come to the Service as it is
Established by Law in other, either Cathedral or Parochial Churches, my Lord
has had great Wrong, to be accounted a Separatist. But if my Lord will not
come to the Prayers of the Church of England by Law Established, let his
Pretense be what it will, a Separatist he is.

But my Lord says, that this Particular Separation is not in respect of
difference with them, in matter of Faith or Love.

Where First you may observe on the by, that in my Lord's Judgment, 1.
Public Breach in Charity, as well as in Faith, may be Cause of this
Separation too, as well as of that from the Universal or Catholic Church,
before mentioned.

Next, that this particular Separation, if it be not in respect of Difference 2.
in Faith or Love; in what respect is it then? Why, if we may herein believe my
Lord, it is only in dislike of such Corruptions in their external Worship and
Liturgies, as they do admit of, and would enjoin others. Well, First I Will pray
for my Lord, that there be no difference in Faith and Charity; but I do very
much doubt there is. Next, either there are such Corruptions in the External
Worship and Liturgies, as his Lordship has just Cause to dislike, or there are
not. If there be not, why does he Separate from them? If there be, or probably
seem to be; why does he not complain to the King, and the Church; that these
Corruptions may be considered on, and amended, if Cause appear?

And this he ought to do, before he Separate. For, I hope Christianity is not
yet come to that pass, (though it draw on apace) that a Powerful Layman or
two, shall say there are Corruptions in the set Service of God, and then be
Judges of such Corruptions themselves. Nor does the Church of England admit of
Corruptions in her Liturgy, or labor to enjoin them upon others. Now my Lord
tells us farther. That

This is a Separation not from their Persons, as they are Christians; But from
their Corruptions in matter of Worship, as they are therewith defiled. And this
Separation, every Man, that will keep himself Pure from other Men's Sins, and
not Sin against his own Conscience, must make.

This will not yet help my Lord: For say this be not a Separation from their
Persons, as they are Christians; which yet it too often proves to be. And I
believe, if this Lord would impartially examine himself, he would find to be
true in himself, and his Comportment. But that it is from their Corruptions in
matter of Worship, as they are therewith defiled. First, these Corruptions are
not proved; so it is Petitio Principii, 1.
the begging of that to be granted, which is the thing in question. Secondly,
if there be Corruptions; yet it is not proved they 2.
are in the Matter; but of the two, rather in the Manner of Worship. Thirdly,
were both these granted, yet it will remain a Question still; 3.
whether these Corruptions be such, as that the Worshippers are defiled
therewith? And another Question, whether so deeply defiled, as that other good
Christians shall be defiled, by coming to Common Prayer with them? For I am not
yet persuaded, nor shall be, till I be convinced, That every Man that will keep
himself pure from other Men's Sins, and not Sin against his Conscience, is bound
to make this Separation. For I conceive, many Corruptions may be tolerated;
nay, ought to be, before a Separation be made. And that a private Conscience is
to be both informed, and reformed, before it be attempted.

Nor can I think, that he which comes to the public Service of any Church that
is not Idolatrous, or peccant in the Fundamentals of Religion, does partake
with other Men's Sins, that frequent the same Common Prayer or Service with him,
or he with them.

And yet my Lord is so peremptory, as that without any distinction or Degrees
of Corruption; he delivers it positively, with a great deal more Boldness than
Knowledge; That every Man, that will keep himself pure from other Men's Sins,
must make this Separation. Every Man, and must make. And it is not to be
conceived, but that what every Man must do, my Lord, who seems to be so careful
to keep himself pure from other Men's Sins, has done already. That is, has
made this Separation from the Church. And my Lord, for ought I see, is ready to
confess as much. For he adds, And I will ingenuously confess, that there are
many things, in many Churches or Congregations in England, practiced, and
enjoined upon all to be practiced and suffered; which I cannot practice nor
admit of, except I should Sin against the Light of my Conscience, until I may
out of the Word of God be convinced of the Lawfulness of them; which hitherto I
could never see sufficient ground for.



I told you my Lord was very near confessing as much as I have said. For he
says ingenuously there are many things in many Churches in England practiced.

First, I told my Lord before, that this Business of Separation, was not to be
judged by what is practiced in one or more Parochial Congregations, but by what
ought to be practiced in all the Churches of England. And if my Lord dislike
any thing in one Congregation, he may go to another (so he will endure the
whole Liturgy, as it is settled by Law) and no Man if he will do this, ought to
account him a Separatist. And I find by my Lord's Words, that his Exception is
to many Churches; and I would willingly hope (if his Carriage would let me)
that he excepts not against all. Besides, he tells us, that many things are so
practiced; but he is not pleased to tell us what they are. And then it is not
possible for me or any Man else, either to know whether his Lordship's
Exception be just against them, or to give him satisfaction in them. And it is
no great sign, that my Lord bears any good Mind to the Church, that he is so
ready to charge many things against the Church, and to name none.

My Lord goes farther, and says plainly, that these many things thus practiced,
or enjoined also, and that upon all, to be practiced or suffered, which he
cannot practice nor admit of, except he should Sin against the Light of his
Conscience. You have heard already, how much my Lord is troubled with this
Enjoining, and to that I refer you: In the mean time, since I am the Man so
particularly shot at by my Lord, I shall answer for my self according to Truth;
and with Truth I can legally prove, if need be; I have not Commanded or
enjoined any one thing Ceremonial or other, upon any Parochial Congregation in
England, much less upon all, to be either practiced or suffered, but that which
is directly commanded by Law. And if any Inferior (...) in the Kingdom, or any
of my own Officers have given any such Command, it is either without my
Knowledge, or against my Direction. And it is well known, I have sharply chid
some for this very particular; and if my Lord would have acquainted me with any
such troubled thought of his, I would have given him (so far as had been in my
Power) either Satisfaction or Remedy, if any thing had been against the Light
of his Conscience. Though in these things I must needs tell my Lord, that there
is now adays, in many Men which have shaken off all Church Obedience, great
pretensions to Light in their Understandings and Consciences; when to Men which
see indeed, it is little less than Palpable Darkness. But how it is with my Lord
and his Conscience, I will not take upon me to Judge; but leave him to stand or
fall to his own Master. Rom 14. Romans 14. 4.


For it seems, my Lord stands not simply upon the Light of his Conscience; but
only until he may be convinced out of the Word of God, of the Lawfulness of
these things, which hitherto he could never see sufficient ground for. And this
is the Common-Plea, which all of them have resort to, till they be convinced;
which (as I have had experience of many) they are resolved not to be. And they
will be convinced in every particular, out of the Word of God, to the very
taking up of a Rush or Straw, as their grave Master T. C. L. S. p. 59, 60. apud
(...). L. 2. S. 1. p. 54.
T. C. taught them. As if God took care of Straws, or their taking of them up.
As if every particular thing of Order or Decency, were expressly set down in the
Word of God. Surely, if this were so, St. Paul should have had nothing to set
in order when he came to Corinth. 1 Cor 11. And if this 1 Cor. 11. 34.
be so, the Church has no Power left in any thing, not so much as to Command a
Bell shall Tole to call the people to public Prayers, because it is no where
commanded in the Word of God. So that upon this Ground, if any Man shall say,
he has Light enough in his Conscience, to see the unlawfulness of such Humane
Devices, he may Separate from the Church, rather than Sin against this Light.
So there shall be no Public Service of God; but some Ignis Fatuus or other,
under the Name of Light in the Conscience, shall except against it, and
Separate from it. Which is directly to set up the Light in each private Spirit,
against that Light which God has placed in his Church; shine it never so
clearly. Yet his Lordship is confident, and says,

But, my Lords, this is so far from making me the greatest Separatist in
England, that it cannot argue me to be any at all. For my Lords the Bishops do
know, that those whom they usually apply this term unto, are the Brownists (as
they call them by another Name) and they know their Tenants. The truth is, they
differ with us in no Fundamental Point of Doctrine, or saving Truth, I know.

Here then my Lord is (...) to say, that all that he has hitherto said, is so
far from making him the greatest Separatist in England, that it cannot argue
him to be any at all: For my part, I would to God it were so: But let us
examine, whether it be so or not. First then, this I humbly conceive is
certain; That he, whoever he be, that will not Communicate in Public Prayers
with a National Church, which serves God as she ought, is a Separatist. But the
Church of England as it stands established by Law, serves God as she ought:
Therefore my Lord, by his general absenting himself from her Communion in
Prayers, is a Separatist. And this is by his own confession: For he says, a
little before, and that expressly, that this is a Separation, which every Man
must make, that will keep himself pure from other Men's Sins. And I cannot
doubt, but his Lordship has made that, which he says he must make.

All that can be said for my Lord herein, is this; First, That my Lord Charges
the Church of England with Corruptions in the Worship of God; and such
Corruptions, as he must Separate from her. But is it sufficient for a
Separation for a particular Man, barely to say there are such Corruptions in
the Liturgy, when he does neither prove them to be such, nor so much as name
them what they are? Surely no. And I think these Gnats (which his Lordship
strains at) may be swallowed, without any Offense to God or Man. So far are
they from being a just Cause of Separation: Therefore, for all this, my Lord is
a Separatist.

Yea, but my Lord charges upon the Church of England, that she injoyns her
Liturgy upon all Men, by a certain Number of Men usurping Authority to
themselves, and imposing this Injunction, under the name of the Church. I have
made answer already to this Power of the Church to compose a set Form for
public Service; and I hope made it manifest, that this Authority is not
usurped. And then that can be no just Cause of a Separation. Nay, I must doubt,
whether if such Authority were usurped by some Churchmen, in any National
Church, the injoyning of the Service after it is made, supposing always that it
contain no Idolatry, or Fundamental Error, be for the Injunction alone a
sufficient Warrant to my Lord, or any other to Separate? Therefore, my Lord's
forsaking the public Service of the Church, upon no better Grounds than these,
makes him a Separatist by his own Confession, without any Man calling him so.

As for his Lordship's being the greatest Separatist in England: I have at the
beginning of this Tract clearly related, to the uttermost of my Memory, what
and upon what occasion I spoke of his Lordship in this kind. But whether I said
it or not, my Lord, for ought I see, will hardly escape being so. For he is the
greatest Separatist from the Church, that absents himself with most will and
least cause: And this, if I mistake not, is my Lord's Case; for he separates
with most will, that says Men must and ought to Separate: And upon least Cause,
because as yet he has Named none at all; but Corruptions in general; which any
Man may say; and the Injunction of a set Form, which is no cause. Therefore
(for ought I yet see) it may truly be said of his Lordship, that he is the
greatest Separatist in England.

Especially if you add to this, how busy and active his Lordship is, and for
many Years has been, to promote this Cause of Separation. And I have some very
good grounds to think, that his Lordship has been and is the great Cause, and
enlarger of all the Separation that now is in Church Affairs. And of all the
Disobedience thereby bred or cherished against Sovereign Power.

Next, my Lord appeals to my Lords the Bishops; and tells them, that they know
that they whom they usually apply this Name (Separatist) unto, are the
Brownists, as they call them by another Name. I know not all things, which the
rest of my Learned Brethren the Bishops know. Yet, I think, both they and I
know this, that the Name Separatist, is a common Name to all Heretics or
Schismatics, that separate for their Opinions sakes, either from the
Catholic, or from any particular Orthodox Church. And if my Lord himself (who
it seems is well acquainted with them) or any of my Lords the Bishops do know,
that this Name is usually applied to the Brownists; be it so. That I am sure is
not material, unless it be for that which my Lord closes this passage withal.

Namely, that my Lords the Bishops know the Tenants of the Brownists; and that
the truth is, they differ from us in no Fundamental Point of Doctrine or Saving
Truth that his Lordship knows. I doubt not but my Lords the Bishops know the
Tenants of the Brownists, so far forth at least, as they be Tenants, and not
varied from; and so far as they are their General Tenants, to which all or most
of them agree. And so far as they are plain and univocal Tenants, and not such
as shall equivocate with the very Faith it self. But such Tenants of the
Brownists as these are, it may be, all my Lords the Bishops know not.

Now if the Truth be, as my Lord says it is, for ought he knows, that the
Brownists differ from us in no Fundamental Point of Doctrine, or saving Truth:
Then out of all doubt Majus peccatum habent, their Sin (and my Lord's too) is
the greater, that they will so Uncharitably, and with so great Heat and settled
Violence, and to the great scandal of Religion, first separate themselves from,
and now labor utterly to overthrow that Church, which (by my Lord's own
Confession here) differs not from them in any Fundamental Point of Doctrine or
saving Truth. For sure, if they differ not from us, we differ not from them.
But this is only Argumentum ad Hominem, and is sufficient to convince this
Lord, I think, in his own way.

But I doubt the Truth is quite another thing. Namely, that the Church of
England is very Orthodox, and that the Brownists or Separatists, call them as
you will, do Separate upon false and unchristian Opinions. And that besides
Matters of Opinion and breach of Charity, they do differ from us in some
Fundamental Points of Doctrine and saving Truth.

My Lord a little before tells us of Corruptions in the Liturgy of the Church;
but names none. And should I charge the Brownists, with difference from the
Church in Fundamental Points of Doctrine, and yet name none, I should run into
the same fault for which I there taxed my Lord: I shall therefore give some
Instances of some of their Opinions, and then leave the indifferent Reader to
judge, whether they do not differ from us in some Fundamental Points of
Doctrine and saving Truth. And then consequently, whether it be not an
Heretical, as well as a Schismatical Separation, which they make from the
Church of England.

1. And first, there was a Creed Printed by John Turner, in this present Year,
and the Parliament sitting. This Turner is a Notorious Separatist, or Brownist
if you will. In this Creed of his, he leaves out the descent of Christ into
Hell. This is an Article of the Apostle's Creed. And it is an Article of the
Church of England. And so I presume a Fundamental Point of Doctrine. Yet
herein, this Brownist and his Fellows differ from us. And I have heard from
some present, that at a Committee of Lords, appointed for Matters of Religion,
a The Lord Brook.
young Lord should say openly and boldly enough, that he did not believe the
descent of Christ into Hell. And that my Lord, the Author of this Speech,
should second him.

2. In the same Creed, Turner professes, he believes that Christ Instituted by
his Apostles certain particular Churches here on Earth, and no other. So the
Catholic Church, the Mother of all particular, both Men and Churches, and out
of which there can be no Salvation in the ordinary way, is quite thrust out of
this Brownist's Creed. And this I hope is another Fundamental Point of Doctrine
and saving Truth. But in this I must do my Lord right, and not charge him with
this point. Because a little before, his Lordship tells of a twofold
Separation, one whereof he says is from the Universal or Catholic Church. So
the Catholic Church is not yet thrust out of my Lord's Creed. But then this
appears, that the Separatists are not yet agreed upon all the Articles of their
Creed. Nay, some of them call the Apostle's Creed a patched Forgery. And Barrow
justifies it. Barrow's Reply to Gifford, p. 255.


3. Thirdly, they differ from us in charging gross Corruptions upon the Church
of England. And these are known to my Lord; for he acknowledges them; and so
gross, that, should they be true, the Church of England must be faulty in
Fundamental and Saving Truth. As shall farther appear in my Answer to my Lord's
next Passage. Therefore p. 48.
if their Charge be true, they must, by my Lord's own Confession, differ from
us in Fundamental and saving Truth. And if their Charge be false, why do they
separate from us? Besides, all Anabaptists and Brownists agree in this, that
the Church of England is Antichristian. And if it be so, they must either
differ in Fundamentals from the Church of England: Or be Antichristian
themselves in joining with them: Or grant, that Christ and Antichrist have one
and the same Foundation.

4. Fourthly, some of them yet living, though they dare not speak it out in all
Companies, do cunningly insinuate, That at Death, Soul and Body are extinct
together; but shall rise again at the Resurrection, first or last. And that
Christ shall come and live here upon the Earth again. That the Martyrs shall
then rise and live with him a Thousand Years. And that Christ once come upon
the Earth, shall not, (for any thing they can learn out of Scripure) ever
depart from the Earth again.

5. Fifthly, one Brierly and his Independent Congregation, are of this Belief.
The 50. (...) taken from his own (...).
That the Child of God, in the Power of Grace, does perform every Duty so well,
that to ask Pardon for failing, either in matter or manner, is a Sin. That it
is unlawful to pray for Forgiveness of Sins, after their Conversion. With
diverse others, some as bad, some worse, to the number of Fifty.

6. Sixthly, One Spisberrye yet living, and of that Independent Fraternity,
maintains, that God works all things in us; and that we are but Organs,
Instruments, and mere empty Trunks. Which is to make God the Author of all the
Sins which Men commit: And therefore proposit. 19.
Brierly says expressly, that if they do at any time fall, they can by the power
of Grace, carry their Sin to the Lord, and say, here I had it, and here I leave
it. Will not the Devil one day stop the Mouth of this Blasphemy?

7. Seventhly, Mr. Pryn himself (who has been a great stickler in Pryn in his
perpetuity. p. 432.
these Troubles of the Church) says expressly; Let any true Saint of God be
taken away in the very act of any known Sin, before it is possible for him to
Repent; I make no doubt or Scruple of it, but he shall as surely be saved as if
he had lived to have repented of it. And he instances in David, in case he had
been taken away, before he had repented of his Adultery and Murder. So
according to this Divinity, the true Saints of God may commit horrible and
carrying Sins, dye without Repentance, and yet be sure of Salvation; which
teareth up the very Foundations of Religion; induces all manner of Profaneness
into the World; and is expressly contrary to the whole current of the Ezech. 18.
26. Prove. 28. 13. S. Luc. 13. 3. S. Luc. 21. 24. Acts 3. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 9. Gal.
5. 10. and many other places.
Scripture.

8. In the Eighth place, almost all of them say, That God, from all Eternity
Reprobates by far the greater part of Mankind to eternal Fire, without any Eye
at all to their Sin. Which Opinion my very Soul abominates. For it makes God,
the God of all Mercies, to be the most fierce and unreasonable Tyrant in the
World. For the Question is not here, what God may do by an absolute act of
Power, would he so use it upon the Creature which he made of nothing: But what
he has done, and what stands with his Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness to do.

9. Ninthly, One Lionel Lockier, now or late of Cranbrooke in Kent, among other
his Errors, rails against teaching Children the Lord's Prayer, or other Forms
of Catechizing. And if they differ from the Church of England in the whole
Catechism, I think the Lord must work a Miracle, before he can make his Speech
good, That they differ from us in no Fundamental point.

10. Lastly, to omit all those base Opinions, in which the Brownists agree with
the Anabaptists; this, in which they differ from them, will be sufficient to
prove, that they differ from us in that which is fundamental; unless they will
say, that to believe the Trinity is not Fundamental. For some of them, and by
name one Rog. in Symb. Art. 7. Prop. 5.
Glover, deny the Deity of the Holy Ghost. Which stands condemned for a gross
and Fundamental Heresy in the Second Council. Constable. 1. Hooker's Pref. to Eccl.
pol. S. 3.
General Council, held against Macedonius. And for the Familists (of which
there is Store this Day in England) they deny the Resurrection of the Flesh,
turning it, as they do many other things, into a Mystery or Allegory. Perhaps,
more particulars might be found, upon a narrow search. But if there be no more,
these are enough to make it evident to the World, that these Separatists (...)
from us in some fundamental points of Doctrine, or saving Truth. And as these
are in fault for their Separation; so I doubt the Church is to blame, for not
proceeding against such of them as are altogether incorrigible.

But whether my Lord thinks these to be Fundamental Points; or whether he know,
that the Brownists do differ from us in them; I shall not take on me to
declare, till his Lordship open himself farther. In the mean time, his Lordship
goes on to tell us, wherein these Brownists fail, though they do not differ in
Fundamental Points to his Knowledge.

Their failing is in this. They hold that there is no true Church in England,
no true Ministry, no true Worship which depend the one upon the other; they say
all is Antichristian. Here is their Error; they distinguish not between the
been esse or Purity of a true Church; and the esse or true being of it, though
with many Defects and gross Corruptions. But conclude, because such things are
wanting, which are indeed necessary to the well-being of a true Church, and to
be desired; therefore there is none at all in being.

Here my Lord shows a great deal of sharp and good Apprehension. And
distinguishes very rightly between the entire being of a true Church, which is
her been esse; and the true Being of a Church, which is her esse only. And my
Lord does farther fairly acknowledge, that this is the Brownists Error, To
conclude no Church in being, because it has many Defects and gross Corruptions
in it to hinder its well-being.

So then, my Lord here grants two things.

First, that to hold there is no True Church in England, no True Ministry, no
true Worship (which depend one upon another) but that all is Antichristian; is
an Error.

And Secondly, that it is the Brownists Error. How, and how far these Three: No
True Church; no True Ministry; no True Worship depend one upon another: And in
what cases it may in some Exigents be otherways, I will not now dispute, nor
divert from the main Business.

1. First then, if it be an Error to say, there is no True Church, no True
Ministry, no True Worship in England. Then, I hope, it will be found Truth to
say, there is a True Church, a True Ministry, and a True Worship in England.
And he that shall avow the contrary, must needs differ from the Church of
England, in Fundamentals. For these Contradictions; a True Church, and no True
Church; a True Ministry, and no True Ministry; a True Worship of God, and no
True Worship; cannot be built up but upon different Foundations. And as for
that, which my Lord affirms, is added by the Brownists, That there are many
Defects and gross Corruptions in it: So long as this is said, and not proved;
it is enough, without farther Proof to deny, both the Defects and Corruptions,
both the many and the gross. As I doubt not but the Church of England can make
good against, both my Lord, and all the Brownists in England.

2. Secondly, if to affirm this, be the Brownists Error; then I would fain know
of my Lord, how he can say the Brownists do not differ from or with us, in any
fundamental Point of Doctrine or saving Truth? For if this be no fundamental
Point, or no saving Truth; that we be in, and of a true Church; that this
Church has a true Ministry, to be between God and us, in all the Duties of
their Function; whether upward to God in Prayer and Spiritual Sacrifice, or
downward to us in the Word and Sacraments; that in this Church, and by this
Ministry, there is a true Worship, and that without gross Corruptions: What can
be accounted, next the Creed it self, fundamental or saving? So that in one
Line, my Lord is pleased to say, the Brownists do not differ with us in any
fundamental Point of Doctrine, or saving Truth; and in the very next Line, his
Lordship confesses, they differ from us in these three things, which if not
several, yet altogether, as they depend one upon another, are saving and
fundamental.

Nor can this cautelous close help my Lord one jot, that he adds; The Brownists
do not differ from us in any fundamental point of Doctrine or saving Truth, as
his Lordship knows. For were his Lordship of a shallow, or narrow
Comprehension, 'twere another matter: But since he is so full of understanding
in these things, it is impossible but he must know these three together are
fundamental; and being so, he must needs know also, that the Brownists differ
with us in Fundamentals; which is that which he denied. If therefore my Lord
will say, he knows not this to be the Brownists Error, why does he take upon
him to say it is? If he will grant, that he knows it, he must needs know withal
(if he will not shut out the Light of his Conscience, of which a little before
he is so tender) that the Brownists, or Separatists, call them what you will,
differ from us in some fundamental Points of Doctrine or saving Truth.

Thus far then my Lord relates the failing of the Brownist. I hope he will be
so careful as not to fail with them himself. Yes sure; for he adds;

I hold no such Opinion; but do believe to the contrary: That there are in
England many true Churches, and a true Ministry which I do hear, and with which
Churches I could join in Communion, were those Yokes of Bondage, which are laid
upon them, taken off, and those Corruptions removed, which they do (contrary,
as I think, to their Duty) yield unto, and admit of: And this I am sure, no
Separatist in England holds, that deserves that Name. And therefore I hope your
Lordships will in that respect let me stand right in your Opinions.

Here my Lord tells us, he holds no such Opinion, but does believe to the
contrary. But I doubt, he so believes to the contrary, as that he is of the
same Opinion. For he believes, that there are in England, many true Churches,
and a true Ministry. And so do all the Brownists: For no doubt, but they
believe, that all their Congregations or Conventicles, are true Churches in
England; and that the Ministers which they hear are true Ministers. And this is
plainly my Lord's Belief. For he says, he believes there is a true Ministry in
England, (...) he does hear. But what Ministers they are, which he does hear,
he does not say.

Or if this be not my Lord's meaning; but that there are some true Churches,
and some true Ministers in England, though ordained as in England they are; yet
my Lord continues a Separatist still. For his Lordship does not say, either
that he does, or that he will, or that he can join in Communion with any of
these Churches, or this Ministry, which he says, are true. But only that he
could join with them, if; If what? Why, if these Yokes of Bondage were taken
off, which are laid upon them, and those Corruptions removed. By the Yokes of
Bondage, he means the Injunction of a set Form of Prayers, which he has so
often mentioned in this Speech.

But what Corruptions he means, I know not, till his Lordship shall be pleased
to tell us. Only this I conceive I may add; That all things are not Corruptions
in the Church, which my Lord calls so. That if these Corruptions be
fundamental, they may be such too, as may keep these Churches which he speaks
of, from being true Churches, and the Ministry from being a true Ministry. But
if these Corruptions be of a very light Allay, (as I verily believe they are,
if there be any) then his Lordship ought not to separate, but to join in
Communion with them; for all these, either Yokes, or Corruptions. The Apostle
indeed tells us of a Church without Wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. But that is a Triumphant
Ephesians. 5. 27.
Church in Heaven; not a Militant upon Earth. And for the Yokes, which my Lord
speaks of, they are not Yokes of Bondage, as he pleases to call them; but Yokes
of Obedience, which, whenever they shall be broken, the wild Asses of the
Wilderness, will overrun Jer. 2. 24.
all.

My Lord goes farther, and says; That in these true Churches, this true
Ministry does yield unto, and admit of these Yokes, and these Corruptions,
contrary, as he thinks, to their Duty. But it seems, they think not so; or if
they do think so, why do they not remonstrate their Grievance? Sure, if their
Conscience tell them they do against their Duty, they ought to inform their
Conscience, or forbear the Work. To inform their Conscience, I am sure is fit
for them, if they need it. Though it seems, my Lord would rather have them
forbear the Duty, the doing whereof, he calls their yielding unto; and their
admitting these things, which he calls Yokes and Corruptions.

As for that which follows, and which my Lord says he is sure of, that no
Separatist in England that deserves that Name, holds that which his Lordship
says here he does believe. In that also, I conceive his Lordship is utterly
mistaken. For, I believe, there is no Separatist in England, Brownist, or other
deserving that Name; but he holds, and will say as much as my Lord believes,
namely, that there are in England many true Churches, that is, Assemblies, or
Congregations of their own Brotherhood. And a true Ministry: To wit, those
which themselves have made. And that they do hear them; that is, such as these.
Yea, and that they could join in Communion with some other Churches, were those
Yokes of Bondage, which are laid upon them, taken off, and those Corruptions
removed. That is, upon the matter, if they would become as themselves are, then
they would join with them. And this (...) of all doubt they think they ought to
do, and neither yield unto such Yoeks, nor admit of such Corruptions. So that
my Lord may see every (...) in England, even they, which most deserve that
Name, hold that which his Lordship believes. And therefore no question can be
made, but that my Lord deserves that Name, as much as any of them, even while
he says, he is sure no Separatist in England that deserves that Name, holds as
he does.

But to come to the quick. The Brownists and Separatists deal plainly with God
and the World, and say expressly, that the whole Church of England, as it stands
established by Law, is peccant, both in the Doctrine, Liturgy, and Discipline
of it; and in such a degree, as that they neither will, nor can join in
Communion with it: And therefore separate from it, and betake themselves to
their own private Opinions and Congregations. But my Lord he Equivocates both
with God and Man: And tells us, he believes there are true Churches in England,
and a true Ministry which he hears. And this no Separatist that understands
himself, but will say as fast as he. But let his Lordship come home to the
Business directly and plainly: Let him say, that the Church of England is a
true Church; That the Ministry of it, is a true Ministry; That the Doctrine,
Liturgy and Discipline of it, as it stands established now by Law, are free
from any such Corruptions as give just cause for a Separation.

And when he has said this, let him join in Communion with it as he ought to
do; and then he shall wrong my Lord very deeply, that says he is a Separatist.

But for all this which he has yet said for himself, it is manifest, that a
Separatist he is. And I doubt, has hereby proved himself, whether I will or
no, the greatest Separatist in England. And therefore he has little cause to
hope (as he says he does) that he shall stand right in their Lordships
Opinions, or any other Man's, that is not possessed with the same Humor. Yet, my
Lord has two Requests to make.

I will now end with two Requests: The one, that your Lordships will please to
pardon me, for troubling you with so long a Discourse concerning my self. I
have not used it heretofore; and I am not like to offend again in the same
kind. It is but once, and your Lordships will consider the occasion.

In this Suit, were there need, I would join with my Lord. For though I have a
great deal of hard Measure put upon me in this Speech; yet I have the more
reason to be content with it, because this whole Discourse of my Lord's, well
weighed, is more against himself than me. And such Trouble of his Lordship's, I
hope all Men well affected to the present Church of England, will easily
Pardon. And this I doubt not, but their Lordships, and all Men else, will the
rather do, when they consider the Occasion. Which certainly I gave not
personally in the House: But a Guilty Conscience (it seems) would needs be
meant.

The Second ( Request) is to entreat of you, that where you know there is one
and the same God worshipped, one and the same Faith embraced, one and the same
Spirit working Love, and causing an unblamable Conversation, without any
offense to the State, in your Brethren, who in all these concur with you; you
will not suffer them, (for Ceremonies and Things indifferent to you, but not to
them but Burdens, which without offense to the State, or prejudice to the
Churches you may take off if you will) to be thrust out of the Land and cut off
from their Native Country. For if you thus shall wound the Consciences of your
Brethren, you will certainly offend and sin against Christ.

In this second Request, I can easily agree with my Lord in some things; but
must differ in other. And First, I agree with all my 1.
Heart, that I would have no pressure at all; much less cutting off from their
Native Country, put upon them, who are known to worship the same God, to
embrace one and the same Faith, and one and the same Spirit working Love. But
in this I must disagree, that the Separatists, (for they are the Men of whom
this Lord speaks thus, and says they are your Brethren, and concur with you in
all these) are not known to be such. For though he be one and the same God whom
they worship, yet the Worship is not one and the same. For my Lord says
plainly, that our set Forms are Superstition: And that he cannot join in
Communion with us, till our yokes of Bondage, and our other gross Corruptions
be removed. And I must doubt they embrace not the same Faith, till they admit
the whole Creed, and will use the Lord's Prayer, which few of them will. As for
the Spirit that works by Love, I much fear he is a great stranger to many of
these Men. For I have many ways found their Malice to be fierce, and yet
endless. And therefore I wonder my Lord should have the Boldness to tell my
Lords in Parliament, that they know all these things of these Men, and that
they are their Brethren and concur with them in all these forenamed things;
whom in the mean time, their Lordships do, and cannot but know, different from
them; nay separating from them, in the very Worship of God.

Next I agree with my Lord again, that I would have no pressure put 2.
upon those Men, in whom the Spirit of Love causes an unblamable Conversation,
without any offense to the State. But in this I must disagree, that the
Separatists from the Church of England, are such manner of Men. For the private
Conversation of very many of them (whom I could name, were it fit,) is far from
being unblamable. ^.


And the Public Conversation of all, or most of them, is full of offense to
the State: Unless my Lord think the State is or ought to be of their Humor.
For how can their Conversation be without great offense, very great, to this or
any State Christian; who shall have and maintain private Conventicles and
Meetings, in a different way of Religion, from that which is Established by the
State? Nay, which shall not only differ from, but openly and slanderously
oppose that which is so Established? Besides, no well governed State will allow
of private Meetings, especially under pretense of Religion (which carry far)
without their privity and allowance. For if this be permitted, there lies a way
open to all Conspiracies against the State whatsoever, and they shall all be
satisfied under the pretense of Religion.

The third thing in which I agree with my Lord is, that I would 3.
not, that for Ceremonies and Things indifferent, these Men should be thrust
out of the Land, and cut off from their Native Country. No, God forbid; if any
thing will reclaim them. But then I must disagree with my Lord in this, That
these Men (whether such as my Lord describes them or no) are thrust out of the
Land, or cut off from their Native Country, for Ceremonies or Things
indifferent. For First, they are not all Ceremonies, for which they separate
from the Church. For they pretend certain gross Corruptions in the very Worship
of God (as my Lord a little before delivers.) Secondly, be the Cause what it
will, none of them have been banished, or thrust out of the Land, or cut from
their Native Country (as is here spoken to move Hatred against the Government.)
But it is true, they have thrust themselves out, and cut themselves off, and run
a Madding to New England, scared away (as they say) by certain gross
Corruptions, not to be endured in this Church. Nor after they have gone a
Madding enough, is their return denied to any: And I know some that went out
like Fools, and are come back so like -- that you cannot know the one from the
other.

In this Passage it is said by my Lord, that these Ceremonies and Things 4.
indifferent unto you, (speaking to the Lords in Parliament) are not so to
them, but Burdens. In this Passage I can agree with my Lord in nothing. For
First, my Lord but a very little before, tells of Yokes of Bondage and gross
Corruptions. And are they so soon become but Ceremonies and Things indifferent?
If they be more than Ceremonies and Things indifferent, then my Lord delivers
not the whole Truth. And if they be but Ceremonies and Things indifferent, then
his Lordship and all other Separatists, ought rather to yield to the Church in
such things, than for such things to separate from it. And certainly so they
would, if the Spirit that works by Love, did work in them. Yea, but my Lord
says, they are such things, as though they be indifferent to others, yet to
them they are not, but burdens. And it may be, they make them so; for in their
own Nature they are nothing less: And of great use they are to preserve the
Substance and the Body of Religion. But this I find; let any thing in the World
be enjoined by the Church Authority, and it is a Burden presently. And so you
see all along this Speech, how earnest my Lord is, in behalf of himself and
these Separatists, against all Injunctions of set Forms, and Yokes of Bondage.
This is an excellent way of Religion, to settle Temporal Obedience.

And I can as little agree with that which follows. Namely, that 5.
the Lords may without any Offense to the State, or prejudice to the Churches,
take away, if they will, these Things indifferent to them; but Burdens to
these Brethren. For First, suppose them to be but (...) and Things indifferent;
yet can they not be taken away without offense to the State, or prejudic to the
Churches; who to please a few unruly Separatists, must make an Alteration in
that part of Religion, which has continued with great Happiness to this
Church, ever since the Reformation. Secondly, I will not dispute it here, what
Power a Lay Assembly (and such a Parliament is) has to determine Matters of
Religion, Primely and Originally by and of themselves, before the Church has
first agreed upon them. Then indeed they may confirm or refuse. And this course
was held in the Reformation. But Originally to take this Power over Religion,
into Lay Hands, is that which has not been thus assumed, since Christ to these
unhappy days. And I pray God this Chair of Religion, do not prove Cathedra
Pestilentiae, as the vulgar reads it Psalm. 1. 1. to the infecting of this whole
Nation with Schism and Heresy, and in the end bring all to confusion.

I meddle not here with the King's Power. For he may be present in Convocation
when he pleases, and take or leave any Canons, as he pleases, which are for the
Peace and well Ordering of the Church; as well as in Parliament, take or leave
any Laws made ready for him, for the good and quiet of his People. But if it
come to be Matter of Faith, though in his Absolute Power he may do what he
will, and Answer God for it after: Yet he cannot commit the ordering of that to
any Lay Assembly, Parliament, or other; for them to determine that, which God
has entrusted into the Hands of his Priests. Though if he will do this, the
Clergy must do their Duty, to inform him, and help that dangerous Error if they
can. But if they cannot, they must suffer an unjust Violence, how far soever it
proceed; but they may not break the Duty of their Allegiance.

It Is true, Constantius the Emperor, a great Patron of the Arrians, was by
them interested in their Cause, and meddled in Athan. in Epist. ad solit. (...)
agentes Edit Gr. Lat. p. 862.
decernendo, in determining, and that beforehand, what the Prelates should do;
and sometimes in Commanding the Orthodox Prelates to Communicate with the
Arrians. This they refused to do, as being against the Canons of the Council of
Nice.

And then his Answer was; (...) Epist. ad Solit. Vitam (...).
Yea, but that which I will, shall go for Canon. But then we must know withal,
that (...); cap. 9. 27. Athanasin Epist. (...). vitam agentes. Edit. Gr. (...)
page 862.
Athanasius reckn'd him for this, as that Antichrist which Daniel Prophesied of.

In (...) ad Constantium quae extat apud Athana. Ibid. p. 829.
Hosius also, the Famous Confessor of those Times, condemned in him that kind
of meddling in and with Religion. And so does St. Hilary cont. Constantium.
Edit. (...). p. 272. and passim alibi.
St. Hilary of Poictiers. Valentinian also the Younger, took upon him to judge
of Religion, at the like presuasion of Auxentius the Arrian; but he likewise
was sharply reproved for it by Quando audiisti (...) Imperator in (...) Fidei
Laicos de (...) judicasse? quis est qui (...) in causa Fidei, in causa (...)
Fidei. (...) solere de Imperatortbus Christianis, non Imperatores de Episcopis
(...)? Pater tuus baptizatus in (...), inhabilem se ponderi tanti putabat esse
judicii, etc. St. Amb. L. 5. Epist. 32.
St. Ambrose. In like manner, Maximus the Tyrant took upon him to judge in
Matters of Religion, as in the Case of Priscillian and his Associates. But this
also was checked by Novum and inauditum nefas esse dicens, ut causam Ecclesiae
Judex Saeculi judicaret. Sulp. Sever. L. 2. Hist. (...).
St. Martin Bishop of Tours: Where it is again to be observed, that though
these Emperors were too busy in venturing upon the determination of Points of
Faith; yet no one of them went so far, as to take Power from the Synods, and
give it to the Senate. And the Orthodox and Understanding Emperors, did
neither the one nor the other. For Pater tuus, Deo favente, vir maturioris
(...), dicebat, non est meum Judicate inter Episcopos. St. Amb. L. 5. Epist. 32.
Valentinian the Elder, left this great Church-work, to be done by Churchmen.
And though the Power to call Councils, was in the Emperor: And though the
Emperors were sometimes personally present in the Councils, and sometimes by
their Deputies, both to see Order kept, and to inform themselves; yet the
decisive Voices were in the Clergy only. And this will plainly appear in the
Instructions given by the Emperor Theodosius to Condidianus, whom he sent to
supply his place in the Council of Ephesus; which were, Vt cum quaestionibus
and controversiis quae circa fidei dogmata incidunt, nibil quicquam commune
habeat. Nefas est enim, qui Sanctissimorum Episcoporum (...) ascriptus non est,
illum Ecclesiasticis negotiis and consultationibus sese immiscere. Bin. Tom. 1.
Conc. Par. 2. p. 166. Ed. Colon.
That he should not meddle with Matters of Faith, if any came to be debated.
And gives this Reason for it: Because it is unlawful for any but Bishops, to
mingle himself with them in those Consultations. And Basilius the Emperor,
long after this, in the Eighth General Council held at Constantinople, (...).
l. 869.
870. affirms it of the Laity in general; Quod (...) modo iis liceat de
Ecclesiasticis causis sermonem movere. Hoc enim (...) and investigare,
Patriarcharum, Pontificum and Sacerdotum est, qui regiminis officium (...)
sunt. Nos (...) oportet cum timore and fide sincera (...) adire, etc. Bin. Tom.
3. Council. Par. 2. 682.
That it is no way lawful for them to meddle with these things. But that it is
proper for the Patriarchs, Bishops and Priests, which have the Office of
Government in the Church, to enquire into these Things. And more of this
Argument might easily be added, were that needful, or I among my Books, and my
Thoughts at liberty. And yet this crosses not the Supremacy, which the King of
England has in Causes Ecclesiastical; as it is acknowledged, both by the
Church and Law. For that reaches not to the giving of him Power to determine
Points of Faith, either in Parliament or out; or to the acknowledgment of any
such Power residing in him; or to give him Power to make Liturgies, and public
Forms of Prayer; or to Preach or Administer Sacraments; or to do any thing
which is merely Spiritual. But in all things which are of a mixed Cognizance;
such as are all those, which are properly called Ecclesiastical, and belong to
the Bishops External Jurisdiction; the Supremacy there, and in all things of
like Nature is the Kings. And if at any time the Emperor or his Deputy, sit
Judge in a Point of Faith, it is not because he has any right to judge it, or
that the Church has not Right; but merely in case of Contumacy, where the
Heretic is wilful, and will not submit to the Church's Power.

And this the Heretics sometimes did; and then the Bishops were forced to
Appeal thither also; but not for any Resolution in Hist. Trip. L 5. 35. in the
case of Heretics.
the point of Faith, but for Aid and Assistance to the just Power of the Church.

I cannot but remember a very Prudent Speech uttered in the beginning of the
late preceding Parliament, and by that Lord who now made this. The occasion
was. A Lord offered to deliver a Message from the King before he was formally
brought into the House, and his Patent showed. This Lord, who thinks
Church-Ceremonies may so easily be altered, stood up and said: He would not be
against the delivery of the Message; he knew not how urgent it might be; but
desired withal, that it might be entered, that this was yielded unto by Special
leave of the House. For that (says he) though this be but a Ceremony, yet the
Honor and Safety of the Privileges of this Great House, is preserved by
nothing more, than by keeping the Ancient Rights and Ceremonies thereof entire.
And this I think was very wisely spoken, and with great Judgment. And could my
Lord see this in the Parliament, and can he not see it in the Church? Are
Ancient Ceremonies, the chief Props of Parliamentary Rights; and have they no
use in Religion, to keep up her Dignity; yea perhaps, and Truth too? The House
of Parliament, is, I confess; a Great and Honorable House. But the whole
Church of Christ is greater. And it will not well beseem a Parliament to
maintain their own Ceremonies, and to kick down the Ceremonies of the National
Church, which, under God, made all their Members Christians. Most sure I am,
they cannot do it, without ossence both to State and Church, and making both a
Scorn to Neighboring Nations.

Now in the close of all, my Lord tells his Fellow Peers, and all others in
them, That if they shall thus wound the Consciences of their Brethren, (the
Separatists) they will certainly offend and sin against Christ. Soft and fair.
But what shall these Lords do, if to Humor the Consciences of those Brethren
(some weak, and many wilful, and the cunning misleading the simple) they shall
disgrace and weaken, and perhaps, overthrow the Religion they profess? Shall
they not then, both wound their own Consciences, and most certainly sin against
Christ? Yes, out of all doubt, they shall do both. Now, where it comes to the
wounding of Consciences, no question can be made, but that every Man ought
first to look to his own; to his Brethrens after. A Man must not do that which
shall justly wound his Brother's Conscience, though he be his Brother in a
Separation, and stand never so much a-loof from him. But he must not wound his
own, to preserve his Brother from a wound; especially such a one as happily may
cure him, and by a timely pinch make him sensible of the ill Condition in which
he is.

As for these Men, God of his Mercy give them that Light of his Truth, which
they want; and forgive them the boasting of that Light, which they presume they
have. And give them true Repentance, and in that Sense, a wounded Conscience,
for their breaking the Peace of this Church.

And forgive them all their Sins, by which they still go on with more and more
violence to distract this Church.

And God of his Infinite Goodness preserve this Church at all times, and
especially at this time, while the Waves of this Sea of Separation rage so
horribly. And as for this Lord, God forgive him, and I do, and I hope this
Church will. Amen.

In Turri Land: Dec. 3. 1641.

S. S. Trinitati sit Laus and Gloria in AEternum.

Archbishop LAUD's ANNUAL ACCOUNTS OF HIS PROVINCE, PRESENTED TO THE KING IN
The beginning of every Year; With the KING's Apostills; or, Marginal Notes:
Transcribed and Published from the Originals.

Together with the KING's INSTRUCTIONS TO THE Archbishops Abbot and Laud, Upon
which These ACCOUNTS were formed: AND The last Account of Archbishop Abbot to
the King concerning his Province.

LONDON: Printed for (...): (...), at the Rose and Crown in St: Paul's
Churchyard, M DC XCV.

INSTRUCTIONS
Sent from the King to Archbishop Abbot, in the Year: 1629.
Carolus Rex.

INstructions for the most Reverend Father in God, our right Trusty, and right
entirely well beloved Councellor, George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury;
concerning certain Articles to be observed, and put in execution by the several
Bishops in his Province.

I: That the Lords the Bishops, be commanded to their several Sees to keep
Residence, excepting those which are in necessary Attendance at Court.

II: That none of them Reside upon his Land or Lease that he has Purchased, no
ron his Commendam, if he hold any. Instruct. adLaud.
should have any, but in one of the Episcopal Houses, if he have any. And that
he waste not the Woods where any are left.

III: That they give charge in their Triennial Visitations, and all other
convenient times, both by themselves, and the Archdeacons; that our. Id.
the Declaration for the settling all Questions in difference, be strictly. Id.
chiefly observed by all Parties.

IV: That there be a special care taken by them all, that their. Id.
the Ordinations be Solemn, and not of unworthy Persons.

V: That they take great care concerning the Lecturers, in these special
Directions following.

1: That in all Parishes the Afternoon Sermons may be turned into Catechizing
by Questions and Answers, when, and wheresoever there is no great cause
apparent to break this ancient and profitable Order. 2: That every Bishop
Ordain in his Diocese, that every Lecturer do read Divine Service according to
the Liturgy Printed by Authority, in his Surplice and Hood, before the Lecture.
3: That where a Lecture is set up in a Market Town, it may be read by a company
of Grave and Orthodox Divines near adjoining, and in the same Diocese; and that
they Preach in Gowns and not in Cloaks, as too many do use. 4: That if a
Corporation maintain a single Lecturer, he be not suffered to Preach, till he
profess his willingness to take upon him a Living with cure of Souls within
that Corporation; and that he actually take such Benefice or Cure, as soon as
it shall be fairly procured for him.
VI: That the Bishops do countenance and encourage the Grave and Orthodox
Divines of their Clergy; and that they use means by some of their Clergy, that
they may have knowledge, how both Lecturers and Preachers behave themselves in
their Sermons within their Diocese. That so they may take Order for any abuse
accordingly.

VII: That the Bishops suffer none but Noblemen, and Men qualified by Learning,
to have any Private Chaplain in his House.

VIII: That they take special Care, that Divine Service be duly frequented; as
well for Prayers and Catechizing, as for Sermons: And take particular note of
all such as absent themselves as Recusants, or otherwise.

IX: That every Bishop, that by our Grace, Favor, and good Opinion of his
Service, shall be nominated by us to another Bishopric, shall, from that Day
of Nomination, not presume to make any Lease for Three Lives, or One and Twenty
Years, or concurrent Lease; or any way make any Estate, or cut any Woods or
Timber; but merely receive the Rents due, and so quit the place: For we think
it an hateful thing, that any Man, leaving the Bishopric, should almost undo
the Successor. And if any Man shall presume to break this Order, we will refuse
him at our Royal Assent, and keep him at the Place which he had so abused.

X: We Command you to give us an Account every Year the Second Day of February.
exemplar aliud.
January, of the performance of these our Commands.

Dorchester.

Archbishop Abbot's Account of his Province for the Year: 1632. sent to the
King.
May it it Please your most Excellent Majesty,
THE Year is at an end; redit Orbis in Orbem, and moritura ruit perituri
Machina Mundi. But the Account of the Church Affairs for the last Year must not
be forgotten.

To speak generally unto the Articles heretosore propounded by your Majesty; it
is enough to say, that the Bishops, for ought it appears unto me, have lived
at home; and in their Episcopal-Houses: Saving only my Lord of St. David's; who
by his Wives Sickness, but especially by a Law Suit, which concerns him for
all that he has, as he informs, was constrained to keep here. But now that
vexatious Suit being ended, he promises to repair home, and there to reside;
that there shall be no just Occasion of Complaint against him.

Of Arminian Points there is no dispute: And Ordinations of Ministers, for
ought that I can learn, are Canonically observed: The Rules for Lecturers are
strictly kept.

Care is had, that Divine Service is Religiously read and frequented; saving by
certain Separatists about London, who for their Persons are contemptible, but
fit to be punished for their wilful Obstinacy; which we do with Moderation: Yet
yielding them Means to confer with Learned Men, which we hope will prevail with
some of them. And so it may be said of the rest of the Articles, that I find no
noted Transgression of them.

There is not in the Church of England left any inconformable Minister, which
appears: And yet the Lord Bishops of London and Lincoln have been forced to
deprive Two or Three, whom no time can Tame, nor Instruction conquer, according
to the rule, Immedicabile Vulnus Ense recidendum est.

There was one Burges, a Physician, who opened his Mouth wide against the
repairing of St: Paul's Church; but he has been so castigated, that, as I
trust, very few others will be encouraged to walk in his ways, and to Blaspheme
so Holy a Work.

There has been these Two last Years past, mention made of Papists frequenting
Holy-Well or St. Winifred's Well in Wales; and the Bishop of St: Asaph does not
forget to touch it again in these Words: There has been there all this Summer
more than ordinary concourse of People, and more bold and open practice of
Superstition. Where it is not to be forgotten, that at that Well a great part
of the Powder Treason was hatched: And therefore my humble Opinion is, that
serious Letters should be directed from your Majesty or Privy Council, to the
Lord President of Wales and his Fellow Commissioners, that at Summer next, some
course should be taken for the repressing of this Confluence, being indeed no
better than a Pilgrimage.

The Lady Wotton in Kent has set up a bold Epitaph upon her Lord's Tomb, and
will not be persuaded to take it down. We have therefore called her into the
High Commission, where, by excuse of Sickness, she has not yet appeared: But
at the next Term (God willing) we intend to proceed with her; which is but
necessary, for the avoiding of Scandal in the Country.

These few, are the most observable things, whereof I can give your Majesty any
reckoning: And if there were any thing else worthy the reporting, I should not
conceal it. But there being nothing more, it may be the great comfort of your
Majesty, that in so large and diffuse a Multitude both of Men and Matters, upon
strict Examination, there is so little exorbitancy to be found.

Lambeth: Jan: 2. 1632. Your Majesty's Humble Servant, G: CANT.

INSTRUCTIONS
Sent from the King to Archbishop Laud, in the Year: 1634.
Ex Registro Laud: Fol: 217.
Charles R.

INstructions for the most Reverend Father in God, our right Trusty, and right
entirely Beloved Counselor William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning
certain Orders to be observed and put in Execution by the several Bishops of
his Province.

I: That the Lords the Bishops respectively be commanded to their several Sees,
there to keep Residence; excepting those who are in necessary Attendance at our
Court.

II: That none of them Reside upon his Land or Lease that he has Purchased,
nor on his Commendam, if he hold any; but in one of his Episcopal Houses. And
that he wast not the Woods where any are left.

III: That they give Charge in their Triennial Visitations, and at other
convenient times, both by themselves, and the Archdeacons; that our
Declaration for settling all Questions in difference, be strictly observed by
all Parties.

IV: That there be a special care taken by them all, that their Ordinations be
Solemn, and not of unworthy Persons.

V: That they likewise take great care concerning the Lecturers within their
several Diocesses; for whom we give the special Directions following.

1: That in all Parishes, the Afternoon Sermons be turned into Catechizing by
Question and Answer; when, and wheresoever there is not some great Cause
apparent to break this ancient and profitable Order. 2: That every Bishop take
care in his Diocese, that all Lecturers do read Divine Service according to the
Liturgy Printed by Authority, in their Surplices and Hoods, before the Lecture.
3: That where a Lecture is set up in a Market Town, it may be read by a Company
of Grave and Orthodox Divines, near adjoining, and of the same Diocese; and
that they ever Preach in such seemly Habits as belong to their Degrees; and not
in Cloaks.
That if a Corporation do maintain a single Lecturer, he be not suffered to
Preach, till he profess his willingness to take upon him a Living with Cure of
Souls within that Corporation; and he do actually take such Benefice or Cure,
so soon as it shall be fairly procured for him.

VI: That the Bishops do countenance and encourage the Grave and Orthodox
Divines of their Clergy, and that they use means by some of the Clergy, or
others, to have knowledge, how both Lecturers and Preachers within their
several Diocesses behave themselves in their Sermons; that so they may take
present Order for any abuse accordingly.

VII: That the Bishops suffer none under Noblemen, and Men qualified by Law, to
have or keep any Private Chaplain in his House.

VIII: That they take special care, that Divine Service be diligently
frequented, as well for Prayers and Catechism, as Sermons; and that particular
notice be taken of all such as absent themselves, as Recusants or otherwise.

IX: That no Bishop whatsoever, who, by our Grace and good Opinion of his
Service, shall be nominated by us to another Bishopric, shall from the Day of
that our nomination, presume to make any Lease for Three Lives, or One and
Twenty Years, or Concurrent Lease, or any way renew any Estate, or cut any Wood
or Timber; but merely receive the Rents due, and quit the Place. For we think
it a hateful thing, that any Man's Preferment to a better Bishopric should
almost undo the Successor. And if any shall presume to break this Order, we
will refuse him at our Royal Assent, and keep him at the Place which he has so
abused.

X: That every Bishop give his Metropolitan a strict Account yearly, of their
Obedience to our late Letters prohibiting them to change any Leases from Years
into Lives; and that they fail not to certify, if they find that the Dean, or
Dean and Chapter, or any Archdeacon, or Prebendary, etc. within their several
Diocesses, have at any time broken our Commands, in any particular contained in
the aforesaid Letters.

XI: That every Bishop, to whom, in regard of the small Revenues of his
Bishopric, we either have already, or shall hereafter, not only give Power,
but Command to receive and hold as in Commendam any Lease expired, or near
expiring, and belonging to their See, or any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or
Benefices, or other Promotion with Cure, or without; being in his, or their own
Gift by Letters given under our Signet, and sent to those Bishops respectively,
do likewise give an Account yearly to his Metropolitan, that he does not put
any of the aforenamed Benefices, or other Preferment out of his Commendam, to
give to any Son, Kinsman, Friend, or other, upon any pretense whatsoever,
thereby to frustrate our gracious Intentions to those several Sees, and the
Succeeding Bishops therein.

XII: That every Bishop respectively do likewise in his yearly Account to his
Metropolitan, give notice of any notable Alteration, or other Accident within
his Diocese, which may any ways concern either the Doctrine or the Discipline
of the Church established.

XIII: That whereas John Bancroft Dr. in Divinity, and Bishop of Oxford, has
very worthily, at his own proper Cost and Charges Built a House for himself,
and the Bishops of Oxford successively, (by our both leave and encouragement)
upon the Vicarage of Cuddesden near Oxford, which Vicarage is in the Patronage
and Gift of him and his Successors. And whereas our farther Will and Pleasure
is, that the said House together with the Vicarage aforesaid, shall ever be
held in Commendam by the Bishops of Oxford successively. That therefore the
said Bishop for the time being do yearly give his particular Account of his
holding both the House, and Benefice aforesaid, to the end, that we and our
Successors may upon all occasions be put in mind of keeping that House and
Vicarage to the Sea of Oxford, at all times of change, when or howsoever that
Bishopric shall become void.

XIV: Lastly, we Command every Bishop respectively, to give his Account in
Writing to his Metropolitan, of all these our Instructions, or as many of them
as may concern him, at, or before the Tenth day of December yearly. And
likewise, that you out of them make a Brief of your whole Province, and present
it to us every Year, by the Second day of January following, that so we may see
how the Church is Governed, and our Commands Obeyed. And hereof in any wise
fail you not.

Jan. 19. 1634. Comput. Angl.
A Memorial of the Archbishop's Annual Account to the King's Majesty, of his
Province, for the Year: 1635.
Ex Registro Laud, fol: 241.
WHereas his Majesty in his late Instructions to the Lords the Bishops, has
amongst other things commanded, that every Bishop respectively, should give an
Account in Writing to his Metropolitan, of all those Instructions, or so many
of them as may concern him, at, or before the Tenth day of December yearly: And
likewise, that the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, do make out of
them a Brief of his whole Province, and present it to his Sacred Majesty every
year, by the second day of January following. My Lord Archbishop in Obedience
to the said Commands, did present an Account in Writing to his Majesty, how
those Prudent and Pious Instructions, for the Good and Welfare of the Church of
Christ in this Kingdom, have been obeyed and performed by the several Bishops
within his Province of Canterbury, for the Year of our Lord God 1634. Which
Account by his Grace's Command, is Registered amongst the other Acts of his
Province by his principal Register. And that in farther Obedience to the said
Instructions, his Grace delivered another Brief in Writing, of his said
Province, for this present Year of our Lord God, 1635. unto Sir John Cook
Knight, one of the Principal Secretaries of State, to be presented to his
Majesty by the time aforesaid; but by Reason of his the said Secretary's
Sickness, it is mislaid or lost, and so has not been presented to his Majesty,
nor any Observation by the King put upon it; which loss notwithstanding, the
Lord Archbishop commanded instead of Registring the Brief it self, that this
Memorial of the loss of it should be Registered. Martij: 14. 1635.

W: Cant.

W. S. A. C.
NOtwithstanding this Memorial, the Archbishop's Account for the Year 1635. is
very happily come to my Hand after this manner. My very Worthy Friend, Sir
Will. Cook of Broom in Norfolk, sent me a Letter dated Nov: 6: 1681. that
being Executor to an Uncle of his then lately Deceased in Suffolk, he found in
his Study a Bundle of Original Papers of Archbishop Laud, (which are the
Annual Accounts here following, from: 1632. to: 1639.) with a Letter to me in
the Words following. May it please your Grace, etc. vide infra. The Writer of
this Letter Mr: Thomas Raymond, a very Ingenious Gentleman, was (as Sir Will:
C: tells me) bred up under Sir Will. Boswell Ambassador in Holland, and was
after Governor to the present Earl of Peterborough in his Travels: And was
after his Return, (as I have heard) one of the Clerks of his Majesty's Privy
Council, possibly, under Sir Jo: Cook Principal Secretary, by which Means
these Papers might come into his Hands. The Originals are all Signed by the
Archbishop; that of 1632. by G. Cant. being Abbot's last, and the rest W:
Cant. being Archbishop Lauds; all which are Apostilled in the Margin with the
King's own Hand, except only that of 1635. which it seems by Secretary Cook's
default, never came to the King's view. I found also, among Archbishop Laud's
Papers, Duplicates of the Accounts for 1634, 6, 7, 8, and 9. with the King's
Notes also Copied in the Margin: And 3 of them, ( scil. the 3 last) are
Registered in Registr. Laud, f. 215. 254. 289.

Mr. Raymond's Letter to my Lord Archbishop Sancroft; concerning the following
Papers.
May it please your Grace,
THE enclosed Papers being of Ecclesiastic Concern, and true and mighty
Evidences of the abundant Love and Care of a Blessed King, for the good of the
Church, as well as that of a most Pious and Learned Prelate, your Grace's
Predecessor; I thought my self bound both in Duty and Prudence, to Transmit
them to your Grace, as to their proper place, both for use and safety: And this
I have endeavored to do in the carefullest manner I could; and do implore your
Grace's Pardon for this intrusion; beseeching (most humbly) Almighty God, to
grant your Grace multos annos in all Health and Prosperity, so much conducing
to the good of his Church amongst us: And withdrawing my self unto my wonted
Solitude, do crave the great Honor to be esteemed, as I am ready to approve my
self,

Della mia povera Capanna 18 -- di Novembre: 78. Your GRACE's Most Humble, and
Most Faithful Servant, THO. RAYMOND.


Archbishop Laud's Account of his Province, sent to the King, for the Year
1633. with the King's Apostills, in the Margin.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
ACcording to Your Royal Commands, I do here, upon the Second of January 1633.
Comput. Aglic: present my Account of both the Diocese and Province of
Canterbury, concerning all those Church Affairs, which are contained within
your Majesty's most gracious Declaration and Instructions; Published out of
your most Princely and Religious Care to preserve Unity in Orthodox Doctrine,
and Conformity to Government in this your Church of England.

And First, for my own Diocese of Canterbury, I hear of many things Canterbury.
amiss; but as yet, my time has been so short, that I have had no certain
knowledge of any thing fit to certify; save only, that some of my Peculiars in
London are Extremely out of order.

For the Bishopric of London, it is certified, that my Lord the now London.
Bishop has not received complaint against any of his Clergy, since his coming
to that See, which was since Michaelmas last. For all the former part of this
First Year I must give your Majesty Account for my self, being then Bishop
there.

And First, having heretofore, after long patience and often conference,
proceeded against Nathaniel Ward, Parson of Stondon in Essex, to
Excommunication and Deprivation, for refusing to subscribe to the Articles
established by the Canon of the Church (of which I certified the last Year) I
have now left him still under the Censure of Excommunication.

I did likewise convent Mr: John Beedle, Rector of Barnstone in Essex, for
omitting some parts of Divine Service, and refusing Conformity. But upon his
submission and promise of reformation, I dismissed him with a Canonical
Admonition only.

Since my return out of Scotland, Mr: John Davenport, Vicar of St: Stephens in
Coleman-street (whom I used with all Moderation, and about Two Years since,
thought I had settled his Judgment, having him then at advantage enough, to have
put extremity upon him, but forbear it) has now resigned his Vicarage,
declared his Judgment against Conformity with the Church of England, and is
since gone (as I hear) to Amsterdam.

For Bath and Wells, I find that the Lord Bishop has in his late Visitation
Bath and Wells.
taken a great deal of pains to see all your Majesty's Instructions observed.
And particularly has put down diverse Lecturers in Market Towns, which were
Beneficed Men in other Bishops Diocesses. Because he found, that when they had
Preached Factious and Disorderly Sermons, they retired into other Countries,
where his Jurisdiction would not reach to punish them.

His Lordship has likewise sent up a List of Romish Recusants, which were
presented at his last Visitation; which, he says, are for the most part but of
mean Condition, and those not many, considering the greatness of the County.

In this Diocese, the Town of Mawling, and that whole Deanery, Rochester:
were very much out of Order; but the Archdeacon, by my Lord the Bishop's
Command, has settled them.

My Lord likewise brought Mr: Throgmorton the Vicar of Mawling into the High
Commission; where he submitted himself, and received a Canonical Admonition.

I likewise certify your Majesty, that the Bishop complains that the Cathedral
Church suffers much for want of Glass in the Windows, and that the Churchyard
lies very undecently, and the Gates down; and that he C: R: This must be
remedied one way or other; concerning which I expect a particular account of
you.
has no Power to remedy these things, because the Dean and Chapter refuse to
be visited by him, upon pretense that their Statutes are not confirmed under
the Broad Seal; with some other circumstances, with which I shall acquaint your
Majesty more at large.

Concerning this Diocese, whereas your Majesty's Instructions require
Peterburgh.
that Lecturers should turn their Afternoon Sermons into Catechizing by way of
Question and Answer; some Persons and Vicars make a question, whether they be
bound to the like Order, because Lecturers only be named, as they pretend: But
your Majesty's Expression is clear for Catechizing generally, and my Lord the
Bishop will presently settle this doubt.

There is one Mr: Elms in that Diocese, who being not qualified by Law, keeps a
Schoolmaster in his House, and uses him as a Chaplain to preach a Lecture
upon Sundays in the Afternoon in the Church of Warmington: But by this time, if
the Bishop keep his promise, that abuse is Rectified.

The Bishop complains, that the Peculiars of his Diocese (wherein Coventry and
Lichfield.
he has no Power) are much out of Order; and I easily believe it. But the
Remedy will be hard; because I know not in whom the Peculiars are; but shall
inform my self.

His Lordship farther certifies, that he has suppressed a Seditious Lecture at
Repon; and diverse Monthly-Lectures, with a Fast and a Moderator (like that
which they called Prophesying in Queen Elizabeth's Time) as also the Running
Lecture, so called, because the Lecturer went from Village C: R: If there be
Dark Corners in this Dioces; it were fit a true Light should Illuminat it; and
not this that is falce and uncertain.
to Village; and at the end of the Week Proclaimed where they should have him
next, that his Disciples might follow. They say this Lecture was ordained to
Illuminate the Dark Corners of that Diocese.

My Lord of St: David's is now Resident in his Diocese, and has St. David's.
so been ever since the last Spring; and professes, that he will take great
care hereafter, to whom he gives holy Orders.

His Lordship certifies, That he has Suspended a Lecturer for his
Inconformity; and that they have but few Romish Recusants.

The Bishop of St: Asaph returns, That all is exceeding well in his St. Asaph.
Diocese, save only that the Number and Boldness of some Romish Recusants
increases much in many Places, and is encouraged by the Superstitious and
frequent Concourse of some of that Party to Holy-Well, otherwise called St:
Winifreds Well: Whether this Concourse be by way of Pilgrimage or no, I know
not; but I am sure it has long been complained of, without Remedy.

My Lord the Bishop certifies, that he has not one Refractory Nonconformist
Landaff.
or (...) Minister within his Diocese; and that there are but two Lecturers,
and that they both are Licensed Preachers.

My Lord the Bishop of Lincoln signifies, That the Company of Lincoln.
Mercers in London, trusted with the Gift of one Mr: Fishburn, set up a
Lecturer in Huntingdon, with the allowance of Forty Pounds per An. to Preach
every Saturday Morning (being Market Day) and Sunday in the Afternoon; with a
Proviso in his Grant from them, that upon any dislike they may have of him, he
shall at a Month, or a Fortnights Warning, give over the Place, without any
relation to Bishop or Archbishop.

My most humble Suit to your C. R. Certainly I cannot hold fit, that any
Lay-Person or Corporation whatsoever, should have the Power thease Men would
take to themselves. For I will have no Priest have any Necessity of a Lay
Dependancie. Wherefore I command you to show me the way to overthrou this, and
to hinder the Performance in time, to all such Intentions.
Majesty, is, that no Lay - Man whatsoever, and least of all Companies or
Corporations, may, under any Pretense of giving to the Church or otherwise,
have Power to put in or put out any Lecturer, or other Minister.

His Lordship likewise complains of some in Bedfordshire, that use to wander
from their own Parish-Churches, to follow Preachers Affected by themselves, of
which he has caused his Officers to take special care. As for the placing of
the Communion Table in Parish-Churches, his Lordship professes, that he takes
care of it, according to the Canon. These two last are no part of your
Majesty's Instructions; yet, since his Lordship has been so careful to report
them to me, I take it my Duty to express that his Lordship's care to your
Majesty.

These two Diocesses are void; and I had no Certificat before the Hereford and
Bangor.
Death of the Bishops.

All the Bishops above mentioned (which are all that have yet certified) do
agree, that all other things in your Sacred Majesty's Instructions contained,
are carefully observed; and particularly that of avoiding factious meddling with
the prohibited Questions.

From any of the rest of the Bishops within C. R. As soon as may be, get these
Bishops Certificats.
my Province, I have not as yet received any Certificat at all, namely;

Salisbury,

Norwich,

Worcester,

Oxford,

Bristol,

Winchester,

Chichester,

Gloucester,

Exeter.

So I humbly submit this my Certificat:

W. CANT.

The Lord Bishop of Ely certifies, that he has had special Care of Ely.
your Majesty's Instructions; and that he does not know that they are broken in
his Diocese, in any point.

Jan. 2. 1633. W. CANT.

The Archbishop's Account of his Province to the King for the Year: 1634.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
I Am at this time, in Obedience to your Sacred Majesty's Commands, Januar. 2.
1634.
to give you an Account, how your prudent and pious Instructions for the Good
and Welfare of the Church of Christ, in this your Kingdom, have been obeyed and
performed by the several Bishops within my Province of Canterbury, which, with
all Humility and Obedience, I here present as follows:

And First I represent to your Majesty, That I have this Year, Cant.
partly by my Vicar General, and partly by the Dean of the Arches, visited
seven Diocesses, beginning (as I am bound by the Ecclesiastical Laws) at my own
Metropolitical Church of Canterbury, and that Diocese, that I might first see
what was done at Home, before I did curiously look abroad into other Bishops
Jurisdictions.

And not to conceal Truth from your Majesty, I found in my own Diocese
(especially about Ashford-side) diverse professed Separatists, with whom I shall
take the best and most present Order that I can; some of them, and some of
Maidstone (where much Inconformity has of late Years spread) being already
called into the High Commission, where, if they be proved as guilty as they are
voiced to be, I shall not fail to do Justice upon them.

I conceive, under favor, that the Dutch C: R: Put me in mind of this at some
convenient time, when I am at Council, and I shall redress it.
Churches in Canterbury and Sandwich are great Nurseries of Inconformity in
those Parts. Your Majesty may be pleased to remember, I have complained to your
self, and my Lords at the Council Board, and humbly desired, That they, both of
the French, Italian, and Dutch Congregations, which are born Subjects, may not
be suffered any longer to live in such a Separation as they do, from both
Church and State. And have, according to that which I thought might best sort
with your Majesty's Intentions, commanded my Vicar General, when he was lately
at Canterbury, to begin fairly to call them to Conform with the English Church.
Which business I do hereby humbly beseech your Majesty to look upon with a
provident Eye, not here only, but much more in London, for the better settling
of both Church and Commonwealth in that Particular. And for your Majesty's
Instructions I have for my own part punctually observed them.

The rest of the Diocesses which I visited this Year, are Rochester, Salisbury,
Bristol, Bath and Wells, Exeter and Lincoln.

For Rochester I found no eminent thing amiss; but the Bishop himself Rochester.
fell into a Palsy, and was thereby forced to go to the Bath, and so to be
longer absent from his Diocese, than otherwise he would have been; and he is
now returned, God be thanked, much better; though not perfectly well. And for
the Diocese, I did not find in my Visitation any noted Breach upon any your
Majesty's Instructions.

For Salisbury, I found the Bishop had taken a great deal of Care Sarum.
about your Majesty's said Instructions; and that they might be the better both
known and obeyed, he has caused Copies of them to be sent to most of the
Ministers in his Diocese; which has done a great deal of good.

And though it be not amongst your Instructions, yet I am bold to signify unto
your Sacred Majesty, that I find the greatest part of Wiltshire overgrown with
the Humors of those Men that do not Conform; and are as backward, both Clergy
and Laity, toward the Repair of St. Paul's Church, as any part of England that
I have observed.

The Cathedral at Salisbury is much pestered C. R. I do, and will express my
Pleasure (if need be) what way you will.
with Seats, and I have given Order to remove them; which I hope your Majesty
will approve, as well as you did at York and Durham; and add your Power, if
mine be not sufficient.

For Bristol, I find in my Visitation that the Bishop there has taken Bristol.
very good Pains and Care since his coming thither. And that some Clergymen in
Dorsetshire, which gave great cause of Suspicion, have quit themselves in a
better manner than was expected; though all be not right in those Parts.

Concerning Bath and Wells, I must needs return to your Majesty, Bath and Wells.
that which I would to God I could do of all the rest, namely, That all your
Instructions are punctually observed; and the Lectures (as many as are in that
Diocese) read, not by any particular factious Persons, but by a Company of
Learned neighboring Ministers, which are every way conformable to the Church.

For Exeter, where, according to many Complaints that had been Exon.
made here above, I might have expected many things out of Order; I must do my
Lord the Bishop this Right, that for your Majesty's Instructions, they have
been carefully observed. But a great Division there is between the Dean and
Chapter. I have twice set them at Peace, yet it breaks out again. And, I doubt,
there being so many Brothers and Brothers-in-Law in that Chapter, is not the
least Cause of it; the rest siding together for fear of Oppression.

I find also there has been, and is at this present, a great Difference
between the Dean and Chapter and the City, about Burial within the Churchyard
of the Cathedral. I shall do my best to set Peace between them, and if I
cannot, as I much fear it, I shall be an humble Suitor to your Majesty, to take
it into your Princely Consideration; lest it do more Prejudice to both Bodies,
than is yet thought of.

As for Lincoln, it being the greatest Diocese in the Kingdom, I have Lincoln.
now reduced that under Metropolitical Visitation also, and visited it this
preceding Year. My Visitors there found Bedfordshire, for the bigness, most
tainted of any part of the Diocese: And in particular Mr: Buckley is sent to
the High Commission for Inconformity. And in Leicester the Dean of the Arches
Suspended one Mr: Angel, who has continued a Lecturer in that great Town, for
these diverse Years, without any License at all to Preach; yet took Liberty
enough. I doubt his Violence has cracked his Brain, and do therefore use him
the more tenderly, because I see the Hand of God has overtaken him.

For Lincoln it self, my Vicar General certifies me, there are many Anabaptists
in it, and that their Leader is one Johnson a Baker; and that in diverse parts
of that Diocese, many both of Clergy and Laity are excessively given to
Drunkenness: That the Town of Boston, which was a great Nursery of
Inconformity, is since the calling of some of the Magistrates into the
High Commission, become very Orderly, and settled to Obedience. But the Town of
Louth somewhat to blame.

At Kelstern dwells the wild young Gentleman Mr: South (concerning whom I have
lately spoken, and that often C. R. The South-West Windis commonly the best,
therefore I will not hinder the blowing that way.
with your Majesty) he has committed a horrible Incest, and gotten two Sisters
with Child. I have called him into the High Commission against the next Term,
and I hope your Majesty will give me leave to make South blow West for St.
Paul's.

At Kensworth in Hertfordshire, and some other Places, many gadd from their own
Churches by Troops, after other Ministers. Which is a common fault in the South
Parts of that Diocese, where the People are said to be very giddy in matters of
Religion.

The Cathedral of this Diocese is not well ordered, either for Reparation or
Ornaments; but the Dean and Chapter, to whom that Care belongs, have promised
speedy amendment.

For Eaton College, within that Diocese, I do not find but that the Provost,
Sir Henry Wotton, has carried himself very worthily. The greatest things
thought to be amiss in that Society, are those which are referred to me by your
Majesty, upon the Complaint of Kings College in Cambridge; to which I have no
more to say, till I see whether they of Eaton will decline the Reference or no.

Thus far concerning the Diocesses, which I have visited this Year. In all
which I find one great Complaint, and very fit to be redressed. It is the
general grievance of the poor Vicars, that their Stipends are scarce able to
Feed and Cloth them. And which is worse, the Vicars in great Market Towns
where the People are very many, are for the most part worst provided for. But I
humbly thank your Majesty, some good has of late been done for them; and I
shall pursue all just and fair ways to give them Relief; Humbly beseeching you
to give your gracious Assistance to me and them.

For Winchester, I find my Lord Bishop there, has been very careful Winton.
for all your Majesty's Instructions, and that they are well observed through
that Diocese; save only, that in two Parishes, the Bishop finds some defect
about Catechizing in the Afternoon, of which he will take great Care, that it
my be remedied. And I find by his Lordship's return to me, that there are
diverse obstinate Recusants in those parts, which, I presume, are certified to
your Majesty's Judges according to Law.

The Bishop of London visited his Diocese this Year, the City and London.
Middlesex in Person, the rest by his Chancellor, by reason of his necessary
attendance upon your Majesty. In this his Visitation, he found diverse
complaints about Inconformity to the Church Discipline; but the Proofs came
home only against Four, Three Curates, and a Vicar. The Vicar upon Submission,
has time given him till the next Term, to settle himself and reduce his
Parishioners. And two of the Three Curates did presently submit themselves, and
promise constancy in their Obedience to the Church. The Third Curate one Philip
Saunders of Hutton in Essex, being Refractory was Suspended, and has since
forsaken the Diocese. It seems he means to settle himself, where he may hope to
find more Favor.

For Norwich, the Bishop certifies, that he has put down some Norwich.
Lectures, where Factious Men performed them, and particularly, that he has
Suspended one Bridges Curate of St: Georges Parish in Norwich, for
transgressing your Majesty's Declaration in his Lectures; but has of late
freed him from that Suspension, upon humble submission made, and promise not to
offend hereafter. And farther, that he has lately heard complaint of Mr: Ward
of Ipswich for some Words uttered in Sermons of his, for which he is now called
into the High Commission.

He farther Certifies, that he has Suspended one Enoch Gray for unsound
Doctrine Preached by him. And that one Simon Jacob, alias Bradshaw, and Ralph
Smith two Wanderers, went up and down Preaching here and there, without Place
of Abode or Authority: And that upon his Summoning them to appear, they are run
out of that Diocese. Your Majesty's Instructions in other things, have (as he
certifieth) been carefully observed both by himself and his Clergy.

The Bishop of Ely certifies, that for any thing that has been Ely.
made appear to him, all your Majesty's Royal Injunctions for the good of the
Church have been carefully observed throughout his Diocese. And he promises to
carry a watchful Eye, as he has ever done, concerning all such Lecturers, as
are, or shall at any time be in his Diocese.

For St. David's, the Bishop is now gone and settled in his Diocese, St. David's.
whence he has not been absent two Months these two Years. He promises to be
very careful whom he Ordains. The Lecturers in those parts are not many; yet of
late, he has been driven first to Suspend, and afterward to dismiss one
Roberts a Welsh Lecturer for Inconformity. And one or two others, that have
with their giddiness offered to distemper the People, he has likewise driven
out of his Diocese. But his Lordship complains grievously (and not without
Cause) that diverse Impropriators, in those parts, have either pulled down the
Chancels, or suffered them to fall, to the great debasing of their Churches,
and leaving them so open and cold, as that the People in those mountainous
parts must endure a great deal of hardness, as well in the Churches, as in
their way to them.

The Bishop of St. Asaph professes he has little to return. And St. Asaph.
that it is a great part of his Comfort, in that remote place, that the whole
Diocese in a manner is peaceable and obedient, as well to your Majesty's
Instructions, as other things which concern the Church. That they are not any
where troubled with Inconformity: But heartily wishes, that they might be as
well acquitted from Superstition and Profaneness.

The Bishop of Landaff certifies, That this last Year he Visited in Landaff.
Person; and found that William Erbury, Vicar of St. Mary's in Cardiff, and
Walter Cradocke his Curate, have been very disobedient to your Majesty's
Instructions, and have Preached very Schismatically and Dangerously to the
People. That for this he has given the Vicar a Judicial Admonition, and will
further proceed, if he do not submit. And for his Curate, being a bold ignorant
young Fellow, he has Suspended him, and C. R. This is not much unlike that
which was not long since uttered elsewhere, viz. That the Jews Crucified
Christ like a Damned Rogue between two Thieves, etc.
taken away his License to serve the Cure. Among other things he used this base
and Unchristian passage in the Pulpit, That God so loved the world, that for it
he sent his Son to live like a Slave, and dye like a Beast.

He farther Certifies, that one William Newport, Rector of Langua in
Monmouthshire, has pulled down the Partition betwixt the Chancel and the
Church, and sold part, and disposed the rest to his own use, with some other
violences, to the great profanation of that place: For which the Bishop
desires leave to bring him into the High Commission.

The Bishop of Gloucester Certifies, That he is forced to Ordain Gloucester.
some very mean Ministers in his Diocese, to supply Cures as mean; yet he
professes, that to his knowledge, he never gave Holy Orders to any unworthy
Person. And further he says, that he has put down some Lecturers, C. R. I
must be satisfied, that the Occasions were very necessary, otherways he shall
Answer itt.
and set up othersome, which he conceives he did without offense, being done
upon different occasions; but says, that he does neither know, nor can
probably conjecture, that there is any one unconformable Man in all his
Diocese. Which, if it be true, is a great clearing of those parts, which have
of late been so much suspected.

This Bishopric is void. Hereford.


For the Diocese of Oxford, I find the Bishop very careful, and Oxford.
that he has according to his Promise made to your Majesty, built a House at
Cuddesden, a Vicarage in his own Diocese and Gift, which he now holds in
Commendam. Which House he humbly desires, by your Majesty's Favor, may be
annexed to the Sea of Oxford, which never yet had any House belonging to it.
And for your Instructions, they have all been observed within his Diocese, save
that he doubts some few Lecturers, of whom he will make present Inquiry, and
has already suppressed Two, which were not performed as they ought, viz. at
Dadington and Woodstocke.

My Lord of Chichester Certifies all very well in his Diocese; save Chichester.
only in the East part, which is far from him, he finds that some Puritan
Justices of the Peace, have awed some of the Clergy into like Opinions with
themselves, which yet of late have not broken out into any public Inconformity.

The Bishop of Peterborough has Visited his Diocese this last year,
Peterborough
and begun so well to look to all good Orders, that I hope things will go very
well there. But I find he is beholding to his Predecessors, who took very good
care in former Years concerning your Majesty's Instructions.

This is all the Return which I have this year to make to your Majesty, having
received no Account at all from these Bishops following, viz. Worcester,
Coventry and Lichfield, and Bangor.

So I humbly submit my Certificat.

W. Cant.

The Archbishop's Account of his Province to the King, for the Year 1635.
ACcording to your Royal Commands, I do here, upon the Second of Januay 1635.
Comput: Angl. present my Account both for the Diocese and Province of
Canterbury, concerning all those Church Affairs, which are contained in your
Majesty's most gracious Instructions, published out of your most Princely and
Religious care to preserve Unity in Orthodox Doctrine, and Conformity to
Government within this your Church of England.

And First, for my own Diocese; I humbly represent to your Majesty, Canterbury.
that there are yet very many Refractory Persons to the Government of the
Church of England about Maidstone and Ashford, and some other Parts; the
Infection being spread by one Brewer, and continued and increased by one
Turner. They have been both Censured in the High Commission Court some Years
since; but the Hurt which they have done, is so deeply rooted, as that it is
not possible to be plucked up on the sudden; but I must crave time to work it
off by little and little.

I have, according to your Majesty's Commands, required Obedience to my
Injunctions sent to the French and Dutch Churches at Canterbury, Maidstone and
Sandwich. And albeit they made some show of Conformity; yet I do not find they
have yielded such Obedience as is required, and was ordered with your Majesty's
Consent and Approbation. So that I fear, I shall be driven to a quicker
proceeding with them.

The Cathedral Church begins to be in very good Order. And I have almost
finished their Statutes; which being once perfected, will (mutatis mutandis) be
a sufficient Direction for the making of the Statutes for the other Cathedrals
of the new Erection, which in King Henry the Eighth's Time, had either none
left, or none Confirmed; and those which are, in many things not Canonical. All
which Statutes, your Majesty has given Power to me with others, under the
Broad Seal of England, to alter, or make new, as we shall find Cause. And so
soon as these Statutes for the Church of Canterbury are made ready, I shall
humbly submit them to your Majesty for Confirmation.

There is one Mr: Walker, of St: John's the Evangelist, a Peculiar of mine in
London, who has all his time been but a disorderly and a peevish Man; and now
of late has very frowardly Preached against the Lord Bishop of Ely his Book
concerning the Lord's Day, set out by Authority. But upon a Canonical
Admonition given him to desist, he has hitherto recollected himself, and I
hope will be advised.

For the Diocese of London, I find my Lord the Bishop has been very London.
careful for all that concerns his own Person. But Three of his Archdeacons
have made no return at all to him; so that he can certify nothing, but what
has come to his knowledge without their help.

There have been convented in this Diocese Dr: Stoughton of Aldermanbury, Mr:
Simpson Curate and Lecturer of St: Margarets- New-Fishstreet, Mr: Andrew Moline
Curate and Lecturer of St: Swithin, Mr: John Goodwin Vicar of St: Stevens
Colman-street, and Mr: Viner Lecturer of St: Laurence in the Old (...), for
Breach of the Canons of the Church in Sermons, or Practice, or both. But
because all them promised Amendment for the future, and submission to the
Church in all things; my Lord very moderately forbore farther proceeding
against them.

There were likewise convented Mr: Sparrowhawke Curate and Lecturer at St: Mary
Woolchurch, for Preaching against the Canon for Bowing at the Name of Jesus;
who, because he wilfully persisted, is suspended from Preaching in that
Diocese. As also one Mr: John Wood, a wild turbulent (...), and formerly
Censured in the High-Commission-Court. But his Lordship forbore Mr: White of
Knightsbridge, for that his Cause is at this present depending in the Court
aforesaid.

Concerning the Diocese of Lincoln my Lord the Bishop returns Lincoln.
this Information. That he has Visited the same this Year all over in Person,
which he conceives no Predecessor of his has done these Hundred Years: And
that he finds so much good done thereby, beyond that which Chancellours use to
do when they go the Visitation; that he is sorry he has not done it
heretofore, in so many Years as he has been Bishop.

He farther Certifies, that he has prevailed beyond Expectation for the
Augmenting of Four or Five small Vicarages; and conceives (as your Majesty may
be pleased to remember I have often told you upon my own Experience) that it is
a Work very necessary and fit to be done, and most worthy of your Majesty's
Royal Care and Consideration.

For Conformity, his Lordship professes that in that large Diocese he knows
but one unconformable Man, and that is one Lindhall, who is in the
High Commission Court, and ready for Sentence.

My Lord the Bishop of Bath and Wells Certifies, that his Diocese is Bath and
Wells.
in very good Order and Obedience. That there is not a single Lecture in any
Town Corporate, but grave Divines Preach by course; and that he has changed
the Afternoon Sermons into Catechizing by Question and Answer, in all Parishes.

His Lordship farther Certifies, that no Man has been Presented unto him since
his last (...), for any Breach of the Canons of the Church, or Your Majesty's
Instructions; and that he has received no notice of any increase of Men
Popishly affected, beyond the number mentioned in his last Certificat.

The Bishop of this See died almost Half a Year since; and had Norwich.
sent in no Certificat. But I find by my Visitation there this present Year,
that the whole Diocese is much out of Order, and more at Ipswich and Yarmouth,
than at Norwich it self: But I hope my Lord, that now is will take care of it;
and he shall want no Assistance, that I can give him.

Mr: Samuel Ward, Preacher at Ipswich, was Censured this last Term in the
High Commission Court, for Preaching in Disgrace of the Common Prayer Book and
other like gross Misdemeanors.

These Six Bishops respectively make their Answer, that in their Oxon. Sarum.
Ely. Chichester. St. Asaph. Bristol.
own Persons they have observed all your Majesty's Instructions; and that they
find all their Clergy very conformable, no one of them instancing in any
particular to the contrary.

In this Diocese, the Bishop found, in his Triennial Visitation the Landaff.
former Year, two noted Schismatics, Wroth and Erbury; that led away many
simple People after them. And finding, that they wilfully persisted in their
Schismatical course, he has carefully preferred Articles against them in the
High Commission Court; where, when the Cause is ready for Hearing, they shall
receive according to the Merits of it.

Concerning this Diocese, your Majesty knows, that the late Bishop's Hereford.
Residence upon the place was necessarily hindered by his Attendance upon your
Majesty's Person, as Clerk of the Closet. But he has been very careful for the
observance of all your Instructions; and particularly for Catechizing of the
Youth: As also for not letting of any thing into Lives, to the Prejudice of his
Successor; in which he has done exceeding well: And I have by your Majesty's
Command laid a strict Charge upon his Successor, to look to those Particular
Leases which he has made stay of, that they may be reduced into Years, for the
good of that See, which abundantly needs it.

My Lord Bishop of Winchester Certifies, that there is all Peace and Winton.
Order in his Diocese; and that himself and his Clergy have duly Obeyed your
Majesty's Instructions. But he Informs, that in the Parish of Avington in
Hampshire, one Vnguyon an Esquire, is Presented for a new Recusant; as also
Three others, whereof Two are in Southwark.

These Three Bishops, for their several Diocesses, respectively make Peterburgh
Rochester. Exeter.
return, that all Obedience is yielded to every of your Majesty's Instructions.

The late Bishop of St: David's (now of Hereford) has in his time St: David's.
of Residence, taken a great deal of pains in that See, and has caused Two to
be questioned in the High Commission, and Suspended one Roberts, a Lecturer,
for Inconformity. Three or four others which were Suspended, he has released,
upon hope given of their Obedience to the Church, and has absolutely deprived
Two for their exceeding Scandalous Life. He complains much, and surely with
cause enough, that there are few Ministers in those poor and remote places,
that are able to Preach and Instruct the People.

My Lord the Bishop informs, that that County is very full of Gloucester.
Impropriations, which makes the Ministers poor; and their Poverty makes them
fall upon Popular and Factious courses. I doubt this is too true, but it is a
Mischief hard to cure in this Kingdom; yet I have taken all the care I can, and
shall continue so to do.

From the rest of the Bishops of my Province, I have received no Certificat
this Year, viz.

Covent. and Litchfield.

Worcester.

Bangor.

So I humbly submit this my Certificat.

W. CANT.

The Archbishop's Accounts of his Province to the King, for the Year: 1636.
The Account of my Province of Canterbury for the Year, 1636, presented to his
Majesty, Jan. An. Praed.

May it please your Sacred Majesty,
ACcording to your Royal Commands expressed in your late Instructions for the
good of the Church, I do here most humbly present my Yearly Account for my
Diocese and Province of Canterbury, for this last Year ending at Christmas,
1636.

And First, for my own Diocese, I have every Year acquainted Canterbury.
your Majesty, and so must do now, that there are still about Ashford and
Egerton, diverse Brownists and other Separatists. But they are so very mean and
poor People, that we know not what to do with them. They are said to be the
Disciples of one Turner and Fennar, who were long since apprehended, and
imprisoned by Order of your Majesty's High Commission Court. But how this part
came to be so infected with such a Humor of Separation, I know not, unless it
were by too much connivence at their first beginning. Neither do I see any
Remedy like C. R. Inform me of the Particulars, and I shall command the
Judges to make them Abjure.
to be, unless some of their chief Seducers be driven to Abjure the Kingdom,
which must be (...) by the Judges at the Common Law, but is not in our power.

I have received Information from my Officers, that the Walloons and other
Strangers in my Diocese, especially at Canterbury, do come orderly to their
Parish Churches, and there receive the Sacraments, and Marry, etc. according to
my Injunctions, with that limitation which your Majesty allowed.

There have been heretofore many in Canterbury, that were not conformable to
Church Discipline, and would not kneel at the Communion; but they are all now
very Conformable, as I hear expressly by my Officers; and that there is no
falling away of any to Recusancy.

There has been a Custom, that some Ministers thereabouts, have under diverse
pretenses lived for the most part at Canterbury, and gone seldom to their
Benefices; which has given a double Scandal, both by their absence from their
several Cures, and by keeping too much Company, and that not in the best
manner. I have seen this remedied in all, save only one Man; and if he do not
presently Conform, I have taken order for his Suspension.

In the Diocese of London, I find that my Lord the Bishop there London.
(now by your Majesty's Grace and Favor Lord High Treasurer of England) has
very carefully observed those Instructions which belong to his own Person. And
for the Diocese, his Lordship Informs me of three great Misdemeanors. The one
committed by Dr: Cornelius Burges, who in a Latin Sermon before the Clergy of
London, uttered diverse insolent passages against the Bishops and Government of
the Church, and refused to give his Lordship a Copy of the Sermon; so there was
a necessity of calling him into the High Commission Court; which is done.

The second Misdemeanour, is of one Mr: Wharton, a Minister in Essex, who in a
Sermon at Chelmesford, uttered many unfit, and some scurrilous things. But for
this he has been Convented, and received a Canonical Admonition. And upon his
sorrow and submission, any farther Censure is forborne.

The third Misdemeanour which my Lord complains of, is, the late spreading and
dispersing of some Factious and Malicious Pamphlets against the Bishops and
Government of the Church of England. And my Lord farther Certifies, that he
has reasonable ground to persuade him, that those Libellous Pamphlets have
been Contrived or Abetted, and dispersed by some of the Clergy of his Diocese;
and therefore desires me to use the Authority of the High Commission, for the
further discovery of this Notorious practice, to prevent the Mischiefs which
will otherwise ensue upon the Government of the Church. This, God willing, I
shall see performed. But if the High Commission shall not have Power enough,
because one of those Libels contains Seditious Matter in it, and that which is
very little (...) of Treason (if any thing at all) then I humbly crave leave to
add this to my Lord Treasurer's Motion, and humbly to desire, that your Majesty
will call it into C. R. What the High Commission cannot do in this, I shall
supply, as I shall find Cause in a more powerful way.
a higher Court, if you find Cause; since I see no likelihood, but that these
Troubles in the Church, if they be permitted, will break out into some Sedition
in the Commonwealth.

My Visitation is yet depending for this Diocese; and by reason of the
Sickness, I could not with safety hold it, nor think it fit to gather so much
People together; but, God willing, I shall perform that Duty, so soon as
conveniently I may, and then Certify your Majesty at the next return, what
shall come under mine own view.

In this Diocese I find by my Lord's Report from his Officers, that Winchester.
there are diverse Recusants in several parts of the Country, and that some of
them have been seduced away from the Church of England within these two or
three Years.

For all things else I receive no complaint thence, save only of three or four
Ministers that are negligent in Catechizing, and observe it not at all, or but
in the Lent only. But I shall call upon the Bishop to see this remedied, and to
be as vigilant as he can against any farther increase of Recusants.

From Bath and Wells I have received a very good and happy Certificat, Bath and
Wells.
both that all your Majesty's Instructions have been exactly performed
throughout that whole Diocese. And that by God's Blessing, and the well
Ordering of Church Affairs, there have been fewer Popish Recusants presented
than formerly, and that the number of them is much decreased. And this I cannot
but highly approve to your Majesty, if there be not fewer presented, either by
the overawing of them which should present, or some Cunning in those which
would not be presented.

For this Diocese, my Lord has given me in a very careful and punctual Norwich.
Account, very large, and in all Particulars very considerable; And I shall
return it to your Majesty as briefly as I can reduce it. And first, he has for
this Summer, but by your Majesty's leave, lived (from both his Episcopal
Houses) in Ipswich, partly because he was informed, that that side of his
Diocese did most need his presence, and he found it so: And partly, because his
Chapel at his House in Norwich, was possessed by the French Congregation, and
so the Bishopric left destitute. But he has given them warning to provide
themselves elsewhere by Easter next.

His Lordship found a general defect of Catechizing quite through the Diocese;
but has settled it. And in Norwich, where there are 34 Churches, there was no
Sermon on the Sunday Morning, save only in four; but all put off to the
Afternoon; and so no Catechizing. But now he has ordered that there shall be a
Sermon every Morning, and Catechizing in the Afternoon in every Church.

For Lectures, they abounded in Suffolk, and many set up by private Gentlemen,
even without so much as the knowledge of the Ordinary, and without any due
observation to the Canons, or the Discipline of the Church. Diverse of these his
Lordship has carefully regulated according to Order, and especially in St.
Edmonds-bury, and with their very good content, and Suspended no Lecturer, of
whom he might obtain Conformity. And at Ipswich it was not unknown unto them,
that now Mr: Ward stands Censured in the High Commission, and obeys not: Yet
the Bishop was ready to have allowed them another, if they would have sought
him; but they resolve to have Mr. Ward or none, and that (as is conceived) in
despite of the Censure of the Court.

At Yarmouth, where there was great division heretofore for many Years, their
Lecturer being Censured in the High Commission, about two Years since, went
into New England, since which time there has been no Lecture, and very much
peace in the Town, and all C. R. Let him go: We are well ridd of him.
Ecclesiastical Orders well observed. But in Norwich, one Mr: Bridge, rather
than he would Conform, has left his Lecture and two Cures, and is gone into
Holland. The Lecturers in the Country, generally observing no Church Orders at
all. And yet the Bishop has carried it with that Temper, and upon their
promise, and his hopes of Conformity, that he has Inhibited but three in
Norfolk, and as many in Suffolk, of which one is no Graduate, and has been a
common Stage Player.

His Lordship craves direction what he shall do with such Scholars (some in
Holy Orders, and some not) as Knights and private Gentlemen keep in their
Houses, under pretense to Teach their Children. As also with some Divines that
are Beneficed in Towns or near, but live in Gentlemen's Houses. For my part, I
think it very fit the Beneficed Men were punctually commanded, to reside upon
their Cures. And for the rest, your Majesty's C. R. I approve your Judgment in
this. I only add, that care must be taken, that even those Qualified by Law,
keep none but Conformable Men.
Instructions, allow none to keep Chaplains, but such as are qualified by Law.
All which notwithstanding, I most humbly submit (as the Bishop does) to your
Majesty's Judgment.

For Recusants, whereas formerly there were wont to be but two or three
Presented, his Lordship has caused above forty to be Endicted in Norwich, at
the last Sessions; and at the Assizes in Suffolk, he delivered a List of such
as were Presented upon the Oath of the Churchwardens, to the Lord Chief
Justice, and his Lordship to the Grand Jury: But they C. R. Bishops
Certificates in this Case, must be most unquestionable Evidence.
slighted it, pretending the Bishop's Certificat to be no Evidence. But the
true Reason is conceived to be, because he had also inserted such as had been
Presented to him for Recusant Separatists, as well as Recusant Romanists.

His Lordships Care has been such, as that though there are about One Thousand
Five Hundred Clergymen in that Diocese, and many Disorders; yet there are not
Thirty Excommunicated or Suspended; whereof some are for Contumacy, and will
not yet submit; some for obstinate denial to Publish your Majesty's
Declaration; and some for contemning all the Orders and Rites of the Church,
and intruding themselves, without License from the Ordinary, for many Years
together.

Last of all, he found, that one half of the Churches in his Diocese had not a
Clerk able to Read and Answer the Minister in Divine Service, by which means
the People were wholly disused from joining with the Priest, and in many
places, from so much as saying Amen. But concerning this his Lordship has
strictly enjoined a Reformation.

If this Account, given by my Lord of Norwich, be true, as I believe it is (and
ought to believe it, till it can be disproved) he has deserved very well of
the Church of England, and has been very ill rewarded for it. His humble C. R.
His Suit is granted, and assuredly his negative Consequence shall follow.
Suit to your Majesty is, That you will be graciously pleased in your own good
time to hear the Complaints that have been made against him, [that he may not
be overborn by an Outcry, for doing Service.

In the Diocese of Oxon I find all your Majesty's Instructions carefully Oxford.
obeyed; and there is but one Lecture in the whole Diocese, and that is read at
Henly upon Thames, by some Ministers of the Diocese, conformable Men, and
allowed by the Bishop.

His Lordship has also called upon diverse C. R. If this be not, upon
Composition, I understand itt not.
Recusants; but upon their being questioned, they plead an Exemption from his
Authority under your Majesty's Great Seal.

From my Lord of Ely, I have received a very fair Account, that Ely.
his Diocese is very orderly and obedient; insomuch, that he has not any thing
of Note to acquaint me with.

My Lord in his Certificat mentions two Particulars fit for your (...).
Majesty's Knowledge: The First is, that one of His Clergy in Bedfordshire, a
Learned and Pious Man (as he says) set up a Stone upon Pillars of Brick, for
his Communion Table, believing it to have been the Altar-Stone. C. R. This may
prove a bold Part in the Bishop, and the poor Priest in noe Fault; as the
other Day his information proved concerning the Ship Business at the
Council Board: therefore examine this farther.
And because this appeared to be but a Gravestone, and for avoiding of farther
Rumors in that Country, among the preciser sort his Lordship caused it to be
quietly removed, and the ancient Communion Table placed in the room of it: But
did not farther question the Party, because they found him a harmless Man, and
otherwise a Deserver. But how deserving soever he be, I must judge it a very
bold part in him to attempt this without the Knowledge and Approbation of his
Ordinary.

The Second is, that there are risen some Differences in the Southern parts of
his Diocese, about the Ministers urging the People to receive at the Rails,
which his Lordship, says he, has procured to be placed about the Holy Table,
and the People in some places refusing so to do. Now because this is not
Regulated by any Canon of the Church, his Lordship is an humble Suitor that he
may have Direction C. R. Try your way for some time.
herein. And truly, I think for this Particular, the People will best be won by
the Decency of the Thing it self; and that I suppose may be compassed in a
short time. But if your Majesty shall think it fit, that a quicker way be held,
I shall humbly submit.

From the Lord Bishop of this Diocese I have received no Particular; Sarum.
but in General thus: That all your Majesty's Instructions are now observed
there, without repugnance, for ought either Chancellor, or any other Officer of
his has informed him.

My Lord the Bishop of this See certifies, That your Majesty's Instructions
(...)
are carefully observed; and that there are only two Lecturers in the City of
Worcester; both very conformable, and that they shall not longer continue than
they are so. And that the one of them preaches on Sundays in the Afternoons,
after Chatechizing and Service in the Parish-Churches, and ending before
Evening Prayers in the Cathedral.

I may not here forbear to acquaint your Majesty, that this Sunday Lecture was
ever wont to be in the Cathedral, and that it is removed, because the City
would suffer no Prebendary to have it. And Evening Prayers in their
Parish-Churches must needs begin betimes, and their Catechizing be short; and
the Prayers at the Cathedral begin very late, if this Lecture can begin and end
in the space between. But if it can be so fitted, I think the Dean and Chapter
will not complain of the remove of the Lecture to a Parish Church.

For these Three Diocesses my Lords the Bishops Certify that all Exon.
Chichester. Peterborough.
your Majesty's Instructions are carefully observed; neither do any of them
mention any thing amiss in the general, either for Doctrine or Discipline. Only
the Bishop of Exeter has sent me up two Copies of the late Libel, Entitled,
News from Ipswich, which were sent thither to a Stationer with Blank Covers.

These Five Diocesses following I have Visited this Year, by my Hereford.
Vicar General and other Commissioners. And for Hereford, I find not many
things amiss; though the often change of the Bishop there which has of late
happened, has done no good among them. But C. R. Which ye shall not want if you
need.
some pretensions there are to certain Customs, which, I conceive, were better
broke than kept: And I shall do my best to reform them, as I have Opportunity;
and humbly beg your Majesty's Assistance, if I want Power.

For St. David's, the Bishop is now there, and will take the best St. David's.
care he can, to see all things in Order. But there is one Matthews the Vicar
of Penmayn, that preaches against the keeping of all Holy Days, with diverse
other as Fond, or Profane Opinions. The Bishop has inhibited him, and if that
do not serve, I shall call him into the High Commission Court.

Baronet Rudde is in this Diocese, the Son of a late Bishop there, who is a
sober Gentleman, He has Built him a Chapel, and desires the Bishop to
Consecrate it. But his Lordship finding one of your Majesty's Instructions to
be, that none should keep a Chaplain in his House, but such as are qualified by
Law, which he conceives a Baronet is not, has hitherto forborne to Consecrate
this Chapel, as being to be of small use without a Chaplain; and humbly craves
direction herein what he shall do. I humbly propose to your Majesty, whether,
considering C. R. Since he has been at the Charge and has so good
Testimony, let him have his desire, with those restrictions mentioned.
the Charge this Gentleman has been at, and the ill Ways which many of them
there have to Church, it may not be fit to Consecrate this Chapel, and then
that he may have a License to use the Minister of the Parish, or any other
lawfully in Orders. Always provided, that he use this Chapel but at times of
some necessity, not making himself or his Family strangers to the
Mother Church; and that there be a Clause expressed in the License for
recalling thereof, upon any Abuse there committed; and that this License be
taken, either from the Bishop under his Seal, or from the Archbishop of the
Province.

For Landaff, there is very little found amiss: Only the Bishop Landaff.
complains, that whereas Mr. Wroth and Mr. Erbury are in the High Commission
for their Schismatical proceedings; the slow prosecution there against them,
makes both them persist in their By-ways, and their Followers judge them
Faultless. But for this, I humbly present to your Majesty this Answer, That now
the loss of two Terms by reason of the Sickness, has cast the Proceedings of
that Court, as well as of others, behind-hand: And there is no Remedy, where
all things else stay as well as it.

In the Diocese of St. Asaph there is no Complaint, but the usual, St. Asaph.
That there is great resort of Recusants to Holy-Well; and that this Summer the
Lady Falkland and her Company, came as Pilgrims thither; who were the more
observed, because they traveled on Foot, and Dissembled neither their Quality,
nor their Errand. And this Boldness of theirs is of very ill construction among
your Majesty's People. My humble Suit to your Majesty is, That whereas I
complained of this in open Council in your Majesty's presence, you would C. R.
Itt is done.
now be graciously pleased, that the Order then resolved on for her
Confinement, may be put in execution.

For Bangor, I find that Catechizing was quite out of use in those Bangor.
remote parts (the more the Pity): But the Bishop is now in hope to do much
good, and sees some Reformation in that particular already. And I would say for
this, and the other Diocesses in Wales, that much more good might be done there
in a Church Way, if they were not overborn by the Proceedings of the Court of
the Marches there. And this present Year in this Diocese of Bangor my
Commissioners for my Metropolitical Visitation there complain unto me, that the
Power which belongs to my place, has been in them very much wronged and
impeached by that C. R. I doubt not, but by the Grace of God to agree these
Differences by my hearing of them.
Court: And I do most humbly beseech your Majesty in your own good time, to
give this my Cause a Hearing, if it take not a fair end without that trouble.

For Rochester, the Bishop (God comfort him) is very ill of a Palsy, Rochester,
Gloucester, Bristol.
and that I fear has made him forget his Account. Neither has the Bishop of
Gloucester sent me any; but why I know not. And for Bristol, that See is void.

For this Diocese, I have likewise received no Account. But I fear, Coventry
and Lichfield.
that whereas the Bishop was lately complained of to your Majesty for making
Waste of the poor Woods there remaining; he is not over-willing to give an
Accotnt of that Particular. Nor of the gross Abuse committed in the Cathedral
Church by the Lady Davis, who, I most humbly beseech your Majesty, may be so
restrained, as that she may have no more Power to commit such horrible
Profanations.

And so I most humbly submit this my Yearly Account of my Province of
Canterbury to your Majesty's Princely Wisdom.

C: R. For the Bishops of Gloucester and Coven: and Lich: I must know why they
have not made other Account. Whythall: the 21: of Feb: 1637:
W: CANT.

The Archbishop's Account of his Province to the King, for the Year: 1637.
In Dei Nomine, Amen.
May it please Your most Gracious Majesty,
ACcording to your Commands, in your Instructions Published for the good of the
Clergy, and my bounden Duty, I here present my Annual Account for the Province
of Canterbury, for the Year last past, 1637.

And First, to begin with mine own Diocese, I must give your Cant.
Majesty to understand, that at and about Ashford in Kent, the Separatists
continue to hold their Conventicles, notwithstanding the Excommunication of so
many of them as have been discovered. They are all of the poorer sort, and very
simple, so that I am utterly to seek what to do with them. Two or three of
their principal C. R. Keep those particular Persons fast, until ye think
what to do with the rest.
Ringleaders, Brewer, Fenner and Turner, have long been in Prison, and it was
once thought fit to proceed against them by the Statute for Abjuration: But I
do much doubt, they are so ignorantly wilful, that they will return into the
Kingdom, and do a great deal more hurt before they will again be taken. And not
long since Brewer slipped out of Prison, and went to Rochester and other parts of
Kent, and held Conventicles, and put a great many simple People, especially
Women, into great Distempers against the Church. He is taken again, and was
called before the High Commission, where he stood silent, but in such a jeering
scornful manner, as I scarce ever saw the like. So in Prison he remains.

In the Churchyard of the same Town a Butcher's Slaughterhouse opened, to the
great Annoyance of that place; which I have commanded should be remedied, and
the Door shut up.

At Biddenden I have Suspended Richard Warren the Schoolmaster, for refusing
the Oath of Allegiance, of Canonical Obedience, and to Subscribe to the
Articles. Besides, this precise Man will read nothing but Divinity to his
Scholars: No, not so much as the Grammar Rules; unless Mars, Bacchus, Apollo,
and Pol, AEdepol, may be blotted out.

The Strangers in Canterbury do not so much resort to their Parish-Churches, as
formerly they did, at my first giving of my Injunctions. But Visiting this
Year, I have given a public and strict Charge that the Delinquents be
presented and punished, if they do not their Duty in that behalf.

There is one dwelling in Addisham, a Married Man, called by the Name of Thomas
Jordan: He was formerly called Thomas Mounton, because he was found in the
Church Porch of Mounton in Swaddling Clothes, left there in all likelihood by
his Mother, who was some Beggar or Strumpet. It is believed, he was never
Christened: I have therefore given Order that he shall be Christened, with that
Caution which is prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, where the Baptism is
doubtful.

About Sittingborn there are more Recusants than in any other part of my
Diocese. And the Lady Roper Dowager is thought to be a great means of the
increase of them. But I have given strict charge that they be carefully
presented according to Law.

There is still a remainder of Schismatics in Egerton, and the Parishes
adjacent. But they are as mean People as those about Ashford, and I am as much
to seek what to do with them.

My Lord Treasurer complains, that he has little assistance of London.
his Archdeacons; and I believe it to be true, and shall therefore if C. R. Itt
is most fit.
your Majesty think fit, cause Letters to be written to them, to awake them to
their Duties.

His Lordship likewise complains of some inconformable Men which his Chancellor
has met with in this his last Visitation; but they have received such Censure,
as their Faults deserved, or else submitted themselves. Only Mr. John Knolles a
Lecturer at Colchester, had forborne to receive the Holy Communion for two
Years, since he came to be Lecturer: And being enjoined to perform that Duty
within a Month, he was so zealous, as that he forsook Lecture and Town and all,
rather than he would receive the Communion.

I find likewise in this Account, 28 Ministers Convented before the Chancellor
for some Inconformities. And five for excess in Drinking. But there is as good
Order taken with them as could be.

The Lectures in this Diocese continue many: But there is great care taken to
keep them in order.

I find in the Diocese of Winchester, diverse Recusants newly pretended: Winton.
But whether they be newly perverted, does not appear by C. R. I desire to know
the certainty of this.
my Lord the Bishops Account to me.

There are some five complained of for not Catechizing, which I shall require
of the Bishop to see remedied.

Here my Lord the Bishop Certifies, that he is very careful, and Ely.
sees all things done according to your Majesty's Instructions.

My Lord the Bishop of this Diocese, dyed before the time came, Rochester.
that he was to give up his Accounts; so that I can relate nothing upon
certainty; but shall give the succeeding Bishop Charge to be very careful,
because his Predecessor lay languishing, and was able to look to little for
three whole Years before his Death.

The Account from hence is very brief. But my Lord is confident, Sarum.
that his Diocese is clean through in good Order; and I will hope it is so.

My Lord of Peterburgh has taken a great deal of pains, and Peterburgh.
brought his Diocese into very good order. Only he says, there are three
Lecturers in the same; one at Northampton, but that is read by the Vicar of the
place; one at Rowel, which has Maintenance allowed; and a third at Daventree,
maintained by the Contribution of the Town. And this last I think the Bishop
had need take care of.

This Diocese appears by my Lord's Certificate, to be in marvelous Bath and
Wells.
good order for all things; and a great Reformation has been wrought there by
his Care and Industry.

For Popish Recusants, the number of them is there much decreased; neither are
any newly presented for Recusancy.

My Lord the Bishop of Lincoln is not (as your Majesty knows) in Lincoln.
case to make any Return for his Diocese. And since the Jurisdiction thereof
came by his Suspension into my Hands, I have neither had time nor leisure to
make any great Inquiry how conformable in Doctrine or Discipline Men in those
parts are. Yet this I find, that both in Buckinghamshire and in Bedfordshire,
there are many too refractory to all good Order. And there are a great number
of very poor and miserable Vicarages and Curatships in many parts of this large
Diocese, and which are almost past all cure and hope of help, unless by your
Majesty's Grace and Favor some may be had.

My Lord of Norwich has been very careful of all your Majesty's Norwich.
Instructions. And upon the 24th of September last, being then in his Diocese,
and giving Orders, he refused to admit five well Learned and well Mannered Men,
because they wanted a sufficient Title according to the Canon of the Church.

I find that there are in this Diocese six Lectures, namely at Wimondham,
North-walsham, East-Earling, Norwich, Linn, and Bungay: But they are all
performed by Conformable and Neighboring Divines, and under such Conditions
and Rules as my Lord their Bishop has prescribed them. Only that at Bungay is
inhibited for a time, at the entreaty of some of their own Company, and for
Misdemeanors in it. As for the single Lecturers, my Lord has had a special
Eye over them.

Your Majesty's Letters, requiring the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen, etc. to
repair on Sundays to Divine Service and Sermons, at the Cathedral in Norwich,
are very well observed by the most of them. But Complaint is brought to the
Bishop against one Thomas King, who is held a factious and a dangerous Man, and
he frequently absents himself from the Cathedral, and it is doubted that his
ill Example will make others neglect their Duties.

Divine Service, both for Prayers, Catechism and Sermons, is diligently
frequented; and that beyond what could suddenly be hoped for in such a
Diocese, and in the midst of the humorousness of this Age.

Of those which stood under Episcopal Censure, or that fled to C. R. Let him
proceed to Deprivation.
avoid Censure, there are not above three or four which have submitted
themselves. Yet his Lordship has had patience (notwithstanding a peremptory
Citation sent out) hitherto to expect them: But now must proceed to
Deprivation, or suffer Scorn and Contempt to follow upon all his Injunctions.
Nevertheless, herein he humbly craves direction, and so do I, if it please your
Majesty to give it.

His Lordship likewise, very carefully and necessarily (as I conceive) craves
direction for these Particulars following. 1. Diverse Towns are depopulated; no
Houses left standing, but the Manor House and the Church, and that turned to
the Lord's Barn, or worse use; and no Service done in it, though the Parsonages
or Vicarages be presentative. 2. In other Towns the Church is ruined, and the
Inhabitants thrust upon Neighboring Parishes, where they fill the Church, and
pay few or no Duties. 3. At Carrowe Close by Norwich, there are twelve Houses,
some of them fair, reputed to be of no Parish, and so an ordinary receptacle
for Recusant Papists, and other Separatists, to the great prejudice of that
Neighboring City. 4. At Lanwood near New Market, and in Burwell the Mother
Church stands; but the Roof suffered to decay within the Memory of Man, and the
Bells sold, and the Hamlet quite slipped out of all Jurisdiction (...). That
Church was an Impropriation to the Abbey of Ramsey, and is now in Sir William
Russell's Hands. 5. The Churchyards in many places are extremely Annoyed and
Profaned, especially in Corporate Towns. And at St. Edmonds-Bury, the Assizes
are Yearly kept in a remote side of the Churchyard, and a common Alehouse
stands in the middle of the Yard: The like abuses by Alehouses, Backdoors, and
throwing out of Filth, with something else not fit to be related here, are
found at Bungay: At St. Mary's ad Turrim in Ipswich, at Woodbridge, and at
Norwich, the Sign-Posts of two or three Inns stand in the Churchyard. Of
remedy for these Abuses, the Bishop is utterly in despair, unless your Majesty
be pleased to take some special Order for them: Because C. R. Let him do his
Duty, and I shall take care, that no Prohibition shall trouble him in this case.
they which have these Back-doors into Churchyards or common Passages, will
plead Prescription, and then a Prohibition will be granted against the
Ecclesiastical Proceedings. 6: Lastly, his Lordship Certifies, that diverse, not
only Churches, but Town-ships themselves, are in danger of utter ruin by a
breach of the Sea. And there was provision made by Act of Parliament, in the
Seventh Year of your Majesty's Royal Father of Blessed Memory for redress of
it: But nothing being since done, it will now cost five times as much to remedy
as C. R. Herein I shall not fail to do my Part.
then it would. But the Bishop is in good hope great good may yet be done, if
your Majesty will be graciously pleased to appear in it, upon such Humble
Petition as he and I shall make to Your Majesty.


The Bishop of this Diocese assures me, that all things are in very Exon.
good Order there. And indeed I think the Diocese is well amended within these
few Years, his Lordship having been very careful both in his Visitations and
otherwise.

This Year, by reason of the return of diverse that were Captives in Morocco,
and having been Inhabitants of those Western Parts, there arose in my Lord the
Bishop a Doubt, how they, having renounced their Savior, and become Turks,
might be readmitted into the Church of Christ, and under what Penitential Form.
His Lordship at his last being in London spoke with me about it, and we agreed
on a Form, which was afterward drawn up, and approved by the Right Reverend
Fathers in God my Lords the Bishops of London, Ely and Norwich, and is now
settled by your Majesty's Appointment; and I shall take care to see it Registered
here, and have given Charge to my Lord of Exon to see it Registered below, to
remain as a President for future times, if there should be any more sad
Examples of Apostasy from the Faith.

Whereas your Majesty has lately been graciously pleased to grant Oxford:
the ordering of the Woods of Shotover and Stowe by Lease, to the Lord Bishop
of Oxford; his Lordship assures me, that there is a great deal of Care taken,
and a great deal of Charge laid out by him and his Tenant for the Preservation
and well ordering of the Woods there.

He has likewise been very careful concerning Recusants within that Diocese:
But says that diverse of them pretend and show their Exemptions, that C. R.
Let me see those exemptions and then I shall declare my further Pleasure.
they should not be troubled for matters concerning their Religion in any
Ecclesiastical Courts; which has made his Lordship forbear till your Majesty's
Pleasure be farther known.

For Lectures, there are none in that Diocese, save one at Henly upon Thames;
Preached by the Incumbent, an orderly Man; and in the Peculiars at Tame and
Banbury; but they are out of the Bishop's Jurisdiction.

My Lord Bishop of this See has taken great care in his first Bristol.
Visitation; and if he continue that care (as I doubt not but he will) he will
quickly settle that Diocese into better Order. But he complains of the Dean and
Chapter (for whose Benefit he has lately made many good Injunctions) that they
will not consent that Twenty Pounds per An. ordered by their Statute, for the
Repairing of Highways, may be turned to the necessary supply of their Quire,
in regard that 100 l. per An. is lately given by Dr. White toward the Repair
of the same Highways. But this, and other things if C. R Do so.
your Majesty thinks fit, I can easily alter when I come to revise their
Statutes, or by a Command from your Majesty in the mean time.

He farther complains, that his Predecessor, Bishop Wright (now Bishop of
Lichfield) detains in his custody, all the Writings belonging to Cromhall, the
Lease which your Majesty by your Royal Letters commanded should expire and
return to the Bishopric. And sure, C. R. I shall.
if this be so, it is very fit he be commanded to restore them out of Hand.

Lastly, he complains, that they of the preciser Faction do every Day endeavor
to disquiet the People, and that by strange Inventions. And at present they
give out, that the Liturgy Printed for Scotland, has in it sundry Notorious
Points of Popery, etc. Which troubles the People, and does much harm otherwise.
The like is certified me from the Bishop of Exon, concerning Rumors raised in
those Parts.

My Lord Bishop of Chichester is in a Quartan-Ague, besides his Chichester.
old Diseases of the Stone and the Gout: I pray God comfort him. But I do not
hear from him, that there is much amiss in that Diocese.

The Bishop of this Diocese certifies me, that your Majesty's Hereford.
Instructions are in all things carefully observed, and he has used the utmost
Diligence he can, in reclaiming of Recusants; and such as will not conform
themselves, he has taken a strict Course, to have them proceeded withal, and
granted Significavits against diverse.

In this Diocese, my Lord's Words are, That there is nothing but St. Asaph.
common Peace, and universal Conformity.

My Lord of Landaff has been very careful for the settling of the Landaff.
Rights and Profits of this Bishopric; and God has Blessed his Endeavors
therein. And for the Government, he professes, that in his late Visitation he
has not found one Schismatical Minister, or Nonconformist in the Diocese.

The Bishop of this See was Consecrated but a little before Bangor.
Michaelmas last; and, by your Majesty's leave, has not been yet in his
Diocese; and so for this broken part of the Year is able to give no Account.

My Lord the Bishop Certifies, that he is less troubled with Non-Conformists
Worcester.
since Mr: Wheatly of Banbury gave over his Lecture at Stratford within that
Diocese. And that during this heavy Visitation at Worcester, he has caused the
Lectures to cease in that Town.

The Bishop of this See has not had his Health of late, and is St. David's.
now come to Town to seek to recover the same, for which he humbly craves your
Majesty's Favorable Construction. But he Certifies, me that all your Majesty's
Instructions, are duly observed within that Diocese.

From the Bishops of Lichfield and Gloucester, I have not received C. R. Cale
for them.
any Certificates.

And so with my Prayers for your Majesty's long Life and Happy Reign; I humbly
submit this my Account for the Year last past, 1637.

W. CANT.

The Archbishop's Account of his Province to the King, for the Year: 1638.
May it please your Most Sacred Majesty.
ACcording to my bounden Duty, and your Majesty's Commands, expressed in your
Instructions for the good of the Clergy, I here present my Account for the Year
last past, 1638.

And First, to begin with my self and my own Diocese, I have been Canterbury.
careful to obey all your Majesty's particular Instructions, both for the
residing upon my Houses, and preserving of my Woods, etc.

There was one Bedle a Minister of Essex, came into this Diocese; and at
Harbledown near Canterbury (the Curate there being dead) Preached very
disorderly, three hours together at a time, and got himself many ignorant
followers. But so soon as ever he was enquired after by my Officers, he fled
the Country, and I purpose, God willing, to speak with the Chancellor of London
concerning him.

I do not find that there is either any increase or decrease of Papists or
Puritans in the Diocese. But the Separatists about Ashford, are very busy,
miserable poor, and out of that, bold against all Church Censure; so that
without some Temporal Assistance from the Judges we know not what to do: And
this I have often and humbly represented. Yet two C. R. Demand their help and
if they refuse, I shall make them assist you.
notorious Separatists being called in question, are fled the Country, and one
of them brake Prison.

At Tenterden some People are somewhat refractory; but the Archdeacon assures
me, he has great hope to reduce them; which I shall be glad of.

The Strangers at Canterbury do reasonably well obey my Injunctions for coming
to our Churches, and I shall give them all Encouragement, holding it fitting to
keep a moderate Hand with them.

In the Diocese and City of London, there was like to be some distraction,
London.
both among the Ministers and the People, occasioned at first, by some
over-nice Curiosities, Preached by one Mr. Goodwin, Vicar of St. Stephens in
Coleman-street, concerning the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the
Justification of a Sinner. But the differences arising about it were timely
prevented by Convention of the Parties dissenting. And so, God be thanked, that
Business is at peace.

There is but one noted refractory Person that stands out in that Diocese, and
he is now under Suspension.

My Lord the Bishop's Certificate informs me, that there are a Winton.
great many Recusants within that Diocese; and that in some (...) their
Children are not brought to be Baptized in the Church, which I shall require
the Bishop to take special care of.

This Diocese being now in my Charge, I do humbly certify your Lincoln.
Majesty, that one part of Buckinghamshire, and some places in Lincoln and
Leicestershires are somewhat disorderly. But I do not find any Man presented
unto me for any wilful Refractoriness, save one, whom Ih ave caused to be
called into the High Commission Court.

There are in Lincolnshire many miserable poor Vicarages and Curateships. Might
your Majesty's Reign be so blessed, as that they might in time find some relief.
But this is quite beyond Episcopal Power.

In this Diocese my Lord has taken care of all your Majesty's Instructions,
Oxon.
and assures me that there is no Lecture in any Market Town within his Diocese,
except at Henley, which is performed by their own Minister, a discreet Man. As
for that which was begun by private Persons in the Chapel of your Majesty's
Manor House at Woodstocke, and might have been of very dangerous, both Example
and Consequence, the Bishop has carefully suppressed it by your Majesty's
Gracious Command upon his Petition.

There is no Complaint in this Diocese, but only of one Mr. Ephraim Worcester.
Hewet of Wraxhall in Warwickshire, who has taken upon him to keep Fasts in
his Parish, by his own appointment, and has contemned the decent Ceremonies
commanded by the Church. My Lord the Bishop proceeds against him, and intends
either to reform or punish him.

In this Diocese the Bishop assures me that all things go very orderly Exon.
and well, saving that diverse Impropriators suffer willing Ruins (as he
conceives) in the Churches, which belong unto them; wherein he humbly craves
both Advice and Aid, that it may be remedied.

There was one Mr. Workman, sometimes a Lecturer at Gloucester, Hereford.
and for Inconformity in a very high degree, put from that place, by Sentence
of the High Commission Court. Since that, this Man has been received into the
House of one Mr. Kyrle of Wallford, and lived there without any Cure or other
known Employment. The Bishop hearing of him, and resolving to call him in
Question, if he did not Conform himself, he has suddenly left that Diocese,
and is gone God knows whether.

There were some other Complaints put up, which I certified to the Bishop: But
his Lordship has given me a fair Answer, and assures me, that by his care and
vigilance they shall all be rectified, and that out of hand.

My Lord informs me, that in his Predecessor Bishop Whites absence, Ely.
he living most commonly at London, being your Majesty's Almoner, there was cut
down and wasted above a Thousand Loads of Wood.

For all other businesses they are in good condition within that Diocese,
saving that my Lord the Bishop humbly craves leave hereby, to represent a great
grievance to your Majesty, which concerns the Bishopric, the Dean and Chapter,
and all other Clergy Men (or indeed rather all your Majesty's Liege People)
inhabiting within the Isle of Ely.

In this Diocese, the Bishop found out one Jeffryes, who commonly Bristol.
Administered the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, being either not in Holy
Orders at all, or at least not a Priest: So soon as he was discovered, he slipped
out of the Diocese; and the Bishop thinks, that he now serves in a Peculiar
under the Dean and Chapter of Wells. I will send thither to know the certainty,
and see the abuse punished, if I can light upon the Person.

The Bishop further Certifies me, that there are very many within that small
Diocese, who stand Excommunicate, and diverse of them only for not payment of
Fees: And again, that many of these are not able to pay them. I think it were
not amiss, that once every Year in Lent, the Chancellor C. R. In this ye have
very great reason, for it is not fit that the Sentence of Excommunication
should stand longer then it needs must.
were commanded to take an Account of all the Excommunicats in the Diocese, and
to cause all to be Absolved that shall be fit for Absolution; and particularly,
to see that no Man be suffered to continue Excommunicated, where nothing but
Poverty hinders the payment of Duties or other Fees. The Bishop likewise
informs me, that Monuments even of obscure and mean Persons, are grown very
common in those Parts, and prejudicial both to the Walls and Pillars, and
Liberty of Churches, which the Bishop opposes as much and as fairly as he can:
But all is too little.

There were in this Diocese the last year but two Refractory Ministers Landaff.
known to the Bishop, Mr. Wroth and Mr: Erbury: The former has submitted; but
the other would neither submit, nor satisfy his Parishioners, to whom he had
given public offense; so he resigned his Vicarage, and has left thereby the
Diocese in peace.

For this Diocese, the Bishop humbly craves your Majesty's Pardon, St. David's.
for his longer stay in London than ordinary, and professes his Excuse formerly
made to your Majesty to be most true, viz. That he was forced to it by
extremity of Sickness falling upon him in those parts, and forcing his change
of Air.

That Diocese has been a little out of quiet this year, by some Men's meddling
with those C. R. It is no wonder that this Relation is imperfect, since the
Bishop's Sickness gives him an excuse for absence.
nice Questions, which your Majesty has forbidden should be commonly preached
in the Pulpit. But the Relation being somewhat imperfect, I shall inform my
self farther, and then give your Majesty such Account as I receive.

In this Diocese, the Bishop Certifies me two considerable things, Bangor.
and both of them are of difficult Cure. The one concerns his Bishopric, where
every thing is let for Lives by his Predecessors to the very Mill that Grinds
his Corn. The other concerns the Diocese in general, where, by Reason of the
Poverty of the Place, all Clergymen of Hope and Worth, seek Preferment
elsewhere. And he tells me plainly, some weak Scholars must be Ordained, or
else some Cures must be left altogether unsupplied.

My Lord of Gloucester confesses he has Gloucester.
been absent from his Diocese a good part of C. R. This is well enough if he
have left his desire of further absenting himself.
this Year, being kept from his Dwelling-Houses, by the Infection at Gloucester,
which just Cause of Absence he humbly submits to your most gracious Majesty.

Concerning that Diocese the Bishop speaks not much more: But the Archdeacon
at his Visitation, finding the Clergy conformable, gave them this grave and
fitting Admonition, viz. That no Man should presume his conformity should
excuse him, if in the mean time his Life were Scandalous. Which was very
necessary for that Place, and these Times. And the Archdeacon certifies
farther, that there are diverse, which as far as they dare, oppose Catechizing;
and but for fear of losing the Livings, would almost go as far as Burton and
Bastwick did, which is his own expression under his Hand.

My Lord the Bishop there complains much of the Decay of his Norwich.
Houses, and the impoverishing of that Bishopric by some of his Predecessors.
And this partly by letting of long Leases before the Statute restrained it, and
partly by a coarse exchange of some Lands in former times. This latter cannot
now be helped; but for the decay of his Houses, if he pursue that faculty which
I granted to his immediate Predecessor, he may help a great part of that decay
without much charge. And this, God willing, I shall put him in mind to do, and
give him the best assistance that I can by Law.

For the Churches in that Diocese (which are very many) my Lord acknowledges,
that they are in very decent and good order generally.

The only thing which he says troubles his Diocese is, that the People have
been required to come up and receive at the Rail which is set before the
Communion Table, and that heretofore many have been Excommunicated or Suspended
for not doing so. For the thing it self, it is certainly the most decent and
orderly way, and is practiced by your Majesty, and by the Lords in your own
Chapel, and now almost every where else. And upon my knowledge, has been long
used in St: Giles his Church without Cripplegate London, with mavelous
Decency and Ease; and yet in that Parish there are not so few as Two Thousand
Communicants, more than within any Parish in Norwich Diocese: And when your
Majesty had the Hearing of this Business, in the now Bishop of Ely's Time, you
highly approved it. And therefore, I presume, you will be pleased to command C.
R. I do so.
that the present Bishop continue it, and look carefully to it. And whereas
they plead that many stood suspended for it, the Bishop of Ely, in whose Time
it was, does assure me, that in above One Thousand Three Hundred Parishes,
there were not Thirteen either Excommunicated or Suspended for refusing of this.

In this Diocese, the Bishop gives a fair Account to all your Majesty's
Lichfield.
Instructions; so that I have cause to hope, that that Diocese is in reasonable
good Order: Only he complains, that his Predecessors have Leased out part of
his House at Lichfield, which puts him to very great Annoyance: But he is
entering into a Legal way for redress of his Abuse; in which I presume your
Majesty will give him all C. R. I shall.
fair and just Assistance, if he shall be forced to crave the same.

My Lord the Bishop came but lately to this See, and has not as Chichester.
yet found much amiss.

The Bishop of that Diocese is Dead, and no other yet settled; so Peterborough
I can have no Account from thence this Year.

These Four Bishops Certify, that all things are orderly and well Sarum. Bath
and Wells. Rochester. S. Asaph.
within their several Diocesses.

And so with my Prayers for your Majesty's long Life, and happy Reign; I humbly
submit this my Account for the Year last past, being: 1638.

January: 2d. (...) W. Cant.

The Archbishop's Account of his Province to the King, for the Year: 1639.
In Dei Nomine, Amen.
May it Please your most Sacred Majesty,
ACcording to your Royal Commands expressed in your Instructions for the good
of the Church, I here most humbly Present this my Account for the Year finished
now at Christmas 1639.

And First, to begin with my own Diocese. The great thing which Canterbury.
is amiss there, and beyond my Power to remedy, is the stiffness of diverse
Anabaptists and Separatists from the Church of England; especially in, and
about the Parts near Ashford. And I do not find, either by my own Experience,
or by any Advice from my Officers, that this is like to be remedied, unless the
Statute concerning Abjuration C. R. It were not amiss to speak with the
Keeper about this.
of your Kingdom, or some other way by the Power of the Temporal Law or State
be thought upon. But how fit that may be to be done for the present, especially
in these broken Times, I humbly submit to your Majesty's Wisdom, having often
complained of this before.

Many that were brought to good Order for receiving of the Holy Communion,
where the Rails stand before the Table, are now of late fallen off, and refuse
to come up thither to receive. But this, God willing, I shall take care of, and
order as well as I can, and with as much speed. And the same is now commonly
fallen out in diverse other Diocesses.

There was about half a Year since, one that pretended himself a Minister, who
got many Followers in Sandwich, and some Neighboring Parishes; but at last,
was found to have gone under three Names, Enoch, Swann, and Gray; and in as
several Habits, of a Minister, an ordinary Layman, and a Royster. And this
being discovered, he fled the Country, before any of my Officers could lay hold
on him. Upon this occasion, I have commanded my Commissary and Archdeacon to
give Charge in my Name, to all Parsons and Vicars of my Diocese, that they
suffer no Man to preach in their Cures, but such as for whom they will Answer,
as well otherwise, as for the point of Conformity; which I hope will prevent
the like abuse hereafter.

In this Diocese, the last Year, there was some heat struck by opposite London.
Preaching in the Pulpit, between one Mr: Goodwin Vicar of St: Stevens in
Coleman-street, and some other Ministers in the City, concerning the Act of
Believing, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the Justification of
a Sinner. And the Peoples Minds were much perplexed hereabouts. This business
was quieted by my Lord the Bishop and his Chancellor, and a Promise of
Forbearance made: Yet now lately Mr: Goodwin has preached again in the same
way, and the same Perplexity is like to be caused again thereby in the City.
Yet my Lord the Bishop is in hopes to settle this also quietly; wherein he
shall have the best Assistance I can give him.

The Archdeacons in this Diocese and others, are too negligent in giving their
Bishops due Information of such things as are committed to their Charge.

Mr: Joseph Simonds, Rector of St: Martin's Ironmonger-lane, is utterly fallen
from the Church of England, and has abandoned his Benefice, and gone beyond
the Seas; and so was deprived in September last past. Mr: Daniel Votyer, Rector
of St: Peter's in Westcheap, has been likewise convented for diverse
Inconformities, and promised Reformation, as Mr: Simonds also did; but being
now called into the High Commission, Order is taken for the Officiating of his
Cure, till it shall appear, whether he will desert it, or no; for he also is
gone beyond the Seas.

Mr: George Seaton, Rector of Bushy in the County of Hertford, is charged with
continual Non-residency, and other Misdemeanors, little beseeming a
Clergyman. But of this, neither my Lord nor my self can say more to your
Majesty, till we see what will rise in Proof against him.

My Lord, the Bishop of this Diocese, gives me a very fair Account Winton.
of all things regular therein; saving, that the Popish Recusants, which, he
says, are many in that Diocese, do yearly increase there; and that this may
appear by the Bills of Presentment in his Annual Inquisitions.

My Lord the Bishop informs me, that he has been very careful in Oxford.
point of Ordination, as being a Bishop near the University, and to whom many
resort for Holy Orders at times appointed by the Church. But he complains, that
having refused to give Orders to Twenty or Thirty at an Ordination, most of
them have addressed themselves to other Bishops, and of them received Orders,
not only without Letters Dimissory, but without such Qualification as the Canon
requires.

In this Case I would humbly advise your Majesty, That my Lord C. R. Command
him in my name to do so.
the Bishop may enquire, and certify by what Bishops these Parties so refused
by him, were Admitted into Holy Orders, that so they may be admonished to be
more careful for the future; and that this Abuse may not find Encouragement,
and increase.

For Popish Recusants, they have been proceeded against in this Diocese
according to Law, saving only such of them as have pleaded, and showed your
Majesty's Exemption under your Great Seal, from being questioned in any
Ecclesisiastical Court for matters concerning their Religion.

I find by the Bishop's Certificate, that he has constantly resided Conventry
and Lichfield.
upon his Episcopal Houses; but says, that he cannot have his Health at
Eccleshall, and has therefore since resided in his Palace at Lichfield; but
with very little Comfort, by reason of Inmates, left, as his Lordship says,
upon the Church's Possession. His Lordship adds, That he has an ancient Palace
at Coventry in Lease, but with reservation of the Use thereof, in case the
Bishop shall at any time come to live C. R. I am content.
there. Here he means to reside for a time, if it stand with your Majesty's
good liking.

For Popish Recusants, his Lordship says, they are presented and prosecuted
according to the Law.

This Diocese, my Lord the Bishop assures me, is as quiet, uniform, Norwich.
and conformable, as any in the Kingdom, if not more. And does avow it, that
all which stood out in Suffolk, as well as Norfolk, at his coming to that See,
are come in, and have now legally subscribed, and professed all Conformity; and
for ought he can learn, observe it accordingly. Yet his Lordship confesses,
that some of the Vulgar sort in Suffolk are not conformable enough, especially
in coming up to Receive at the Steps of the Chancel, where the Rails are set:
But he hopes by fair means he shall be able to work upon them in time.

His Lordship adds, That some have Indicted a Minister, because he would not
come down from the Communion Table to give them the Sacrament in their Seats.
But this your Majesty has been formerly acquainted with by the Minister's
Petition, which you were graciously pleased to command me to underwrite, and
send to the Lord Chief Justice, who rides that Circuit; which I did
accordingly; and hope your Majesty will be pleased to take Care, that there may
be some Settlement in this Particular.

My Lord the Bishop of Ely informs me, That Sir John Cutts, a Gentleman Ely.
near Cambridge, keeps a Chaplain, being not thereto (as he conceives)
qualified by Law. Sir John pretends, that he keeps him as a Curate to the
Parson. The Case, may it please your Majesty, is this: In the Town of Childerly
there were of old two Parishes, Magna and Parva: The one was long since wasted
and lost; the other remains Presentative. But the whole Town is depopulated,
except the Knight's House; and the Church is gone; upon the decayed Walls
whereof stand mean Houses of Office, as Brewhouse, Stable, etc. Upon this
Rectory the Knight ever provides to have a Titular Incumbent, who now is one
Mr: Rainbowe, a Fellow of S: Magdalen College in Cambridge, and Household
Chaplain to the Earl of Suffolk. What Allowance the Knight makes him is not
known. Tithes he takes none. The Knight and his Family go to no other Church:
But he has a Chapel, which, he says, was Consecrated by Bishop Heton; and
produces an Instrument with Seal, purporting, that on such a day at Childerly,
Bishop Heton did Consecrate a Chapel, by saying Service there himself, and
having a Sermon. Now upon color hereof, the Knight entertains a Stipendary,
who is termed his Chaplain, and pays him a Stipend; but he is neither appointed
nor paid by the Incumbent.

The Bishop questioning the whole business, has required him to attend me, to
know whether such a Consecration be to be allowed of. And if it be, then
whether I will allow of a Chapel in that place instead of a Parish Church, now
diverted to other profane Uses. Of this I shall take the best care I can, by
advice of the ablest Civilians: And in the mean time certify your Majesty,
that the Bishop has reason to be as strict in this as he may, because there is
a good Rectory devoured by this means, and that almost in the view of the
University of Cambridge.

I likewise find by my Lord the Bishop's Account, that there are diverse
Particulars of moment, and very fit for redress, presented to him in his late
(yet being his first) Visitation, and most of them in the University and Town
of Cambridge. As namely, that Emanuel, Sidney and Corpus Christi Colleges have
certain Rooms built within the Memory of Man, which they use for Chapels to
all Holy Uses; yet were never Consecrated. That most of the Churchyards within
the Town of Cambridge are annoyed and profaned with Dwelling-Houses and Shops,
and part of them turned in Gardens, where by digging, the Bones of the Dead
have been displaced; with diverse other Profanations; as namely, the
Churchyards of St: Michaels, St: Marys, St: Bennets, and of St: Botolphs: And
farther, that in most of the Chancels of the Churches in Cambridge, there are
common Seats over-high and unfitting that place in diverse Respects. In all
which businesses the Bishop has been very tender, both out of his respect to
his Mother the University of Cambridge, and because diverse of the Benefices in
Cambridge are Impropriations belonging to some Colleges there; yet is pleased
to ask my Direction herein, as I most humbly do your Majesty's. And herein, if
your Majesty so please, I think it may be fit to consider well of the ill
Example, if Three College Chapels shall be used without any Consecration. And
for the C. R. It must not be.
Profanations and disorderly Seats, I think, if an Admonition would amend them,
it were well given. But if that prevail not, the High Commission You are in the
Right, for if fair means will not, power must redress it.
may order it, if your Majesty so please. And I hope my Lord the Bishop should
not have had all this to do at his first coming into that Diocese, if I could
have held my Metropolitical Visitation of that See before this time: From
performance of which Duty, I have been bold heretofore to acquaint your Majesty
what has hindered me.

There are also diverse poor Cures within Six or Seven Miles round about
Cambridge, which are served by some Fellows, or other Members of Colleges
within the University, who, being many of them Stipendaries, go or send thither
upon Sundays, and perchance on Holy Days to read Service; but are absent all
the rest of the Week from all necessary Duties of their Cure. And by this
means, the Parishioners want such necessary help and comfort in all time of
Sickness, either of them, or their Families. Against this, I have taken the
best care I can in Oxford. But how to effect it in Cambridge, I understand not
so well, being not acquainted with the course of that University. There happened
also in the Town of Tadlow a very ill Accident on Christmas Day, 1638. by
reason of not having the Communion Table railed in, that it might be kept from
Profanations. For in Sermon time a Dog came to the Table, and took the Loaf of
Bread prepared for the Holy Sacrament, in his Mouth, and ran away with it. Some
of the (...) took the same from the Dog, and set it again upon the Table. After
Sermon, the Minister could not think fit to Consecrate this Bread; and other
fit for the Sacrament was not to be had in that Town; and the Day so far spent,
they could not send for it to another Town: So there was no Communion. And this
was Presented by Four Sworn Men of the Town aforesaid.

Lastly, it was likewise Presented to the Bishop, that about Forty Years ago,
one Sir Francis Hind did pull down the Church of St: Etheldred in Histon, to
which then appertained a Vicarage Presentative, and forced the Parishioners to
thrust themselves upon another small Church in the said Town, to the great
wrong of the Parishioners thereof. And that the Lead, Timber, Stones, Bells,
and all other C. R. Cotting! on would be spoken withal concerning this.
Materials, were sold away by him, or employed to the Building of his House at
(...): And that now it is called in question, the People (not being able of
themselves to re-edifie the Church) can get no redress against the Descendents
from the said Sir Francis, because the Heir was a Child, and in Wardship to
your Majesty.

There is notice come to my Lord the Bishop of some Brownists in Hereford.
that part of his Diocese adjoining to Wales, which Schismatically preach
dangerous Errors, and stir up the People to follow them. And when they hear of
any Enquiry made after them, they slip out into another Diocese. But the Bishop
promises to do his best to order them. But howsoever, your Majesty may hereby
see how these Schisms increase in all parts of your Dominions.

This Diocese is in good order; and there was lately given Ten Bristol.
Pounds per Annum for Four Solemn Sermons, to be preached Annually for ever,
which the Bishop has ordered very well.

In this Diocese, Catechizing in the Afternoon by Question and Answer,
Peterburgh.
is generally well observed; though some Men do preach also in the Afternoon.
In this Particular, the Bishop craves to receive Direction, whether he C. R.
So that Catechizng be first duly performed let them (...) a Sermon after that
if theye desire it.
shall command them to Catechize only, and not Preach; because your Majesty's
Instructions seem to be strict in this point. I think your Majesty may be
pleased to have the Ministers to preach if they will, so that they do first
Catechize orderly by Question and Answer, and afterward preach upon the same
Heads to the People, for their better understanding of those Questions.

Besides, some Knights and Esquires keep Schoolmasters in their Houses, or
Scholars to converse with, or diet the Vicar, where his Maintenance is little:
And this they say is not to keep a Chaplain, which your Majesty's Instructions
forbid. Yet most of these read or say Service in their Houses, (which is the
Office of a Chaplain) But they read not the Prayers of the Church, according to
the Liturgy Established. The Bishop craves direction in this also. And I think
it be very necessary, that the Bishop proceed strictly, and keep all such, that
C. R. It is most necessary that the Bishop observe this that you mention,
strictly.
they read or say no Prayers, but those which are allowed and established by
the Church, in the Book of Common Prayers.

There are not observed more than Seven or Eight throughout the whole Diocese
which seem refractory to the Church; and they have made large professions of
their Conformities, which the Bishop will settle so soon as he can. But this he
says he finds plainly, that there are few of the Laity Factious, but where the
Clergy misleads them. And this I doubt is too true in most parts of the
Kingdom. They have in this Diocese come to him very thick to receive
Confirmation, to the number of some Thousands.

There were two Lectures held this last Year, the one at Wainfleet, Lincoln.
and the other at Kirton in Lindsey, where some two or three of the Ministers,
which read the Lecture, were disorderly. Among the rest, one Mr. Show preached
very Factiously, just at the time when your Majesty was at Barwicke, and his
Fellow Lecturers complained not of him. Hereupon the Chancellor having notice
of it, called him in question; and the business was so foul, and so fully
proved, that the party fled the Country, and is thought to be gone for
New England.

Some other small Exorbitances there are, which the Chancellor complains of:
But there is hope that this Example will do some good among them.

In this Diocese, one Mr. Coxe upon Hosea: 4. 4. preached a Sermon, Exeter.
to prove that the Church of England did not maintain the Calling of Bishops,
to be Jure Divino; which Sermon troubled those Parts not a little. My Lord the
Bishop after he had had Speech with him, sent him to me. When he came, it
pleased God so to bless me, that I gave him satisfaction, and he went home very
well contented, and made a handsome Retractation voluntarily of himself, and
satisfied the People.

In the skirts of this Diocese in Shropshire, there was a Conventicle St. Asaph.
of mean Persons laid hold on, and Complaint was made to the Council of the
Marches. And the Lord President of Wales very Honorably gave notice of it,
both to the Lords and my self; Bath and Wells. Sarum. Worcester. Gloucester.
Rochester. St. David's. Landaff. Bangor.
and they were remitted to receive such Censure, as the Laws Ecclesiastical
impose upon them.

These Bishops do all Certify, that every thing is well in their several
Diocesses, concerning the Particulars contained in your Majesty's Instructions,
and otherwise.

The like is Certified by the Lord Bishop of Chichester, saving that of late
there has happened some little disorder in the East parts of that Chichester.
Diocese about Lewis, which we are taking care to settle as well as we can. And
for Non-Conformists, he says, that Diocese is not so much troubled with
Puritan Ministers, as with Puritan Justices of the Peace, of which latter there
are store.

And so with my Prayers for your Majesty's long and happy Reign, I humbly
submit this my Account. January 2. 1639. C. R. I hope it is to be understood,
that what is not certified here to be amiss, is right, touching the
observation of my Instructions, which granted, this is no ill Certificat. 10:
Feb. 1617/40. C. R.


W. Cant.

H. W.
WHen I wrote the Preface to this first Volume, I had intended to reserve what
follows, as well as the immediately preceding Papers (viz: the Archbishop's
Annual Accounts of his Province) for the Second Volume; as not believing there
would be any room for them in this. But the Book having now fallen much short
of the number of Sheets, by me at first computed; I have thought fit to cause
these Memorials to be here adjoined, that so this Volume might be thereby
increased to a convenient Bulk. I made choice of these, rather than any other
Papers for this purpose; because they contribute very much to the more perfect
knowledge of the great Transactions of those Times, both in Church and State;
and do indeed constitute a part of the History of the Life and Actions of the
Archbishop, and are often referred to by him in the preceding History. The
Original Accounts of the Archbishop to the King concerning his Province,
Apostilled in the Margin with the King's own Hand, are now in my Custody. The
Accounts indeed are not wrote in the Archbishop's own Hand (that being not
thought fair enough by himself, to be presented to the King's view upon that
occasion) but very fairly wrote by his Secretary, or some other employed by
him. But the Notes or Apostils, added by the King to them, and therewith
remitted to the Archbishop, are wrote in the King's own Hand; which is fair
enough, although the Orthography be vicious (a matter common to many Learned
Men of that time, and even to the Archbishop himself) which yet however I have
caused to be retained; as having observed, that the Archbishop had caused the
King's Orthography to be Literally followed in those Transcripts, which he
ordered his Secretary and Registrary to make of them; either to be kept for his
own use, or to be inserted in his Public Register.

ROME's MASTERPIECE: OR, THE Grand Conspiracy of the POPE AND HIS JESUITED
INSTRUMENTS, TO Extirpate the Protestant Religion, Re-establish Popery, Subvert
Laws, Liberties, Peace, Parliaments; BY Kindling a Civil War in Scotland, and
all his Majesty's Realms, and to Poison the King himself, in case he Comply not
with them in these their execrable Designs.

Revealed out of Conscience to Andreas ab Habernfield, by an Agent sent from
Rome into England, by Cardinal Barbarino, as an Assistant to Con the Pope's
late Nuncio, to prosecute this most Execrable Plot, (in which he persisted a
principal Actor several Years) who discovered it to Sir William Boswell, his
Majesty's Agent at the Hague, 6: Sept: 1640. He, under an Oath of Secrecy, to
the Archbishop of Canterbury (among whose Papers it was casually found [by Who
I believe, is the Author of this Tract.
Mr: Prynn, May,: 31: 1643.] who Communicated it to the King, As the greatest
Business that ever was put to him.

Together with The Archbishop's NOTES.

The Lord both will bring to Light the hidden things of Darkness, and will make
manifest the Counsels of the Hearts; and then shall every man have Praise of
God. 1: Cor: IV: 5. It is Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in
Parliament, concerning Printing, this first day of August,: 1643. That this
Book, Entitled, ROME's MASTERPIECE, be forthwith Printed by Michael Spark,
Senior.

John White.

LONDON: Printed for Ri: Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
ChurchYard, M DC XCV.

ROME's MASTERPIECE.
IF there be any professing the Protestant Religion within the King's
Dominions, or elsewhere, who are yet so wilfully blinded as not to discern, so
sottishly incredulous as not to believe, any real long-prosecuted Conspiracy,
by former secret Practices and the present Wars to extirpate the Protestant
Religion, re-establish Popery, and inthrall the People in all three Kingdoms,
notwithstanding all visible effects, and transparent demonstrations of it,
lively set forth in the late Declaration of the Lords and Commons, concerning
the Rise and Progress of the Grand Rebellion in Ireland, and other
Remonstrances of that nature; let them now advisedly fix their Eyes, Minds,
upon the ensuing Letters and Discoveries, (seized on by Master Prynn, in the
Archbishop's Chamber in the Tower, May 31. 1643. by Warrant from the close
Committee, unexpectedly commanded on that service) and then they must needs
acknowledge it an indubitable verity; [Since Sir William Boswell, the
Archbishop,] and those who revealed this Plot, were persuaded [of its reality
upon the first Discovery,] before it brake forth openly in Ireland and England.

Who and what the Author of this Discovery was; who the chief active
Instruments in the Plot; when, and where they assembled; in what vigorous
manner they daily prosecuted it; how effectually they proceeded in it; how
difficult it is to dissolve or counterwork it, without special diligence, the
Relation it self will best discover. Whose verity if any question, these
Reasons will enforce belief:

First, That the Discoverer was a chief Actor in this Plot, sent hither from
Rome by Cardinal Barbarino; to assist Con the Pope's Legate in the pursuit of
it, and privy to all the particulars therein discovered.

Secondly, That the horror and reality of the Conspiracy so troubled his
Conscience, And would be then disclose it to me, if I were in any degree a
Promoter of it, or a Favourer of the Religion:
[as it engaged him to disclose it,] yea to renounce that bloody Church and
Religion, which contrived it; though bred up in, preferred by it, and promised
greater advancements for his diligence in this Design.

Thirdly, That he discovered it under an Oath of Secrecy, and offered to
confirm every particular by solemn Oath.

Fourthly, That he discovers the Persons principally employed in this Plot, the
places and times of their secret Conventions, their manner and diligence in the
pursuit of it, with all other Circumstances so punctually, as leaves no place
for doubt.

Fifthly, The principal Conspirators nominated by him are notoriously known to
be fit instruments for such a wicked design.

Sixthly, Many particulars therein have [immediate relation to the King and
Archbishop,] to whom he imparted this Discovery, and durst not reveal any
thing for Truth, which they could disprove on their own knowledge.

Seventhly, Sir William Boswell, [and the Archbishop,] if not the King
himself, were fully satisfied, that it was real and most important.

Eighthly, Some particulars [are ratified by the Archbishop's Testimony, in
the Memorials of his own Life,] written with his own Hand some Years before;
and others so apparent, that most intelligent Men in Court or City, were
acquainted with them whiles they were acting, though ignorant of the Plot.

Finally, The late sad effects of this Conspiracy in all three Kingdoms, in
prosecution of this design, compared with it, are such a convincing Evidence of
its reality; and God's admirable hand of Providence in bringing this concealed
Plot so seasonably to light, This is not so. For I gave not any Vote at all for
his Censure.
[by an instrument unexpectedly rarsed from the Grave of Exile and
Imprisonment, to search the Archbishop's Papers, who had seized his in former
times, and shut him up close Prisoner in a Foreign Dungeon] such a Testimony
from Heaven super-added to the premises, that he who deems it an Imposture, may
well be reputed an (...), if not a Monster of Incredulity.

The first Overture and larger Relation of the Plot it self, were both writ in
Latin, as they are here Printed, and faithfully translated word for word, as
near as the Dialect will permit. All which premised, the Letters and Plot here
follow in order.

Sir William Boswell's first Letter to the Archbishop concerning the Plot.
May it please your Grace,
THE offers (whereof your Grace will find a Copy) here enclosed toward a
further and more particular discovery, were (...) made unto me at the second
hand, and in speech, by a Friend of good Quality and Woith in this place. But
soon after (as soon as they could be put into Order) were avowed by the
principal Party; and delivered me in writing by both together: Upon Promise and
Oath, which I was required to give, and gave accordingly, not to reveal the
same to any other Man living but your Grace; and by your Graoe's Hand, unto his
Majesty.

In like manner they have tied themselves not to declare these things unto any
other, but my self; until they should know, how his Majesty and your Grace
would dispose thereof. The Principal giving me withal to know, That he puts
himself and this Secret into your Grace's power: As well because it (...) your
Grace so nearly after his Majesty: As that he knows your Wisdom to guide the
same aright; and is assured of your Graces Fidelity to his Majesty's Person, to
our State, and to our Church.

First, Your Grace is humbly, and earnestly Prayed, to signify his Majesty's
Pleasure (with all possible speed) together with your Grace's Disposition
herein, and purpose to carry all with Silence, from all, but his Majesty, until
due time.

Secondly, When your Grace shall think fit to show these things unto his
Majesty; to do it immediately; not trusting to Letters, or permitting any other
person to be by, or in hearing: And to entreat and council his Majesty, as in a
case of Conscience, to keep the same wholly and solely in his own Bosom, from
the knowledge of all other Creatures living, but your Grace; until the Business
shall be clear, and sufficiently in his Majesty's and your Grace's Hands to
effect.

Thirdly, Not to enquire or demand the Names of the parties from whom these
Overtures do come; or any farther discoveries and advertisements in pursuit of
them which shall come hereafter, until due satisfaction shall be given in every
part of them. Nor to bewray unto any person but his Majesty, in any measure or
kind, that any thing of this nature, or of any great importance is come from me.

For as I may believe these Overtures are verifiable in the way they will be
laid; and that the parties will not shrink: So I make account, That if never
so little a glimpse, or shadow of these Informations shall appear by his
Majesty's, or your Grace's Speech or Carriage, unto others, the means whereby
the business may be brought best unto Trial, will be utterly disappointed: And
the parties, who have in Conserence toward God, and Devotion to his Majesty,
Affection to your Grace, and Compassion of our Country, disclosed these things,
will run a present and extreme Hazard of their Persons and Lives. So easily it
will be conjectured (upon the least occasion given upon his Majesty's or your
Grace's parts) who is the Discoverer; by what means, and how he knows so much
of these things; and where he is. These are the Points, which together with the
offers, they have presfed me especially to represent most seriously unto your
Grace.

For my own paticular, having most humbly craved pardon of any Error or
Omissions, that have befallen me in the managing of this business, I do beseech
your Grace to let me know;

First, Whether, and in what order I shall proceed hereafter with the Parties?

Secondly, What Points of these Offers I shall chiefly, and first put them to
enlarge and clear?

Thirdly, What other Points and enquiries I shall propose unto them, and in
what manner?

Fourthly, How far farther I shall suffer my self to hear and know these things?

Fifthly, Whether I shall not rather take the parties Answers and Discoveries
sealed up by themselves; and having likewise put my own Seal upon them, without
questioning or seeing what they contain, so transmit them to his Majesty or
your Grace?

Sixthly, Whether I may not insinuate upon some fair occasion, That there will
be a due Regard held of them and their Service, by his Majesty and your Grace:
When all particulars undertaken in these general offers, and necessary for
perfecting the discovery and work intended, shall be effectually delivered to
his Majesty or your Grace?

Upon these Heads, and such other as his Majesty or your Grace shall think
proper in the business, I must with all Humility beseech your Grace to furnish
me with Instructions, and Warrant for my proceedings, under his Majesty's Hand
with your Grace's Attestation, as by his Majesty's Goodness and Royal
Disposition is usual in like Cases.

May it please your Grace to entertain a Cipher with me upon this Occasion. I
have sent the Counterpart of one here enclosed: In the vacant spaces whereof
your Grace may insert such Names more, with numbers to them, as you think
requisite.

If these Overtures happily sort with his Majesty's and your Grace's Mind, and
shall accordingly prove effectual in their Operation, I shall think my self a
most Happy Man, to have had my Oblation in so Pious a Work for my most Gracious
Sovereign and Master: More particularly, in that your Grace, under his Majesty,
shall be Opifex rerum and Mundi melioris origo. Which I shall incessantly beg
in my Prayers at his Hands, who is the giver of all good things; and will never
forsake or fail them, who do not first fail and fall from him, the God of Mercy
and Peace. With which I remain evermore,

I have not dared to trust this Business (without a Cipher) but by a sure Hand;
for which I have sent this Bearer, my Secretary, Express: But he knows
nothing of the Contents hereof.

Hague in Holland, 9. Sept. 1640. Sti. loci. Your GRACE's Most Dutiful and
Obliged Servant, William Boswell.

Sir William Boswell's Indorsement. For Your Grace. The Archbishop's
Indorsment with his own Hand. Rece. Sept. 10. 1640. Sir William Boswell about
the Plot against the King, etc.
Andreas ab Habernfield his Letter to the Archbishop, concerning the Plot
revealed to him.
Illustrissime ac Reverendissime Domine,
COncutiuntur omnes Sensus mei, quoties praesens negotium mecum revolvo; nec
Intellectus sufficit, quaenam aura, tam horrenda attulerit, ut per me apricum
videant. Praeter spem enim bonus iste vir mihi innotuit, qui cum me
discurrentem de turbis istis Scoticicis audisset; ignorare me, inquit, nervum
Rei, superficialia esse ista quae vulgo sparguntur: Ab ista hora indies mihi
fiebat familiarior; qui dexteritate mea agnita, pleno pectore cordis sui onera,
in sinum meum (...); deposuisse se gravamen conscientiae, quo premebatur,
ratus. Hinc Factiones Jesuitarum, quibus totus terrenus intentatur orbis, mihi
enarravit; depastasque ipsorum pervirus, Bohemiam and Germaniam ut adispicerem,
ostendit, sauciam utramque partem vulnere irreparabili: Eandem Pestem per
Angliae Scotiaeque repere Regna, cujus materiam, Scripto adjacenti revelatam,
me edocuit: Quibus auditis, viscera mea convellebantur, tremebant horrore
Artus; Tot animarum millibus infestam paratam esse vora ginem: Verbis
conscientiam mo ventibus, animum hominis accendi; vix horam unam monita
coxerat, abdita omnia apperuit, liberumque dedit, agerem, ut iis, quorum
interest, innotescerent. Non tardandum cum rebus censui: Ea ipsa hora Dominum
Bosuelium Residentem Regium Hagae Comitum, adii, juramento silentii mihi
obstricto, Rem communicavi, ponderaret ista ad trutinam monui, neque differret
ei quin ageret, ut (...) succurratur propere. Is, ut virum honestum condecet,
officii memor, propiusque introspecto negotio, monita recusare non quievit;
quinimo egit e vestigio ut expressus expediretur. Retulitque iterum, quam
acceptissimum Regi, tuaeque Reverentiae fuisse oblatum; de quo ex cord gavisi
sumus, judicavimusque ac tutum, favorabibile sese interposuisse in hoc Negotio
NUMEN, quo servaremini.

Ut vero rerum enarratarum confirmetur veritas, studio primaria nonnulla
conjurationis capita sunt praeterita, ut notitia eorum ab circumventa
conjurationis societate extorqueatur.

Promovebitur res cito tutoque in actum, si caute procedetur Bruxellis. Meo
consilio observandum esse eam diem qua fasciculi literarum expediuntur, qui sub
titulo, Al Monsignor Strario Archidiacono di Cambray, una coperta ligati,
Praefecto Tabellionum traduntur, ab ipso talis fasciculus tacit poterit
repeti; inutilis tamen erit, quia omnes inclusae Characteristice scriptae sunt:
Alter quoque fasciculus hebdomadatim Roma veniens, qui sub inscriptione, Al
Illustrissimo Signor Conte Rossetti, pro tempore Legato, adportatur, non
negligendus: Cui similiter Charactere eodem conscriptae includuntur literae. Ut
intelligantur, Reda consulendus erit. Supra nominata dies expeditionis. AEdibus
Redae adcumulata congregatio circumvenietur; quo succedente, Tuae Reverentiae
erit Negotium disponere. Detecto tandem per Dei gratiam, intestino host, omnis
amaritudo animorum qua ab utraque part causata est, aboleatur, oblivioni
tradatur, deleatur and consopiatur, utrique parti Insidiare hostis: Ita Rex,
amicusque Regis, and Regnum utrumque Discrimini vicinum servabitur, eripietur
imminenti periculo.

Haec penes etiam Reverentia tua Injunctum sibi habeat, si alias consultum sibi
optime volet, ne Pursivantibus suis nimium fidat; vivunt enim eorum nonnulli
sub stipendio partis Pontificiae. Quot Scopuli, quot Scillae quotque infensae
obsultant Tae. Rae. Charibdes, quam periculoso mari agitatur vita T. R. Cymbula
naufragio proxima, ipse judicet; pellenda ad portum prora propere.

Haec omnia tuae Reverentiae in aurem; scio enim juramento silentii obligatam;
ideo aperto nomine, praesentibus Reverentiae tuae innotescere volui mansurus.

Hagae Comitum Sept. 14. S. N. 1640. Observantissimus, and Officiosissimus
Andreas ab Habernfeld.

Illustrissimo ac Reverendissimo Dom. Domino Gulielmo Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, Primati and Metropolitano totius Regni Angliae Dom. meo.
Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord,
ALL my Senses are shaken together as often as I revolve the present business;
neither does my Understanding suffice (to conceive) what Wind has brought such
horridthings, that they should see the Sunshine by me. For besides expectation
this good Man became known unto me, who when he had heard me discoursing of
these Scottish stirs, said, that I knew not the Nerve of the Business, that
those things which are commonly scattered abroad are Superficial: From that
hour he every day became more familiar to me; who acknowledging my dexterity
herein, with a full Breast poured forth the Burdens of his Heart into my Bosom,
supposing that he had discharged a Burden of Conscience wherewith he was
pressed. Hence he related to me the Factions of the Jesuits, with which the
whole Earthly World was assaulted, and showed, that I might behold how through
their Poison, Bohemia and Germany were devoured, and both of them maimed with
an irreparable Wound: That the same Plague did creep through the Realms of
England and Scotland, the matter whereof revealed in the adjacent writing, be
discovered to me: Which things having heard, If a stranger were thus affected
at the hearing of this Plot, how should we our selves be sensible thereof?
my Bowels were contracted together, my Loins trembled with horror, that a
pernicious Gulf should be prepared for so many thousands of Souls: With Words
moving the Conscience, I inflamed the Mind of the Man: He had scarce one hour
concocted my Admonitions, but he disclosed all the Secrets, and he gave free
Liberty that I should treat with those whom it concerned, that they might be
informed thereof. I thought no delay was to be made about the things? The same
Hour I went to Master Boswell the King's Ledger at the Hague, who being tied
with an Oath of Secrecy to me, I communicated the Business to him; I admonished
him to weigh these things by the Balance, neither to defer, but act, that
those who were in danger might be speedily succored: He, as becomes an honest
man, mindful of his Duty, and having nearer looked into the business, refused
not to obey the monitions: Moreover, he forthwith caused that an Express should
be dispatched; and sent word back again, what a most acceptable Oblation this
had been to the King and your Grace; for which we rejoiced from the Heart, and
we judged, that a safe and favorable Deity had interposed it self in this
Business, whereby you might be preserved.

Now that the verity of the things related might be confirmed, some principal
heads of the Conspiracy were purposely pretermitted, that the Knowledge of them
might be extorted from the circumvented Society of the Conspirators.

Now the things will be speedily and safely promoted into Act, if they be
warily proceeded in at Bruxels. By my advice, that day should be observed
wherein the Packet of Letters are dispatched, which under the Title of, To
Monsieur Strario Archdeacon of Cambray, tied with one Cover are delivered to
the Postmaster, such a Packet may be secretly brought back from him; yet it
will be unprofitable, because all the enclosed Letters are written
Characteristically. Likewise another Packet coming weekly from Rome, which is
brought under this Subscription, to the Most Illustrious Lord Count Rossetti,
Legate for the time; these are not to be neglected: to whom likewise Letters
writ in the same Character are included. That they may be understood, Read is
to be consulted with. The forenamed day of dispatch shall be expected: In
Read's house an accumulated Congregation may be circumvented; which succeeding,
it will be your Grace's part to order the Business. The Intestine Enemy being
at length detected by God's Grace, all Bitterness of Mind which is caused on
either side may be abolished, delivered to oblivion, deleted and quieted, the
Enemy be invaded on both parts: Thus the King and the King's Friend, and both
Kingdoms near to danger, shall be preserved, delivered from imminent Danger.

Your Grace likewise may have this Injunction by you, if you desire to have the
best advice given you by others, that you trust not overmuch to your
Pursevants; for some of them live under the Stipend of the Popish party. How
many Rocks, how many Scillaes, how many displeased Charibdes appear before your
Grace, in what a dangerous Sea the Cockboat of your Grace's Life, next to
Shipwreck, is tossed, your self may judge; the Fore-deck of the Ship is
speedily to be driven to the Harbor.

All these things (I whisper) into your Grace's Ear; for I know it bound with
an Oath of Secrecy; therefore by open Name, I would by these Presents become
known unto your Grace.

Hague 14. Sept. S. N. 1640. Your Grace's most Observant, and most Officious
Andrew Habernfeld.


Andreas ab Habernfeld, [a Chaplain (as some affirm) to the Queen of Bohemia]
his Indorsement hereon. The Archbishop's Indorsement with his own hand. Rece.
October. 14. 1640. Andreas ab Habernfeld his Letters sent by Sir W. Boswell about
the discovery of the Treason. I conceive by the English Latin herein, that he
must needs be an Englishman, with a concealed and changed Name. And yet it may
be this kind of Latin may relate to the Italian. Or else he lived some good
time in England. [The declaration of this Treason I have by his Majesty's
special Command, sent to Sir W. Boswell, that he may there see what proof can
be made of any particulars.]

The general Overture and Discovery of the Plot sent with Sir William Boswell's
first Letter.
The King's Majesty, and Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, are to be secretly
informed by Letters.

I have not looked upon these (...) these two Years and (...) half. Yet (if my
memory fail not) here are some (...) left (...).
1. THat the King's Majesty, and the Lord Archbishop are both of them in great
danger of their lives.

2. That the whole Commonwealth is by this means endangered, unless the
mischief be speedily prevented.

3. That these Scottish Troubles are raised to the end, that under this
pretext, the King [and Archbishop might be destroyed.]

4. That there is a means to be prescribed, whereby both of them in this case
may be preserved, and this Tumult speedily composed.

5. That The Jesuits Plots are never ended till they obtain their (...) ends in
all things.
although these Scottish Tumults be speedily composed, yet that the King is
endangered; and that there are many ways, by which Destruction is plotted to
the King [and Lord Archbishop.]

6. That a certain Society has conspired, which attempts the Death of the
King, [and Lord Archbishop,] and Convulsion of the whole Realm.

7. That the same Society every week deposits with the President of the
Society, what intelligence every of them has purchased in eight days search,
and then confer all into one Packet; which is weekly sent to the The Pope and
Cardinal Barbarino.
Director of the Business.

8. That all the Confederates in the said Conspiracy may verily be named by the
Poll. But because they may be made known by other means, it is thought meet to
defer it till hereafter.

9. That there is a ready means, whereby the Villainy may be discovered in one
moment, the chief Conspirators circumvented, and the primary Members of the
Conjuration, apprehended in the very act.

10. That very many about the His Majesty and the Realm may be soon be trayed
by such false Attendants.
King, who are accounted most faithful and intimate, to whom likewise the more
secret things are entrusted, ARE TRAITORS TO THE KING, corrupted with a foreign
Pension, who communicate all secrets, of greater or lesser moment, to a foreign
Power.

11. These and other most secret things, which shall be necessary to be known
for the security of the King, may be revealed, if these things [shall be
acceptable to the Lord Archbishop.]

12. In the mean time, if his Royal Majesty and [the Lord Arch-Bishop] desire
to consult well to themselves, they shall keep these things, only superficially
communicated unto them, most secretly under deep silence, not communicating
them so much as to those whom they judge most faithful to them, before they
shall receive by Name, in whom they may confide: For else they are safe on no
side.

Likewise they may be assured, that whatsoever things are here proposed, are no
Figments, nor Fables, nor vain Dreams; but such real Verities, which may be
demonstrated in every small Tittle. For those who thrust themselves into this
Business, are such Men, who mind no gain; but the very Zeal of Christian
Charity suffers them not to conceal these things: Yet both from his Majesty
[and the Lord Arch-Bishop] some small exemplar of Gratitude will be expected.

All these Premises have been communicated under good faith, and the Sacrament
of an Oath, to Mr. Ledger Ambassador of the King of Great Britain, at the
Hague; that he should not immediately trust, or communicate these things to any
Mortal, besides the King [and the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.]

Subscribed, etc.

Present, etc.

Hague, Com. 6 Sept. 1640. in the style of the place.
Regiae Majestati, and Dom. Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi insinuandum per Literas.

1. REgiam Majestatem and Dom. Archiepiscopum, utrumque in magno discrimine
vitae constitutum.

2. Totam Rempublicam hoc nomine periclitari, nisi propere occurratur malo.

3. Turbas istas Scoticas in eum finem esse concitatas; ut sub isto praetextu
Rex and Dominus Archiepiscopus perimeretur.

4. Dari medium, quo utrique hac in part been consuli, and tumultus iste cito
componi possit.

5. Compositis etiam turbis istis Scoticis, (...) periclitari Regem; esse
plarima media quibus Regi, and Domino Archiepiscopo machinatur exitium.

6. Conspirasse certam societatem, quae Regi and Dom. Archiepiscopo molitur
necem, totiusque Regni convulsionem.

7. Eandem Societatem singulis septimanis, explorationis octiduae suum quemque
quod nundinatus est, ad Praesidem Societatis deponere, and in unum fasciculum
confer; qui Hebdomadatim ad Directorem negotii expeditur.

8. Nominari quidem posse omnes per capita dictae conspirationis conjuratos. At
quia alio medio innotescent differ in posterum placuit.

9. Medium esse in promptu, quo uno momento detegi poterit scelus,
Conspiratores praecipui circumveniri, membraque primaria Conjurationis in ipso
actu apprehendi.

10. Astantes Regi plurimos, qui pro fidelissimis and intimis censentur, quibus
etiam secretiora fiduntur, proditores Regis esse, peregrina pensione corruptos,
qui secreta quaeque majoris, vel exigui momenti, ad exteram Potestatem deferunt.

11. Haec and alia secretissima, quae scitu ad securitatem Regis erunt
necessaria, quod si haec accepta Dom. Archiepiscopo fuerint, revelari poterunt.

12. Interim si Regia Majestas sua and Dominus Archiepiscopus been sibi
consultum volunt, haec superficialiter quidem tantum ipsis communicata, sub
profundo silentio, and secretissime servabunt, ne quidem iis, quos sibi
fidelissimos judicant, communicaturi, antequam de nomine acceperint, quibus
fidendum sit: Ab nullo enim latere alias tuti sunt.

Sint etiam certi, quicquid hic proponitur, nulla figmenta, nec fabulas, aut
inania Somnia esse; sed in rei veritate it a constituta, quae omnibus momentis
demonstrari poterunt. Qui enim se immiscent huic negotio, viri honesti sunt,
quibus nullus quaestus in animo; sed ipse Christianae Charitatis Fervor ista
facere non sinit: Ab utroque tamen, suae Majestati, tum Domino Archiepiscopo,
gratitudinis exemplar tale quale expectabitur.

Haec omnia antecedentia sub bona fide and juramenti Sacramento, Dom. Residenti
Regis Magnae Britanniae, Hagae Comitum communicata esse, ne ulli mortalium,
praeter Regem, and Dom. Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem immediate ista fideret,
vel communicaret.

Subscripta, etc.

Proesentes, etc.

Hagae Com. 6 Sept. 1640. St. loci. Detectio etc. offerenda Seren. Regiae
Majestati Britanniae and [Dom. Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi,] etc. 6. Sept. 1640.
The Archbishop of Canterbury's Letter to the King concerning the Plot: With
the King's directions in the Margin, written with his own Hand. I beseech Your
Majesty read these Letters as they are endorsed by figures, 1, 2, 3, etc.

May it please your Majesty,
AS great as the Secret is which comes herewith, yet I choose rather to send it
in this silent covert way, and I hope safe, than to Ye had reason so to do.
come thither, and bring it my self. First, because I am no way able to make
haste enough with it. Secondly, because should I come at this time, and
antedate the meeting September. 24. there would be more jealousy of the Business,
and more enquiry after it; especially, if I being once there, should return
again before that Day, as I must if this be followed, as is most fit.

The danger it seems is imminent, and laid by God knows whom; but to be
executed by them which are very near about you. (For the great Honor which I
have to be in danger with you, or for you, I pass not, so your Sacred person
and the State may be safe.) Now, It is an unanswerable Dilemma.
May it please your Majesty, This Information is either true, or there is some
mistake in it: If it be true, the persons which make the discovery, will
deserve Thanks and Reward; if there should be any mistake in it, your Majesty
can lose nothing but a little silence.

The Business (if it be) is extreme foul. The discovery thus by God's
Providence offered, seems fair. I do hereby humbly beg it upon my Knees, of
your Majesty, that you will conceal this Business from every Creature, I concur
totally with you in opinion, assuring you that no body does, or shall know of
this business, and to show my care to conceal it, I received this but this
afternoon, and now I make this dispatch before I sleep. Herewith I send his
warrant, as you advise, which indeed I judge to (...) the (...) way.
and his Name that sends this to me. And I send his Letters to me, to your
Majesty, that you may see his Sense both of the Business and the (...). And
such Instructions as you think fit to give him, I beseech you let them be in
your own Hand for his Warrant, without imparting them to any. And if your
Majesty leave it to his Discretion to follow it there in the best way he can,
that in your own Hand will be Instruction and Warrant enough for him. And if
you please to return it herewith presently to me, I will send an Express away
with it presently.

In the mean time, I have by this Express returned him this Answer, I like your
answer extreme well, and do promise not to deceive your confidence, nor make
you break your word.
That I think he shall do well to hold on the Treaty with these Men, with all
Care and Secresy, and drive on to the Discovery, so soon as the Business is
ripe for it, that he may assure himself and them, they shall not want reward,
if they do the Service. That for my part he shall be sure of Secresy, and that
I am most confident that your Majesty will not impart it to any. That he have a
special Eye to the Eighth and Ninth Proposition.

Sir, for Gods sake, and your own safety, secresy I have sent all back. I
think these Apostyles will be warrant enough for you to proceed, especially
when I expressly command you to do so.
in this business: And I beseech you send me back this Letter, and all that
comes with it, spedily and secretly, and trust not your own Pockets with them.
I shall not eat nor sleep in quiet till I receive them. And so soon as I have
them again, and your Majesty's Warrant to proceed, no diligence shall be
wanting in me to help on the Discovery. In this I am as far from condemning
your judgment, as suspecting your fidelity. C. R.


This is the greatest business that ever was put to me. And if I have herein
proposed or done any thing amiss, I most humbly crave your Majesty's pardon.
But I am willing to hope I have not herein erred in judgment; and in fidelity I
never will.

These Letters came to me on Thursday, September. 10. at night, and I sent these
away according to the date hereof, being extremely wearied with writing this
Letter, copying out these other which come with this, and dispatching my
Letters back to him that sent these, all in my own hand. Once again, secrecy
for God's sake, and your own. To his most blessed Protection I commend your
Majesty and all your Affairs: And am

The King's hand and date.
York 13. Lambeth September. 11. 1640. Your Majesty's most humble faithful
servant, W. Cant.


The Archbishop's Postcript.
As I had ended these, whether with the labor or indignation, or both, I fell
into an extreme faint Sweat: I pray God keep me from a Fever, of which three
are down in my Family at Croyden.

These Letters came late to me, the Express being beaten back by the Wind.

The Archbishop's Indorsement with his own Hand. Received from the King, Sept.
16. 1640. For your Sacred Majesty. Yours Apostyled. The King's Answer to the
Plot against him, etc.

Sir William Boswell's second Letter to the Archbishop.
May it please your Grace,
THis Evening late I have received your Grace's dispatch, with the enclosed
from his Majesty, by my Secretary Oueart, and shall give due account with all
possible speed of the same, according to his Majesty's and your Grace's
Commands, praying heartily that my Endeavors, which shall be most faithful,
may also prove effectual, to his Majesty's and your Grace's content, with which
I do most humbly take leave, being always

Hagh. 24. Sept. 1640. S. Angelo. Your Grace's most dutiful and humble servant,
William Boswell.


The Archbishop's Indorsement. Received Sept. 30. 1640. Sir William Boswell
his acknowledgment that he has received the King's directions and my Letters.

Sir William Boswell's third Letter to the Archbishop, sent with the larger
Discovery of the Plot.
May it please your Grace,
UPon receipt of his Majesty's Commands, with your Grace's Letters of 9. and
18. Sept. last. I dealt with the party to make good his offers formerly put in
my Hand, and transmitted to your Grace: This he hopes to have done, by the
enclosed, so far as will be needful for his Majesty's satisfaction; yet if any
more particular explanation or discovery shall be required by his Majesty or
your Grace, He has promised to add thereunto, whatsoever he can remember and
knows of truth. And for better assurance and verification of his integrity, he
professes himself ready (if required) to make A very good Argument of truth
and reality.
Oath of what he has already declared, or shall hereafter declare in the
business.

His Name he conjures me still to conceal: Though he thinks his Majesty and
your Grace, by the Character he gives of himself, will easily imagine who he
is, having been known so Therefore a man of note and employment.
generally through Court and City, as he was for three or four Years, in the
quality and employment he acknowledges (by his Declaration enclosed) himself
to have held.

Hereupon he does also redouble his most humble and earnest suit unto his
Majesty and your Grace, to be most secret and circumspect in the Business, that
he may not be suspected to have discovered, or had a hand in the same.

I shall here humbly beseech your Grace to let me know what I may further do
for his Majesty's Service, or for your Grace's particular behoof; that I may
accordingly endeavor to approve my self, as I am

Hague. 15. October. 1640. Your Grace's most dutiful and obliged servant, William
Boswell.


The Archbishop's Indorsement. Received October. 14. 1640. Sir William Boswell
in prosecution of the great Business. If any thing come to him in Ciphers, to
send it to him.

The large particular Discovery of the Plot and Treason against the King,
Kingdom, and Protestant Religion; and to raise the Scottish Wars.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord.
WE have willingly and cordially perceived, that our offers have been
acceptable both to his Royal Majesty, and likewise to your Grace. This is the
only Index to us, That the blessing of God is present with you, whereby a spur
is given, that we should so much the more cheerfully and freely utter and
detect those things whereby the hazard of both your Lives, the subversion of
the Realm and State both of England and Scotland, the tumbling down of his
Excellent Majesty from his Throne, is intended. Now lest the Discourse should
be enlarged with superfluous circumstances, we will only premise some things
which are merely necessary to the business.

They may first of all (...), that this The quality of the discoverer and means
inducing him to reveal this Plot.
good Man, by whom the ensuing things are detected, was born and bred in the
Popish Religion, who spent many Years in Ecclesiastical dignities. At length
being found fit for the expedition of the present Design, by the counsel and
mandate of the Lord Cardinal Barbarino, he was adjoined to the assistance of
Master Cuneus ( The Popes Nuncio then in England.
Cun) by whom he was found so diligent and sedulous in his Office, that hope of
great promotion was given to him. Yet he, led by the instinct of the good
Spirit, has, howsoever it be, contemned sweet promises, and having known the
vanities of the Pontifician Religion (of which he had sometime been a most
severe defender) having likewise noted the Malice of those who fight under the
Popish Banner, felt his Conscience to be burdened; which Burden that he might
case himself of, he converted his Mind to the Orthodox Religion. Soon after,
that he might exonerate his Conscience, he thought (...), that a desperate
Treason, machinated against so many Souls, was to be revealed, and that he
should receive ease, if he vented such things into the Bosom of a Friend: Which
done, he was seriously admonished by the said Friend, that he should show an
Example of his Conversion and Charity, and free so many innocent Souls from
imminent Danger: To whose monitions he willingly consented, and delivered the
following things to be put in Writing, out of which the Articles not long since
tendered to your Grace, may be clearly explicated and demonstrated.

1. First of all, that the Hinge Four sorts of Jesuits.
of the Business may be rightly discerned, it is to be known, that all those
Factions with which all Christendom is at this Day shaken, do arise from the
Jesuitical Offspring of Cham, of which four Orders abound throughout the World.

Of the First Order are Ecclesiastics, whose Office it is to take care of
things promoting Religion.

Of the second Order are Politicians, whose Office it is, by any means to
shake, trouble, reform the State of Kingdoms and Republics.

Of the Third Order are Seculars, whose property it is to obtrude themselves
into Offices with Kings and Princes, to insinuate and immix themselves in Court
Businesses, bargains and sales, and to be busied in Civil Affairs.

Of the Fourth Order are Intelligencers (or Spies) Men of Inferior condition,
who submit themselves to the A good Caveat to Nobles and Gentlemen, to beware
they entertain not a Jesuit or Romish Spy in their Houses instead of a Servant.
services of great Men, Princes, Barons, Noblemen, Citizens, to deceive (or
corrupt) the Minds of their Masters.

2. A Society of so many Orders the We had need (...) about, when so many
active (...) are harbored among us, even perchance at this present.
Kingdom of England nourishes: For scarce all Spain, France, and Italy, can
yield so great a multitude of Jesuits, as London alone; where are found more
than Fifty Scottish Jesuits. There the said Society has elected to it self a
seat of Iniquity, and has conspired against the King, and the most faithful to
the King, especially the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and likewise against
both Kingdoms.

3. For it is more certain than Therefore (...) Kingdoms need (...) to
themselves.
certainty it self, that the forenamed Society has determined to effect an
universal Reformation of the Kingdom of England and Scotland. Therefore the
determination of the end, necessarily infers a determination of means to the
end.

4. Therefore to promote the undertaken Strange, that such a Society should be
(...) under the Desender of the Faith.
Villainy, the said Society dubbed it self with the Title of, The Congregation
of propagating the Faith; which acknowledges the Pope of Rome the Head of the
College, and Cardinal Barbarino his Substitute and Executor.

5. The chief Patron of the Society A strangeWorld when a Popes Legate shall be
openly (...) boured so (...) the King and Court, and have free access to (...)
without control.
at London, is the Popes Legate, who takes care of the business; into whose
Bosom, these Dregs of Traitors weekly deposite all their Intelligences. Now the
Residence of this Legation, was obtained at London, in the name of the Roman
Pontif, by whose mediation it might be lawful for Cardinal Barbarino to work so
much the more easily and safely upon the King and Kingdom. For none else could
so freely circumvent If the King truly hate the Pope, it will make his
Instruments less effectual if they come in his Name:
the King, as he who should be palliated with the Pope's Authority.

6. Master Cuneus did at that time enjoy the Office of the Pope's Legate, an
universal Instrument of the conjured Society, and a serious promoter of the
business, whose secrets, Popes Instruments are ever very active.
as likewise those of all the other Intelligencers, the present good Man, the
Communicator of all these things, did receive and expedite whither the business
required.

Cuneus set upon the chief Men Strange it was that the chief Men should not set
themselves against him, and his, to send them packing hence; especially that the
King himself did it not when hethus tempted and assaulted him.
of the Kingdom, and left nothing unattempted, by what means he might corrupt
them all, and incline them to the Pontifician Party: He enticed many with
various Incitements; yea, he sought to delude the King himself with gifts of
Pictures, Antiquities, Idols, and of other Vanities brought from Rome, which
yet would prevail nothing with the King.

Having entered familiarity with That a Popes Legate should be so familiar with
the King, and the King make much of him instead of banishing him, is a Riddle.
the King, he is often requested at Hamptoncourt, likewise at London, to
undertake the cause of the Palatine, and that he would interpose his Authority,
and by his Intercession persuade the Legate of Colen, that the Palatine in the
next Diet to treat of Peace, might be inserted into the Conditions; which
verily he promised, but performed the contrary. He writ indeed, that he had
been so desired by the King concerning such things, yet he advised not that
they should be consented to, lest peradventure it might be said by the
Spaniard, that the Pope of Rome had patronized an heretical Prince.

In the mean time, Cuncus smelling The Archbishop therefore, and he, had some
familiarity and acquaintance at first.
from the Archbishop, most trusty to the King, that the King's Mind was wholly
pendulous (or doubtful,) resolved, That he would move every Stone, and apply
his Forces, that he might gain him to his party: Certainly, considing, that he
had a means prepared. For he had a command to This offer appears under the Arch
- Bishop's own hand in the (...) of his Life.
offer a Cardinal's Cap to the Lord Archbishop, in the Name of the Pope of
Rome, and that he should allure him also with higher Promises, that he might
corrupt his sincere Mind. Yet The Papacy of Cant. and this otherWorld is of
greater value, than an Italian Cardinalship.
a sitting ocasion was never given, whereby he might insinuate himself into the
Lord Archbishop (for the Scorpion sought an Egg:) Free access was to be
impetrated by the Earl and Countess of Arundel, likewise by Secretary
Windebank: The intercession of all which being neglected, he did fly the
Company or familiarity of Cuneus, worse than But he kept not him from the Court.
the Plague: He was likewise persuaded by others of no mean rank, well known to
him, neither yet was he moved.

7. Another also was assayed, who Jesuits are both diligent and able to remove
their (...) at Court from out of Place and Favor too.
hindered access to the detestable wickedness, Secretary Cook; he was a most
bitter hater of the Jesuits, from whom he intercepted access to the King; he
entertained many (of them) according to their deserts, he diligently enquired
into their Factions; by which means every incitement, breathing a Magnetical
(attractive) power to the Popish Party, was ineffectual with him; for nothing
was so dear unto him, that might incline him to wickedness. Hereupon being It
is admirable this Faction should be so powerfully predominant as to displace
the greatest and faithfulest Officers.
made odious to the Patrons of the Conspiracy, he was endangered to be
discharged from his Office; it was labored for three Years space, and at last
obtained.

Yet notwithstanding there remained on the King's part a knot hard to be
untied; for the Lord Archbishop by his constancy, interposed himself as a most
hard Rock.

When Cuneus had understood Jesuit I will be sure to move Hell when they cannot
prevail with Heaven.
from the Lord Archbishop's part, that he had labored in vain, his Malice and
the whole Societies waxed boiling hot: Soon after Ambushes began to be
prepared, wherewith the Lord Archbishop, together with the King, should be
taken.

Likewise a Sentence is passed against Jesuits cannot endure neuters. If a man
may be saved in any Religion be may safely embrace any and cleave close to none.
the King (for whose sake all this business is disposed) because nothing is
hoped from him, which might seem to promote the Popish Religion (but especially
when he had opened his Mind, that he was of this Opinion, that every one might
be saved in his own Religion, so as he be an honest and pious Man)

8. To perpetrate the Treason undertaken, the Criminal The Bishop's Tyranny
against Puritans the best advantage, and greatest advancement of Popes designs.
execution at Westminster, caused by some Writings of Puritans, gave occasion
of the first Fire: Which thing was so much exasperated and exaggerated by the
Papists to the Puritans, that if it remained unrevenged, it would be thought a
blemish to their Religion; the Flames of which Fire, the subsequent book of He
means the Scottish Prayerbook; the alterations whereof from the English were
found in the Original Copy, under the Archbishop's own hand, when his Chamber
was (...). The Jesuits love to Fish when the Bishops trouble the Streams with
their Innovations and Popish Ceremonies. The Jesuits the plotters and chief
directors of the Scottish War.
Prayers increases.

9. In this heat, a certain Scottish-Earl, called Maxfield, if I mistake not,
was expedited to the Scots by the Popish party; with whom two other Scottish
Earls, Papists, held correspondency: He ought to stir up the People to
Commotion, and rub over the injury afresh, that he might inflame their Minds,
precipitate them to Arms, by which the hurtful Disturber of the Scottish
Liberty might be slain.

10. There, by one Labor, Snares are prepared for the King; for this purpose
the present business was so ordered, that very many of the English should
adhere to the Scots; That the King should remain inferior in Arms, who
(thereupon) should be compelled to crave assistance from the Papists; which yet
he should not obtain, unless he would descend into The King tied to Conditions
by Papists before they aided him. Now practiced in Oxford, Wales, and the
Northern parts, by open toleration.
Conditions, by which he should permit Universal liberty of the exercise of the
Popish Religion; for so the affairs of the Papists would succeed according to
their desire. To which consent, if he should show himself more difficult, there
should be a present remedy at hand: For the King's Son growing now very fast to
his youthful age (who is The more shame and pity, and a good Caveat for the
Parliament henceforth to look to it.
educated from his tender age, that he might accustom himself to the Popish
Party) the King is to be dispatched: For an The King then must needs be in
great danger among Papists now.
Indian Nut stuffed with most sharp Poison, is kept in the Society (which
Cuneus at that time showed often to me in Jesuits make but a vaunt of poisoning
Kings.
a boasting manner) wherein a Poison was prepared for the King; after the
Example of his The Jesuits it seems know very well King James was poisoned,
belike by some of their Instruments.
Father.

11. In this Scottish Commotion, the Marquess of Hamelton, often dispatched to
the Scots in the name of the King, to interpose the Royal Authority, whereby
the heat of minds might be mitigated, returned notwithstanding as often without
Fruit, and without ending the business: His Chaplain at that time repaired to
us, who It seems some Noblemens Chaplains are but the Popes and Jesuits
Intelligencers, if not their Confederates.
communicated some things secretly with Cuneus. Being demanded of me in Jest,
Whether also the Jews agreed with the Samaritans? Cuneus thereunto answered;
Would to God all Ministers were such as he: What you will, may be hence
conjectured.

12. Things standing thus, there All foreign Popish States contribute their
best assistance to reduce England to Rome.
arrived at London from Cardinal Richelieu, Mr. Thomas Chamberlain, his
Chaplain and Almoner, a Scot by Nation, who ought to assist the College of the
Confederated Society, and seriously to set forward the business, to leave
nothing unattempted, whereby the first heat might be exasperated. For which
service he was promised the Reward of a A meet Guerdon for such a Service.
Jesuits will not give over acting, till they (...) their Designs.
Bishopric. He cohabited with the Society four Months space; neither was it
lawful for him first to depart, until things succeeding according to his wish,
he might be able to return back again with good News.

13. Sir Toby Matthew, a Jesuited Bishops Sons oft-times the Pope's greatest
Agents. (...) industrious Activity should shame our Slothfulness.
Priest, of the Order of Politicians, a most vigilant Man of the chief Heads,
to whom a Bed was never so dear, that he would rest his Head thereon,
refreshing his Body with Sleep in a Chair for an Hour or two; neither Day nor
Night spared his Machinations; a Man principally noxious, and himself the
Plague of the King and Kingdom of England; a most impudent Man, who flies to
all Banquets and Feasts, called or not called; never quiet, always in action
and perpetual motion; thrusting himself into all Conversations of Superiors;
he urges Conferences familiarly, that he may fish out the Minds of Men;
whatever he observes thence, which may bring any Commodity or Discommodity to
the Part of the Conspirators, he communicates to the Pope's Legate; the more
secret things he himself writes to the Pope, or to Cardinal Barbarino. In sum,
he adjoins The Protestants want of such mutual correspondency and intelligence
is a great weakening to their cause. Let them learn Wisdom by their Enemies.
himself to any Man's Company; no Word can be spoken, that he will not lay hold
on, and accommodate to his Party. In the mean time, whatever he has sished
out, he reduces into a Catalogue, and every Summer carries it to the General
Consistory of the Jesuits Politics, which secretly meets together in the
Province of A (...) place for their intelligence and correspondency with
Ireland, lying in the midst between both.
Wales, where he is an acceptable Guest. There Councils are secretly hammered
which are most meet for the Convulsion of the Ecclesiastic and Politic Estate
of both Kingdoms.

14. Captain Read, a Scot, dwelling in Longacre-street, near the The Jesuits
(...) make (...) use of all Nations and (...).
Angel-Tavern, a Secular Jesuit, who for his detestable Office performed
(whereby he had perverted a certain Minister of the Church, with secret
Incitements to the Popish Religion, with all his Family, taking his Daughter to
Wife) for a O that such Romish Seducers should obtain such Power and Rewards,
for being seducing Instiuments.
Recompense obtained a Rent or Impost upon Butter, which the Country People are
bound to render to him, procured for him from the King, by some chief Men of
the Society, who never want a Spur, whereby he may be constantly detained in
his Office. In his House The Jesuits it seems are very powerful at (...).
the Business of the whole Plot is concluded, where the Society, which has
conspired against the King, the Lord Archbishop, and both Kingdoms, meet
together, for the most part every Day: But on the Day of the Carriers (or
Posts) dispatch, which is ordinarily Friday, they meet in greater numbers; for
then all the Intilligencers assemble, and confer in common, what things every
of them has fished out that Week; who that they may be without suspicion, send
The Pope's weekly intelligence at Rome, from hence, can (...) no (...) England.
their Secrets by Toby Matthew, or Read himself, to the Pope's Legate; he
transmits the compacted Packet, which he has purchased from the
Intelligencers, to Rome.

With the same Read, the Letters Jesuits (...) how to (...) their Names and
(...).
brought from Rome are deposited, under feigned Titles and Names, who by him
are delivered to all, to whom they appertain; for all and every of their Names
are known to him.

Upon the very same occasion, Letters also are brought hither under the covert
of Father Philip, (he notwithstanding being ignorant of things) from whom they
are distributed to the Conspirators.

There is in that very House a There are more Popish Chapel in and about
London, than are (...) known.
public Chapel, wherein an ordinary Jesuit consecrates, and dwells there. In
the said Chapel, Masses are daily celebrated by the Jesuits, and it serves for
the Baptizing of the Children of the House, and of some of the Conspirators.

Those who assemble in the forenamed Jesuits can (...) any (...) or Part to
delude the (...).
House, come frequently in Coaches, or on Horseback in Laymens Habit, and with
a great Train, wherewith they are disguised, that they may not be known; yet
they are Jesuits, and conjured Members of the Society.

15. All the Papists of England Papists large Contributions to undermine our
Religion, should make us liberal to defend it.
contribute to this Assembly, lest any thing should be wanting to promote the
undertaken Design. Upon whose Treasury, one Widow, owner of the Houses, wherein
Secretary Windebank now dwells, dead above three Years since, bestowed four
hundred thousand English Pounds; so likewise others contribute above their
Abilities, so as the Business may be promoted unto its desired End.

16. Besides the foresaid Houses, Jesuits are as wise as Serpents, though not
so innocent as Doves.
there are Conventicles also kept in other more secret places, of which verily
they confide not even among themseves, for fear lest they should be discovered.
First, every of them are called to certain Inns, (one not knowing of the other)
hence they are severally led by Spies to the place where they ought to meet,
otherwise ignorant where they ought to assemble, le st peradventure they should
be surprised at unawares.

17. The Countess of Arundel, The Jesuits (...) of the Serpent to seduce men by
female (...) to their ruin. Her Voyage to Rome to visit the Pope, made her
frequently to visit his Legate.
a strenuous She-Champion of the Popish Religion, bends all her Nerves to the
universal Reformation; whatsoever she hears at the Kings Court, that is done
secretly or openly, in Words or Deeds, she presently imparts to the Popes
Legate, with whom she meets thrice a Day, sometimes in Arundel-House, now at the
Court, or at Tarthal. He scarce sucks such things by the Claw.

The Earl himself called now about The Countess belike was his forerunner (...).
three Years since, this Year, ought to go to Rome; without doubt to consult
there of serious things, concerning the Design. With gifts and Speeches the
Jesuits watch diligently to their Masses.

At Greenwich at the Earl's costs, No wonder theEarls Debts be so great. A
School of Nunns.
a Feminine School is maintained, which otherwise is a Monastery of Nuns; for
the young Girls therein, are sent forth hither and thither into foreign
Monasteries beyond the Seas.

18. Mr. Porter of the King's Bedchamber, Is not the King in gre it danger who
has such a Person in his Bedchamber, now keeper of the great Seal?
most addicted to the Popish Religion, is a bitter Enemy of the King; he
reveals all his greatest Secrets to the Popes Legate; although he very rarely
meets with him, yet his Wife meets him so much the oftener, who being informed
by her Husband, conveighs secrets to the Legate. In all his Actions he is
nothing inferior to Toby Matthew; it cannot be uttered how diligently he
watches on the Business.

His Sons are secretly instructed Both King and Prince have Jesuitical (...) in
their Bed-chambers.
in the Popish Religion; openly, they profess the Reformed. The Eldest is now
to receive his Father's Office, under the King which shall be: A Cardinals Hat
is provided for the other, if the Design shall succeed well.

Above three Years past, the said All businesses and employments must be (...)
aside to (...) this Plot.
Mr. Porter, was to be sent away by the King to Morocco: But he was prohibited
by the Society, lest the Business should suffer delay thereby.

He is a Patron of the Jesuits, for whom for the exercise of Religion, he
provides Chapels both at home and abroad.

19. Secretary Windebank, a most A Jesuitical Secretary; his (...) and Articles
in Parliament confirm (...) this and more.
sierce Papist, is the most unfaithful to the King of all Men, who not only
betrays and reveals even the King's greatest Secrets, but likewise communicates
Counsels, by which the Design may be best advanced. He at least thrice every
Week converseth with the Legate in Nocturnal Conventicles, and reveals those
things which he thinks fit to be known; for which end, he hired a House near to
the Legat's House, whom he often resorts to through the Garden-door; for by
this vicinity, the Meeting is facilitated.

The said Secretary is bribed with Papists spare no cost.
Gifts to the Party of that conjured Society, by whom he is sustained, that he
may the more seriously execute his Office.

He sent his (...) expressly to Rome, who ought to insinuate himself into the
Roman Pontif.

20. Sir Digby, Sir Winter, Mr. The other Conspirators Names.
Mountague the younger, who has been at Rome, my Lord Sterling, a Cousin of
the Earl of Arundel's, a Knight, the Countess of Neuport, the Duchess of
Buckingham, and many others who have sworn into this Conspiracy, are all most
vigilant in the Design. Some of these are enticed with the hope of Court;
others of Political Offices; others attend to the sixteen Cardinals Caps that
are vacant, which are therefore detained idle for some years, that they may
impose a vain hope on those who expect them.

21. The President of the aforesaid Society was my Lord Gage, a Jesuit Priest,
dead above three years since. He had a Palace adorned with lascivious A sit
Cover for such a Dish.
Pictures, which counterfeited Profaneness in the House; but with them was
palliated a Monastery, wherein forty Nuns were maintained, hid in so great a
Palace: It is situated in Queen Street, which the Statue of a golden Queen
adorns. The Secular Jesuits It seems their Purses were strong, and their hopes
great.
have bought all this Street, and have reduced it into a Quadrangle, where a
Jesuitical College is tacitly built, with this hope, that it might be openly
finished, as soon as the universal Reformation was begun.

The Pope's Legate uses a threefold Character, or Cipher; one wherewith he
communicates with all Nuncios; another, other, with Cardinal Barbarino only; a
third, wherewith he covers some great Secrets to be communicated.

Whatever things he either receives from the Society, or other Spies, those he
packs up together in one Bundle, dedicated under this Inscription, To Monsieur
Stravio, Archdeacon of Cambray; from whom at last they are promoted to Rome.

These things being thus ordered, if every thing be laid to the balance, it
will satisfy in special all the Articles propounded.

WHEREIN,

1. THe Conspiracy against the King [and Lord Archbishop is detected] and the
means whereby ruin is, threatened to both, demonstrated.

2. The imminent Dangers to both Kingdoms are rehearsed.

3. The rise and progress of that Scottish Fire is related.

4. Means whereby the Scottish Troubles may be appeased, are suggested; for
after the Scots shall know by whom and to what end their Minds are incensed,
they will speedily look to themselves; A good Caveat for England now.
neither will they suffer the Forces of both Parts to be subdued, lest a middle
Party interpose, which seeks (the ruin) of both.

5. With what Sword the King's Throat is assaulted, even when these Stirs shall
be ended, Cuneus his Confession, and a visible Demonstration, shows.

6. The Place of the Assembly, in the House of Captain Read, is nominated.

7. The day of the eight days dispatch by Read and the Legate is prescribed.

8. How the Names of the Conspirators may be known.

9. Where this whole Congregation may be circumvented.

10. Some of the principal unfaithful ones of the King's Party are notified by
name; many of whose Names occur not, yet their Habitations are known; their
Names may be easily extorted from Read.

If these things be warily proceeded in, the strength of the whole Business
will be brought to light; so the Arrow being foreseen, the Danger shall be
avoided; which that it may prosperously succeed, the Omnipotent Creator grant.

The Archbishop's Indorsement with his own Hand:

Rece. October. 14. 1640.

The Narration of the great Treason, concerning which he promised to Sir
William Boswell, to discover against the King and State.

Illustrissime ac Reverendissime Domine.
ACcepta suae Regiae Majestati simulac Reverentiae Tuae fuisse offerta nostra
lubentes, and ex animo percepimus. Adesse vobis benignitatem Numinis, hoc
unicum nobis Index est, quo stimulus datur, ut tanto alacrius, liberaliusque,
illa quibus vitae discrimen utriusque, statusque Regni Angliae, tum Scotiae
eximiae Majestatis sede deturbatio intendatur, effundamus, detegamus. Ne autem
ambagibus superfluis dilatetur Oration, nonnulla, quae tantum ad rem necessaria
praemittemus.

Sciant primo, bonum istum virum per quem sequentia deteguntur, in pulvere isto
Pontificio esse natum and educatum, qui in dignitatibus Ecclesiasticis aetates
consumpsit. Tandem praesentis Negotii expeditioni, par inventus, Consilio and
Mandato Domini Cardinalis Barbarini, ad auxilium Domino Cuneo adjunctus est;
penes quem in officio ita diligens ac sedulus inventus, ut spes magnae
promotionis ipsi data fuerit. Ipse vero, boni Spiritus ductus instinctu, ut
dulcia promissa contempsit, agnitisque Religionis Pontificiae vanitatibus;
(quarum alias defensor fuerat severissimus) malitia etiam sub vexillo Papali
militantium notata, gravari Conscientiam suam senserat; quod Onus ut deponeret,
ad Orthodoxam Religionem Animum convertit. Mox ut Conscientiam suam exoneraret,
machinatum in tot innocents Animas scelus, revelandum censuit, levamen se
percepturum, si in sinum Amici talia effundat. Quo facto, ab eodem Amico serio
commonitus, verae Conversionis, Charitatisque Exemplar ostenderet, liberaret ab
imminenti Discrimine innocents tot Animas: In cujus monita lubens consenserat,
calamoque sequentia excipiendum dederat, ex quibus Articuli non ita pridem tuae
Reverentiae oblati, luculenter explicari and demonstrari poterunt.

1. Ante omnia, ut Cardo Rei recipiatur, sciendum est, omnes istas, quibus tota
Christianitas hodie concutitur, Factiones, exoriri ab Jesuitica ista Chamea
Sobole, cujus quatuor per Orbem luxuriant Ordines.

Primi Ordinis sunt Ecclesiastici, quorum Religionis promotoria est curare.

Secundi Ordinis sunt Politici, quorum Officium est, statum Regnorum, Rerumque
publicarum, quoquomodo intentare, turbare, reformare.

Tertii Ordinis sunt Seculares, quorum proprium est, Regibus, Principibusque,
ad Officia sese obtrudere, insinuare, immiscere se rebus forensibus;
emptionibus venditionibusque, and quae Civilia sunt occupari.

Quarti Ordinis Exploratores sunt, sortis inferioris homines, qui servitiis
Magnatum, Principum, Baronum, Nobilium, Civium, sese submittunt, Animis
Dominorum imposituri.

II. Tot Ordinum Societatem Regnum Anglicanum alit: Vix enim tota Hispania,
Gallia and Italia tantam multitudinem Jesuitarum, quantam unicum Londinum,
exhibere posset; ubi plus quam 50. Scoti Jesuitae reperiuntur. Ibi sedem
iniquitatis, dicta Societas sibi elegit, conspiravitque in Regem, Regique
fidelissimos, inprimis vero Dominum Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, etiam in
Regnum utrumque.

III. Certo certius enim est, determinasse Societatem nominatam, reformatione
universali Regnum Angliae tum Scotiae adficere. Determinatio ergo finis, infert
necessario determinationem mediorum ad finem.

IV. Ad promovendum ergo susceptum scelus, Titulo Congregationis Fidei
propagandae, dicta Societas sese insignivit; quae Caput Collegii Pontificem
Romanum substitutum, and executorem Cardinalem Barbarinum agnoscit.

V. Patronus Societatis primarius Londini, est Legatus Pontificius, qui curam
negotii gerit; in cujus sinum, faex illa proditorum omnia explorata,
hebdomadatim deponit. Impetrata autem est reseda Legationis istius Londini,
Pontificis Romani nomine, qua mediante, Cardinali Barbarino agere in Regem
Regnumque tanto tutius faciliusque liceret. Nullus enim alias, tam libere
ambire Regem posset, quam ille qui Pontificia Auctoritate palliatus fit.

VI. Fungebatur tum temporis Officio Legati Pontificii, Dominus Cuneus,
Conjuratae Societatis Instrumentum universale, and serius negotii promotor;
cujus secreta, ut and aliorum exploratorum omnium, praesens vir bonus,
communicator horum, excipiebat, expediebatque quo res postulabat.

Adoriebatur Cuneus primaria Regni Capita, nihilque intentatum sivit, quomodo
singula corrumperet and ad partem Pontificiam inclinaret: Variis incitamentis
plurimos alliciebat; Etiam Regem ipsum donationibus Picturarum, Antiquitatum,
Idolorum, aliarumque vanitatum Roma allatarum, deludendum quaerebat, quae tamen
apud Regem nihil proficerant.

Familiaritate inita cum Rege, rogatur sae pius Hantocurti, etiam Londini,
Palatini causam ageret, interponeretque auctoritatem suam, intercessione Legato
Coloniensi persuaderet, ut Palatinus in conditiones, proximis Comitiis de pace
acturis, insereretur; quod quidem pollicitus est, contrarium vero praestitit;
scripsit quidem, Jesuits know well how to equivocate thus.
Rogagatum se de talibus ab Rege fuisse, non consulere tamen, ut consentiatur,
Ij Popes must not favor Protestant Princes, its a Miracle that they should
favor them, or harbor any of their Agents now near them.
ne ab Hispanis fortasse dicatur, Pontificem Romanum Principi Haeretico
parocinatum fuisse.

(...) interim Cuneus, ab Domino Archiepiscopo Regi fidelissimo, totum animum
Regium esse pendulum, omnem se moturum lapidem, nervosque adplicaturum
statuerat, ut ad partem suam lucrari possit: Paratum se habere medium certo
confisus. Mandatum enim habebat, Pileum Cardinalem, Nomine Pontificis Romani,
Domino Archiepiscopo offerret, lactaretque pollicitis etiam sublimioribus, ut
Animum sincerum corrumperet. Commoda tamen occasio nunquam dabatur, qua Domino
Archiepiscopo sese insinuare posset (quaerebat enim Scorpius ovum:) Per Comitem
and Comitissam Arondelianam, etiam per Secretarium Windebankum, liber accessus
impetrari debebat: Quorum omnium intercessionibus neglectis, societatem vel
familiaritatem Cunei, Peste pejus fugiebat: Persuadebatur etiam ab aliis non
infimis, ipsi been notis, nec tamen commovebatur.

VII. Quaerebatur and alius qui ad facinus detestandum accessum impediebat,
Secretarius Cook; erat is osor Jesuitarum infensissimus, quibus aditum ad Regem
intercipiebat; excipiebat plurimos pro meritis, in illorum Factiones, sedulo
inquirebat; quo nomine incitamentum omne, vim magneticam ad partem Pontificiam
spirans, erat apud ipsum inefficax; nihil enim tam carum erat, quod ipsum ad
pravum inclinasset. Hinc Conjurationis Patronis exosus factus, periclitabatur
de Officio ut exueretur; laborabatur per triennium, quod ultimo impetratum.

Mansit nihilominus ab part Regis, nodus solutu difficilis; Dominus
Archiepiscopus enim constantia sua, sicuti durissimum sese interposuit Saxum.

Laborasse se incassum, ab part Domini Archiepiscopi Cuneus cum intellexisset,
efferbuit Malitia ipsius, totiusque Societatis: Mox insidiae parari caeperunt,
quibus Dominus Archiepiscopus una cum Rege caperetur.

In Regem quoque (cujus gratia totum istud disponitur negotium) a quo quia
nihil quod promovendae Religioni Papistic ae inserviret speratur, (imprimis
vero, Cum Animum suum aperuerit, se ejus Opinionis esse, quemvis in Religione
sua dummodo vir probus and pius sit, salvari posse) Sententia lata est.

VIII. Ad perpetrandum susceptum facinus, executio criminalis Westmonasterii,
per scripta nonnulla Puritanorum causata, primi incendii ansam dedit: Quae res
ab Papistis apud Puritanos in tantm exacerbabatur, exaggerabaturque, ut si
inulta maneret, Religioni ipsis duceretur; cujus incendii, subsequens tandem
liber Precum, flammas auxit.

IX. In isto fervore expeditus fuit ad Scotos ab part Pontificia Comes quidam
Scotus Maxfield, ni fallor nomine, cum quo, duo alii Comites Scoti Papistae,
correspondebant. Is commovere debebat plebem, injuriamque refricare ut Animos
accenderet, ad Arma praecipitaret, quibus noxius libertatis Scoticae,
perimeretur Turbator.

X. Ibi una opera paratus in Casses Regi; eo enim directum esse praesens
negotium ut Anglorum complurimi sese adglutinarent Scotis; Rex armis maneret
inferior, qui ab Papistis auxilia petere cogeretur; quae tamen non impetraret,
nisi in Conditiones discenderet, quibus libertatem universalem exercitii
Religionis Pontificiae, permitteret; ita enim res Papistarum ad nutum
succederent. Quo consensu si difficiliorem sese exhibuerit, remedium erit in
promptu: Adolescente enim cum primum Regio Filio, (qui a teneris, ut parti
Pontificiae adsuescat, educatur) de Rege actum est: Nux quippe Indica
acutissimo veneno referta in Societate servatur (quam Cuneus tum temporis
gloriabundus mihi ostentabat) quo Regi exemplo Patris, parabatur Pharmacum.

XI. In ista Commotione Scotica Marquess d'Hamelton saepius Regis nomine ad
Scotos ablegatur, Regiam auctoritatem interponeret, qua aestus animorum
mitigaretur, sine fructu tamen, reque infecta toties reversus. Ipsius
Concionator tum temporis nos adiit, qui cum Cuneo secret nonnulla
communicavit. Interrogatus a me, joco; Number etiam Judaei cum Samaritanis
convenirnt? Ad quae Cuneus respondit, Vtinam omnes ministri tales ut ipse
essent: Conjiciatur hinc quidcunque.

XII. Rebus sic stantibus, ab Cardinali Richelieu, Dominus Thomas Camerarius,
Sacellanus and Eleemosinarius ipsius, natione Scotus, Londinum adpulit, qui
Collegio Societatis conjuratae adsidere debebat, remque serio agere, nihil
intentatum relinquere, quo primus exasperaretur fervor. Quo Officio Honorarium
Episcopatus erat ipsi pollicitum. Conhabitabat and Societati per quatuor
Menses; nec prius discedendum licebat, donec rebus ex voto cedentihus, cum
bonis novis redux fieri possit.

XIII. Cavalliero Tobias Mathei, Sacerdos Jesuita, Ordinis politicorum, e
capitibus primariis homo vigilantissimus, cui nunquam tam charum cubile, quo
caput reclivet, ad sellam tantum, hora una, atque altera, somno corpus reficit;
nec diei nec nocti, machinamentis parcit; vir sum noxius and ipsa Regis
Regnique Angliae Pestis; homo impudentissimus, qui per omnia convivia,
epulasque, vocatus vel non vocatus, volitat; nunquam quietus, semper in
action, motuque perpetuo; singulis Conversationibus Superiorum immiscuit;
urget familiarie colloquia, ut animos hominum expiscaretur: Quicquid inde ad
parts Conjuratorum commodi vel incommodi concernere advertit, Legati
Pontificio communicate; Secretioria ipse ad Pontificem vel Cardinalem Barbarinum
praescribit. In summa, cuivis Societati sese adglutinat; nullum verbum effari
potest, quod ipse non arripiat and ad parts suas accommodet. Quicquid inter a
temporis expiscatus, in Catalogum redigit, and quavis AEstate ad Consistorium
generale Jesuitarum Politicorum, quod in Provincia Wallensi secreto concurrit,
Hospes acceptus defert. Ibi tacit (...) cuduntur quae ad convulsionem Status
Ecclesiastici, tum Politici, Regni utriusque sunt aptissima.

XIV. Capitaneus Reda, Scotus, habitans in platea Longaker, prope tabernam
Angeli, Jesuita Secularis, qui ob detestandum officium praestitum (quo
Ministrum quendam Ecclesiae, incitamentis dulcibus ad Religionem Papisticam,
tota cum familia ipsius perverterat, filia ipsius in uxorem ducta) pro repensa
obtinuit reditus vel vectigal Butiraceum, quod Rustici sibi praestare tenentur,
adquisitum ipsi ab Rege, per non nullos Societatis praecipuos, cui stimulus
nunquam deficit, quo in officio constans detineatur. In ipsius aedibus Rei
totius peragitur Negotium, ubi Societas quae in Regem and Dominum
Archiepiscopum, Regnumque utrumque conjuravit, plerumque diebus singulis
concurrit: Die vero expeditionis Tabellarii, quae ordinary est dies Veneris,
tanto frequentiores; tum enim omnes Exploratores convenient, quae quisque ea
hebdomada expiscatus est, in commune conferunt; qui ut extra suspicionem sint,
secreta sua per Tobiam Mathei vel ipsum Redam, ad Legatum Pontificium amandant;
ipse, fasciculum compactum quem ab Exploratoribus nundinatus est, Romam
transmittit.

Apud eundem Redam deponuntur literae Roma illatae, sub titulis and nominibus
fictis, quae per ipsum singulis ad quos spectant traduntur; illorum enim omnium
and singulorum nomina ipsi sunt cognita.

Eadem ipsa occasion adferuntur etiam literae, sub coperta Patris Philippi
(ipso tamen rerum nescio) a quo conjuratis distribuuntur.

Habetur in illis ipsis aedibus Sacellum publicum; cui Jesuita ordinarius
consecrat, ibidemque habitat. In dicto Sacello Missae celebrantur quotidie a
Jesuitis; Baptismoque liberis domesticis and nonnullorum Conjuratorum
inservitur.

Qui in nominatis AEdibus concurrunt, Rhodis vel Equis, frequenter habitu
Politico, magnoque Comitatu, quo palliantur ne innotescant; Jesuitae tamen
sunt, and Membra Societatis conjurata.

XV. Hoc coetu contribuitur ab omnibus Papistis Angliae, ne quidquam ad
promovendum susceptum Negotium deficiat. In quem fiscum, unica Vidua,
proprietaria olim AEdium, quas modo Secretarius Windebank inhabitat, ante
triennium defuncta 40000 Librarum Anglicarum, contulit; sic and alii etiam
citra vires faciunt, modo ad optatum finem promoveatur negotium.

XVI. Praeter nominatas AEdes, etiam per alia loca secretiora fiunt
Conventicula, de quibus ne inter se quidem fidunt, metu ne dispatentur.
Convocantur primo ad certa Diversoria singuli, (alter alterius inscius) hinc
per Exploratores ad locum ubi convenire debent, singuli deducuntur, ignari
alias ubi conventuri sint, ne forte insperato obruantur.

XVII. Comitissa d' Arondel, strenua Pontificiae Religionis Propugnatrix, ad
Reformationem universalem omnes nervos intendit; quicquid ad Aulam Regis,
secret vel aperte verbis vel factis geritur, Legato Pontificio insinuat, cum
quo ad minimum ter de die, modo in AEdibus Arondelianis, jam ad Aulam vel
Tarthalae cum ipso congreditur. Ex Ungue talia vix exsugit.

Ipse Comes vocatus jam a triennio hoc Anno ire debebat Romam; acturus ibi
dubio procul de seriis, Negotium concernentibus. Donis dictionibusque suis,
Jesuitae missis invigilant.

Grinwici, Impensis Comitis, Schola Foeminea sustentatur; quae alias
Monasterium Monialium est; Adultae enim inibi Juvenculae, hic inde per extera
transmarina Monasteria emittuntur.

18. Dominus Porter, Cubicularius Regius, Pontificiae Religioni addictissimus,
Regis infensus hostis, Is ipsius secretissima quaeque, Legato Pontificio
aperit, quamvis rarissime cum ipso conveniat; Uxor tanto saepius, quae ab
marito informata, Legato secreta confidit: In omnibus suis actionibus Tobiae
Mathei nihil cedit; effari non potest qualiter negotio invigilet.

Filii ipsius in Religione Pontificia occulte informantur; aperte, Reformatam
profitentur. Major Natu Officium Patris suscepturus, sub Rege futuro: Alteri,
si negotium been successerit, Pileus Cardinalis paratus est.

Ante triennium ablegari debebat dictus Dominus Porter a Rege (...): Prohibitus
fuit ab Societate ne, moram pateretur negotium.

Patronus est Jesuitarum, quibus ad exercitium Religionis, Sacella, domi
forisque subministrat.

19. Secretarius Windebank, Papista acerrimus, Regi omnium infidelissimus, qui
non solum secretissima etiam quaeque Regia prodit and revelat, sed etiam
Consilia, quibus optime Negotio consuleretur, communicate. Ipse ad minimum ter
in hebdomada, per nocturna Conventicula cum Legato conversatur; injungitque
quae scitu digna cogitat: Cujus causa, aedes vicinas Legati Domo conduxit, quem
saepius per portam horti adit; hac enim vicinitate facilitatur congressus.

Dictus Secretarius ad partem Societatis conjuratae, muncribus emptus est,
quibus sustentatur, ut magis serio officium peragat.

Filium suum express Romam misit, qui Romano Pontifici sese insinuare debebit.

20. Cavalliero Digbi, Cavalliero Winter, Dominus Mountagu Jun. qui Romae fuit,
Mi-lord Sterling, Cognatus Comitis d'Arondel, Eques, Comitissa de Neuport,
Ducissa Buckingham, and plerique alii qui in Conditionem hane jurarunt, omnes
in opere sunt vigilantissimi. Horum alii, Aulicorum; alii Politicorum
Officiorum spe inescantur; alii ad sexdecim Pileos Cardinales vacantes
attendunt, qui ideo ab aliquot annis otioss detinentur, ut spem vanam
expectantibus imponant.

21. Praeses nominatae Societatis erat Mi-lord Gage, Sacerdos Jesuita, ante
triennium defunctus. Habebat is Palatium, lascivis Picturis exornatum, quae
prophanitatem in aedibus mentiebantur; Palliabatur vero illis, Monasterium, quo
quadraginta Moniales sustentabantur, tanto Palatio occultatae: Situm (...) in
Platea Reginae, quam Statua Regina aurea decorat. Istam Plateam totam Jesuitae
Seculares emerunt, redegeruntque in Quadratum, ubi tacitae Collegium Jesuiticum
exstruitur, ea spe, ut quam primum Reformatione universali incepta, aperte
elaborari possit.

Legatus Pontificius triplici Charactere sive Cifra utitur: Uno, quo, cum
omnibus Nunciis communicate; altero, cum solo Cardinale Barbarino: Tertio, quo
secretioria nonnulla communicanda occultat.

Quaecunque per hebdomadam ab Societate aut aliis Exploratoribus excepit, illa
uno fasciculo consarcinat, sub inscriptione, Al Monsignor Stravio Archidiacono
di Cambray, dedicat; ab quo tandem promoventur Romae.

His ita constitutis, si singula ad trutinam ponantur, satisfiet in specie
omnibus Articulis propositis.

QUIBUS,

1. COnjuratio in Regem, and Dominum Archiepiscopum detegitur; Media quibus
exitium utrique minatur, demonstratur.

2. Pericula Regno utrique imminentia recensentur.

3. Exortus incendii illius Scotici and progressus enarratur.

4. Media quibus turbae istae Scoticae sedari possint, suggeruntur; postquam
enim resciverint Scoti, a quibus and in quem finem animi ipsorum accendantur,
consulent sibi propere; neque utriusque partis vires succumbere sinent, ne
medius sese interponat qui utramque quaerit.

5. Quo ense Regis petatur jugulum, etiam turbis istis sopitis, Cunei
Confessio, oculataque demonstratio docet.

6. Lous Congregationis, in AEdibus Capitanei Redae, nominatur.

7. Dies expeditionis octiduae per Redam and Legatum injungitur.

8. Quomodo nomina Conjuratorum innotescere possent.

9. Ubi tota ista Congregatio possit circumveniri.

10. Infideles nonnulli ab part Regis praecipuorum de nomine notificantur;
plures, quorum nomina non occurrunt; habitationes tamen notae sunt; de nomine
facile ab Reda extorqueri poterunt.

Si caute in his procedetur, nervus totius negotii in apricum prodibit; ita
Sagitta praevisa, effugietur periculo; quod ut succedat prospere, Creator
Omnipotens faxit.

A further Evidence and Confirmation of some things in the Relation concerning
the Archbishop of Canterbury.
THE Relation of this horrid Plot by a chief Actor in it, (with which the
Archbishop acquainted the King, not many Days before this Parliament began)
lay concealed among the Archbishop's Papers, I did all I could; and the whole
Business was examined at a Committee of Lords, his Majesty being present. And
Sir William Roswell's last Answer to these Lords Committees came after I was
committed, when it lay not in my Power to follow it any farther.
[without any Prosecution of the Conspirators (for ought appears) who are since
dispersed in part by the Parliament] but neither Dissolved, nor taken off this
Plot, but more active in it; putting forth their last and utmost Endeavors in
all Places to accomplish this their Design, which they have almost brought to
Maturity, to our Shame and Grief, by new raised Civil Wars both in Ireland and
England.

Two things in this Plot which concern [the Arch-Bishop] may perchance seem
strange to different sorts of Men.

First, That [the Pope's Legate should presume to tempt the Archbishop with the
Offer of a Cardinal's Cap,] and that certainly no such Proffer was ever made
unto him. But to put this out of Question: The Bishop himself, under his own
Hand, among other Memorials in the Journal of his Life, (found in his Pocket)
has these two remarkable Notes, Anno 1633. August 4. Sunday, News came to
Court of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Death, and the King resolved
presently to give it me. That very Morning at Greenwich there came one to me
SERIOUS-LY, and THAT AVOWED This must needs be the (...), or one employed from
him.
ABILITY TO PERFORM IT, and OFFERED ME TO BE A CARDINAL. I went presently TO
THE KING and ACQUAINTED HIM BOTH [WITH THE THING and PERSON.] August 17. (the
same Month) Saturday I had A SERIOUS OFFER MADE ME AGAIN TO BE A CAR-DINAL. I
was then from Court; but so soon as I came thither (which was Wednesday, August
21.) I ACQUAINTED HIS MAJESTY WITH IT. But my Answer again was, That somewhat
dwelt within me that would not suffer that TILL ROME were other than it is. So
that by his own Notes it appears, a Cardinal's Cap was twice proffered him very
seriously, and that he acquainted the King with it; Yet, by (...).
[not by way of Complaint] to crave Justice against Most false.
[the Party who durst presume to tempt him with such a Foreign Dignity, to be
the Pope's Sworn Instrument, but by way of Advice, and to sound his Majesty's
Opinion hereof, as his Answer] imports: Neither did he absolutely disclaim the
Dignity it self, as if he might in no case accept it, but conditionally, Till
Rome should be other than it is now, This is added.
[and then he would not refuse it.] Indeed the Archbishop in his Page 171.
Reply to Fisher, It Is no Challenge neither.
[challengeth] this Title ( Patriarch of another World) as his Due, being given
to his Predecessor Anselme; and therefore cannot brook any other Pope (in point
of Sovereignty) to Lord it over him here; and this made him refuse the Cap. But
had he resisted the (...) Landing or Continuance here, which he never Most
false.
[did for ought appears, but entertained some Familiarity with him] at first,
though they afterward grew more strange; or peremptorily refused the first
Offer with Indignation, [thrust out the Legate or Offerer by Head and Shoulders,
I could not prosecute him: Nor the Author of this Tract, had he been in my
place.
prosecuted him] (as he did poor innocent Puritans) [upon the Statute of 23
Eliz. c. 1. as a Traitor, for attempting to seduce and subject him to the Sea
of Rome;] or brought him [publickly into the Star Chamber or High-Commission]
as he did some others for lesser pretended Crimes and Scandals; he had
discharged the part of a good zealous Prelate and Protestant: But here was no
such Proceeding in this Case. The very Parties that tendered this Cap, The
slanderous Tongues of your Faction made him presume, if any thing.
[presuming some good Inclination in him to accept it] and to the Romish
Church, which he maintains to be a True Church, wherein Men are, and may be
saved: And the Second Proffer following so soon at the Heels of the First,
intimates, That the First was in such sort entertained by him, as rather
encouraged, than discouraged the Party to make the Second. And his Second
Consultation with the King concerning it, insinuates, That [the King rather
inclined to, than against it;] or at leastwise left it arbitrary to him, to
accept or reject it, as he best liked. As for his Severity in prosecuting
Papists, it appears by his Epistle to the King before his Conference with the
Jesuit Fisher, where he uses these Speeches of his Carriage toward them; God
forbid that I should persuade a Persecution in any kind, or practice it in the
least These Words are not mine. Besides, take the whole Sentence; and then, etc.
[against Priests and Jesuits.] For to my remembrance I have not given him or
his so much as cross Language. Therefore he is no great Enemy to them.

The Second thing which may seem strange to others, is this; That the Pope's
Legate and Jesuits should ever hate, or conspire his Death, unless he were an
utter Enemy to all Popery, Papists, and the Church of Rome; which admits an
easy Answer. The Truth is, the Bishop being very pragmatical and wilful in his
Courses, could not well brook pragmatical peremptory Jesuits, who in Popish
Kingdoms are in perpetual Enmity with all other Orders, and they with them;
they having been often banished out of See the General Hist. of France in the
Life of H. 3. and 4.
France and other Realms by the Sorbonists, Dominicans, and other Orders; no
Protestants writing so bitterly against these Popish Orders, as themselves do
one against the other; yea, the Priests and Jesuits in See the English Pope.
England were lately at great Variance, and persecuted one another with much
Violence. This is no good Argument then [that the Archbishop held no
Correspondence with Priests and other Orders,] and bare no good Affection to
the Church of Rome, in whose Superstitious Ceremonies he outstripped many
Priests themselves. What Correspondency he held with I had (...) with either of
them. And have received Blame from some Great Men, that I would not make use of
them, as my Predecessor (...) have done.
[Franciscus de Sancta Clara, with other] Priests, and I had (...) with either
of them. And have received Blame from some Great Men, that I would not make use
of them, as my Predecessor (...) have done.
[Dr: Smith Bishop of Calcedon,] whom the Jesuits persecuted, and got
Excommunicated, (though of their own Church and Religion) is at large
discovered in a Book, entitled, The English Pope; and by the Scottish
Common Prayer Book found in the Archbishop's Chamber, with all those
Alterations, wherein it differs from the English, I had good reason to write
them in my own Hand. Yet shall they never be proved to be all (...). And if
they were, yet, etc.
[written with his own Hand;] some of which smell very strongly of Popery: As
namely, his blotting out of these Words at the Delivery of the Bread and Wine
in the Sacrament, Take and eat this, in remembrance that Christ died for thee;
and feed on him in thy Heart by Faith with Thanksgiving: Take and This is
according to the First Book of Edw 6.
[drink this in remembrance that] Christ's Blood was shed for thee, etc. and
leaving only this former Clause (the better to justify and imply a With which
his Speech in Star Chamber agrees; There it is Hoc est corpus meum, etc.
This is no greater Proof of Corporal Presence, than the retaining of it is
only to make a bare remembrance, etc.
[ Corporal] Presence of Christ in the Sacrament) The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ which was given for thee: The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was
shed for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul unto everlasting Life. And this
Popish Rubric written with his own Hand. The Presbyter, during the time of
Consecration, shall stand AT THE MIDDLE OF THE ALTAR, where he may with more
Ease and Decency To elevate the Hostia as Papists do.
USE BOTH HIS HANDS, than he can do, if he stand at the North-end: With other
Particulars of this kind. Moreover, in his Book of Private Devotions, written
with his own Hand, he has (after the Romish Form) reduced all his Prayers to
Canonical Hours. And in the Memorials of his Life, written with his own Hand,
there are these suspicious Passages, among others, besides the Offer of the
Cardinal's Cap, Anno 1631. Jun. 21. and 26. My nearer Acquaintance began to
settle with Dr. S. God bless us in it. Junii 25. Dr. S. with me at Fulham cum
Ma. etc. It was never meant of Dr. (...).
[meant of Dr. Smith, the Popish Bishop of Calcedon, as is conceived.] Jun. 25.
Mr. I hope I shall not answer for other Men, if they prove not as they should.
[Fr. Windebank my old Friend] was Sworn Secretary of State, which Place I
OBTAINED FOR HIM of my Gracious Master King Charles. What an Arch-Papist and
Conspirator he was, the Plot relates, and his Flight into France See the
Articles against him in Parliament.
for: releasing Papists and Jesuits out of Prison, and from Executions by his
own Warrants, and imprisoning those Officers who apprehended them) confirms. He
was (...) inward with another Bishop, and who labored his Preferment more
(...) I.
[About this time Dr: Theodore Price, Sub-dean of Westminster, a Man very
intimate with the Archbishop,] and recommended specially to the King by him to
be a Welsh Bishop (in Opposition to the Earl of Pembrook, and his Chaplain
Griffith Williams) soon after died a Reconciled Papist, and received Extreme
Unction from a Priest: Noscitur ex comite. August 30. 1634. he has this
Memorial: Saturday, at Oatlands the Queen sent for me, and gave me Thanks for a
Business with which she trusted me; her Promise then that she Go Potlids.
[would be my Friend,] and that I should have immediate Address to her, when I
had occasion. All which considered, together with My Chaplains have answered
their Faults; or may, when (...).
[his Chaplains] Licensing diverse Popish Books, with their expunging most
Passages against Popery out of Books brought to the Press, with other
Particulars commonly known, will give a true Character of his Temper, that he
is Who told you so?
[another Cassander,] or middle Man, between an Absolute Papist, and a real
Protestant, who will far sooner hug a Popish Priest in his Bosom, than take a
Puritan by the Little Finger: An absolute Papist in all matters of Ceremony,
Pomp and external Worship, (in which he was over-zealous, even to an open
Utterly False.
[(...) Persecution of all Conscientious Ministers,] who made Scruple of them,)
if not half an one at least in Doctrinal Tenets. How far he was guilty I helped
on that Parliament. And Sir Henry Vane was the Man that brake it, for ought I
know.
[of a Conditional Voting] the breaking up the last Parliament before this was
called, and for what end it was summoned, this other Memorial under his own
Hand will attest: December. 5. 1639. Thursday, the King declared his Resolution
for a Parliament, in case of the Scottish Rebellion: The first Movers to it
were my Lord Deputy of Ireland, my Lord Marquess Hamilton, and my self: And A
RESOLUTION VOTED AT THE BOARD TO AS-SIST THE KING IN EXTRAORDINARY WAYS, IF THE
PARLIAMENT SHOULD PROVE PEEVISH AND REFUSE, etc. But of him sufficient, When
it is prepared, it shall be welcome to me, to have any end.
[till his Charge (now in preparation) shall come in.]

Observations on, and from the Relation of this PLOT.
FRom the Relation of the former Plot by so good a Hand, our own Three Realms,
and all Foreign Protestant States may receive full Satisfaction.

First, That there has been a most cunning, strong, execrable Conspiracy long
since contrived at Rome, and for diverse Years together most vigorously pursued
in England with all Industry, Policy, Subtilty, Engines, by many active, potent
Confederates of all sorts, all Sexes, to undermine the Protestant Religion,
re-establish Popery, and alter the very Frame of Civil Government in all the
King's Dominions; wherein a most dangerous visible Progress has been lately
made.

Secondly, That to effect this Traiterous Design, they have not only secretly
erected some Monasteries of Monks, Nuns, in, and about London; but sent over
hither whole Regiments of most active subtle Jesuits, incorporated into a
particular new Society, whereof the Pope himself is Head, and Cardinal
Barbarino his Vicar; which Society was first discovered, and some of them
apprehended in their private College at Clerkenwel (together with their Books
of Account, Relics, and Massing Trinkets) about the beginning of the Second
Parliament of this King; yet such Power, Favor, Friends they had then
acquired, that their Persons were speedily and most indirectly released out of
Newgate without any Prosecution, to prevent the Parliament's Proceedings
against them. Since which, this conjured Society increasing in Strength and
Number, secretly replanted themselves in Queenstreet and Long-Acre; and their
Purses are now so strong, their Hopes so elevated, their Designs so ripened, as
they have there purchased, and founded [a new magnificent College] of their own
for their Habitation, near the fairest Buildings of Nobles, Knights and
Gentlemen, the more commodiously to seduce them.

Thirdly, That these Jesuits and Conspirators hold weekly, constant,
uninterrupted Intelligence with the Pope and Romish Cardinals; and have many
Spies or Intelligencers of all sorts about the King, Court, City, Noblemen,
Ladies, Gentlemen, and in all Quarters of the Kingdom, to promote this their
Damnable Plot.

Fourthly, That the Pope for diverse late Years has had a known avowed Legate,
Con by Name, openly residing even in London near the Court, of purpose to
reduce the King and his Kingdoms to the Obedience of the Church of Rome; and
the Queen at least, another Ledger at Rome trading with the Pope, to facilitate
the Design, to wit, one Hamilton a Scot, who receives a large Pension out of
the Exchequer, granted to another Protestant of that Name, who pays it over
unto him, to palliate the business from the People's knowledge; by which means
there has been a constant allowed Negotiation held between Rome and England,
without any open interruption.

Fifthly, That the Pope's Legate came over into England to effect this Project,
and kept his Residence here in London, for the better Prosecution thereof, by
the King's own Privity and Consent. And whereas by (...). Eccles. (...). p.
322. Ead. lib. 1. and (...) Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. Edit. ult. p. 926.
the ancient Law and Custom of the Realm yet in force, even in Times of Popery,
no Legate whatsoever coming from Rome ought to cross the Seas, or land in
England, or any the King's Dominions, without the King's Petition, Calling and
Request; and before he had taken a Solemn Oath or Protestation to bring and
attempt nothing in Word or Deed to the Prejudice of the Rights, Privileges,
Laws and Customs of the King and Realm. This Legate, [for ought appears] was
here admitted without any such cautionary Oath, which would have crossed the
chief End of his Legation, to prejudice all of them, and our Religion too.

Yea, whereas by the 23 Eliz. c. 1. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 3 (...) c. 3, 4, 5.
Statutes of the Realm, it is made no less than High Treason for any Priests,
Jesuits, or others, receiving Orders or Authority from the Pope of Rome, to set
footing in England, or any the King's Dominions, to seduce any of his Subjects
to Popery: And no Popish Recusant (much less then Priests, Jesuits and Legates)
ought to remain within Ten Miles of the City of London, nor come into the
King's or Prince's Courts, the better to avoid such traitorous and most
dangerous Conspiracies, Treasons and Attempts as are daily devised and
practiced by them against the King and Commonweal. Yet notwithstanding, this
Pope's Legate, and his Confederates, have not only kept Residence for diverse
Years in, or near London and the Court, and enjoyed free Liberty, (without
Disturbance, or any Prosecution of the Laws against them) to seduce his
Majesty's Nobles, Courtiers, Servants, Subjects every where, to their Grief and
Prejudice; but likewise have had familiar Access to, and Conference with, the
King himself (under the very Name and Authority of the Pope's Legate) by all
Arts, Policies and Arguments, to pervert and draw him, with his three Kingdoms,
into a new Subjection to the Sea of Rome, (as See 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary. c. 8.
Cardinal (...) the last Pope's Legate extant in England before this in Queen
Mary's Reign, reconciled her and the Realm to Rome, to their intolerable
Prejudice. An [Act so inconsistent with the Laws of the Realm, with his
Majesty's many ancient and late Remonstrances, Oaths, Protestations to maintain
the] Protestant Religion, without giving way to any backsliding to Popery, in
such sort as it was maintained and professed in the purest Times of Queen
Elizabeth, etc. as may well amaze the World, which ever looks more at real
Actions than verbal Protestations.

Sixthly, That the Popish Party and Conspirators have lately usurped a
Sovereign Power, not only above the Laws and Magistrates of the Realm (which
take no hold of Papists, but by the Parliament's late Care against them here)
but even over the King himself; who either cannot, or dares not (for fear,
perchance, of Poisoning, or other Assassination) oppose or banish these horrid
Conspirators from his Dominions and Court, but has a long time permitted them
to prosecute this Plot without any public Opposition or Dislike, by whose
Powerful Authority and Mediation all may easily divine. Alas! What will become
of the poor Sheep, when the Shepherd himself not only neglects to chase and
keep out these Romish Wolves, but permits them free Access into, and Harbor in
the Sheepfold, to assault, if not devour, not only his Flock, but Person too?
Either St. Joh. 10. 10, 11, 12, 13.
John was much mistaken in the Character of a good Shepherd, and in prescribing
this Injunction against such Seducers, 2 John 10, 11.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into
your House, neither bid him God speed: for he that bids him God speed, is
Partaker of his evil Deeds. And the Gratian. cause. 23.
Fathers and Canonists deceived in this Maxim, Qui non prohibet malum quod
potest, jubet: Or else the Premises cannot be tolerated or defended by any, who
profess themselves Enemies, or Opposites, to the Pope, Priests, or Church of
Rome.

Seventhly, That these Conspirators are so potent, as to remove from Court and
Public Offices all such as dare strenuously oppose their Plots, [(as the
Example of Sir Henry Vane wrought him out.
Secretary Cook, with other] Officers lately removed in Ireland, evidence) and
plant others of their own Party and Confederacy both in his Majesty's Court,
Privy Council, Closet, Bedchamber, [if not Bed,] and about the Prince, to
corrupt them: And how those who are thus environed with so many industrious
potent Seducers of all sorts, who have so many Snares to entrap, so many
Enticements to withdraw them, both in their Beds, Bed-Chambers, Closets,
Councils, Courts, wherever they go or come, should possibly continue long
untainted, unseduced, without an omnipotent Protection (of which none can be
assured, who permits or connives at such dangerous Temptations) is a thing
scarce credible in Divine or Humane Reason, if Genesis 3.
Adam's, 1 King. 11.
Solomon's, and others Apostacies by such means be duly pondered. He who sails
in the midst of dangerous Rocks, may justly fear and expect a Qui amat (...),
peribit in co.
Wrack.

Eighthly, That the late Scottish Trouble and Wars were both plotted and raised
by these Jesuitical Conspirators, of purpose to force the King to resort to
them and their Popish Party for Aid of Men and Money against the Scots; and by
Color thereof, to raise an Army of their own, to gain the King into their
Power, and then to win or force him to what Conditions they pleased; who must
at leastwise promise them an universal Toleration of their Religion throughout
his Dominions, e're they will yield to assist him. And in case they conquer or
prevail, he must then come fully over to their Party, or else be sent packing
by them with a poisoned Fig to another World, [as his Father (they say) was;]
(it is likely by their Instruments or Procurement, they are so conusant of it;)
and then [the Prince yet young, and well inclined to them already by his
Education] being got into their Hands by this wicked Policy, shall soon be made
an Obedient Son of the Church of Rome. Thus the Relator, a chief Actor in this
pre-plotted Treason, discovers. And if his single Testimony (though out of a
wounded Conscience) will not be believed alone, the ensuing Circumstances will
abundantly manifest the Scottish Wars to be plotted and directed by them: For
Con the Pope's Legate, Hamilton the Queen's Agent, most of the Jesuits then
about London, Captain Read their Host, the Lord Sterling, with other
Chamberlain, Cardinal Richelieu his Agent.
chief Actors in the Plot, being all Scots, and employing Maxfield, and he two
other Popish Scots, in raising these Tumults; the Earl of Arundel, [another
principal Member of this Conspiracy, being by their procurement made General of
the first Army against the Scots,] and most of his Commanders Papists; the
Papists in all Counties of England (upon the Queen's Letters directed to them)
contributing large Sums of Money, besides Men, Arms and Horses, to maintain
this War. Sir Toby Matthew (the most Industrious Conspirator in the Pack)
making a Voyage with the Lord Deputy into Ireland, to stir up the Papists there
to contribute Men, Arms, Moneys, to subdue the Scottish Covenanters; [yea,
Marquess Hamilton's own Chaplain] (employed as the King's Commissioner to
appease these Scots) [holding Correspondency with Con, and resorting to him] in
private, to impart the Secrets of that business to him, the general Discontent
of the Papists and Conspirators upon the first Pacification of those Troubles,
which they soon after infringed, and by new Contributions raised a second Army
against the Scots, when the English Parliament refused to grant Subsidies to
maintain the War. All these concurring Circumstances compared with the
Relation, will ratify it past Dispute, that this War first sprung from these
Conspirators.

Ninthly, That the subsequent present Rebellion in Ireland, and Wars in
England, originally issued from, and were plotted by the same Conspirators. For
the Scottish War producing this settled Parliament, beyond their expectation,
which they foresaw would prove fatal to this their long-agitated Conspiracy, if
it continued undissolved; thereupon some Popish Irish Commissioners coming over
into England, and confederating with the Duchess of Buckingham, [Captain Read
Now a Prisoner in the Tower, and taken in the Field in actual Rebellion in
Ireland.
] and other of these Conspirators, who afterward departed secretly into
Ireland, they plotted an universal Rebellion, Surprisal and Massacre of all the
Protestants in that Kingdom; which though in part prevented by a timely
discovery, securing Dublin, and some few Places else, yet it took general
Effect in all other Parts, to the loss of [ about an Hundred and Forty Thousand
Protestants Lives,] there massacred by them. And finding themselves likely to
be overcome there by the Parliament's Forces sent hence, and from Scotland, to
relieve the Protestant Party; thereupon to work a Diversion, they raised a
Civil Bloody War against the Parliament here in England, procuring the King
[after Endymion Porter, a principal Conspirator in the Plot, had gained the
Custody of the Great Seal of England] to issue out diverse Proclamations under
the great Seal, proclaiming the Parliament themselves Traitors and Rebels, to
grant Commissions to Irish and English Papists (contrary to his former
Proclamations) to raise Popish Forces both at Home and in Foreign parts, for
his Defense, as his trustiest and most loyal Subjects; to send Letters and
Commissions of Favor to the Irish Rebels, and hinder all Supplies from hence
to the Protestant Party. And withal they procured [the Queen,] by the Earl of
Antrim and Duchess of Buckingham's Mediation, [to send Ammunition to the Irish
Rebels,] and to attempt to raise an Insurrection in Scotland too, as the
Declaration of the Rise and Progress of the Rebellion in Ireland, more largely
discovers. Seeing then all may clearly discern the exact Prosecution of this
Plot, carried on in all these Wars by the Conspirators therein particularly
nominated, by the Queen and Popish Party in all Three Kingdoms, and in Foreign
Parts too, who have largely contributed Men, Money, Arms, Ammunition, to
accomplish this Grand Design, through the Instigation of those Conspirators in
this Plot, who are gone beyond the Seas, and have lately caused public
Proclamations to be made in Bruges, and other parts of Flanders, in July last,
(as appears by the Examination of Henry Mayo, since seconded by others, That
all People who will now give ANY MONEY TO MAINTAIN THE RO-MAN CATHOLICS IN
ENGLAND, should have it repaid them again in a Years time, with many Thanks;)
the whole World must now of Necessity both see and acknowledge (unless they
will renounce their own Eyes and Reason) that this Conspiracy and Plot is no
feigned Imposture, but a most real perspicuous agitated Treachery, now driven
on almost to its Perfection, the full Accomplishment whereof (unless Heaven
prevent it) the Catholics of England expect within the Circuit of one Year, as
the forenamed Proclamations intimate.

Tenthly, That no settled Peace [was ever formerly intended, nor can now] be
futurely expected in England or Ireland without an universal public Toleration
(at the least) of [Popery, and a Repeal and Suspension of all Laws against it;]
this being the very Condition in the Plot which the King must condescend to,
e're the Papists would engage themselves to assist him in these Wars thus
raised by them, for this end. And that none may doubt this Verity, the late
most insolent bold Demands of the Irish Rebels in the Treaty with them, the
present Suspension of all Laws against Priests and Recusants in all Counties
under his Majesty's Power; [the uncontrolled multitudes of Masses in his
Armies, Quarters, Wales, the North, and elsewhere;] the open Boasts of Papists
every where, most really proclaim it. And if the King, after all their many
Years restless Labor, Plot, Costs, Pains, and pretended Fidelity to his Cause
against the Parliament, should deny these Merit-mongers such a diminutive
Reward as this is, (the very least they will expect) now they have him, the
Prince and Duke within their Custody, Bristol, Chester, [ Ireland,] all his
Forccs in their Power, this Discoverer (an Eye and Earwitness of his Destiny
from the Legat's own Vaunt, will inform his Majesty, and all his Protestant
Subjects (who will tremble at the very apprehension of it) that they [have an
Indian poisoned Nut] reserved for him amongst this Jesuitical Society; or if it
be lost, a poisoned Knife perchance, or some other Instrument, to dispatch him
out of the World, and to get the possession and protection of the Prince, whom
they will educate in their Antichristian Religion; which how possible, how
probable it is for them (considering their present Power and Endeavors to
effect it, their Grimston in his Life, Fox, Speed.
poisoning of the Emperor Henry the Seventh, in the sacred Host; of King John
in the Chalice; their General History of France.
stabbing of Henry the Third of France, with a Knife in the Belly; of Henry the
Fourth his Successor, first in the Mouth, next in the Heart Strings; though all
of their own Religion, because they would not humor the Pope in every
unreasonable Demand, (though Henry the Fourth turned an Apostate from the
Protestant Religion wherein he was bred, restored the Jesuits formerly banished
out of France, rased the Pillar erected in Paris, as a standing Monument of
their Treasons against their Sovereigns, and built them a stately College, to
secure his Life from their Assassination, which yet would not save him from
their Butchery:) Together with their pistolling of the Prince of (...),
Grimston.
Orange [and poisoning of See Dr. (...) Book, and the Commons Charge against
the Duke of (...).
King James himself (as the Legate boasted)] may inform his Majesty, and all his
faithful Protestant Subjects, (especially such as by their confederating with
them in these their Wars, have done naught but executed their forenamed
Designs) whom it concerns now very nearly, to prevent, if possible, such a sad
Catastrophe of that bloody Tragedy which has been acted overlong in Ireland
and England, by these Conspirators foreplotted Treasons. The execrable
Horrridness and Reality whereof, made the very Discoverer of the Plot, out of
remorse of Conscience, to desert the Conspirators Conspiracy, and that bloody
Religion which begot it; and therefore should much more incite [all such in his
Majesty's Army] who are cordially faithful to their Sovereign, Religion,
Country, Posterity, and have hitherto ignorantly acted these Conspirators
Treasonable Designs, under color of serving the King, to consider with remorse
of Conscience, whose Instruments they have thus long been, whose Treasons they
have ripened, what Protestant Blood they have shed, how much they have
weakened, impoverished, betrayed their own Protestant Party, who have really
stood for God, Religion, King, Country, Parliament, against these Romish
Conspirators; and what Hopes, what Advantages they have given these
Confederates both in England and Ireland, to overtop, suppress, and ere long
utterly to extirpate the Protestant Religion, themselves, and all others who
cordially profess it, as they have done many thousands of them already. And
then upon all these sad, most serious Considerations (the very Thoughts whereof
should cause their Souls to bleed and tremble) speedily to desert these
traitorous Papists, ere they get all into their Power, [and unite all their
Heads, Hearts, Hands, Forces, to the Parliament's Party] who had so good cause
to take up defensive Arms, to prevent the imminent ruin, which otherwise is
like to befall both King, Kingdom, Religion, Parliament, Liberty, Property,
Posterity, ere we be aware; [especially since the most cowardly unworthy
yielding up of Bristol, a fit Inlet for the Irish Rebels] who have conspired to
come over hither with all expedition, and [ Welsh Papists to cut all our
Throats.]

Eleventhly, That those Protestants who now side with Popish Conspirators, when
they have accomplished their Designs, whatsoever they may now fancy to
themselves, shall find no more Mercy or Favor from them, than the greatest
Roundheads, if they comply not with them in all things, and even in Popery it
self: For if they will not spare the King's own Person and Life, after so many
Favors, Graces, extended to them, (as they will not, if we believe this
Relation, or the late Story of King Henry the Fourth of France, yet fresh in
memory) what inferior Person can think to be secure to fare better than the
King himself? And if Con the Legate, to insinuate himself into the King's and
[Palatine's Favours] at the first, when he had no interest in them, would not
so much as advise the Legate of Cologne, to mediate for the Palsgrave, lest
peradventure the King of Spain should report, that the Pope had Patronized an
Heretical Prince, as the Relation attests, though he promised the King
effectually to do it; How [can Prince Rupert, Maurice, or any other Commanders
in the King's Army, when they have fully accomplished the Pope's, and these his
Instruments Designs] (under whose Banner they ignorantly, yet really militate,
and promote his Cause, instead of the King's and Kingdoms, to whom they and
others have been so much engaged) hope to receive the least Dram of Favor,
Pity, much less any Recompense from the Pope and Popish Party, if they continue
Heretics still, notwithstanding all their present goodly Promises? Will they
part with any other Inheritances to them, then, who will not so much as now
mediate for them to regain their own? Will these, who have butchered so many
thousands of innocent Protestants in Ireland, in England, even before they were
sure of the Day, without any provocation given, spare any Mother's Son of them
alive, if they once erect their Trophies over them? Certainly the Experience of
all former Ages, compared with the present, may fully resolve all, That the
very tender Mercies of these wicked ones, will be naught but extreme Cruelty;
and if they prevail, we all must perish, without distinction, sooner or later,
unless we will turn Apostates, and lose our Religion, God, Heaven, Souls, to
save our transitory Lives.

Finally, Therefore let the serious Consideration of all the Premises instruct
us, to learn Wisdom from these our Adversaries; let their indefatigable
Industry, subtle Policy, sincere Fidelity, cheerful Constancy, bountiful
Liberality, fraternal Unanimity, undaunted Magnanimity, indissolvable
Confederacy, and uninterrupted Pertinacy in prosecuting, establishing,
propagating their Antichristian Religions, Treasons, Designs, excite all
Protestants [(according to their several late Covenants and Protestations much
forgotten)] to equalize, if not transcend them in all these, in defending,
securing, propagating our true Christian Religion, protecting our King,
Kingdoms, Parliament, Laws, Liberties, Posterities, all we yet have, or
hereafter hope for, from that imminent ruin, which these Popish Conspirators
threaten to them. Fore-warned, fore-arm'd: If now we perish through our own
private Dissentions, Folly, Cowardice, Covetousness, Treachery, or Security, or
[monstrous Credulity] that these Conspirators and Papists now in Arms, fight
only for the King and establishment of the Protestant Religion, as it was in
Queen Elizabeth's days, against whom they plotted so many Treasons, even for
her very Religion, and the Powder Plot since, against King James and the whole
Parliament; our Blood shall rest upon our own Heads, who would not take timely
notice of our incumbent Dangers, nor suddenly prevent them whiles we might.

THE EXAMINATION OF HENRY MAYO.
WHO says, That on Thursday last, being the Twentieth of July, One Thousand
Six Hundred Forty Three, he being at Bruges in Flanders, heard Proclamation
made in Dutch, (who understands it very well) That all People within that City,
that would go to the Governors House, and give any Money to maintain the Roman
(...) in England, they should have their Money repaid them again in a Years
time, with many Thanks.

HENRY MAYO.

This Examination was taken before (...)

EDWARD BOYCE.

JOHN BOYCE.

GEORGE TROTTER.

H. W.
I Will conclude this first Volume with three Letters of the Archbishop; two
of them wrote by him, while Chancellor of the University of Oxford, to his
Vice Chancellor there, for discovering, preventing and punishing the Practices
of Romish Emissaries; who endeavored to seduce the Youth of that Place; and
the third to Sir Kenelm Digby, upon his return to the Communion of the Church
of Rome; being so many Authentic and Undeniable Arguments of the Archbishop's
Sincecerity in the profession of, and Zeal for the Established Religion of the
Church of England. To which I will subjoyn the Testimonies of two worthy
Persons yet living, concerning the Opinion had of the Archbishop at Rome,
during his Life; and with what Joy they received the News of his Death and
Sufferings.

The first Letter to Oxford, was wrote upon Occasion of this following Letter.

Letter from Oxon, to Mr: Fish of Clerkenwell; to convey two Oxford Youths
beyond Sea.
Mr. Fish brought me this Letter, Aug: 29: 1637.

Sir,
THough unknown, I have presumed to be so bold, as to solicit you in a
Business, viz. To know, whether you could send over one or two, who for
Religion sake are desirous to be entered into some Order beyond the Seas,
especially that of the Fratrum Minorum, or Jesuits. So, expecting your Answer,
and unwilling to disclose my self, till I have it; I rest

23. Augu: Yours --


Direct your Letter as (...) as you can to one Richard Pully in St: John's
College Oxon.

Superscribed thus,

To his very loving Friend Mr: John Fish in Clerkenwell, give these.

Leave this at one Mr: Fishes at Doctors Commons, to be delivered unto him.

London.

My Letter to the Vice Chancellor [Dr: Bayly] Aug: 29: 1637. sent presently
away, for care to be had of this Business.
Salutem in Christo. S I R,
I Have yet received no Letter from you this Week. If I do, you shall have
answer on Friday, if I have so much Leisure. In the mean time, I send you this
enclosed, which came to my Hands this present Afternoon. I pray examine the
Business, with all the care and industry you possibly can, as well for the
discharge of your own Duty and Credit as mine, in the Government of that Place.
And if there be such a Man as It should seem, that this Popish (...) had
assumed a wrong Name, and made use of that of a much (...) Person, then a
Member of the University; who, perhaps, being absent at that time, might have
unadvisedly left a Commission with this Emissary, to receive the Letters
directed to him at Oxford. For from Dr: Bayly's Answer to the Archbishop it
appears, that after all the enquiry he could make into the matter, he could not
find any reason to fasten any Suspicion upon Mr. Pully; or that he was in the
least inclined to Popery.
Pully here mentioned; be sure to make him fast, and examine him thoroughly
touching all Particulars, that you shall think material for the discovery of
these unworthy Practices, for the seducing of Youths in that University or
elsewhere. Especially concerning the Author of this Letter; and what Youths
have been dealt withal after this sort, either in that House, or any other of
the Town. And whether any Jesuits, or other, have of late lain hankering up and
down thereabouts, or be there at this present to that purpose, or any other as
bad. In all which I desire you to use your utmost Diligence and Discretion,
that you can; and let me have an account with all convenient speed. So I leave
you to God's Grace, and rest

Croydon, Aug: 29: 1637. Your very Loving Friend, W: C A N T.

My LETTER to the Vice Chancellor [Dr: Frewen] for watchfulness against
Jesuits, Febr: 7:
-- You had need be very careful of the University: For while none of you think
of it, the Jesuits and their Instruments are busy thereabouts. And at this
present they have seduced a young Youth of Exeter College. I have forgotten his
Name; but it begins with a His Name is Weal.
W, and the young Organist of St: John's, who slipped away, whilst the President
was at Sarum. I have granted an Attachment against them, if they can light upon
them, before they take Shipping; as also against Cherriton, for that I hear is
his Name, who seduced them. You had need be very careful in these Businesses;
for else we shall very deservedly hear ill of it. --

Lambeth, Febr: 7: (...). W: Cant.

Archbishop Laud's Letter to Sir Kenelm Digby.
Salutem in Christo. Worthy Sir,
I Am sorry for all the Contents of your Letter, save that which expresses your
Love to me. And I was not a little troubled at the very first words of it. For
you begin, that my Lord Ambassador told you, I was not pleased to hear you had
made a Defection from the Church of England. It Is most true, I was informed so;
and thereupon I writ to my Lord Ambassador, to know what he heard of it there.
But it is true likewise, that I writ to your self; and Mr. Secretary Cook sent
my Letters very carefully. Now seeing your Letters mentioned my Lord
Ambassador's Speech with you, without any notice taken of my writing; I could
not but fear these Letters of mine came not to your Hands. Out of this Fear,
your Second Letters took me; for they acknowledged the receipt of mine, and
your kind acceptance of them. Had they miscarried, I should have held it a
great Misfortune. For you must needs have condemned me deeply in your own
Thoughts, if in such a near and tender Business, I should have solicited my
Lord Ambassador, and not written to your self.

In the next place I thank you, and take it for a great Testimony of your Love
to me; that you have been pleased to give me so open and clear Account of your
proceedings with your self in this matter of Religion. In which as I cannot but
commend the strict reckoning, to which you have called your self; so I could
have wished, before you had absolutely settled the Foot of that Account, you
would have called in some Friend, and made use of his Eye as a By-stander, who
oftentimes sees more than he that plays the Game. You write, I confess, that
after you had fallen upon these troublesome Thoughts, you were nigh two Years in
the diligent Discussion of this matter; and that you omitted no Industry,
either of conversing with Learned Men, or of reading the best Authors, to beget
in you a right Intelligence of this Subject. I believe all this, and you did
wisely to do it. But I have some Questions, out of the freedom of a Friend, to
ask about it. Were not all the Learned Men, you conversed with for this
Particular, of the Roman Party? Were not the best Authors, you mention, of the
same Side? If both Men and Authors were the same way; can they beget any
righter Intelligence in you, than is in themselves? If they were Men and
Authors on both Sides, with whom you conversed; why was I (whom you are pleased
to Style one of your best Friends) omitted? True, it may be, you could not
reckon me among those Learned Men and Able for Direction, with whom you
conversed: Suppose that; yet your self accounts me among your Friends. And is
it not many times as useful, when Thoughts are distracted, to make use of the
Freedom and Openness of a Friend not altogether Ignorant, as of those which are
thought more Learned; but not so Free, nor perhaps so Indifferent?

But the Result, you say, that first-began to settle you, was, that you
discerned by this your diligent Conversation, and studious Reading, that there
were great Mistakings on both Sides, and that Passion and Affection to a Party,
transported too many of those that entered into the Lists in this Quarrel.
Suppose this also to be true, I am heartily sorry, and have been ever since I
was of any Understanding in matters of Religion, to hear of Sides in the
Church. And I make no doubt, but 'twill one Day fall heavy upon all, that
wilfully make, or purposely continue Sidings in that Body. But when Sides are
made and continued, remember you confess there are great Mistakings on both
Sides. And how then can you go from one Side to the other; but you must go from
one great Mistaking to another? And if so, then by changing the Side, you do
but change the Mistaking, not quit your self from Mistakes. And if you do quit
your self from them, by God's Goodness, and your own Strength; yet why might
not that have been done, without changing the Side; since Mistakes are on both
Sides? As for the Passion and Transportation of many that enter the Lists in
this Quarrel; I am sure you mean not to make their Passion your Guide; for that
would make you mistake indeed. And why then should their Passion work upon your
Judgment? especially, since the Passion, as well as the Mistakes are confessed to
be on both Sides.

After this follows the main part of your Letters, and that which principally
resolved you to enter again the Communion of the Church of Rome, in which you
had been Born and Bred, against that semblance of good Reason, which formerly
had made you adhere to the Church of England.

And first you say, you now perceive that you may preserve your self in that
Church, without having your Belief bound up in several particulars, the dislike
whereof had been a motive to you to free your self from the Jurisdiction which
you conceived did impose them. It Is true, all Churches leave some particulars
free. But does that Church leave you free to believe, or not believe, any thing
determined by it? And did not your former Dislike arise from some things
determined in and by that Church? And if so, what Freedom see you now, that you
saw not then? And you cannot well say, that your Dislike arose from any thing
not determined; for in those, the Jurisdiction of that Church imposes not.

You add, That your greatest Difficulties were solved, when you could
distinguish between the Opinions of some New Men raised upon wrested
Inferences, and the plain and solid Articles of Faith delivered at the first.
Why, but I cannot but be confident you could distinguish these long since, and
long before you joined your self to the Church of England. And that therefore
your greatest Difficulties (if these were they) were as fully and fairly solved
then, as now they are, or can be. Besides, if by these plain and solid Articles
you mean none but the Creed (and certainly no other were delivered at the
first) you seem to intimate by comparing this and the former Passage, that so
you believe these plain and first Articles, you may preserve your self in that
Church, from having your Belief bound up to other Particulars; which I think
few will believe, besides your self, if you can believe it. And the Opinions of
New Men, and the wrested Inferences upon these, are some of those great
Mistakes which you say are on both sides, and therefore needed not to have
caused your Change.

To these first Articles you say, The Church, in no succeeding Age has power
to add (as such) the least Tittle of New Doctrine. Be it so; and I believe it
heartily (not as such) especially if you mean the Articles of the Creed. But
yet if that Church do maintain, That all her Decisions in a General Council,
are Articles Fidei Catholicae; and that all Christians are bound to believe all
and every of them, eadem Fide, qua Fidei Articulos; and that he is an Heretic
which believes them not all: Where is then your Freedom, or your not being
bound up in several Particulars? And if you reply, You dislike no Determination
which that Church has made; then why did you formerly leave it, to free your
self from that Jurisdiction that you conceived imposed them? For if the things
which troubled you were Particulars not determined, they were not imposed upon
your Belief. And if they were determined, and so imposed; how are you now set
free more than then?

You say again, You see now, that to be a Catholic, does not deprive them of
the forenamed Liberty, who have Abilities to examine the things you formerly
stuck at, and drive them up to their first Principles. But first then, what
shall become of their Liberty, who are not able to examine; shall they enthral
their Consciences? Next, what shall secure them, who think themselves, and are
perhaps thought by others able to examine, yet indeed are not? Thirdly, what
Assurance is there in Cases not demonstrable (as few things in Religion are)
that they which are able to examine, have either no Affection to blind their
Judgment, or may not mistake themselves and their way, in driving a doubtful
Point to its First Principles? Lastly, how much does this differ from leaning
upon a private Spirit; so (...) cried out against by that side, when Men, under
pretense of their Ability, shall examine the Tenets of the Church, and assume a
Liberty to themselves, under a color of not being bound?

But, you say, this is not the breaking of any Obligation that Church lays upon
you; but only an exact understanding of the just and utmost Obligations that
Side ties Men to. I must here question again: For first, what shall become of
their Freedom, that cannot reach to this exact understanding? And next, do not
you make your self, as a private Man, Judge of the Church's Obligations upon
you? And is it not as great an Usurpation upon the Church's Power and Right, to
be Judge of her Obligations, as of her Tenets? For if the Points be left free,
there is no Obligation: Nor can you, or need any other, have any Scruple. But if
the Points be binding by the Predetermination of the Church; can you any way be
Judge of her Obligation, but you must be Judge also of the Point to which she
obliges? Now, I think, that Church will hardly give liberty to any private Man
to be so far her Judge, since she scarce allows so much to any, as Judicium
Discretionis, in things determined by her.

These utmost Obligations, to which that Side ties Men, you believe many Men
(and not of the meanest Note) pass over in gross, without ever thoroughly
entering into the due Consideration thereof. And truly I believe so too, that
among too many Men on both sides, neither the Points nor the Obligations to
them, are weighed as they ought. But that is no Warrant (pardon my Freedom) that
your self has considered them in all Circumstances; or that you have
considered them better now, than you did before, when the Dislike of that
imposing Jurisdiction, was your first Motive to free your self from it, by
joining to the Church of England.

And whereas you say, That you have returned into that Communion, who from your
Birth had right of possession in you, and therefore ought to continue it,
unless clear and evident proof (which you say surely cannot be found) should
have evicted you from it: Truly, Sir, I think this had been spoken with more
advantage to you and your Cause, before your adhering to the Church of England,
than now; for then right of possession could not have been thought little. But
now since you deserted that Communion, either you did it upon clear and evident
proof, or upon apparent only. If you did it then upon clear and evident proof,
why say you now no such can be found? If you did it but upon apparent and
seeming proof (a semblance of very good Reason as your self calls it) why did
you then come off from that Communion, till your proof were clear and evident?
And why may not that, which now seems clear and evident, be but apparent, as
well as that which then seemed clear unto you, be but semblance now? Nor would
I have you say, That clear and evident proof cannot be found for a Man, in this
case of Religion, to forego the Communion, which had right of possession in him
from his Birth: For the Proposition is an universal Negative, and of hard
proof. And therefore though I think I know you and your Judgment so well, that
I may not without manifest wrong charge you, that you did in this great Action,
and so nearly concerning you, ad pauca respicere, which our Great Master tells
us Ethic. l. 1.
breeds facile and easy, rather than safe and warrantable Determinations; yet
it will lie upon you not only in Honor without, but also in Conscience within,
to be able to assure your self that you did ad plurima, if not ad omnia
respicere. The thing being so weighty in it self, and the miserable Division of
Christendom (never sufficiently to be lamented) making the Doubt so great, that
you who have been on both sides, must needs lie under the Dispute of both
sides, whether this last Act of yours, be not in you rather a Relapse into a
former Sickness, than a Recovery from a former Fall.

But against this, the Temper of your Mind (you say) arms you aagainst all
Censures, no slight Air of Reputation being able to move you. In this, I must
needs say, you are happy: For he that can be moved from himself by the
changeable Breath of Men, lives more out of, than in himself; and (which is a
Misery beyond all expression) must in all Doubts go to other Men for
Resolution; not to himself; as if he had no Soul within him: But yet post
Conscientiam Fama. And though I would not desire to live by Reputation; yet
would I leave no good means untried, rather than live without it. And how far
you have brought your self in question, which of these two, Conscience or
Reputation, you have shaken by this double Change, I leave your self to judge;
because you say your first was with a semblance of very good Reason. And though
you say again, That it now appears you were then misled; yet you will have
much ado to make the World think so.

The way you took in concealing this your Resolution of returning into that
Communion, and the Reasons which you give why you so privately carried it here,
I cannot but approve. They are full of all Ingenuity, tender and civil
Respects, fitted to avoid Discontent in your Friends, and Scandal that might be
taken by others, or Contumely that might be returned upon your self. And as are
these Reasons, so is the whole frame of your Letter (setting aside that I
cannot concur in Judgment) full of Discretion and Temper, and so like your
self, that I cannot but love even that which I dislike in it. And though I
shall never be other than I have been to the Worth of Sir Kenelm Digby; yet
most heartily sorry I am, that a Man whose Discourse did so much content me,
should thus slide away from me, before I had so much as suspicion to awaken me,
and suggest that he was going. Had you put me into a Dispensation, and
communicated your Thoughts to me before they had grown up into Resolutions, I
am a Priest, and would have put on what Secrefie you should have commanded. A
little Knowledge I have (God knows a little) I would have ventured it with you
in that serious Debate you have had with your self. I have ever honored you,
since I knew your Worth, and I would have done all Offices of a Friend to keep
you nearer than now you are. But since you are gone, and settled another way,
before you would let me know it, I know not now what to say to a Man of
Judgment; and so resolved: For to what end should I treat, when a Resolution is
set already? So set, as that you say no clear and evident proof can be found
against it: Nor can I tell how to press such a Man as you to ring the Changes
in Religion. In your power it was not to change; in mine it is not to make you
change again. Therefore to the Moderation of your own heart, under the Grace of
God, I must and do now leave you for matter of Religion; but retaining still
with me, and entirely, all the Love and Friendliness which your Worth won from
me; well knowing, that all Differences in Opinion shake not the Foundations of
Religion.

Now to your Postscript, and then I have done. That I am the first, and the
only Person to whom you have written thus freely: I thank you heartily for it.
For I cannot conceive any thing thereby, but your great Respect to me, which
has abundantly spread it self all over your Letter. And had you written this
to me, with a Restraint of making it further known, I should have performed
that Trust: But since you have submitted it to me, what further Knowledge of it
I shall think fit to give to any other person; I have, as I took my self bound,
acquainted his Majesty with it, who gave a great deal of very good Expression
concerning you, and is not a little sorry to lose the Service of so able a
Subject. I have likewise made it known in private, to Mr. Secretary Cook, who
was as confident of you as my self. I could hardly believe your own Letters,
and he as hardly my Relation. To my Secretary I must needs trust it, having not
Time to write it again out of my scribled Copy; but I dare trust the Secrecy
in which I have bound him. To others I am silent, and shall so continue, till
the thing open it self; and I shall do it out of Reasons, very like to those
which you give, why your self would not divulge it here. In the last place, you
promise your self, That the Condition you are in, will not hinder me from
continuing to be the Best Friend you have. To this I can say no more, than that
I could never arrogate to my self to be your Best Friend; but a poor, yet
respective Friend of yours I have been, ever since I knew you: And it is not
your Change, that can change me, who never yet left, but where I was first
forsaken; and not always there. So praying for God's Blessing upon you, and in
that Way which He knows most necessary for you, I rest,

Lambeth, March, 27, 1636. Your very Loving Friend, To serve you in Domino.

I have writ this Letter freely; I shall look upon all the Trust that ever you
mean to carry with me, that you show it not, nor deliver any Copy to any Man.
Nor will I look for any Answer to the Quaeries I have herein made. If they do
you any good, I am glad; if not, yet I have satisfied my self. But leisure I
have none, to write such Letters; nor will I entertain a Quarrel in this
wrangling Age; and now my Strength is past. For all things of moment in this
Letter, I have pregnant places in the Council of Trent, Thomas, Bellarmin,
Stapleton, Valentia, etc. But I did not mean to make a Volume of a Letter.

Endorsed thus with the Archbishop's own Hand.

March: 27: 1636. A Copy of my Answer to Sir Ken: Digby's Letters, in which he
gives me an account of his Return to the To: Communion.

The Testimony of the Reverend Mr: Jonathan Whiston, concerning the Opinion had
of the Archbishop at Rome; and with what Joy the News of his Death and
Suffering was there received.

I Do remember, that being Chaplain to the Honorable Sir Lionel Tolmach
Baronet, about the Year: 1666. I heard him relate to some Person of Quality,
how that in his younger days he was at Rome, and well acquainted with a certain
Abbot; which Abbot asked him, Whether he had heard any News from England? He
answered, No. The Abbot replied, I will tell you then some; Archbishop Laud is
Beheaded. Sir Lionel answered, You are sorry for that, I presume. The Abbot
replied again, That they had more cause to rejoice, that the Greatest Enemy of
the Church of Rome in England was cut off, and the Greatest CHAMPION of the
Church of England silenced: Or in Words to that purpose. In witness whereof, I
have hereunto set my Hand, this 28th: Day of September, 1694.

Jona. Whiston, Vicar of Bethersden in Kent.

The Testimony of the Learned and Worthy John Evelyn Esquire Fellow of the Royal
Society, concerning the same Matter.

I Was at Rome in the Company of diverse of the English Fathers, when the News
of the Archbishop's Suffering, and a Copy of his Sermon made upon the
Scaffold, came thither. They read the Sermon, and commented upon it with no
small Satisfaction and Contempt; and looked upon him as one that was a great
Enemy to them, and stood in their Way; whilst one of the blackest Crimes
imputed to him was his being Popishly affected.

John Evelyn.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL.
SCriptorum (...) Historia Literaria a Christo nate usque ad seculum xiv:
facili (...) Digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus Gestis, de Secta,
Dogmatibus, (...), Style; de Scriptis Genuinis, Dubiis, Suppositiis, Ineditis,
Deper ditis, Fragmentis; Deque Variis Operum Editionibus perspicue Agitur.
Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christianae Religionis (...); and Cujusvis Seculi
Breviarum. Inseruntur suis Locis Veterum (...) Opuscula and Fragmenta, tum
Graeca, tum Latina hactenus inedita. Premissa denique (...), quibus plurima ad
Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae Studium spectantia Traduntur. Opus indicibus
necessariis Instructum, Authore Gulielmo Cave, SS. Theol. (...). (...)
Windesoriensi. Accedit Hen. Whartoni Appendix ab ineunte Secula xiv: ad Annum
usque MDX VII. (...):

Disquisitiones Criticae de Variis per Diversa (...) and (...) Bibliorum
Editionibus. Quibus Accedunt Castigationes Theologi Cujusdam Parisiensis ad
Opusculum Is: Vossii de Sybillinis Oraculis, and Ejusdem responsionem ad
Objectiones nuperae Critica Sacra: 4to.

Censura Celebriorum Authorum; sive tractatus in quo Varia Virorum (...) de
Claris. Cuiusque Seculi Scriptoribus Judicia traduntur. Unde Facilimo (...)
Lector (...) queat quid in singulis quibusque istorum Authorum Maxim
Memorabile sit and qucnam in pretio apud Eruditos (...) Habiti Fuerunt. Opera
Thomae Pope-Blunt, Baroneti. Fol:

V: Cl: Gulielmi Camdeni, and Illustrium (...) ad G. Camdenum Epistolae, cum
Appendice Varii Argumenti. Accesserunt Annalium Regni Regis Jacobi (...).
Apparatus, and (...) de Antiquitate, Dignitate, and Officio Comitis Marescali
Angliae. Premittitur G. Camdeni Vita. Scriptore Thoma Smitho, S: T: D:
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero. 4to.

Jacobi Usserii Armachani Archiepiscopi Historia Degmatica Controversiae inter
Orthodoxos and (...) de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis; nunc primum Edita.
Accesserunt ejusdem Dissertationes duae de Pseudo-Dionysii seriptis, and de
(...) ad Laodiceos antehac (...). Descripsit, Digessit, and notis atque
auctario, Locupletavit Henricus Wharton, A: M: Rev: in Christo Pat: ac (...):
Archiepisc: Cantuariensi a sacris Domesticis. 4to. 1690.

Anglia (...) sive Gollectio Historiarum Antiquitus Scriptarum de
Archiepiscopis and (...) Angliae a Prima Fidei Christianae susceptione ad Annum
1540. in duobus Voluminibus per Henricum Whartonum. Fol. 1691

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of (...).
By Peter Allix, D: D: Treasurer of Sarum. 4to

-- his Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of the
Albigenses. 4to

Dr: Burnet's (now Lord Bishop of Sarum) Vindication of the Ordinations of the
Church of England. 4to.

-- History of the Rights of Princes, in disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices,
and Church Lands. (...) 8vo.

-- Life of William Bedel D: D: Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland; together with the
Copies of certain Letters, which passed between Spain and England, in matter of
Religion, concerning the general Motives to the Roman Obedience: Between Mr:
James (...), a late Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in Sevil, and the said
William Bedel. 8vo.

-- Some Passages of the Life and Death of John late Earl of Rochester. 8vo.

-- A Collection of Tracts and Discourses, from 1678 to Christmas 1689
inclusive. In 2 Volumes. 4to.

-- Examination of the Letter writ by the late Assembly-General of the Clergy
of France to the (...), inviting them to return to their Communion; together
with the Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. 8vo.

-- Pastoral Letter to the Clergv of his Diocese, concerning the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, to K: William and Q: Mary. 4to

-- Ten several occasional Sermons since 1690.

The Jesuits Memorial for the intended (...) of Ergland, under their first
Popish Prince. Written by Father Parsons 1596. And prepared to be proposed in
the first Parliament after the Restoration of Popery, for the better
Establishment and Preservation of that Religion. Published from the very
Manuscript Copy that was presented by the Jesuits to the (...) K: James the
Second, and found in his Closet. With an Introduction, and some Animadversions,
by Edward Gee, Chaplain to their Majesty's. 8vo.

Dr: Cumberland (now Lord Bishop of (...)) his Essay toward the Recovery of
the Jewish Measures and Weights, comprehending their (...); by help of Ancient
Standards, compared with ours of England; useful also to state many of those of
the Greeks and Romans, and the Eastern Nations. 8vo.

Dr: Patrick (now Lord Bishop of Ely) his Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a
Friend, the sixth Edition. 4to, 1681.

-- Hearts-Ease; or, a Remedy against all Troubles: with a consolatory
Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost their Friends and
Relations. To which is added two Papers, printed in the time of the late
Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12mo. 1695.

-- Answer to a Book spread abroad by the Romish Priests, (...) [ The
Touch-(...) of the Reformed Gospel] wherein the true Doctrine of the Church of
England, and many Texts of the Holy Scripture are faithfully explained, 1692.
8vo.

-- Nine several occasional Sermons since the Revolution, 4to.

-- Exposition of the Tea Commandments. 8vo.

A Vindication of their Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of the deprived
Bishops, in a Letter (...) by (...) B -- 's refusal of the Bishopric of Bath
and Wells. 4to.

A Discourse concerning the unreasonableness of a new Separation on Account of
the Oaths to the present Government. With an Answer to the History of Passive
Obedience, so far as relates to them. 4to:

A Vindication of the said Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New
Separation from the Exceptions made against it in a Tract called, [ A brief
Answer to the said (...) etc.] 4to.

(...): Or, a Discourse concerning the Earth before the Deluge; wherein the
Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book, entitled, [ The Theory of the
Earth], are excepted against; and it is made appear, That the Dissolution of
that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a New Explication of
that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of (...) in (...). 4to.

The Present State of Germany. By a Person of Quality. 8vo.

Memoris (...) to the Royal Navy of England for Ten Years, determined December
1688: By (...), (...) 8vo.

(...) of what (...) in Christendom, from the War begun 1672. to the Peace
concluded 1679: 8vo.

(...) Historical Collections: The Third Part, in two Volumes. Containing the
Principal Matters which happened from the Meeting of the Parliament, Nov: 3:
1640. to the end of the Year 1644. Wherein is a particular Account of the Rise
and Progress of the Civil War, to that Period. Fol: 1692.

A Discourse of the Pastoral Care. By Gilbert Burnet, Lord Bishop of Sarum:
1692:

The Character of Queen Elizabeth: Or, A full and clear Account of her
Policies, and the Methods of her Government, both in Church and State; her
Virtues and Defects: Together with the Characters of her Principal Ministers of
State; and the greater part of the Affairs and Events that happened in her
time. By Edmund Bohun Esquire: 1693. 8vo.

The Letters of the Reverend Father Paul, Councellor of State to the most
Serene Republic of Venice, and Author of the Excellent History of the Council
of Trent. 1693.

An Impartial History of the Wars in Ireland. In Two Parts. From the time that
Duke Schomberg landed with an Army in that Kingdom, to the 23 d. of March,
1691/2. when their Majesty's Proclamation was published, declaring the War to
be ended. Illustrated with Copper Sculptures, describing the most important
Places of Action. By George Story, an Eyewitness of the most remarkable
Passages. 4to. 1693.

Linguae Romanae Dictionarium (...) Novum: Or, A New Dictionary, in Five
Alphabets. ((...)) English Words and Phrases before the Latin. (2:) Latin
Classic. (3:) Latin Proper Names. (4.) Latin Barbarous. (5.) Law-Latin.
Cambridge. 4to. 1693.

Dr: John Conant's Sermons. 1693. 8vo.

Of the Government of the Thoughts. By Geo: Tully, (...) of York. 8vo. 1694.

Origo Legum: Or, A (...) of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power; as
also of their great Variety; and why some Laws are immutable, and some not, but
may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended, or abrogated. In Seven
Books. By George Dawson. Fol. 1694.

Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum: (...) I: The
Truth of the Christian Religion. II: The Divinity and the Death of Christ. III:
The Infallibility and Authority of the Church. IV. The Obligations to continue
in the Communion of the Church. By Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum. 8vo. 1694.

A brief Discourse concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the
Common Prayer; In Answer to a Book, intitused, [ A brief Discourse of the (...)
of Common-Prayer-Worship.] By John Williams, D: D: 4to. 1694.

A true Representation of the absurd and (...) Principles of the Sect commonly
known by the Name of the (...) 4to. 1694.

Memoirs of the most (...) Thomas (...), Archbishop of Canterbury: Wherein the
History of the Church, and the Reformation of it, during the Primacy of the
said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many singular Matters relating
thereunto, now first published. In Three Books. Collected (...) from Records,
Registers, Authentic Letters, and other Original Manuscripts, By John (...),
M. A. Fol. 1694.

A Commentary on the First Book of Moses, called Genesis. By Simon Lord Bishop
of Ely. 4to: 1695.


