THE FREEBORN English Man's Plea FOR JUSTICE: Or, A Cry against Post-Fact LAWS.

Being a survey of the Controversies touching late Purchased Titles through the
true perspective of Justice.

By WILLIAM IACKSON, One who has lived to see the Famine of Justice removed,
and hopes to see it continue as plentifully amongst us; as Food in Samaria;
after the flight of these Assirians: 2 Kings, 7.

Themistocles postulanti a se Simonidi ut sententia^ qua^dam injustam ferret;
Neque tu (inquit) poeta bonus esses si praeter numerum caneres, neque ego
princeps probus si contra Leges judicarem: Plut. in. vit. Themist.

Leges Sapientu^ causa positae, non ut injurijs abstineam sed ne eis
afficiamur: Epicur. ex Stob. Sermon. 41.

LONDON: Printed by Edward Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1660.

To the Right Honorable and truly Noble Henry Hastings, Lord Loughborough
Commissary General of England under his Majesty.
May it Please your Lordship.
ESteeming it the greatest Honor I ever yet had, that I have served under your
Lord-ship, not only in the General cause that those true English Spirits in
Colchester were embarked in, but also under your Lord-ships particular command
in the store, subjected to your Lord-ship as Commissary General: I have
presumed, (emholdened by that Nobleness, wherewith your Lord-ship then obliged
not only me, but all that knew you) to present your Lord-ship with this small
discourse. Being a sum of what, your Lord-ship, and those Heroic spirits, then
(joined in command with you) labored for. The observation of Laws and Justice
is a cause no man need ever be ashamed of; but what those Heroic endeavors
then missed of, God has now given us hopes, may be obtained in a more
peaceable manner; having opened a way to us for reason to be heard; and reduced
us from the use of barbarous violence, to the force of arguments; fitter
Weapons for human societies. It Is with such my Lord, that, I have endeavored
here to be still an assertor of that general cause of Englands liberty, to the
utmost of my Capacity. And it is my hopes, your Lord-ship, that were then a
strenuous defender of this cause by your valor in that Bellum Martiale, will now
grant your Protection to him that by this submits himself your Servant, whilst
your Lord-ship in Parliament are now managing this Bellum Mercuriale: Bellum I
cannot but term it because still there appears many opposers of Justice it self,
which is our cause, having no argument (but their fucated pretenses to
Saints-ship) to cover the great injustices they have done; but my Lord when
like paint on faces these are melted off by the impartial scrutiny of Justice,
there appears naught but Rapines, and mere Wolves under the Sheeps Clothing:
which disguise; since it has occasioned the devouring of so many Lambs, I hope
for the future our Shephards will so defend us by the pale of Justice that we
may hereafter be secure, and every man admitted to that which Law calls his
own. Of the want of which pale your Lord-ship has been as sensible as any by
the injuries you have suffered, both in Estate and Liberty. If the meanness of
my performances cause your Lord-ship to censure me Presumtuous in perfixing
your Name to so small a discourse, my Petition is, that my zeal both to Justice
and your Lord-ships Service may beg pardon for: my Lord

Your most Humble and Devoted Servant. William Iackson.

THE FREEBORN English Man's Plea FOR JUSTICE.
THere have bin of late many Papers Published under the names of Pleas. As the
purchasers Plea; the sequesterd clergies Plea, and the Plea of them that are in
the benefices of these, and the Plea of them whose Lands the others have
purchased, these latter written in answer to the former, but in my opinion (at
a time of so general a concernement when all are interressed, and all expecting
a general satisfaction to the whole nation) these Pleas are too much restrained
to particular interests, to terminate in a general union of all, which were the
only blessing to be wished for by all which have the least pretense to
Christianity, or any spark of the hope of a comfortable satisfactory
conscience, which I shall always esteem the greatest temporal blessing men can
wish for; These Pleas are likewise a very ill example for every man to seek his
own interest, which perhaps may make men draw diverse ways and therefore
likelier increase divisions (of which this Nation has had too much) than
compose them.

That therefore a more charitable way may be found, it behooves every man to
ponder such things in his mind, and (if he acts at al) to excite others to
endeavor the promoting of such interests wherein al are equally concerned; and
which have such rootings naturally in every man's conscience, Nich. Machiav.
Disput. de Rep. Cap. 27.
that (though he should with the briars and cares of this world intend the
stiffing of that good seed) he can not (at least will not) before men gainsay
the motion: for it is seldom seen that a man is totally good, or absolutely
wicked. Because of some sparklings of that inward self accusing light which
(should he impudently out dare) would render him odious even to his own
accomplices seeing him lay aside all thoughts of shame.

First, Therefore (man's life being a race through this world to another, his
chief aim is how he may run that race most to his own peculiar benefit; (for we
are all by nature lovers of our selves) to which purpose mankind being now
grown numerous if we were without order; as wild beasts, we should be a pray
one to another, so as to have many unquiet interruptions in our race and not
only so but to be without those mutual conveniences which we might have one of
another; now to rectify these inconveniences it has pleased God to send into
the world disciplines: to defend men in societies from the aforesaid abuses and
direct them in their race with comfort; these disciplines are two:
Eclesiastical, to direct them to the end of their race, and civil, or
political: to direct them in their race; and to fit men for these orders in
their societies he gave that general tie of Justice for a rule, and planted in
us a sparkling beam of his truth to witness unto us this Justice and be as our
magnetic balance, to fit us to act his will, the more conformably under his
ordinances, this is that diamond of Conscience that excuses or accuses every
man and always tells our Souls the truth, if Lusts be not the perspective
Medium through which we see, which often dazels our understanding: by which
means we are often led into the more tempting way leaving that which our
conscience tells us to be the more Just. Now for regulating such deviations, and
depravations of our apprehensions it was requisite that provision should be
made by discipline, leaving therefore the Eclesiastical discipline and its
unity (as not any branch of this discourse) to men whose profession it is (that
being the very top of the building to beautify and confirm the foundation
laid by the civil) I think it might be much more pertinent to the condition of
our Nations at present if every man would make it his request that we might
enjoy that firm hand of all societies, JUSTICE. being the true rule to regulate
all actions in any society whatsoever and give up his cause to such a decree;
but in regard we are (apt looking through the fraudulent Medium of lusts before
mentioned) to be too partial in our own causes, it is not fit we be our own
judges; The party perhaps that thinks himself injured if he have not his will;
will be apt to say, neither ought our adversaries to be judges in their own
cause against us, so say I; who then? JUSTICE say I: So I believe all men will
be ready to say too, what ever they think, yet will not they say they desire
any thing but Justice, but cannot have that; yes, but any English man may
really say we can have Justice, our Fathers have so labored in their days,
that we receive from them both Tree and Fruit, for in Political or civil
Discipline it is impossible to maintain any at all, Tullij. Offic. Lib. 1.
without order, whose business it is to fit every thing to its proper place to
appoint some to Judge in cases of difference between party and party which
Judgment though in the Infancy of the world it were, wholly left to the
discretion of the Judge, yet finding men apt to be biased by Alliance, favor,
brybery. etc. it was then found a very unsatisfactory way, the suffering party
being apt always to think himself wronged whether so or not; to prevent which
it was thought a much more indifferent course to have all cases reduced into
Judgments, which should be for Laws, to decide all controversies, and prescribe
all penalties, whatsoever. By which means men had a rule to walk by to direct
them what was evil or good, what to pursue or avoid, what to be encouraged or
punished for: so that it was some satisfaction to them that they were securd
from particular Spleen or Malice of others, and by this means were not
damnified for any thing, of which, they were not forewarned by the Law: No, nor
the Judge himself could give any censure that was not prescribed to him in the
same Law: of this Nature were the Laws of Lycurgus, Moses and most of the
Ancients that were Lawgivers: but in regard, this power of Law making in the
vicissitude of times is sometimes devolved to men of less qualified parts and
integrity, and that such did sometimes make Laws, too, too, partial to
themselves and too too grating upon the liberties and properties of others, All the Laws, which were of equity (and held proportion with that rule Do unto all
Men as you would they should do unto you) were by Justinian drawn in Canons,
and are still used in a great part of Europe, and called by the Name of the
Civil Law, but though here were a good provision for Laws there was not so good
a provision for giving Right Judgment as could be wished for; because the
interpretation of the Law and interpretation of the fact were referred to the
breast of one man which was thought might be prejudicial to the true
distribution of Justice; Wherefore our Auncesters in this Nation I think have
taken the most satisfying course, most Just, most free, and generous way of all
other Nations; for first to preserve true discipline, we have the Magistracy
and Nobility our Law-giving power in as great and true a state of Honor and
Justice and far more equitable then any of the former; for our Prince and Peers
have this privilege only of constituting Laws: and of appointing Judges for the
distribution of Justice to the whole Nation. Next a far greater liberty and
security to the Commonalty because though they make not the Laws yet they
contrive and compose all the Laws by which any of them are bound, so that it is
as satisfactory a condition as can be contrived for a man to be tied by no Laws
but such as himself and Ancesters have tied and bound themselves by their own
consent, and with all these Lawmakers after sessions in Parliament is ended are
as subject to be punished by these Laws as any other by which means the whole
commonalty have as much security as can be devised; the self preservation of
the devisers of the Law themselves, being the buckler for every man against
partiality: And more than this; least Laws so prudently contrived might be
perverted in the dispensation; the Judges are restrained from interpreting the
fact of the delinquent who is to be tried by twelve of his Peers; as if it were
their own case, so that all the Justice imaginable is in the Constitution of
our Government so that for any to complain and say he can not have Justice is
a very falsity, if he can have the aforesaid administration of it, if he can
not; he may have his remedies against any where he finds the default or
obstacle.

But now I have run through so great a digression I shall return to the cause
of it from whence I swerved; These Plea's I say coming out on both sides now
when the times begin to calm after so terrible a tempest would make a
foraigner that should read them, think we had naught but tumultuary proceedings
and imagine that they that could make most of their part should get the
advantage of their adversaries; certainly to quiet Jealous spirits it is very
necessary to tell such if they be lovers of Justice (as I question not but they
will say they are) that its sit every man have Justice: for Justice is the
maine pillar of a Nations safety; for as in our bodies the due distribution of
all Humors to every part its due and the preserving every part in its right
temper and composition are the efficient causes of a man's health, unless some
part contrary to Nature be foul, corrupt or gangrened, then it is most
conducing to the health of the whole sometimes to divert the nourishment and
Humors, sometimes to cauterise, sometimes to cut it off. But mark! this is when
it transgresses the Laws of Nature; so likewise these that make Pleas for their
losses if they have not transgressed any known Laws that were in force before
their fact (objected) were committed: it is fit the due distribution of Justice
of giving every man his due, procure them a restitution to what they have been
by the distempers of the times deprived of; but if they have transgressed any
such known Laws, that were in force before their fact, then let them in Gods
name receive the penalties, allotted by those Laws for such trespasses, and
none other: this is the true birth right of every freeborn English man and
this he ought to have in Justice.

On the Contrary if they that are in possession whether benefices or other
purchased Lands have such true Titles to their Possessions as the Laws of the
land shall justify, we cannot think such injustice can be permitted by his
Majesty, as to suffer them to be expelled contrary to Laws, of which his Royal
Proclaimation has given them assurance: but if the Laws of the Land will not
Justify their possessions, it is great injustice they should hold them both to
the detriment of those in present, that ought to enjoy them, and to be an il
example or encouragement to others to enrich themselves out of others ruins
for the future; for without a Buyer there can be no Seller; therefore where the
Law did not Justify that Title, at the time of bargain. In the name of God let
Justice frustrate, and restore to the just owner according to the true Title,
and let not our Age seek to justify wrong by a post fact Law, for which these
Kingdoms have already felt such sore Judgments; one such Law to take the blood
of one man in that nature has been revenged upon the whole three nations with
the blood of many; and should post fact laws be now created to take the
Estates of those which were not forfeitable by Laws extant at the time of the
forfeiture, I pray God do not revenge it after the same manner upon the three
Nations and lay al of them desolate; Romans 7. 7. What shall we say then is the
Law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin but by the Law for I had not
known sin except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet: Where there is any
forfeiture of an Estate there needs no post fact Law to confirm it, for that
Law which makes a man an offender, has the forfeiture annexed to it; If post
fact Laws be allowed, Who knows when he does amiss? Therefore both dispossessed
and Possessors, gainers and loosers, if ye agree in nothing else, agree in this
one voice; Fiat Iustitia. You would be loath either of you to be accounted
unjust; ye ought not to be your own Judges, the Law ought to be our Judge: for
as Justice is, and ought to be the rule to our Lawmakers in making their Laws,
to show them what should be Law; so should the Law be both to them and us the
rule of what is Justice. They that fear the Law are partial and of a Tyranous
spirit seeking a privilege for themselves above their fellows, whereas Justice,
and Laws are always general, and privilege or punish every man alike in the
same case making no difference to any; and this is the liberty of the subject
to have al in the same capacity with him excepting only such as are empowered
with the supreme oversight of the whole. To prevent those innumerable
inconveniences which such (should they be in hazard) might precipitate the
Nation into. Nevertheless by that exception are they subjected as much or more
to the bond of love, for their own strength, as they could have been by the
penal laws but with far more security to the Nation.

Seeing therefore, that Justice is, that general privilege wherein all Just and
equal interests are most privileged: let us with one mind think of no other
Plea than that, which I hope will be so provided for by his Majesty and the
Parliament now sitting that there will be no need of promoting any pleas for
it: for no man petitions at any time for what he has, but what he wants, so
that it is the part of every man to rest satisfied in expectation of what is
preparing by them (whom we should very much injure) to think would omit, or act
any thing that Justice should not require; but when any such thing is, then
promote Pleas for Justice according to the known Laws, but in your particular
Pleas to make such objections as one is out so much moneys, and is like to be
ruined, if he be deprived of what he holds; or that such were deboist in their
lives. On the other side that we are brought to poverty, those that possessed our
estates are so, or so, these savor more of passion than reason, for it they
that have gamed the sequestered Estates have them by Law, the others poverty is
no reason they should loose their right: but if the others have lost their
Estates without Law, There is no equity but that Law should restore them; it is
not the debauchery laid to their charge (which besides is to be proved as well
as said) that excuses any man in another right; for whereof a man is legally
possessed; of that he is to be deemed true owner in the same capacity he was at
first invested with, til the Law disposess him again, and whosoever enters
without his consent before such declaration be made by Law, has as much title
to it, as a Thief on the high way to the money in a man's purse; for such
entries are not by the right door. The Laws of the Land are the right door to
all manner of possessions. John, 10. 1.
Whosoever therefore comes not in by the right door the same is a Thief and a
Robber, says Christ. And though this may have been a Judgment on such as did
set their minds too to much upon this world to wean them from laying up
treasures to themselves upon earth where moth and rust do corrupt and Thieves
break through and steal they should be so deprived that they might lay up
treasures in Heaven etc. Math. 6. 19, 20.
God send all men to make use of his dispensations to his glory, he can renew
his Judgments on them when they give him the same provocation.

But as the Infirmities of men (if they be true) ought not to bar them of the
privilege of the Law, so ought not the excellency of any man or Saint-like
Godliness (to call it by the usual word) privilege him to do injustice against
Law: Nay it is vehemently to be suspected that where a godly man drives on
designs of depriving any man of his right (before the Law has divested him of
it) that his godliness is but seeming not real, for Justice is the fit
foundation to build godliness on, Justice may be where godliness is not, but
godliness cannot be where Justice is not: therefore such assertors of their own
righteousness may well be conjectured Pharisee like less Justifiable than the
poor dejected Publican, Luke, 18. 11.
for though they are more circumspect in Punctillio's yet they omit the weighty
matters, of doing Justice, Obeying Princes, and Laws; and this their desire of
holding what they have (without relation had to the Justness of it) very much
discovers; for we Judge by the fruits, Math. 7. 17.
not the flowers. And whereas these may superficially for a mask of such
intrusion plead Orders of Parliament to be the Law that authorized their
possession; it is very well known in England that no order of Parlliament was
ever pleaded to be in force longer than the Session of that Parliament which
made it, but that such orders as they hold necessary to continue were drawn
into Acts and confirmed by the Approbation of the King: therefore in this
respect their Plea for such a Title is now fully void, that Parliament after a
double resurrection being quite rooted up by their own Act; if the death of the
late King had not nulled it before: next it is observable that those Orders they
can plead in that behalf were made by scarce half the Parliament; the other
half being removed to Oxford by the Kings Order (for though he had released the
power of dissolving, he had not that of removing it) where they jointly with
the consent of the King set out Proclaimation for the Continuance of all
Ministers in their benefices til duly convicted and ejected by a lawful
authority: so that to any unbyassed man such a Proclimation had much more
reason to be regarded than any they can plead to the Contrary: as to other
sequestrations, they, and these too, have only one excuse, that there were Wars
then in the Land (the Justness of which (that things may come to a composure)
is not fit to be examined) which procured many things as necessary that could
not be Justified in peace, for Inter arma silent leges) to which nevertheless
it may very well be answered that though sequestrations were then necessitated,
yet since it has pleased God that the days of oppression and violence should
be shortened by procuring a right understanding between his Majesty and his
People: Mark, 13 20.
God forbid injustice should still remain, or that postfact Laws should be
created at their own unjust desires to confirm injustice because it has been
made good by a strong hand; for a while,

But here may be inferred the old Objection to Law and Justice that sumum jus is
summa injuria; which I to avoid other Objections willingly in general grant:
but if these use this as a reasonable Objection in this case that exactness in
doing right, be great wrong, what is extremity of wrong; surely an oppression
beyond a name; Christ uses this kind of Argument; Math. 6. 23.
If the light that is in them be darkness, then how great is that darkness? so
if the very extremity of Justice (pressed against these men) shall be thought
great wrong? what wrong do they think those suffered, that lost wrongfully all
they had, thus long; certainly they may be something sensible when they think,
and reflect on these things; I wish they may and repent for something else, than
that they are permitted to do injustice no longer, for as hitherto that has
appeared their greatest trouble, not for what ill they have done, but for what
they cannot do. But this is no Godly sorrow.

But having admitted the Objection made against the beauty and benefit of true
Justice, I say England has made Happy provision in that behalf, for in
deciding controversies, we have the High Court of Chancery, to mitigate the
rigor of the Law of proprieties; and in matters Capital because they are all
Culpae lesae Majestatis, they have their mitigation in the Kings breast; whose
perogative is to remit punishments that are against his royalty or Person; as
he shall in his clemency see reason for it: not meddling usually with any man's
propriety. But neither of these can give any relief in this case to them that
plead for mitigation; for these can but moderate the rigor of the Law, by
extenuating or remitting the penalty that is subject to their prerogatives, but
cannot lay it on the shoulders of them that ought not to bear it; for 'twere a
miserable doing of equity to the guilty, by obtruding injustice on the
guiltless. We have many Commands and examples for being merciful in our
Justice, but none, that our mercy to offenders should make us unjust, and cruel
to the innocent; 'twere a strange sentence if a Judge from the Bench giving
Judgment on a Criminal guilty of Burglary or such like offense should say, By
the Law thou ought to die, nevertheless that mercy may abate this rigor thou
shall but be half hanged, and he whom thou have robbed shall be half hanged with
thee, but far worse if he should hang the innocent and let the offender enjoy
his booty, the transferring the sentence, or part on the innocent is of the
same nature and holds proportion very well, if the Innocent must lose their
whole or part of their estates against Law, to save the losses of such as ought
to be punished for their unjust intrusion, besides the loss of the estates so
gotten. But if these lay a farther stress on the argument of his Majesty's
referring all to the sentence of the Parliament. I say God forbid, that there
could be such a thing in England as an unjust Parliament. Unjust Factions, and
pieces of mock Parliaments we have too sensibly felt, but to imagine that a
whole Parliament free from force, or fear can be so perverted is a kind of
Blasphemy against the dignity of so Eminent an Assembly, so fundamental in our
Constitution of Governments as that is; And although his Majesty has been
graciously pleased in his clemency to submit these matters of Controversy to
their composure; his yiedling to their arbritration will not by them be deemed
a sufficient warrant for them to be unjust in their umpirage. If the matter in
Controversy belong to one of the parties; it is not to be called an equal
Arbitration if the Umpire shall part it between both parties, Equity consists in
doing Justice, but still upon lawful considerations; so it suffers not the
Morgagee to take the forfeiture of the Morgager; but it always provides that
the morgagee shall have no loss neither in principal nor interest; because the
Law makes the bargain, a just bargain on both parts; but when the Law Justifies
not the alienation; why one man should be justified in buying another right of
them that had nothing to do with it; not any thing to color such sales or
disposures more than a Thief that it too strong for a man; will never seem
reasonable. God be thanked Right, and Might, were never made termini
convertibiles til of late when our nation through the violence of the Fever it
labored withal suffered a delirium, hideous Fancies crept into the seat of
Reason, misinforming the whole. Solomon has given us a very imitable example to
follow in our arbitrations; for though like a wise Arbitrator he pretended the
division of the Child between the true Mother and the false; yet having by that
found out the truth, he restord the Child whole and living to the right Mother
with the applause of all for his Justice and Wisdom; 1 Kings 3. 27, 28.
my hopes and prayers shall be: that God will not suffer either his Wisdom or
Justice to shine less in our Senators than in Solomon.

Now if they make that other general Plea that their acquiesing to the return
of his Majesty ought to be Considerable in mitigating the Rigor of Justice, and
his return ought to procure such an Union as to take away all animosities and
distinctions whatsoever, that they together with others might make one
harmonious body of people, and not be yielded up to any severity more than
others; I answer first that not one of a hundred interressed in any such unjust
acquests, had the least good liking to this revolution, but as much as in then
lay, both with body, and mind endeavored all such meant to hinder it, as was
possible for them to contrive; by which the Parliament and Nation are not so
obliged to them in point of gratitude as some of them pretend: And farther
though that consideration, were eminent enough to obliterate all past
disaffections (though visibly it be far otherwise) yet ought not far greater
merits than they can plead for, to privilege them more than the rest of their
fellowsubjects; for if they be continued in such Possessions, as the Common
Laws of the land will not Justify them in; are not they made above Law to their
advantage? and others whose right the Law says it is, oppressed against Laws;
so that if it should pass thus; breach of Laws, Peace, Justice, etc. would be
rewarded with privildges above and against Laws; and Duty Obedience, Conformity
to Laws, Honesty, good Conscience and loyalty (which let me tell you is no small
virtue in any Member of a body politicko) ppressed contrary to Law and equity:
which were a pestilent perverting of the very essential constitution of al
Governments; and a poison beyond al Antidotes; for as Justice is the greatest
maintainer, and efficient cause of the well being of a Nation, so injustice, the
greatest poison and destroyer that can be permitted; but that Government that
shall prescribe so broad a way for the propagation of it, like a dispairing man
provides the readiest instrument for its own destruction that may be; and
renders it self highly guilty of self murder.

All this pleads still with the most equitable moderation but for equity on all
parts, that we may have all the same Laws, nor is it my drift to urge rigor at
all against the greatest offenders whatsoever: but shall while I breath desire
so much Justice that Laws may be equally general to all; and that upon so
little deserts the worst of subjects might not have their unjust actions
countenanced nor the truest subjects for their duty, and love both to King and
Laws, Country, and Justice be injured by post fact laws, such things as no
honest man! that made Conscience of his actions, would ever need; No modest
man! that did not arrogantly seek to privilege his unjustifiable actions, could
ever have impudence to demand; So barbarous are they, that there is but one
Nation, or rather herd of wolvish Tartars that even owned them; These are those
Spiders Webs, that catch only the laboring Bees, but let ravenous Waspes, and
Hornets go free; and since they have been, and are still endeavored to be made
so mischeivous to this Nation; we have as much reason to insert them into our
lettany as the Plague, Pestilence, or Famine; and indeed the Judgment that such
Laws are like to bring upon us, may give all good men just cause to say: From
Post-fact Laws and the contrivers of them good Lord deliver us.

Now for the last Asylum. Or resuge that those Law breakers have for themselves
to say that others are wicked, themselves good, others profane themselves holy,
others Devils, themselves Saints; and many expressions of like Nature; first
let me tell them it is an ill sign for people to speak well of themselves; and
no Law either of God or man in any Nation ever accepted of a man's testimony in
his own cause; and Christ himself denies it of himself: though the
transcendency of his person might have privileged him without being an example
of the like to us, but belike he foresaw of how il consequence it might be, to
leave such an example: therefore says. John, 5. 31. 33.
If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true. Men's own words are no
testimony in their own cause; next let me tell them, it is so Pharisaical a trick,
that though perchance it should prove true, it will make others Judge of them as
the Gospel censures the Pharisees, always joining the Name of Hypocrites; Woe to
you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, Math. ^3. v. 23. 27, 29.
for self Justification when not necessary, to vindicate a man from some
imputation laid to his charge is a common badg of Hypocrisy; and next, this
(as is before mentioned) is no Justification of a wrong. Nay it is a notable
return that those that intrude upon such specious holiness, unjustly, are more
wicked in such an extortion than all they can object to the wronged party, will
render him guilty of: and are so, very justly disrobed of their own holy Cloak
that covered their covetousness. Such Boasters are very well resembled by the
Peacock which gives a glorious show with his spread train forwards, sees it
himself and walks stately with the conceit of his glorious appearance. But to
them that veiw him round; behind his Feathers are dark colord and unseemly and
his Feet black and uncomly; which is not so easily discovered when he gives not
standers by, occasion to observe him by his pride. If therefore these men did
not so much cry up their own holiness and others Profaneness: their
imperfections might pass less noted, but to cure such arrogance there is no way
but to let them see the blackness of the feet they stand on, that Peacock like
they may let fall their boasting with shame; I mean to give them a remembrance
of the unjust extortion, which they conceald under the specious covering of
reformation and zeal; for whilst they make these gay pretenses; they rob
others contrary to the Laws, foment the divisions of the Nation to the
procuring of much effusion of blood; and much more mischief that might be
reckoned; now if they would look upon these deformities sure they would never
boast of their Saint like appearance; It Is not for a man to boast of godliness
and urge breach of Laws; or to say they seed the flocks, that rob the true
Shep-heards put in by the Laws of the Land; 1 Peter, 2. 13.
St. Peter and Paul both give other Ruls; Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man, for the Lords sake; Romans 13. 1. etc.
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto governors as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, etc. So that it is not men's
gilded behavior, but their obedience to the Laws of the Land is to give us
direction to judge of their goodness; this makes a man a good subject, without
which (what ever he pretend to) he can never be a Saint indeed. Obedience
(says Samuel) is better than Sacrifice; (and St. James) Show me thy faith by
thy Works. Appearances are good, if they be joined with inward righteousness:
for Christ commands it: Math. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men; but he adds, That they may see your, good
Works. Now the work of obedience to the Laws of the Land is the great and
weighty work, as is showed before out of Peter: Math. 23. 23, 24.
It Is not the tithing of Mint, Annise, etc. Justifies a Man, But the weighty
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, Faith; these ought ye to have done but not
to leave the other undone ye blind guides which strain at a Guat and smallow a
Camel. It Is not a pretense of scruple against ceremonies, can Justify the
disobedience to the higher powers, and the violent and illegal seizing of
others men's Estates, in which the Law Justifies them; And let me tell them it
makes not much for their Justification or Saintedness, that they were put into
possession by the Arbitrary violence of such a power, that terminated in the
Murder of the King; which without doubt bolstred themselves with such
Appendixes as should be necessary to support them to their intended mischief:
It Is a wonder to me with what impudence men can plead a possession from so
villainous a force, no more justifiable, by Law or reason than any common
robbery; not see I how any one that holds any benevolence of theirs, dffers any
more from their crime, than the receiver from the Theif; (that is if they shall
stand upon maintaining the possession they had of them; possibly some may have
been abused by their false Glosses, but if they persevere; their fault appears
not through ignorance, but willfulness; for the ringleaders of that treasonable
Practice could give no better title than they had, which was only Violence, and
Rapine; do not then they partake with them that shall Justify any possession
from their Title? Nay can they hope that so Free a Parliament as this is, can
make good the receipt of their roberies? No, I persuade my self too many of
them have felt their malice too much, and have known their cruelty and
injustice too well, to be brought to consent to their Villainies: for they know
very well that Qui non probibet cum licet, Iubet. And I am confident these men
will have a greater task than Hercules's labor, to prevail with so eminent an
assembly, ever to justify such villainies; The injustice they have seen, will
make them too fearful of the like again, to give any encouragement to what is
past: it is time at length to lay aside Private interest, and advance the
public; which can be no way provided for but by Justice, losses will be great
enough to the loosers, do what can be done; so long profits can never be
restored them they belonged to; and on the otherside, the gains will be too
great to them that have deserved far otherwise; how strictly soever they be
called to account; and we may be certain of this that very few of them can be
brought to a more desperate fortune that they began withal; so that none need
fear overdoing on this hand, so long riot upon other men's Purses and labors,
together with corporal impunity is advantage enough, Nay too great for such
unacceptable Service as they have done the Nation; therefore I think it will be
the most reasonable ples, that all sufferers can make, that they may have
Justice: and in that, their oppressors will not know how to oppose their
desires; for to say they desire no Justice (though it be like all former
impudence of theirs) they perhaps are yet ashamed to profess themselves enemies
to it; but if they say they desire Justice according to the Laws, then all
English men have their privilege; and one plea will serve us all; but by their
fruits already brought forth we may partly know what to expect for the future;
and assure our selves they will pervert the sense of the thing or slink into
obscurity least now the light of truth shines freely every where; their
deformities he made more apparent, for Justice is the light and life of the
Body Politic, and the Law the window to let that light into all parts of that
Body to discover, the actions of every man, so that they that hate the Law hate
the light, that makes their actions appear, and it is a shrowed sign of their
own conscience accusing them if they refuse to be tried by the Laws. John, 3.
20.
For every one that does evil, hates the light neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reprooved, but he that does truth comes to the light,
that his deeds be made manifest that they are wrought in God? Let us therefore
with alacrity think on no other Plea than that Justice may be afforded to all
alike; we desire no more privilege than other men have, and we desire on the
contrary they may have no more than we; and that no Postfact Laws may be made
to the advantage of any particular man's interest; but that as God has ordained
from the beginning one only truth and one Catholic Church universally
dispensable to all; so that our Nation in Imitation to his ordering of the
Economy of the universe; may have one general maintenance of his truth, by an
equal and general dispensation fo the Laws, our property rectified and secured,
that once again Justice may flourish, that so we may receive his best of
temperal blessings PEACE and Truth within our Walls and Plenteousness in our
Palaces: So let every true English man and Loyal subject pray.

These Queries I thought fit to add for a Pallisad, about what has been
written, that if any suarle at what has been said, he may happily first break
his Teeth against these following.
1. Whether Might; without right be not absolute Tyranny and usurpation? 2.
Whether to argue from the orders and injunctions of violent assemblies, be not
to set up the power of the Sword, above the civil power, and consequently a
changing of government, from the rule of reason to be ruled by will? 3. Whether
they can be friends to a Nation that endeavor alteration of Government by
force. Contrary to the will of all parties related to such a Government? 4.
Whether Laws are not to be the rule of our actions in this Kingdom? 5. Whether
it be Justice to dispossess any man of his possession, by force, who is not
first dispossessed by the Judgment of the Law? 6. Whether right be any thing
else in civil societies, than a legal warranting of our actions or claims by
the Law of the Land? 7. Whether a violent possession against the Laws of the
Land, be Justifiable by any honest man, good Christian, or any other than a new
fashioned Saint? 8. Whether: Vir bonus est quis? Qui consulta patrum qui leges
Iuraque, servat. Be not a sufficient character to know an honest man by? 9. And
Lastly, Whether Post-fact Laws, be not the most Arbitrary Imposition that can
be contrived, and whether it be possible to avoid such snares if they should be
allowed.
FINIS.

