Collectanea Chymica: A COLLECTION Of Ten Several Treatises IN CHEMISTRY,
CONCERNING The Liquor, Alkahest, the Mercury of Philosophers, and other
Curiosities worthy the Perusal.

Written by Eir. Philaletha, Anonymus, Ioh. Bapt. Van-Helmont, Dr. Fr. Antonie,
Bernhard Earl of Trevisan, Sir Geo. Ripley, Rog. Bacon. Geo. Starkey, Sir Hugh
Platt, and the Tomb of Semiramis, see more in the Contents.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1684.

Ad Lectorem.
Reader,
WE seek no Mecaenas to flatter with a Dedication, nor crave we any sh^lter
from great Personages, for we know that our Philosophy is the Worlds Contempt,
and its Professors their scorn and derision, therefore we neither crave their
Pardon nor fear their Frowns, but shall assert this truth only, that Arts have
no Enemies but such as are Ignorant thereof, for which reason we fear no
Jack-straws Insurrection though levelled against our learning, for true Wisdom
is justified of her Children, and to them only we give this account of the
occasion of printing this Collection of these small Chemical Treatises which
was (next to the usefulness of them) for their Preservation, being by several
Ingenious Chemists conceived to be well worth the perusal, and too good to be
lost, for the smallest Treatises on this Subject are not always of the least
worth or esteem, (for Truth needs no large Mattleings to set her forth.) And
for that small Treatise of the Alkahest, it was bestowed upon and sent unto me
by a Generous Stranger, who was pleased to take notice of my care in the
preserving the Porta Prima at the end of Ripley Revived, as likewise of that
general Invitation in the aforesaid Book page 390, which i^ any other Gentlemen
shall be pleased to Imitate, I hope in time we shall obtain all the lost pieces
of the Works of that Famous Modern English Adept, so much thirsted after, which
will be very acceptable Service to all Philosophers, and not the least kindness
unto Your Servant W. C. B.

THE CONTENTS.
1. EIrenaeus Philaletha his Arcanum, or Secret of the immortal Liquor
Alkahest, called Ignis-Aqua, in English and Latin. Page 5. 2. Anonymus's
Practice of Lights, or an Excellent and Ancient Treatise of the
Philosophers-stone. p. 27. 3. Joh. Bapt. Van. Helmonts Praecipiolum, or the
Immature Mineral Electrum, the first Metal which is the Minera of Mercury. p.
47. 4. Fr. Antonie M. D. his Aurum-Potabile, or his Receipt, showing his Way and
Method how he made and prepared that most excellent Medicine for the Body of
Man. p. 73. 5. Bernhard Earl of Trevisan his Treatise of the
Philosophers-Stone. p. 83. 6. Sir Geo. Ripley's Bosome-book, containing his
Philosophical Accurtations in the making the Philosophers Mercury and Elixirs.
p. 101. 7. Roger Bacon's Speculum Alchymiae, or the true Glass of Alchemy. p.
125. 8. Geo. Starkeys Admirable Efficacy, and almost incredible Virtue of true
Oil which is made of Sulphur-vive per Campanam. p. 139. 9. Sir Hugh Platts's
New and Artificial Remedies against Famine, written upon the occasion of the
great Dearth in the Year 1596. p. 155. 10. Tumba Semiramidis, the Tomb of
Semiramis Hermetically Sealed, which if a Wise Man open, he shall find
inexhaustible Riches, and the Treasures of Kings, to his content. By. H. V. D.
THE SECRET OF THE IMMORTAL LIQUOR CALLED ALKAHEST, OR IGNIS-AQUA.

By EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES.

Communicated to his Friend, a Son of Art, and now a Philosopher.

By Question and Answer.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1683.

THE SECRET OF THE LIQUOR Alkahest,
Quaest. 1 WHAT is the Alkahest?

Answ. 2 It is a Catholic and Universal Menstruum, and, in a Word, may be
called ( Ignis-Aqua) a Fiery-Water, an uncompounded and immortal ens, which is
penetrative, resolving all things unto their first Liquid Matter, nor can any
thing resist its Power, for it acts without any reaction from the Patient:
nor does it suffer from any thing but its Equal by which it is brought into
Subjection; but after it has dissolved all other things it remains entire in
its former Nature, and is of the same Virtue after a thousand Operations as at
the first.

3. Q. Of what Substance is it?

4. A. It is a noble circulated Salt, prepared with wonderful Art till it
Answers the Desires of an Ingenious Artist, yet is it not any Corporal Salt
made Liquid by a bare Solution, but is a saline Spirit which Heat cannot
Coagulate by Evaporation of the moisture^ but is of a Spiritual uniforme
Substance, volatile with a gentle heat, leaving nothing behind it, yet is not
this Spirit either Acid or Alkali but Salt.

5. Q. Which is its Equal?

6. A. If you know the one, you may without difficulty know the other: Seek
therefore for the Gods have made Arts the reward of Industry.

7. Q. What is the next matter of the Alkahest?

8. A. I have told you that it is a Salt, the Fire surrounded the Salt and the
Water swallowed up the Fire, yet overcame it not, so is made the Philosophers
Fire, of which they speak, The Vulgar burn with Fire, we with Water.

9. Q. Which is the most noble Sal^?

10. A. If you Desire to learn this descend into your self, for you carry it
about with you, as well the Salt, as its Vulcan, if you are able to discern it.

11. Q. Which is it, tell me I pray you?

12. A. Man's Blood out of the Body, o^ Man's Urine, for the Urine is an
Excrement separated for the greatest part from the Blood^ Each of these give
both a volatile and fixed Salt, if you know how to collect and prepare it you
will have a most precious Balsom of Life.

13. Q. Is the property of Hum^ne Urine more noble than the Urine of any Beast?

14. A. By many degrees, for though it be an Excrement only, yet its Salt has
not its like in the whole Universal Nature.

15. Q. Which be its parts?

16. A. A volatile and more fixed; yet according to the variety of ordering it,
these may be variously altered.

17. Q. Are there any things in Urine which are different from its inmost
specific urinaceous Nature?

18. A. There are, viz. A Wa^ery Phlegm, and Sea Salt which we take in with our
Meat, and remains entire and undigested in the Urine, and by Separation may be
divided from it, which (if there be no sufficient use of it in the Meat after a
convenient time) cease.

19. Q. Whence is that Phlegm or insipid watery humidity?

20. A. It is chiefly from our several Drinks, and yet every thing has its own
Phlegm.

21. Q. Explain your self more clearly?

22. A. You must know that the Urin^ partly by the separative Virtue, is
conveye with what we drink to the Bladder; partl^ consists of a watery Teffas
(an excrementitio^ humor of the Blood) whence being sepa^rated by the odor of
the urinaceous ^ermen^ it penetrates most deeply, the saltness being unchanged,
unless that the saltness of the Blood and Urine be both the same; so tha^
whatsoever is contained in the Urine beside Salt is unprofitable Phlegm.

23. Q. How does it appear that there is a plentiful Phlegm in Urine?

24. A. Thus suppose, first from the Taste, secondly from the. Weight, thirdly
from the Virtue of it.

25. Q. Be your own interpreter?

26. A. The Salt of Urine contains all that i^ properly essential to the Urine,
the smell whereof is very sharp, the taste dif^ers according as it is
differently ordered, so that sometimes it is also Salt with an urinaceous
Saltness.

27. Q. What have you observed concerning^ the weight thereof?

28. A. I have observed thus much, that three ounces or a ^ittle more of Urine
taken from a healthy man, will moderately outweigh about 80 Grains of Fountain^
Water, from whence also I have seen a Liquor distilled which was of equal
weight to the said Water, whence it is evident that most of the Salt was left
behind.

29. Q. What have you observed of its Virtue?

30. A. The Congelation of Urine by cold is an Argument that Phlegm is in it;
for the Salt of Urine is not so congealed if a little moistened with a Liquid,
though it be Water.

31. Q. But this same Phlegm tho most accurately separated by Destillation,
retains the Nature of Urine, as may be perceived both by the smell and taste?

32. A. I confess it, tho little can be discerned by taste, nor can you
perceive more either by smell or taste, than you may from Salt of Urine
dissolved in pure Water.

33. Q. What does Pyrotechny teach you concerning Urine?

34. A. It teaches this, to make the salt of Urine volatile.

35. Q. What is then left?

36. A. An earthly blackish stinking Dreg.

37. Q. Is the Spirit wholly uniform?

38. A. So it appears to the sight, smell and taste; and yet contains
qualities directly contrary to each other.

39 Q. Which be they?

40. A. By one through its innate Virtue the Dulech is coagulated, by the other
it i^ dissolved.

41. Q. What further?

42. A. In the Coagulation of Urine it Spirit of Wine is discovered.

43. Q. Is there such a Spirit in Urine?

44. A. There is indeed, truly residing i^ every Urine, even of the most
healthful man most which may be prepared by Art.

45. Q. Of what efficacy is this Spirit?

46. A. Of such as is to be lamented, and indeed may move our pity to mankind.

47. Q. Why so?

48. A. From h^nce the Dulech its mos^ fierce Enemy has its original.

49. Q. Will you give an Example of this thing?

50. A. I will. Take Urine and dissolve in it a convenient quantity of
Saltpeter: let it stand a Month, afterward distill it, and there will come
over a Spirit which burns upon the Tongue like a coal of Fire, pour this Spirit
on again and cohobate it 4 or 5 times, abstracting every time not above half,
so the Spirit becomes most piercing, yet not in the least sharp; the heat
which goes out in the first destillation of the Liquor, afterward grows
sensibly mild, and at length almost (if not altogether) vanishes, and the
second Spirit may be perceived mild both by the smell and taste which, in the
former was most sharp.

51. Q. What have you observed concerning the former Spirit?

52. A. If it be a little shaked oily streaks appear sliding here and there,
just as Spirit of Wine destills down the Head of the Alembick in streaks like
Veins.

53. Q. What kind of Putrefaction should the Urine undergo that such a Spirit
may be got from it?

54. A. In a heat scarce to be perceived by sense; in a Vessel lightly closed
or covered rather; it may also be sometimes hotter sometimes cooler, so that
neither the heat nor cold exceed a due mean.

55. Q. How may this winy Spirit become most perspicuous?

56. A. By such a putrefaction which causes a Ferment, and exciteth
ebullition,) which will not happen in a long time) if the Urine be kept in a
Wooden Vessel, and in a place which is not hot (but yet keeps out the cold) as
suppose behind a Furnace in Winter, where let it be kept till of it self a
ferment arise in the Urine and stirrs up bubbles, for then you may draw from it
a burning Water which is somewhat Winy.

57. Q. Is there any other Spirit of Urine?

58. A. There is; for Urine putrified with a gentle heat the space of a
fortnight o^ thereabout sends forth a coagulating Spirit which will coagulate
well rectified Aqua-Vitae^

59. Q. How is that Spirit to be prepare^ which forms the Duelech of it self
with ^ clear Watery stalagma; and also that which dissolves the same?

60. A. Urine putrified for a month an^ half in a heat (most like the heat of
Hor^^ dung) will give you in a fit Vessel each still^^titious stalagma
according to your desire.

61. Q. Does every Spirit of Urine coagula^ the Spirit of Wine?

62. A. By no means; this second Spirit observed to want that Virtue.

63. Q. What does Urine thus ordere^ contain besides the aforesaid Spirits?

64. A. It Is more fixed Urinaceous Sal^ and by accident foreign Marin Salt.

65. Q. Can this more fixed Salt (...) brought over the Alembick with a gent^^
heat in form of a Liquor?

66. A. It may, but Art and ingenuity a^ required.

67. Q. Where is the Phlegm?

68. A. In the salt; for in the Prep^ratio^ of putrefaction the Salt being
putrified (...) the Phlegm ascends together with it.

69. Q. Can it be separated?

70. A. It may, but not by every Artis^^

71. Q. What will this Spirit do, when i^ is brought to this?

72. A. Try and you will wonder at wh^^ you shall see in the solution of Bodies.

73. Q. Is not this the Alk^hest?

74. A. This Liquor cannot consist without partaking of the Virtues of Man's
blood and in Urine the Footsteps thereof are obse^vable.

75. Q. In Urine therefore and Blood t^^ Alkahest lies hid?

76. A. Nature gives us both Blood and U^rine; and from the Nature of these
Py^^^techny gives us a Salt which Art circula^^ into the circulated Salt of
Paracelsus.

77. Q. You speak short?

78. A. I will add this; the Salt of Bloo^ ought so to be transmuted by the
Urina^^ous ferment that it may lose its last Li^^ preserve its middle Life, and
retain its sal^^ness.

79. Q. To what purpose is this?

80. A. To manifest the excellency which is in Man's blood above all other Blood
wha^ ever, which is to be communicated to the U^rine (after an excrementitious
Liquor is sep^^rated from it) whence this Urine excells a^ others in a
wonderful Virtue.

81. Q. Why do you add Urine?

82. A. You must know that to transmu^^ things a corruptive Ferment: is
required, in which respect all other Salts give place to the strong urinous
Salt.

83. Q. Cannot the Phlegm be collected apart from the Salt?

84. A. It may, if the Urine be not first putrified.

85. Q. How great a part of the Water i^ to be reckoned Phlegm?

86. A. Nine parts of ten or there abouts distilled from fresh Urine are to be
rejected, the tenth part (as much as can be extracted i^ form of Liquor) is to
be kept; from tha^ dried Urine which remains in the botto^ by a gentle Fire
(which will not cause subl^^mation) let the Salt be extracted with W^^ter, so
that there be as much Water as ha^ that Urine whence this Feces was dried
whatsoever is imbibed by the Water let it (...) powered off by decanting, let it
be strained (...) purged per deliquium, then filtre it through^ Glass: Let
fresh Water be powered on, an^ reiterate this Work till the Salt become pu^^
then join this vastly stinking Salt with you^ last Spirit and cohobate it.

Praised be the Name of the Lord Amen.

ARCANUM LIQUORIS IMMORTALIS IGNIS-AQUAE; SEU ALKAHEST.

Ab EIRENAEO PHILALETHA.

Amico suo, Filio ARTIS, jam PHILOSOPHO, Per Interrogationes ac Responsiones
communicatum.

LONDINI, Sumptibus Gulielmi Cooper, ad Insigne Pelicani, in Vico vulgo dicto
Little Britain. 1683.

ARCANUM LIQUORIS Alkahest,
Quaest. 1. QUID est Alkahest?

Resp. 2. Est Universale Menstruum Catholicum, uunius verbi Ignis-aqua, ens
^implex, immortale, penetrans, cuncta resolvens in primam nempe Liquidam suam
Ma^eriam, and ejus Virtuti nil resistere valeat, agitque absque Reactione
patientis, nec ab ul^a re patitur nisi a solo suo Compari a quo ^ub Jugum
trahitur, alias autem res quasvis postquam dissolvit integer in sua pristina
Natura manet, tan^umque ^valet millesima Action tanquam Prima.

3. Q. Cujusnam est Substantiae?

4. R. Sal Circulatus est nobilis, mira Art praeparatus, usquedum voto
respondeat sagacis Artificis; neutiquam tamen sal corporalis est nuda
Recollatione liquidus, at salinus Spiritus qui calore non coagulatur
evaporatione humidi; sed uniformis est Substantiae spiritualis, levi calore
volatilis, nec quicquam post se relinquens, non tamen acidus est Spiritus aut
Alkalizatus sed salsus.

5. Q. Compar ejus quis est?

6. R. Si Par novisti, Compar haud difficulter noveris; quaere, nam vendidere
Dii sudoribus Arts.

7. Q. Ex qua materia proxime fit Alkahest?

8. R. Salem esse dixi, Salem circumdedit Ignis, Ignem absorpsit Aqua, nec
tamen ei praevalet, sic factus est Ignis Philosophicus de quo dicitur, Vulgus
cremat per Ignem, nos per Aquam.

9. Q. Sal maxim nobilis quinam?

10. R. Hoc si cupis discere, descend in teipsum, nam tecum circumgeritur tam
Sal quam ejus Vulcanus, si valeas discernere.

11. Q. Quis est, dic sodes?

12. R. Sanguis Humanus extra Corpus, ^^ve Lotium Humanum, est enim Lotium
exrementum ex part maxima a cruore decisum, ^trumque dat salem tam volatilem
quam fix^m, si noris colligere and praeparare praesto ti^i erit Balsamum
salutis pretiosissimum.

13. Q. Es^ne proprietas Urinae Humanae, major nobilis Urina quorum vis
jumentorum?

14. R. Multis gradibus, etiam licet Excrementum, Sal tamen ejus non habet sibi
simi^e in tota universa Natura.

15. Q. Quae sunt ejus parts?

16 R. Volatilis and fixior, pro varietate tamen tractationis alterantur hae
mul^ifariam.

17. Q. Suntne aliqua in Urina ab intima ejus Natura Urinacea specifica aliena?

18. R. Sunt, Phlegma aqueum, videlicet, and Sal marinus in cibis intro sumptus
ac sospes indigestusque in Urina habitans, ab eademque per Secretionem
divisibilis, qui (si nullus sit usus satis in cibis per tempus idoneum) cessat.

19. Q. Phlegma (sive Aquea humiditas insulsa) unde?

20. R. Sunt potus ex part maxima, and tamen quaeque habet suum phlegma.

21. Q. Explica te planius?

22. R. Scito Urinam partim per Virtutem ecreticem una cum haustis ad vesicam
transmitti; partim ex Teffas (humore excrementitio sanguinis) aqueo constare,
unde de^isum per fermenti urinacei odorem perme^t intime immutata salsedine,
nisi quod salsum Sanguineum sit salsum Urinaceum, sic quod praeter salem in
Urina quicquid contine^ur Phlegma est inutile.

23. Q. Quomodo patet in lotio Phlegma copiosum contineri?

24. R. Hinc puta, primo quidem ex Gustu, deinde ex Pondere, tertio ex Virtute.

25. Q. Esto tibi Mercurius?

26. R. Sal Urinae totum essentiale proprium lotio continet, cujus odor est
peracutus gustus pro tractationis varietate varius, ut videlicet nonnunquam
quandoque salsus salsedine Urinacea.

27. Q. Quid de pondere observasti?

28. R. Hoc nimirum, quod Urinae tres duplo plus unciae ab homine sano
collectae, mediocriter Aquae fontanae circiter Grana 80 praeponderare, unde
destillatum esse Liquorem eque ponderantem praedictae Aquae vidi, un^e constat
relictum fere fuisse salem.

29. Q. Quid de Virtute observasti?

30. R. Congelatio Urinae a frigore indicio possit esse quod Phlegma insit, non
etenim sa^i Urinae pauco Liquore (etiam aqueo) madefacto competit congelatio
gelida.

31. Q. At hujusmodi Phlegma ut ut exquisitissime Destillatione separetur,
sapit Urinam, idque tam Naribus quam Lingua judicatum?

32. R. Fateor quidem; gustu tamen pa^um deprehenditur, neutro quoque modo plus
quam in Aqua pura a sale Lotii cohobata perciperetur.

33. Q. Quid docet Pyrotechnia circa urinam?

34. R. Hoc, viz. Salem Urinae volatilem reddere.

35. Q. Quid tum relinquitur?

36. R. Faex terrea nigricans faetulenta.

37. Q. Spiritus an totus uniformis?

38. R. Sic quoad visum and odorem pariter and gustum; and tum diversificatum
inter se qualitatibus plane contrariis.

39. Q. Quibus?

40. R. Ab una coagulatur Virtute propria ^nhabitante; ab altera dissolvitur,
puta Due^ech.

41. Q. Quid praeterea?

42. R. In coagulatione Lotii, sui Spiritus vini deprehenditur.

43. Q. Estne talis Spiritus in Lotio?

44. R. Est sane revera inhabitans quamvis Urinam, etiam hominis sanissimi, qui
Art praeparari valet.

45. Q. Cujusnam est hic Spiritus efficaciae?

46. R. Dolendae sane, and humano generi commiserandae.

47. Q. Quare?

48. R. Hinc Duelech hostis atrocissimus suum habet ortum.

49. Q. Dabisne exemplum hujus rei?

50. R. Dabo. Sumatur Lotium, in eoque dissolvetur idonea Salis-Petrae
quantitas, stet per mensem, postea destilletur, and exibit primo Spiritus
ardens supra Linguam ac si esset carbo, readfundatur Spiritus and cohobetur
quater vel quinquies non abstrahendo quavis vice ultra partem dimidiam, sic
fiet Spiritus acutissimus, nil tamen acescens; ardor, qui in prima Liquoris
destillatione egreditur, postea sensim mitescit, tandemque fere (si non omnino)
silet, mitisque secundus Spiritus ^prehenditur tam ad odorem quam ad gu^m, qui
in priori erat acutissimus.

51. Q. Quid de priori Spiritu notasti?

52. R. Si parum agitaretur apparuisse ^asi oleosas strias hinc inde labentes;
non se^s ac Spiritus vini per strias instar venarum ^er Alembici caput
destillat.

53. Q. Qualis esse debet Lotii putrefactio ^d ejusmodi Spiritum eliciendum?

54. R. In calore vix ad sensum percepti^^li, vase levi^er obturato seu
cooperto poti^s; possit item quandoque calere, and quan^oque plus frigere, ita
ut nec calor nec frigus (...) ultra mediocritatem.

55. Q. Quomodo maxim perspicuus fiet ^^c Spiritus vinaceus?

56. R. Tali putredine quae fermentum ^^uset, proritetque ebullitionem quod
haud ^ngo tempore accidet, si in ligneo vase ad^rvata Urina in loco non calido
(frigus ta^en defendente) ut puta pone furnum Hye^is tempore, teneatur quousque
sponte suc^escat in Urina fermentum bullas proritans, ^^de tum exhibit aqua
ardens quodammodo ^^nacea.

57. Q. Estne alius Urinae Spiritus?

58. R. Sic puta per duarum vel circiter ^bdomadarum spatium levi calore
putrefacta ^^ina coagulatorem edit Spiritum, qui A^am Vitae dephlegmatam
coagulat.

59. Q. Quomodo parandus est ille Spiritus ^i Duelech de se formabit claro
aqueo sta^mate, item ille qui praefatum dissolvit?

60. R. Lotium per sesquimensem calore ^imi caloris aemulo) putrefactum, vase
^to utrumque stalagma stillatitium ad vo^um dabit.

61. Q. Coagulatne Urinae Spiritus qui^mque Spiritum vini.

62. R. Neutiquam, hic secundus illa Vir^^te cassus conspicitur.

63. Q. Quid continet Lotium sic tracta^^m praeter Spiritus praefatos?

64. R. Salem suum urinaceum fixiorem, and per accidens Salem peregrinum
marinum.

65. Q. Possitne hic Sal fixi^r per Alem^cum levi calore Liquoris sub forma
evocari?

66. R. Potest, at per Artem ingeniumque.

67. Q. Ubi Phlegma?

68. R. In sali; Praeparatione enim putre^ctionis Sal in phlegmate putrefactus
cum eo^em confusus ascendit.

69. Q. Possitne separari?

70. R. Potest, at non a quovis artifice.

71. Q. Quid faciet huc adductus Spiritus?

72. R. Tenta and quod videbis mirabere in corporibus solvendis.

73. Q. An non hic Alkahest?

74. R. Liquor hic citra humani sanguinis virtutis participationem constare
nequit, and in Urina ejusdem spectantur vestigia.

75. Q. In Lotio ergo and sanguine Alkahest delitescit?

76. R. Sanguinem urinamque pariter dat nobis Natura, and ab horum Natura salem
dat Pyrotechnia, quem circulat Ars in salem circulatum Paracelsi.

77. Q. Sub brevi syrmate loqueris?

78. R. Hoc addam: Sanguinis salem per urinaceum fermentum sic transmutari
debere, ut ultimam Vitam amittat, mediamque servet, salsedinemque retineat.

79. Q. Quorsum hoc?

80. R. Ad dignitatem quae inest sanguini humano prae alio quovis sanguine,
Urinae (ab eodem deciso excrementitio Liquore) communicandum, unde talis Urina
mira prae aliis cunctis Virtute pollet.

81. Q. Qua^^ Urinam addis?

82. R. Ah scias ad res transmutandas corruptionis fermentum adoptari qua dote
cuncta salia urinali olido cedunt.

83. Q. Annon Phlegma possit a sale seorsim colligi?

84. R. Potest, si modo Urina non putruerit prius.

85. Q. Quota pars Aquae Phlegma judicanda?

86. R. Novem parts ex december vel circiter a recenti Urinades^illatae
rejiciuntur, decima pars (quantum sub forma Liquoris extrahi potest) servetur;
exsiccatae Urinae in destilla^ae fundo, calore leni (qui sublimationem non
causat) extrahatur Sal per Aquam, ita ut Aquae tantum sit, quantum valet
dimidium Urinae unde faex haec ex^iccata fuit; in aqua qui quid absorbetur
effundatur decantando, col^t^r vel per deliquium purgetur, deinde fil^retur
aqua per vitrum: recens adfundatur, and ^eiteretur opus donec Sal purus fuerit,
tum conjunge Salem istum immense faetidum cum tuo Spiritu ultimo and cohob^.

Sit Nomen Domini benedictum, Amen.

THE PRACTICE OF LIGHTS: OR AN Excellent and Ancient TREATISE OF THE
Philosophers Stone.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1683.

THE PRACTICE OF LIGHTS.
SUrely, without any falsehood, the Science of Alchemy is true and not to be
mocked or scorned at, as many blind Asses do. Many men blunder about this
blessed Tincture which have neither Learning nor any sight in Philosophy, which
causes great slander and mocking to the great rebuke of this noble and
glorious Science of Grace, which Science and cunning is contained only in
natural moving or circulation and rotation of the Heavens above, as all natural
things do in this World by passing their circuit, which the high Creator of
Nature keeps in His mavelous Divine Power there as he begins and not
else.

The saying of all the Philosophers is, that no man shall come to this Science
by ha^^e and heady strength, but by Patience, and long time, and true
Governance of Fire.

First of all this noble Science they describe of Calcination which I have seen
and done all manner of ways as Sophisters and Ignorants do write, unto this day
(the more the pity.) But truly I have found a Na^ural Calcination, which
rather increases moisture radical than minisheth it: which Calx is of and
without any o^ her things as it is written, nihil demergeretur in Mercurio nisi
solemn, I have kept this compositum Solis and Mercurii one whole year in firing
night and day and in my proportion I lost my purpose, for I took, 24 to one and
left off that Work, then I took 3 to 1: Which I kept in the Fire seven Months
standing in such a heat as the in the highest of, in any part of the World, and
my Glass was but luted, unto which I will never more trust, but only with
nipping or closing of my Vessel or closing with Glass Molten, and at the seven
months end (the matter all molten) I did open my Glass and strongly did cast
the matter up and down, and the Body so opened and melted with the cooling of
the Glass and shaking, cleaved to the high of the Glass and to the sides, and
would not descend, and that part that descended down to the bottom, was black
and unciuous, and I did let it rest that night in the Fire still, and in the
morning it was ascended up to the top again, and it was very Black, and cried
as it had been fried, and so I did let it stand stillin the Fire till on the
next morrow, and then I found it ascended still, and I would have caused it to
descend with Fire, and made a Fire on the top, and with the violence of the
Fire (the Lute being stiff and strong) part passed through the Lute into the
Ashes, and that which remained in the Glass was fair and clear cleaving to the
Glass: Then turned I up the Glass, and there appeared a thousand sparks, like
very crude bright and shining, marvelous to sight, which I picked out as
subtly as I could, and among them I found one that was black on the one side
and bright as Pearl on the other side, and another like the color of the
Rainbow, and all the other were as bright as any thing might be, so that I
thought they had been crude.

Then put I a part of them in a strong Fire, and they never blemished, but ever
continued white, then I would have quickened them with more quick Water, Regm.
Lullii Test. cap. 56. Aqua viva est Argentum vivum congelatum in sulphur,
sicut^ menstruale quod congelatur in Substantiam Embrionis: but they would
never mingle, neither join with them more together: For the impediment was that
these sparks were corrupted among the Ashes in the drying and fixing.

Then I did melt them all together, and never man saw fairer Silver than that
was.

Then I thought to prove a shorter way: I took Sol and our Omogeneum, sometimes
6 to 1, another 1 to 1. and 4 to 1 and 3 to 1. and within 40 days and less I
have made Calces, R. Lullius ex metallorum limis vel oleis factis de corporibus
imperfectis, and in Aquam cristalinum deductis per Artem fit Aqua-Vitae.
Menstrum nostrum resolutivum quo terrae oleorum purificantur a macula
originali: Aliam Aquam nolite quaerere, quia haec Aqua trahit animas a
corporibus, and facit eas visibiliter apparere, si scis hanc Aquam recte
disponere, habes totum: sed difficulter fit Aqua ista, and magno ingenio ex
Luna fit Elixir cum Aqua illa, and ex Sole absque putrefactione: non sic ex
aliis corporibus nisi post p^trefactionem. Stude ergo propter istam Aquam
habendam sine qua nihil fit in hac Art.

Chap 86. Hoc Argentum vivum cum corpore ^onjunctum sunt duo spermata, de
quibus facimus ^asci Aquam-vivam: quae est Argentum vivum ^ostrum, and
Aqua-vitae quae corpora mortua resuscitat.

Argentum vivum constructum and congelatum dat omnem calorem quo indigemus,
fiat ergo oleum de ipso cum corrosiva and abhin^ trabatur aqua quae dissolvit
omnia: vel cum ipso oleo misceatur oleum fermenti album vel rubrum and
putrefiat totum per ^alneum and fac inde Elixir, as red as the Ruby, and in
likewise white calx with Luna; bright shining and as soft as Silk, which Calx I
have examined and proved often times after this manner. I have put the Calce of
Luna into one of our vegetable Menstrues, and after I have put him into a
Limbeck and have distilled from the said Calce the said Menstrue, and the said
Calce has been like a Sponge Spongeous and full of strange Colors, and
shining white mavelous to see. Then have I taken this Substance and put it in
a clean Vessel and stopped it fast, and so have I sublimed out all the Spirit;
and the Body remained beneath as soft as Oil, and impalpable that no man can
express the subtilness thereof: Upon the which Calce I gave, my whole
Confidence: For what learned men soever had seen this Calce, would verily have
known that it had been the very true and right calce after the teaching of wise
Philosophers, for this Body is open and subtilizate, and his radical humidity
saved by his Menstruum fatens.

And this Calce is apt to receive liquefaction and all other Operations to it
naturally conserving. Now I perceive verily and without doubt how they declare
one thing which is true, first of the putting to of the Earth and the Water
together in the Philosophers Egg, which is likened to the Masculine and the
Feminine, the which shall bring and gender betwixt them the Child of the Fire,
which after shall never dread the Fire, for himself is the very Fire natural
and retrograde to Water and Earth again, and after so nourished in the Fire
till he be perfect white called by his Name Magnesia. Magnesia est Aqua
composita and congelata, quae repugnat Igni, and postea nunquam dubitat illum
in aliquo, eoque ipsamet est Ignis and de Natura Ignis fit, and in Igne crevit,
and suum intinctum fuit ignis. Reymund T. T. Cap. 63.

Jo. Dastin, Magnesia sane est Aqua composita Igni repugnans, congelata, corpus
totum redigens in cinerem. Note how here in this wonderful Preparation is hid
all that ever the Wisemen had^ in the which is the Menstruum faetens, or Ignis
contra Naturam; it is the wonderful mavelous and secret life of the Stone, as
by any Practice I have seen and approved; for in the beginning of the first
corruption it smel^eth like foul Brass: and after that he chang^th from favor
to favor, and in Color ^range, and at the last he is fragrant and sweet
smelling.

This I have truly proved by the very expe^ience in making of my foresaid Calce
notwithstanding the Preparations the Philoso^hers have hid and nothing else
which I have ^uly proved, for I have continued our Mercu^y and Sol in firing
ten Months and more, ^n the which process, I have seen the natu^^l Acts with
mavelous things incredible, ^xcept to them that have seen the changing of
them as in manner of other Vegetable things growing by their own radical
moist^re and heat of the Sun, both in burnishing and in diverse Colors,
springing with leaves ^^ke an Hauthorn-tree with Flowers marvel^ous in sight to
behold: and after this ten months I wearyed and hasted with Fire above, and my
Body did melt and rise from the Ground and ascended, and the Spirit brake part
out, and the other part of the work was mavelous to see; for part of the Sun
was turned into Moon, and I assure all good and well disposed men; but not to
Asses and foolish People: for I would not that they should see my Book. But
note the Testament of Reymond, where be declares in the 55 Chapter, and
shows of the changing of common Mercury first ere he may change the Body, for
he says: The common Mercury may neue^ change the Body but himself be first
changed an^ made pure Water, and as he is changed s^ will he change the Body,
and Preparation ^^ never considered till now at the last labor Wherefore let
never man labor, nor busy himself till his Mercury be turned into pure Water
an^ distilled, and every Element well rectified and the Earth well calcinated,
and the same Earth from his original corruption well wished, and that once well
and truly done, tha^ the Sun and Moon joined together with thi^ foresaid
Mercury. And then beginning you^ work, and then with the volatile matter thou
shall have both Earth and Water all ^^ one thing and not of diverse kinds, and
when I thought to be at an end, there was but the beginning, and I never
perceived it till I h^^ studied the 55 Chapter of Reymonds Testament for I
never could find in all the Authors tha^ ever I did read or see the Preparation
s^ plainly declared. Ye may read in the Book of Artephius, called clavis
sapientiae majoris, where he writes nihil occultaverunt praeter
Praeparationem. And this is the very and true way to the Stone of the
Philosophers: For all their wonderful writing is but one thing, and of one
thing, and in one thing, which I have showed you here before. Notwithstanding
with my Calce you may make right good Medicine both man and Venus. But the
Royal Stone must be prepared as I have showed thee: And after this Preparation
done put the Man and the Woman in their Bed and keep them close, and in the Egg
shall be brought forth a Child, and here is all that the Philosophers say that
is but one thing, one work, one Vessel, one Furnace, though it change into many
things after his natures, as ye may see in the Testament about the 67 Chapter,
and there he ^heweth of the four good Elements: and it is called in the Mastery
the first solution, after depuration, and then reduction which comes before
Fixation. But I assure and certify you, that I have seen with mine Eyes
visible like as I have before declared. And I take to witness Reymond in the 67
Chapter, where he makes thereof an open certification to all his Friends that
he and others have done and proved visible these Acts. Here I leave to write
other general sayings of Philosophers, for I intend but only to proceed in this
peculiar thing, which I know is possible to be done: But it is the hardest
Science in the World to an unknowing Man. And it is lightest after it is
understood and known; as I have proved my self by Experience of my Calces
diverse ways, sometime with Blood of common Vitriol, and after I have decocted
it in the Vegetable Mercury ten or twelve days, and of that Powder I have had
fine Silver after the quantity. Also I have examined this Calce of Silver and
O^^ogeneum in common Aquafortis, and they have dried and congealed therein
marvellously bright shining like a Diamond which will melt in the Vegetable
Mercury like Wax, and the Secret of this I have not concluded nor many other
Secrets of the Calce for diverse Considerations that I fear by the Enemies of
the World. The second cause why I do not conclude, is part for Poverty: for
this Science requires three things special to conclude it: One is great ingeny
and a perfect reason in understanding and handling thereof: The second is many
Books to lead a man from one dark saying to another that gives Light; and the
third is Wordly goods to maintain the Expenses and Labor, the Substance of the
two Lights which the Mercury must have to work upon, Sol and Luna for that
Substance shall never be lost, though the Workman do err in his work, but it
shall be rather finer and better then it was at the beginning. Nevertheless, a
man may labor against Nature and destroy and spoil the good Bodies. Wherefore
I advise every man not to meddle with this Science unless they be well learned
and practiced. Many men do boldly meddle and clatter therein saying, it is a
thing cast in the Street and costeth naught, and every man has it, as well the
Poor as the Rich, and every time and place, it is in every Hill and in every
Dale, and the Value at the beginning costeth not past fifty pence. All these
things be true to them that truly understand them. Also they say it is a
Natural Mercury which cost no Money which is the privity and all the ground of
our Wisdom: And all this is no ^easing, but although it cost naught, yet it is
not had of naught, and of a little substance for ye cannot have as much Wheat
of a handful as of a Bushel; then mark well this reason: If you will have much
of this Natural Mercury or privy Corruption, which is the Root and Foundation
of all these wonderful things, thou must have great quantity of their
Materials, I say to thee as a Friend: If you put 20 pound weight of the Body
that Aristotle declares with ^^stro (...), which Body is in Value 24 score
pounds of current Coin, it is not of the price of the secret Stone that we mean
of, and it comes of the qualities of this one thing brought out by Art. And I
say to thee in Charity if thou had seen the privity thereof, thou would
soon believe it, and thou would marvel thereof it is so light and easy a
thing, and ready at thy hand if thou have Grace to understand that Corruption.
But thou that labourest herein must understand of two manner of Corruptions
after the definitions of the Philosophers: One is Corruption alterative, and
the other is Corruption dissipative. And if you be a very true Philosopher then
shall thou know these two Corruptions, as well by the Theorick as by the
Practick, and I say to thee of a Truth that of this Corruption is a new
Generation that brings forth this blessed Tincture, but corruption dissipativa
shall never be brought to natural kind again, and they that labor in this
Corruption shall never lose but their time for lack of good understanding^ for
they may save their good Bodies evermore. Now Corruption alterativa is evermore
in generation, as the Philosopher does make mention de Generatione and
Corruptione, unde Corruption unius est Generatio alterius, etc. And if they err
in this Corruption yet shall they save all their Substance of the Bodies that
shall never be the worse in Comparison in quantity but the better rather in
quality, as is aforesaid. Therefore if thou be a wiseman thou shall have thy
Substance, as surely as in thy Coffer, for as he stands in the humidity and
Corruption, so long is he growing in his own natural kind. Therefore consider
this Example, and understand well these Corruptions: For that I have seen I
testify to you of Truth, I take God of Heaven to Witness, and advise ye well
e're you begin to make thy Mercury Vegetable and flying; but first of all e're
you begin I read ye know well thy Principles, and take them of Aristotle and
Hermes, and of the fourth Book of Meteors of Aristotle, and there you shall
find this Principle, where he says, Sciant Artifices Alchymiae spes variae
transmutari non po^^unt nisi prius reducantur ad primam Materiam. Now note well
what I say, I demand what is the first matter of Mankind? Forsooth, I tell ye
Sperm of man. Then I ask what is the first matter or substance of Sperm? I say
to thee Food; as Meat and Drink. Then it appears, that Meat and Drink is the
first Substance of Sperm, and Sperm is the very true Substance and matter to
bring forth man: So likewise in Mercury of white matter, and of white Substance
comes that Mercury: For so he is of a pure subtle Earth, Sulphur most clear
and most subtle commixed with pure Water and with Commixtion and heat, these
two Elements digesteth with Temperance of heat and so turns into Mercury the
Sperm of Metals, therefore Water and Earth is the first matter of Mercury, and
Mercury is the first matter of all Metals, and when they be put into that
Water, they all melt and dissolve in him as the Ice does in warm Water, and why
do they so, because they were first Water coupled by cold, and now here is
Aristotles's Principle assoyled.

And although there were two things first, yet nevertheless when they be
resolved into clear current Mercury, and no palpable thing of the Body seen nor
felt, but passes through the Philter clean as Water, then is it, but one
thing, upon the which all Philosophers accord and ground them, est una Sola
res. And here now I have showed you more plainly then it has been showed here
before. And I say to thee for truth, this is the very true Key of this Science,
for Merlin and many others write here of diverse ways, as in the verse of
Merlin, dissipare and leviter extracta, etc. and Albertus in the fifth Book de
mineralibus de semine Metallorum, where he upon a little Gloss teaches
Solution, as there ye may see. But of all special Books that ever I could read
or see, Stella Complexionis is the Father of Truth and Doctrine, showing the
clear light and the right way of the Preparation of this precious Treasure, and
he expounds all the Figures of the Philosophers openly, where I doubt not but
God has his Soul in everlasting ^iss: For by the space of thirty years I ever
^udied and busied my self upon the Mystery, ^arables, Figures and Sayings of
old Phi^oso^hers, in the which I was mavelous blinded and overseen, and
specially by one book which is called the 12 Chapters or 12 Gates ^n Meter in
English, which was made by a suf^^cient Clerk and well learned, but I warn
^very man to beware of him, for by him ye shall never know the privity, but
rather he ^eadeth you out of the way, for he says it is ^ne Vessel, one
thing, one furnace and no ^ore.

True it is that it is but one thing, as I have before opened and showed: It is
one ^orm of a Vessel as Stella Complexionis declares, And I say to you this
one thing in the which all ^he Wise Philosophers have grounded themselves on,
it is after the full putrefying and utter rotting of the Elements, then to be
separate and every one of them well rectifyed, and then reduced again to the
Body by Nature in mavelous Sulphur elect. And here I Counsel thee to Practice
truly, and to remember and consider the saying of the great Philosopher
Constantius Affricanus in the Book of Elements, where he^ shows that man is
made by ingression of contrary things, which is to be ^^^derstood of the four
Elements and after this Body reverted to him simple, then all his humor is
turned into Water, the Spirit into Air, the heat into Fire, and the Bones and
Flesh into Earth; now may thou hea^ and know by visible Experience, and in
likewise with our Water one thing by rotting is turned again into his simple
Elements and moisture, then separate them, and the first shall ascend as a
Smoke and turn into Air as Water, keep that Treasure, and then thou shall
distill after that an Air more intentive and thicker, and one drop of this will
swim and go above Water if thou mix it with Water, and in this Air is Fire; and
beneath in the bottom of your Cucurbit is your Earth as a dead Body corrupt and
infect. Note well here be the four Elements reverted into their Simple, as
before is said by the Authority of Constantius. And I assure you that this is
as true as ever God made Gold and Silver and all things else and Heaven and
Earth and the Sea, therefore believe me if thou will or choose thee to thy own
folly, and leave off true Doctrine of the Philosophers, and wander forth in the
World as Mist in the Wind, and so thou shall never come to thy purpose, but
thou must first make the Bodies water, after digest them not burning nor
destroying their radical moisture, which is the life of Tincture of this
precious Treasure, and utterly rot them, and after divide the Elements and well
rectify thy Earth by due Calcination, and with washing of his own Water, till
it be pure, clear, bright and white shining, and then sublime up all the
quintessence again, then thou have the wonderful Earth called Terra foliata and
Sulphur Elect of the Philosophers, more noble more precious then Gold or
Silver, if ^hou wilt work it up as thou may at thy pleasure by continuance
of Reiteration and Sublimation, then he will become clear as Heaven Christaline
shining bright, as thou may see in the Rosary of the Secrets of all
Philosophers in the last work. Therefore may you see and understand when your
Tincture is perfect, which is in the fourth Governance plainly in writing, and
also mark other Authors of this secret Science; for when he is perfect fixed and
stable and will not fume, then he will run through a Plate of Copper, and make
it perfect Silver or perfect Gold, better then ever was produced out of the
Mine by Nature, and also the very truth of this Secret is more wo^th and richer
then man can devise; for of his own sperm or seed he shall evermore increase
and multiply to the Worlds end, for as fire elemental burns all and
overcomes all things, and nothing can overcome him, even so this Magnesia the
Child of Fire shall never be blemished nor vanquished by the Fire, but ever
standing and abiding bright shining, clear, so that almost man cannot express
the brightness which is incredible to any man except to them that have seen it
with their Eyes. And thou that art a finder of this Book, I charge thee as thou will answer to God that thou never show this but to a virtuous and wise,
discreet and well disposed man, which is ever glad to help the Poor and needy
People; for with this glorious Science ye may procure many glorious Gifts of
the blessed Trinity both in Riches and Soul, which shall never fail you
everlastingly. Da gloriam Deo, Amen.

Magnalium Dei,

FINIS.
RAECIPIOLVM: OR THE Immature-Mineral-Electrum. THE FIRST METAL: Which is the
MINERA OF MERCVRY.

By Ioh. Bapt. Van-Helmont.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1683.

Electum Minerale Immaturum (id est) Metallus primus est Minera Mercurii.
TAKE of the best Argentum vivum, which you shall Distill from its own Minera,
that is of the best Hungarian Minera which shall hold abundance of Argentum
vivum, one pound will hold twelve, thirteen or fourteen ounces of Quicksilver,
you shall distill this Minera, (first pulverized) in a Glass Retort with a
Receiver, then you shall squeeze the Mercury diverse times through Leather. If
you cannot get any Minera Mercurii Hungarici, take Spanish Mercury, which is
the best after the Hungarian, squeeze it through Leather diverse times. If you
cannot get this Spanish Mercury, take of the best Argentum vivum, that is to
say, if you put a little of it into a Silver Spoon, and hold the Spoon over
glowing Coals, and when the Mercury flies away it leaves a yellow or white spot
in the Spoon, this Mercury will serve, but if the Mercury leave a black spot,
it is not good for any Work. Take the Mercury which leaves a yellow or white
spot in the Spoon, wash it ten or twelve times with Salt and Vinegar, and then
squeeze it as many times through Leather, that it may be purged from its
outward soulness, the Hungarian and Spanish Mercury are clean of themselves and
need no washing.

Imprimis, you are to separate the Mercurium coagulatum from the Mercurius
Vivus, without any corrosiveness, and that the Mercurius Vivus shall be alive
still, and so clear as a Venice Looking-gloss: Which Mercury coagulate
Paracelsus, and Helmont calls Praecipiolum or Mercurius Coagulatus, and that it
shall be separated dead from its own Minera, and that the Mercury Vivus shall
be still alive after that the Praecipiolum is separate from it, and that the
Corpus Mercurii vivi is the Praecipiolum Minera, and that the Electrum Minerale
immaturum, is the Mercurii vivi Minera. Item Helmont and Paracelsus mentions
that when the Argentum Vivum or Mercurius Vivus shall come to his loca
destinata, that then the Argentum vivum shall leave his Praecipiolum behind him
in the form of a coagulated Mercury, and the Mercurius Vivus will go away alive
and remain a Mercurius Vivus.

The loca destinata, where the Argentum vi^um shall leave the Semen Mercurii,
and the Prae^ipiolum is Gold and Silver, Gold is the best place, by reason of
the Fixation and Purity, and next to Gold is Silver.

In this Praecipiolum lies hidden the whole Art of the true Chemistry. If a
Chemist ^now not how to make or separate that Prae^ipiolum from Mercurius
vivus, he will fail of ^he whole Art.

This Praecipiolum is the matter whereof shall be made the Philosophers
Mercury, that ^s, when it is reduced to his first matter, that ^s in a clear
Water, like the Water which ^uns out of our Eyes now and then, and is ^^ippery:
This Water will eat and drink his ^wn Flesh and Blood, and multiply it self
with it ad infinitum, and this Water will ^ring all Gold and Silver into their
first mat^er, before Praecipiolum is brought into his ^^rst matter, (it is when
it is prepared Phi^osophically without Corrosiveness) it will ^ure triplicem
Hydropem, podagram, morbum vene^ium and also many more sicknesses.

The Philosophers call Argentum vivum their Wine, and the Praecipiolum they
call their Tartar, both makes the Philosophers ^piritum vini Philosophicum,
which they call ^ow and then, Astrum Mercurii, Spiritum Mercurii, their Fire
their Sal Minerale and Sal Armoniacum, their Horse-dung their, Balneum Mariae,
and an hundred more names to deceive the People.

Processus compositus Praecipioli.
Take in the Lords Name of the Mercury which is well purged: ten parts of our
Gold or of our Silver, (not common Gold or Silver as the common people make use
of it) take ours, that is to say, Gold which is well refined through Antimony,
or if you will make it with Silver refine it with Lead, and purge those both
very well from their D^oss and foulness: If you have ten parts of our Mercury.

Take one part of our Gold or Silver made to fine leaves or made into fine
Powder with a File, and make an Amalgama of them both in a warm Glazen or
Marbel Mortar, and with a Pestel of Glass mix it well, and then put this
Amalgama into a Retort (as I shall give you direction below) and put it into an
Earthen C^pel or Earthen Pan, with one part of clear Sand, and three times as
much sifted Ashes, and cover it with another Earthen Pan, and put to it a
little Receiver, without luting, and then make Fire in your Furnace, and give
an indifferent heat, and distil^ the Mercurium from our Gold and Silver with an
indifferent heat, now and then, then take the Pan from it: If you see the
Mercury is distilled from the Gold or Silver, cover it again and let the Fire
go out.

The next morning take your Retort and ^eceiver from the Furnace or out of the
^and, your Mercury will lie some part in the Receiver, and some part will hang
in the Neck of the Retort, which you shall wipe ^ff with a Feather, to the
other Mercury which is in the Receiver.

If you will, you may now and then hold ^ glowing Coal under the Neck of the
Re^ort that the Mercury may run into the Re^eiver.

When you have separated the Mercurium, ^hen scrape the Gold which will lie at
the ^ottom of the Retort with a crooked Iron, from the bottom of the Retort,
and take it out, and put it into a Glass Mortar and powder it small, then
mingle or Amalga^ate your Mercury with it again by degrees or by little and
little, and put your Amalga^a again into the Retort, and if you shall find any
Powder that will not go into the Mer^ury, do not cast it away, but put it with
^he Amalgama into the Retort (or else you will lose your Praecipiolum) and
distill it again as it is mentioned. Now and then take the Earthen Pan from
(...) to see if the Mercury be almost gone over, and if it be almost gone over,
let the Fire go out, and cover with the Earthen Pan again, and let it stand
until the next morning, and then take the Retort and the Recipient again from
the Furnace or out of the Sand, and wipe your Mercury again with a Feather out
of the Neck of the Retort into the other Mercury in the Recipient, and scrape
again with your crooked Iron, your Gold out of the Retort as you did before,
and put it again into your Glass Mortar, (observe you shall distill so that the
Argent vive go from the Gold, and that not any Mercury may be found nor be seen
by your Gold which remains at the bottom of the Retort.) And then take your
Glass Pestel, and Powder again your Gold very small, and Amalgame your Mercury
again with your Gold, by little and little, as before is mentioned.

You will find that the Gold and Mercury will not well mix together as it did
in the first and second time.

Then take it and put it again in the Retort and distill it again as it is
mentioned, not casting any Powder away, which you will think to be faeces, if
you do cast it away, you will I say lose your Praecipiolum. And when the
Mercury is distilled away from the Gold again, take your Glass out of the
Furnace or out of the Sand copel, scrape your Gold with the crooked Iron, again
out of your Retort and you shall find that your Gold is much increased, if you
should weigh it; the reason is your Gold is the Lodestone, which has
attracted the Praecipiolum, or your Gold is the Cask wherein the Philosophers
Wine has let fall its Tartar which Paracelsus and Helmont calls Praecipiolum.

Now how shall the Philosophical Tartar or Praecipiolum be separated from our
Gold?

Take your Gold which you have scraped out of the Retort, and put it into your
Glassen Mortar, and powder it very small with your Glass Pestel and mingle your
Mercury by degrees as by little and little.

Your Mercury will hardly mix with the Gold, the reason is, the Gold is full of
the Praecipiolum, and then it is time to separate the Praecipiolum from the
Gold and Mercury, which is a Woman's work, when her Clothes, are foul, she
washes them from their foulness. The same way you must cleanse your
Praecipiolum from your Gold and Mercury as follows.

When you have the sign that your Mercury will hardly mix with your Gold, and
your Gold will not enter into your Mercurium vivum, then power on it the
clearest and fairest Water (distilled is best) that it may go over three
Fingers breadth your Gold and Mercury, then wash it well, stirring it with your
Pestel the Gold and the Mercury and the Water together which is in the Mortar,
I say you shall wash it together very well, until you see your Water is
discolored bluish black: Then is the sign that the Gold does let fall the
Tartarum or Praecipiolum in the Water and makes it bluish black, then power
off the Water into a Glass (observe that not any Mercury may fall with the
pouring out the bluish Water) then power more fresh Water upon your Gold and
Mercury, and wash it again as is mentioned, and when your Water is blew again
power off the Water to the former Water in the Glass, and thus continue washing
till your Water remain white, then power this Water to the other Water in the
Glass, and cover your Glass very close, that not any foulness may fall into the
Glass. Observe that your Gold will go again into the Mercury, when that
Praecip^olum is washed away as Wax goes in melted Butter.

Take your Amalgama abovesaid, make it dry upon warm Ashes very softly with a
Sponge, and by a little heat that the Amalgama may be dried and when it is dry
put it again in the Retort, and distill it as is before mentioned wit^ the
Mercury as with cohobating; that is to say in distilling your Mercury, so often
from the Gold that the Gold will hardly mix with the Mercury, and this is the
sign that the Gold has attracted enough from the Praecipiolum, and then it is
time to separate with washing your Praecipiolum from your Amalgama.

Now observe, I gave you Charge that you should keep your Glass wherein you put
your bluish Water: which will be clear, and a Powder settled at the bottom,
which is some of the Praecipiolum.

Then power off the clear Water from the Praecipiolum without disturbing the
Water, as soon as you can into another Glass: Now when you have that sign, that
your Gold will not mix well with your Mercury, or not without great Trouble,
then power the same Water, which you powered off from your Praecipiolum into
another Glass, as it is mentioned upon your Amalgama, and wash it again, and
when your Water is bluish power off the Water to your Praecipiolum into
another Glass, as it is before mentioned, upon your Amalgama, and wash it again,
till all your Water has washed away the Praecipiolum, and then stop your Glass
again that no foulness fall into it, then take your Amalgama and dry it again
very gently, and distill again, as is mentioned, till you have the sign, and
then you shall wash it again with the first Water, and you shall find that your
Praecipiolum will Augment or increase daily^ Thus stilling and washing shall
you continue till the Mercury is freed from its Mercury coagulated or
Praecipiolum.

Observe if the Water should grow less add to it now and then fresh Water.

Now the sign is when the Mercurius has lost all its Sperm, or its Tartar, or
its Mercury coagulate, or its Praecipiolum: The Mercury and the Gold will mix
always well together, and if you should distill it a thousand times that Gold
and Mercury the one from the other, and if you should wash it a thousand times
the one from the other with fresh Water, the Water will be clear, not bluish
and so long as the Praecipiolum is in the Mercury, the Gold and Mercury will
hardly mingle one with another, and then when you would have it mix together
you must wash it, and then it will lovingly mix again when it is washed: So I
say when your Praecipiolum is all separated from the Mercury, if you should a
thousand times distill your Mercury from your Gold, it will mingle always
lovingly together, and you will not find any Powder left, it will go all into
the Mercury and your Water remain clear and white.

Now further to our intent, as to make or prepare your Praecipiolum for a
Medicine, power your clear Water, from the Powder which lies at the bottom, in
the Glass that no Water may be left by the Powder.

Put the Glass upon a little warm Ashes that the Powder may be dried, the
Powder will look bluish yellow; also, put the powder into a little Cucurbit
Glass, and distill five or six times Spiritus vini from it, then your
Praecipiolum is made ready for a Medicine.

The Dose two Grains, or three at the most.

Compositio Aquae Albuminum Ovorum.
Take a good quantity of Eggs, boil them very hard, then take the Whites and
cut them very small, and distill them per Cineres per Alembicum very softly,
till you have gotten all the Water from the Whites, ^hen take the Egg-shels,
burn them to Ashes, and put those in a Retort, and power upon them their own
Water, and distill it per arenam very strongly, and then power this Water upon
the Ashes again, and distill it again, thus continue five or six ^imes, the
Water is ready for the Praecipiolum, the Mercurys coagulated Salt.

You may remember I gave you Instruction, that you should pour off the clear
Water from the Praecipiolum, and you should make dry the Praecipiolum, and that
Praecipiolum bring to a Medicinal Powder, or you shall bring all Metals,
Principally his own Body into his first matter, which cannot be done without
the Praecipiolum Salt, which is hidden in the Water you powered from the
Praecipiolum, the same Water filter through a gray paper, and set the Water to
evaporate in a round Glass v^ry softly in Ashes, when the Water is evaporated
away, you shall find at the bottom of the Glass a yellow whitish Salt, which is
the Salt of the Praecipiolum, and the Clavi^ of the Philosophers, wherewith
they do unlock the Lock of the Praecipioli, and brings the same to his first
matter.

If you know not this Salt, you know nothing of the true Chemistry: This Salt
does decrease in the decrease of the Moon, and increases at the full-Moon, and
one Grain will Purge very softly all Podagrous, Venomous and Hydropical Humors
with two Grains of your Praecipioli prepared.

How to bring the Praecipiolum into his first or slippery matter.
Take your Salt and twice as much of your Praecipolum, when it is made dry
first dissolve your Salt in fair warm Water, and power it upon the
Praecipiolum, and evaporate it away very gently in warm Ashes with a gentle
Fire; then take your Praecipiolum with its one Salt and put it into a little
Retort, nip the Neck of the Retort very close, or melt it together, or Seal it
with Hermes Seal, then put it into Balneum vaperojum and let it stand six Weeks
in digestion or to put^ifie, and it will turn to a slimy Water, then take your
Retort, and open the Neck, then lay your Retort in a Sand Furnace and cover
your Retort with an Earthen Pan, and lay a Receiver well luted, and first give
a slow Fire, then a stronger, and this continue till your Spirits be well
resolved into Water, first your Spirit will come in form of a white Cloud, and
at last in the form of red Clou^s or red Smoke, and give Fire so long till all
your Spirits be come over into clear white Water, and when you have this sign,
take your Receiver from the Retort, an^ stop the Receiver very well with Wax
that no Spirit may fly away: Then let your Fire go out, then take the matter
which remains in the Retort out of the Retort, and put the same into a
Bolthead and stop it well, and set it in a warm place, then take your Spirits
which are in the Receiver and rectify them once, and keep those Spirits very
carefully. Observe this, you may remember, when the Praecipiolon has lost its
Mercury that the same Mercury, will be so bright, as a Venus Lookinglass; take
the same bright Mercury and dissolve him in your beforementioned Spirit, as
now follows.

Take one part of your bright Mercury and put it into a Bolthead, and power
upon it two parts of your Spirit of Mercury, and stop it very close and let it
stand in a little warmth, and the Mercury will dissolve or melt in your Spirit,
and then distill it together through a Retort in Sand, and again take one part
of your bright Mercury and put it into a Bolthead, and power upon it two parts
of your Spirit and set it in a warm place and the Mercury will melt in the
Spirit^ then distill again through a Retort in Sand, and it will come over in
the form of Water; this continue as long until the half part of your bright
Mercury is brought to a clear Water, when yo^ have this clear Water, keep it
very close stopped with Wax, and take your Powder, which I gave you to keep in
a Bolt-head, and place it very deep in a Sand Copel, and give it a very strong
Fire for twenty and four Hours, then let the Fire go out of the said Copel, and
stir the Powder with a Wooden-stick, and power upon it the half part of your
clean Mercurial Water, and stop the Glass or melt the Glassmouth together; then
shake it, and let it stand in a warm place for three or four days in digestion,
power off this into another Glass, and power upon the remainder of the Powder
another half of the Water and stop or melt the mouth of the Glass again, and
let it stand again for three or four days in a warm place in digestion; then
power it out to the former Water, and stop the Glass, or melt the mouth of the
Glass very close, that no Spirit may fly out or fly away, and let it stand in
your Balneo Vaporoso eight days, and then distill it through a Retort, and if
any stuff shall remain in the Retort, which will be very little, power upon it
your Spirit again, and distill it over until all is gone over.

Now is the Salt with his own Spirit mixed together and brought into the first
matter, keep it very well stopped.

This is the Water that the Philosophers have given diverse, yea above a hundred
Names unto it as their Horse-dung, their Balneum Mariae, their Calx Vive, and
in short, this is the Philosophers true Fire, without this Fire or Water no man
can do any true Work in Chimistry.

The Philosophers having brought forth this Salamander, which Salamander will
never waste in the Fire, the longer the stronger.

This Water will increase or multiply per Infinitum, that is to say, if all the
Sea should be Mercury it will turn the same into the first matter.

First you must wash your Mercury with Salt and Vinegar diverse times, and at
last with Water to wash away the Salt, then mix this Mercury with Calx Vive and
calcined Tartar, and distill it in a Retort in a Sand Furnace, and lay to it a
Receiver, filled almost half^full with Water, and when your Mercury is dry,
then squeeze him eight or ten times through Leather, and then is your Mercury
well purged from his uncleanness.

This is the Mercury you shall use in multiplying your Spirit ^r Astrum
Mercurii.

Take of this Mercury purged one part, and of your Spirit or Astrum Mercurii
two parts, put them together mixed into a Bolt-head, stop well the Bolt-head,
and let it stand in a warm place one Night, and your Mercury will melt in your
Spirit or Astrum Mercurii, and turn it into Water, and then distill it through a
Retort, and thus you may do by repeating your Water with fresh Mercury as long
as you please. This Water will bring or dissolve all Stones and Gold and Silver
into their first matter, Item, it will bring Gold and Silver over with him,
through a Retort, and that Gold and Silver will never be separated one from the
other.

The reason is, Gold and Silver and all metals be of the same Nature, and have
beginning from the same Water; there is nothing in the World, but has its
beginning from it.

The Universal Medicine.
Take of fine Gold that is made fine Powder (that is to say, take the same
Gold, which did remain, when you made your Praecipiolum) one part of your
finest Silver, made to fine Powder two parts, put every metal by it self into a
Glass, power upon each your Astrum Mercurii, that it may go over it one finger
breadth, and stop each Glass very close, and let it stand in a warm place for
eight days together, and your Gold and Silver will be almost dissolved into
Water, then power off the Water every one by it self in a Glass, and power more
Water to the Gold and Silver which did remain, and let it stand eight days in a
warm place, and then power your Waters off to your former Waters, and all your
Gold and Silver will be dissolved into Water, and there will r^^ain some
faeces; then take of both these Waters of each the fourth part, and put them
together in a Bolt-head, that no more of the Bolt-head be empty then three
parts, and Seal your Bolt-head or melt your Bolt-head mouth very close, and put
your Bolt-head into an Athanor with your matter into a continual warm heat
until it do come to a fixed red Stone or Powder; before it do come to a red
Powder, will appear in your Bolt-head many Colors, as black, green, yellow and
red, and when it is red and a Powder, then take your Bolt-head and bu^y it in a
Sand Copel very deep and give by degrees Fire^ and at last a very strong Fire,
and it will melt as Wax, and let it stand one whole week, or the longer the
better, then take it out and let it cool, and break your Glass and you will
find a fixed Stone, or Powder as red as Scarlet, I did give you Charge that you
should keep three parts of your Gold and Silver which was dissolved into Water,
out both these Waters together in a Retort, dis^il them, and both the Gold and
Silver will go with the Water over through the Re^ort, with which Water you
shall multiply your Medicine.

Now take one part of your Medicine made into fine Powder, and put it into a
little Bolt-head, and pour upon it twice as much of your Water, as of Gold and
Silver, and Seal it again, and set it into your Athanor again, until it do come
into a red Powder, and then put it again into the Sand, for ^o give him the
Fixation, that he may melt ^ike Wax: Upon such a way you may mul^iply your
Medicine ad Infinitum, and your Powder will dissolve in any Liquor.

Now as to make your Astrum Horizontale, or your Golden fixed Praecipitate.

Take the Gold that remains over in the working of your Praecipiolum, and
make it unto a Powder, dissolve it in your Astrum Mer^^rii as much as you will,
distill through the Retort once or twice, and your Gold will go over along with
your Water, and will never be separated one from the other, they are ^oth of
one Nature.

Now take your Praecipiolum which is made dry, (I do not mean your Praecipiolum
which is made already dry to a Medicine) put i^ into a little Glass Cucurbit,
and pour up^on it your Golden Astrum Mercurii, an^ distill it from it three or
four times very slow^ly, and at last very strong, and your Praecipiolum will be
red and fixed, if you will yo^ may do the same with Mercury purged, i^ will fix
the same to a red Powder, and you may do this work with Silver, and with your
Praecipiolum or Argentum vivum purg^tum. No man can find out all those Secret^
which are hidden in this Philosophical Menstruum.

The Oil of Gold.
Take one part of Gold, five or six part^ of the best Mercury, mix them both
together, and then distill the Mercury from the Gold, and then mix the same
Mercury again with the Gold, and this continue until your Gold will not mix
with your Mercury, then take the Gold and grind it, and put it into a clean
Crusible and Calcine it, till it be almost red-hot, and then extinguish your
Gold in the best rectified Spirit of Vinegar, when it is extinguished pour off
your Vinegar from the Gold^ make your ^old dry, and then make it hot again,
then ^gain extinguish it in your former Vinegar, and this repeat five or six
times, and then, ^^ke your Gold and make it dry, and Amal^ame it again with the
aforementioned Mercury, and distill it again as at the first, and this do so
long until the Gold will not ^ix with your Mercury, and then Calcine ^our Gold
again, and extinguish it in the ^ormer Vinegar five or six times, if your
Vi^eger decay or waste you may add to it some more fresh Vinegar. And this you
may con^inue until you think there is no strength ^est in your Mercury: Then
you must take ^resh Mercury and go to work as before, and ^o continue, till you
think you have enough from the Gold.

Then take your Vinegar which is impregnated with the whole Essence of Gold,
Evaporate it, or distill it very softly off, and it will lie at the bottom, like
a yellow Salt, which you shall dissolve in fair distilled Rain Water; filter it
and evaporate it again softly, and then put it into a little Retort, and place
it in Sand, with an indifferent large Receiver for it, and give a Fire by
degrees and it will come over in a white Spirit like Smoke, and then i^ will
come over ^ed like Saffron^ and when it is resolved into a red Liquor, let the
Fire go out and keep it for use, the Dose is three or four drops.

This is (says the Author) one of the greatest Medicines under the Sun, and
you can hardly get a better.

Three drops, are able to extinguish any sickness, and in this Oil of Gold is
the greatest Secret of Nature.

With this Liquor Reymond Lully figureth Mercury in Exenterata Naturae.

These Processes was by a German given to Mr. Richard Pratt, who lived some
time in Hantshire and cured the German of a Sickness, for which Kindness the
German gave him these Processes, protesting that they were some of
Van-Helmonts, and Mr. Pratt gave them to Mr. Yalden minister of Compton near
Godlyman in Surry, who sent them to Dr. Salmon to Print, which he neglecting,
some Years they were sent with Dr. Antonies's Recipe of his Aurum potabile to
William Cooper to Print for the benefit of the Public, and since I received
them, I find Dr. Salmon has newly Printed them in his Doron Medicum called
Liquor Aureus, Lib. 2 d. Book 11. Sect. 2. page 520 to 523. As for the Electrum
minerale Immaturum which he calls Idea, vide Doron lib. 1. Cap. 27. page 315.
to 326. But so very much mangled and altered by putting in feigned Names, when
indeed he received all of them in their proper known Names as you have them
here Printed one purpose to prevent men's being deceived, for Mr. Yalden is a
Man of so Christian a Temper, that he thirsts to do all the good he could in
this World, the Truth hereof his poor Parishioners and Neighbors will
sufficiently testify. Therefore to undeceive the World, and to save men from
false Broyleries and Chargeable Expenses, I have here Printed the true Copy as
Mr. Yalden sent it to me, W. C. B.

FINIS.
AVRVM-POTABILE: OR THE RECEIPT OF Dr. FR. ANTONIE. SHOWING, His Way and Method,
how he made and prepared that most Excellent Medicine for the Body of Man.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1683.

Dr. Fr. Anthonie's Receipt showing the way to make his most Excellent Medicine
called Aurum Potabile.
TAke Block-tinn, and burn it in an Iron Pan (making the Pan red-hot before you
put it in (and keeping a continual Fire under it, and stirring it always till
it be like unto Ashes, some will look red, it will be burning a day, or half a
day at the least, it must be stirred with an Iron Cole-rake, a little one, the
handle two Foot long.

G. H. M. Made an Iron Pan a Foot and half long, and a Foot broad, the Brims
two Inches deep, and made an Oven in a Chimney with Bars of Iron in the bottom,
whereon he placed the Pan, and ^ place under to make Fire, and it will after
this manner sooner be burned ( viz. half a day) the Smoke will not hurt it.

This Ashes keep in a Glass close covered.
Take of these Ashes 4 ^, and of the strongest red Wine Vinegar 3 Pints; and
put them in a Glass like an Urinal, the Ashes being put in first lute the
Vessel, and let him stand in an hot Balneum 10 days, which ended, take it
forth, and set it to cool, and let it stand 2 or 3 whole days that the Feces
may sink unto the bottom, the Glass must be shaken 6 or 7 times every day.

That which is clear let it run forth unfiltred by 2 or 3 Woolen-threds into a
Glass Basin, and distill it in a Glasen Still, till the Liquor be stilled all
forth, this distilled Water put upon 4 ounces of fresh Ashes, upon the Ashes
from which the first Liquor was filtred, put also a Quart of strong red Wine
Vinegar, lute the Glass as before, and put him into the Balneum, and there let
him stand to digest 10 days, filter this, and distill it as aforesaid, thirdly
pour on that Ashes one pint of the like Vinegar, and put it in Balneum 10 Days,
filter it, and distill it as aforesaid, after the third In^usion throw away the
Ashes.

Distill all the Infusions apart, till the Liquor be clean distilled forth.

Take this distilled Water as often as it is distilled, and pour it upon new
Ashes, keeping the weight and order, their Infusions, Filtrings, and
Destillations, reiterate 7 times.

And you shall have of this Water the Menstruum sought for.

You must take heed that the Vinegar be of red Wine, and very strong, otherwise
your Menstruum will not perform your Expectation.

The Bishop gave Dr. Anthony 30 s. for a quart of Menstruum.

Take an ounce of pure refined Gold, (which costs 3 l. 13 s. 4 d.) cast into a
Wedge and File it into small Dust, with a fine File, put this ounce of filed
Gold into a Calcined Pot, and put to it so much white Salt as will near fill
the Pot, and set it among Charcoals where it may stand continually hot 4 Hours,
(if it stand too hot the Salt will melt) which 4 Hours ended take it forth, and
let it stand to cool, then put it on a Painters Stone, and grind it very small
with a Muller; then put it into the Pot and Calcine it, and grind it again,
till you have done it 4 or 5 times i^ it look red and blew when you take it
forth it is perfect good.

After this calcining, and grinding, put it into a Glass Basin, and put to it
the Basin full of scalding hot Water, and stir it a good while, till the thick
part is fully settled to the bottom, then pour away that Water, and put the
like, stir it, and let it settle as before, and so do again, till the Water
when it is settled have no taste of Salt, this will be doing two or three days.

Of this ounce of Gold, there will be hardly above 16 or ^17 Grains brought
into fine white Calx, but to separate it from the Gold, leave a little of the
last fresh Water in the Basin, and stir it well together, the Calx will swim to
the top, which softly pour from the Gold into another Basin, if all the white
Calx go not forth, put a little more Water and stir it again, and pour it into
the Basin to the other Calx, then let it settle, and pour away almost all the
Water, and Evaporate away all the rest over a heat till it be thoroughly dry,
and so put it up into a Glass.

Then put the Gold which is not yet Calx to Salt as aforesaid, and Calcine it,
and grind it four times again, and then wash it, and then take the Calx from it
as before, and the Gold that remains, calcine and wash, as before till it be
all Calx.

Take an ounce of this Calx, and put it into an Urinal like Glass, containing
about a pint, and put to it half a pint of the Menstruum. Set this Glass in a
hot Balneum^ six days (being close luted) and shake it often every day; when
the six days are ended, let it stand two or three days, then pour away that
which is clear, very gently, for fear of troubling the Feces; to these Feces
put fresh menstruum, but not fully so much as at the first, and so the third
time, but not fully so much as at the second, then take the dry Feces which is
the Calx, and keep it lest some Tincture remain in it.

These colored Liquors put into a Glass Still, and distill them in a Balneum at
the first, with a very gentle Fire, till all that which is clear be run forth,
and that which remains be as thick as Honey, then take it forth, and set it to
cool, then put the Glass into an Earthen Pot, and put Ashes about the Glass
into the Pot, and fix the Pot into a little Furnace fast, and make a Fire
under, so that the Glass may stand very warm till the Feces be black and very
dry, (you may look with a Candle through the Glass Still, and see when it is
risen with bunches and dry.) Then take away your Fire, and let the Glass be
very cold, then take out the black Earth, this black Earth being taken forth,
put it into a Glass Basin, and grind it with the bottom of another round Glass
to Powder, then put it into an Urinal-like Glass containing about a pint, and
to that put a little above half a pint of the Spirit of Wine, set this Glass in
a cold place till it be red, which will be about ten days, shake it often every
day, till within three days you pour it forth. Then pour away the clear Liquor
gently, and that clear put into a Glass-Still (or other Glass till you have
more,) then put more Spirit of Wine to that Feces, and order it as before, and
if that be much colored, put Spiritus Vini. to it the third time, as at the
first, put all these colored Liquors together, and distill them till the Feces
(called the Tincture) be as thick as a Syrrup.

Take an ounce of this Tincture, and put it into a pint of Canary Sack, and so
when it is clear, you may drink of it, which will be about a day and a half.

The Preparation of the Vinegar to make the Menstruum.
Glasses necessary get 3 or 4 Glasen Stills which will hold a gallon or two
apiece, the Balneum 2 foot and a half square to hold many Glasses. Get about 6
gallons of the strongest red Wine Vinegar (Vinegar of Claret or White Wind are
too weak) made of red Wine, Sack or M^scadine, and set as many Stills going at
a time as your Balneum will hold, take a pint of that which runs first, and
put it away, as weak and not for his use, then Still ou^ all the rest till the
Still be dry, wash the Still with a little of the (phlegm) the first running,
and then wipe him dry, then put in that which was distilled, and do as before,
putting away the first pint, and so do five times, so of a gallon you shall
have 3 Pints of the Spirit of Vinegar, and of your 6 gallons, only two gallons
and two Pints, and if your Spirit be yet too weak distill it oftener.

This keep in a Glass close stopped to make your Menstruum with you may stop
it with Cork, and Leather over it.

You must provide three strong green Glasses to make Menstruum, with little
Ma^s round the bottoms, containing four Pints apeice.

To Lute them, fit a Wooden stoppel of dry Wood first boiled, and then dried in
an Oven, to the Mouth, then melt hard Wax to fill the Chinks, then paste a
brown Paper next over that, then prepare luting of Clay, Horse^dung and Ashes,
and stop over all that.

Glass Stills 2 or 3 to distill the first Infusions on the Earth, cover 3 or 4
Pints a piece of green Glass.

The Rule of ^ll Stillings, you must paste brown Paper to the closing of the
head of the Still, and also paste the Receiver and nose of the Still together
so that no strength go forth.

Calcining Pots provide about a dozen, for many when they are put into a strong
Fire will break, then must you let your Fire slack.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF BERNARD EARL OF TREVISAN, OF THE Philosophers Stone.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1683.

A Singular Treatise of Bernhard Count Trevisan concerning the Philosophers
Stone.
COnsidering the long Desires and Hopes of the Students in the Chymick Art, I
will in the present Treatise briefly and openly declare this Art. First
therefore the Subject of the Art is to be known, in the second place, the
Foundation, in the third, the Progress, fourthly and lastly, the Extraction of
the Elements: Which being known, every one may most easily attain the end of
the Art.

The Subject of this admired Science is Sol and Luna, or rather Male and
Female, the Male is hot and dry, the Female cold and moist, and know for a
certain that our Stone is not compounded of any other thing, although many
Philosophers name several other things, of which they speak Sophistically.

Nevertheless by Scotus, Hortulanus, St. Thomas, and Christopher Parisiensis,
and very many others, many other things for an other Cause are sophistically
reckoned up, that Ignorant Men may be deceived, because it is not fit for Fools
to know our Secrets: And this is it, which I thought fit at this time to
propound concerning the Subject of our Art.

The Foundation of this Art, is the Knowledge of the four Qualities, and that
in the beginning of the work, Coldness and Moisture have the Dominion: For as
Scotus says, As the Sun dries up the abundance of Water in Fenny and Boggy
Places, after the same manner our Sulphur when it is joined with its Water or
Mercury, does by little and little consume and drink up the same by the help of
the Fire, and that by the assistance of the only living God.

The Progress is nothing else than ^a certain contrary Action, for the
Description of contrary things is one and the same, and if thou shall have
twice made this equality, thou shall finish the whole Progress.

But now all skill consists in drawing forth the Elements, wherefore read
over that which follows so often, until thou can conceive and understand
it; and know that no one ever spoke so plainly as I in this Place, as thou will
find by what follows: Therefore give thanks to the great God, and be grateful
to thy Friend who communicated to thee this Tractate: Live also according to
God and reason, because Divine Wisdom will not enter into a wicked Soul, nor
into a Body subjected to Sins.

The Extraction of the Elements is a certain Composition of Blackness,
Whiteness, Yellowness, and Redness: And know that Natures ought to be drawn
from their Root. But the Root is a certain Congregation of Elements, consisting
in Sulphur and Mercury, which they call a confused Mass. But the Natures, which
are drawn forth from the Root are Sulphur and Mercury, which when they are
joined together are separated, and purified, that they may be the better
mingled afterward, and united with the Body, out of which they are drawn. And
after the Colors have passed, and that which is above, is made like that which
is below, and that which is below like that above, then Miracles will from
thence appear. Which being done, thou have a Triangle in a Quadrangle, and a
fifth thing which is contained in four.

Now remains the Multiplication, in which this briefly is to be noted; That
the Elixir ought to be nourished out of the same things, from which at first it
had its Composition. No Philosopher before now has so openly declared this, as
I have here done; and that for two Causes, first because from the beginning to
the end of the work a long time is required, although some Philosophers do say,
the Stone may be made in one day, and others in one month: But know that they
speak Enigmatically, and that their words ought not thus to be understood.

Nevertheless I say with Scotus that the Stone or perfect work may be made in
one year. Secondly, because Man's Life is short, and he grows Old, before he
comprehends and understands what is needful to be done in the Composition
of the Stone. And therefore I have here so openly explained all things, least
this, so noble a Science, should be lost and perish.

The Theory of the same Author.
Use venerable Nature, for the Philosophers from their own Authority have
imposed various Names on this Nature, by reason of diverse Colors appearing in
its Alteration. For when it appears under the form of Water, they have called
it Argent vive, Permanent Water, Lead, Spirit, Spit^tle of Lune, Tinn, etc. And
when it is made dry and becomes white, they have named it Silver, Magnesia, and
white Sulphur. And when it grows red, they call the same Gold and Ferment.
But they do not vary in the thing it self, when that is always one thing only,
and the same matter, and always of the same Nature, in which nothing enters
which is not drawn from it, and this which is next to it, and of its Nature.
And this is most true, to wit, the Stone is one, and one Medicine, and it is a
Water clear, and bright, permanent, pure and shining, of a Celestical Color.
And if Water did not enter into our Medicine, it could not purify nor mend it
self, and so thou could not obtain thy desire: But that which does mend it is
Sol, for the Water cannot be made better without it: For without Sol and his
shadow a tinging Poison cannot be generated. Whoever therefore shall think that
a Tincture can be made without these two Bodies, to wit Sol and Lune, he
proceeds to the Practic^ like one that is blind. For Body does not Act upon
Body, nor Spirit upon Spirit: Neither does Form receive an Impression from
Form, nor Matter from Matter, when as like does not Exercise either Action or
Passion upon its like ^ For one is not more worthy than an other, wherefore
there can be no^ Action betwixt them, when as like does not bear Rule over
like. But a Body does receive Impression from a Spirit, as Matter does from its
Form, and a Spirit from its Body, because they are made and created by God,
that they may^ Act and suffer each from other. For Matter would flow
infinitely, if a Form did not retard and stop its Flux. Wherefore when the Body
is a Form informing, it does inform and retain the Spirit, that it afterward
cannot flow any more.

The Body therefore does tinge the Spirit, and the Spirit does penetrate the
Body, whereas one Body cannot penetrate an other Body, but a subtle Spiritual
congealed Substance does penetrate and give Color to the Body. And this is
that Gummy and Oleaginous Stone, proportioned in its Natures, containing a
Spiritual Nature occul^^y in it self together with the Elements purifyed.
Therefore the Philosophers-Stone is to be wholly reduced into this Gumminess by
the last Reiteration or Inceration of a certain gentle Flux, resolving all the
Elements, that they flow like Wax. But when it is the Stone, it appears like
Copper, whereas notwithstanding it is a certain Spiritual Substance,
penetrating and coloring or tinging all Metallic Bodies.

From hence thou may easily guess, that this does not proceed from the
cras^itude and grossness of the Earth; but from a Spiritual Metallic
Substance, which does penetrate and enter. Wherefore it behooves thee to
resolve the Body into a subtle Metallic Spirit, and afterward to congeal and
fix, retain and incerate it, that it may flow before ^it tinge. For Gold does
Color nothing besides it self, unless first its own Spirit be extracted out of
its own Belly; and it be made Spiritual.

And know that our Mercurial Water is a living Water, and a burning Fire,
mortifying and tearing in pieces Gold more than common Fire. And therefore by
how much more it is better mixed, rubbed and ground with it, by so much more it
destroys it, and the living fiery Water is more attenuated. But now when
three are made one in the Form of a congealed Substance, then it has in it a
true Tincture, which can endure the Violence of the Fire. Therefore when the
Body is so tinged, it can tinge another, and it has in it self all Tincture
and Virtue. And from hence all they who tinge with Sol and his Shadow, (viz.)
with the Poison, that is Argent vive, do perfectly complete our Stone, which we
call the great and perfect Gumm. And know for certain that it is not necessary,
that our Stone or Gumm lose its first Mercurial Nature in the Sublimation of
its crude and first Spirit: for the Oil and Gumm pertaining to this Stone are
nothing else, then the Elements themselves Mercurialized, and made equal
together, shut up and coagulated, resoluble and living, retained or bound in
the viscosity of the Oily Earth, and inseparably mixed. And we ought to know
that that Gum or Oil is first drawn out of the Bodies, which being added, it is
reduced into a Spirit, until the superfluous humidity of the Water be turned
into Air, drawing one Element out of another by digestion until the Form of
Water be converted into the Nature of Oil, and so our Stone in the end gets
the Name of Gumm and Sulphur.

But whosoever has brought the Stone thus far, that it appear like a mixing
Gumm, and suffers it self to be mixed with all imperfect Bodies, he verily
has found a great Secret of Nature, because that is a perfect Stone, Gum and
Sulphur.

This Stone then is compounded of a Body and Spirit, or of a volatile and fixed
Substance, and that is therefore done, because nothing in the World can be
generated and brought to light without these two Substances, to wit, a Male and
Female: From whence it appears, that although these two Substances are not of
one and the same species, yet one Stone does thence arise, and although they
appear and are said to be two Substances, yet in truth it is but one, to wit,
Argent-vive. But of this Argent vive a certain part is fixed and digested,
Masculine, hot, dry, and secretly informing: But the other which is the Female,
is Volatile, crude, cold and moist; and from these two Substances the whole may
easily be known, and the whole Stone entirely understood. Wherefore if our
Stone did only consist of one Substance, in it there could be no Action and
passion of one thing toward the other; for one would neither touch nor come
nigh or enter into the other: As a Stone and piece of Wood have no Operation on
each other, since they do consist of a different matter, and hence they can by
no means, no not in the least be mixed together, and there is the same reason
for all things that differ in matter. Wherefore it is evident and certain that
it should be necessary for the Agent and Patient to be of one and the same
Genus; but of a different species, even as a man differs from a Woman. For
although they agree in one and the same Genus, yet nevertheless they have
diverse Operations and Qualities, even as the Matter and Form. For the Matter
suffers, and the Form acteth^ assimulating the Matter to it self, and
according to this manner the Matter naturally thirsts after a Form, as a
Woman desires an Husband, and a Vile thing a precious one, and an impure a
pure one, so also Argent vive coveteth a Sulphur, as that which should make
perfect which is imperfect: So also a Body freely desires a Spirit, whereby it
may at length arrive at its perfection. Therefore Learn thou the Natural Roots,
and those that are better, with which thou ought to reduce thy Matter,
whereby thou may perfect thy work. For this blessed Stone has in it all
things necessary to its perfection.

The Practick of the same Author.
If we well consider the Words of Morienus that great Philosopher in Alchimy,
who says, Mix together Water, Earth, Air, and Fire in a due weight, without
doubt thou will obtain all the Secrets of this Divine Science. And first, when
he says, put into the Water, or putrify the Earth in Water, this signifies
nothing else, then the Extraction of Water out of Earth, and the pouring of
Water upon the Earth, so long until the Earth putrify and be cleansed,
otherwise it would not bring forth its Fruit. Secondly when he says, mix Water
and Air, it is no more then if he should have said, mix Water now prepared with
Air dissolved, or join and mix together dissolved Air with Water. Judge ye your
selves: For you know that Air is warm and moist, and ye have the saying of
Morienus concerning the dissolution of Air, Earth, Fire and Water. Some when
they speak of Dissolution, say that the Solution of the Fire is better, because
whatsoever is dissolved in the Fire, that flows in the Air. And Note that the
Fire of the Philosophers is nothing else then the Air dissolved and congealed.
This you may better comprehend from similitude, and suppose that first you have
Air dissolved and congealed, to which add Fire. The Earth ought to be first
prepared, and the Fire dissolved, before they are mixed.

For the Earth together with the Fire ought to be put into a fit Vessel, and
after is to be introduced the inextinguishable Fire of Nature, which when it
descends upon the Earth, devoureth the whole together with its Gumm, and
converteth it into its own Nature. Wherefore if ye consider well the Sayings
and Precepts of the Philosophers, and understand their Mystical Sense, ye shall
come to all the Secrets of the Divine Chymick Art.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of certain Chimical-Books Sold by William Cooper at the Pelican in
Little-Britain London.
ROg. Bacon of the Cure of Old Age, and Preservation of Youth. 1683. 8o. Edward
Madeira Arrais his account of the Tree of Life. 1683. 8o. Cardinal Cusa the
Idiot of Wisdom, and of the Mind, Sublime Philosophy for a mental Man. 1650.
Dominicus de Nuysement of the true Salt and Secret of the Philosophers. 1657.
8o. Lazarus Erkern of the Refining of Metalls with 44 Figures. 1683. Folio.
Fulke of the Causes of all kind of Stones, Metalls, Earths, etc. 1563. 8o. Dr.
Meverells Answers concerning the Compounding, Incorporating, Separation and
Variation of Metalls and Mineralls. 1679. 8o. Lirenaeus Philalethes Ripley
revived, or a Commentary upon Sr. Geo. Ripleys Works of the Philosophers-Stone.
1678, Aurifontina Chimica or 14 Treatises of the Philosophers Mercury. 1680. 24
s: Io. Ioach, Bechers Magnalia Naturae of Transmutations done at Vienna, etc.
1681. Ioh. Ern. Burgravius his Introduction to Astral Philosophy. 1664. 8o.
William Bacons Key to the understanding of Van-Helmonts works. 1682. 4o. Io.
Case his Wards to the Key of Van-Helmont, against Dr. Bacon 1682. 4o. Rob.
Boil his Aerial Noctiluca or the wonder of this Age. 1680. 8o. -- his
Observations upon the Icy Noctiluca. 1682. 8o. -- his Antielixir or Degradation
of Gold Sr. Ken. Digbies Rare Chemical Secrets as they were presented to him in
his Travels through France, Spain, Italy and Germany by the best Chemists of
those Countries through which he passed. and published since his Death by Mr.
Hartman his Steward and Operator. 1682. 8o. Nic. Flammells summary of the
Philoso^^ers-Stone. 1680. 24. Chr. Glasers complete Chemist. 1677. 8o. Geber
the Arabian his Works in Chemistry. 1678. 8o. Hydropyrographum Hermeticum, or
the true fiery Water o^ the Philosophers. 1680. 24. Rara Avis in Terris, or the
complete Miner, their Laws, Customs, etc. 1681. 12o. Nic. Lemerys's Course of
Chemistry. 1677. 8o. -- His Appendix to his Course of Chimistry. 1680. 8o.
Reym. Lullies's Clavicula, or Key to his Works. 1680. 24. A strange Letter
concerning the vast Treasure of an Adept. 1680. 24 s. William Maxwells's 100
Aphorisms of the Body of Natural Magic. 1656. 8o. The Principles of the
Chemists of London. 2 parts. 1676. 8o. A Philosophical Riddle in Verse with
Aurifontina Chym. A Brief Preparation of the Philosophers Stone. ibid.
Paracelsus his Mystical Philosophy written to the Athenians. 1657. 8o. The
Privy Seal of Secrets, discovering the first matter of Philosophers. 1680. Io.
Rays's Account of the melting, smelling, preparing and refining of the Metalls
and Mineralls in England. 1674. 8o. Sr. George Ripley's Treatise of Mercury.
1680. Constable. Rodo^anacis his Discourse of Antimony and its Virtues. 1664. 4o.
An Account of the Philosophers transmuting Powder found by Winces. Seilerus in
the Chapel of a Monastery in Germany. 1683. 4o. David Persons Salamandra or
Treatise of the Philosophers Stone. 1636. 4o. Synesius the Greek Abbot of the
Philosophers Stone. 1678. 8o. Secrets Disclosed of the Philosophers Stone.
1680. 24. William Simpsons Philosophical Dialogues of the Principles of things.
1677. 8o. The Treasure of Treasures. 1680. 24. A Treatise of the Blessed Manna
of the Philosophers. 1680. Tumba Semiramidis, the Wise-men's inexhaustible
Treasure. 1676. 8o. The Touchstone of Gold and Silver wares by W. B. 1677. 8o.
A new Touchstone of Gold and Silver wares by Io. Reynolds. 1679. 8o. G.
Kendall's Appendix teaching the way to make Mathew's Pill. 1663. 8o. Bernard
Earl of Trevisan his Epistle to Thomas of Bononia, concerning the Secret
workings of Nature in the Product of things. 1680. 24. William Cooper's
Catalogue of Chimical Books in 3 parts. 1675. 8o.
The end.
THE BOSOME-BOOK OF Sir GEORGE RIPLEY, CANON OF BRIDLINGTON. CONTAINING

His Philosophical Accurtations in the making the Philosophers Mercury and
Elixirs.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1683.

The Bosome-Book of Sir. George Ripley. The whole Work of the Composition of
the Philosophical Stone, of the great Elixir, and of the first Solution of the
gross Body.
FIrst take 30 pound weight of Sericon or Antimony, which will make 21 pound
weight of Gum, or near thereabouts, if it be well dissolved, and the Vinegar
very good, and dissolve each pound thereof in a Gallon of twice distilled
Vinegar when cold again, and as it stands in Dissolution in a fit Glass
Vessel, stir it about with a clean Stick very often every day, the oftener the
better, and when it is well moulten to the bottom, then filter over the said
Liquors three several times, which keep close covered, and cast away the Feces,
for that is superfluous ^ilth which must be removed, and enters not into the
Work but is called Terra damnata.

The making of our Gum or green Lion.
Then put all these cold Liquors thus filtred into a fit Glass Ves^el, and ^et
it into Balneo Maria to evaporate in a temperate heat, which done our Sericon
will be coagulated into a green Gum called our green Lion, which Gum dry well,
yet beware thou burn not his Flowers nor destroy his greenness.

The Extraction of our Menstrue, or blood of our green Lion.
Then take out the said Gum, and put it into a strong Retort of Glass very well
Luted, and place it in your Furnace, and under that at the first, make sober
Fire, and anon you shall see a faint Water issue forth, let it waste away; but
when you see a white Smoke or fume issue forth, then put too a Receiver of
Glass, which must have a very large Belly, and the mouth no wider then it may
well receive into that the Neck of the Retort, which close well together that
no fume issue forth of the Receiver. Then increase your Fire by little and
little till the fume which issues be reddish, then continue the greater Fire,
until drops like blood come forth, and no more fume will issue forth, and when
that leaves bleeding let it cool or assuage the Fire by little and little, and
when all things are cold, then take away the Receiver, and close it fast
suddenly, that the Spirits vanish not away, for this Liquor is called, our
blessed Liquor, which Liquor keep close stopped in a Glass till hereafter. Then
look into the Neck of the Retort, and therein you shall find a white hard Ryme
as it were the Congelation of a Frosty vapor or much like sublimate, which
gather with diligence and keep it apart, for therein are contained great
Secrets which shall be showed hereafter, after the great Work is ended.

The Creation of our Basis.
Then take out all the Feces which remains in the Retort, and are blackish
like unto Soot, which Feces are called our Dragon, of which feces Calcyne one
pound or more at your pleasure in a fervent hot Fire in a Potters or
Glass-makers Furnace, or in a Furnace of vente (or a Wind Furnace) until it
become a white Calx, as white as Snow, which white Calx keep well, and clean by
it self, for it is called the Basis and Foundation of the Work, and it is now
called Mars, and our white fixed Earth or ferrum Philosophorum.

The Calcination of the black Feces called our black Dragon.
Then take all the rest of the aforesaid black Feces or black Dragon, and
spread them somewhat thin upon a clean Marble, or other fit Stone, and put into
the one side thereof a burning Coal, and the Fire will glide through the Feces
within half an Hour, and Calcyne them into a Citrine Color, very glorious to
behold.

The Solution of the said Feces.
Then dissolve those Citrine Feces in such distilled Vinegar, as you did
before, and then filter it likewise, three times as before, and after make o^
evaporate it to a Gum again, and then draw out of it more of our Mens^ruum,
called now, Dragon^ Blood, and ^terate this Work in all points as before, un^il
you have either brought all, or the most part of the Feces into our Natural and
blessed Liquor, all which Liquor put to the first Liquor or Menstrue called the
Green Lions Blood, and set that Liquor then altogether in one Vessel of Glass
fourteen days in Putrification, and after proceed to the Separation of
Elements, for now have you all the Fire of the Stone in this our blessed
Liquor, which before lay hidden in the Feces, which Secret all the Philosophers
do marvellously hide.

The Separation of the Elements whereof the first is the Air, and is also
counted our Ardent-Water, and our Water Attractive.
Then put all the said putrified Menstruum into a Still of fine Venice Glass
fit for the quantity thereof, put on the Limbeck, and close it to the Still
with a fine Linen Cloth dipped in the White of an Egg, and then set it in Balneo
Mariae, put to the Receiver, which must be of a great length that the Spirit
respire not out again, and with very temperate heat separate the Elements one
from another, and then the Element of Air will issue forth first, which is an
Oil.

Our Ardent Water or Water Attractive is thus made.
When all the first Element is distilled^ then in another Still fit for it,
rectify it, tha^ is to say, distill it over 7 several times, and until it will
burn a Linen Cloth clean up that is dipped in it, when it is put to the flame,
which then is called our Ardent Water rectified, and is also called our Water
Attractive, which keep very close st^pped, for otherwise the Spirit thereof
which is very subtle will vanish away.

By often rectifying the Ardent Water, there will come Aer in a white Oil
swimming above the Water, and there will remain behind a yellow Oil which with
a stronger Fire will also come over. Put Sublimate beaten small upon a Plate of
Iron, and in the cold it will dissolve into Water, and filter it then, and put
upon it some of the Ardent Water, and it will draw to it self all the Mercury
in form of a green Oil swimming aloft, which separate and put into a Retort,
and distill first a Water, and afterward will come a green thick Oil which is
the Oil of Mercury.

The Flood or Water of the Stone.
Then draw out the Flood or Water of the Stone by it self in another Receptory,
which Liquor will be somewhat white, and draw ^t with a very gentle Fire of
Balneo, until ^here remain in the bottom of the Still, a ^hick Oily substance
like unto liquid Pitch, keep this Water by it self in a fit Glass very close
stopped.

Note when the Liquor comes white, you must put on another Receiver, for then
all that Element is come over, two or three drops of this black Liquid Oil
given in Spirit of Wine cures all Poison taken inwardly.

Our Man's Blood is thus made and rectified.
Then put our Ardent Water upon that Matter black and liquid, stir them well
together, and let it so stand well covered, for 3 Hours then decant and filter
it, put on fresh Ardent Water and repeat this Operation 3 times and then distill
it again with a moist lent Fire of Balneo, and so do three times, and then it
is called Man's blood rectified, which the Workers in the Secrets of Nature do
so seek, and so have thou the Elements exalted in the virtue of their
quintessence, namely the Flood that is Water and the Air, let this Blood be
kept for a season.

The Oil or Fire, or the Earth of the Stone.
Then put up the Flood or Water upon the black and soft matter or Earth of the
Stone, let them be well mingled together, and then distill the whole until there
remain in the bottom, an Earth most dry and black which is the Earth of the
Stone, save the Oil with the Water for a season close stopped in any wise.

The Fiery Water.
Then beat this black Earth into Powder, and mingle it with Man's blood, and so
let it stand 3 Hours, after that distill it on Ashes, with a good Fire, and
Reiterate this work 3 times, and then it shall be called Water of the Fire
rectified, and so have thou three of the Elements exalted into the Virtue of
the quintessence, namely, Water, Air and Fire.

The Earth.
Then Calcine the Earth black and dry, in Furnace of Reverberation, until it
become very fine white Calx.

The Water of Life which is our Mercury and our Lunary.
Then mingle with this white Calx the ^iery Water, and distill it with a strong
Fire all (...) as before, and Calcine the Earth again that remains in the
bottom of the Still, and then distill it again with a strong Fire ^s before, and
again Calcine it, and thus ^istil and Calcine 7 times until all the Sub^^ance
of the Calx be lifted up by the Limbeck, and then have thou the Water of Life
recti^ied and made indeed Spiritual, and so have ^hou the 4 Elements exalted in
the Virtue of their quintessence. This Water will dis^olve all Bodies and
putrify them and Purge them, and this is our Mercury and our Luna^y, and
whosoever thinks that there is any other Water then this, is Ignorant and a
^ool, and shall never be able to come to the ^ffect.

A grand secret or Accurtation of Sr. Georg^ Ripley, for the help of those
which have made the Philosophers Mercury and whose Poverty disables them to
proceed to either the Red or White Elixir
Take the Cerus or Cream of the fine^^ and purest Cornish Tinn moulten, reduce
(...) into fine white Calx, put it into a fit Glas^ Still, and thereupon pour a
convenient quantity of our Mercury, when it is our Luna^ry perfect, then distill
that Mercury from the Calx again, and inbibe it therewith again, and again
distill and reiterate this work until the Calx is become subtle an^ Oily, yea
and so subtle indeed, that it will How upon a Plate of Copper Fiery hot (...)
Wax, and not evaporate, which then will convert Copper into fine Silver, for
the softness and neshness of the Tinn is taken away by the benefit of our
Mercury confixed unto it by Virtue of which, it is made indurate an^ clean that
it may agree with hard^ Bodies in fusion and in Malleation even as pure Silver.
This work is very gainful and easy to be dealt withal, use it therefore until
thou be Rich, and then I pray thee for our Lords sake go to the great work,
which ^s hear truly set forth unto thee, according as ^y Practice I have
wrought and proved the ^ame. For the which thank God.

The Oil which is the Element of Fire, and our red Mercury.
The Flood with the Oil before reserved shall be distilled with a most lent Fire
of ^alneo, and the red Oil which remains in ^he bottom shall be diligently
kept by it self, ^or it is the Element of Fire, and the Water shall be
rectified again, and the same work ^terated, until no more of our said red
Luna^y will remain in it.

The work of Putrification.
When all your Elements be thus separated, then take the white Calcined Feces
first of all reserved, called Mars, and put so much thereof into a Chymia as
will scarcely fill half the Glass, and thereupon pour so much of our Ardent
Water rectified as may but well cover the Calx which done incontinent stop
close the Glass with a Blind-head, and set it into a cold place, until the Calx
have drank up all the Liquor, which it will do in 8 days, then imbibe it again
with the like quantity of the same Water and let it stand eight days more, and
so Reiterate the work, from 8 days to 8 days, until the same Calx will drink
no more; but stand Liquid still then Seal up the Glass with Hermes seal and set
it in Balneo Mariae in a temperate heat to Putrefaction.

The digestion of the white Stone.
Then in that temperate Balneo let your Glass stand unremoved by the space of
fully^ 150 days, and until the Stone within the Glass become first Russet, and
after whitish green, and after that very white like unto the Eyes of Fishes,
which then is Sulphur of Nature flowing, and not evaporating in Fire, and our
white Stone ready to be firmented.

Another Secret Accurtation of Sr. George Ripley.
Take the above said Sulphur of Nature, and project a quantity upon a Plate of
Glass fiery hot, and the Glass shall be converted into a Silver Color, and
that Color shall not be removed by any Art.

The digestion of the Red Stone.
Then take out the white Stone and divide it in to two, and know the true
weight of each half, the one half reserve to the white work, the other half put
into the Glass, and seal it up again with Hermes Seal, and then remove the
Glass into a Cinerition which is somewhat a hotter Fire, and let it stand there
likewise unremoved in that digestion, until it become Red, and of a Purple
Color, so have you the red Stone also ready to be fermented.

The Preparation of the Ferment to the white-Stone.
Then take Silver well purged from all Metalls, and other filth that may be
joined with it, and dissolve it in as much of our Lunary, which is our Mercury
as the quantity of your Silver is, and in no greater quantity as near as you
may, and set it upon warm Ashes close covered, and when it is thoroughly
dissolved, the whole Liquor will be green, then rectify our Mercury, clean
from it again twice or thrice, so that no drop of our Mercury be rest with it,
then seal up the Oil of Luna in a Chemia, and set it in Balneo to putrify,
until it show all Colors, and at the last come to be Christaline white, which
then is the white Ferment of Ferments.

The Fermentation of the white-Stone.
Then put that half of the white Stone before reserved, for the white-Work into
a fit Glass, and know his weight, and put so much of the foresaid Lune Ferment
into the Glass with the Stone as may contain the 4 th part of the said Stone,
and in the said Glass well luted fix them together, in a fixatory Vessel under
the Fire, which will be well done in 2 or 3 days.

The Inceration of the White-stone.
When they are thus fixed together, and become one very fine Powder, incerate,
that is to say, imbibe it with the white Oil of our Stone, which is our Lunary
by pouring on as it were drop after drop, until the Stone be Oylish, then
congeal it, and again imbibe it, and in this manner iterate this work, until
this Stone will flow in Fire like Wax, when it is put upon a Plate of Copper
Fiery hot and not evaporate, and congeal it up until it be hard, white and
transparent clear ^s Crystal, then it is the Medicine of the ^hird degree, and
the perfect white Stone, ^ransmuting all Metaline Bodies, and chie^^y Copper
and Iron, into pure and perfect Silver.

The Preparation of the Red-ferment.
Then likewise take Gold very purely, first ^urged from all other Metals that
may be joy^ed with it, with ten parts of Antimony, and ^hen dissolve it in our
Mercury or Liquor So^^tive, as before you did the Lune, and when (...) is
perfectly dissolved the Liquor will be Citrine; then in like manner, rectify
from (...) again our Mercury or Liquor Solutive, and then Seal up the Oil of
Gold Ferment in a Chemia fit for it, and set it in Balneo to Pu^^ifie, which
likewise, will become black, and must stand still unremoved in digestion, until
it become white, which then remove into a stronger Fire without opening the
Glass, and then keep it until it change Colors and become Citrine, which then
is also Ferment of Ferments for the Red-work.

The Fermentation of the Red-stone.
Then to the other half of the Stone before rubified, digested, and reserved
for the Red-work, put so much of the foresaid Gold Ferment as may contain the 4
th part of the said Stone, and then fix them as you did the white-Stone, under
Fire in a fixatory Vessel which will be then very well done in two or three
days.

The work of Inceration for the Red.
When they are thus fixed together, and thereby become one very fine Powder,
incerate, that is imbibe it with the Red Oil o^ our Stone, then congeal it
again, and again imbibe, and congeal and iterate this work so often until it
will flow in Fire as Wax ^ but not evaporate when it is put upon a Plate of
Copper Fiery hot, which then congeal up until it be clear transparent hard red
in Color like a Ruby or Jacinth, which then is the Medicine of the third
Degree^ and the perfect Red Stone, transmuting all Bodies, and especially
Mercury, Lead and Silver into pure Gold, as any of the Natural Mine.

Thus have you the making of the Philosophers Stones, both White and Red, which
is the great Secret of Philosophers. These Stones must be kept by themselves in
several Glasses, or fair Boxes in a warm place, or dry at the least, as you
would keep Sugar, because they are of so tender and Oily Substance, as they are
apt to dissolve in every moist place which therefore preserve as is here showed.

The Multiplication or Increase of the Virtue and Goodness of the aforesaid
white and Red Stone.
If you list to exalt your Medicine or Stone in quantity or goodness, then put
your aforesaid white or red Stone, or part of each into a several Vyol of Glass
fit for the quantity, close well the Viol, then hang your Glass or Glasses in
Balneo Mariae vaporoso so that it touch not the Water, in this warm fume or
breath, the Stone which was congealed before in the Glass will now be
dissolved, which then congeal again upon warm Ashes, and again thus dissolve
and congeal, and so iterate this work of dissolution and congelation until at
last the Stone within the Glass dissolved will be congealed, as soon as he
comes out of the Pot or Balneo, and feels the cold Air, without any other
manner of Congelation to be used, and note that how often in this work you do
dissolve and congeal your said Medicine or Stone, so many times does he
increase his Virtue ten times in projection, so that if at the first one ounce
will convert 100 ounces, after the second Solution, the same one shall convert
1000, after the third 10000, after the fourth time 100000, and after the fifth
1000000 parts of any imperfect Metal unto pure and true Gold and Silver in all
Examinations as any of the Natural Mine.

The way of Projection.
Because it is very combersom to melt a thousand thousand parts of any Body,
when you will make Projection thus do. Take 100 ounces of Mercury first washed
with Salt, and Vinegar, and put it into a Crusible, and set it over the Fire,
and when that does begin to Wax hot, put in one ounce of your Elixir or
Medicine thus prepared as before taught you, upon that hundred parts of the
cleansed Mercury, and all the said Mercury shall become Medicine, project, one
ounce of that Medicine upon another 100, of other washed Mercury, and it shall
all also be converted into Medicine, again the 3 time project one ounce of this
congealed Mercury, upon another 100 ounces of washed Mercury, and all shall be
converted into Medicine, then project, the 4 th time 1 ounce of this, last
congealed Mercury, upon another 100 ounces of other washed Mercury, and all
that shall be converted into Gold or Silver, according as ^our Stone was
prepared, to the white or ^ed, praised be God.

Accurtation of the great Work which saves half the Work and Labor in the
Work revealed by Sr. George Ripley.
The white Frosty Ryme or Powder whereof I told you in the beginning, being
found ^n the Neck of the Retort, after the drawing of the Menstrue is like
Sublimate, and is perfect Sulphur of Nature, and therefore needs neither
Putrefaction nor Digestion unto white, of this Sulphur take either the half, or
the whole if you list, and also take so much of Lune Ferment, when it is
Firment of Ferments as may contain the 4 th part of the said Sulphur, seal them
up both together in a Chemia and fix them together under the Fire in a fixatory
Vessel, which will be well done in three days, and when they are become one
very fine White Powder, then Incerate, that is to say, Imbibe it with the White
Oil of our Stone, which is our Mercury, congealed, and imbibe and iterate this
Work, and in all points do as you did in the White Work, in the great Elixir
before, for this Sulphur is of the same Nature, and thus shall you have the
white Work perfectly made, and the Stone in half the time, and with half the
Labor; which is not only a precious Jewel, but a great secret also.

The like Accurtation of the Red-work done by the aforesaid Sulphur.
Take either the one half or the whole of this abovesaid Sulphur of Nature, and
dissolve it once with our red Mercury congeal it again, and then Seal it up in
Chymea and set it in Cinerition (or Ashes) till it be thoroughly digested, and
until it has put on his Purple Color or Fiery Chariot, then put thereunto so
much of the Ferment of Soll, when it is Ferment of Ferments, as may contain the
4 th part of the said Sulphur, then fix them together under a Fire in a
fixatory Vessel, which will be well done in 3 days, and when they be become one
very fine Red Powder, then Incerate, that is, Imbibe it with the red Oil of our
Stone, which is our red Mercury and red Lunary, and Fire of the Stone, and
continue in doing in all points as in the great Work aforesaid until the Stone
be hard, transparent in Color like a Ruby or Iacinth ^lowing in Fire, and not
evaporating, then have you with less Labor and Expense of time the perfect
Red-Stone for the which tha God.

This is the pleasant and dainty Garden of the Philosophers, which bears the
sweet smelling Roses white and red, abbreviated out of all the Work of the
Philo^ophers, containing in it nothing superfluous or diminished, teaching to
make infinitely Gold and Silver according as the Medicine was prepared, having
Virtue to heal also all Griefs and Sicknesses as well proceeding of cold as of
hot Causes through the subtilty of his Nature, above all other Medicines of
Physicians, for it comfort the Healthy, strengthens the weak, and makes
the Aged seem Young, and drives away all Grief, and puts venom from the
Heart, it moysteth the Arteries and joints it dissolveth all things in the
Lungs, it cleanses the Blood, it purges the Pipes, and keeps them clean,
and if the Sickness be of one Months continuance, it heals it in one day, if
of one Years continuance, it heals it in 12 days, and if the grief be very
old, it heals it in one Month. To conclude, whosoever has this Medicine, he
has an incomparable Medicine above all Treasures of the World, Praise God.

FINIS.
SPECVLVM ALCHYMIAE; THE TRUE GLASS OF ALCHEMY.

WRITTEN By ROGER BACON.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1683.

Speculum Alchymiae, The true Glass of Alchimy by Roger Bacon.
I Salute or greet unto thee, most dearly beloved, the Glass of Alchemy, which
in my heart I have figured or Printed, and out of the Books of Wisemen have
drawn, in the which is contained fully all that they have gathered to the
Perfection of Alchimy, I do give it unto your Person, and in the which all
things which are required to this Art be here gathered together, and those
which be in diverse places dispersed: I shall thus answer unto your Prudence and
Wisdom, all things be created of the four Elements, and they be the Roots and
matters of all things, and the diversity of things consists in three, that is
to say, Color, Tas^e and Smell. There is not to me but three viz. Diversities
of Elements, diverse Proportions, diverse Decoctions, and diverse Mixtions.
Wherefore if ye will one Metalline Body transform into another, ye must know
the Nature of one contrary and of another in every diversity, and when you know
this, then you may by Addition and Substraction, put to more of one Element,
and the less of another, and ^eeth them together well or evil, and also to mix
them together well or evil unto your own will and desire. And that may a Man do
well in Metalls if he might know without error, how to separate the Elements,
that is to say, to reduce them to their first Matter and Root, which Root is
Brimstone and Quicksilver or Sulphur and, and then that is the Root or Matter
nearest or nearer; but because the separation of Elements in Metalls is
difficult and hard, the Masters did seek how to get the Roots nearest without
any labor, from Brimstone and Quicksilver, and of these they made their
Separation of Elements, which they used, and said that only the Elements did
cleave in Metalls, and that strange Elements of other things, as the blood,
Eggs and Hair, do not enter but by Virtue or by Commixtion of them, with the
aforesaid Elements, drawn of the Spirits and Bodies Metalline; but because we
cannot resolve or separate as Nature does, for Nature separateth without
Apposition of any strange thing in the space of a thousand years, and we cannot
live a thousand years, therefore if we will make this Separation we must find
the cunning or knowledge by the which we may do it sooner; but this we cannot
do by no ways except ^e do put unto them things diverse and contrarious, for by
his contraries ought ye to separate the Elements by our Knowledge and Mastery,
therefore when two contrary things be mixed together one works in another,
and so makes him to give of his Complexion and Virtue, part thereof; for this
cause ye must first learn to know the Complexion and Properties of all things,
before you do enterprise to make commixtion together in their proper Natures,
and it is needful that you know the works of Nature which you intend to do, and
how much and what every thing does give, of his Nature and Complexion, and how
much, and what he lacks of another Complexion and Nature, by the means of the
working which you do, and by the Nature of contrary things, which you do commix
together, and if you do err in any of these, to know how much and in what; for
if you know this, then you do know how to rectify any thing of the World, and
to reduce any thing unto his first Matter or Complexion, or to any other thing
according to your desire; then by the contrary, if you know not this you shall
not enterprise to meddle, but by means of some things to attempt to make
ingression or such like until you do know this, and this is in light or in
light things, and the Philosophers do say that if any Man do know how to
convert one Nature into another he knows all the whole Mastery: and Avicen
does say the same, that so it is, all your desire ought to be to this, for this
which I have said be the beginnings or Roots of Alchemy Philosophical and
Medicine. And without the Knowledge of these Roots (if you will do any work or
Medicine, which is called the Elixir in this Art to transmute imperfect Bodies
into Sol and Lune, of whatsoever the Medicine was in his Confection) you must
think well of four things which I shall tell you.

The first is, that you do know how to prepare well all your things, and that
you do know how to remove that which does hurt most, and that which does
comfort your Intention, and that you know the sign when you have that which you
desire to have, and that you know how to remove that which you ought to remove:
For all that Man does has an end, and a certain Term, for according to
Philosophers when Nature intends to destroy any thing, to generate another
thing, worse or better, it intends to seek a certain degree which it does not
pass beyond and so stands, and then another thing preparate, does so provoke
another special form which he had not before.

The second is, that your things preparate you do know to commix them well
together, and that is of sundry and diverse things to make one Substance to be
inseparable for ever; for if you know not how to mix your things well and
naturally, so that every thing be destroyed, and so brought first unto their
own primary being and proper species, and one new thing to be generated of
them, it is worth nothing that you have done, and that you know the sign when
your mixtion is completed.

The third is, that you know the certain proportion, that is, the certain
quantity of such things as thou ought to mix together, and also to know by
reason why it should be so, that thereby you may be sure to find the thing that
you look for: By the quantities that you know to have mixed upon your melted
Bodies, it will away at the last slowly or quickly how well soever the things
were prepared, without they were mixed together according to Knowledge and
Nature thou have lost all thy Labor as much as the final complement does
contain, and that shall be well perceived in the Examination thereof, when the
Body transmuted is put to Examination in Ashes or the Test, for there he will
consume and waste away according as there was too much or too little of his
Proportion at the first; but if the Proportions were rightly mixed according to
Knowledge and Reason, then it shall not do so. And Rasis says, if thou know
how to convert Lune into Sol, thou know the contrary, that is to say, Sol
into Lune. But to know to do this, there is a certain Term and quantity hidden,
which for to know thou ought not a little to study, that is to say, thou
ought thereabout greatly to study, for Rasis says, that the Wisemen did
never hide any thing but quantity and weight, and we care not whether People do
know it or no, for we have made and written our Books unto you that understand
what we mean, and to our Sons and Children. And when you know that then may you
well perceive that no Author or Book does agree or accord with other in Weight
and quantity, and therefore for lack of the Knowledge thereof rises a great
error, and it is hidden for this Cause, that none but a Wiseman and learned
may compass to accomplish the same, which does all his things with Knowledge and
Reason, of the subtle Knowledge of Natural things; for if it might be had
otherwise, Men which do meddle without Knowledge and reason; but only through
Foolish boldness might have come to the end, they would no more have cared for
the Learning and Wisdom of Wisemen, than for Dogs, if that their own proper
Industry and Wit could have helped them to have found or gotten it.

The fourth thing which you ought to consider, is the greatest Secret of all
and mighty Wisdom, that is, that you know how to fortify your Medicine and
multiply his Virtue, and this is a work of great Prudence and Wisdom, and if
you understand this last, one part of your Medicine will not only convert ten
parts of any Body melted but a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, ten thousand
thousand, and much more without end, according to the several Circulations you
shall make. And this which I have now said if you do understand, it suffices
you, and I have touched all things that is needful, and they which do
understand those things, they know the Art and none other, and to speak of this
Art is to speak by means as we have spoken, and to work the Art of Alehemy is
to work as we have said, and to teach the Art is to teach as we have taught,
and he that teaches any other teaches nothing, and he that wor^eth any
otherwise works nothing. For who so desires this Art, if he do err in any of
the aforesaid Articles he shall never come to good end, until he knows the
foresaid Articles, and the Wiseman says that Glass purges Metalline Bodies
Corrupt, and cleanses them: For Glass makes the Metalline Bodies of hard
Fusion, soft in fusion, and this is a Secret. And with salt Bodies are calcined
and dried, for salt does cleanse the Bodies in as much as he dries up the
Sulphur which is in them, by the which humidity they stink and be black and
burnable, for the Bodies calcined is clean suffering the Fire without stinking,
and this is a great Secret; but know you that it is spoken for another Secret,
which I will not show here, nor yet will write of it, for it is the Secret of
all Secrets; for by that Secret, when it is well and perfectly known, a Man may
come to the Secrets of all other kinds, and of this Secret, I have showed you
part, and if you know not that which rests, I will declare no more neither by
Tongue nor Pen. Now is ended the Glass of Alchemy which I have given for his
Name worthy the same, for in that you may when you will, behold, and see as in
a Glass contained all the Articles pertaining to this Art, which you should
desire of Wisemen, I believe that the Roots were never so gathered together as
they be here, for the which, understand you, and bear it in Memory according to
knowledge, and that you do both hide and open according to reason, and as it
ought to be, and not to show it to every Rybald according to the lightness of
the Mind, for then that shall be vile which now is precious. In all the
aforesaid Articles I will make you Answer, if I have Life and Health, either by
Mouth Writing or Words, so that you shall understand it if God will, and thus
ends the true Glass of Alchemy.

Vnum continet in se Masculinum and Femininum ergo Hermophroditum. Duo continet
Masculinum, Femininum and Spiritum, tres Corpus, Sol and Luna.

FINIS.
Books Sold by William Cooper.
Willi^m Simpsons new Hypothesis of Acidum and Sulphur, in a Philosophical
Discourse of Fermentation. 1675. 8o. Eyrenaeus Philalethes his Secrets
revealed, the great Treasure in Chemistry. 1669. The Philosophical Epitaph in
Hi^roglyphical Figures of the Nature, Seed, Life and growth of Metalls of the
Alkahest and Salt of Tartar volatized. 1673. 8o. Tho. Vaughan his Aula Lucis or
House of Light. 1652. 8o. The Practice of Lights, an Ancient Treatise of the
Philosophers Stone. 1683. 8o. Patrick Scot his Tillage of Light, or the
Philosophers Elixir. 1623. 8o. Paul Felgenhaver his Iehior the Morning Light of
Wisdom, or the three Principles of all things whatsoever. 1673. 8o. Opus
Tripatritum de Philosophorum Arcanis 1678. 8o. Io. Bapt. Van-Helmont's Works in
English. 1664. Fol. -- His Praecipiolum of the Immature-Mineral Elec^rum, the
first Metal which is the Minera of Mercury. 1683. 8o. M. Charras his^ Royal
Pharmacopaea Galenical and Chemical. 1678. Fol. O. Crollius and I. Hartmans
Royal and Practical Chemistry. 1670. Fol. -- Item his Admonitory Preface to his
Royal Chemistry. 1658. 8o. Fred. Helveticus of the Transmutation of Lead into
Gold by the smallest Proportion of the Philosophers Stone. 1673. 8o. Iac.
Behmens Aurora the Root, of Philosophy, or the Description of Nature, the
Mother of all beginnings, etc. 1656. 4o. -- Idem the remains of his Books, etc.
1662. 4o. Io. Rod. Glaubers Golden Ass, or the way to get Gold and Silver out
of Sand, Stones, Gravel, Flints, etc. in any Country. 1673. 8o. -- His
Philosophical Furnaces with Figures. 1651. 4o. Eirenaeus Philalethes his Secret
of the Immortal Liquor Alkahest or Ignis-Aqua in Latin and in English. 1683.
8o. Geo. Starkey's Liquor Alkah^st, a Discourse of that Immortal Dissolvent.
1675. 8o. The Sorbonists Grammar to Learn French, in English and French. 1674.
8o. Geo. Thompson's Method of Chimical Physic, or the way of curing Chymically
1675. 8o. Albaro Alonso Barba, the Art of Metalls, translated by Edw. Mountague
the late Earl of Sandwich. 1674. 8o. Mich. Sendivogius his new-Light of Alchemy
and his Treatise of Sulphur. 1674. 8o. Paracelsus of the Nature of things of,
Generations, Growths, Conservations, Life, Death, Renewing, Transmutations,
Separations and Signatures. 1674. 8o. Five Treatises of the Philosophers Stone,
two of Alphonso King of Portugal, Sawtre the Monck, Florianus Raudorff and
William Gratarolle and the Smaragdine Table. 1652. 4o. Roh. Boyle's Esaias of the
Origin and Virtues of Gemms. 1672. 8o. -- His Observations about the growth of
Metals in their Oar, and out of their Mine. 1674. -- His Effluviums or new
Experiments of Fire and Flame, and the perviousness of Glass, 1673. The Lives
of St. Basil and St. Chrysostom drawn by way of Parallel. 1681. 8o. Geo.
Starkeys Liquor Alkahest the Immortal dissolvent of Paracelsus and Helmont.
1675. 12^. Paracelsus his Archidoxis or chief teachings of Quintessences,
Arcanums, Magisteries, Elixirs, etc. 1663. 8o. -- Aurora and Treasure of
Philosophers. 1659. 8o. The Water Stone of the wise Men, describing the
Universal Tincture. 1659. 8o.
The end.
The Admirable EFFICACY, And almost incredible Virtue of true Oil, which is
made of SULPHUR-VIVE, Set on fire, and called commonly Oil of Sulphur per
Campanam,

To distinguish it from that Rascally Sophisticate Oil of SVLPHVR, which
instead of this true Oil, is unfaithfully prepared, and sold by Druggists and
Apothecaries, to the dishonor of Art, and unspeakable damage of their deluded
Patients.

Faithfully collected out of the Writings of the most acute Philosopher, and
unparalleled Doctor of this last Age, John Baptist Van-Helmont, of a noble
Extraction in Belgia, and confirmed by the Experience of.

George Starkey, who is a Philosopher by the Fire.

London, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1683.

The admirable Efficacy, and almost incredible virtue of true Oil which is made
of SVLPHVR VIVE, set on fire, and called commonly Oil of SVLPHVR per Campanam.
OF this most noble Liquor, and not vulgar Medicine, the noble Helmont writes
thus in his excellent Discourse concerning the Tree of Life.

In the year 1600. a certain man belonging to the Camp^ whose Office was to
keep account of the Provision of Victuals which was made for the Army, being
charged with a numerous Family of small Children, unable to shift for
themselves, himself being then 58 years of Age^ was very sen^ible of the great
care and burden which lay upon him to provide for them, while he lived, and
concluded that should he dye, they must be enforced to beg their bread from
door to door, whereupon he came (says Helmont) and desired o^ me something for
the preservation of his life I then (being a young man) pityed his sad
condition, and thus thought with my self the fume of burning Sulphur, is by
experience found powerfully effectual, to preserve Wines from corruption. Then
I recollecting my thoughts, concluded, that the acid liquor or Oil, which is
made of Sulphur Vive, set on fi^e, does of necessity contain in it self this
fume, yea, and the whole odor of the Sulphur, in as much as it is indeed
nothing else, but the very Sulphurous fume imbibed, or drunk up in its
Mercurial Salt, and so becomes a condensed liquor. Then I thought with my self
Our blood being (to us) no other then as it were the Wine of our life, that
being preserved, if it prolong not the life, at least it will keep it sound
from those many Diseases which proceed originally from corruption, by which
means the life being sound, and free from diseases, and defended from pains and
grief, might be in some sort spun out to a further length than otherwise. Upon
which meditated resolution, I gave him a Viol glass, with a small quantity of
this Oil, distilled from Sulphur Vive burning, and ^aught him (moreover) how to
make it as he should afterward need it; I advised him of this liquor, he should
take two drops before each Meal in a small draught of Beer, and not ordinarily
to exceed that Dose, nor to intermit the use of it, taking for granted, that
two drops of that Oil contained a large quantity of the fume of Sulphur, the
man took my advice, and at this day in the year 1641. he is lusty and in good
health, walks the Streets at Brussels, without complaint, and is likely longer
to live, and that which is most remarkable, in this whole space of forty one
years, he was not so much as ill, so as to keep his Bed, yea, although (when of
a great age) in the depth of Winter, he broke his Leg, near to his Ancle-Bone,
by a fall upon the Ice, yet with the use of this Oil, he recovered without the
least Symptom of a Fever, and although in his old age, poverty had reduced him
to great straits, and hardship, and made him feel much want of things necessary
for the comfort and convenience of Life; yet he lives healthy and sound, though
spare and lean. The old man's name is John Mass, who waited upon Rithovius
Bishop of Ypre, in his Chamber, where the Earls of Horn, and Egmondon were
beheaded by the Duke of Alva, and he was then 25 years of age, so that now he
is complete 99 years of age, healthy and lusty, and still continues the use of
that liquor daily.

Thus far Helmont, which relation as it is most remarkable, so it gives the
Philosophical reason of his advice, on which it was grounded: And elsewhere the
same Author relates how by this liquor he cured many dangerous deplorable
Fevers, which by other Doctors had been given over for desperate. And in other
places he commends it as a peerless remedy to assuage the insatiable thirst
which accompanies most Fevers.

To which relation and testimony of this most learned Doctor, and acute
Philosopher, I shall add my own experience.

I find it a rare preservative against corruption, not only in living
Creatures, but even in dead flesh, Beer, Wine, Ale, etc. a recoverer of dying
Beer, and Wines that are decayed, a cure for Beer, when sick and roping; Flesh
by this means may be preserved so incorruptible, as no embalming in the World
can go beyond it, for the keeping of a dead Carcass, nor Salting come near its
effcacy, as to the conserving Meat, or Fowls, or Fish, which by this means,
are not only kept from corruption, but made a mu^ial Balsome, which is it self
a preservative from corruption, of such as shall eat thereof, which being a
curious rarity and too costly for to be made a vulgar experiment, I shall pass
it over, and come to those uses which are most beneficial, and desirable.

It is an excellent cleanser of the Teeth, being scoured with it, they will
become as white as the purest Ivory, and the mouth being washed with Oil
dropped in water or White Wind, so as to make it only of the sharpness of
Vinegar, it prevents the growing of that yellow scale which usually adheres to
the Teeth, and is the forerunner of their pu^refaction, it prevents their
rottenness for future, and stops it (being begun) from going further, takes
away the pain of the teeth, diverts Rheums, and is a sure help for the strong
savor of the Breath, making it very sweet: In a word, there is not a more
desirable thing can be found, for such who would have clean or sound Teeth, or
sweet Breath, or to be free from Rheums: for which use let the water be made by
dropping this Oil into it, as sharp as Vinegar, as I said before.

Against a tickling cough and hoarsness, it is a rare remedy, not only taken
two or three drops, twice a day inwardly, in the usual drink one uses before
each meal, but also by gargling the Throat with it, and (so used) it is
excellent against swelled Throats, Angina's, Struma's, Palates of the mouth
inflamed, or the Uvula of the Throat, or the Almonds of the Ears, which are
(usually said then to be) fallen; It is excellent also against the Headache,
and to divert Rheums from the Eyes, to wash the Temples therewith, likewise to
take away Tetters, Morphew, Itch, or Scabs, this dropped in water is a
pleasant, safe, and effectual remedy.

Besides which outward applications, it is a Lord internally taken, preventing
corruption, rooting out the seeds thereof, though never so deeply concealed in
the body, and upon that score opening inveterate obstructions, eradicating old
pains, and preventing otherwise usual relapses into Stranguretical, Colical, or
Arthritical pains: it is abstersive, cleansing all Excrementitian setlings in
the Mesaraick or Mesenterial Vessels, and so cutting off the original sourse,
and taking away the cause of putrefactive corruption, which is the productive
beginner of very many diseases.

On this score it lengthens the life, and fress the body from many Pains and
Ailes, to which otherwise it would be subject.

It is a pleasant remedy, having only a little sharpness, which to the Palate
is most grateful, and yet this Acidity is contradistinct from that Acidity
which is the forerunner of putrefaction, which it kills and destroys, as the
Acidity of Spirit of Vitriol is destroyed by the fixed Acrim^ny of its own
Caput mortuum, or that of Vinegar, by the touch of Cerusse or Minium.

Praeternatural heat and thirst in Fevers, is no way allayed so speedily, and
easily, as by this, nor is there any thing that for a constant continuance may
be more safely and profitably taken; Spirit of Salt (such as the noble Helmont
speaks of) alone may be joined with this, for its safety, and continual use
with profit, especially in Nephritical distempers, and the heat or sharpness of
Urine.

Now as this is so noble a medicine, so there is none in the World more basely
adulterated and counterfeited, our wise Doctors commending for it ( quid pro
quo) an adulterated mineral acidity of Vitriol, distilled in a Retort form
vulgar Sulphur, which the Apostate Chemists prepare, and sell for, and the
Knavish Apothecarries use, and give to their Patients instead of this tru^
Spirit, which if sincere is clear as water, ponderous, and exquisitely acide,
made of Sulphur Vive only, set on Fire without any other mixture, and the sumes
received in a broad Glass, fitted ^or the purpose, vulgarly called a Campana or
Bell, from its shape or likeness.

Most sottish is that Maxim of the Doctors, that Spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol
are of one nature, when experience teaches, that the mere Acetosity of Vitriol
(which brings over nothing of its excellent virtue) will dissolve Argent Vive,
which the strongest Spirit of Sulphur, truly, and not sophistically made, will
not touch, nor will that recover Beer or Wines, or preserve them, as this will
do, one therefore is an unripe Esurine Acetosity, of little virtue: the other a
Balsom of an Antidotary virtue, a preservative against corruption, and upon
that score nothing can be used more effectually as a preservative against, or a
remedy in, Contagious Fevers, Smallpox, Measles, or Pestilence than this, nor
more ridiculously than the other, which being drawn from the vulgar Sulphur,
that has an infection of malignity mixed with it (which it took from the
Arsenical nature of the Minerals from which it was melted) adds nothing of
virtue to the crude vitriolate Spirits, but only that which was before of
little virtue, to become a Medicine of more danger and hazard, but not a jot
more goodness, than it was, when first drawn from the Vitriol; which being of
it self clear, and crude, is for to deceive the ignorant (by its Color,)
tincted with some Root or Bark; Thus the credulous world is imposed on, and
cheated, while instead of most noble remedies (in name promised) adulterated
trifles are produced, to the Disparagement of Art, and the scandal and reproach
of the prosessors Medicine.

To discover which abuses, and vindicate true Art, I have made my Praeludium,
concerning this Oil or Spirit of Sulphur, the virtues of which (if truly and
faithfully made) are so eminently remarkable, and almost incredibly
efficatious, that I thought it not unworthy my pains, in a few lines to
communicate to the studious Reader, both what real benefit is to be expected
from the true, and what injury is done to deluded (at least) if not destroyed
Patients, by the Sophisticate Oil of Sulphur.

Postscript.
THat those who desire this so pleasant, so efficacious, and profitable a
remedy, may not be abused by the base counterfeit Oil of Vitriol, corruptly
called Oil of Sulphur, because it has been once distilled from common
unwholesome Brimstone, and tincted with some Bark or Root, of which the Town is
full, and all Apothecaries Shops, to the great abuse of Art, but much greater
of those who make use of it instead of the true, when indeed it has not one
quality like thereto: Let the Reader be informed that at George Starkey's
House, in St. Thomas Apostles, next door to Black-Lyon-Court; And at Richard
Johnsons, at the Globe in Mountague-Close in Southwark, the true is to be had,
drawn from Sulphur Vive (set on Fire) without any addition, but the Sulphur it
self, which is easily known by its clearness, sharpness, weight, not working on
Quicksilver, turning bitter like to Gall, on the filings of Silver, preserving
Wine and Beer from Corruption, restoring them when decayed, and in a word, by
its quenching feverish heat and thirst, etc. As before has been rehearsed at
large, may by any one be distinguished, from that which is false and
Sophisticate. However at those two places he may be confident of that which is
real and true; And likewise at Richard Johnsons House, in Mountague-Close in
Southwark aforesaid, you may have any Chimical Salts, Oils, and Spirits.

Besides which Oil or Spirit of Sulp^ur, several other rare and admirably
effectual Medicinal Secrets for the certain, safe, and speedy cure of most (if
not all) diseases, as has been proved by many hundr^d Patients (adjudged
rather incurable^ or d^sperately dangerous by other Doctors) are there to be
had, being the more than ordinary Se^rets, and preparations of George Starkey,
who entitles himself a Philosopher by the Fire.

And in particular, that Pill, or Antidote, injuriously challenged as the
Invention of Mr. Richard Mathews, who in truth had that Preparation (for which
he has since been so famous) from the said George Starkey, the true Author
thereof, who had it from God, by studious search, without the help of Book or
Master, and which Preparation he has since amended, and advanced in its virtue
beyond comparison of that which Mr. Mathews had from him, as has been, and is
daily confirmed by the Experience of able Men. Concerning which Antidote, or
Pill, or rather Anodinous Elixir, its virtues, and advancement, to almost a
true Universality, by four variations thereof, which the first Author of the
thing (by long Experience) found out, he has wrote particularly, and at large,
with the way of administering it, and how to order the Patient, by one or all of
those Preparations, for his recovery, out of any the most desperately acute, or
fixed Cronical disease, which Book being now ready for the Press, in few days
God willing, shall see the light. It is called a brief Examination and Censure
of several Medicines, etc.

For the undeceiving of such who have been injuriously and falsely persuaded,
that only Mr. Richard Mathews, and Paul Hobson have that Medicine truly
prepared, condemning all others as counterfeit, to the disparagement, and
palpable injury of the first Inventor, who accounts it unreasonable, that he
who learned what he had from him, should censure himself as a counterfeit,
unless he bind himself up to his Preparation, which though it be a true one,
yet is the most inferior in virtue of all the Author knows, and called by him,
his Elixir Diaphoretick, commune; Of which, able judicious Practitioners
(having once brought his more effectual, and higher graduated Preparations in
the same kind) have so low an esteem (comparatively to these others) that they
desire no more thereof.

Farewell, George Starkey,


When this Treatise and the Postscript was Written, Mr. Starkey then lived in
the Place therein specified; but he dyed (as I have been informed) of the
Sickness, Anno. Dom. 1655. by venturing to Anatomize a Corpse dead of the Plague
(as Mr. Thomson the Chemist had done before him, and lived many Years after)
but Mr. Starkey's adventure cost him his Life, however the Medicine truly made
and prepared from Mineral Sulphur called Sulphur Vive, may now be had of very
many Chemists in and about London, nay, the difficulty in making thereof is not
so great, but that you may make it your self if you please, and if you do but
wait the time, and Opportunity to buy the Mineral Sulphur (not common
^rimstone) for the Mineral is not to be had at all times.

The Process and shape for the Glass Bell, and the manner of making and
rectifying this Spirit from Mineral Sulphur or Sulphur Vive as it comes
Stone-like out of the Earth, it may be seen in the Chemical Works of Hartman
and Crollius called Royal Chemistry, Charas's Royal Pharmacopaea, Lefebure,
Thibault, Lemery, Glaser, Schroder's Dispensatory, and many others, unto whom I
refer you. W. C. B.

FINIS.
Books Sold by William Cooper.
A Description of the Famous Country of Carolina. 1683. 4o. Ars Notoria, the
Notary Art of Solomon the Cabalistical Key of Magical Operations, etc. 1657.
12o. Truth and Honesty in Plain English, or a Survey of the Libells and
Pamphlets since the Dissolution of the Parliament, 1679. 4o. Godfrey of the
abuses of Physic Physicians, and Apothecaries, by Preventative Physic. 1674.
8o. Webster's History of Metals. 1671. 4o. Eirenaeus Philalethes Expositio in
Gebrum, de Preparatione M^rcurii Sophici and breve Manuductorium ad Campum
Sophiae. 1678. 8o. -- Ejusdem de Metallorum Metamorphosi. 1668. 8o. -- Ejusd.
Brevis Manuductio ad Rubinum Caelestem. 1668. 8o. -- Ejusdem Fons Chimicae
Ph^losophiae. 1668. 8o. -- Ejusd. Arcanum de Igni-Aqua, sive de Liquore
Alkahest. 1683. 8o. -- Ejusdem Introitus Apertus ad Occlusum Regis Palatium.
1667. 8o. -- Idem, his Marrow of Alchem^ in English Verse in 2 parts.
The end.
SUNDRY NEW, AND ARTIFICIAL REMEDIES AGAINST FAMINE.

Written by Sir. Hugh Platt, Upon the Occasion of the great Dearth in the Year
1590.

Non est quo fugias a Deo irato nisi ad Deum placatum, Aug. LONDON, Printed for
William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1683.

New Remedies against Famine.
THe first, and principal, and most Christian Counsel that I can give in these
threatening days of Sword and Famine, is by hearty Prayers from a Zealous Heart
to call upon the Name of the great and mighty Jehovah, and of the gracious and
merciful God of Israel, that it may please him to forget and forgive our
manifold Sins and Transgr^ssions, which have turned his f^vourable Countenance
so long from us, and brought down from Heaven so many Clouds of Wrath upon the
Fruits of the Earth, as that the great hope of our Harvest is smitten and
daunted already, and that it would please him of his fatherly goodness by such
m^ans as shall seem best in his own Eyes, for the relief of these our present
wants, to turn this our penury into plenty, and so to bless us with his
bountiful Hand, that we may all sing a full Song of thanksgiving unto him, as
well for these new and undeserved favors, as for that glorious victory of late
obtained again^ our Popish Adversaries; by the Hand o^ those Honorable
Commanders that have already begun the peace of our Commonwealth.

Secondly, I could wish that all inferiou^ Officers in their places, would have
a more Charitable and Religious care in the Execution of those Orders, which
have of late bee^ penned, and published with grave and deliberate advice from
the Higher Powers for the furnishing of our Markets with all kind of Grain. For
the Execution is the very life of the Law, and the Letter thereon though set
down by Authority and graced with a most honorable Chorus, does give some hope
at the first, but no full Satisfaction in the end unless the executing
Magistrate, together with those high directors do join hand in hand for the
common good of their distressed Country.

Thirdly, I cannot want good will to wish though I have no Authority to
command, that the very food of the Earth even the blessing of the Lord, should
be no longer Subject to this Coppyhold and slavish tenure, of such base and
unmerciful Lords, who upon every rumor of foreign scarcities, upon every petit-
Transportation, yea rumor of Transportation only, upon fair ^eather, or foul
weather, or any weather ^^ they list, can make the same finable ad ^oluntatem
Domini, and set what price they ^ist upon the Bushel. Is there no Court of
Chancery, neither in Heaven nor upon Earth, ^o bridle these covetous and
unmerciful Lords, yea and to stint them, that howsoe^er it shall please the God
and giver of all things to cross us from the Heavens, that yet no inferior
Person should dare to exceed a certain price to be set down by Authority, upon
the confiscation of whatsoever Grain he should so over rate unto his poor and
needy Neighbor?

Fourthly, if ever Abstinence were a true Christian virtue, then now let it
appear amongst us, for why should the Rich Men Feast, when the Poor are ready
to famish? Was there never but one Dives, and one Lazarus upon the Earth? Or do
we want Wit, or Will, or Grace to apply a Parable? Here I may well cry out and
say to the Rich, and fat weathers of our time, as Tully sometime said to
Anthony. Te miror, Anthony, u^ quorum facta imitere, eorum exitus non
perhorrescere. I wonder at you o you Epicures that you are not terrified with
their Destructions whose deeds you seem to imitate. Well if we have brought our
pampered Bodies to those delicacies, that we can now as well leave our Lives,
as our Lusts; yet i^ every Rich Man would spare but one Meal in a Week, and
confer the estimate upon the poor of the Parish where he dwells ( nunquam
nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur) I say even this one Meal would
serve well to mend a whole Weeks Commons of a poor Subscisor.

My fifth and last Petition should be to move us to a Christian charity. And if
that Roman Poet and Orator, that sententious Seneca in the danger and distress
of a private Friend could give in Precept: Quod amicorum necessitati magis
occurrendum, quam succurrendum, that we ought rather to prevent then relieve
the necessity of a Friend. Then what is to be expected at our hands in a case
of so great weight and importance, as does not only touch the credit of our
Profession; but also the lives and welfare of many thousands of our poor
Christian Brethren, whereof some cannot labor, and many are without labor,
and those which labor can hardly maintain themselves by their labor? Yea if
we would look more narrowly and pierce more deeply with a sharp eye into the
threats and terrors of these times, though Religion could wo^k no Charity in
us toward others, yet reason, and civil policy might prevail so much with us
for our selves and those which are dear unto us, that we should not stay so
long until our Neighbors flames take hold of our own Houses, nor try the
extremities that Hunger, and Famine may work amongst us.

Thus much by way of Christian advice and counsel, now because I had rather be
any way wanting, then in good will unto my native Country, unto the which I
confess that I owe my Wit, my Wealth, my Labor, my Life, and whatsoever else I
possess under my gracious Sovereign: And seeing that many grave, and learned
Sermons have already in vain beaten upon this Subject, many careful Provisions
have been from time to time made and published from our Prudent, and provident
Prince, and from those honorable S^nators of our State, which as yet can work
no Impression in the steely, and adamant Hearts of our English Rooks and
Cormorants, though I cannot win the Goal in so great a purpose as I have in
hand, yet I will bid the base to those choice, and delicate Wits of England,
who if they would either associate themselves unto me at the first, or second
me, when I have begun this proud attempt, I would not doubt, but that by these
our joint Labors we should frustrate the greatest part o^ these covetous
complots, and by new, and Artificial discoveries of strange Bread, Drink, and
Food, in matter and Preparation so full of variety, to work some alteration and
change in this great and dangerous dearth.

Nevertheless (though I do only break the Ice, for those that shall follow me
in this kind) yet according to that poor Talent of mine, I will try mine own
strength and confer as well my conceit, as knowledge herein: Which though it be
neither such as I could wish, nor as these urgent times require, yet I will be
bold (in the fullness of mine Affection) to pr^fer and present the same to the
view of the well disposed Reader, whose courteous acceptance hereof, may one
day peradventure wring from me some matter of higher reach, and farther Service
then as yet I see either just cause to promise or reason to speak of.

And because in the Treatise following my Author had ranged over all manner of
Trees, Plants, Roots, green Pulse and Herbs, out of which he might by any
probability draw any kind of su^tenance for the relief of Man, I will only
content my self with ^^e handling of the Preparation of some of these
particulars which are most plentiful in their quantity, least offensive in
their Nature, and most familiar with our Soul and Bodies, so as their offensive
taste being first removed by Art, they may serve us in a far better manner and
to our greater liking then now they do, either for bread, drink or food.

How to take away a great part of that rank and unsavory taste of B^ans,
Pease, Beechmast, Chestnuts, Acorns, Veches, and such like.
IF this may in some good Measure be performed, then I doubt not but that the
Bulk and Body of our Meal and Flower will be much increased and multiplied, at
the least for the poor Man's Table: Then receive mine own Experience therein.
Boil your Beans, Pease, Beechmast, etc. in fair Water, and if they be not yet
pleasing enough, Change your Water again, and at the second or third boiling,
you shall find a strange Alteration in Taste, for the Water has sucked out and
imbibed the greatest part of the^^ rankness, then must you dry them (and if you
think good, you may also hull them, according to the manner set down hereafter
in the Abstract of Anchora Famis, etc.) or else you may grind them unhulled,
and then make bread thereof, either simply of it self, or with the Addition of
some third or fourth part of other Wheat Flour; or else for better Expedition
at the least in drink, if not in bread, you may take the ground Meal of them,
and infuse warm Water thereon, and as it begins to cool, dreyne the same
away, and reinfuse fresh warm Water till the taste please you: Then dry up the
Meal, and make bread thereof either simply, or compounded as before. And as
concerning the Chestnuts, we have the Experience of France therein already,
where in great abundance they are spent and consumed in their usual bread in
diverse parts of that Country.

The Beechmast does yield a most sweet and delicate Oil, and every way
comparable with the Nut it self, and therefore it is very probable that it will
make an excellent bread with a very small correction: and if there might be
some easy way or manner found out for the ready husking or hulling of them
(which seems no matter of any great difficulty) then I durst promise a most
rich and plentiful Oil of our own growing, and serviceable for many necessary
uses. But if notwithstanding my former Preparation of Beans, Pease, etc. The
Meal thereof do not yet content you, then work it into Past, with a liquor
first strengthened with some bruised Annis-seeds, licoras, or sweet Fennel
seeds, or with the seeds themselves incorporated in the Past, or for the
avoiding of charge with Pepperwort, Thime, Wintersavary, Penniroyal, etc. For
if you can but deceive the Taste, you shall find the bread very hearty,
wholesome, and nourishing. And whatsoever is here spoken of Beans, Pease, etc.
May be generally understood of all other Grain, Seeds, Plants, Pulse, Roots,
etc. And that which is serviceable for Bread, will be much more tolerable in
drink: For the making whereof in some more cheap manner then as yet is known or
usual amongst us, you shall find some few notes of mine upon the Abstract
following, in their several places.

Certain strange and extraordinary ways for the relieving of a Prisoner, or
other poor distressed Creatures, when all hope of usual Victuals is taken from
him.
THese as I dare not warrant, so yet because I have received them either from
good Authors, or from the credible report of Men of worth, I will deliver them
as faithfully as I have received them.

1. And first of all Paracelsus himself affirms, that a fresh turf or clod of
Earth, applied every day unto the Stomach of a Man, will preserve him from
famishing for some small number of days.

2. I have heard many Travellours deliver of their own knowledge and
experience, that a Man may live 10. or 12. days by sucking of his own Blood.

3. Bapt. Porta. tells us of a poor fellow upon whom a Ruinous House fell,
and the Man so hedged in with the Floors and Timber that fell upon him, as that
not being able to get out he was forced to relieve himself with his own Urine
for 9. or 10. days, making his hand his cup to drink in.

4. But the strangest and most incredible of all the rest, is that story which
Parson Bateman, sometime Parson of Newington, had by relation of that reverend
father D. Grindal then Archbishop of Canterbury, from the mouth of two English
Captives, that were imprisoned in Turkey, and for their offense condemned to be
famished to death, and escaped by this means. The keeper affecting his
Prisoners for those good parts which he found in them, having received an Oath
of their secrecy, delivers unto each of them a small piece of Allom, which he
willed them five or six times aday to roll up and down in their mouths. Now at
ten days end, the great Turk sending to know if the Christians were dead or
alive, and being informed of their lives, he commanded that upon pain of Death
no man should dare to relieve them with any manner of food. Now when 10. days
more were expired, and the like inquiry and return made as before: Well quoth. the
Turk, if they can continue yet 10 days more without food, I will say that the
God of the Christians will have them preserved, and they shall be enlarged. The
last 10. days expi^ing, and the Prisoners lives certified unto the Turk, they
were forthwith delivered out of Prison, and returned for their own Country, and
here discovered the Secret. The reason, and probability hereof I will leave for
better Magitians then my self. For though we might suppose that the salt of
Nature might receive some strength or vigor from this Mineral Salt, yet how
the Guts should be filled with so small a proportion I cannot guess, much less
determine.

5 A fifth food b^t receiving some help from Corn was commended by Mendozza
himself, wherewith he assured me upon his honor that he had relieved a Spanish
Town, in an extreme Dearth, and scarcity of victual, and therewithal showed me
a Loaf of Composition, which was of Wheat-straw, chopped into short pieces, and
ground with some proportion of Wheat into Meal. But since I have been farther
informed, that the same practice has been usual in hard years in some parts of
England, and for mine own better satisfaction, I caused some of the same flower
to be kneaded into bread, but it was very brown in Color, and very gretty in
the mouth, and therefore it should seem that our Stones be not so apt for the
grinding of it, and I have heard some affirm, that the same cannot well be
ground but in a Steel Mill, or hand Mill.

6 And the East-Indians, as I have read, do use to make little Balls of the
juce of the herb Tobacco, and the Ashes of Cockle-shells wrought up together,
and dried in the shadow, and in their Travel they place one of these Balls
between their nether Lip, and their Teeth, sucking the same continually, and
letting down the moisture, and it keeps them both from hunger and thirst for
the space of three or four days.

7 The seventh and last of this kind, is that sweet Root called Lichoras, which
being chewed only (if we may believe Pliny) does in small quantity satisfy
both thirst and hunger, and yet maintain sufficient strength in the Body.

How to make an excellent Bread of the Roots of Aaron called Cuckowpit, or
Starch Roots.
THe making thereof is set down by a late Writer in this manner. First, the
roots that are large must be cleansed from all skin and filth, and then cut
into small and thin slices, the thinner you make them the sooner they are
prepared, sees them in boiling water, so long as you find the water hot and
biting, and till the Roots begin to wax sweet. Then change your water, and pour
fresh water unto them, and so continue boiling until the water become sweet,
and that the roots have lost all their acrimony. Then take them out, and lay
them abroad upon Canvas, supported with frames, and being dry grind them with
hand-mills, and they make a most white and pure meal, which either of it self,
or by the mixture of one third of wheat meal with it, makes a most fair and
savoury bread. This carries some good sense and likelihood of truth with it,
for we find by daily experience, that it makes as fair, if not a fairer
starch, then our wheat. And therefore it were to be wished, that some good
husbandry were used in the planting, and multiplying of these Roots, observing
the nature of such soil and place wherein they most delight. And though it
should fail us in this kind, yet we shall find our labor richly requi^ed, if
we convert them into starch only. But here it is to be remembered, that the root
must be gathered when it is plump ^ull, and in his pride, which is about the
latter end of March, and all April: For when it begins once to spire, and
that the sap is ^un up into the leaves, then the root shrinketh, and also
loses much of his virtue. Here a just occasion is offered to practice the like
upon the Turnep, whereof there are both good ^iore and the price of them
likewise very reaso^able.

Bread, and other food made of Pompions.
THis fruit being both cheap, and great, does also make a very savoury bread,
if a little meal be mixed therewith, yielding food to a great number with a
small charge. And if you bestow sugar, and other sauce upon it, it may also
pass for a delicate dish. The manner of making the same is thus described by
Porta, Choose the greatest and ripest Pompions, cut them into thin slices, and
take away the hard crust or coat, and the inner marrow or softness, sees them
in boiling water, and bring them to a pulp or pap, and then s^rein it, adding
thereto a third part of meal or flo^er, and make it up into bread, the fresher
you eat the same, the more pleasant and deli^^te you shall esteem it. But with
mine Authors favor: I think you will find it in his best form, and of
farthest extention, when it is in his p^p or pulp, for his Body is exceeding
waterish, and vanishes away to a small sub^^ance if you seek to dry it. This I
write by mine own trial, yet peradventure the Goord of Naples, which he calls
Cucurbita may b^ of a differing nature from our Pompions.

How to save much fl^wer^ or meal that is lost in all our usual Corn mills,
that grind either, with Wind or Water.
IF I teach the Miller so to grind his wheat as that neither the starchmaker
(if I be not deceived) shall have stuff to make his starch with, except he
grind for himself after the a^cient manner; nor the brown Baker any bran to
make horsebread withal, I hope that my fault will be pardonable at this time,
because I hold it much b^tter to want flower about our necks then in our
bellies, and that horses should s^^rve before their masters. The conceit is
short, and easy, and I hope without controlment. Let every Mill that grindeth
corn, have also a boulting mill annexed unto it, that the same mover may play
upon both, and by shaking of the boulter make a division of the bran from the
flower. This bran as soon as it is divided from the flower must be returned
again into the hopper amongst the rest of the wheat that is unground, and so as
fast as you gather any bran, you must mix it with more corn: And by this means
you shall have much less bran, and also more flower, though you would
notwithstanding this course, pass the same through a fine boulter again. It is
an usual manner in the higher part of Germany to boult with these mills, but
not to grind over their bran again in the first mill, for ought that I know, or
as yet can learn.

How to make starch without any corn.
IT is well known that those Aaron-roots before mentioned, will make a white
and delicate starch. You must gather them in March or April, washing them
clean, and paring away all the filth, or foul skins from them, and after
slicing them into thin slices, and so leaving them in fair clear water, and
changing your water every 12. hours, for the space of four or five days, till
they become exceeding white and clean; then stamp them, and force them through
a strainer with clean water, and when the substance of the starch is settled in
the bottom, which will be in a few hours, then drein away all the clear water
that fleeteth on the top, very gently, and expose the rest being in flat
earthen pans or clean tubs to the Sun, which will attract or draw up all the
water, and leave a hard cake in the bottom. But in the winter time, when you
cannot have the Sun of a sufficient force for this purpose, then set your stone
pans, or pewter basins wherein you have strained out your starch upon a pot
with s^alding water, and so you may dry the same in a sufficient quantity for
your own use all the year long. And if you would harden the same without
charge, then place your pan upon your bief pot, and so you shall make one fire
to perform several actions at once. But because these roots are not to be had
in all places, nor at all times of the year, therefore for a second supply I
have thought good to set down this receipt following.

Take of the whitest Gum Arabique that you can buy at the Grocers, let them
beat the same into pieces for you as big as hasel nuts in their great morters,
then take 3. ounces of this Gum, and first wash it in fair Conduit water, in a
Stone Basin, stirring it up and down with your hands to take the filth from it;
then wash it again with some more water, and pour that also away, and then to
every 3. ounces so washed put a wine pint of fair Conduit-Water, stirring it up
and down 3. or 4. times aday to procure a speedy solution or dissolving of the
Gum: Then cover your Pan, and when all the Gum is dissolved, strein the water
through a clean and thin Linen cloth, and reserve the same in Glasses well
stopped, till you have cause to use it. It will last sweet at the least three
weeks after it is made. When you would use this starch, if you desire to have
your ruffs to carry a pure and perfect white color, you must mingle some blew
with the water, stirring it up and down with your finger in a Porrenger, and
before the blew settle to the bottom, wet your ruff therein, and presently
wring it out again; then put it till it be clear, and after set it, as you do
in your common starch. I do find by experience, that half the time that is lost
in the other manner of starching, is here gained: For by reason that your
starch is in a thin water, the Lawn and Cambrick will be soon cleared and with
much less beating. And I think that a second profit will here likewise fall out
by the way, viz. That your Lawn and Cambrick will last much longer: For (if I
be not deceived) the continual patting, or beating thereof between the hands in
our usual starching, works a great fretting and wearing of the same. And I
doubt not, but that there be many other sorts of Grain, Pulse and Roots, which
will make as good Starch as Wheat, which at this time I leave unto the studious
endeavors of those that are careful for the common good. It may be that at my
better leisure I may handle this subject more at large, but now the present
times enforce me, to deliver that knowledge which I have. And thus much for
starch.

Sweet and delicate cakes made without Spice or Sugar.
SLice great and sweet Parsnep roots (such as are not seeded) into thin slices,
and having washed and scraped them clean, dry them, and beat them into powder
(here a mill would make a greater dispatch) searcing the same through a fine
searce, then knead two parts of fine flower with one part of this powder and
make the same into cakes, and you shall find them to taste very daintily. I
have eaten of these cakes diverse times in mine own house, Quaere, what may be
done in Carots, Turnips, and such like roots after this manner.

Here I think it not impertinent to the purpose, which I have in hand to wish a
better survey to be made of my book of Husbandry, being a parcel of the Jewel
house of Art and Nature, Printed an. 1594. Wherein sundry new sorts of Marle
are familiarly set down, and published for the good of our English Farmers:
amongst the which, those waste ashes of the Sope-boylers (for such as dwell
near unto the City of London, or may by easy water carriage convey them unto
their hungry and lean grounds) have a principal place for the enriching of all
cold, moist and weeping grounds. The book is to be had at the Peli^an in Little
Britain. And if there were such plenty as I could wish of those shavings or
cuttings of Horn, whereof those that work for Lanthor^s only make the greatest
store, I would then in respect of the infinite extention thereof, commend that
before any other manuring of ground whatsoever, and for the only Garden-dung
that I know, although for arable ground I must needs confess, that I have one
secret, not as yet made known or common to the world, that would prove more
general, and more easy of price then any other whatsoever that I as yet have
either heard, or read of, but for some reasons best known unto my self, I do as
yet forbear the discovery thereof.

There is also a certain victual in the form of hollow pipes, or wafers,
wherewith, as also with a de^ensative oil for his armours, pieces, and other
Weapons^ I furnished sir Francis Drake in his last Voyage, which has been well
approved and commended by sundry of his followers upon their return for
England, whereby I was the more encouraged to make a second trial thereof in
the Bear which went lately for CHINA. This food I am bold to commend in this
place, both because it argues ad propositum, and for that I know that if the
Masters, Owners, or Mariners of Ships, would advisedly look into it, they
should find it one of the most necessary, and cheap provisions that they could
possibly make, or carry with them. The particular commendation whereof, rests
upon these few branches following.

1 First, it is very durable, for I have kept the same both sweet and sound, by
the space of 3. years, and it agrees best with heat, which is the principal
destroyer of Sea victual. 2 It is exceeding light: For which quality Sir
Francis Dr^ke did highly esteem thereof, one man may carry upon any occasion of
land service, so much thereof, as will be sufficient to relieve two hundred men
aday. 3 It is speedily dressed, for in one half hour, it is sufficiently
sodden, by which property it may also save much fuel and firing, which
occupies no small room in a Ship. 4 It is fresh, and thereby very pleasing
unto the Mariner in the midst of his salt meats. 5 It is cheap, for in this
dearth of corn, I dare undertake to feed one man sufficiently, for 2 pence a
meal. 6 It serves both in stead of bread and meat, whereby it performs a
double service. 7 Not being spent it may be laid up in store for a second
Voyage. 8 It may be made as delicate as you please, by the addition of Oil,
Butter, Sugar, and such like. 9 There is sufficient matter to be had all the
year long, for the composition thereof. 10 And if I might once find any good
encouragement therein, I would not doubt but to deliv^r the same prepared in
such sort, as that without any farther dr^ssing thereof, it should be both
pleasing, and of good nourishment unto a hungry stomach.
All those which are willing to victual their Ships therewith, if they repair
unto me, I will upon reasonable warning, furnish them therewith to their good
contentment.

A speedy or present drink which Travelers may make for themselves (extempore)
when they are distressed for want of good Beer or Ale at their Inn.
TAke a quart of fair water, put thereto five or six spoonfuls of good Aqua
composita, which is strong of the Annis-seeds, and one ounce of Sugar, and a
branch of Rosemary, brew them a pretty while out of one pot into another, and
then is your drink prepared. Or if you leave out Sugar, it will be pleasing
enough. I have been credibly informed that diverse Gentlemen of good credit,
when they travel abroad, and cannot like the taste or relish of their drink,
that they use no other then the aforesaid composition, and find the same both
to refresh and cool them very well, neither are they troubled with the rawness
of cold water, by reason that it has received some correction by the Aqua
composita, and that the Annis-seeds do give a delicate taste unto it. It were
not amiss for all Seamen to carry some store of Aqua-vitae with them, that when
their Wine, Cider, Pe^ry, and Beer are spent, they may transmute their water
into the said drink.

A cheap liquor for poor men, when Malt is extreme dear.
IF a poor man in the time of flowring, do gather the tops of Heath with the
flowers, (which is usually called and known by the name of Linge in the
Northerly parts of this Realm, and is that plant whereof our common Heath
Brushes are made,) and lay up sufficient store thereof for his own provision,
being well dried and care^ully kept from putrefying or molding, he may at all
times make a very pleasing and cheap drink for himself, by boiling the same in
fair water, with such proportion thereof, as may best content his own taste. And
this liquor is commended unto me, by one of the most sufficient professors of
Physic of our times, and that upon his own and often experience, for a most
wholesome and medicinable drink, as well for the Liver as the Spleen. It may be
graced with a little Licoras in the decoction, if he see cause.

I have also heard Sir Francis Drake affirm that fair Water and Vinegar mixed
in a due proportion, does make a fine cooling and refreshing drink in hot
weather, which he esteemed for a rare secret at the Sea. And I have also known
them that have made a voluntary drink thereof on the land, when they have had
sufficient choice of others before them.

How to brew good and wholesome Beer, without any Hops at all.
SInce my profession in this Book, is in some sort to Anatomize both Art and
Nature, without any regard of private men's profits, whom it either may
essentially or accidentally touch, I am bold therefore, without craving any
leave to do good: To renew, or rather to confirm and ratify an ancient opinion
and practice, which long since in the great dearth and scarcity of Hops, many
brewers of this land have been enforced to put in use for the better
supportation of their weak and declining estates. But because they failed in
proportion (without the which there can be nothing complete or absolute) they
suffered a good conceit to die in the Birth. And no marvel then, if Wormwood
notwithstanding it be a Simple so highly commended of all the ancient and new
H^^b^rists, for his great and singular effects in Physic, be in a manner
^^terly abandoned of all the Brewers in our time (except a few that can make a
difference between five Shillings, or 5 pound charge, when Hops are sold for
50. s. an hundred) seeing as yet not any one of them has so clerkly wrought
upon this Simple, as to cover and hide the taste thereof^ from the well mouthed
Ale-cunners of our Commonwealth, which weakness of theirs, because it
consists wholly in the want of a due proportion between the Malt and other
beercorn, in respect of Wormwood, I have thought good to set down a sufficient
direction for those that are wise, and willing to do good both to themselves,
and to their Country, whereby they may easily even in one days Practice attain
to the full perfection thereof. Supposing then that your Wormwood is either cut
down in the Leaf before it be seeded, or being seeded that it is cut into short
pieces, whereby there may be made an equal mixture of the whole Bulk together
(for you must note that the seedy tops are much stronger and much more Oily
then the rest of the leaves or stalks) make first a decoction of 4. ^unces of
Hops with nine Gallons of water (which is the proportion which some Brewers in
some sorts of drink do use) and when you have gotten out by e^ullition or
boiling, the full strength and virtue of them, keep the same, and begin
likewise with some small proportion of Wormwood to the like quantity of water
as before; and when you have bestowed as much time and fire therein, as you did
about the Hops, then taste each of them by it self, and if you find the same to
exceed the first in bitterness, then begin with a less proportion of Wormwood,
and so reiterate your work, till you have equally matched the one with the
other: Then may you safely proceed by the rule of proportion to a barrel, and
from thence to a Tun, and so to a whole brewing. Neither let the bitterness of
Wormwood in his present taste any thing dismay you, for if you did but taste the
decoction of hops only before the mixture of ground Malt (which does
wonderfully sweeten the same) you would think it a very u^^pt liquor to be
wrought up into so pleasing a drink as our ordinary Beer does show it self to
be: For it is the Hop^ only which ma^eth the essential difference between Beer
and Ale, and that by allaying the exceeding lusciousness of Malt by his
bitterness, whereby both uniting themselves together, become a savoury and
wholesome drink for man's body: Which may be in every respect as well performed
in Wormwood, as in the Hop, yea, and peradventure with Centaury, Artichoke
leaves, or Aloes hepatique, as some workmasters have confidently affirmed unto
me. And though the Hop be usually in drink, and the Wormwood only in medicine,
whereby some may happily be persuaded, that it is inconvenient for men that are
in health to drink a Medicine continually to their meat: Yet let this be a
sufficient answer to that Objection, that it is the dose only that makes the
difference herein. For I can assure you in mine own experience, and by the
experience of one of the best experienced Brewers in London, who yet lives,
that if you give a double or treble quantity of English Hops to an ordinary
guile of strong Beer, you shall find the same to be a sufficient preparative to
your body for the best purgation that shall be ministered after. And this is the
reason why Venice-Turpentine, which being ministered in a small dose is given
for the strengthening of the Back, and to stay the running of the Reins: Yet i^
it be taken in the quantity of an ounce at once, it will purge sufficiently in
diverse Bodies. So then either let there be no more taste of Wormwood, then there
is of Hops in our drink, and we shall find no difference in effects, but such
as shall commend and grace the Wormwood beyond the Hop; or let Beer be advanced
with the Hop ^ to the bitterness of Wormwood Wine, and so we shall find the Hop
far to exceed the Wormwood in his malign quality.

Thus much I have thought good to publish, for the credit of Wormwood and for
the benefit of this Island in sundry respects, which I shall not need to
particularize at t^is time, because they are so commonly known to all men. And
though I know I may be overweighed either with the Flanders Merchants, or with
the great hopmasters of England, whose Foundation is so deeply laid, that a few
loose lines can neither shake nor stir the same: yet either knowing or at the
least persuading my self to maintain the truth, before I give it over, I will
crave the liberty of the Schools, qu^d fiat controversia. And in the mean time,
those which will not be satisfied of the wholesome and rare medicinable helps of
the one, together with the weak and feeble virtues of the other (which was but
a hedg-bird the other day, though now it be perking so proudly upon his Poles)
I will refer them to the learned Herbals of D^scorides Mathiol^^, Doctor
Turner, Dodoneus, Thurnizerus, and the rest.

An Abstract of certain frugal Notes, or Observations in a time of Dearth or
Famine, concerning bread, drink, and meat, with some other circumstances
belonging to the same, taken out of a Latin writer, intituling his book,
Anchora famis and sitis.
FIrst, for the avoiding of all putrefaction, as well in bread, as in corn, it
is very requisite that they be per^^ctly dried, or gently parched, either in
the sun, or by the warmth of the Air, or else in the want of these two, in some
apt Oven, or rather in a Stoue, but with such care, as they do not burn, or
savor of adu^^ion.

2 After the baking of your bread, it is necessary that the same be left in the
Oven, well closed, for some reasonable time, the heat thereof being less'ned by
degrees, for so the bread being thoroughly baked, and suffered to cool of it
self again, will satis^ie the hunger of a man in double p^op^rtion to that
which otherwi^e it would.

3 Each kind or sort of bread being a little tosted over the coals, and
a^terwards sopped in Wine, will fill or glut ^xc^^dingly: Such a Breakfast as
this taken in the Morning is a sufficient repast for the whole day after.

4 The meal of par^h^d corn does fill the gut exceedingly.

5 Bread may be made of Rice, Indian millet, or Turkish Wheat, ^ither by
decocting the whole grain in water, and so bringing it to the form of a
Pulteis, and after baking the same, ^r el^e by grinding it into Meal, but the
latter way makes the fairer bread. This may as suffi^i^ntly be performed with
our ordinary wheat, for ^ught that I can imagine.

6 All manner of Pulse, ^s Lentils, Vetches, Beans, and such like, if they be
first rubbed over in Lee, and then hull^d and after ground, they will yield
both fairer meal, and better bread.

7 Past or Dow is soon baked upon thin Plates of Iron or Brass.

8 Those which ^ide Post, are oftentimes content both to bake their Bread, and
also to roast their meat under the seats of their Saddles, here I think that our
climate will prove too cold.

9 Men must be brought by degrees, and not too suddenly from their usual and
natural Food and drink, into these artificial diets.

10 A Pulteis or hochpot, made of Flower or Meal sodden amongst Apples, Pears,
Plums, and such like Fruit; or of some bread and water, or the broth of Flesh
that has been tosted in the Smoke, or with Milk well boiled together, does
fill the Stomach more then thrice so much of dry bread eaten alone, especially,
if the same be high boiled to a sti^ne^s, or consistency.

11 Such like compositions do also extend farther in the satisfying of hungry
Maws, being made of Biskets, or dry, hard, or stale grated bread. And by this
means one loaf will go as far as two new loaves.

12 All sorts of good Cakebread, or Spicebread steeped a convenient time in
fair water, will convert the water into a most pleasant or wholesome drink, the
Bread notwithstanding being very wholesome to be eaten.

13 Pound your Pepper, Ginger, and such like Spices, and having steeped them in
water, place the same well covered over a gentle fire, and then work your paste
with the imbibition, or decoction thereof. And by this means your spice will
extend much farther in Cakebread. And the same spice also being new pounded or
beaten, may be afterward wrought up in Paste for cakebread. Here you may
practice upon these Plants, which be hot and wholesome withal: As the wild
Cresses, otherwise called Pepperwort, Galingale, Thime, Orrace, Isop,
Wintersavery, Penniroyal, and such like Herbs instead of Spices.

14 Some of these Artificial kinds of bread and drink, if there be any left
that may be well spared, will serve for the feeding and fatning of Cattle,
Geese, Hens, Hogs, etc.

15 The smell or sent of Bread ( I think he means that, which is new and hot
from the Oven) does nourish the body, and refresh the Spirits greatly. Some
comme^d the Spirits of bread extracted by distillation, as a most sovereign
preservative in the Consumption, and other pining Diseases.

16 If any of these Artificial foods or drinks do happen to offend, either in
color, taste, or savor, they may be helped with Honey, Sugar, Saffron, Wine,
Annis-seeds, Co^iander seeds, sweet Fennel, Cinnamon, and such like.

17 In the time of necessity, even green corn taken as it grows of it self,
or a little parched or dried against the Fire, or steeped, or boiled in Wine,
or water, affords a reasonable kind of sustenance.

18 The distilled water of Oats, does so warm the Stomach, as it does overcome
the senses. It is well known that many do Brew a very strong and mighty drink
with malted Oats, and how profitable the same might be to all our English
Brewers (if there might be sufficient store of them had) in a dearth of Wheat
and Barley, the same being rightly matched, or rather mastered a little with
the Hop, to alter their taste: They can best tell that have made their private
experience and profit of them, when others very inconsiderately have run on in
their common, and chargeable course of brewing^

19 The Liquor of the Birch tree is both wholesome, and savory, and deserves
to be recommended in his kind.

20 There may be an excellent extraction made of Ale, which you may term either
a Spirit or a quintessence, and that in a small dose, far more excellent then
all the tartareous, sulphurous, or mercurial preparations. If the Author do
here mean any Philosophical course, it will be both too curious and costly for
the common sort of people: If only a well rec^ified Aquavitae, or an
evaporation of the Phlegmatic part to a thick body, I cannot see how we shall
raise any store, or quantity of m^tter to furnish the Subject which we have in
hand. If he mean physically, we will reserve the strict examinati^n thereof,
till a fitter Occasion be offered.

21 The meal of such corn as is ground in the month of August, is remembered
amongst the Writers of best credit, to keep and last best all the year after.

22 Such bread as is made up of the Flower of dry Beans is most strong in
nourishment, and may be corrected of his taste by the addition of Cumminseed.
And it is also a usual matter in Germany to make drink of Beans^ Our English
Brewers do also find good use of them amongst other Corn in a small proportion,
wherein they have a special care not to surcharge the rest of their Beer Corn,
with too great a quantity of Beans^ lest they should give a bad smack or
farewell to their Beer: But I am verily perswad^d that if either Beans, or Pease
were artificially hand^ed according to the manner before expressed, that they
would not only prove serviceable, and that in a large manner for Beer only, but
also for the making of wholesome, swe^t, and delicate bread.

23 Of Vetches first hulled, and of the Herb Aphace, which receives diverse
Translations, and is called Dandelion, Priests crown, Swines snout, Monks head,
Dogs teeth, or common Cicory, may be made a bread so as it be mixed with a
convenient proportion of other usual meal, for it yields a very ^air and
savoury Flower, as the Author testifies of his own experience: The same may be
corrected with Annis-seed, Fennel seed, Coriander seed, etc.

24 Both Bread, and Drink may also be made of Lentils.

25 Bread may be made of Pannick, as also of Millet, whose seed even in a small
quantity does arise greatly both in Bulk, and substance.

26 A solid, and wholesome Bread may be made of wheat starch. But such bread, by
reason of his price, will have no fit place here-except every private man do
make his own provision.

27 A decoction of Annis seed, Fennel seed, Caraway seed, and such like, either
in Wine, or Water, is a most wholesome drink. Hereunto may be added a decoction
also of Licoras with Annis-seeds together in fair Water in a due proportion.

28 Of Beechmast, Acorns, and the Barks or raping of Trees that are wholesome, a
convenient drink may be had.

29 Mushrooms will spring abundantly if you ^^it the Barks of the black, and
white Poplar, and bury them in Furrows well dunged. So likewise the white
Poplar being cut off close by the ground, and watered with warm water well
seasoned with Leaven, in four days space will bring forth most pleasant, and
delicate Mushrooms. These being dressed in their kinds are accounted amongst
the most lusty, and stirring meats with the Italians.

30 A good bread may be made of the Rape, or Navew, being first scorched, and
after sodden, and then baked.

31 A bread may be made of the powdered, or ground leaves of the Pear Tree,
Apple tree, Beech and Oak, and so likewise of drink.

32 Dow may be kneaded up with Wine, Vinegar, or Ale, if you would make the
same hot, and hearty. But I think the new Must of Wine, or the best Wort of
Ale, or Beer much better, for that we may well doubt, or rather assure our
selves that the whole spirit of Wine, or Ale will fly away in the baking,
because the same had first wrought it self into a body, whereas in Wort that
never came to Workmanship, the fire or spirit does as yet lie close, and
couched within it.

33 A drunken bread may be made with spirit of Wine and Flower. But I think
that common Aqua-composita would pro^e over chargeable.

34 A Paste consisting of meal, and the Oil of Olives, or other Fruit, or seeds
mixed together may be made into bread.

35 Miz^ldus r^porteth of a certain Traveler, who undertaking a long journey
did relieve himself with one pound of the Oil of Violets and soft grease mixed
together, and therewith he preserved himself by the space of ten days. The like
effect has also been found in the Oil of Almonds mixed with the grease of a
Cow, and that by reason of the clamminess thereof.

36 A bread made of Eggs is both wholesome, and more filling then other
ordinary bread, but especially if the same be kneaded up with the yiest of the
strongest Beer or Ale.

37 Those Eggs are most carefully to be gathered, and kept, which are laid from
the new Moon in August, others do rather commend the Wain, and the time of both
the Sunsteads. And new laid Eggs will keep long in dry Chaff or Bran.

38 An excellent bread may be made with milk either leavened, or unleavened,
and of exceeding nourishment being taken but in a small quantity, but they fill
more if resty Bacon being fried be also incorporated therewith.

39 A man may live with milk only, and it will serve in stead of meat, and
drink, and medicine.

40 A glutting kind of bread may be made of new Cheese, and likewise of old
being grated; mixed, and wrought up with meal. For it comes all to one end
whether we eat bread and cheese severally, or both mixed together.

FINIS.
A Petition to the courteous Reader.
HEre I have thought good (Gentle Reader) to entreat thus much favor at thy
hands, that seeing my new fire of Coleballs, together with some other few
inv^ntions, first mentioned in mine Apology, do as yet attend some courtly
favors, whereby they cannot so pr^sently as I wish, break forth into the
public service of this Land: That thou would for a little time (which I
hope is n^w drawing to his period) entertain them with a good conceit and kind
opinion, not reg^rding the censures of those ignorant, or malicious spirits of
our age, who presuming to know the si^ples of my fire, may happily range into
base and offensive matter, and thereby lab^u^ to discredit that secret, whose
composition they could never yet reach unto, nor, if they had the particulars,
were they able to combine and knit them with their left handed Workmanship.

And for the b^tter satisfac^ion of my well-wishing friends, and the full
confutation of mine undeserved Foes, I would have them to understand that
seeing the prem^sed Secrets, have not only been seen, and allowed, but at this
present are also countenanced by those which are right Honorable in their
places: that from henceforth they will scorn the malice both of Viperous
Tongues, as also of slanderous Pens, if any man should happen to be so
extremely, or desperately mad, as to take upon him to argue upon that project,
whereof he can neither find a medium, nor communes terminos, and therefore
impossible to conclude Syllogistice si non in Bocardo against it.

Books sold by William Cooper.
GEorge Starkey's Admirable Efficacy, and almost incredible Virtue of the true
Oil of Sulphur-Vive made per Campanam. A detection of the various injuries, and
abuses in Chemical and Galenical Physic, committed both by Physicians and
Apothecaries. 1674. 8o. Fr. Mer. Van-Helmont his Cabbalistical Dialogue
concerning the Worlds Cr^ation, in Answer to Dr. Hen. More. 1682. 4o. Geo.
Kendall's Appendix to Mathew's unlearned Alchemist, or the Art and way taught
how to make the said Pill^ for the benefit of the People of England. London.
1663. 8o. Sir George Ripley's Bosome-Book of his Philosophical Accurtations in
the making of the Philosophers M^rcury and Elixirs. 1683. 8o. Sir Hugh Plat's
new and Artificial Remedies against Famine, wrote upon the Occasion of a great
Dearth in the year 1569. 8o. El. Ashmole's way to bliss, proving by Philosophy,
and Reason the possibility of an universal Medicine. Land. 1658. 4o. Matthew.
Ma^kaile the diver^ity of Salts and Spirits maintained, or the imaginary
volatility o^ some Salts and Nonentity of the Alcali before Cremation and
Identity of all Alcalies, all volatile Salts, and all vinous Spirits, by an
only Lamp ^urnace, resolved into real improbability, in Answer to Dr. Dan. Cox,
and with Animadversions upon Gid. Harvey's new discovery of the Scurvey, etc.
Ab^rdeen. 1683. 8o. -- His M^ffet-Well or a Topographicospagyrical Description
of the Mineral Wells at Moffet in Annedale in Scotland, and the Oily Well at
St. Catherines Chapel, with a Character of Mr. Culpepper and his Writings.
Edinburg, 1664. 8o. Starkey Revived, or the pre^ent state of Physic, as now
practiced by R. Fl^tcher. Land. 1676. 8o. R. Fletcher's Character of a true
Physician or a true Chemist, etc. London. 1676. 8o. Io. Collins his Discourse
of Salt and the several ways to make Salt in England, the Character of good and
bad Salts, and the several sorts of refined English Salts, London. 1682. 4o.
Fr. Cox his Treatise of the making and use of diverse Oils, distilled Waters,
etc. Land. 1575. 8o.
The end.
THE TOMB OF SEMIRAMIS Hermetically Sealed, Which if a Wiseman open (not the
Ambitious Covetous Cyrus) he shall find the Treasures of Kings, inexhaustible
Riches to his content.

H. V. D.

He that exercises Love, will apprehend what I say: but if I speak to the
ungrateful, he shall not comprehend my sayings. S. Aug. of Divine Love. London,
Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1684.

Most Noble and most Famous, S. R. I. curious in the inspection of Nature, and
my most honored Patrons.
NOt only in former times, but also in this old Age of the World, nothing has
been deeper buried, nor hitherto more desired by all, especially the lovers of
Art, than the knowledge of that great Mystery of the Philosophers, which by a
known word is called the Philosophers-Stone; We therefore preserving the
Inscription of the Monument, do raise this Knowledge, buried and obscured under
the pretext of the Tomb of the most wise Semiramis, formerly Queen of Babylon,
out of its Grave, and present it to the view of the Learned, which if (not an
ambitious covetous Cyrus, but) a wise man open, he will to his satisfaction
find Royal and inexhaustible Treasures: I may also add constant Health: which
two, you will say, are the principal supporters of an happy life.

But some happily of no small ingenuity will imagine that this Tomb may be opened
by Women's work, or Childrens sport: but let them know that this Knowledge is a
most deep River, wherein the Lamb wades, that is, the upright profits; and
the Elephant swims, that is, the most Learned do fluctuate, yea are drowned in
their opinions, errors and doubts; whilst one is yet doubtful concerning the
true subject of the great Work, yea generally a stranger to it; another very
solicitous in acquiring the sophical Mercury, wearyeth himself with
unsuccessful labors, not knowing what it is, or of what form; Another tortures
himself with vain perplexity to know what the Philosophers Fire is, what the
magical Elements, the Key, or dissolving Menstruum, whence it is to be drawn,
whether sweet, or corrosive? cold or fiery? it has troubled me often to see
such men so concerned, and in vain laborious in those things, wherein they at
length could find nothing but vanity and affliction of mind; wherefore
commiserating them by the impulse of Charity, I do freely impart (though many
will accuse me as guilty of violated silence) the Light mercifully communicated
to me, that they may use the same as a Key to the Sanctuary of that sacred
Knowledge.

But the curious Industry, and indefatigable Curiosity of you, being most
excellent in the exact Arcana's and Work of Polydaedalus nature, having invited
all the Learned men of the World by your most sweet incitements, to communicate
the most secret things, enjoyneth and obliges me to make you (the genuine Sons
of all sorts of Knowledge) Heirs of this, which in my judgment is the most exact
and curious Work of all Nature. But who I am, enquire not. I am a man that
makes it my study to profit others, your Friend, and an admirer of your
Virtues, known to many, at least by name.

Farewell therefore, ye Students of Nature, and Highpriests of Art, the lofty
Stars of Germany, God be with you, and with his Power strengthen your Works and
Thoughts, that they may be highly advantageous to the whole Commonwealth of
Learning, for the increase of the Publick-good, and the immortal Glory of your
own Names.

From my Study, Ian. 1. 1674.
THE Tomb of SEMIRAMIS Hermetically Sealed.
CHAP. I. Of the Physical subject of the Philosophers Stone.
THE Fear of the Lord is the beginning of our Work, and the end Charity, and
love of our Neighbor. Entering therefore with the assistance of our good God
upon so divine a Work, it must be first enquired, what the subject thereof is.
For as a Plough-man in vain prepares his Ground for Harvest, unless he be
assured of the Seed; so also he prepares the Chemical Ground without any
recompense, if he knows not what he sows therein: and herein at this day many
do perplex themselves, and are hurried into different opinions.

But this is not a place to discuss all these things, whilst some do seek it in
the Animal Kingdom in Blood, Sperm, Sweat, Urine, Hair, Dung, Eggs, Serpents,
Toads, Spiders, etc. Others are with great diligence employed in the Vegetable
Kingdom, especially in Wine for the unprofitable Magistery. For though it be
manifest to us, that the supreme Medicine of our health may be obtained in
either Kingdom, and indeed in Man, (especially in his heart) as also in Wine:
for as Gold contains the virtues of all Minerals, so do these two comprehend
the powers of all Animals and Vegetables as contracted into one; yet that the
great work of Philosophers could be made from them, was never in the thought of
any Adept, it is therefore requisite to be sought in the Mineral Kingdom. But
there is also here a great company of Dissenters, so that we have need of an
Oedipus. For some there be that think to extract it out of the middle Minerals,
as they call them, namely, Salt, Nitre, Alom, and such other, but all in vain,
because they have in them no Argent vive, into which they may be resolved; in
which error even we in our primitive ignorance were also involved. It remains
therefore to be supposed, that Metals are the Physical subject of our blessed
Stone. But here also the matter is in suspense, because Metals are some perfect
and some imperfect.

But in fine we say, that all fused Metals, but especially the not fused,
though imperfect, may by the intimate depuration of their original pollution
(which yet is very difficult, and by outward appearance scarce possible) be the
subject of the Stone, whereof, says Flamel, some have operated in Jupiter,
others in Saturn, but I (says he) have operated and found it out in Sol: and
in Exercit. ad Turbam it is read, That all Metals clean and unclean are
internally Sol, and Luna, and Mercury, but there is one true Sol, which is
drawn from them. And the Author of the ^ecret work of the Hermetick Philosophy,
Can. 16. says, He that seeks the Art of multiplying and perfecting imperfect
Metals but by the nature of Metals, deviates from the truth; for Metals must be
expected from Metals, as the species of Man from Man, of Beast from Beast. And
Can. 18. He proceeds thus: Perfect Bodies are endowed with a more perfect Seed;
under the hard shell therefore of the perfect Metals lies the perfect Seed,
which he that knows how to extract by Philosophical Resolution, is entered
into the Royal Path. So also that Anonymous Philalethes in his Introduction
into the King's Sacred Palace, Chap. 19. concerning the progress of the Work in
the first forty days; There is indeed in all (even in the common) Metals, Gold,
but nearer in Gold and Silver, though (as the same Adept speaks well) there is
yet one thing in the Metallic Kingdom of an admirable offspring, in which our
Gold is nearer than in common Gold and Silver, if you seek it in the hour of
its nativity, which melts in our Mercury, as Ice in warm Water, etc.

But leaving now these more imperfect Metals, at present we declare those two
great and more perfect Luminaries Sol and Luna, to wit, Gold and Silver, to be
the Physical subject of the Stone, which way a great part of the Philosophers
have followed, and came to their desired end. Which same thing Augurellus
shows, 2 Chrysop. when he says, Take a Metal pure, and purged of all its
dross, whose Spirit recedes in its secret part, and being pressed with a great
weight, lives privily, and desires to be released from bands, and to be sent
out of prison to Heaven, being spread into thin plates. The same in Chrysostom. lib.
1. Seek not the principles of Gold any-where else: for in Gold is the seed of
Gold; though being close shut up, it retires further, and is to be sought by us
with tedious labor. And concerning the dignity of both the Luminari^s, Lully,
that Star of Spagyrick Philosophy, in his Book, P.M. 28. says, Two are more
pure than the rest^ ^amely, Gold and Silver, without which the Work cannot be
begun or finished, because in them is the purest substance of Sulphur perfectly
purified by the ingenuity of Nature; and out of these two bodies prepared with
their Sulphur or Arsenick, our Medicine may be extracted, and cannot be had
without them. And Cla^gor Buccinae says, You must operate prudently and
expressly, because neither Sol nor Luna can be without ferment, and any other
seed or ferment is not proper and useful, but Gold to the red, and Silver to
the white; which bodies being first subtiliated under weight, must then be
sowed, that they may putrify and be corrupted; where one form being destroyed,
another more noble is put on; and this is done by the means of our Water alone.
From hence a certain Anonymous in his Answer excellently concludes; As Fire is
the principle of Fire, so Gold is the principle of Gold; such as the Cause is,
such is the Effect; such as the Father, such the Son; such as the Seed is, such
is the Fruit; Man generates Man, and a Lion a Lion.

But you will say, The Philosophers affirm, that the matter ought to be such,
that the Poor as well as the Rich may obtain it; from whence that saying is,
God has granted this treasure to be sought by all men; nor does he deny that
great Good to any man, except to him that makes himself unworthy by the
depraved affections of his heart. And Geber, You ought not to consume your
goods because of mean price: if you understand the principles of Art, which we
shall deliver to you, you will attain to the complete Magistery. For if it were
Gold, or any such costly thing, the Poor would be constrained to postpone this
glorious Work. And whereas an Artist may oftentimes happen to err, a poor man
could not repeat the Work after an error committed, which must absolutely be
done, if there be no other remedy. And Lilium; This Stone is openly sold at the
meanest rate, which if the Sellers knew, they would keep it in their hands, and
by no means sell it. And another Anonymous, Our expenses exceed not the price
of two Florins: which Arnoldus thus confirms; Hold fast, because the charge of
our most noble Art exceeds not the price of two pieces of Gold in its emption,
that is, in the operation. And Geber says, If in operations you lose your
money, reflect not injuriously on us, but impute it to your own imprudence; for
our Art requires no great expenses.

To which we answer; That we never denied, that besides Gold and Silver there
is not also granted another subject of meaner value, where we excluded not
imperfect Metals, as we mentioned before out of an Anonymous Philosopher in
these words; There is yet one thing in the Metallic Kingdom if an admirable
beginning, etc. though many Philosophers would have this vile price to be
^nderstood of our dissolving Menstruum.

Moreover, you will say out of Sendivogius Tract. 11. in your Operations take
not common Gold and Silver, for these are dead things.

We answer, by granting that the Stone is not made of common Gold and Silver,
as such, and so long as they are dead, but when resuscitated, and reduced into
their first seminal nature, and made like unto the Philosophers Gold, then do
they not only express their seed, but also do serve instead of ferment: which a
certain Philosopher confirms in those words, saying; Neither the ancient (...)
the modern Philosophers have ever made any thing but Gold of Gold, and Silver
of Silver, yet that was not common Gold or Silver.

By which it appears, that the Philosophers Gold is not common Gold, neither in
color nor in substance, but that which is extracted from them is the white and
red tincture.

CHAP. II. What the Physical or Philosopher's Gold is.
THe Philosophers Gold or Silver, is a metallic body, resolved into the last
matter, to wit, into Mercury, which is the first matter of the Stone, and is
thus proved Every thing is from that into which it is resolved: But all Metals
are reduced into Argent vive; ergo, they were Argent vive.

For, according to the common opinion of Philosophers, that which the wise men
seek is in Mercury. Moreover, Mercury is the radix in Alchymy, because from it,
by it and in it are all Metals. And Theophrastu^ (that most profound Sea of the
Spagyrick-Philosophy) thus speaks concerning the first matter of Metals: To
extract Mercury from metallic bodies, is nothing else but to resolve or reduce
them into their first matter, that is, running Mercury, even such as it was in
the center of the Earth, before the generation of Metals, to wit^ a moist and
viscous vapor, which is the Philosophers Gold or Silver, containing in it
invisibly the Mercury and Sulphur of Nature, the principles of all Metals,
which Mercury is of ineffable virtue and efficacy, and contains divine secrets^

CHAP. III. Of the preparation of Bodies for the Philosophers Mercury.
AVicen says, If you desire to operate, you must necessarily begin your Work
in the solution or sublimation of the two Luminaries; because the first degree
of the Work is, that Argent vive may be made from thence; but because these, as
the more perfect Bodies, are closer bound, and have an ba(...) lation, that
they may be reduced into (...) do in the first place require preparation,
a^^^physical calcination, which indeed is not so necessary in Silver; for by
reason of the cleanness and softness thereof, our Water easily acts upon it;
which is not done in Gold, and the other Metals, which do all require
Calcination, on which our Water then more easily acts, especially if those
which are impure be deputated for the similitude of substance.

Concerning the Calcination of Bodies out of the secret Work of the Doctor and
Bishop of Trent for the Philosophers Stone: Metals to be dissolved ought to be
first calcined or purged in Lac virginis, and Luna being most fine and subtly
filed, must be dissolved in Aquafortis, and distilled rainwater in which Sal
Armoniack or common Salt has been dissolved; then it must be precipitated into
a most white Calx, and washed in decanted water, and the Calx must be
edulcorated in other rainwater hot, that all the saltness and acrimony may be
taken away, then must it be dried, and it will be a most pure Calx.

But Gold must be calcined after this manner: Make an Amalgame with Gold (which
must be first depurated by the Body of the black Eagle, that it may be made
beautiful and glorious above measure) and Mercury very well purged with Salt
and Vinegar, and strained through Leather, put it in purified Aquafortis, that
all the Mercury may be dissolved, decant the Aquafortis from the Calx of Sol,
wash the Calx as aforesaid in warm water, and dry it with a gentle heat, that
Calx (if artificially and lightly reverberated, yet so that it flow not) will
be converted into a most beautiful Crocus.

Gold that it may be reduced into the first Matter, or Mercury of Philosophers,
is thus otherwise calcined, whereof Paracelsus, in his 7th Book of
Metamorphosis concerning resuscitation, declares, namely; that Metal must be
calcined with revivified Mercury, by putting Mercury with the Metal into a
Sublimatory, digesting them together, till an Amalgame be made, then sublime
the Mercury with a moderate Fire, and bruise it with the metallic Calx, and as
before, repeat the digestion and sublimation, and that so often till the Calx
being put to a burning Candle will melt like ice, or wax. This Metal so
prepared, put to digestion in Horse-dung or in ^al. Mariae, moderately hot,
digesting it for a mo^^h, and the Metal will be converted into living Mercury,
that is, into the first matter, which is called the Philosophers Mercury; and
the Mercury of Metals, which many have sought, but few have found.

Ioachimus Poleman of the Mystery of the Philosophers Sulphur, by help of his
duplicated and satiated Corrosive, divides a Metal into the least Atoms, and
dilacerates it to be delivered to the ^^ry Menstruum, dissolving it to a
tinging Soul.

It is calcined by us another and better way, which Calcination we rather call
the first solution, and it is done by pouring the Wine of Life to the Calxes of
Sol or Luna aforesaid, put into a Phial, (which is our Menstruum, of which
hereafter in Chap. 6.) to the height of a fingers breadth, and putting to an
Head or Alembick, they must be digested in Ashes, or also in Sand, and
coagulated; being coagulated, you must pour on new Menstruum, as before, and
coagulate, and that three or four times, or till the metallic Calx melt at the
^^re like Wax or Ice, which is a sign of sufficient Philosophical calcination;
and this is done with the preservation of the Metal in its primitive virtue;
and this is that which Aristotle says in the Rosary, join your Son Gabricius
deare^ to you then all your Children) with his Sister Beja, who is a tender
sweet and splendid Virgin.

CHAP. IV. Of the second and true Philosophical Solution of Bodies, and their
reduction into Mercury.
HAving performed Calcination, or the first Solution, whereof we have spoken in
the preceding Chapter, and which (a^ the anonymous Philosopher in his Golden
Treatise of the Philosophers Stone in his Answer has it) ought to be sweet and
full natural; that is, which should without noise dissolve the Subject with the
preservation o^ its radical moisture, then the Bodies so calcined^ must be put
into a Phial hermetical^y sealed, and in a gentle heat of Bal. Mar^r Dew, be
digested, or putrified the space ^f a Philosophical Month: for a voluntary
^olution is better than a violent; a tem^erate, than a speedy; as the
Philosopher ^ath it. And thus is made the second and true Solution of a Metal
into viscous water, ^r a certain Oleity with the preservation of ^he radical
moisture, in which is the true metallic Sulphur, together with the true and
most noble Mercury: for one of them is always the Magnet, and remains solving
with ^he solved, and desires to continue inseparably, and that because of the
similitude of substance. Wherefore the Ancients said, Nature rejoices in
Nature, Nature overcom^th and alters Nature, whereby the essen^ial or formal
Solution is distinguished from the corrosive Solution. But you must know that
from Luna is obtained a liquor, or green ^incture, which is the true Elixir of
Luna, and the highest Arcanum to comfort the Brain. But from Sol by equal
putrefaction ^s produced a Liquor of the highest redness, which is the true
Elixir of Sol, and the quinessence of Metal. Whereof, says Geber, we make
sanguine Gold better than that produced by Nature, which Nature no wise makes.
Concerning this Viscosity, Geber further speaks briefly: We have most exactly
tried all things, and that by approved Reasons but we could never find any
thing permanent i^ Fire, except the viscous Moisture, the sole radi^ of all
Metals, when as all the other Moisture being not well united in homogenei^y do
easily ste^ from Fire, and the Elements are easily separated from one another,
but the viscous Moisture, to wit^ Mercury is never consumed with Fire, nor is
the Water separated from the Earth, but they either remain altogether, or go
altogether away.

But will you enquire in what weight the Menstru^m is to be ^spoused to a
Metal? The Philosophers Rosary says, As in the working of Bread, a little
Le^ven le^veneth and sermenteth a great quantity of Paste; so also a modicum of
Earth is sufficient for the nutrition of the whole Stone. Aristotle nominates
the weight, saying, do thus, and coct till the Earth that is, the Gold) has
exhausted ten parts of the Water.

The Author of Novum Lumen at the end of his Book breaks forth into these
words; There ought to be ten parts of Water to one part of Body: and by this
way we make Mercury without common Mercury, by taking ten parts of our
Mercurial Water (that is, the Mercurial Oil of Salt putrefied and alembicated)
which is an unctious vapor, to one part of the body of Gold, and being
included in a Vessel by continual coction, the Gold is made Mercury, that is,
an un^^uous vapor, and not common Mercury, as some falsely do imagine.

CHAP. V. What a Quintessence properly is.
PARACELSVS in his third Book of long Life, chap. 2. discoms^th thus: A
Quint^ssence is nothing else but the goodness of Nature, so that all Nature
passes into a spagyrick mixture and temperament, in which no corrup^ible
thing, and nothing contrary is to be found.

He also in his fourth Book Archidox. of the Quintessence says, A Quintessence
is a matter which is corporally extracted out of all Creseitives, and out of
all things that have life, being separated from all impurity and mortality,
most purely subtiliated, and divided from all the Elements thereof.

And a little after in the same place; You ought to know concerning the
Quintessence, that it is a matter little and small, lodged and harbored in
some Tree, Herb, Stone, or the like; the rest is a pure body, from which we
learn the separation of the Elements.

Rupescissa concerning the Quintessence, in chap. 5. about the end, says, The
Quintessence which we seek is therefore a thing ingeniated by divine breath,
which by continual ascensions and descensions is separated from the corruptible
body of the four Elements; and the reason is, because that which is a second
time, and often sublimed, is more subtle, glorified and separated from the
corruption of the four Elements, then when it ascends only once; and so that
which is sublimed even to a thousand times, and by continual ascension and
descension comes to so great a virtue of glorification, that it is a compound
almost incorruptible, as the Heavens, and of the matter of the Heavens, and
therefore called Quintessence; because it is in respect of the Body, as the
Heavens are in respect of the whole World, almost after the same way: by which
Art can imitate Nature, as by a certain like, very near and connatural way.

CHAP. VI. Of the Philosophical Fire, or Dissolving Menstruum, or our Liquor
Alkahest.
THe preparation of this Water, or most noble Juice, (which is the Kings true
Bath) the Philosophers always held occult, so that Bernard Count Tresne and
Neigen, Book 2. said, he had made a vow to God, to Philosophers, and to Equity,
not plainly to explain himself to any man, because it is the most secret
Arcanum of the whole Work, and is so indeed; for if this Liquor were manifested
to every man, Boys would then deride our Wisdom, and Fools would be equal to
the Wise, and the whole World would rush hither with a blind impulse, and ^un
themselves headlong without any regard to Equity or Piety, to the bottom of
Hell. Augurellus calls this Menstruum Mercury in these words: Tu quoque nec
coeptis Cylleni and acibus unquam Defueris Argentum vulgo quod vivere dicunt
Sufficit, and tantis praestant primordia rebus. Nor is Argent vive ever wanting
to the bold undertaking of Cylenus, it yields principles to great things. The
same does George Ripley judge in his Preface of the twelve Gates: I will teach
you truly, that these are the Mercuries that are the keys of Knowledge, which
Raymund calls his Menstrua's, without which is nothing done. Geber names it
otherwise, saying, by the most high God, this is that Water, which lights
Candles, gives light to houses, and yields abundance of Riches, Oh the Water of
our Sea! Oh our Sal Nitre app^rtaining to the Sea of the World! Oh our
Vegetable! Oh our fixed and volatile Sulphur! O the Caput mortuum, or faeces of
our Sea!

Tridensine in his secret work of the Philosophers Stone, says: The Water
which Philosophers used for the complement of the Work, they called La^
Virginis, Coagulum, the Morning-dew, the Quintessence, Aquavitae, the
Philosophers Daughter, etc.

Paracelsus variously also, Azoth, Spirit of Wine tempered and circulated,
Mercurial-Water, Sendivogius, Chalibs; Rupescissa, Vinegar most nobly distilled.

Van-Helmont (that most profound Philosopher by Fire) called it, the Liquor
Alkahest, and thus described it: The Liquor Alkahest resolves every visible and
tangible body into its first matter, preserving the power of the Seed,
concerning which the Chemists say, the Vulgar burn by Fire, but we by Water.

We, by the Philosophers leave, are those that can at will give names to their
products, do call it the Mercurial Oil of Salt putrefied and alembicated: for
Oil is exalted to an higher degree of a fiery quality, as it is the foundation
of the whole metallic solution, (which is to be well observed) without which
nothing can be advantageous in the Art, and it acts the part of a Woman in our
Work, and is deservedly called the Wife of Sol, and the Matrix; and it is the
hidden Key to open the close Gates of Metals; for it dissolves calcined Metals,
it calcines and putrefies the volatile and spiritual, it tingeth into all
colors, and is the beginning, middle and end of Tinctures; and is of one
nature with Gold, as Arn. de Villa Nova affirms, unl^ss that the nature of Gold
is complete, dig^sted and fixed: but the nature of the Water is incomplete,
indigested and volatile. In a word, it is the Philosophers Fire, by which the
Tree of Hermes is burnt to ash^s.

Concerning this Fire Johannes Pontanus in his Epistle says, The Philosophers
Fire is not the Fire of Balneo, nor of Dung, nor of any thing of that kind,
which the Philosophers have published in their Writings; it is mineral, it is
equal, it is continual, it evapourates not, unless it be too much incensed; it
participates of Sulphur; it is taken elsewhere than from the matter; it divide,
dissolves calcines and congeals all things; and it is a Fire with moderate
burning; it is a compendium without any great charge, because the whole work
is^ perfected therewith. Study therefore therein: for if I had found this at
first, I had not erred two hundred times before I attained to practice:
wherefore men do err, have erred, and will err, because the Philosophers have
not constituted a proper Agent in their Books, except one, namely Artephius.
But he speaks according to his judgment; and unless I had read Artephius, and
perceived his scope, I had never attained to the Complement of the Work, etc.
Do you consult him, and ye shall know what our Menstruum is. I have said enough.

CHAP. VII. Whether the dissolving Menstruum be corrosive.
GEBER de Sum. perfect. Cap. 52 seems to be of this opinion, whilst he says,
Every thing that is solved must necessarily have the nature of Salt, Alums, and
the like. And Paracelsus in his fourth Book Archidox. of the Quintessence, a
little after the beginning, says thus: It is difficult, and scarce credible,
to extract a Quintessence without a Corrosive out of Metals, but especially out
of Gold, which cannot be overcome but by a Corrosive, by which the Quincessence
and Body are one separated from ^he other; which Corrosive may again be taken
from it. And Chap. 3. of Long Life, Tom. 6. Book 3. he thus speaks: Resolve
Gold together with all the substance of Gold by a Corrosive, etc. and that so
long till it be made the same with the Corrosive: nor be you dismayed because
^f this way of operation; for a Corrosive is commodious for Gold, if it be
Gold, and without a Corrosive it is dead.

Yet you must know, that our Menstruum being poured upon Gold, ought not
properly be said to be corrosive, but rather fiery; the strength and virtue of
which Arcanum overcomes all Poisons. For every Realgar, that is, Mercury vive
and sublimate, as also precipitate, ought to dye in the Elixirium of Sol, and
come to a singular and excellent tincture; because also violent solution is not
made by our Menstruum, such as by the Resuscitatives, Aquafortis and Regia, and
others of this form; but (as was said before in the fourth Chapter) it is done
gently, sweetly, without any noise, and with the preservation of its radical
moisture, with the spirits of which (as Lully has it in his Vade mecum) a
vivified virtue is infused in the matters.

CHAP. VIII. Of the practice of the Sto^e.
WHen you have acquired the tinging Soul of the Planet, or the true
Quintessence thereof by previous putrefaction, in which the true Mercury, and
the Philosophers true Sulphur are contained: then is your matter prepared, ^^t
to make thereby our blessed Stone. Take therefore (in the name of Him that
said, and all things were done) of this most pure matter a sufficient quantity,
put it into a fixing Vessel, or Phial, or Philosophical Egg, h^rmetically
sealed; place it in an Athanor, as you know, and proceed with a convenient,
viz. a digesting heat, continual, (for that failing it must needs dye, or
become abortive) sweet, subtle, altering, and not burning (that I may use the
Counts own words) from the first conjunction, even to perfect ablution,
government of the Fire, concerning which the anonymous Philalethes may be
further consulted, who by the government of every Planet clearly describes the
diversities of colors, coagulating and fixing it into the white or red Stone:
for (as Raymund Lully advertiseth) he that has not power and patience in the
work, will corrupt it with too much haste.

The sign of the Work perfected will be this: If the Stone being projected upon
an hot plate of Venus, does melt like Wax, and not smoke, but pen^trate and
tinge, then is the Oriental King born, sitting in his Kingdom with greater
power than all the Princes of the World. Hence a Philosopher cries out, Come
forth out of Hell, arise from the Grave, awake out of Darkness^ for thou have
put on Brightness and Spirituality, because the voice of Resurrection is heard,
and the Soul of Life is entered into thee, praised be the Most High; and let his
Gifts redound to the Glory of his most holy Name, and to the good and benefit
of our neighbor.

CHAP. IX. Of the augmentation of the blessed Stone.
WHen by the help of God you have now obtained the ^foresaid incombustible
Sulphur, red with Purple, that you may by the repeated inversion of the Wheel
(as the Philosophers term it) know how to augment it; in which no small mystery
of Art is contained, we may the same way and method augment it, whereby we made
it; yet you must know that the oftener our Sulphur, which is our Stone, is
moistened or nourished by its proper Milk, dissolved in a moist Balneo, and
again coagulated and fixed, as in the first work, the tinging virtue of it will
be always greater; so that indeed after the first absolute work, one part will
tinge an hundred of purged Mercury, or any other imperfect Metal, in the second
solution by Lac Virginis, and the coagulation and fixation thereof, one part
will tinge a thousand. And thus time after time is our Medicine augmented and
multiplied in quantity and quality, in virtue and weight.

Take therefore one part of our Stone, and pour it upon two parts of Lac
Virginis, or the Mercurial Oil of Salt putrefied and alembicated; solve and
coagulate as you did in the first work, and our Water which before was only a
Mineral potentially, is actually made a Metal more precious than Gold. And thus
is the Stone mortified by sublimations, and revivified by imbibitions, which is
the chief universal way. These things being brought to a desired end;
Projections may at pleasure be made upon this or that Metal prepared, and
decently mundified and fused, as you have obtained the tincture either for
white or red; the true use of this Art, and all the Philosophers Books,
(especially our Philalethes) will abundantly show.

CHAP. X. Of the physical use of the Stone both internal and external.
YOU must know concerning this blessed Stone, that it is an universal Medicine
containing in it the perfect Cure of all Diseases, as well hot as cold, so far
as they are known to be curable by Nature, and are permitted by God to be
cured. If you enquire, how this most perfect Medicine, and Celestial Tincture,
and such other Universal Curatives do act, and operate, by curing contrary
things in Man's Body. We answer; They perform all this by heating,
illuminating, and irradiating the Archaeus, as our Philosopher Van Helmont has
it in a Treatise, entitled, There is in Herbs, Words and Stones a great
Virtue, that they do certainly act without their dissolution or destruction,
without their penetration, intro-admission, commixture, and commutation, also
afar off upon the drowsy or inflamed Archaeus, as it were by the sight alone,
by the irradiation or ejaculation of their virtues produced and exposed, their
former weight and properties being yet retained, and not changed. After which
manner, as Ioachimus Poleman excellently says, They transmute the spirits of
darkness, to wit, diseases, (which are all nothing else but the properties of
the seat of death, or the forerunners of dark and obscure death) into good
spirits, such as they were when the man was sound in perfect health, and by
this renovation of the defective powers, strength is withal universally
restored.

The dose of it is from one grain to two, according to the age and strength of
the Patient in a d^aught of warm Wine, or in a spoonful of the same
Quin^^ss^nce dissolved, and taken every third day. In ex^ernal Diseases,
Wounds, Cacoe^heck and Phagedenick Ulcers, Pistulaes, Gangreen, Cancer, etc.
one grain is taken in Wine every day, or once in two day^; but the part
externally affected is washed in Wine, wherein a portion of our Stone has been
dissolved; or if necessity require, it is injected by a Sy^inge, putting a
plate of Lead, and a convenient Ligature thereupon.

And this is the internal and external use of this great Mystery consummated,
for the acquisition of which invoke the Light of Light, and with a pure heart
pray for the illumination of your understanding, and you shall receive it: th^n
operate prudently, give relief to the Poor, abuse not the blessings of God,
believe the Gospel, and exercise your self in Piety. Amen.


