THE DECISIONS OF THE LORDS OF COUNCIL and SESSION, In the most Important Cases
Debate before them, With the ACTS OF SEDERUNT.

AS ALSO, An Alphabetical Compend of the Decisions; With an Index of the Acts
of Sederunt, and the Pursuers and Defenders Names. From June 1661. to July 1681.

PART FIRST, etc.

OBSERVED BY Sir JAMES DALRYMPLE of Stair, Knight and Baronet, etc.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1683.

Unto the Right Honorable GEORGE EARL of ABERDEEN etc. Lord High Chancellor
of SCOTLAND.
Sir David Falconer of Nevvtoun, Lord President of the Session. Sir George
Mckenzie of Tarbet, Lord Clerk-Register. Sir James Foulis of Collingtoun. Sir
John Lockhart of Casslehill. Sir David Balfour of Forret. Sir James Foulis of
Reidfoord. Sir Alexr. Seton of Pitmedden. Sir Roger Hogg of Harcarse. Sir
Andrew Birnie of Saline. Sir Patrick Ogilvie of Boyn. Sir John Murray of
Drumcairn. Sir George Nicolson of Kemnay. John Wauchop of Edmistoun. Sir Thomas
Steuart of Blair. Sir Patrick Lion of Carse.

SENATORS of the COLLEGE of JUSTICE, and Ordinar LORDS of COUNCIL and SESSION.
WILLIAM Marquess of Queensberry etc. Lord high Thesaurer of SCOTLAND.
JOHN Marquess of Athol etc. Lord Privy Seal, and Vice Admiral of SCOTLAND.
ALEXANDER Earl of Murray etc. Conjunct-Secretary of State.
JAMES Earl of Pearth etc. Lord Justice-General,
Extraordinar LORDS of the SESSION.
My Lords,
MY Duty and Affection obliges me to Dedicate these Acts and Decisions to your
Lordships, because they are your own; I have only been your Servant in
Observing and Collecting them, and am confident, they will serve for the
Illustration and Vindication of your Justice, and Faithfulness in your Service
to the King and Kingdom, to whom it cannot but be highly acceptable and
satisfying to see, that in so long a tract of time, you have kept so steady and
equal a course in the Administration of Justice with (...).

It has been looked upon as the privilege of Judges^ to bring in Causes to be
determined, in what order they thought fit, which gave occasion of great
Reverence to, and dependence upon them, and of gratifications to their Friends,
but your Lordships having found so much inconveniency to the Subjects, by their
tedious, expensive, and uncertain attendence, unavoidable in that way, you did
therefore willingly, and of your proper motion quite that Privilege, and
ordered that all men should have dispatch in Justice, as their own diligence
put them in readiness to demand it, without pretense of complaint for being
postponed or delayed; and you gave the rise for interposing the Authority of
Parliament to that Order, which could not but avoid the suspicion of
inequality, which did occur, while every Judge in his course, did choice at
discretion what Causes to hear, which were readily supposed to be these of his
Friends and Relations.

As your Lordships have been equal in the Order, so these Decisions will show
that you have been impartial in the matter of Justice, and it will appear that
you have followed the same uniform Course of Justice, otherwise it had been
impossible for you to quadrat with your selves, if you had followed any other
Rule; for if personal Interest had great influence, it could not fail but the
same case, would have been diversely determined amongst different Parties: The
way of Truth and Justice is one, and never crosses or just^eth with it self;
but the way of Error and Partiality is infinite, and can never be long
consonant, and the pretense of varying upon differences in the cases will
easily be perceived, when these are not the true motives of Variation, nor can
the greatest caution keep former Cases so in memory, as not to fall in flat
contradictions in some length of time, when Justice is not the Rule; It was no
wonder that inconsistencies did occur, when former Decisions were but little
known, and were only Transmitted by uncertain Tradition, from the memory of
Judges or Advocats, where a constant Custom was not introduced; but in
circumstantiat Cases, all the points of Fact, could not be so preserved, but
Pleaders would differ about them, and controvert whether the difference were so
material as to be the just motives of alteration; and if they should have
recourse to Records, they could thence have little remedy, seeing many eminent
Decisions came to be Transacted before any Act or Decree thereupon were
Recorded, and though they were, yet the Motives upon which the Lords did
proceed were seldom decernable in the mass of Disputes. The contrarieties that
are remarked by the judicious and industrious Lord Dury (who did serve and
observe about the same length of time that I have done) are the more
excuseable, that before his time the Decisions of Session were not much marked,
and but in few hands, yea it was a long time before the Decisions observed by
Dury, were become common, and were cited by Pleaders, or noticed by Judges.

It is impossible to evite the clamours of Parties coming short of their
expectation, when they are in heat and fervency carrying on their Cause, and
when they have heard the Wit and Eloquence of their Advocats, endeavoring to
make their Case, if not evidently just, at least probably such; but when that
fervor is cooled, upon second Thoughts, re-considering the Motives upon which
the Lords proceeded, if they see that they Decided not otherwise upon the same
Grounds, they cannot be so far wanting to their own quiet, as not to acquiesce
and rest satisfied, considering that their first Thoughts were in fervor, and
at best, were but the Conceptions of Parties, whose interest has a secret
influence to bias their first Apprehensions, they could not but be convinced
that the private and particular opinion of Parties interressed, should quietly
cede to the Judgment of so many learned and experienced Judges, having no other
concernment in the event of the Cause, but that Justice might be inviolable,
and that no pernicious or dangerous preparative might be laid, to the common
detriment of all, and who by all the obligations whereof men are capable,
toward God, their Prince, Country and Posterity, are engaged to be careful
and tender of Justice.

It is the great interest of Mankind, that every man should not be Judge in his
own Cause, but that there should be indifferent Judges, of good report, men of
courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness, who might hear and determine the
Controversies of Parties, which necessarly does imply, that either Party should
acquiesce in the public judgment of Authority.

It is amongst the greatest interests of Mankind, that they may securely enjoy
their Rights and Possessions, being free from fear to be overreached, or
oppressed, without remedy; which can not be attained, unless their Rights be
lodged in the hands of just and judicious Judges, wherein at first they could
have little more to rest on, but the Reputation that their Judges were such,
nor could the Judges then have any other Rule then bonum and equum, according
to the discretion of good men, and therefore did differ little from Arbiters,
until they came to have fixed Customs and Statutes, clear and known, which
could not come the length of a sufficient Rule for all Cases, for there will
ever be new Cases occurring; and therefore the best expedient to give this most
desirable Security, is, to show that Judges do always proceed suitably to
themselves without interfeiring; and that they make not Law like the Delphick
Sword, bowing or bending to the several Parties, but as a firm and stable Rule,
which will ply to no obliquity, but whatever must be regulate by it, must be
applied to it, and be straight like it, and so quadrat one to another, which
can be no way better known, than by the publishing and comparing of Decisions,
whereby it may be seen, that like Cases have like events, and that there is no
respect of persons in Judgment; all men cannot be Lawers, nor can the most part
have discretion enough to understand aequum and bonum; yet few will be found to
want capacity to compare Decisions, and so perceive if they be congruous and
uniform, and if they find them such, they may easily be persuaded, that their
uniformity could be by no other Rule than Law, and Justice.

It is no small prejudice to any Nation, to make them believe or suspect that
their Rights are not secured in just hands, for that overturns their quiet and
security. The most part will never have a Pursuit determined against them, and
far fewer will find themselves worsted by personal considerations, But no man
can say but he may, and most do fear that they shall be involved in Law Suits,
and if they be not persuaded to find a sure Remedy by just and knowing Judges,
then all is unsecure and disquieted, so that it is more the advantage of a
Nation that their Judges were but reputed just, though they were not, then that
they were just, yet were reputed unjust, for this Case touches and grieveth
all, whereas the former can reach but a few.

King James the fifth, who Institute the College of Justice, Ordered one of
the Lords to keep a Journal of their Decisions, with which Henry Sinclar Dean
of Rastalrig was entrusted, and did observe the same for the space of ten
years, as Maitland, Hadingtoun, Hope, Balfour, Spotswood, Dury, and several
others since have done; And after Our Sacred Sovereign who now Reigns, did
Restore the College of Justice to it is ancient Constitution and Splendour, and
did make a full Nomination of the Senators thereof; and Call most of the
Eminent Advocats to the Bench, so that after a long interruption, the Session
was almost wholly new, therefore it was very necessary that their Decisions
should be Observed, which induced me (being one of that Nomination) to
undertake that Task, which I did constantly follow, making up this Journal of
all the Decisions that had any thing of difficulty or importance in them, which
I did design to leave behind me, as a Token of my most devoted affection to
that excellent Society, The College of Justice, in which, with much
satisfaction I spent the far greatest part of my Life, and was very happy in
the mutual affection of my Colligues, both while I was at the Bar, and on the
Bench, yet the weight of the Charge I did bear, (which in a few years sunk my
Predecessor Sir John Gilmour, though a man of great strength of Body and
Spirit, when he undertook that Office) made me consider, that it was fit for
me, before Age or Infirmity should make that burden more uneasy, to have some
remnant of my Life, of which I might be Master, without Diversion, for which
some of your Lordships and others knew my Resolution to retire long ago; and
therefore I did propose to your Lordships the publishing of these Decisions
wherein I have your allowance and approbation.

I shall need to say nothing as to these Decisions in behalf of your Lordships,
I hope the Matter will speak more for your Honor, than to need any thing
further from me; I might say great things of that Judicature, and of your
selves particularly, but I shall forbear, least any should think it might look
like flattery, and therefore shall only add a little for my self.

I did not pick out such Decisions as I liked best, leaving out others which
might have showen contrariety; nor did I express my opinion when different from
the plurality, but I had ever that Deference to your Judgment, that I did not
omit any thing that was said for it, much less did I magnify my own opinion
against it, though I cannot say that I did often differ from it.

I did form this Breviat of these Decisions, in fresh and recent Memory, de die
in diem as they were pronunced; I seldom eat, before I Observed the
Interlocutors I judged of difficulty, that past that day, and when I was
hindered by any extraordinary occasion, I delayed no longer then that was over.
It was neither feazable nor fit that I should set down the large Pleadings, or
the Written Informations of Parties, I did peruse them thoroughly, and pitched
upon the Reasons which were of moment, as to the points determined, whereas in
the same Informations, there were many obvious clear Points insisted on, which
I omitted.

I did always relate the Case as it was proposed or resumed to the Lords, and
with the important Reasons offered by Parties, I added these which occurred to
the Lords in their Deliberations; so that all the Reasons and Motives upon
which the Lords proceeded, will neither be found in Parties Informations, nor
Clerks Minutes, for though it was not fit for the Lords to suggest any Point of
Fact not alleged by Parties: Yet it was most proper for them to supply the
Points of Law arising from the Fact proposed. And in such a Breviat it is not
to be expected that I should at large set down the Elegant and Eloquent
Disputes of the Lawers, but that I should express the Matter and Moment of
their Reasons, with the greatest plainness and equality that I could.

It is like, some of my Colligues may have observed other Cases than these, and
in these, may have worded Interlocutors otherwise, and adduced some other
Reasons, which cannot at all weaken the Credit of these, for some Decisions
were past when I kept my Course in the Outter-House, and others were Reported
long after the Informations were given, which might escape me, and many I
thought of no such intricacy or importance, as made them fit to be published,
but I do with all sincerity and confidence assert, that I did omit none I found
of difficulty, upon any design to cover inconsistencies, or any other end of
that kind, nor is it of import what the words were, if the Matter were truly
expressed; for no Observer did ever look into the Clerks Minutes, and different
Observers will not always have the same Opinion of the importance of Reasons,
nor will find themselves obliged to adduce all the Reasons proposed: Neither
have I Recorded any Decisions but what was determined while I was present,
being resolved to take nothing at a second hand.

These Decisions were Written with many different hands, but all of them were
then in my Family, and some of them understood not the Matter, by which, and
the haste I was forced oftimes to put them to, there was much uncorrect, but I
did expect that I might have been present, and have overseen the Press my self;
I began to cause Transcribe them with a better hand, and did consider whether
it were not fit to amplify and embellish the Disputes so, as might have been
expected from so pregnant and eloquent Pleaders, as our time has afforded, who
have been nothing short of their Predecessors, but I thought that this would
look too like a new Frame from my own Fancy or Memory, after so long a time,
and therefore I resolved they should be keept as they were at first Written,
and if so they prove uniform, as it will be a great evidence of your Lordships
Justice, so it will be a strong proof that they are sincere and authentic,
having been Written on the several Sederunt days, for more then twenty years
together; and therefore I do int^eat the favor, that what is uncorrect may be
excused and supplied from the Matter.

I had the best opportunity to make these Observations, being scarce a day
absent in any of these Sessions wherein I have marked them from the first of
June 1661. until the first of August 1681. And I was not one day absent from
the thirteenth of Ian^ary 1671. when it pleased His Majesty to appoint me to be
constant President of the Session in place of my Lord Craigmiller, who had then
demitted, except the Summer Session 1679. when I attended His Majesty by His
own Command, during all which time, I hope your Lordships will bear me Witness
that I never used Arrogance or Insolence, or the least reproachful or bitter
expression against any of the number; and I do with great thankfulness
acknowledge that I could not have expected more kindness and respect than I
found from your Lordships, which made me in gratitude take this Opportunity to
testify the Honor and Value I have for that honorable Society, and that I am
in great sincerity,

LEYDEN October 30. November 9. 1683. My Lords, Your Lordships most humble
Servant, IA: DALRYMPLE.

His Majesty's Gift and Privilege to Sir James Dalrymple of Stair, for
Printing his Institutions, the Acts of Sederunt, and Decisions of the Lords of
Session.
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To all and sundry Our Leidges and Subjects whom it
effeirs, to whose knowledge these Presents shall come, Greeting: Forasmuch as
Our Trusty and welbeloved Counselor, Sir James Dalrymple of Stair, President
of Our Session, has Observed and Written the Acts and Decisions of the Lords
of Our Session, since Our happy Restoration to this time: and has also
Written the Institutions of the Law of that Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
And We being well satisfied with his pains and diligence therien, and knowing
his long experience and knowledge of the Laws and Customs of that Our Kingdom,
and his constant affection and faithfulness to Us; and being confident of the
great benefit may arise to all Our Subjects of that Our ancient Kingdom, by
publishing of the said Decisions and Institutions; and being willing to give
to the said Sir James all encouragement therein, Therefore wit ye Us to have
Ratified and Approven. Likeas, We by their Our Letters, Ratify and Approve the
Contract agreed upon betwixt the said Sir James and Agnes Campbel and Patrick
Tailziefer Merchant in Our Burgh of Edinburgh, now her Spouse, having the Right
to, and exercing the Office of Our Printer in Our said ancient Kingdom of
Scotland, for Printing of the said Books in all the Heads, Articles and
Clauses therein contained whatsomever: Prohibiting all others to Print the
said Books, for the space of ninteen years, without the special leave of the
said Sir James, his Heirs and Successors, as the said Contract of the date the
26. ^f March 1681. year^, at length contained in the said Gift and Ratification
under Our Privy Seal more fully bears.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, Aprile 11. 1681. years, and of Our Raign^ the
33. Year. Per Signaturam manu S. D. N. Regis supra scriptam.

Act of Sederunt, Decimo Iunij 1681.
THe Lord President did signify to the Lords, that he having these twenty
years Observed the remarkable Practiques or Decisions that had past in this
Court, either upon Debate in presence of the whole Lords, or upon Report from
the Ordinary in the Outter-house, expressing not only the sum of the Debate, as
it was considered, and resumed by the Lords, with the Interlocutor; But also
the Grounds whereupon the Lords proceeded: and being of intention to put these
Decisions in Print, he had acquainted the King therewith, and had His Majesty's
allowance and approbation therein. And the said Lords considering that the
Lord President has been at extraordinary pains, in Observing and Collecting
these Decisions, and that the publishing thereof will be of great use and
advantage, not only to the College of Justice, but to the whole Leidges; They
approve his Resolution to Print the said Decisions, and did render him hearty
Thanks for undertaking this Work, tending so much to the public Good.

Errata vide after the first Index.

INDEX Of the Acts of Sederunt.
ACt for uniformity of Habit amongst the ordinary Lords, June 5th, 1661. Act
for continuing Summons and Writing in Latin as formerly, 1661. Act anent
Wakenings, June 11. 1661. Act for retaining the principal Writs presented to
the Register, and giving forth only Extracts thereof, 1661. Act for
Protestation Money, July 4th 1661. Act for granting Commissions to Debitors who
are sick, or out of the Country, on the Act Debtor and Creditor, July 31:
1661. Act discharging Lessons, the last Month of the Session, November 28.
1661. Act anent Executors Creditors, February 28. 1662. Act anent granting of
Bonds by apparent Heirs; whereupon Apprizings or Adjudications may follow, in
prejudice of the Defuncts Creditors. 1662. Act anent Advocats and Expectants,
not paying their dues, 1662. Act discharging Confusion the last day of the
Session, February 21. 1663. Act in favors of the Keeper of the Minute-Book,
June 6. 1663. Act concerning the buying of the Citiedail, September 8. 1663.
Act anent the Seal of Court, November 26. 1663. Act against general Letters,
June 8. 1665. Act for Keeping the Bar^s, June 22. 1665. Act anent Pro^tutors,
June 30. 1665. Act Ordering no sight of Process in the Summer Session, which
were seen in the Winter before, November 8. 1665. His Majesty's Instructions to
the Commissars, February 20. 1666. Orders to be observed in Confirmations of
all Testaments, Ibid. Instructions to the Clerk, Ibid. Act against Decreets,
for not Reproduction of Cessiones bonorum, November 6. 1666. His Majesty's
Letter to the Lords concerning Prizes, January 3. 1667. Warrant for general
Letters, for the Contribution due out of Benefices to the Lords, November 17.
1668. Oaths to be taken for the price of Fowls, January 15. 1669. Act anent
Extracts of Registrate Writs, bearing the Procurators names, though not
Subscribing, December 9. 1670. Act anent Extracting Acts and Decreets, January
20. 1671. Act against Magistrates of Burghs, for letting Prisoners for debt go
out of the Tolbooth, June 14. 1671. His Majesty's Order to the Commissioners of
His Thesauray to free the Lords from the Cess, July 19. 1671. Act for Keeping
the Bars, November 3. 1671. Act concerning privileged Summons, July 21. 1672.
Act anent payment of Dues for Summons, containing two Diets, July 11. 1672. Act
concerning Bankrupts, January 23. 1673. Act Ordaining Advocations, or
Suspensions of Processes for Conventicles, to be only past in presentia, or by
three Lords in vacant time, June 24. 1673. Letter anent Pryzes, July 8. 1673.
Act for Ordering new hearings in the Outer House, July 11. 1673. Letter from
His Majesty against appeals, June 17. 1674. Act concerning Acts before Answer,
July 23. 1674. Act for Trial of those presented to be Ordinary Lords of
Session, July the last 1674. Act upon the Marquess of Huntly's disowning
Appeals, January 26. 1675. Act concerning Prisoners for debt, February 5. 1675.
Act anent Bills of Suspension, February 9. 1675. Act Ordaining Processes after
Avisandum to be carried to the Ordinary that same day, and Reported in his
Week, June 2. 1675. Heugh Riddel sent to the Plantations, July 20. 1675. Act
anent passing of Bills for liberty out of Prison, July 21. 1675. Act concerning
the granting of Protections, February 1. 1676. His Majesty's Letter concerning
the Clerks, June 20: 1676. Act concerning the Registers, July 4. 1676. Act for
Inventaring the Registers Books, July 13. 1676. Act anent the manner of Booking
Decreets of Registration, November 21. 1676. Act anent the Registers of
Seasines and Hornings in the several Shires, January 4. 1677. Act concerning
Arrestments, February 1. 1677. Act concerning Advocates, June 7. 1677. Act
concerning the sisting of Execution upon Bills of Suspension, July 3. 1677. Act
concerning the Suspensions of Protestations, July 10. 1677. Act against
Solicitations, November 6. 1677. Act concerning Bills relating to concluded
Causes, November 9. 1677. Suspensions of the Excize to be past only in
presentia, December 6. 1677. Warrant anent Precepts for giving Seasine upon
Retoures, February 15. 1678. Act in favors of the Lord Register, February 22.
1678. Act Discharging Clerks to lend out Processes to any except Advocats and
their Servants, February 26. 1678. Act prohibiting the Clerks to give up Bills
relating to Processes, whereupon there is any Deliverance of the Lords, July
23. 1678. Act discharging Advocates, and Writers Servants, to Write their
Masters Subscription, July last 1678. Act Ordaining Hornings and Inhibitions to
be Booked, which were not Booked the time of the Usurpers, January 3. 1679.
Orders for payment of the Dues of the Signet, where Suspensions are appointed
to be discust upon the Bill, January 24. 1679. Act in favors of Intrant
Advocats, February 7. 1679. Act anent Executors Creditors, November 14. 1679.
Act anent the Registration of Hornings, November 19. 1679. Act against
Solicitations, December 24. 1679. Act anent the taking of Renunciations from
Persons Inhibited, February 19. 1680. Act against Petitions for alteration of
Acts Extracted, February 24. 1680. His Majesty's Letter in favors of the Lord
Register, anent the nomination of the Clerks of Session, June 8. 1680. Act
concerning Nottars, July 29. 1680. Act concerning Bills of Suspension, November
9. 1680. Act anent the marking of Advocates compearance for Defenders, November
25. 1680. Act in Favors of the Macers, February 15. 1681. Act anent Seasines
and Reversions of Lands within Burgh, February 22. 1681.
THE ACTS OF SEDERUNT, OF THE LORDS of SESSION.
Beginning the 5th June 1661, and ending in February 1681.
ACT for Uniformity of Habit by the ordinary Lords. June 5th. 1661.
THE Lords did find, that the whole fifteen ordinary Lords of Session, of
whatsoever Place, Dignity, or Title they be, should carry and use the ordinary
Habit and Robes of the ordinary Lords of Session in all time coming.

ACT for continuing Summonds, and writing in Latin as formerly. June 6. 1661.
THE Lords taking to their serious consideration, of how dangerous consequence
the alteration of Forms and Customs is; They have therefore ordained, and
hereby ordain all Summonds which formerly abode Continuation, and shall be
insisted in before them to be continued in time coming, and an Act to be made
thereanent, and Letters to be direct thereon, as was in use to be done before
the Year 1651, not exceeding the Rates and Prices formerly exacted. And also,
considering that during the Power of the late Usurpers, the use and custom of
writing in Latin was then discharged, by the pretended Commissioners for
Administration of Justice: Therefore the said Lords ordain all Charters,
Seasings, and other Writes of that nature, alswell such as pass the Seals, as
other ways, which were in use to be formed and written in Latin, to be
continued in the same Language as formerly, before the Year 1652. And to the
effect none may pretend Ignorance hereof, ordains these Presents to be
published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, after sound of Trumpet by a Macer.

ACT anent Warnings. June 11th. 1661.
THE said Lords ordain, That all wakenings of Processes lying undiscust, be
execute upon 24 hours, against all such Persons as are for the time within
Edinburgh, or Leith, and upon 6 days against all other Parties within this
Kingdom; and upon fifteen days against all such Persons as are out of the
Kingdom.

ACT for retaining the Principal Writes presented to the Register, and giving
forth only Extracts thereof.
THE which Day, the Lords of Council and Session taking into their
consideration, That the custom of the Clerks in the Usurpers time of giving
back to the Parties the Principal Bonds, Contracts, and other Writes, given in
to be registrat, did tend to the hazard and prejudice of the Leidges, and was
contrary to the practice formerly observed. They do therefore ordain, that the
Clerks of Session, and all Clerks of Inferior Courts and Judicatories, shall
henceforth keep and retain the Principal Writes (for which they shall be
answerable and give forth only Extracts thereof as formerly, before the Year
1651.) and ordains these Presents to be published at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh. Likeas, the said Lords require the Clerks of the Session to be
careful in preserving and keeping all Principal Bonds, Contracts, and other
Writes to be given in to them to be registrat, and that they be countable for
them and for their Servants, so long as they shall give them trust thereof. And
that once in the two years they deliver them to be kept by the Clerk of
Register, with the Public Records of the Kingdom.

ACT for Protestation Money. July 4. 1661.
THE said day the Lords taking to their Consideration, the Litigiousness, and
Malitiousness of some Suspenders, who upon frivolous and unjust Reasons and
Grounds, purchase Letters of Suspension and Advocation, and will not at the Day
of Compearance, nor on any other of the Days appointed for Production of the
said Principal Letters of Suspension and Advocation, produce the respective
Letters aforesaid, but keep the famine up, of purpose to trouble, vex, and put
to farther Charges and Expenses, the Chargers and Parties Persuers in the
Principal Cause Advocated to the said Lords. Therefore, the said Lords ordain
the several Sums of Money following to be paid by the said Suspenders, and
Purchasers of the said Letters of Advocation, to the Chargers and Parties
Pursuers in the Principal Cause Advocated to the said Lords; And that upon
their purchasing of Protestation, or Act of Remit against the said Suspenders,
and purchasers of the said Letters of Advocation; viz. If the sum charged for
be an hundred merks, or within the same, the sum of 8. lib. Scots; and if the
sum be above 100. merks, or not a liquid sum, the sum of ten pounds money
foresaid. And for every Remit the sum of 15. lib. Scots, and ordains an Act to
be extended hereupon in manner foresaid.

ACT for granting Commissions to Debitors, who are sick or out of the Country
on the Act Debtor and Creditor. July 31. 1661.
THE Lords of Session considering, that in prosecution of the Act of Parliament
of the 12. of July last, anent Creditor and Debtor; such Debitors as are far
off the Country, or are, or shall be disabled by Sickness to come here, to
take the benifite of the Act, will be thereby prejudged of the benefit thereof,
if some course be not taken to prevent the same. They do therefore empower the
Lord President, or the Lord Register, or any two of the Lords of Session, upon
Petitions, and sufficient Attestations of the Sickness of any Debtor, or of
their being forth of the Country, to give Commission during this ensuing
Vacation, to such Persons in the Country, as they shall think fit to receive
the Oath and Declaration of the Debitors, conform to the said Act, and to
report the same betwixt and the day of November next to come, to the Clerk of
Register, or his Deputs (Clerk to the Bills) to be Recorded with others of that
nature.

ACT discharging Lessons the last month of the Session. November 28. 1661.
THE same day the Lords considering, that in the end of the Session, the giving
way to Young-gentlemen to give proof of their Literature, by making public
Lessons, is greatly prejudicial to the Leidges: that time which is appointed
for hearing and discussing of Interloquitors being taken up with the said
Lessons. Therefore the Lords renews a former Act made to the effect
after-specified, in Anno 1650. And of new ordains in all time coming, That any
who are to make their Lessons, shall come and make them at such times of the
Session, as the hearing of them be not prejudicial to the administration of
Justice, and that none shall be heard to make such Lessons any time the last
month of of the Session.

ACT anent Executors Creditors. February 28. 1662.
THE which day, the Lords of Council and Session considering the great
confusions that arises amongst the Executors of Defunct Persons, and prejudices
sustained by many of them, in prosecution of their respective diligences,
against the Executors of Defunct Persons, and otherways, by obtaining the said
Creditors to be themselves decerned Executors Creditors to the Defunct, in
prejudice of other Creditors, who either dwelling at a far distance, or being
out of the Country, or otherways not knowing of the death of their Debitors,
are postponed; and others using sudden diligence are preferred. In respect
whereof, and for a remeid in time coming, The said Lords declare, and ordain,
that all Creditors of Defunct Persons using Legal diligence at any time within
half a year of the defuncts death, by citation of the Executors Creditors, or
intrometters with the Defuncts Goods, or by obtaining themselves decerned, and
confirmed Executors Creditors, or by citing of any other Executors confirmed:
the said Executors using any such diligence before the expiring of half a year
as said is, shall come in pari passu with any other Creditors, who have used
more timely diligence, by obtaining themselves decerned, and confirmed
Executors Creditors, or otherwise. It is always declared, That the Creditor
using posterior diligence, shall bear a proportional part of the charges wared
out by the Executor Creditor first decerned, and confirmed, before he have any
benefit of the Inventarie confirmed; and that it shall be lawful to the said
Creditor to obtain himself joined to the said Executor: and ordains these
presents to be insert in the Books of Sederunt, and to be Proclaimed at the the
Market Cross of Edinburgh.

ACT anent granting of Bonds be appearand Heirs; whereupon Apprysings, or
Adjudications may follow, in prejudice of the Defuncts Creditors.
THE said day the Lords of Council and Session taking to their consideration,
the manifest Frauds and Prejudices done by appearand Heirs, to the Creditors of
their deceast Fathers, or other Predecessors, in their just and lawful debts:
Therefore, and for preventing any such fraud for the future, the said Lords
declare, That if any appearand Heir shall grant Bonds, whereupon Adjudications,
or Apprysings shall be deduced to their own behove; or that the said
Apprysings, or Adjudications shall return before, or after the expyring of the
Legal Reversion, in the Persons of the said appearand Heirs, or any to their
behooves. In either of these cases, the said Apprysings or Adjudications shall
no ways defend them against their Predecessors Creditors; but that they shall
be liable, as behaving themselves as Heirs to their predecessors by
intromission with the Rents of their Estates, so Adjudged, and Apprysed; nor
shall it be lawful to them to renunce to be Heirs, after such intromission: and
ordains an Act to be made thereupon, and to be registrate in the Books of
Sedernut, and to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,

ACT anent Advocats Expectants.
THE said day the Lords of Council and Session understanding, that the greatest
number of the Advocats, and Expectants, admitted since the first of January,
1648. years. Are deficient, in paying of Dues to the keepers of the Box for the
Advocats: to wit, twenty merks for every Advocate, and ten merks Scots, for
every Expectant; to the prejudice of the Box appointed for the poor, and others
their public affairs. Therefore the said Lords ordain all Advocats and
Expectants, admitted since January, 1648. who are deficient, in payment of the
said dues: and all others who shall be admitted, and receive the said
respective privileges in time coming, to pay the said dues, to the keeper of
the Box for the time. And ordains Letters of Horning, and Poynding, upon sex
days, to be direct against the deficients; upon a subscribed Roll by the
Thesaurer: and ordains no suspension to pass but upon consignation.

ACT discharging confusion the last day of the Session. February 21. 1663.
THE Lords of Council and Session considering, how necessary it is for the
advancement, and honor of His Majesty's service, that the Judicatories
entrusted in him in the principal administration of Justice to His People, be
attended in all their meetings, with due Decency, and Respect from all His
good Subjects. And that the rude, disorderly, and barbarous carriage of some
Servants attending the College of Justice, and others joining with them upon
the last day of the Session, is dishonorable to the Authority of the Court,
unsuitable to the gravity becoming the Persons relating thereto, and
un-beseeming the civility fit for such a place: have therefore thought fit to
discharge, and hereby discharges all Servants of any Advocats, Clerks, Writers,
or other members of the College of Justice; and all other Persons whatsoever:
That none presume upon the last day of the Session, to throw, or cast any
pocks, dust, sand, or stones, or to make any disorder, or to use any rude, or
uncivil carriage within the Session House, or in the Parliament Closs.
Certifying all such, who being Servants to any Members, or relating to the
House, shall in any degree offend herein; they shall suffer three months
imprisonment, and for ever thereafter be debarred the House, and service
thereof. And if they shall happen to escape the time of the committing the
offense: That their Masters shall be oblidged to enter them in prison in the
Tolbooth of Edinburgh, within eight days thereafter, under the pain of two
hundred merks Scots: and ceritfying all such Persons, who not relating to the
House as said is; shall offer to offend in manner foresaid: They shall be
apprehended, and committed to waird, for the space of three months; and
thereafter banished the Town. And that none pretend ignorance, ordains these
presents to be printed, and affixed upon the most patent doors of the Session
House; and to be insert in the Books of Sederunt: therein to remain ad futuram
rei memoriam.

ACT in favors of the keeper of the Minut Book. June 6. 1663.
THE which day, the Lords taking to their consideration an overture formerly
presented to them, be the Advocats, in favors of John Scot keeper of the Minut
Book: showing that the allowance appointed to him for inrolling of Causes; by
the Act of Sederunt, dated the 28. of February 1662. is very inconsiderable
(being only two shilling scots for every Process) and no ways answerable to his
pains, and attendance thereupon: In respect whereof, and for the said John Scot
his further encouragement to continue that faithfulness, and integrity,
whereof he has hitherto given proof, in discharging the said trust. The Lords
ordain, in time coming the Parties at whose desires any Process shall be
enrolled, or his Agent, to pay to the said John Scot, for every Cause that
shall be enrolled be him four shilling Scots money allanerly. And ordains these
presents to be publicly intimate, and an Act to be extended thereupon.

ACT concerning the buying of the Citiedeal. September 8. 1663.
THE Lord President having produced before the Lords, a proposition made by the
Town Council of Edinburgh, and subscribed by Sir Andrew Ramsay Provost of the
said Burgh, bearing as follows, viz. The Lord Provost having reported to the
Committee, That the Citiedeal of Leith being of late erected in a Burgh of
Regality, which without doubt may in time prove prejudicial to this City, for
many undeniable reasons. And that the Honorable Lord the Earl of Lauderdail,
to whom His Majesty has granted the Right of the said Citiedeal, had done the
honor and favor to the Council of Edinburgh, as to make them an offer
thereof, upon reasonable terms: And that they are come that length in their
Treaty; as that it may be had for 6000 lib. Sterling payable in four years;
which the Magistrates are not at all in capacity to raise, or make payment of,
without the two third parts thereof be raised out of the Chamber of Imposition;
which the Council thought not fit to do without the consent of the Grand
Committee of the said Imposition. And therefore desired the advice of the Lord
President; and all others the Members of the Committee. To which report, and
proposition the said Lord President, Sir John Nisbet, Mr. John Ellies, and
Robert Hay made answer: That they found His Majesty's gift so strick, as they
could not of themselves, without consent of the whole College of Justice give
consent; That any of the said moyeties should be employed otherwise, then to
the payment of debts contracted before September, 1650. Therefore the Committee
thought expedient, That the President Sir John Nisbet, Mr. John Ellies, and
Robert Hay might advise concerning that scruple, and with all convenience
report, that so necessary a bargain might be brought to some conclusion: The
said Lords having considered the above-written proposition in one voice do
consent, and give advice, that the two third parts of the price of the
Citie-deal be raised forth of the Chamber of Imposition.

The Seall of Court. November 26. 1663.
MR. Alexander Gibson produced in presence of the Lords their common Seal,
wherewith Commissions, and other Papers, which went out of the Country, use to
be Sealled; which Seal the Lords ordain to be made use of in time coming. And
ordained the said Mr. Alexander to make the same forthcoming to the said
Lords, when ever it should be required: And ordains him to give the use of the
said Seal to the remanent Clerks, when they have to do therewith.

ACT against general Letters. June 8. 1665.
THE Lords considering the manyfold inconveniences arising of late from the
frequent use of directing General Letters, and Charges Summarly; and that the
same is contrary to the ancient custom, whereby they were only raised upon
Decreets conform: Therefore the Lords do hereby revive and renew that ancient
custom: And Enact, and ordain, that in time coming, no Charges, nor Letters of
Horning shall be direct Generally, against all and sundry; except allanerly
upon Decreets conform; purchased, and obtained be the Parties raisers of the
said Letters. And prohibit and discharge the Writers to the Signet, and the
Clerks to the Bills to writ, present, or pass any Bills for General Letters,
and the keeper of the signet to affix the signet to any such General Letters;
unless the same be direct upon Decreets, conform as said is. Likeas the Lords
declare any such General Letters that shall be raised in time coming, where
Decreets conform have not proceeded, with all execution following thereupon, to
be void, and null, and have no affect; But prejudice always of any General
Letters, or Charges raised, or to be raised at the instance of His Majesty's
Thesaurer, Thesaurer Depute, or others empowered for His Majesti's Rents,
Customs, Casualities, or other dues belonging to the KING'S Majesty, according
as they have been in use to do. And also excepting any General Letters raised,
or to be raised at the instance of the Lords of Session, for the contribution
money, payable to them, And such other General Letters as are expressly
warranted be the Acts of Parliament. And ordains an Act to be extracted
hereupon, and insert in the Books of Sederunt.

ACT for keeping the Bars. June 22. 1665.
THE Lords considering, what great confusion, and disorder, is occasioned by
the thronging of people, of all sorts within the Bars, of the Inner, and utter
House, in the morning, before the Lords sit down, and at twelve a clock in the
forenoon, and the prejudice arising there through; by the miscarrying of
Processes. For remeid whereof, the Lords do hereby discharge the Macers in time
coming; to give access to whatsomever Persons of whatsoever quality, within the
Bar of the Inner-house, after any of the said Lords have entered the House; in
the morning, or after twelve a clock: till the Lords be all risen off the
Bench, and be removed out of the House. And sicklike, that they permit no
person whatsoever, to stay within the Innermost-barr, of the Utter-house, where
the ordinary Lord, and Clerks do abide, neither before the ordinary Lord come
out after that the Clerks and their Servants have begun to call, nor during the
time that the ordinary Lord is upon the Bench, neither after, until the
reading of the Minut Book be ended: except the persons following, viz. The
keeper of the Minut Book, the King's Solliciter, and one Servant appointed by
His Majesty's Advocat: And that person appointed for reading the Minut Book,
during the time of the reading of the Minut Book and no longer. And the Macers
are hereby authorized to carry immediately to prison any person that shall be
found within any of the said Bars, during the time foresaid^ Certifying the
said Macers, that if any of them shall be found negligent in performance of
their duty in the premises, They shall forthwith be removed from their
Office. And ordains an Act to be extended hereupon.

ACT anent Pro-tutors. June 10. 1665.
FOrasmuch, as in the Action of count and reckoning depending at the instance
of Robert and Bessie Swintouns, against James Notman, at length heard before
the Lords of Council and Session; It being questioned, and debated, how far a
Pro-tutor is liable by the Law, and Practice of this Kingdom; whether for
ommission, as well as for commission, and intromission: And the said Lords
considering, That albeit Pro-tutors be excusable, as to their bygon
intromissions; In regard it was not constant hitherto, how far they could be
liable: yet finding it expedient, that the foresaid question should be
determined as to the future; and the Leiges no longer left in uncertainty
thereanent. Therefore the Lords declare, that whatsoever person, or persons
shall in time coming intromet with the means and estate of any Minor, and shall
act in his affairs, as Pro-tutors, having no right of Tutory, nor Curatorie,
established in their Persons. They shall be liable as well for what they might
have intrometted with, if they had been Tutors, and Curators; as for what they
shall intromet with de facto; Sicklike, and in the same manner as Tutors, and
Curators, are liable by the Law and Practice of this Kingdom. And the Lords
declare, that they will observe this as an inviolable practice in time coming.
And ordain these presents to be published, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and an Act to be extended thereupon, and insert in the Books of Sederunt.

ACT ordering no sight of Processes in the Summer Session which were seen in
the Winter before. November 8. 1665.
THE Lords considering, That through the shortness of the Summer Session,
unnecessary giving out, and malicious detaining of Processes, which have been
seen the Winter Session immediately preceding: The Leiges are oftimes
frustrate of Justice during that Session, after much charges, expenses, time,
vexation, and trouble. And having it always in their thought how Justice may be
speedily administrat, with the greatest ease, and least expenses to the
Subjects. Do declare, that in the future they will not allow Defenders, and
their Procurators to see Processes in communi forma, during the Summer Session:
where the same has been seen, and returned by them the Winter Session,
immediately preceding: and that they will proceed to do Justice therein
without indulging to defenders any such sight, during the Summer Sessions, in
the future, where there has been no material amendments, made be the Pursuers,
of their Summonds nor new pieces produced in the Process; to be instructions
and grounds thereof: and which were not seen the Winter Session immediately
preceding. And ordains these presents to be insert in the Books of Sederunt.

His Majesty's Instructions to the Commissars. February 20. 1666.
THE Lord President having received the Instructions following from John Earl
of Rothes His Majesty's High Commissioner, did communicate the same to the hail
Lords: and that it was His Graces pleasure, and desire, that the same might be
recorded in the Books of Sederunt. The Lords of Council, and Session, ordained
the said Injunctions to be insert, and recorded in the said Books of
Sederunt: under Protestation always, that the recording of there said
Injunctions should be no ways prejudicial to the privilege of the Lords of
Session, or derogat in any sort from their Jurisdiction in civil causes. And
ordained the said Injuctions after recording thereof; to be given up, and
delivered, to the Archbishop of St. Andrews his Grace, or to any having his
warrant to receive the same. And that the Extracts of the said Injunctions be
given to all Persons who shall conceive themselves concerned therein, whereof
the tenor follows.

Sic Supra Scribitur CHARLES R.
HIS Majesty Authorizes and injoyns, these following Instructions, contained in
five Leaves, Attested, and Subscribed by two of the late Commissars of
Edinburgh, for regulating the Proceedings, of the Commissars in their
respective Courts. Oxford, January 21. 1666. and of His Reign, the seventeenth
year. By his Majesty's Command,

Sic Subscribitur, LAVDERDAIL.
INstructions and Rules set down, and appointed, by the Reverend Fathers,
Archbishops, and Bishops, in this Kingdom, to the Commissars, Clerks,
Procurator-fiscals, and other Members of Court, of the Whole Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; having Commission from the said Reverend Fathers.
1. Ye are by virtue of your Commission, to decide, and judge, in Causes
concerning Benefices, and Teinds, in matters of Scandal, Confirmations of
Testaments, great, and small, within your bounds, all Causes Testamentar, and
in all other matters, wherein the Oath of Party is required; if the same does
not exceed forty pounds. And in all other Causes wherein the Parties submit
themselves to your Jurisdictions.

2. Ye are to Judge, in Reductions, and Declarators, of Nullity of Marriage,
for Impotency, or upon any other ground, or reason whatsomever. All actions of
Divorcement for Adultery, or upon any other ground. All Actions, or Questions,
of Bastardry, and adherences, when the samine shall have a connection with the
Lawfulness of Marriage, or Adultery; all which are reserved to the Commissars
of Edinburgh, and do belong to their Jurisdiction, privative. But when the
adherence is pursued, upon the account of malicious desertion only; and where
there is no question of the Nullity and lawfulness of the Marriage: the
inferior Commissars may decide in the samine.

3. You are to proceed, in rebus levibus, not exceeding forty pounds upon the
Pursuers Claim, without necessity of a libelled Summons: the Defender being
always cited at several times, by two distinct Warrands, and Summons, to that
purpose. And the case foresaid, where the subject is Leve, not exceeding the
said sum; you are to proceed in manner foresaid: whether the Defender be
pursued upon his own Deed, or representing any other Person, his predecessors;
in rebus levibus; and in Cases of the nature foresaid, If the Claim be referred
to the Defenders Oath; and the Defender appear, and be content to depone
presently; you are to take his declaration upon the same. And if the Defender
desire to see, and be advised with the Claim: ye shall give him a short time to
that purpose. If the Claim be referred to the Defenders Oath; and he appear not
himself: he is to be warned again pro tertio, and cited personally to give his
Oath, with certification, he shall be holden as confessed. In such cases of small
moment, if the Claim be not referred to the Parties Oath, nor verified
in^ranter; and the Defender appear, you are to give, a short time to him, if he
be conveened, upon his own Deed; to see the Claim, and answer verbo. And if he
be conveened as representing any other person, as Executor, or Intrometter; or
otherways; you shall assign a time to the Defender to qualify, and give in his
Defenses in Writ.

4. In Causes of greater moment exceeding forty pounds, and in Arduis, wherein
there may be difficulty, you are to proceed upon a Libelled Summons; in the
same manner as is prescribed in the Cases abovementioned, except only, that at
your discretion, you may assign, a longer time to the Defender to give his
Oath; if the Libel be referred thereto: and to answer verbo^ or to qualify,
and give in his Defenses in writ: when the Libel is to be proven otherwise, and
the Defender is conveened, either as representing another person, or
difficulty, or importance of the case does require; that the Dispute shall be
in Writ.

5. You shall be careful that your Clerks shall have and keep on Book for all
the ordinary Dyets, and Acts; and also another Book for Acts of
Litiscontestation, either made in absence, or part comparente, wherein it
shall be set down, as shortly as can be, the substance of the Libels and
Alleadgences, Interlocutors, and Litiscontestations thereupon; which Record
shall be sufficient without necessity, either for extracting the same, or of
Registration, or extracting an Act of Litiscontestation ad longum, except
either of the Parties shall desire an Act to be extracted ad longum; upon the
Parties Charges, who shall desire the same.

6. Your Clerk shall keep a Register of Decreets of whatsoever nature: but so
that in cases of small moment, within forty pounds; the said Decree shall be
recorded as shortly as can be.

7. If in any Process whatsomever, the time of Litiscontestation, or after the
Interlocutor is pronounced: and when either a Term is assigned for proving the
Libel, or any alleadgance; or the Judge having pronounced Interlocutor verbo;
or a Signature, being made in Writ; is about to assign a Term, the Defender
shall pass from his compearance: or any time thereafter post
Litiscontestationem. Nevertheless, Litiscontestation in all such Processes,
shall be holden and esteemed, to be made part comparente. And in like manner,
if the Defender, at Sentence, shall pass from his compearance; the Sentence,
nevertheless, shall be given out against the said Defenders; as compearing.

8. Ye shall be careful, that your Summons be execute, always by a sufficient
man; before two Witnesses at least. And that the same being returned, and
indorsed, be kept by the Clerk; in case the execution be questioned: and that
ye are not to stay the proceeding of the principal Cause, upon offer of
Improbation, of the execution: and if any execution shall be found false, and
Improven; and if it shall be found, that any of your Advocats, Procurators, or
their Servants, or Agents, or other Persons, having interest in your Courts;
have written, or caused write the said executions, or has used, the same, and
knowing them, to be false; or are otherwise accessory to the said folshood:
they shall be declared incapable of any Office, Trust, Interest, or Practice
within the said Court: without prejudice of such further Censure, and
punishment as may be inflicted, for the Crime of falsehood; and upon the
contriver, or user, or false Writs.

9. Ye shall direct Precepts for Summoning of Witnesses, to compear before you,
to be Witnesses in Causes: under such pecunial pains as ye shall think
expedient, according to the value of the Causes, and quality of the Person,
that bees Summoned. And if the Witnesses contemptuously disobey, the fines, and
mulcts, to be uplifted by your Officers: and they to have power to poind for
the samine. And the pains shall be applied; the one half, for your own use: and
the other half to the poor. And if the Witnesses compear not for the first
Summons: the Party to have Summons, against the Witnesses not compearing, under
greater pecunial pains; to be applied at your discretion: or to raise Letters
upon deliverance of the Lords of Session, for compelling them to compear, under
the pain of Horning: as you shall think expedient. At the examination of
Witnesses, your selves shall not fail to be present: excluding all others.

10. You shall suffer none of the Advocats, in their procuring, to use
frivolous Alleadgances and if they do, sharply to reprove them therefore: and,
in case of not amending, for reproof, to proceed to pecunial pains: and if they
persist, to deprive them.

11. In the advising of Processes, ye are not the use the advice of any
Procurator, or Advocat, or consult with them thereanent; neither admit of them,
to be present at the advising of the same.

12. Ye shall tax the expenses of all pleas, of Causes, where Sentence is
obtained, before you, and that right highly. And shall insert the same, in the
principal Decree, or Sentence. And the Precept, to be directed out for
executing of the Sentence, shall contain Poinding, as well for the said
expenses, as for the principal.

13. Ye may direct your Precepts, to Officers of your Commissariot, or Officers
of Arms, or to the Officers of Provost, Bailzies of Burghs; at the desire and
option of the Party. If any Person shall deforce your Officers, in execution of
your Precepts: ye may be Judges, to all such Deforcements: and inflict the like
pains, as by the Law may be inflicted, for deforcing of Officers, of Arms,
excepting only the loss of Deforcers, their Escheat. Without prejudice to the
Person concerned, to pursue for the same, upon the Deforcement of your
Officers, before the competent Judge.

14. If any temporal Judge within this Realm will proceed, in Causes belonging
to your Jurisdiction: you shall direct Precepts for Inhibiting them, from all
further proceeding thereuntil.

15. Ye shall give forth Inhibition upon Teinds, great and small, as you are
desired upon sight of the Parties Title, allanerly.

16. If Summons of Reduction, be Libelled against any of your Decreets, before
the Commissars of Edinburgh: ye may cause, notwithstanding, put your Sentence
to execution. And if the same be not pursued, within year, and day, the Party
being of perfect age, and within this Realm: your Decree stands unreduced.

17. You, and your Clerk, shall reside in the place of your Commissariots,
under the pain of deprivation; except by the Archbishop or Bishops, Consent
and License, upon grave occasion, you obtain liberty, to do otherwise

18. You shall make two Registers, of the Testaments, to be confirmed by you.
The one to be kept by you; and the other to be delivered, to to the
Archbishop, or Bishop, yearly.

19. Your Clerk, the time of making the Accounts, two times in the year, viz.
the first day of May, and first of November; shall make Faith to the respective
Archbishops, Bishops, or any having their Order: That there is no more
Testaments Confirmed then these, which are Booked, in the Books, then to be
produced.

20. You shall give forth no Precepts, in matters above forty pounds; until
the Decree be first extracted.

21. In case any of you shall happen to fall sick, and not be able to wait upon
your Office, or give attendance: or if it shall happen any such Declinator, or
exception, (being of Verity) to be proponed against you, as might set, or
decline, Sheriffs or any other Judge: In that case, you shall show the
Archbishop, or Bishop the samine; who then shall deput another, who shall be
most fit, and apt, to sit, cognosce, and decide, in the Causes aforesaid.

22. Ye shall find Caution to compear, before the Archbishop, and Bishop,
twice every year, viz. The first day of May, and November, and give just count
of your intromission with the Quote: where the Archbishop, or Bishop, has not
a Quot-master appointed by themselves. And also for payment of your
Contribution Silver, to the Commissars of Edinburgh: and that under the pain of
five hundred pounds, toties, quoties.

23. If any of you or your Clerks, Confirm any Testaments, and make no account
thereof, to your Archbishop, or Bishop, the said days: the samine being
sufficiently verified; your Office, shall thereby ipso facto, Vaick.

24. It shall not be leisome for you, to admit any procurator, without License
of your Archbishop, or Bishop, respective. But you may create,
Commissar-officers, that be honest, and faithful, as ye will be answerable. And
your Procurators, shall wear Gowns in the Court, as ye are appointed, and
enjoined, by these principal injunctions, to do the samine your selves. And
that you put the samine to execution, betwixt and the day of next to come.

25. The profit of all Summons, Sentences, Transumpts, Registrations, and
Confirmations of Testaments, and Registrations of all Tacks, Contracts,
Obligations, and other Writs whatsomever, and Extracts of the samine. As
likewise the profit of the Seal, and Signet; to be divided in manner
following: That is to say; the two part thereof to the Commissars, and the
third part to the Clerk; he always, finding Paper, Ink, Wax, and
Writing-Chamber.

ORDERS
To be observed in Confirmations of all Testaments.
YOU shall have a care, that all Edicts be served generally, at the Paroch
Churches, twice, or at least every year. And if any Party shall desire
particular Edicts, as occasion offers: you shall cause give them forth, and the
general Edict to be given gratis to the Procurator-fiscal. The Edict being
Served, and the Person, or Persons, having best right, being decerned
Executors, to the Defunct; the Inventary shall be given up by the Executor, who
shall make Faith upon the truth of the samine. If the Wife be Deceast, and the
Husband give up Inventary; both of the Goods, Geir, and Debts, owing by hi^,
and to him, such Debts as he gives up, and by his Oath Swears, to be true
Debts, should be deduced off the free Geir always, if the Executor suspect any
Fraud, that the Debts given up exhaust the free Geir, and think fit to omit the
samine, he may lawfully do. And their Debts are in Testaments Dative, only to be
received as owing by the Defunct, Servants Fe^s for a year preceding the
Defuncts decea^e, Duties of Lands, or T^inds for a year, Apothecaries Drogs
immediately employed before the Defuncts decease, House-meals for half a year at
most, Pensions, and Ministers Stipends, Steelbow-goods, and Corns to the
Master: If the man, or the Person whose Testament is to be confirmed, give up
the Inventary of Debts, with his own mouth, in a Testament Testamentar; such
Debts, as they give up, must be allowed. But if there be no Testament
Testamentar made by the Defunct; or that in the samine he has ordained his
Executor to give up the Inventary of his Goods, Geir, and Debts; in that case,
no Debts are to be deduced; except the Debts mentioned, and contained in the
immediate preceding Article. Which Deductions being made by the Person deceast;
he leaving behind him. Wife and Bairns; if any of the Bairns, be
unfori^familiat; the Testament is divided in three parts; and the third part of
the ^^ee Geir, pays only Quot.

If all the Bairns be forisfamiliat, the Testament then divides in two: and the
half of the free Geir pays Quot. If there be no Bairns, the Testament likewise
is divided in two: and the half of the free Geir pays Quot. If the Person
deceast be single, and has no Bairns unforisf^miliat, in that case the whole
free Geir pays Quot, without any division. If it fall out that any challenge
the Geir of the Defunct, by virtue of an Assignation, from the Defunct before
his decease; he ought, not the less, to Confirm the Testament: notwithstanding
of the Assignation. Quia quoad confirmationem Testament; it is estimat to be
simulat. But he may as Assignay, make Protestation, That the Confirmation shall
not prejudge his Assignation, pro ut de jure.

Ye are to advert, that the prices of the Goods, given up in Testament, be
estimat, conform to the common course, as they are sold in the Country,
neither too high, nor to low, in prejudice of the Quot, and Bairns of the
Defunct.

Let no Testament be Confirmed, without the Oath of the Executor, and the
Relicts Oath, Man, or Wife, who survives other; and if any thing shall be found
to be omitted: any benefit which would have belonged to the persons omitting,
of the which they had no probable ignorance; The samine shall pertain to the
Archbishop, or Bishop, or to any, to whom they shall dispone it.

You shall give no License to pursue, except to poor bodies: and that for small
sums, and where Debts are desperate. If there be no nomination, or Testament
made by the Defunct, or if the Testament Testamentar, shall not be desired to
be Confirmed: ye shall Confirm the nearest of Kin, desiring to be Confirmed.
And if the nearest of Kin shall not desire to be Confirmed; ye shall Confirm
such of the Creditors, as desire to be Confirmed as Creditors: they instructing
their Debts. And if^ neither nearest of Kin, Executor, nor Creditor, shall
desire to be Confirmed, you shall Confirm, the Legators, such of them as desire
to be Confirmed; and instruct, that they are Legators. And if no other person
having interest foresaid shall Confirm^ you shall Confirm your
Procurator-fiscal, datives, always being duly given thereto before. And if
after the said datives, but before Confirmation; any Person having Interest,
shall desire to be Surrogat, in place of the Procurator-fiscal: ye shall
Confirm them as Executors, Surrogat, in place of the Procurator-fiscal. And to
the effect the Debts may be the better known; ye shall call within your
Jurisdictions, the Intrometters with the Defuncts Goods, and Geir, ( Datives
being given up as said is) to give up Inventar thereof. And in case the
Intrometters will not compear, to the effect foresaid. Then ye shall cause
Summond, four or five of the Defuncts nearest neighbors; and others who best
knew the samine^ who being sworn, shall give up Inventar; of the Dead's Goods,
and declare the quantity thereof, under what division the samine comes, and the
expense, to be made thereupon, shall be modified yearly: at the making of the
Accounts.

That every one of you have a Procurator-fiscal, who shall be an honest,
discreet man, and responsal, for pursuing all common actions, and who shall be
decerned Executor dative, to all the Defuncts, within your Jurisdiction where
he serves; in case the nearest of Kine of the Dead, nor any other nominat
Executor, Confirm not his Testament, in due time. And ilk Procurator-fiscal
shall find Caution that the Goods he shall happen to intromet with, shall be
forthcoming as effeirs: and shall make Count yearly, and payment of the said
Goods, that shall happen to be intrometted with by him: to the Archbishop, or
Bishop, and shall have three shilling, for ilk pound that he brings in, and
makes payment of. The Procurator-fiscals, shall be holden to Count twice in the
year, for the diligence to be done by them, in taking up the names of all the
Defunct Persons, within the whole Parochs of your respective Commissariots:
wherein they shall be faithful. And if it shall be found that they have exacted
Money from the People, or oppressed them, or transacted with such Persons as
shall happen to be charged to Confirm, and shall receive Money from them to
pass from the said charges, or for Money or good deed; shall forbear to cause
charge any such person, who ought to be charged. Any such Procurator-fiscal so
doing; the samine being sufficiently proven, shall be deprived from his Office.

That all Persons, named, or to be named Executors, to any Defunct; shall
Confirm their Testaments within three Months, after the Defunct's death, at
farthest.

If any person shall be decerned Executor to a Defunct, when he compears not
personally, by reason of sickness, or upon any other reasonable occasion: and
craves a commission to take the Executors Oath. Ye shall not grant any
Commission for that effect, without the Ministers Testificat, of the Parties
inability, and knowledge, and consent, of the Archbishop, and Bishop.

When an Edict is execute to a day, and the Party compear and desire to be
decerned, Executor, and crave a day, to give up Inventary, and Confirm: ye
shall continue the decerning of the Party as Executor, until the day, that he
should Confirm; to the end all may be done, Simul and semel.

You shall not suffer Testaments to have Faith, or any thing contained in them,
without Confirmation, ye shall not suffer an e^k of Testaments to be made,
exceeding^ the third of the Inventary, and that but once, without knowledge of
the Archbishop, or Bishop. That the Inventar be likewise given up, as they
were the time of the Defuncts decease. And twelve pennies of every pound of the
Deads part, shall be the Quot of all Testaments, both great and small, which
shall be Confirmed; as well of the Testaments, dative, as others. And the
mitigation, and composition of the samine Quot, shall appertain to the
Archbishop, or Bishop, to whom it belongs alanerly: if need beis.

Institutions to the Clerk.
YE shall have two Register Books, one for the Acts, and Sentences, and another
for the Testaments. Which Book of the Testaments, shall be marked by the hand
of the Archbishops or Bishops, or Bishops Clerk: and when the samine are
filled up, to receive a new Book, besides your Book of Registration.

Ye are all of you, both Commissars, Clerks, and Fiscalls, to serve the Leidges
thankfully: at the Rates, and Prices which are to be settled, by the
Archbishops, and Bishops.

We have considered the abovementioned Instructions, contained in these five
preceding Leaves. And to conceive that it is fit, that the same be Authorized
and enjoined, for Regulating the Proceedings of the Commissars; in their
respective Courts.

Sic Subscribitur, IO. NISBIT. IO. BAIRD.

ACT against Decreets, for not Reproduction of c^ssiones bonorum. November 6.
1666.
THe Lords considering, the great abuse lately crept in, under the color, of
the Act, ordering Decreets for not Reproduction of Process: to extract Decreets
of Bonorum, which was never the Lords meaning, to extend the foresaid Act, to
any Summons of Bonorum. Therefore the said Lords, for Rectification of the
foresaid abuse: discharge the granting of any Decreets for not Production, in
time coming; in so far as relates to Actions of Bonorum: at the Instance of any
Debtor, against his Creditors. But ordain the Pursuer to complain to the
Lords, in presentia, in communi forma, for keeping up of Processes, of that
Nature: and discharge the Lord Ordinary, in the Outter-house, to decern in any
such Causes: but that they be all Advised, and Decerned, in presentia.

His Majesty's Letter to the Lords concerning Prizes. January 3. 1667.
Follows the Tenor of the Letter, Superscribed thus;

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and Right well beloved Cusing and Counselor, Right Trusty, and
well beloved Councillors, and Trusty and well beloved: We Greet you well: we
have been often troubled, with Complaints from strangers, in Amity with Us; and
others, concerning the Prizes taken by Our private men of War, in that Our
Kingdom, and Sentences pronounced by Our High Court of Admirality there: and
whereas We understand, that ye by Our Law, are Authorized to be Supreme Judges
in all these cases: We do hereby Require, and Authorize you, to think, and
conclude on such Orders, as shall be necessary for bringing before you, and
Deciding all these Causes in a Summar way: and that ye proceed with all
expedition; in respect the Persons concerned, are, for the most part,
Strangers. And their Ships, and Goods, being apt to perish; their prejudice may
be irreparable; if they have not Summar Justice. And We do most particularly
recommend to you, the Subjects of the Kings of Spain, and Sweden, with whom we
have particular Treaties, which We shall send to you: And w^ose Ships, and
Goods are to pass free; they having such Passes, as are agreed upon, of which,
We did send Copies to Our Privy Council; and so We bid you Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the twenty seven day of December, One
thousand six hundred sixty and six. And of Our Reign, the eighteen year. By His
Majesty's Command, Subscribed thus, LAUDERDAIL.

VVarrand for General Letters, for the Contribution due out of Benefices to the
Lords. November 17. 1668.
THE Lords have Ordained, and hereby Ordain, Letters, and Executorials of
Horning, to be Direct at the Instance of these Ordinary Lords; who have been
admitted, since June 1663. or shall be admitted hereafter, against the
Archbishops, Bishops, Priors, Heretors, Liferenters, Feuars, Farmers,
Tennents, and Tacksmen of the Prelacies within this Kingdom: for payment to
them of their respective proportions, of the Contribution Money, payable out of
the said Prelacies, and Allocat to their Predecessors: in whose place they
have succeeded, by an Act of Sederunt, of the date, the 11. day of June 1663.
and a Roll subjoyned thereto; containing the particular division, of the
Contribution Money amongst the said Lords, and that for all Years and Terms,
since their admission, and Entry, and Yearly and Termly in time coming.

Oaths to be taken for the Price of Fowls. January 15. 1669.
THE which day, It being represented to the Lords, That the Magistrates of
Edinburgh, desired to know, whether they might warrantably exact the Oaths of
the Poultrie-men, and In-keepers, concerning their contravention, of the Acts
lately made for the price of Fowl dressed and undrest. The Lords finds that the
Magistrates of Edinburgh, may and ought to exact the Oaths, of the
contraveeners of these Acts, either the Poultrie-people, who sell the Fowls
undrest, or In-keepers^ who sell them dressed. And recommend to the Magistrates
to be careful, in the speedy, and exact execution of these Acts.

ACT anent extracts of Registrate writs bearing the Procurators named though
not subscribed. December 9. 1670.
THE Lords of Council and Session, do grant warrant to the Lord Register, and
the Clerks of Session; his Deputes to registrate such Bands, Contracts, and
other Writs, as shall be given in to them to be registrat, and therein to
insert the consent of Advocats, as Procurators to the Registration: as they
were in use to do formerly^ and accordingly to give out extracts thereof,
notwithstanding that the Advocats do not subscrib their consent. And appoints
this warrant to continue until further order. Likeas, the Lords declare, that
any Extracts given out by the Clerks, in manner foresaid; since the first day
of November last are warrantably given: and cannot be quarrelled upon that
ground, that the Advocats consent to the Registration is not subscribed.

ACT Anent Extracting Acts and Decreets. January 20. 1671.
THE Lords enacted and ordained that no Act, or Decree, done either in the
Inner or Utter-house shall be extracted until 24 hours elapse, after the same
is read in the Minut Book.

ACT against Magistrates of Burghs, forletting prisoners for Debt go out of the
tolbooth. June 14. 1671.
THE Lords considering, That albeit by the Law, Magistrates of Burghs, are
oblidged to retain, in sure ward and firmance, Persons incarcerat in their
Tolbooths for Debt. Yet hitherto they have been in use to indulge Prisoners, to
go abroad upon several occasions. And it being expedient, that in time coming
the foresaid liberty, taken by the Magistrates, of Burghs should be restrained;
and the Law duly observed. Therefore the said Lords do declare, that
hereafter it shall not be lawful to the Magistrates of Burghs, upon any occasion
whatsomever, without warrant from His Majesty's Privy Council, or the Lords of
Session to permit any Person incarcerat in their Tolbooth for Debt, to go out
of Prison, except in the case of the Parties sickness, and extreme danger of
Life: The same being always attested upon oath, under the hand of a Physician,
Surgeon, Appothecary, or Minister of the Gospel in the place: Which
Testificat shall be recorded in the Town Court Books. And in that case, that
the Magistrates allow the Party only liberty, to reside in some house, within
the Town during the continuance of his sickness: They being always answerable
that the Party escape not. And upon his recovery to return to Prison. And the
Lords declare, that any Magistrates of Burghs who shall contraveen the
premises, shall be liable in payment of the Debts^ for which the Rebel was
incarcerat: And appoints this Act to be intimat to the Agent for the Royal
Burrows: and to be insert in the Books of Sederunt.

His MAJESTY'S Order to the Commissioners of His Thesaury to free the Lords
from the Cess. July 19. 1671.
CHARLES R.

RIght trusty and well beloved Cusing and Counciller, right trusty and well
beloved Councillers, and trusty and well beloved, We greet you well. Upon the
humble desire of President, and Senators of Our College of Justice Signified
unto Us by Our Secretary. We have thought fit to express Our so great
tenderness of their Privileges, as to discharge the President, and all the
ordinary Lords of Session, of their proportions of the Current Supply granted
unto Us, by the late Session of Our Parliament; although they gave their Bond
for the same. Therefore Our pleasure is, and We do hereby Authorize you to give
Command nor to exact any of the said Supply from the proper states of the said
President, and ordinary Lords of Session, but that the same be discharged. And
if any part thereof be already Collected, that it be paid back to them
respectively; for which this shall be your warrant. And so We bid you heartily
Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor Casile the 12 day of July, 1671. and of Our
Reign the 23 Year. Subscribed thus by his Majesty's command Lauderdail.

ACT for keeping the Bars November 3. 1671.
THE Lords of Council and Session considering, that there is great disorder and
confusion occasion^d by the thronging in of the Advocats men, and others upon
the Clerks, and their Servants in the Utter-house before the ordinary Lord go
to the Bench. And after twelve a clock at the reading of the Minut Book: For
remeid whereof, they ordain the Minut Book in time coming to be read in the
nethermost end of the Loft appointed for the Advocats Servants. And prohibit
and discharge all Advocats Servants, and other persons, who are not licenced,
and allowed to enter, or remain within the Innermost Bar of the Utter-house,
where the Clerks, and their Servants stays; under the pain of three pounds
Scots, to be applied the one half for the use of the Poor, and the other to the
Macers. And to be further censured by imprisonment, or otherways as the said
Lords shall think sit. And to the end the said Act may be more duly observed.
The Lord do ordain, authorize and require the Macers to exact the said ^ine of
three pounds, Scots, from any Person whom they shall find within the said Bar.
And in case the Party refuse to pay the same: that they carry them to Prison,
until they make payment thereof. Certifying the said Macers, that if upon
delation of them, by any of the Clerks, they shall be found negligent in
performing of what is hereby enjoined to them, they shall be fined in the said
sum of three pounds Scots: and imprisoned during the pleasure of the Lords. And
this Sentence to be inflicted upon the Macers, or other transgressors of this
Act, as often as they shall be found to contraveen the same.

ACT concerning Privileged Summons. July 21. 1672.
THE Lords considering, that diverse Summons as declarators, and others, which
by the constant from and practice of this Kingdom, did always abide 21. days
warning, have of la^e been execute sometimes upon six days, as being
privileged by deliverance of the Lords upon Bills given in for that effect;
and seeing these Bills being d^awn and given in by Writers to the Signet, do
pass of Course without perusal, or consideration thereof, by the ordinary,
which has given occasion to the foresaid abuse. And finding it expedient, that
it be determined for the future, what Summons shall be Privileged: Therefore
the said Lords do ordain, That in time coming, all Summons shall come in upon
21 days warning. And that none be privileged by the Lords deliverance, or
otherways, except these following, viz. Removings, Recent-spulzie, and Recent
Ejections, where the Summons is Execute within 15 days after the comitting of
the deed intrusions, and coming in the Vice, Causes alimentary, Exhibitions,
Summons, for making arrested Goods forthcoming, Transferrings, Poyndings of the
Ground, Waknings, Special Declarators, Suspensions, Prevento^s, and Transumpts.
And that Recent-spulzies, Ejections, Intrusions and Succeeding in the Vice be
execute upon 15 days: and that all the rest of the foresaids Summons be Execute
upon six days: and that the second Citation be likewise upon six days. And it
is further declared, That all the Summons abovementioned shall be privileged
as a foresaid, whither the Summons bear a privilege or not. And the Lords do
hereby prohibit, and discharge the Writers to the Signet, to Write, Form, or
Present to the Clerks to be put in any Bills for priviledging any Summons, but
these above-expr^st; Certifying such as shall coutrav^en, that for the first
fault they shall be fined in one hundred merks Scots, to be applied for the use
of the poor: and for the second fault, they shall be deprived of their Office.
It is always hereby declared, that this Act is not to be extended to Summons
execute against Persons Inhabitants of the Burgh of Edinburgh, or the
contiguous Suburbs thereof, who may be Summoned by the second Citation, upon 24
hours, conform to the custom formerly observed.

ACT anent payment of dues for Summons containing two dyets. July 11. 1672.
FOrasmuch, as the Lords, after mature d^liberation, did think fit, That the
former custom of continuing Summons, and taking out of Act and Letters
thereupon, in all such Causes, and Processes, as formerly did require and abide
continuation, should be laid aside in time coming. And that in Place and Lieu
thereof; the Summons in all Process of the nature foresaid, should contain two
distinct warrands, for citing the Defenders at two several times, and to two
several dyets, and days of Compearance with the same Certification as before
was usual; and contained in the first and second Summons respective. And that
Proc^ss^s should be granted in the Causes foresaids, upon Summons containing
the warrands abovementioned, and Execute conform to the same, as formerly was
granted upon Summons, Act and Letters. And upon an overture given in, and
approven by the Lords of Articles. An Act of Parliament has followed, and is
made to that purpose. As the Act of Parliament entitled Act discharging second
Summons, at length proports. And seeing the Lords of Session, when they had the
said alteration of the former Custom, under their consideration, thought it no
ways reasonable, that thereby, either His Majesty's Secretary, or the Clerk of
Register, or the ordinary Clerks of Session, his Deputes should be prejudged of
their dues, and profits formerly belonging to them respective. And in regard,
the Summonds which are to contain the said distinct warrands for Citation, are
in effect, and upon the matter, two several Summons, and are equivalent to
Summons, Acts and Letter, and have the same effect to all intents: and the
profits formerly arising from all Acts of Continuation, and Letters thereupon,
are a considerable part of the Dues belonging to the Lord Secretare, Lord
Register, and his Deputs, for their Encouragement, and Service in their
respective Offices^ and upon the considerations foresaid, it was resolved. That
notwithstand,ing, the said alteration, the same should be continued, and
secured to them, in manner after mentioned. Therefore, and in order to their
satisfaction: The Lords of Session does Statute and Ordain, That for the
Signing of all Summons, which formerly did abide continuation; and in lieu
thereof, shall now, and hereafter continue the said warrands for two several
Citations, the keepers of the Signet shall have, and may take as much as
formerly he might have taken, both for Summons and Letters, while the same were
signeted a part. As also it is hereby appointed, That all the said new
Summons, containing two distinct warrands for citing to the Defenders two dyets
be subscribed by the Clerk of Register, or in his absence, by one of his
D^puts, or the ordinary Clerks of Session, who at the subscribing thereof, are
to receive for the same, the dues formerly paid, for Act, and Letters. And the
Lords do hereby discharge the keeper of the Signet to affix the Signet to any
of these new Summons, for two, or more Citations, but such as shall be
subscribed by the Clerk of Register, or his Deputes, as said is: and that no
Process be granted upon auy such Summons unless they be subscribed by them in
manner foresaid.

ACT concerning Bankrupts. January 23. 1673.
FOrasmuch, as by an Act of Sederunt, of the 26 February, 1669. It is Satute an
Ordained, that all Decreets of Bonorum in time coming, should contain a Clause,
ordaining the Persons, in whose favor the Bonorum should be granted: To take
on, and wear the habit of Bankrupts. Which is a Coat, or upper Garment, which
is to cover the Parties Clothes, Body and Arms: whereof the one half is to be
of a Yellow, and the other half of a Broun Color, and a Cape, or Hood, which
they are to wear on their Heads, Partie-coloured, as said is, which habit, they
are to take on, before they come out of Prison, and come out with it upon them.
And that it shall be lawful to the Creditors, to seiz upon, and imprison any of
them, who shall be found wanting the foresaid habit. And the Lords considering,
that this Course, for preventing, and punishing of Bankrupts, has through the
in-observance of the same, proven ineffectual, as to the designed end of the
same, do therefore statute, and ordain, That all Decreets, of Bonorum, and
Charges to put at liberty, to be raised thereupon, shall thereafter contain the
hail tenor of the Act of Sederunt abovewritten. And that the Magistrates of
Burghs shall not put out the Party in whose favors the Decree, and Letters
are granted, until first they put on the habit, and come out of the Tolbooth,
betwixt 9. and 12. a clock in the Fore-noon, with the habit on them, as is
prescribed by the Act. And ordain the Clerks of the Session, the Keepers of,
and Writers to the Signet; and others having interest, to be careful, that this
Act be punctually observed. And ordain a Copy thereof to be delivered to the
Baillies of Edinburgh, to be Registrate in their Books, and kept for the
entry, and liberty of Prisoners in their Tolbooth.

ACT ordaining Advocations, or Suspensions, of Processes for Conventicles to be
only past in presentia, or by the three Lords in vacant time. June 24. 1673.
THis day the Lords ordained, that no Bill of Advocation be past of any
Processes depending before the Sheriffs and other Judges ordinary, against
Persons guilty of keeping Conventicles, unless the same be past in presentia,
during the sitting of the Session, or by three Lords met together in time of
Vacancie, and that no supension be past of Decreets given upon those Processes,
except upon Consignation of the sums decerned, or in presence of the whole
Lords, or in time of Vaca^cie by three Lords. And appoint Intimation hereof to
be made to the Clerks of the Bills.

Letter anent Prizes. July 8. 1673.
THis day the Lord Chancellor produced, in presence of the Lords, a Letter
directed from the Duke of Lauderdail Lord Secretary, by His Majesty's Command
to the Lord Chancellor, President, and remanent Senators of the College of
Justice, which Letter being Read in presence of the said Lords: they ordained
the same to be Recorded in the Books of Sederunt, whereof the tenor follows.
For the right Honorable. The Earl of Rothes Lord Chancellor of Scotland, Sir
James Da^ymple of Stair President of the College of Justice, and the Remanent
Senators thereof: Whitehall, June 30. 1673. My Lords, Since the Receipt of
Yours, of the 25. January, I have been using my best Endeavors to know how to
satisfy your Lordships desire therein. And now having acquainted the KING
t^erewith, in presence of diverse of his Council here; I am commanded by His
Majesty, to let you know, that the Treaty of Breda is certainly void by the
War: and that no Ally can claim any benefit thereby, when they carry any
provision of Victual, or other Counterband Goods to the Ports of Our Enemies,
or when they have Goods belonging to Enemies on Board. As to the other part of
the Letter, it was deliberatly thought fit in the Council of England, That any
number of the Dutch Nation being found aboard, should not confiscat Ship and
goods, as it did during the last War, and therefore, that Article was kept out
of the Rules, which were given to the Court of Admiralty here in England. But
if any part of the Ship belong to any Inhabiting within the Dominions of the
States General; the whole both Shipe and Goods are to be declared Prize, and if
the Master have his Residence in Holland, you are left to judge in this case
according to Law, and as you shall think just.

I have likewise communicated to the KING your answers to the Swedish Envoys
memorial. And to the Complaints of the King of Polland, and the City of
Danzick, which did give a great dale satisfaction to His Majesty, and severalls
of His Privy Council there, who were present^ And Coppies of them were sent
unto Sweden. I am, my Lord, your Lordships most humble Servant,

Sic subscribitur LAUDERDAIL.
ACT for ordering new hearings in the Vtter-house. July 11. 1673.
THE which day, the Lords ordain any Lord, who is to hear a Cause debated in
the Utter-house, before the Lord ordinary come forth; shall go to the Bench,
and call the said Cause at 8 a clock in the morning: And ordain the Advocats,
Clerks, and Macers, to be present, and attend at the said hour: and if no
Procurators be present, for that Party, that seeks calling; yet the said
Lord shall proceed, in making Act or Decree; and the said Cause is not to be
heard any more thereafter. And if none be appearing for the other Party, at
the said hour, or when the Cause shall be called: then that Parties Procurators
are not thereafter to be heard by the said Lord, except the said Party, or his
Procurators give in two Dollers to the poor's Box. And ordain this Act to be
recorded in the Books of Sederunt, and intimate to the Advocats in the
Utter-house.

Letter from His Majesty against Appeals. June 17. 1674.
THis day the Lord Thesaurer Deput produced, in presence of the said Lords, a
Letter, direct from His Majesty, to the Lord Chancellor, Lord President, and
Remanent Senators of the College of Justice. Whereof the tenor follows.
CHARLES R.

RIght trusty and well-beloved Cusing^ and Councilers, Right trusty and
well-beloved Council^rs, and trusty and well-beloved. We greet you well, We
received your Letter of the 28 February, Last, with an account of these
Appeals, given into you by the Lord Almond, and Earl of Aboyne, but could not
then return any answer, the Session being up. And now upon full consideration
of that whole affair, We find it indispensably necessary, for Our Service, and
the mentainence of Our Authority, and for the quiet and security of Our
Subjects in their Fortuns and Estates, That the honor, and Authority of Our
College of Justice be inviolably preserved: and that there be an entire
confidence in, and def^rence to all the Decreets and Sentences thereof. And
after the Laudable Example of Our Royal Progenitors; We do assure you, that We
will constantly mentain Our Authority exercised in that Court, against all
Encroachments, Indignities and Reproaches, that may be attempted against the
same, or against any of the Lords of Session, whom We shall always cause to be
held in special Honor, as these who represent Our Person, and ^ear Our
Authority. And as We cannot but declare Our dis-satisfaction with, and
abhorance of these Appeals: So it is Our express pleasure, that special care be
taken to prevent the like practices for the future; and for that effect, that
you cause solemn Intimation to be made, to all Advocats, Clerks, Writeres and
others, who are members of, or have dependence upon the College of Justice,
and others whom it may concern, That none of them presume to advise, consult,
propose, plead, speak, or suggest any thing, that does import the charging of
any of the Decreets, and Sentences of the Lords of Session, with In-justice,
whether in the Terms of Appealls, Protestations, Supplications, Informations,
or any other manner of way, either publicly, in the exercise of their
Function, or privately in their ordinary conversation with their Clients, or
others, under the pain of being utterly excluded, from exercising any Office,
in, or, depending upon the College of Justice: and that all Advocats to be
admitted hereafter have the same declared to them, as a part of the Oath de
fid^^, and obedience to the Lords, which is ^e^customed to be given by Advocats
at their entry. And We are graciously pleased, that you proceed no further
against those who gave in these late appealls, nor ^ga^st these Advocats, who
refused to give their Oaths concerning their accession thereto, providing these
Advocats do som^nly disown these appealls, and all other appealls, and
Protestations, which may any way import a Charging of the Sentences of the
Lords, or their In^e^ locutors with un-justice, and in case they refuse to
disown the same, We peremptorlie command you to debar them from the Ex^rc^se of
any part of their Function as Advocats in time coming. And We do Authorize^ and
strickly Command you to declare any membe^ of the College of Justice, or
others, who depend thereupon, who shall not give ob^d^ence in the particulars
abovementioned, incapable to exerce any Office in, or depending upon the
College of Justice: and for the better discovering cont ivances, you are to
receive no Supplications, but such as are signed by an Advocat. As also you are
hereby required, if need bees, to put all who depend upon the College of
justice to give their Oaths, as Parties, or Witnesses for d^scovering the
contrivances: and in case any other, having no dependence upon the College of
justice, shall present any thing Expressing, or Importing the cha^ging of any
of your Sentences, with Injustice in the Terms foresaid, or any other way. We
do Auth^rize, and Command you, that you do immediately secure their Pers^ns, if
they be present, and if they be absent, that you isue forth Charges, and all
other Execution against them for that effect, And that you give an account
thereof to Us^ That We may signify Our further pleasure therein. For doing of
all which, this shall be your sufficient warrant. And so We bid you heartily
Farewell.

Given at Our Court, at Whitehall the 10 May, 1674. And of Our Reign the 26.
year. Sic Subscri^itur, By His Majesty's Command LAUDERDAIL.

July 23. 1674. ACT concerning Acts before answer.
THE Lords considering, That in several Cases, they are in use before
discussing of the Relevancy of the points debated, to ordain the Parties
Pursuer, or Defender, or either of them, to produce Writs, or to prove certain
Points of fact, that they may have the whole matter entirely before them, both
as to the Relevancy, and Probation; whereupon Acts are Extracted: Which are
called Acts before Answer. And in reguard Questions do, and may arise,
concerning the import and effect of such Acts, if the Parties be thereby so
concluded, as they may not thereafter propon new alledgances; and what Terms,
and Dyets should be allowed for Probation: and seeing it will be a great
prejudice to the Leiges, if after Acts Extracted, and Probation led thereupon,
Parties, or their Pocurators should be permitted to to offer new alledgances,
not formerly insisted on in the Act: for Probation whereof, new Terms behoved
to be asigned, and thereby Processes would be drawn to a great length.
Therefore, the said Lords do ordain the Parties Procurators to propone all
their alledgances in the Cause before, or at the time of pronouncing these
Acts, before Answer. And declare, that after these Acts are Extracted; they
shall not be heard to propone any new alledgances which were competent, but
omitted to be proponed when the Act was pronounced. And the Lords declare,
That, where the Parties Pursuer, or Defender are, before answer to the
relevancy burdened with the Probation of any point: they shall have the same
Terms, or Dyets, for Probation thereof, as by the constant practice is allowed
to Pursuers for proving their Lybells, when the same are admitted to their
Probation; but if in the same Acts, any point be found relevant, and admitted
to Probation: that the Parties Pursuer, or Defender to whose Probation the same
is admitted, shall have the same Dyets for proving thereof, as are allowed to
them respective, in Acts of litis contestation. But after the Probation upon
the said Acts is closed, they shall not be admitted to adduce any other
probation, of any points formerly alleged in the Act. And further, the Lords
declare, that where any Alledgance, or Reply is founded upon Writs, and that
before Answer there to, the Writs are ordained to be produced, in case the
Party burdened with the producing of these Writs shall fail therein and
thereupon the Term shall be circumduced against him, that the alledgance, or
reply in the Case foresaid shall be holden as not proponed.

ACT for trial of those presented to be Ordinary Lords of Session: July Last
1674.
THE Lords considering, That the KING'S, Majesty, by His Letter, May 19. last,
did require them, to present to His Majesty, what Trial they should think best
and firest to be taken, for Cognoscing the Qualifications, and sufficiency of
such Persons, as His Majesty shall hereafter Nominat to supply any Vacant place
in the Session, and the said Lords, in answer thereunto, having offered their
humble opinions. That thereafter, when any new Lords of Session shall be
presented by His Majesty, for trial of their Qualifications: they shall sit
three days beside the ordinary, in the Utter-house, and shall have inspection
of the said Processes, which shall be carried to Interlocutor; and shall make
report of the Points taken to the Interlocutor, in presence of the whole Lords.
As also for completing their Trial, they shall sit on day in the Inner-house,
and after any Dispute is brought to a Period, and the Lords are to advise the
same, in order to the pronouncing their Interlocutor; they shall resume the
Dispute, and first give their opinion there anent, in presence of the whole
Lords. Likeas, His Majesty by His Letter, of the 14. of this instant, having
approven the foresaid Rule offered, for the Trial of such as shall be presented
by His Majesty, as ordinary Lords of Session, and appointed it to be entered in
the Books of Sederunt, for that purpose. The said Lords, in obedience to His
Majesty's commands, do ordain the same to be observed, as the constant Rule in
all time coming, for Trial of such Persons, as shall be presented by His
Majesty to be ordinary Lords of the Session. And ordain these presents to be
Recorded in the Books of Sederunt.

January 26. 1675.
THIS day compeared Personally, George Marque^s of Huntly, in presence of the
Lords, and declared, that he having given Commission to diverse of his Friends,
for managing his affairs during his absence forth of the Country, who, as he
was informed had given in an Appeal in an Action pursued in his Lordships name
against Gordon of Carnborrow; and craved that in regard he does pass from the
said Appeall, that warrant might be given to deliver up the same to him. Which
desire the Lords granted.

ACT concerning Prisoners for Debt. February 5. 1675.
THere being an Address made to the Lords of Council, and Session by the Keeper
of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, representing, That Persons imprisoned in the said
Tolbooth for Debt, upon Captions, having obtained discharge of the Debt, are
pressing to be liberat, upon production of the discharge, without a Charge to
set at Liberty, which he refuses to do, al^^it the same be usually done, by the
Keepers of other Tolbooths. And particularly, by the Jailor of the Tolbooth of
the Canongate; and therefore d^siring, that the Lords would allow him the same
privilege, which is assumed by the Jailor of the Tolbooth of the Canongate, or
otherways to determine what both of them ought to do herein. And the said
Lords having taken the general Case to their consideration, and finding, that
where the Debt, for which Persons are Incarcerat, is in-considerable, the
Expenses of procuring ^ Charge to set at Liberty will sometimes near equal the
Debt it self, the Prisoners being also poor, and not able to satisfy the said
Expenses; Therefore, the said Lords do Authorize, and allow the Magistrates of
Burghs, to set at Liberty out of their Tolbooths, Persons imprisoned for Debt,
by virtue of Letters of Caption, upon production of a sufficient discharge of
the Debt, granted by the Creditor, at whose instance they are incarcerat,
bearing a Consent to the Debitors Liberation, and duly registrat, if the sum do
not exceed two hundred merks Scots, and the Prisoner be not arrested at the
Instance of other Parties, the Magistrates, or Keeper of the Tolbooth, being
always careful to keep an Extract of the said discharge; and finds no
necessity, in this Case of a Charge to set at Liberty. But if the sum, for
which the Debtor is Incarcerat, exceed two hundred merks Scots, the Lords
discharge the Magistrates of the Burgh to Liberat him out of Prison, without a
Suspension, and Charge to set at liberty under His Majesty's Signet.

February 9. 1675. ACT anent Bills of Suspension.
THE Lords finding it expedient, That some settled Rule, and Order be set down,
concerning the presenting and passing of Bills of Suspension; That any abuses
which of late have creept in, may be prevented in time coming, do ordain: that
hereafter, in time of Session, no Bill of Suspension shall be presented to any
Lord to be past, but to him who shall be ordinary Lord for the time upon the
Bills, and that both in time of Session, and Vacancy, the Ordinary shall
continue upon the Bills, from Tuesday to Tuesday, in the inseuing week. And
ordain the Bills to be presented only by the Clerk of the Bills, or his
Servant; and when the Bill of Suspension shall be presented, if the Ordinary,
after the perusal thereof, find the Reasons relevant, and sufficiently
instructed, that he pass the Bill. And in case application shall be made to
him by the other Party concerned, for a hearing; the Ordinary shall Writ
toward the foot of the Bill; that before the Bill of Suspension be expede, and
go to the Signet, the other Party shall see and answer, and in that Case he
may stop execution for sometime, not exceeding a month from the time of
presenting the Bill. And if the Ordinary shall re^use the Bill of Suspension,
he shall mark upon the back of the Bill with his own hand, that the Bill is
refused, in respect the Reasons are either not relevant, or not instructed;
which Bill the Clerk is thereby ordered to keep, and mark with his hand, upon
the back thereof, what Writs are produced for instructing the Bill. And if the
same Bill, or any new Bill of Suspension upon that matter shall be desired to
be presented to another Lord being Ordinary for the time, the Clerk shall
present to the Ordinary, the Bill of Suspension which was formely refused. In
which Case the Ordinary is not to pass the Bill, until it be presented to the
whole Lords in time of Session, or to three Lords met together in time of
Vacancy.

ACT ordaining Processes after Avisandum to be carried to the Ordinary that
same day, and reported in his Week. June 2. 1675:
THE Lords considering, the inconveniences arising from the giving up of
Processes to Parties, or their Advocats, after the same are taken to
Interlocutor, the reporting of Causes being thereby much delayed, and it being
contrary to the ancient Custom; Therefore, the said Lords ordain, that in time
coming, after any Cause is dispute before the Ordinary, in the Utter-house, and
an Avisandum made therein to the Lords, that the Process shall that same day be
carried by the Clerk, or his Servants to the Ordinary, that he may peruse the
same, and that he may endeavor to report to the Lords, the points taken to
Interlocutor the next day thereafter; or at fardest once in his Week. And the
Lords discharge either the Ordinary, or the Clerk to give up, or lend out to
the Parties, or any Person for them, the Processes, or any part thereof, after
an Avisandum is made therein to the Lords, or when the Ordinary shall call for
the Process, to consider it himself. And if any Act or Decree pronounced by
the Ordinary shall be stopped upon the desire of any of the Parties, for a new
hearing, that the Lord who formerly hard the Cause, shall go to the Bench in
the Utter-house, betwixt 8. and 9. a clock in the morning before the ordinary
come out, and call, and hear the Parties Procurators, wherein the Lord was
Ordinary the immediate preceding Week shall have the preference before any
other Lord, who was Ordinary in any of the former Weeks. Likeas, the Lords
discharge any written Dispute upon Bills of Suspensions, or Advocation, but
where the Ordinary upon the Bills, shall think fit to allow a Bill, to be seen,
that he call the Parties the next day and hear what they have to say, viva
voce, without taking in written answers.

Hugh Riddel sent to the Pla^tations. July 20. 1675.
THE which day, anent the Petition given in to the Lords, by John Riddel
Merchant in Edinburgh, showing that, Heugh Riddel, the Petitioners only
Brother, having committed an unexcusable Crime (Whereat the Supplicant blushes)
in cutting some Silver-buttons off a Gentle-mans Clothes, in the Utter-house,
during the time that the Lords were sitting; and being therefore committed to
Prison, the said Lords have most justly ordered him this day to be brought by
the public Executioner, from Prison, to the great door of the Session House,
at 9. a clock in the forenoon, and to stand till 10. a clock, with a Paper on
his Forehead, expresing the Crime whereof he is guilty: and thereafter to be
taken by the foresaid Executioner to the Trone, and there to stand with that
Paper on his forehead, from ten to eleven a Clock: Which Sentence, the
Supplicant acknowledges to be less then the said Hugh Riddel deserves; only
he being a young man, and related to honest Parents, and the Supplicants
Brother, and never known to have been addicted to any such base Acts formerly:
albeit the Petitioner and his Friends, are ashamed in his behalf, to plead any
exemption from his deserved punishment, which his riper years may cause him
detest and abhore, as an offense to the said Lords, and Scandal to his
Friends, and prejudice to the Party offended: which the said Party offended,
willingly forgiveth, out of respect to his Friends. Therefore humbly desiring,
that the said Lords, for preventing such a public Stain upon the Petitioner
and his Friends, by the said public disgrace upon a youth of his years, would
be pleased to (...) his Sentence, as to the way and manner of the disgrace, and
infamy, by (...) his Imprisonment upon the Supplicants Charges, till there be
an occasion for Transporting of him beyond Seas, or where the said Lords shall
judge convenient, whether by way of banishment, or otherwise, during then
Pleasure, for which effect the Supplicant shall be obliged by Bond, if the
Lo^ds shall require the same: and in the mean time, to be favorably pleas^d to
discharge the Execution of the said Sentence. Which Supplication being
considered by the s^ids Lords; they by their deliverance thereupon, of the 16.
of thus Instant, granted Warrant to the Magistrates of Edinburgh, to continue
the execution of their Sentence, pronounced against the said Hugh Riddel, until
Wednesday the 21. of this Month: betwixt and which time, if he should find
sufficient Caution, to conti^^e in Prison upon his own Charges, until an
occasion shall offer for his Transportation, to his Majesty's Plantations in
America, and that he shall then remove to the said Plantations, and not return
to this Kingdom, under the pain of five thousand merks, Scots Money, to be
disposed of as the said Lords shall think fit, in case he contraveen: In that
case, the Lords declare, they will dispense with the execution of their former
Sentence: and if Caution were not found, to the effect foresaid, betwixt and
the said day, they ordained the former^ Sentence to be then put in execution.
Likeas, this day the Lords having considered a Bond of Cautionry produced,
subscribed by the said John Riddel, dated the 19. day of this Instant; and
finding the same to be conform to their foresaid deliverance: therefore they
have dispensed, and hereby dispense with the execution of their former
Sentence, pronounced against the said Hugh Riddel, upon the 15. Instant; and
grants Warrant to the Magistrates of Edinburgh, to deliver the Person of the
said Hugh, to the said John Riddel, when he shall desire him, in order to his
Transportation.

ACT anent passing of Bills for liberty out of Prison. July 21. 1675.
THE Lords considering, that oftentimes, where Parties have done ultimate
diligence against their Debitors, by apprehending them with Caption, and
Incarcerating them: Bills of Suspension and Charges to set at liberty are
presented, and past in favors of these Persons, without the knowledge of the
Creditors, at whose Instance they are Incarcerat, and to their great prejudice,
thereby frustrating the diligence done by them: For remeid whereof, the Lords
ordain, That in time coming, when any Person intends to give in a Bill of
Suspension, and Charge to set at liberty, that he shall make previous
Intimation of the same, to his Creditor, at whose Instance he is Incarcerat, or
arrested in Prison, Personally, or at their dwelling place by a Nottar, before
Witnesses, mentioning the time when the Bill shall be presented, in case the
Creditors be within the Kingdom for the time: and that the Instrument of
Intimation to the Creditors, under the Nottars hand, be produced, with the Bill
of Suspension, and Charge to set at liberty, when the same is presented to the
Ordinary upon the Bills: otherwise that the Bill be not past. And the Lords
ordain the Intimation to be special, in the time when the Bill shall be
presented, being within the latitude of a Week, that the Creditors may be at a
certainty, when to attend the same.

ACT concerning the granting of Protections. February 1. 1676.
THE Lords considering, that diverse Persons who are under the hazard of Caption
for Debt, pretending that they are cited to bear Witness in Processes,
depending before the Lords, do upon production of a Charge given to them for
that effect, under Messengers hands, procure Warrants from the Lords, to
Discharge the execution of Letters of Caption, and Acts of Warding, against
them for some time, albeit they be not made use of as Witnesses; but only the
said Charge impetrat by them from a Messenger, that they may obtain the
foresaid Warrant. For remeid of which abuse, the Lords declare, that in time
coming, they will grant no Warrant for stopping of execution, of Letters of
Caption, or Acts of Warding upon that ground, that the Craver thereof is cited
as a Witness in a Process, unless, with the Petition, there be given in a
Declaration under the hand of the Party Pursuer, or Defender, who adduces the
Witnesses, bearing, that the Person who desires the said Warrant is really
cited at his instance as a VVitness, and that he is a necessary VVitness: And
the Lords declare, they will fine the Party who gave the said Declaration, if
at the conclusion of the Cause, it appear that there was Collusion in giving
the same; it being only done, that the said Person might obtain a Personal
Protection.

His Majesty's Letter concerning the Clerks. June 20. 1676.
CHARLES R.

RIGHT Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counselors, Right Trusty and well
beloved Counselors, and Trusty and well beloved, We Greet you well: We have
often evidenced Our Affection to, and Care of you, the Senators of Our College
of Justice; and as We have Trusted you with the Distribution of Justice, and
the preservation of the Rights and Properties of Our Subjects in that Kingdom,
according to Law; and are very confident of your equal and expedite procedor in
Justice, to all Our Subjects, which is the most acceptable Service you can
perform to Us: So We will suffer none of Our Subjects to reproach your
Procedor; much less these who serve before you, and by your Favor and
VVarrand, have the privilege to procure and plead for others, who (if they
should be permitted to defame your Sentences) might prove the unhappy
Instruments to lessen the Honor and Confidence which has been always
attributed to that Senate by Natives and Strangers, and might diffuse the
Leaven of Malcontents amongst Our People, as if their Rights and Interests
were not securely lodged; and thereby make them more capable of evil
Impressions, and desirous of change. And We do Require you by all means to
suppress and prevent all mutinous Courses, which you have prudently adverted
to, and obviat by your Act of Sederunt, of the 5th. of January last, wherewith
We are very well satisfied. And We do leave the Advocats, and others of the
College of Justice, to be Ordered by you in all things relating to their
Employments. And We do further Require you to prevent and punish all
Conbinations, and unwarrantable Correspondences amongst Advocates, whereby they
may forbear or refuse to Consult, Plead, or concur with these who did so
faithfully adhere to Our Service; and did continue in, or early return to their
Station; and as further Evidences of Our Royal Favor, We do Ordain, That the
three Clerks of Session, who do expede your Decreets, shall be nominate by the
Senators of Our Coledge of Justice, in all time coming; and that they be
subject to their Sensare, and that the Clerk of Register give them Deputations
from time to time: and in case of Vaiking of the Clerk of Registers Off^^^, We
do Authorize the said Clerks of Session, to Act by your Warrant, as they shall
be Ordered by you, without prejudice, to the Clerk of Register, of all other
Benefit, and Emolument belonging ^o, or depending upon that Office. And it is
Our further Pleasure, that in all time coming, there be only three ordinary
Clerks of Session, besides the Clerk of the Bills, according to the ancient
Constitution, and that of the number that now serve you, make choice of three
that shall still serve; and that you modifie such Satisfaction, to be paid by
those that remain, to those that are to go out, as you shall find just and
reasonable; and so We bid you Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the twenty fourth day of May, One thousand
six hundred seventy and six. And of Our Reign, the twenty eight year.
Subscribed thus, by His Majesty's Command, LAUDERDAIL.

ACT concerning the Registers. July 4. 1676.
THE Lords having considered His Majesty's Letter, direct to them, bearing,
that whereas by His Majesty's advancing Sir Archibald Primerose of Caringtoun,
late Clerk Register, to the Office of Iustice-General, the Office of Clerk
Register is now Vacant; and seeing His Majesty has thought it necessar for the
advantage of His Service, and for the good of His Subjects, that the hail
public Records of this Kingdom, which are, and were in the Possession and
Custody of the late Clerk Register, or his Deputs and Servants, be put and
kept in good Order: Therefore His Majesty, impowers and authorizes the said
Lords, to take special care, and see that the same be effectually done; and to
that effect, that they appoint some of their number, to take inspection
thereof: and by themselves, and such as they shall employ under them, to put,
and continue them in good Order. And His Majesty authorizes the said Lords,
and those of their number, appointed by them, to receive the hail public
Registers and Records from the late Clerk Register, upon such account and
Inventar, as they should find just, safe and secure: and which being
effectually gone about, and done, that they render to His Majesty, or to His
Secretary, for His Majesty's perusal, a full and exact account of their
diligence therein, to the end, His Majesty may thereafter, declare His further
Pleasure; and for effectuating hereof, that the Lords in His Majesty's Name,
and by His Authority, Require the late Clerk Register and his Deputs and
Servants, to exhibit and produce the said hail Records to them, or those
appointed by them, immediately after receipt of His Majesty's Letter. The said
Lords in pursuance of His Majesty's Command, do nominat and appoint the Lords
Thesaurer Depute, Collingtoun, Reidfoord and Newtoun, or any two of them, to
meet at such times as they shall think convenient, and to take inspection of
the hail public Records of the Kingdom, which are, or were in the Possession
and Custody of the Lord Caringtoun, late Clerk Register, or his Deputs and
Servants, and by themselves, or such as they shall employ under them, to put,
and continue the same in good Order; and authorize the Lords abovenamed, to
receive the said hail public Records from the Lord Caringtoun, upon
sufficient Account and Inventar: and to that effect, the Lords in His Majesty's
Name, and by His Authority, do Require the Lord Caringtoun and his Deputs and
Servants, to exhibit and produce the said hail public Records, to the Lords
abovenamed, or any two of them, whem they shall desire the same; and allows
the said Lord Caringtoun, or any Person whom he shall authorize to be present
at the Inventaring of the said Registers, to the end, obedience may be given
to His Majesty's Letter in all points.

ACT for Inventaring the Registers Books. July 13. 1676.
THE which day, the Lord Thesaurer Depute, Collingtoun, Reidfoord and Newtoun,
made report to the Lords, that conform to the Warrant given to them, they had
met with the Lord Caringtoun, late Clerk Register, and had delivered to him the
Ordinance, past by the Lords upon His Majesty's Letters, concerning the
Registers, and had taken a view of the hail Records in his Custody, in the
Parliament House, and in the Castle of Edinburgh; and that the Lord Caringtoun
declared^ he would deliver the same, either upon Inventar, or in bulk without
Inventary upon oath, that he has Abstracted none of them, as the Lords should
think fit to order, he being exonered of the said Registers: but they found
the Warrans to be so many, and not in order that it would take a long time to
Inventar them; which report being considered by the Lords, they in pursuance of
His Majesty's Commands, do ordain the whole Register Books, which are in the
said Lord Caringtoun's Custody, to be presently Inventared by John Anderson
Writer in Edinburgh, and any others who shall be appointed by the Lords
abovenamed, who shall give their oaths, that they shall faithfully discharge
this Trust, according to such Directions as they shall receive from these
appointed by the Lords: and ordain the Inventary to bear, What each Book
contains in general, at what time it^ begins, and when the same ends, and if
there be any blanks in, the Books, that the same be marked in the Inventary:
And ordains the said Lord Caringtoun, to give the said John Anderson, or any
others to be appointed by the said, Lords, access to the said Registers, to
the effect foresaid, and allows him, or any he shall appoint, to be present at
the said Inventaring: and after the said Inventar shall be made, the Lords do
empower those of their number abovenamed, or any two of them, to to take the
oath of the Lord Caringtoun, if he has any more Register Books, Records, or
Warrants, then are in the Rooms in the Parliament House, and Castle of
Edinburgh, whereof he is to deliver the Keys, and if he abstracted, or
embazeled any of them, or if they be all entire, as he received them, or as
they came at any time thereafter to his hands. And likewise ordain any of his
Servants, entrusted with the keeping of the said Registers, to be examined
upon oath thereanent: and thereafter ordain the Lord Caringtoun, to deliver the
Keys of the Rooms, or Presses where the said Registers and Warrands are, to
these of their number, appointed to receive the samine: Which Inventary being
made, and the Lord Caringtoun giving his oath, and delivering the Keys^ as said
is: the Lords ordains the said Lord Caringtoun to be Exonered, and Discharged
of the said Records, and of his Trust in keeping of the same; and ordain an
Act of Exoneration to be extended thereupon, in his Favors.

The Lords do ordain the Inventar of the Register Books, to be set down in
order in time coming, and according to the several matters contained therein.
First, of the Records, of Parliament. Secondly of the Records of Council.
Thirdly, the Registers of Session: and amongst them of Registrate Writs apart,
of Decreets and Acts apart, and of Books of Sederunt. Next to these, the
Registers of Exchequer. Then the Registers of the Chancellory. And thereafter,
the Registers of Seasins, both the general Registers at Edinburgh, and the
special Registers of the Shires. And in all, to keep the order of time.

As for the Warrands of the Registers of Session, since the year 1660. they are
yet in the hands of the Clerks of Session. And the former Warrands being in
great Masses, without any Order; the Lords do appoint, that the said Masses be
sorted, putting the Registrat Writs together, and the Processes together; and
that the number of them both be taken and set down, that thereafter they may be
also digested, according to the Order of time.

It is appointed, that so soon as the Inventary shall be perfected, it shall be
insert in the Books of Sederunt.

ACT anent the manner of Booking Decreets of Registration. November 21. 1676.
THE Lords considering that where Registrations are persued by by way of
Action, it is, and has been the custom of the Clerks, to keep in their hands,
the principal Writes, decerned to be Registrate in the same manner as they do,
where Writs are Registrat upon the Parties consent. Therefore the Lords ordain,
that these Decreets of Registration be Booked together, with Bonds, Contracts,
and other Writes, which are Registrat upon the Parties consent, according to
the date thereof; and that the Process be kept with the Warrants of the
Registrat Writes.

ACT anent the Registers of Seasins and Hornings in the several Shires. January
4. 1677.
THE Lords considering, that by the Act of Parliament, in Anno 1672. Concerning
the Regulation of Judicatories; the Keepers of the Registers of Hornings, and
Inhibitions, and Seasins, and Reversions in the several Shires, are ordained to
make exact Minut-books, relating to these Registers, in manner prescribed in
that Act: and the Sheriff, Bailzie of the Regality, or Royalty, or their
Deputs, with two Justices of Peace, if they be present, are appointed at the
times expressed in the said Act, to take inspection of the said Registers, and
the Minut-books relating thereto, and after Collationing thereof, to Subscribe
the Minut-book, under the Penalty of an hundred Pounds Scots, for ilk Failzie,
in not meeting, and comparing the said Registers. And the said Lords to whom
the care of seeing the Premises done, is committed by the said Act, having by
Missive Letters, of the 31. of July last, direct to the several Sheriffs of
this Kingdom, required them by themselves, or their Deputs, to go about the
performance of what is enjoined to them by the foresaid Act, and to return a
satisfactory account of their diligence, the first day of November thereafter,
now bypast: certifying them if they failed, they would be charged with Letters
of Horning, for the Penalties contained in the said Act: and seeing the
Sheriffs of the Shires after-mentioned, and their Deputs, viz. of Argile
Renfrew, Wigtoun, Bute, Peebles, Sel^irk, Perth, Kincardin, Aberdene, Nairn,
Sutherland, Caithness, Berwick, ^or^ar and Inverness, The Stewart of
Kirkcudburgh, and the Stewart of Orkney, have not returned report to the said
Lords, of their diligence in the Premises: therefore the Lords do ordain
Letters of Horning to be direct against the said Sheriffs and Stewarts, and
their Deputs, Charging them to meet, and to compare the Registers of Hornings,
Inhibitions, Seasins and Reversions, in their respective Shires, with the
Minut-books relating thereto; and after Collationing of the same, to Subscribe
the Minut-books, conform to the said Act of Parliament, and to make report of
their diligence therein to the said Lords, betwixt and the twenty day of
February next: and likewise Charging them to make payment to Sir William Sharp,
His Majesty's Cashkeeper, of the Penalties already incurred by them, viz. an
hundred Pounds Scots, for ilk bygone Failzie, in not meeting and comparing the
said Registers, at the times expressed in the said Act of Parliament, and that
within the space of fifteen days after the Charge, as to such of the said
Sheriffs and their Deputs, who reside upon this side of the River of Spey: and
upon twenty one days, as to those who reside benorth Spey.

ACT concerning Arrestments. February 1. 1677.
THE Lords considering the great prejudice to Creditors, and delay of Justice,
occasioned by Arrestments, proceeding upon Decreets, which are not ordinarily
loused, whereupon Debitors do procure delay of the Decreets at the instance of
their Creditors against them, before the same be extracted, whereby lawful
Creditors are hindered in recovering their j^st Debts, until a several Process
of double Poinding, calling the Creditors and Arresters to dispute their
Rights, be raised and determined; which, if they should come in as distinct
Processes, by the course of the Roll, would take a long time, during which, the
principal Cause behoved to ^ist. For remeid whereof, the said Lords do
declare, that they will receive all double Poindings, for purging of
Arrestments, as incident Processes with the principal Cause, without any new
Inrolment; and do further declare; that if the Arrester proceed not in
Diligence, by an Action for making forthcoming, whereby his Debtor may be
Certiorat of the Arrestment, and may raise double Poinding in the name of his
Creditor, in whose hands the Arrestment is made, that they will grant no delay,
upon pretense of such Arrestments, albeit upon Decreets: But that the same
shall be purged by Caution, to be found by the Creditor to warrant the Debtor,
at the hands of the Arrester, and that upon pretense of the Caution found, they
will not grant Suspension, except upon Consignation, after Distress by Decree.
Likeas, the said Lords do declare, that they will grant no Suspension upon
Arrestments, laid on after extracting of Decreets; whether upon Decreets or
Dependences, but by way of double Poinding; that thereupon both the Creditor
and Arrester may be called.

ACT concerning Advocats. June 7. 1677.
THE Lords having called in the whole Advocats, did intimate to them, that
whereas His Majesty had by a Letter, of the 24. of May, 1676. required the
said Lords to prevent and punish all Combinations and unwarrantable
Correspondences amongst Advocats, whereby they may forbear, or refuse to
Consult or Concur with these who did faithfully adhere to his Majesty's
Service, and did continue in, or early return to their Station. Which Letter,
immediately after receipt thereof, was publicly read before the whole Advocats,
notwithstanding whereof, some Advocats do refuse, or forbear to meet with
others of the same Station, and jointly Consult their Clients Causes: which
being contrair to the Custom, always formerly observed, and very inconvenient
and prejudicial to the Leidges, who are thereby put to Consult their Advocats
severally, and have not the benefit of their joint Advice, as to the matter and
manner of carrying on their Causes, whereof the Lords have seen instances in
their own presence, by some Advocats, their difiering and disclaiming the
alleadgences proponed by others for the same Party: For remeid whereof, the
Lords declare, that if any Advocat in time coming, upon the account of Personal
prejudice, or any other pretense, shall re^use or forbear to Consult or Concur
in the capacity of an Advocat, with any others, whom the Lords do, or shall
authorize to be Advocats, that they shall be removed from their Employments.

ACT concerning the sisting of Execution upon Bills of Suspension. July 3. 1677.
THE which day, the Lords considering that sometimes after Bills of Suspension
are past, the same are not exped at the Signet, through the Parties fault, in
not finding Caution, or other neglect; and that Bills of Suspension are
frequently by Deliverance of the Orpinary, appointed to be seen by the Charger,
or his Procurators, and in the mean time, Execution stopped at the Chargers
Instance, indefinitly, not limiting the same to a certain day. And seeing some
Question may arise, if in these Cases Execution should be sisted, and during
what time? For clearing whereof, the Lords declare, that where a Bill of
Suspension is past and intimat, or shown to the Charger, or to the Messenger,
the time of the Execution, but not expede at the Signet: That Execution is only
to sist for the space of fourteen days after the Date of the Deliverance
passing the Bill, unless the Ordinary upon further consideration, by a
Signature upon the Bill, Subscribed by him, discharge the expeding of the Bill,
until a further day, or allow the Suspender a longer time for expeding thereof
providing the same exceed not a Month from the Date of the Deliverance of the
Bill, passing the same. After ela^sing whereof of, the Lords declare, that the
Charger may proceed to further Execution, notwithstanding of the foresaid past
Bill. And if the Ordinary express no day, but stop Execution indefinitly: The
Lords declare that the stop shall continue only for the space of fourteen days
from the Date of the Deliverance as aforesaid: but prejudice always of
Deliverances given by the Lords in presentia, upon Petitions, ordaining the
Reasons of Suspension to be Discust summarly upon the Bill: and in the mean
time, discharging execution. In which case Execution is to sist, until the
Cause be Discust, or the Stop be taken off by the Lords. And the said Lords
prohibit the Clerk of the Bills to write any Date upon the Deliverance of a
Bill of Suspension, but in presence of the Ordinary, and that it be the true
Date, wherein the same is Subscribed.

ACT concerning the Suspensions of Protestations. July 10. 1677.
THE Lords considering that the Act of Parliament does appoint, that where a
Protestation is Suspended, the Deliverance of the Bill should mention, that it
is the second Suspension, and so forth of all the Suspensions obtained
thereafter, that the same is the third or fourth Suspension: Yet
notwithstanding by the Fault, or Inadvertency of the Clerk of the Bills, the
same is not observed: Therefore the Lords declare, that where there is a
Suspension past of a Protestation, if the Deliverance of the Bill do not bear,
that the same is the second Suspension, and so forth of any subsequent
Suspensions, that they will recall the Suspension, albeit the same be exped at
the Signet, as being contrair to the Act of Parliament.

ACT against Solicitations. November 6. 1677.
THE Lords taking to their serious consideration, that by several Acts of
Sederunt, The Lords have formerly prohibited all Solicitations, in Causes
depending before them, whereby Parties did endeavor and expect favor, by the
Credit, and Moyon of themselves, or their friends interposing with the Lords,
and Personal respects, not relating to the Cause, to the great discouragement
of others, who had not the like friendship, or moyon, and to the great trouble
of all, conceiving it their interest, and that it might be looked on as a
slight, or neglect, if they did not upon all occasions by themselves, or their
friends Solicit the whole Lords, at their Houses lying scattered through the
several places of the City, imagining thereby, to have much promoted their
interest, and paid respect to the Lords, who have no regard to, but are
troubled with such Solicitations; it being their duty, and design to do
Justice to all impartially, without respect of Persons: Notwithstanding of
which Acts, and endeavors of the Lords against Solicitations, the same have
been revived upon pretense of giving Information in the Cause: but now seeing
written Informations are become ordinary; and that all that ought to be
represented to the Lords in any Case, may easily without trouble be done, by
written Informations sent to the Lords by a servant, which they will heartily
accept, and will not fail to peruse; and finding it unfeasible to hinder
Solicitations so long as they admit of Verbal Information. Therefore the Lords
do declare, that they will admit of no Solicitation, or Verbal Information, in
any Cause depending, or that shall depend before them, during the Dependence
thereof either by the Parties themselves, or by any other Person. And to the
end, the same may be effectual against all importunity. The said Lords do
Enact and Declare, That it shall be a relevant Reason of Declinator against any
of the said Lords Ordinary, or Extraordinary, that they have received or heard
any Solicitation, or Verbal Information in the Cause, during the Dependence
thereof. But upon the first observing, that the matter offered to be spoken to
them, did bear, or import any Solicitation, or Verbal Information, in a Cause
depending, if they did not use all the means they could to stop, or withdraw to
hear any further thereof. Or in case any Solicitation, or Information, in a
Cause depending, be offered by a Missive-letter, if they do not present the
same to the Lords. Likeas, the said Lords do strictly Prohibit all Advocats,
Clerks, Writers and others, depending upon the College of Justice, or their
Servants, to offer to any of the Lords, any Solicitation or Information, by
Word or Letter, but only by Written Informations Bills or Tickets, for calling,
under the pain of Deprivation, and being secluded from the House, excepting the
Clerk of the Process, for clearing any Interlocutor, or Minute in the Cause.
Likeas, the said Lords do declare, That if any Party, or others of the
Leidges, offer any Solicitation or Information, by Word or Missive, that they
will Ammerciat them as follows, viz. Every Nobleman in three hundred merks
Scots Money: Every Baron, or Knight, in two hundred merks: Every other Heretor,
Gentleman, or Chief Burgess, in one hundred Pounds: And every other Person in
one hundred merks, toties quoties, to be applied for the use of the Poor. It is
always hereby declared, That the Verbal Information of any Party, or other
Person for him, when required or allowed Judicially, or before Auditors, in
Diets appointed for both Parties to be heard; or before the Ordinaries upon the
Bills, in relation to the passing of Bills of Suspension or Advocation; or
before any of the Lords, to whom, either by consent of Parties, or by
appointment, or Recommendation of the Lords, an Accommodation in any Process is
referred, is no ways hereby Prohibited. And to the effect, the Leidges may be
secured against any prejudice which they may apprehend, by debarring them from
Solicitation, or Verbal Information, the Lords do declare, that there shall be
free access for all Persons to Inform them by Written Informations, only to be
delivered by Servants, and that in all Cases, from time to time; and for the
more sure delivery of Informations, they ordain, that every one of the Lords
shall have a Servant attending in his House, from^ five a Clock, to eight a
Clock at night, who shall be holden to receive any Informations, doubles of
Bills, or Tickets for Calling, that shall be given in without payment of any
Money, under such pain or punishment as the Lords shall think fit: And which
Informations, Bills, or Tickets, shall be delivered by the Servants of
Advocats, or of the Parties, and by none others. And Ordain this Act to be
affixed on the Wall of the Outter-House. And to be Printed, that none may
pretend ignorance thereof.

ACT concerning Bills relating to concluded Causes: November 9. 1677.
THE Lords considering, that sometimes after concluded Causes are Advised, and
Sentences pronounced therein, Parties endeavor to delay the Extracting thereof
for a considerable time, and then do offer Petitions for alteration of the
Decree, whereby the Process not being recent in the Memory of the Lords, they
are put of new to peruse the Process and Probation. For remeid^ whereof, the
Lords Declare, that in timecoming, they will not receive any Petitions, in
relation to the Stopping or altering of any Decree or Interlocutor
pronouncing, upon Advising of concluded Causes, unless the Petition be given in
within the space of two Sederunt days, after pronouncing of the Decree or
Interlocutor.

Suspensions of the Excise to be past only in presentia. December 6. 1677.
THE which day, the Lords Ordained that no Suspension shall be past of any
Charges given for His Majesty's Annuity or Excise, except in presence of the
whole Lords.

Warrant anent Precepts, for giving Seasine upon Retours. February 15. 1678.
THE which day, the Lords Ordained, that Bills craving Warrant to the Director
of the Chancellory, to direct Precepts to a Sheriff in that part to grant
Infeftement upon Retours, in respect of the Sheriffs refusal, to Infeft the
Party; shall not be past in time coming, by the Ordinary upon the Bills, but
the same shall be past by the whole Lords in presentia; and the Lords discharge
the Director of the Chancellory, to direct, or give out any Precepts to
Sheriffs in that part, for granting Infeftment upon Retours, unless the Warrant
be past in presentia, as said is.

ACT in Favors of the Lord Register. February 22. 1678.
THE which day, the Lords considering, that the Kings Majesty has nominated
and appointed Sir Thomas Murray of Glendook, one of their number, to be Clerk
of Register, with power to him to receive all the Profits of the Office, since
the advancement of Sir Archibald Primerose to be Justice-General: and he being
accordingly admitted to the said Office. Therefore the Lords do grant Warrant
to the Lords, Newtoun and Hercus, to take the Oaths of these Persons, who by
their Warrant, were entrusted with the keeping of the public Registers, which
were in the Custody of the late Clerk of Register, if they have abstracted or
imbazeled any of the said Register Books, or Warrants, or if they be all entire
and in the same order as they are set down in the Inventar, insert in the Books
of Sederunt. And ordain the Keys of the Rooms, wherein these Registers are,
viz. that below the Parliament House, and of the Chamber in the Castle of
Edinburgh, to be delivered to the said Lord Register. And grants Warrant and
Order to Mr. Alexander Gibson, one of the Clerks of Session, to make Count and
Payment to the said Lord Register, of the Dues of the Clerk of Registers
Office, which he has intrometted with, by Warrant of the Lords: and declare,
that this Act, with the said Lord Register his receipt, shall be a sufficient
Exoneration to the said Mr. Alexander Gibson thereof.

ACT Discharging Clerks to lend out Processes to any, except Advocats and their
Servants. February 26. 1678.
THE Lords considering the abuse committed by giving out of Processes, to some
Persons attending the House, and pretending to Negotiat in, and manage
Processes, who are neither Advocats, nor Servants to Advocats. For remeid
whereof, the said Lords Discharge the Clerks of Session, and their Servants,
to give up, or lend out to any Persons, any Processes or Writes, produced
therein, except only to Advocats and their known Servants. And the Lords
Declare, that each Advocat shall be allowed to have one Servant; and if any
shall desire to have more Servants allowed to them then one, appoint them to
represent the same to the Lords, and they will take it unto their Consideration.

ACT prohibiting the Clerks to give up Bills relating to Processes, whereupon
there is any Deliverance of the Lords. July 23. 1678.
THE which day, the Lords did Discharge the Clerks to give up to Parties, any
Bills or Petitions, whereupon there are Deliverances, relateing to
Interlocutors or Decreets in Processes, except where the same are appointed to
be seen and Answered. And appoint the Clerks to keep the foresaid principal
Petitions, bearing, Deliverances of the Lords, and to give out to parties only
doubles thereof.

ACT Discharging Advocats, and Writers Servants, to Write their Masters
Subscription. July last, 1678.
THE which day, the Lords Considering, that there is a corrupt Custom, lately
crept in of Advocats, and Writers Servants, adhibiting their Masters
Subscriptions, to Petitions and Bills given in to the Lords which is not to be
endured. Therefore the Lords declare, that if in time coming, the Servant of
any Advocat shall presume to Adhibite and Write his Masters Subscription to a
Petition, or to the out-giving, or return of a Process; or if the Servant of
any Writer to the Signet, shall Adhibite his Masters Subscription to a Bill of
Suspension, or other Bill used to be drawn by Writers, that they will proceed
against, and punish these Persons as falsaries and forgers of Writes.

ACT Ordaining Hornings and Inhibitions to be Booked, which were not Booked the
time of the Usurpers. January 3. 1679.
THE which day, the Lord Register, Newtoun and Hercus did make Report to the
Lords, that conform to the Warrant given them, of the fourth of December last,
they had considered the condition of the general Registers of Hornings and
Inhibitions, and of the particular Registers thereof in the Shire of Edinburgh
during the Englishes time, and found, that during the said time, there were no
Hornings Booked for the space of five years, and three months, or thereby; and
that no Inhibition were Booked for the space of three years and six months;
and that they had called the Persons who were entrusted in that time, as Clerks
to, and Keepers of the said Registers of Hornings and Inhibitions, and where
they were dead, they called and heard their Representatives; but that one of
these who had the Keeping of the said Registers, from the 5. of June 1652. to
the 8. of September 1654. Called Thomas Freeman, being deceased, there can be
none found to represent him, which being taken in consideration by the Lords,
they Ordain the Hornings and Inhibitions to be Booked for the said years, by
such Persons as the Lord Register shall appoint, and allows them for their
pains, three shillings four pennies for ilk Leaf of the Book, Written in such
manner as the Lord Register shall appoint, And the Lords Ordain the same to be
paid by the Persons who enjoyed and possessed the said Offices, and were
obliged to have Booked the same, or their Representatives. And where they have
none to Represent them by the Person who succeeded next in the said Office, and
his Representatives. And Ordain Letters of Horning to be direct upon six days,
to the effect foresaid.

Orders for payment of the Dues of the Signet, where Suspensions are appointed
to be discussed upon the Bill. January 24. 1679.
THE Lords considering that they do frequently grant Warrands to the Ordinary
upon the Bills, to Discuss the Reasons of Suspension upon the Bill, especially
where the Charger desires the same. And seeing that Warrant or Deliverance,
has the effect of a Suspension past the Signet, the Party ingiver of the Bill
of Suspension, being thereby secured against any further Personal Execution,
until the Reasons of Suspension be Discussed. It is just and reasonable in
this Case, that the Dues payable for affixing the Signet, should be satisfied,
as if the Suspension had been past and exped. Therefore the said Lords do
Ordain, that before the Suspenders Process be heard upon the Reasons of
Suspension before the Ordinary upon the Bills, in order to the Discussing
thereof, there be paid in to the Clerk of the Bills, or his Servant in that
Office, the Dues payable for affixing the Signet to the Suspension, for which
they are to be comptable to the Keeper of the Signet, under the Lord Secretary,
and to make payment thereof as he shall call for the same. And appoint the
Clerk of the Bills, and his Servants, to keep a Note of such Bills of
Suspension, whereof the Reasons are ordained to be be Discussed on the Bills,
to the effect foresaid.

ACT in Favors of Intrant Advocats. February 7. 1679.
THE Lords considering a Petition presented to them by Robert Nairn, Son to Mr.
Alexander Nairn of Greenyards, mentioning, That the Petitioner upon a Reference
of the Lords, to the Dean of Faculty, and the Advocats, Examinators for taking
Trial of his Qualifications, in order to his Admission to the Office of an
Advocat, having undergone, both the private and public Trial and Examination,
and thereafter applied to the Dean of Faculty, to assign him the Subject of his
public Lesson before the Lords; the same is refused, until the Petitioner make
payment to the Advocats Box, of 500. merks Scots, conform to a late Act of the
Faculty, made to that purpose. And the Lords considering, that the Office and
Employment of Advocats, being a liberal profession, albeit they will not allow
any sums of money to be imposed upon young men, at their Entry to the Office,
and Station of Advocats, yet they recommend to them, to Contribute Voluntarly,
for a Library to be erected for the use of the College of Justice.

ACT anent Executors Creditors. November 14. 1679.
THE Lords considering, that it is imcumbent to all Executors, by virtue of
their Office, to execute the Testament of the Defunct^ by recovering his Goods,
and payment of the Debts owing to him, for the behove and interest of the
Relict Children, or nearest of Kin, Creditors and Legatars of the Defunct.
Therefore the said Lords do Declare, that Executors decerned, and Confirmed as
Creditors to the Defunct, are holden as liable to do Diligence, for recovery of
the Defuncts Goods and the Debts due to him Confirmed in the Testament, or
^iked, sicklike as other Executors Dative are holden to do by the Law, and
practick of this Kingdom. And to the effect, that Creditors be not unnecessarly
entangled in the Execution of Defuncts Debts, beyond their own satisfaction;
The Lords Declare, that Executors Creditors shall not be obliged to make a
total Confirmation; but only of so much as they shall think fit, that there may
be place for an Executor, ad ommissa, for the rest, who shall be liable to all
Parties having Interest in the same way as principal Executors. It is also
Declared, that Executors Creditors, shall have license to pursue, if they will
make Faith, that they are doubtful of the Validity, Existence, or Probation of
the Debts of the Defunct, for which they desire license; the same being
returned to the Commissars within such competent time, as they shall appoint,
and upon Caution to Confirm as has been granted in the Case of Licenses
formerly.

ACT anent the Registration of Hornings. November 19. 1679.
FOrasmuch; as all Letters of Horning are to be Registrate, either in the
Registers of the Shire, where the Denounced Person dwells, or in the general
Register of Hornings, kept at Edinburgh: and the Sheriffs, Clerks, and
Keepers of these Registers in the Shires, are by special Act of Parliament,
appointed to bring in those Registers, to be marked by the Clerk of Register:
and when they mark the Registration of any Horning upon the Letters, they
should also insert therein the number of the leaves of the Register wherein the
same is Registrate. Which Order is renewed by Act of Regulation, in Anno 1672.
And the due observance hereof being of great Importance, for the Benefit and
Security of the Leidges. Therefore the Lords do accordingly Ordain, all Sheriff
Clerks, to bring in their Registers of Horning, to be marked by the Clerk of
Register; and that in every Horning to be Registrate by them, they insert at
the marking thereof, the particular leaf of the Register, wherein they are
Registrate: and that the Sheriff^ Clerk take in no Hornings to be Registrate in
their Books, but against Persons dwelling within their Shire. And the Lords
recommend to the Lord Register, to take special care of the exact observance
hereof: And also Ordain the Clerk of the Bills, not to receive any Bill of
Caption or others, upon any Horning not Registrate and marked in manner
foresaid: And Ordain Letters of Horning, to be direct hereupon, upon a Charge
of fifteen days.

ACT against Solicitation. December 24. 1679.
THE which day, the Lords considering, that notwithstanding of the Act made
against Solicitation and verbal Information, dated the sixth day of November
1677. years. Yet some Persons are so bold, as to venture to Solicit the Lords
in their Actions. And it being the Resolution of the said Lords, that so
laudable and necessary an Act be made effectual. Therefore they declare, that
in any Process now depending or which shall hereafter be intented before them,
when the same comes to be advised, they will purge themselves concerning their
receiving any Solicitation, or Verbal Information in the Cause, if it shall
either be desired by the Partis, or moved by any of their own number. And that
they will delate the Persons, who do Solicit, or Verbally inform them, that
they may be punished therefore conform to the said Act.

ACT anent the taking of Renunciations from Persons Inhibited. February 19.
1680.
THE Lords considering, That it has been the ordinary Custom of Debitors, to
make payment of sums due upon Wodset, or Anualrent by Infeftment, and to accept
Renunciations, or grants of Redemption from the Wodsetter, or Annualrenter;
albeit the Credtor had been Inhibit before payment: which being made bona fide
the Debitors conceived themselves secure, and that they needed not search
Registers, to find Inhibitions against the Wodsetters, or Annualrenters. Which
has tended much to the detriment of Creditors, seeing such Sums secured by
Infeftment were not arrestable. For remeid whereof, the said Lords declare
that if the user of an Inhibition upon search of the Registers, or otherway
shall find Infeftments of Annualrents, or upon Wodsets, in favors of their
Debtor, being Inhibit, and shall make intimation, by Instrument of an-Nottar,
to the Persons who have Right to the Reversion of the said Wodsets, or
Annualrents, that the Wodsetter or Annualrenter stands Inhibit, at their
instance; and shall produce in presence of the Party, and Nottar the
Inhibition duly Registrat. Then, and in that Case, the Lords will not sustain
Renunciations, or grants of Redemption, although upon true payment, not being
made bona fide in respect of the Intimation, unless the Redemption prcceed by
way of action; the Inhibiter being always Cited thereto, or by Suspension of
double Poynding, upon consignation of the sums, whereupon the Annualrent, or
Wodset is Redeemable. And ordain this Act to be Printed and afixed upon the
Wall of the Utter-house, that the same may be known to all the Lelges.

ACT against Petitions for alteration of Acts Extracted. February 24. 1680.
THE which day, the Lords considering, That some times, after Acts of Litis
contestation are Extracted, Petitions are given in to them by one of the
Parties, craving the Act to be altered, wherein there may be prejudice to the
other Party concerned; not being present, nor at that time obliged to be
present: conceiving himself in tuto, after Extracting of the Act. For remeid
whereof, the Lords declares, that in time coming, they will receive no Bills,
or Supplications for alteration of Acts after the Acts are warantably
Extracted, seeing both Parties, or either of them may have a sight, or Scroll of
the Act before Extracting, if they desire the same. And likewise, because
sometimes Bills are given in for adducing of Witnesses, which have not been
contained in the first Diligence, but are alleged to have come to Knowledge
since the first Diligence was taken out; or after taking out of the second
Diligence, whereby Witnesses come to be Examined, when the other Party is not
present, nor obleiged to attend, that they may either object against the
hability of the Witnesses, or propone Interrogators to them. Therefore the
Lords do declare, that in case upon any speciallity, they do give warrant to
Examine any Witnesses, not contained in the first and second Diligence; that
they will only admit the said Witnesses to be examined at the first and second
Terms of Probation, when both Parties are obliedged to attend.

His Majesty's Letter in favors of the Lord Register anent the nomination of
the Clerks of Session. June 8. 1680.
CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and well beloved Councillors, and Trusty, and well beloved, We
Greet you well: Whereas, by Our Letter to you, of the 24. of May, 1676. We did
Ordain, That the three Clerks of the Session, who do Expede your Decre^ts,
shall be Nominated by the Senators of Our College of Justice, in all time
coming. And that the Clerk of Register give them Deputations from time to time;
without prejudice to the Clerk of Register, of all other Benefit and Emolument
belonging to, or depending upon that Office. And seeing the Office of Clerk of
Register was then Vacant, and that the Nomination of the Clerks of Session was
always Inherent in, and Depending upon the office of Clerk of Register. And
that since We have advanced Sir Thomas Murray of Glendook one of your number,
to the said Place: And being well satisfied with the good Service done by him
to Us, in the late Convention of Estates, and upon several other occasions.
Therefore, as a Mark of our Royal favor to him, We do by these presents,
Recall our said Letter, anent the Nomination of the Clerks of Session; and do
Empower, Authorize and Appoint the the said Sir Thomas Murray, during his
enjoyment of the said Office of our Clerk of Register, Solely to nominate, and
appoint the Clerks of Session. So that upon Death, Demission, and Vacancy of
any of the Clerks of Session, the said Sir Thomas Murray is to grant
Deputations, to such Persons as he shall think fit, and that during their
Lifetime; and shall as absolutely amply, and freely use, and exerce the said
Office of Clerk of Register as any other Clerk of Register formerly did, or
might do, declaring the same to be as Effectual to the said Sir Thomas Murray,
as to his sole Nomination of the Clerks of Session, as if it had been contained
in his Gift, of the Office of Clerk of Register. And ordaining these Presents
to be Recorded in your Books of Sederunt. And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the twelfth day of November, One thousand six
hundred seventy and nine. And of Our Reign, the thirty one year. Sic
subscribitur. By His Majesty's Command, LAUDERDAIL.

ACT concerning Nottars. July 29. 1680.
THE Lords considering, That by Acts of Parliament, it is Statute and Ordained;
That Nottars be sufficiently Qualified for exercing that Office, after
examination by the Lords of Session; that sufficient Caution be found, for
their due Administration of their Office: and in case the Caution be not
sufficient, that new and better Caution be found: and after the Decease of the
Nottars, their Protocalls are Ordained to be brought in to the Clerk of
Register, or his Deputs, appointed by him to that effect, who is empowered to
Revise the Protocalls of all Nottars, and consider in what Condition they are.
And albeit the due observance of these Acts of Parliament, be a public
Concern, as to the interest, and security of the whole Leiges; Yet the said
Lords understanding, that by reason of the late Troubles, and the Confusions
ensuing thereupon. Especially during the time of the Usurpers, these Acts have
been neglected to be put in Execution: In so far, as many Nottars are Deceased,
whose Protocals are not returned to the Clerk of Register, or his Deputes; but
do remain in the hands of their Relicts, and Children, which occasions diverse
inconveniences, and diverse of their Protocalls are upon perusal, found to be
Defective, and Unformal: and some of their Cautioners are not sufficient.
Likeas, diverse Persons pretending to have been admitted under the Usurpers, do
presume to Officiat as Nottars, albeit they be not lawfully Authorized so to
do. For redress of which abuses and disorders, The Lords do Ordain Letters to
be direct at the Instance of the Clerk of Register, or his Deput, Clerk to the
admission of Nottars, for charging the Relict, and Executors of such Persons as
are Decea^ed, and their Cautioners, to bring in, and deliver to them the
Protocall Books of the said Nottars, conform to the Act of Parliament, and
their Respective Acts of Admission. And also Ordains General Letters to be
Direct, at the Instance of the Clerk of Register or his said Deput; for
charging such Nottars, as they are informed to have Protocalls Detective, or
Informal, to produce their Protocalls before the said Deput, at the head Burgh
of the Shire, where the Nottar does Reside; and where the Cautioners found for
any Nottar is insufficient, to charge that Nottar to find new, and more
sufficient Caution. And Ordain these General Letters to be Execute upon six
days, and that against such Particular Persons, only as shall be given in a
List, under the hand of the Clerk of Register. And the said Lords do hereby
prohibit, and discharge all Persons who were admitted Nottars, under the
Usurpers, to Officiat as Nottars, until they be of new admitted. And the said
Lords considering, that it is Statute and Ordained by Acts of Parliament, and
specially by the 78. Act Parliament 5. James 5. That all Sheriffs, Stuarts,
Bailzies and others, both to B^rgh and Land shall present their Clerks in
presence of the Lords of Session, to be Examined, Sworn and admitted by them:
and seeing the Clerks of these Courts have neglected for some time by past, ^o
compear before the said Lords, to be tried and approven by them: and it being
necessary, and the public Interest of the Leidges, that these Acts of
Parliament be punctually observed in time coming. Therefore the said Lords do
ordain and require all persons, who hereafter shall be nominate Sheriff Clerks,
Clerks of S^ewartries, and Bailiries, before they enter to, and exerce their
Office of Clerkship, to compear before the said Lords, that they may be tried
and approven by them, conform to the Act of Parliament, Certifying them, if
they failzie therein, they shall be deprived of their Offices.

ACT concerning Bills of Suspension. November 9. 1630.
THE Lords considering, that by former Acts of Sederunt, of the 9. of February
1675. and the 3. of July 1677, They did give Warrant to the Ordinary upon the
Bills, to allow a sight of a Bill of Suspension, to the Charger, and to stop
Execution for some time, not exceeding a Month, declaring also, that a Bill of
Suspension signed by the Ordinary, though not expeded at the Signet, should
import a stop of Execution for the space of fourteen days, from the date it
was signed, that in the mean time sufficient Caution might be found, and that
the Clerk of the Bills might enquire anent the condition of the Cautioner. And
now finding that abuses have crept in, stops being procured from several
Ordinaries, from time to time, and that when the first fourteen days after, a
signed Bill were elapsed, a new one was presented and past, which stopped
Execution for other fourteen days, and so might continue for a long time.
Therefore the Lords do declare, that they will give no stops of Execution
hereafter, upon Bills of Suspension, fourteen days from the date being a
sufficient time, both for seeing and expeding the Bill. And Declares all other
stops to be void, except where Causes are ordained by the Lords, to be Discust
upon Bills; and ordains the Clerk of the Bills to make a Minut-book, both of
past and refused Bills, by the Alphabetick Order of the Parties sirnames, which
he is to make patent to any Charger that shall desire to see the same, gratis,
and discharges him to present any new Bills in that Cause except to the whole
Lords in time of Session, or to three Lords in time of Vacance, as he will be
answerable at his peril; and because Parties, or their Procurators, are
accustomed to procure Suspensions, upon pretense, that the Copy of the Charge
given by the Messenger is general, or unformal; and for verrifying thereof, do
produce forged Copies, and sometime forged Writes, for instructing Reasons of
Suspension, founded thereupon, never intending to make use of the same; and
therefore do suffer Protestations to pass. For remeid whereof, the Lords do
declare, that if the Charger shall produce such a Suspension, or a duplicat
thereof, under the hand of the Keeper of the Signet, that in that case, the
Lords, besides the ordinary expenses of Protestation, will modifie large
Expenses to the Charger, for his delay; and in case Protestation shall not be
admitted but the Suspension shall come to be Discust: and at the Discussing the
Charge, or other Writes mentioned in the Reason of Suspension, be not produced:
The Lords Declares, they will hold these Writes false and sorged, and modifie
large Expenses to the Charger, but pr^judice to insist against the forger of
the said Copies or Writes; and ordain a Copy of this Act, and of the other two
Acts abovementioned, to be affixed upon the Wall of the Outter-House, and
Copies thereof to be delivered to the Clerk of the Bills, to remain affixed on
the Wall of the Bill-Chamber, that he may exactly observe the same.

ACT anent the marking of Advocats Compearance for Defenders. November 25. 1680.
THE Lords declares, that in time coming, where several Defenders are conveened
in one Summonds; and that at the calling thereof by the Clerk, an Advocat shall
be marked, compearing indefinitly for the Defenders, and who shall likewise
return the Process: that Advocat shall be holden compearing for all the
Defenders, unless by the return upon the Process, he qualify his Compearance,
and express, for which of the Defenders he compears, and for which of them he
does not compear.

ACT in favors of the Macers. February 15. 1681.
THE which day, there being a Petition given in to the Lords, by their four
ordinary Macers, representing, that where the Lords are in use upon application
of Parties to grant Commissions for taking the Oaths of Parties, and the
Depositions of Witnesses in Causes, where it appears by Testificats produced,
that the Parties or Witnesses, are through age and infirmity, unable to travel.
And sometimes Commissions are grantted, where the persons live at a great
distance, and the matter is of Small moment: By granting of which Commissions,
the Petitioners are frustrate of the Dues payable to them, in case the Parties
and Witnesses did come here and Depone before the Lords; and therefore craving
that they might have their Dues, for Parties and Witnesses, where they are
Examined by Commission: which being taken to consideration by the said Lords,
they Ordain, that in time coming, where Commissions shall be granted by the
Lords, for Examining Parties or Witnesses, that the Macers shall have the half
of the Dues which are paid to them, when Parties and Witnesses do compear
before the Lords and Depone, viz. twelve shilling scots for ilk Party to be
Examined by Commission, to be paid in manner following, viz. where a
Commission is granted for taking a Parties Oath, that the Dues be paid to
Francis Scot, Keeper of the Minut-book, within forty eight hours after the
Commission shall be put up in the Minut-book, and in case the same be not paid
within that space, that the Commission shall be delet out of the Minut-book,
and not Extracted until the same be put up again, and the Dues paid; and that
the said Dues for Witnesses be paid at the return of the Report and
Commission, before an avisandum be put up thereof in the Minut-book: And to the
end, the number of the Witnesses may be known, that the Person to whom the
Commission is granted, shall set down upon the back of the Commission, or
Report, a list subscribed by him, of the Witnesses names: and the Clerks are
hereby Ordered, to insert in the Commission a Warrant to the Commissioner to
transmit that list with the Report of the Commission; and that Francis Scot
attest under his hand, that payment is made to him of the said Dues, before an
avisandum be put up of the Report in the Minute-Book.

ACT anent Seasins and Reversions of Lands within Burgh. February 22. 1681.
THE Lords of Council and Session considering, that the Act of Parliament 1617.
anent the Registration of Seasins and Rev^rsions of all Lands and Annualrents,
there is an exception of Land and Annualrents lying within Burgh, and within
the Burgage Lands of Royal Burrows, which is supposed to have been upon
account of the Books of the Town Clerks of Royal Burrows, wherein the Seasins
and Reversions of such Lands might be found. Nevertheless the Lords finds, that
not only Seasins within Burgh, are sometimes omitt^d, and not found insert in
the Town Clerk Books: But that frequently, Reversions of Tenements and
Annualrents within Burgh, and Assignations to, and Discharges of Reversions,
and Bonds for granting such Reversions, are not to be found in the said Books,
to the great detriment of the Leidges, and especially of the Inhabitants of the
said Royal Burrows. For Remeid whereof, the Lords do appoint and ordain, the
Magistrates of Royal Burrows, and their Successors in Office, to take good
Caution and Surety of their Town Clerks, that now are, or shall be in Office,
that they insert in their Books, all Seasins of Lands, Tenements, and
Annualrents within their respective Burghs, or Burrow-lands; and of all
Reversions, Bonds for granting Reversions, Assignations to, and Discharges of
Reversions, Renounciations, and grants of Redemption, of any Tenements, or
Annualrents within their Burghs, or Burgage Lands, that shall be given at any
time hereafter, within the space of threscore days, from the dates thereof
respective, in like manner as is prescribed by Act of Parliament, anent the
Registration of Seasins, or Reversions of Lands without Burgh: and that the
said Surety be under the pain of the damnage that shall befall to any Party,
through the Latency of the said Writes, which shall be past by the said
Clerks, or presented to them to be insert in their said Books. Likeas, the
Lords ordains the said Magistrates to insert an Act hereupon, in their Town
Court Books, and to cause publish the same by Tuck of Drum, that none pretend
ignorance. And further, the Lords do Declare, that if any Party shall neglect
to insert their Seasins, Reversions, Bonds for granting of Reversions,
Assignations to, and Discharges of Reversions, Renounciations and grants of
Redemption, in manner foresaid, that the Lords will hold and repute them as
latent and fraudulent Deeds, kept up of design, to deceive and prejudge the
Purchasers of Tenements and Annualrents within Burgh, bona fide, for just and
onerous Causes; and ordains the Provost of Edinburgh, to intimate this Act to
the Commissioners of the Royal Burrows, at the next Convention of Burrows, And
ordains their Presents to be Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh and other places needful.

CERTAIN DECISIONS Of several Debates, Intented and Debated BEFORE THE LORDS OF
COUNCIL and SESSION, IN Some Weighty and Important Affairs, brought before them.
Beginning the 29. of June 1661. and ending in July 1681.
James Talzifer contra Maxtoun and Cunninghame. June 29. 1661.
JOHN KER, Merchant in Edinburgh, having an Wodset-Right of some Tenements in
Edinburgh, William Clerk his Creditor, Comprised the Wodset-Right from him, and
obtained Decree of Removing, against the Tennents of the Tenements; James
Tailzifer having Right to the Reversion of the said Wodset, consigned the Sum
for which the Wodset was granted, in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills, and
thereupon obtained a Suspension of the Decree of Removing; and thereafter
having obtained Right from William Clerk, to his Appryzing, did, by
Supplication, desire the sum Consigned by him, to be given up to himself; 1.
Because the Consignation was not orderly made, conform to the Reversion. And,
2. Though it had been orderly, yet before Declarator, he might pass from the
Consignation, and take up his Money, whereby the Wodset Right wou^d remain
unprejudged. 3. The Wodset-Right being now returned to himself, by acquiring
Clerks Appryzing, he had thereby Right to the sum Consigned, for Redemption of
the Wodset: Compearance was made for Maxtoun and Cunningham, for whom it was
alleged that the consigned Sum ought to be give up to them; because, before
William Clerks Appryzing, they and William Clerk, had jointly obtained from the
King, a Gift of the Escheat, and Liferent of the said John Ker, who had been
year and day at the Horn, before Welliam Clerk Appryzed from him; so that the
sum Consigned, being now moveable, fell under Kers E^chea^, and thereby they
have R^ght to two third parts thereof, and Clerk or Tailzifer by his Right, can
only have the other third; and if the Sum were not ^ound to fall under Kers
E^cheat, the Annualrent thereof, during K^rs(...) would fall to the three
Donators of his Liferent equally, and the ^um ought to be given out, in
security to them for their Liferent; and to Tailzifer, as having Right to
Clerks Appryzing in Fee, except the third, thereto Clerk had Right as joint
Donator with them; neither could Tailzifer pass from his Confignation, seeing
they accepted thereof; nor could he object against any informality in the
Consignation made by himself, seeing they past from that objection. It was
answered for Tailzifer, that Maxtoun and Cunninghame had no Right by the single
Escheat of Ker; because before the Consignation, by which it is pretended the
Consigned Sum became moveable, Ker was den^ded by Clerks Appryzing: So that the
Consigned Sum came in place of the Appryzing. It was answered for Maxtoun and
Cunninghame, that albei^ the Apprizing might carry the Stock and Fee of the
Consigned Sum; yet the Liferent of the Annualrent thereof, belongs to the three
joint Donators of Kers Liferent, seeing Ker was year and d^y Denounced; whereby
jus fuit acquisitum domino Regi, before Welliam Clerk Apprized. It was answered
for Tailzifer, the diligences of Lawful Creditors, are still preferred to the
Fisk, before Declarator, and here that was no Declarator, of the Liferent of
Ker: and therefore Clerks Appryzing must carry the whole Right of the Wodset,
and in consequence of the Sum Consigned in place thereof. It was answered for
Maxtoun and Cunninghame, that although complete Dilligences of Creditors,
attaining effect before Declarator, are not liable to Re^^i^ution, in single
Escheats, it is not so in Liferent-escheats; especially where the Diligence is
not complete, ^n cursu rebellionis, as in this case, and likewise Clerk,
Tailzifers author had homologat the Right of Liferent, by concurring with them,
founding thereon in many Process^s.

The Lords found the Alleadgence for Maxtoun and Cunninghame, upon the joint
Gift of Kers Liferent, Homologate, as said is, relevant and proven; and
therefore, ordained the Consigned Money to be given up to Tailzifer, who by
virtue of his Right to Clerks Appryzing, had the Right of the Stock thereof,
and ordained him to employ the same, or give Security for the Annualrent, of
two third parts thereof to Maxtoun and Cunninghame, during John Ker's Lifetime.

Major of Bervick, contra L. of Hayning. June 1. 1661.
THE Major of Bervick, and others having right to the Salmond Fishing in Tweed,
within Bervick bounds, gave in a Supplication to the Parliament, against the
Lord of Hayning, bearing, that he was now drayning a Loch, which fell into the
Water of Etrick, and thence into the Water of Tweed, which had given a red
Tinctur to all the River to the Sea, most noysom to the Salmond, which were
found never to swime where the said Tinctur was, but in other clearer places of
the Water, all the Salmond Fishing was prejudged to a great sum, to the
detriment of the Country, and the Kings Customs; Therefore desiring that he
might be ordained to desist and cease: The Parliament remitted the Bill to the
Lords. It was alleged for the Defender, that the Bill was not Relevant,
because of any alleged prejudice of the Pursuers, to take away from the
Defender his undoubted Right of Property, giving him power to dispose of his
own at his own pleasure. And so to drain his Loch, or to cut his own ground,
especially seeing His Majesty, by His Proclamation having invited all His
Subjects to drayning. The Pursuer answered, that his Petition was most
Relevant, and no ways contrair to the Right and Effect of Property, which
gives the Proprietar power to dispose of his own, so that he keep him within
his own bounds, and do not send forth any noisome thing upon his Neighbors, but
he may not do so to his Neighbors detriment, especially if he make use of that
which is his own, not according to the nature and common use thereof, but
against the same, and so though he may build upon his own ground, albeit to the
detriment of his Neighbors light or prospect, or may dig a Well in his own
ground, albeit thereby he cut off the veins of his neighbors well, yet can he
not otherwise prejudge his neighbors, as if he had a Loch on a Hill, he might
not cut it, if it drowned his Neighbors ground below, nor may he build a Milne
upon his own ground, so as to take the the water from his Neighbors Milne, nor
may he turn the water out of the old Channel, or make it rune other ways upon
his Neighbors, then was accustomed. In like manner, in Superior and Inferior
Tenements in Town, The Superior may not be made use of, to the detriment of
the Inferior, nor the Inferior to the detriment of the Superior, by putting
Fire on the Floor, which would smoke the same. The like is provided by many
Interdicts in the Civil Law, etc. And therefore the Defender might not contrair
to the nature of a Loch, which has perpetually been a Loch, do any deed
beginning within his own Bounds, but ending in a public River, to the
detriment of the Fishing; which is worth more then 12000. lib. Sterling. by Year.
The Defender answered, that suppose he might not make use of his own, to emit
any thing upon his Neighbors property contrare to Nature, to his Neighbors
Detriment, as in the Instances alleged, they did not meet with this case,
because here he offered him to prove, That his Loch had a perpetual Current to
the water of Ettrick, which made a Milne go, and when his drayning was done
(which would be shortly) the Current to the River would be as little, and as
pure as ever, so that albeit there was Detriment, it was but Temporary, nor was
he working contrary Nature, but helping it, by redding the passage, to let the
Loch run quickly away. 2dly. Albeit he might make no new work on his own
ground, to the Detriment of his Neighbors Property, yet might he well send
away any stagnant water, corruption or filth, by a public River, whereof one
prime use is to purge the earth of all corruption, and to carry it to the Sea,
and therefore the Corruption, not only of Men, and Beasts, but of the Earth, as
of Minerals, Coal-pits, Lime, and all others might be freely turned thereunto,
unless there were a positive Law or Custom to the contrair, albeit there may
be detriment of Fishing, which is but a Casualitie, and must carry the accident
of such inconvenience along with it. And as for the Roman Interdicts, they
neither meet the Case, nor are they Laws for us, where the Civil Law is not a
Law, but an Example we follow freely when we find it Just and fit.

The Lords were Inclined to refuse the said Bill, on that consideration mainly,
that it was the proper use of Rivers to carry away the Corruption and Filth of
the Earth, which should not be hindered by any Right of Fishing, which is but a
Casualiti^ given and taken with the common use of the River, but in regard the
matter was remitted by the Parliament, who might, if they found great
Inconveniency make a Law for remeid thereof (before answer) The Lords granted
Commission to try the condition of the Loch, and how it runn before this
drayning, and how it would run after the same, and how long the drayning would
continue, and what alteration was in the Fishing of Tweed thereby, and what
appearance that the same was caused by the drayning of this Loch.

Raith of Edmonstoun, Contra the Lord of Niddrie. July 4. 1661.
JOhn Boid Merchant in Edinburgh, as Assigny constitute by the Lord of of
Wolmet, to a Decree obtained at his Instance, against Niddrie, for payment of
the sum of 7000. merks, for which he gave Band to Wmquhil Wolmet for James
Reith of Edmonstoun his good brother, as an Asythment for the Mutilation of the
Lord of Wolmet by Edmonstoun, who cut off Wolmets left hand. Niddrie Suspended
on double Poynding, called the said John Boyd, Iean Douglas, Umquhile Wolmets
Relict, and the said James Reith. It was alleged for Niddrie, and the said
James Reith, that the Decree did bear the sum not to be payable till their
were delivered, a sufficient Letter of Slain and Remission for the Mutilation,
but the Letters of Slain now produced is not sufficient, because it did bear
only the Remission of an accidental Mutilation, and this Mutilation being of
purpose. 2dly. It was only subscribed by Wolmets Heir, and not by his Wife, and
their Children. It was answered for the Chargers, that there was no necessity
of a Letter of Slains for Mutilation, but the Remission alone was sufficient.
2dly. This sum was granted for Asythment to Umquhile Wolmet himself in his
Lifetime, and the Decree mentioned a Letter of Slains granted by him. 3dly.
Any Interest his Wife or Bairns could have, was only for the Asythment of their
Damnage, which could be none, seeing Wolmet was a Landed Gentleman, and did not
intertain his Family by his handie work, The Lords Repelled the Reason of
Suspension; In respect of the Answer on the Decree and Letters of Slain
produced, which they found Sufficient. It was also alleged be the said Iean
Douglas, that she ought to be preferred to the said John Boyd, because she had
arrested the sum long before his Assignation. It is answered, for Boyd, the
Arrestment was upon a dependence and loosed, and there is yet no Decree upon
the Dependence. It is answered for Douglas, That the loosing of the Arrestment
would have freed Niddrie, if he had actually paid the sum, but it being yet in
his hand, it ought to prefer her as Creditor, doing first Diligence,
especially, seeing Wolmet the time of the Assignation, was Rebel, and Bankrupt.
The Lords preferred the Assigny, in respect there was no Decree Extracted upon
the Dependence: Reserving to the Arrester after sentence to reduce upon the
prior diligence as accords, etc.

Tailizfer, Contra Maxtoun and Cuninghame. July 6. 1661.
IN the Competition betwixt Tailzifer, Maxtoun and Cuninghame, mentioned June
29. Where Tailzifer was preferred to the Stock of the sum consigned, for the
Redemption of the Wodset in Question. It was further alleged for Maxtoun, that
he ought to have a share of the Stock, because he produced a mutual Band
betwixt himself and William Clerk, Tailzifers Author, who apprysed the Wodset,
whereby they were oblidged to to Communicate the Profit that should accresce to
them by their Actions intented, and to be intented upon their Rights of John
Ker, the common Debitors Lands, without opposing one another upon their several
Apprysings, Tailzifer answered non relevat against him, who was a singular
Successor, this being but a personal Band of his Author, and could not affect
his Real Right of Apprysing, it was answered for Maxtoun, First, Albeit
Apprysings and Infeftmens thereupon be Real Rights, in some respect, yet in
many others, they were only accounted as Personal Rights, at least might be
taken away by Personal deeds, as by Intromission with the Maills and Duties of
the Apprized Lands, or by payment of the Sums therein contained, which would be
valid against singular Successors, without necessity of any Consignation. It
was answered for Tailzifer, That this is by reason of the Act of Parliament
1621. Declaring Apprysings satisficable by Intromission with the Maills and
Duties, and so to expire ipso facto, but cannot be streached beyond the Tenor
of that Statute, contrair the nature of Real Rights. The Lords repelled the
alleadgeance for Maxtoun upon the Band for Communication, which did not affect
singular Successors. It was further alleadged^ that this mutual Band was
Homolgat by Tailzifer in so far as he had concurred in all pursuits with
Maxtoun conform to the Tenor of the said Band, and had uplifted the Mails and
Duties accordingly. It was answered for Tailzifer, non relevat, to infer
Homologation, seeing these Deeds are not relative to any such personal Bond,
which Tailzifer never knew, and therefore could not Homologat; whereupon
Tailzifers oath was taken, if he knew the same, who denied: And thereupon the
alleadgence was repelled. Maxtoun farther alleged, that albeit there had been
no more, but the concurrence judicially, it was sufficient to communicate the
Appryzings. It was answered for Tailzifer, non relevat, unless the concurrence
had born expressly, to communicate, for the concurrence only to exclude third
Parties, would never infer the same.

The Lords Repelled Maxtoun's Alleadgences, and adhered to their first
Interlocutor.

College of St. Andrews Supplicant. July 16. 1661.
THE College of St. Andrews Supplicat, that in respect their hail Rents were
arrested, at the Instance of Doctor Gleig, and thereby they were not able to
intertain their Table and Bursers; craved the arrestment to be loosed, without
Caution, in respect they were an Incorporation, for whom no body would be
Caution.

The Lords after debating the Case amongst themselves, whether arrestment could
be loosed without Caution, or upon juratorie cautione, thought it could not;
but in this case, they allowed the same to be loosed, the Masters of the
Colleges giving a Bond, to bind themselves and their Heirs personally, for
what should be uplifted by any of them, whereby every Person stood Caution for
his own Intromission, for the University, they not being otherwise bound
personaliter, but only secundum officium.

Relict of Robert Fleming, contra Forresters. July 17. 1661.
THE Relict of Robert Fleming, Bailzie of Edinburgh, as his Executrix, Charged
Forresters the Bailzies Sister Daughters, to pay 1600. merks, due by their
Father, by Bond, and decerned against them as lawfully Charged to enter Heirs
to him nineteen years ago, and now eiked to the Bailzies Testament, by the
Charger; whereupon She obtained Letters of Horning, Summarly; the Suspenders
alleged, the Letters ought to be Suspended simpliciter, because they offered
a Renounciation to be Heirs: The Charger answered, non relevat post sententiam
et tantum temporis Intervallum: The Suspender replied, they were Minors the
time of the Decree, and that the delay of time was, because their Uncle never
Insisted, and it was like, purposed not to Insist. The Charger answered, they
were now Majors, and did not reduce intra annos utiles.

The Lords admitted the Renunciation.

Lord of Buchannan. contra Oseburn. July 24. 1661.
THE Lord of Buchannan Pursues, Reduction of a Decree, obtained against him,
at the Instance of Lieutennent Colonel Oseburn, in Anno 1653. upon many
Reasons, mainly, because the ground of the Decree was only a Bill not past the
Signet, at the Instance of umquhil, Mr. William Cunninghame, continued in
Oseburn, after his decease, without transferring, for rectifying or rescinding
a minute of Disposition, of the Lands of Ballindalloch, by Mr. William to
Buchannan, put in the hands of Mr. David Buchannan, who gave his Ticket that
the same should be kept, until it were perfeited according to Equity and
Justice; and Deponed, that the Point to be rectified, was only the warrandice
which in the Minute was absolute, upon which Bills, the then Judges, ordained
the Parties to submit, who accordingly submitted to four Friends, and two
Oversmen, who were to report, February 10. 1653. Which Oversmen did
unwarrantably report, after the expyring of the said Reference, upon the 19. of
February, to Buchannans great prejudice, contrair to Justice, in so far as they
ordained him to pay Oseburn sixteen years Purchase, for the price of the Lands,
without Production or Debating of the Parties Rights, or calling, or hearing
the Arbiters; and with warrandice from Oseburn, and his Goodfathers Fact, and
Deed only, albeit the Lands were insecure, holden Ward, and lying in the
Highlands. And found the Rental of the Lands to be five thousand merks yearly,
without distinguishing between Stock and Teind, though the Testimony of the
Witnesses proves not above three thousand merks, beside the Teind; of which
Lands, Oseburn nor his Goodfather, had neither Title nor Possession of
Buchanbeg; Buchanmore and Ballochroon, which are parts of Ballandoloch,
whereunto the Judges did unjustly interpone their authority, superceeding
twenty thousand merks, until the Right of Buchanbeg, Buchanmore and
Ballachroon, were discussed; and whereas the Decree bears, Buchannan to have
consented, he denied the same, neither was there any minut of Process taken
upon the day of his alleged consent; but by an Ordinance of the Judges half a
year thereafter, made upon their memory, which cannot prove against him, not
being subscribed by him, at least he might have resiled, re integra, before
extracting the Decree, as he did. The Defender answered, that whatever was the
ground of the Processes, yet there was a Submission subscribed by both Parties,
and a Report by the Oversmen conform, which is express contrair to all that is
alleged: and is sufficient and full Probation, Arbiters having so great
Trust. And the Decree bears, the Report made upon the 9. of February: And
albeit the minutes of Process were wanting, or contrary, nihil est, because the
Clerk being publicus proto notarius his solemn Instruments make full Probation,
and the minutes are but the notes taken by him for remembrance, till the full
Instrument be completed; against which, Parties may object at Extracting, as
not conform to the Warrands, but not thereafter; otherwise the Clerks by
altering, or losing the minutes, might destroy all Decreets, which are the
greatest Securities of the Kingdom. The Report also bears, Inspection of the
Parties Rights, and consid^ration thereof, and of the Debates and Informations
given in by either (...) in write: And if Buchannan saw not Oseburns Rights, it
was his fault, that called not for them out of the Overs-mens hands, where they
long lay, being expired Appryzings and Infeftments against Glengarnock, the
ancient Proprietar, and against the Lairds of Buchannan themselves; so that the
Report being a Decree Arbitral, and Confirmed by the Judges, and consented to
by Parties, is most solemn. And as to the Consent, it was Judicial and
Palpable, by joining hands, and needed no Subscription; it be-being most
ordinary, that Decreets bear, Consent of Parties; especially when the Consent
quadrateth with, and is conform to a Process; as the compearances of Parties,
whereby Decreets became irreduceable, accepting of Offices of Tutory, or
Curatory: and so if Buchannan had appeared, and said for forty thousand pound,
non faciam vim; but as for the twenty thousand merks, the Right of these Lands
would be first cleared. It would have been an unquestionable consent, albeit
contrary or extrinsick Acts require Subscription, and ex abundanti, have the
same: yet they need not, seeing publica scriptura, by the Instrument Judicial
of the Clerks, of Supreme Court, is more Solemn than a private Write by Parties
Subscription; and albeit de recenti, at the same time, when consents, or offers
are proposed, Parties may resile, yet ex intervallo, they cannot: For there is
only locus penitentiae in Dispositions, or Tacks of Lands, where Writ is
requisite, not only as an Evidence, but as a solemnity accomplishing the Right:
But in other Pactions and Promises, where Write is not essential, there is no
place therefore. The Lords having considered the Decree, and whole Warrands
thereof, Reduced, and turned the same in a Libel, ordained O seburn to proceed
upon the two Supplications, on which the Decree was pronounced, and continued
his Possession, till the close of the next Session, for they found beside, many
informalities, the sentence and Report of the Overs-men, to have been after
expyring of the Reference, by the Warrant thereof, subscribed with their hands:
And as to the Consent, they found by Signature of Process under all the then
Judges hands, that there was no minut of the said Consent at the time it was
alleged to have been, but half a year thereafter, made up of their memories:
Upon which two Points mainly they Reduced, without Discussing the other
Alleadgences: neither had they respect to Buchannans Homologations of the
Arbiters Sentences, by taking out Diligences conform, and adducing Witnesses to
prove the Rental: nor by acquiescing in his Bills to the price; because there
was always some qualities in his Consent.

Lord of Lamertoun, contra Earl of Levin, and Alexander Kennedy. Eodem die.
THE Lord of Lamertoun having wakened an Improbation against Alexander
Kennedy, and the Earl of Levin, for improving of several Bonds, exhibit by the
said Alexander Kennedy, and made use of by the Earl of Levin; Lamertoun craved,
that the Earl of Levin, might bide by the Bonds, seeing he made use thereof;
the Earl offered to abide by them, qualificate^, viz. that he made use of them,
as believing they were true Bonds; and that he was not accessory to any
falsehood, or forgery thereof. It was alleged, he ought to bide by them
simply, for such qualities were contrair to the Act of Parliament, declaring
users of false Writs, and abiders by them, to be accounted as accessory
thereto; many of the Lords were of opinion, that he should abide by them
simply; but that he might protest under the foresaid quality, in respect it was
not proper to the Lords, to consider the consequence of his biding by the
Bonds, which was Criminal; yet alterius fori; yet it was carried, that he might
bide by them qualificate: and therefore he was ordained to give it in in Write,
that the Lords may consider how far they will allow it.

Mitchels, contra John Hutchison. July 24. 1661.
JEAN and Marion Mitchels, having ^pursued John Hutchison, in Anno 1659. for
Reduction of a Decree, obtained by him against them, as Heirs to their Father,
upon Minority and Lesion: and also, because their Service, the only ground of
the Decree was Reduced, in Anno 1656. wherein there was an Act of
Litiscontestation now wakened. The Defender alleged he got wrong in the said
Act; because, he having proponed a Defense upon the Pursuers behaving
themselves as Heirs (no ways acknowledging their Minority) he alleged they
behoved to prove the Reason, as well as the Exception, seeing they were both
consistent: yet the Act ordained him to prove his Defense of behavior; but did
not ordain them to prove their Minority. The Lords found this alleadgence
relevant. It was further alleged, that the Reduction of the Pursuers retour
is not competent against this Defender, to Reduce his Decree; because the said
Reduction was long posterior to his Decree, and he was not cited to the
Reduction. The Pursuers answered, they needed call none to the Reduction of of
their Retour, but the Judge, and Clerk, and Inquest^ and though the Defenders
Decree was anterior, they did not know the same, having been obtained when
they were within twelve years of age, and never charged thereupon, before the
Reduction of their Retour, and so they never knew it, nor were obliged to know
it.

The Lords repelled this Defense, and sustained the reason of Reduction, unless
the same were elided by the said Defense, of behaving as Heir.

Thomas Jack, contra Fiddess. Eod die.
EODEM die, Thomas Jack pursues Fiddess, alleging that Fiddes having given
him in custody, the sum of five hundred merks, in Anno 1650. by a Ticket
produced, bearing, To be kept by him with his own, upon the Deponers hazard;
and that the Pursuer for his security, did thereafter go to Dundee, and took
his Goods thither, where he lost the said sum, and all his other Goods, by the
English taking the Town by storm, and plundering it: yet Fiddess conveened him
before the English Officers at Leith, who most unjustly decerned him to pay the
sum, and put him in Prison, till he was forced to give Bond for it, and
thereafter paid it, unto this Defender his Assigney, who concurred with him,
and knew the whole matter, and now craved repetition condictione indebiti. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Pursuer made voluntar payment, and
so homologat the Decree, and never questioned the same till now. The Pursuer
answered, it was no homologation, nor voluntar, he being compelled to grant it,
and expected to remeid from the English Judges, with whom the Officers had so
grear power; neither could this be counted any Transaction, seeing the whole
sum was paid, nor any voluntar consent, nor homologation, being to shun the
hazard of Law: So that though these Officers had been a Judicature, if in
obedience to their Sentence, he had paid, and after had Reduced the Sentence,
he might have repeated what he paid, much more when they had no color of
Authority. The Lords Repelled the Defense of Homologation. It was further
alleged for the Defender, Absolvitor; because he offered him to prove, he
required his Money from the Pursuer, before he went to Dundee, and got not the
same; and it was his fault he took it to Dundee, being a place of hazard. The
Pursuer replied, that after the said Requisition, he made offer of the Money,
and Fiddes would not receive the same, but continued it upon his hazard, as it
was before.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply: and because the
Defense and Reply were consistent, ordained the Parties to prove, hinc inde;
the Pursuer his Libel, and Reply; and the Defender his Defense

Weymes, contra Lord Torphiohan July 25. 1661.
LADY M^ray, Iean, Elizabeth and Katharine ^^ymes, pursue the Lord Torphichane,
alleging that their Deceased Sister, Dam Anna (...), having a Wodset of
20000. Merks, upon the Barrony of Errot, granted a Bond of Provision thereof to
her Daughter Iean Lindsay, thereafter Lady Torphichane, and to the Heirs of her
Body, which failzing, to return to the said Pursuers, with an obliegement,
that her said Daughter should do nothing to prejudge the said Heirs of
Tailzie; which Bond was delivered by the Earl of Weymes to the Defender, then
Husband to the said Iean Lindsay, who obliged himself to make the same
forthcoming to all Parties having interest, as accords: Yet thereafter, during
the Marriage, the said Iean Lindsay entered Heir to her Mother; and she and the
Defender uplifted the Wodset sum, passing by the Bond of Provision: which sum
being in place of the Wodset, and unwarrantably uplifted by the Defender,
contrair the Bond of Provision, known to himself, which he was obliged to make
forthcoming; he ought to refound the sum. The Defender answered, that the
Libel is no ways relevant: for if his Deceast Lady Iean Lindsay, being Feear
of the Wodset, did uplift the same, and contraveened the Bond of Provision,
nihilad eum, who is but a singular Successor, having Right from his Lady, by
Contract of Marriage, whereof there was a minute at the time of his Marriage,
expressly disponing this sum, without any mention, ^^knowledge of the Bond of
Provision; and albeit he knew the fame after his Right, nihil est. And as for
his Ticket, it can work nothing; though the Band of Provision were now
produced, it being but a Personal Oblidgment, can oblidge none but his Ladies
Curators, or Successors, and if they will allege, that he is either Heir or
Successor Relevant, and his Ticket to make it forthcoming as accords, nihil
novi Iuris tribuit. The Pursuer Replied, That albeit a singular Successor, for
an onerous cause might have uplifted the Wodset, and been free, yet the
Defender being as the same Person with his Lady, and having no onerous cause,
but his Contract of Marriage, wherein there was a plentiful Tochar of 20000.
lib. provided to him besides this, and having known the Band of Provision,
before the uplifting of the Sum, and so particeps fraudis he is liable to make
the Sums received by him forthcoming, by the Act of Parliament, 1621. And also
by the Common Law, in quantum est accratus alterius dispendio.

The Lords found the Lybell and Reply relevant and approven, and therefore
decerned Torphichine to refound the Sum.

William Ker, contra Parochiners of Cardine. July 26. 1661.
WILLIM KER, as Executor confirmed to Umquhile Mr. Andrew Ker his Father,
pursues the Minister, and Parochiners of Cardine, for intrometting with his
Fathers Steipend of the Kirk of Cardine, in Anno 1652. and 1653. And for the
Annatine 1654, Because his Father died on the 22 of November, 1653. The
Defenders alleged absolvitor, because he being Colleague Minister, placed with
the Defuncts consent, and the Defunct being Suspended by the Presbetrie, he got
Right to these Years Stepends, and obtained Decree against the Heritors, and
uplifted conform, and so was bona fidei possessor cum titulo. 2. He offered him
to prove, by an Act of Presbytrie, that at the time of his entry he was
provided to eight hundred merks of the Defuncts Steipend, by the Defuncts own
consent. And as for the Annat, it was not confirmed, and could be extended to
no more but the half of 1654. The Pursuer answered to the First, That the
Presbytrie had no power to dispose of that Steipend, by the Act of Parliament
1644. because the Defunct was only Suspended ab officio, which makes not the
Kirk Vaick, maxim, seeing the Defunct was Reponed by the Synod, and never
desposed, and as to the Decree, at the Defenders Instance, it was given
without calling the Defunct, whom he was in mala fide to misken. To the second,
That the Act of Prisbytrie cannot prove, unless it had been subscribed by the
Defuncts, own hand, matters of Steipend not being the proper work of
Presbitries, but proper for civil Judges, especially, seeing the Defunct was
Suspended for Preaching for the Engagement, 1648. Against which that Presbytrie
protested; and so the Act being Eairtester, is the more suspect. To the Third,
The Annat not being in bonis defuncti, but indulged by the Law, to the Wife,
Bairns, and nearest of Kin to the Defunct Minister, and so originally their
Right, though upon occasion of his Service, the same needs no Confirmation, and
the Defunct having right proprio jure to the whole Year, 1653. Surviving both
Terms Anne signifying a Year further must be the heal Year, one thousand six
hundred fifty and four.

The Lords Repelled the first Defense, and found the Suspension of the Minister
not to make the Steipend Vaccand, and had no respect to the said Decree,
whereto the Defunct was not called. They found also the second Defense not
probable by the Act of Presbytrie, and found that the Anne needed no
Confirmation, but that the Anne did only extend to half a Year more then the
Defunct had right to proprio jure.

Lord of Lamirtoun contra Alexander Kennedy Farl of Levin. Eodem die
EOdem die, The Lord of Lamertoun, upon the Improbation mentioned, July 24.
Did then desire that Alexander Kennedy producer of the six Bonds quarrelled,
might be examined in presentia, and his Person Sequestrated and Secured, and
warrant granted to examine new Witnesses.

The Lords superceided to give answer till they considered the Process, and now
having considered the same, and finding, that the direct manner of Improbation
was not Competent, because the Witnesses were dead; and that the Pursuer had
insisted in the Indirect manner, and had obtained warrant for Inspection of the
Dispositions taken in the Cause, both of Alexander Kennedy himself, and of the
Witnesses then adduced, and had given in Articles of Improbation, and the
Defenders Articles of Approbation, Replies and Duplyes both which being
considered by the Lords, they found grounds of Suspition^ and therefore granted
all the desires of the Supplication, and Ordained Alexander Kennedy to be
kept close Prisoner in the Tolbooth, till he were re-examined, and Witnesses
hinc inde, to be examined by some of the Lords in the Vaccancy, upon what
either Parties should desire, which seemed peri^ent to the said Lords
Examinators.

Dame Elizabeth Fleming contra her Children November 14. 1661.
DAme Elizabeth Flemming Relict and Executrix to Umquhile Malcome Flemming
Merchant in Edinburgh, and Tutrix dative to his Bairns, having formerly pursued
an Action of Exoneration against her Children, in which she gave up as an
Article of her Account a hundred pounds Sterling, paid by her to Patrick Scot
of Langshaw, whereupon she had retired her Husbands Bond, and taken a discharge
upon the back thereof, and had taken her Husbands name therefrom, whereanent
the Defenders alleged, That this being a cancelled Paper, could establish no
Debt against them, neither could Patrick Scots discharge prove against them
that it was a debt restand by their, Father and paid since his death, as
Patrick's Testimony and Oath could not prove, much less his Declaration in wri;
whereupon, the Lords had ordained Patrick Scots Oath to be taken ex officio;
upon the truth of the Debt; and when it was paid to him, and by whom; who
having D^poned, that it was paid by this Pursuer after her Husbands Death. The
Lords did allow the Article: Now the Cause being wakened at the Pursuers
instance, and Sir John Gibson now her Husband, one of the Clerks: The Defenders
further alleged, that Patrick Scots oath ought not to have been taken, and
could not be sufficient to prove against them, that this was a true Debt, and
paid by their Mother, but it behoved to be presumed, if it was a Debt at all,
to have been paid by their Father, and the Bond cancelled by him, and left
amongst his writs, and found by their Mother there; and now after her second
Marriage made use of against her own Children; albeit she made no mention of it
before: And therefore the cancelled Bond being no Writ^ subscribed by the
Defunct, cannot prove, nor can Patrick, Scot's Discharge, or his Oath make it
up; nor any other thing, except the Defenders own Oath, or Writ; seeing
Witnesses are not admitted in cases of this Importance. Secondly, though it
were Evidently, and Legally Instructed and Proven, yet the Debt was paid by
the Mother, she can have no allowance of it, because she paid Voluntarly, not
being Tutrix nor Executrix at that time, and cancelled it, and took a discharge
of it; and so it is both unwarrantably done, and must be presumed to have been
of purpose, to gift it to her Children out of her opulent Fortune, having given
above forty thousand pounds to the second Husband. The Pursuer answered. That
the alleadgances were most Irrelivant, for as to the first, anent the Probation
of the truth of the Debt, and payment by the Executrix; It is sufficiently
proven by the cancelled Bond, at which the Witnesses Names are yet standing; by
Patrick Scot's Discharge and Oath, already taken, who is a Person inconcerned;
and above all exception, and if need bees, it is offered to be proven by many
Witnesses above exception, who saw the Bond un-cancelled after the Defuncts
Death, which is abundantly sufficient, to take away the Presumption, that it
was retired, and cancelled, by the Defunct himself, and that such Probation was
Legal, and Warrantable; was formerly found by the Lords of Session, upon the
7th of March, one thousand six hundred twenty nine, betwixt Falconer and
Blair, where an Executor pursuing the Hetr, for relief of a moveable Debt,
produced only the Defuncts cancelled Bond, without a discharge, and these same
points being alleged; The Lords found, that the Action ought to be sustained,
and the truth of the Debt, and the Payment after the Defuncts decease, to be
proven by the Creditors Oath; or after his decease by the Heirs Oath; and it is
unquestionable, That the Lords, in matters obscure, as to the Probation, may ex
^ob^li officio take all manner of Trial, for finding out the Truth, by Oaths of
Parties, Witnesses, or any other manner of way, in matters of greatest moment,
which being here already done, and the Testimony so clear, and of so
unquestionable a Person as Patrick Scot, there remains no doubt, but the Debt
was truly owand, and paid by the Relict, after her Husbands decease. As to
the second Point, there is no necessity in Law for Executors, or Tutor^ to have
Sentence, unless it be in Cases of Competition, to secure themselves, against
other Creditors, pursuing afterward; or Cases dubious, where the Probation is
not clear, but to pay a clear Debt without burdening Pupils with unnecessary
expenses of Law, against which the Pupils can now allege nothing, wherein
they were prejudged, by voluntar payment, such payments were never Repelled:
Especially in the Case of a Woman paying so soon after her Husbands death, nor
can it be presumed a Donation, because Donations are never presumed, but must
be clearly proven; and it is very ordinar to those who have Interest to pay the
Debts, and Confirm afterward.

The Lords considering the whole Circumstances, found the Article not to be
allowed, a bent they were clear, that the Debt was true, and really paid by
the Executrix; yet seeing she paid, not being then Executrix, nor Tutrix; and
cancelled the Bond, without taking Assignation; they thought she could not
distress her Children with it, but that it was a Donation in their favor.

Dame Elizabeth Flemming contra John ^ibson and Flemming. November 19. 1661.
INter eosdem, There was another Article of the said account, whereby the said
Dame Elizabeth Flemming, having lent out a sum of money, in the Name of Mal^ome
and Andrew Flemming's, two of her Bairns, she craved, that the said Sum should
be taken in part of payment, of the Portions of the whole Bairns; or at least,
in so far as was more nor the Portions of these two Bairnes, might be declared,
to belong to her self. It was answered for the Bairns, that this Bond was a
Donation by the Mother, out of her own means, in favors of her Children; and
could not be imputed as a part of their means, because, First The Bond did bear
the Money to be lent by her in her Childrens name, and not in her own; Neither
did it bear to be as a part of the Bairns means, nor in satisfaction thereof,
as she had specially taken other Bonds in these same Bairns names, and so
presumed consideratly, to gift the Sum to these two Bairns, of whom one was a
pocthmus Child, born eight months after his Fathers Death, and so was not
thought upon by his Father, nor provided with Legacies as the rest were,
Secondly, The Tenor of the Bond bears expressly, the Sum to be payable to the
Mother, in Liferent; and one of the Children is substitute Heir to another, in
case they had not Children of their own, (Whereas another would have fallen
Heir of Line to them, viz. An intervenient Brother) and to them both the Mother
her self, and her Heirs were substitute. The Pursuer answered, That supposing
this were a Donation; yet it being a free gift, the mother might do it upon
what Terms, and Conditions, and what way she pleased. Ita est, by the Tenor of
the Bond. It is provided, that she shall uplift the Sum, during her Life, and
the Children after her decease; by which Clause, she is more nor a naked
Life-renter; and seeing this Clause must be interpret cum effectu, the only
meaning of it can be, That during her own Lifetime, she might uplift the Sum,
and dispose of it at her pleasure: and so evacuat the fee in her Childrens
Persons, seeing there is nothing to oblidge her to re-imploy it for the Bairns
use, if she should once uplift it, it, as when a Father Infeft his Son in his
Lands, reserving his own Liferent, with power to Dispone, during his own life;
there the Father is Liferenter, yet by that Reservation, he may annull and
evacuat the Sons Fee, even so here: For which two Practicks of Dury was
adduced, that a Father providing a Sum to himself and his Wife, and the longest
liver of them two; and failzing of them by Decease, to his Son, the Son being
Infeft in Fee: and in the other Practick, the Father being expressly infeft in
an Annualrent for his Lifetime; Yet the Lords found, that the Father, during
his lifetime, might uplift the sum, and Dispose of it at his pleasure. The
Lords found, by the Tenor of the Bond, that the Mother had Constitute her self
expressly Liferenter, and the Children Feears: And that the power to Charge for
the Money, did bear nothing of a power to her to Dispose of it; but was only
the ordinar Reservation adjected after the Clause of Annualrent, in these
words, but prejudice of the said Annualrent to her, during her life, and after
her Decease, to ^he Bairns to uplist the money; and so, that albeit she was not
expressly obliged to re-imploy it; yet she Constituting her self Liferenter,
without a power to Dispose of the Fee, did sufficiently obliege her to
re-imploy the sum. And as to the Practicks, the case clearly differed, in this;
that there the Father and Mother were not Constitute Liferenters in the sum,
though the Father was mentioned Liferenter, of an Annualrent, accessory to the
sum: But the Clause being to the Father and Mother, and after their Decease to
the Son. It was clear by the common Practicks, that the Son was not Feear, but
Heir Substitute; so that the Father was Feear, and might Dispose at his
pleasure.

November 20. 1661. In the foresaid Cause, It was further alleged for the
Tutrix, that the Bond in question could not be accounted a Donation,
notwithstanding the Reasons before adduced, in so far as she was Debtor to the
said two Bairns, for their Portion, quia debtor non presumitur donare; and
therefore, Provisions granted by Husbands to their Wives, albeit they mention
not the Contract of Marriage, but love and favor: And so in the Terms of a
Donation, yet it is always interpret, to be in satisfaction of a prior
obliegement in the Contract of Marriage, and not, that both the posterior and
former Provision, are due to the Wife. It was answered for the Bairns, that
though Donation be not presumed, yet when by the Nature of the Deed done, it
appears to be animo donandi; I it is truly such, albeit it bear not the name
of a Donation, especially in this case: Which Law excepteth from that general
Rule, that Parents bestowing sums for the use of their Bairns, from their
natural affection, are always presumed to gift, and not to satisfy any former
Provision, unless it were so expressed: Upon which ground an Infeftment granted
by a Father to his Son, though but a Bastard, Redeemable upon a sum of Money,
was not found in satisfaction of a former Bond, granted by him to that natural
Son, as is observed by Dury, upon the 24. of July 1623. Stuart contra Fleming:
But here, not only is this Bond, not in satisfaction of the former Portion; but
bears a Clause of a Liferent, and of a return to the Mother, which are
incompatible with an intention of satisfaction.

The Lords found the Bond to be in satisfaction of the Bairns Portions, pro
tanto, and a Donation pro reliquo; which many thought strange, seeing a Bond of
100. Sterling, mentioned 14th. Instant, re^eired and paid by the Mother, and
being proven by Patrick Scots oath, so to have been done, to the satisfaction
of most of the Lords, which was clogged with no Provision, was not allowed to
be in Satisfaction of these Bairns Portions.

Bosewel contra Bosewel. November 22. 1661.
JOHN Bosewel Pursues Bosewel of Abden, as representing Henry Bosewel his
Father, for payment of a 1000. pounds, due to the Pursuer, by the said umquhil
Henry, and insisted against the Defender, as lucrative Successor, by accepting
a Disposition of Lands, and Heritage, from the said umquhil Henry, whereunto he
would have succeeded, and was therein his appearing Heir. The Defender
alleged, he was not lucrative Successor; because the Disposition was for
Causes onerous. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, unless it were alleged for
Causes onerous, equivalent to the worth of the Land; as was formerly found in
the Case of Elizabeth Sinclar contra E^phingst^^^ of Cardo^^. The Defender
answered maxim relevat, to purge this odious, passive Title, of lucrative
Successor, which is no where sustained, but in Scotland; specially, seeing the
Pursuer has a more favorable remeid, by Reduction of the Disposition upon the
Act of Parliament, 1621. if the price be not equivalent, and there it is
sufficient, to say it was for a considerable sum, or at least, it exceeded the
half of the worth, for there is latitude in buying and selling, and as an
inconsiderable Sum could not purge this Title; so the want of an inconsiderable
part of the full price, could as little incur it.

The Lords before answer, ordained the Defender, to produce his Dispositior,
and all Instructions of the Cause onerous thereof, that they might consider if
there was a considerable want of the equivalence of the price; here the
Defender pleaded not, that he was not alioqui successurus, the time of the
Disposition, being but Consing German to the Defunct, who might have had
Children.

Dowglasse contra Iohnstoun. Eodem die.
EODEM die, In the Competition between Dowglass in Abernethie, who Confirmed
himself Executor Creditor to Gilbert Weymes in Dumblane, where Gilbert dwelled;
and John Iohnstoun as Executor, Confirmed to the said Gilbert, by the
Commissars of Edinburgh; because Gilbert in a Voyage from Scotland to Holland,
died at Sea.

The Lords found the Commissars of Edinburgh to have no Right, unless the
Defunct had died abroad, animo remanendi, This Interlocutor was stayed, till
the Commissars were further heard.

Marjory Iamison contra Rodorick Mccleud. December 3. 1661.
MARIORI Iamison, Relict of umquhil Mr. John Alexander Advocat, pursues
Rodorick Mccleud, for payment of a Bond of Pension, of 200. merks yearly,
granted to her Husband, bearing, For Service done and to be done. The Defender
alleged the Libel is not relevant, unless it were alleged, that Mr. John
had done Service constantly, after granting of the of the Pension, which the
Lords Repelled. The Defender alleged further, that he offered him to prove,
that Mr. John did desist from his employment as Advocat, after the Pension, and
became Town Clerk of Aberdeen; and the Pension being granted to him, who
exerced the Office of an Advocat at that time, must be persumed for his
Service, as Advocat.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, in respect of the Bond of Pension, bearing,
For Services done and to be done, generally.

Sir Robert Farquhar contra Lion of Muiresk. Eodem die.
SIR Robert Farquhar, pursuing a Reduction of a Disposition, against John Lion
of Muiresk, upon Circumvention.

The Lords granted Certification, unless not only the Extract, but the
Principal Disposition were produced, in respect they were registrate at that
time, when the Principals were given back to the Parties.

Thomas White contra Crocket. December 4. 1661.
THOMAS White pursues Patrick Crocket in Eliot, to make payment of the sum of
600. merks, which the Pursuer alleged he had in a Leather-Girdle, when he
lodged with Crocket, being in an In-keepers House, and that the Defender
promised that the Pursuer should want nothing, after the Pursuer had shown him
the said Girdle; yet the Defender came ordinarily in the Chamber, where the
Pursuer lay that night, and he wanted his money from under his head, which he
declared, and show to the Defender the next morning: and therefore, according
to the Law, nautae caupones stabularij etc. (which is observed in our Custom)
the Defender as Keeper, ought to be Decerned to restore. The question was here
only, of the manner of Probation.

The Lords found all the Libel Relevant to be proven, pro ut de jure, and
declared, that these being proven, they would take the Pursuers oath, in litem,
upon the quantity.

Baillie of Dunnean contra Town of Inverness. Eodem die.
BAILLIE of Dunnean pursues the Town of Inverness, for violent Intromission in
his Moss, and molesting him therein, both Parties were content to Dispute, as
in a Molestation. The Defenders alleged Absolvitur; because the Town of
Inverness was Infeft in their B^rgh and Burrow-lands, with common Pasturage in
Montkapl^ch, and offered them to prove, the Moss contraverted, was a part of
Montka^loch, and that they have been in constant Possession thereof
accordingly. The Pursuer Replied, the Defense ought to be Repelled; because he
offered him to prove, that he was Infeft in his Lands of Dunnean, with Parts
and Pertinents; and that the Moss contraverted, was proper Part and Pertinent
of his said Lands, and that he was in use to debar the Defenders therefrom, and
to get Moss Mail for tollerance, to cast therein, and produced the same, under
the hand of nine of the Citizens, and one by their Clerk; and therefore, being
in libello, ought to be preferred in Probation. The Lords before answer,
granted Commission to Examine Witnesses, hinc inde, upon the Possession of
either Party: Which being Reported, the Defenders craved the same, with the
Dispute, to be Advised. The Pursuers Procurators alleged, there was yet no
Litiscontesta^ion, and they were not Insisting, and the Defenders could not
compel them to Insist, without a Process to Insist, with certification: in
which case, they would get a day to Insist.

The Lord found, that the Probation being taken before Answer, was equivalent
to Litiscontestation, as to the Points Proposed, and that they mi^ht proceed,
both to Advise the Points of Probation, and Relevancy together, and might
instantly Decern accordingly; albeit it hindered not the Parties to Propone
other Alleadgences, in jure, then it were in the Dispute, as in ordinary
Litiscontestation: and therefore the Lords considered the Parties Infeftments,
specially that of the Town of Inverness, bearing, with liberty to them to cast
Fail and Divote, in the Month of Kaploch, and several other Months, according
as they were accustomed of before. Which Clause the Lords found to be Qualified
and Taxative, and not to give an absolute Right of Commonly, but only such as
they had before, which behoved to be cleared by Posterior long Possession; and
found by the Depositions of the Witnesses, that that part of the Town of
Inverness, on the North^side of the Water, only had been in Possession, by
casting Peats in the Moss contraverted, and that the same is a part of Month
Kaplock, and that the Pursuer had proven the Right of Property therein: And
therefore ordained the Town of Inverness, on the other side of the Water, to
desist from the Moss contraverted, and granted Commission to se^tle the
Parties, anent their place, in casting in the Moss, or in case of variance, to
Report.

Iean Dalmahoy contra Hamiltoun of Binnie. December 6. 1661.
JEan Dalmahoy Charges Alexandee Hamiltoun, of Binnie, for a Tack-Duty of 2000.
merks, due to her for her Liferent-lands; he Suspends on this Reason, that he
has taken the benefit of the late Act of Parliament, between Debtor and
Creditor and this Sum being above 2000. merks, stands thereby Suspended for six
years. The Charger Answers, non relevat, because the Act extends not to Rents,
or Tack-Duties of Lands, albeit exceeding 1000. Pounds; but only to borrowed
Sums, and other money bearing Annualrent; which in Recompense of that
forbearance, are accumulat with the Principal Sums.

The Lords found the Act not to extend to Rents, or Tack-duties, and therefore
repelled the Reason.

James Hoom contra Abraham Hoom. Eodem die.
JAmes Hoom as Assigney to a Reversion, and order of Redemption used by the
Earl of Hoom, against Abraham Hoom, pursues Declarator of Redemption, and
Removing in the same Process. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the
Reversion expressed not Assigneys; and therefore, the Defender cannot be
obliged to renounce to the Pursuer, an Assigney. Secondly, At the time of the
Confignation, the Earl required the Wodsetter to Subscribe the Renounciation,
to a blank Person, upon a back Bond, declaring the same to the Earls behove,
which he was not obliged to do by the Tenor of the Reversion. Thirdly, No
Declarator, till the Earl produce the Sum at the Bar, seeing he lifted it
himself.

The Lords found, that albeit the Reversion expressed not Assigneys; yet seeing
the Order of Redemption was used, by the Earl himself, the Assigney had
sufficient Right, but Decerned the Defender to Renounce only in favor of the
Earl and his Heirs, but not to Dispone to any other Person, as the Earl
desired; and Declared, there should be no Decree extracted, till the Consigned
Money were produced, and given up, neither did they decern in the removing,
till the Parties were further heard thereupon.

Alexander Tailzifer contra Sornebeg. Eodem die.
ALexander Tailzifer, as Heir appearand to umquhil Tailzifer of Redheus,
Pursues Mistress Margaret Forrester, his Uncles Relict, and John Schaw of
Sornebeg, her Husband, for Exhibition, ad deliberandum, of all Writs granted,
not only to the Defunct, but also granted by the Defunct, to his said Relict,
or any other Person. The Defender alleged, non relevat; for Writs granted by
the Defunct to the Defender, or other Persons; because, albeit the Pursuer were
entered Heir, he had no interest for Exhibition thereof, unless there were
Clauses in his favor therein, and nemo tenetur edere instrumenta contra se;
and if this were sustained, it were the way to make patent, all the Charter
Chists in Scotland, at the Instance of appearand Heirs, under pretense to
Deliberat, but in effect to pick Quarrels, and find the weakness thereof. The
Pursuer answered, maxim relevat; for seeing the Law gives Heirs the benefit of
Deliberation, they must have the necessary means thereof, by Inspection, not
only of the benefit, but also of the burden of the Defunct, without which they
cannot know, number sit damnosa haereditas: Especially in this case, against a
Relict, who probably might have had Influence upon the Defunct Husband, to
grant Right to her, that might Evacuat the Heritage: And in this case, the
appearand Heir had a more large Interest to crave Exhibition, nor the Heir
Entered, who could only crave Exhibition for Delivery, Transumpt, or
Registration, and so behoved to Libel a peculiar Interest; but the appearand
Heirs Interest, is only ad deliberandum: And therefore, the Exhibition, as
medium thereto, must reach to all, whereupon he ought to Deliberat. Especially
the Defuncts Debt; and albeit it be true, nemo tenetur edere instrumenta contra
se, to found, or give Title to the Pursuers Action: Yet he having Title by the
Law, to crave Inspection for Deliberation, has good Interest: Yea, if he
produce a Title in himself, he may even force the Defender to Exhibit Writes,
ad probandum, by an incident, as well as third Parties, to whose Writ he has
no Right, save only to bear testimony for him.

The Lords having heard this Case in their Presence, because the Point had been
variously Decided, as to Writs granted by Defuncts, found the Libel Relevant;
not only for all Writs, granted to the Defunct; but also granted by the
Defunct, to his Relict Bairns, or Servants, in his Family, at the time of his
Death, being such Writs, upon which no Infeftment followed; for as to these,
they thought the Registers may give as much Evidence, as was sufficient to
Deliberate, and would not upon this ground, open Charter Chists, for showing
real Rights, and the plurality carried, that even Personal Rights, granted to
strangers, should not be produced, hoc modo; severals being of the opinion,
that Debts, Discharges and Personal Rights, should be thus Exhibit. In respect
that Heirs in Scotland were liable simpliciter, for all the Defuncts Debts: And
therefore, should have Inspection, as well of his Debts, as of his Estate, as
was found before, between the Lairds of Swintoun and West-nisbit, observed by
Dury, February 26. 1633.

Katharine Kinross contra Lord of Nunthil. December 10. 1661.
KAtharine Kinross, having Charged the Lord of Nunthil, for payment of a Bond,
granted to her first Husband, and the longest liver of them two, and their
Heirs; which failzing, his Heirs; he Suspends on this Reason, that she is but
Liferenter, and the Defunct being Infeft in Fee, she would not Renounce, but
the Heir:

Which the Lords Sustained, and found the Letters only orderly proceeded for
the Annualrent.

The Earl of Roxburgh contra Mcdowal of Stodrick. December 11. 1661.
THE Deceased Earl of Roxburgh, having obtained Decree of the Commission, for
the valuation of Teinds, in Anno 1635. against Mcdowal of Stodrick; this Earl
having Right from the Deceast Earl, pursues Stodrick for payment of the valued
Duty. The Defender alleged, no Process, because he had intented Reduction of
the said Decree, and Improbation of a Procuratory mentionated therein, to have
been produced by Mr. Robert Trotter, warranding him to consent for Stodrick, to
that Valuation; which is the only ground of the Decree, without either Dispute
or Probation. In which Reduction, Terms are taken to produce; and being
prejudicial to this Action, it must be first Discussed. The Pursuer answered,
that there can be here no prejudiciallity, which is only betwixt two Principal
Actions: but here, res est judicata, by a Decree, and stat sententia, and
dubious est eventus litis; neither can Reduction, which is a petitory Judgment,
sist the Pursuers Process, which is a possessory Judgment, upon pretense of
prejudiciallity; otherwise Possession might still be inverted upon such
pretenses; Nor can the Earl be put from his Possession thereby: Especially for
the years preceding the intenting of the Reduction.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, as to the years, ante litem motam, by the
Reduction, but Sustained it for the years since, in respect the Earls
Possession was not clear, and that the Valuation was exorbitant, near as great
as the Stock.

Hellen Hepburn contra Hamiltoun of Orbestoun. December 12. 1661.
HEllen Hepburn, as Executrix to her Father Humbie, Pursues Sir James Hamiltoun
of Orbestoun, for payment of a 1000. merks, due to her Father by Bond. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because there being a Bond of 10000. pounds
granted by Balhaven, Humby, Prestoun, and Orbestoun, for the use of the late
Duke of Hamiltoun, but there being nothing to Instruct that it was the Dukes
Debt: yet there was a Transaction with the Duchess of Hamiltoun, for a lesser
Sum, whereof Balhaven, Prestoun and the Defender, had paid their part: by
which Transaction, the Pursuers Tutrix and Overseer, did agree to quite this
Bond, in respect that her Father was acquitted of any share of the Bond, of
10000. pounds. The Pursuer answered: First, That the Defense ought to be
Repelled; because, being but a Verbal Agreement, before Writ was subscribed,
either Party might Resile. Secondly, The Transaction cannot be Instructed,
there being no Write, and Witnesses are no competent; neither can the Tutrix
Oath prove against the Pupil. The Defender answered, to the first, that the
Transaction being pactum liberatorium, it required no Write, and so there was
not locus penitentiae. And as to the Probation of the Transaction, though
Tutors Oath of Knowledge, of any Debt of the Pupils Predecessors, will not
prove against the Pupil, because the Tutor is singularis testis, and not in
officio: But a Tutors Oath as to Deeds done by himself, in officio, would
sufficiently prove the same.

The Lords thought there was not locus penitentiae, from the Tra^saction,
though but Verbal: but as to the manner of Probation, they ordained the ^utrix,
and overseers Oaths to be taken, ex officio.

Gordoun of Gight contra Abercrombie of Birkbog. Eodem die.
SIR Alexander Aberc^omb^e of Birkbeg, having obtained Decree of of Ejection,
against Sir George Gordoun of Gight, for Re-possessing him in certain Lands,
and paying the double Rent for the violent Profits. Gight Pursues Reduction of
the Decree, on these Reasons^ First, because there was no Law nor Practick, to
make the violent Profits of Lands, without Burgh, to be the double of the Rent;
which is only competent by Custom, in prediis urbanis. Secondly, The Ejection
was prescribed, not being intented within three years, conform to the Act of
Parliament. Thirdly, Gights Defense of Entering, in vacuum possessionem, was
only found probable, scripto vel juramento, whereas being facti, it was
probable by Witnesses.

The Lords Repelled the First and Second Reasons, as Competent, and emitted in
the Decree, and as to the Third, The Decree did bear the alleadgence in the
Decree, to be Gights entering into void possession, with consent of Party,
which consent not being qualified by any palpable fact was not Probable by
Witnesses.

James Hamiltoun contra the Tenants of Overshe^ls. December 13. 1661.
JAmes Hamiltoun Merchant in Glasgow, having right to two apprysings of the
Lands of Oversheils, Pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties, and after
Litiscontestation, John Rollane Writer Compears for his interest, and produces
an Apprysing, at his Instance; with a Charge against the Superiors. It was
alleged he could not be admitted in this state of the Process. The Lords
admitted him, in respect he craved no alteration to be in the
Litiscontestation, but concurred therein, and craved Preference to what should
be found due thereby: The said John being admitted, alleged, he ought to be
Preferred, because he had charged the true immediate Superior, whereas the
other two Apprysers had taken Infeftment, as if the Lands had holden immediately
of the KING. It was answered for James Hamiltoun, that he ought to be
preferred, because he was Infeft long before John Rollane, and supposing his
Infefment were not of the immediate Superior, yet being in Possession, by
virtue thereof, five or six Years, he has the benefit of a Possessorie
Judgment, and his Infeftment cannot be taken away without Reduction.

The Lords preferred John Rollane, and granted not the benefit of a Possessorie
Judgment without seven years Possession.

John Boyd contra Lord of Niddrie and Edmonstoun. Eodem die.
JOhn Boyd, as Assigny Constitute to a Bond of a thousand merks by Wolmet,
charged Niddrie the Debtor, who Suspends on double Poynding: In which
Compearance was made for John Boyd, who having declared upon Oath, that the
Assignation was to his behove, for the satisfaction of the Sum of fourteen
hundred pounds, and that the remainder was to Wolmets own behove; according to
which he had granted back bond to Wolmet, and thereafter granted a second back
bond to Major Bigger; oblidging him to make the Sum forthcoming to Biggar,
which was done before any Arrestment; but depones, that he knows, at that time
his first back bond was given, and that a Discharge of his first back bond
produced, was by a mistake, kept up by Major Biggar, and not delivered up to
him till within this few days; upon this Oath, the Lord of Edmonstoun, who had
arrested all Sums due to Wolmet in Niddries the Suspenders hand, in June 1658.
alleged, That the ought to be preferred to Biggar, because it is clear, by
the Oath, that the superplus of the Sum was to Wolmets behove, and he having
arrested it before the discharge of John Boyds first back bond was delivered to
John Boyd, or expressly delivered, to John Boyd's behove, or otherwise, that
the first back bond were re-delivered, no deed that John Boyd could do without
Wolmets express consent, could prejudge Wolmets Creditors. It was alleged
for Biggar, that albeit the first back bond was not delivered back to John Boyd
before the Arrestment, nor the discharge delivered to him, yet Wolmet having
subscribed the discharge, and delivered it, albeit it came not to John Boyds
hands, it was sufficient to take away the first black bond.

The Lords preferred the Arrester, and found the discharge could operat
nothing, unless it were delivered to John Boyd, or some Person to his behove,
before the Arrestment, for they thought if discharges by Creditors put in a
third Parties hands, not delivered to the Debtor, should be sufficient; it
would e^ervart all Arrestments, unless the deliverie were expressed to the
Debitors behove.

Homes contra John Bonnar. December 14. 1661.
MAry and Homes, as Donatar to the Escheat, and Liferent of Umquhile John Home,
pursued John Bonnar, for Count, Reckoning, and Payment of the Sum of 16000.
merks due to the Rebel, for the price of a House. The Defender alleged
absolvitor, because he had bona fide made Count, Reckoning and Payment to Mr.
Alexander Home, Assigny Constitute by the Rebel, before any Citation, or
Diligence done against him, to put him in mala fide, so to do, and produced the
Assignies discharg, bearing, that the Defender had made Count with the Assigny^
and that there remains only the Sum of 1100. merks, which he acknowledgeds to
have received, and therefore discharged him of the whole. The Pursuers
alleged the discharge, not bearing Payment of the whole Sum, but only of
1100. merks; nor yet bearing^ that the Instructions, were given up to the
Assigny cannot exoner the Defender; but he must yet Re-produce the Account, and
Instructions thereof, likeas he has produced a great part thereof in this
Process, because no discharge could be relevant, to liberat this Defender, but
only payment made bona fide.

The Lords found the Discharge sufficient, to liberat the Defender; mainly,
because, albeit the Discharge mentions not the Instructions to be given up, yet
the Defenders was not oblidged to preserve the same, or be at the hazard
thereof. The Pursuer further offered them to prove, that the Defender had yet
in his hand, the account and whole Instructions, and therefore ought to
repreduce the same, that the Lords might consider, whether the Rebels
Assignyes had allowed any thing to him, which ought not to be allowed, and did
belong to the Donatar, which the Lords sustained.

James Dewar contra Countess of Murray. December 19. 1661.
JAmes Dewar, pursues the Countess of Murray, for Ejecting him out of certain
Lands, whereof he had Tack, and Spuilzing from him certain Goods. The Defender
alleged absolvitor: because there was a Clause in the Pursuers Tack^
providing that if two Years Duty run together, the Tack should expire, and in
that Case he Renunced the Tack, and thereafter the Pursuer having Compted with
the Defenders Chamberlain, by Writ produced; he acknowledged himself Debtor,
in such Sums, and such Duties for bygone Years, with this Provision, that if he
Failzied in payment thereof, my Lady should, (at her own hand,) intromet with
the Corns, and others lybelled, which were disponed to her, for satisfaction of
the Rent; and likewise, it should be leisum, to my Lady to set the Lands to any
other Tenent thereafter, at the Term of Mertimess, and to Dispose thereof, at
her pleasure. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, unless by Authority of a
Judge, the Failzie had been Declared. The Defender answered, maxim relevat,
because Declarators are only necessar, in Reversions, Back-tacks, or
Infeftments, being of great Importance; but not in ordinar Tacks, betwixt
Master and Tenent.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, founded upon the Account, and Bond; in
respect of the Tenor thereof as a foresaid; but would not have so done upon the
Clause of the Tack, unless it had born expressly a power to enter to the
Possession at any time brevi manu.

The Pursuer further Replied, That the Defense ought to be repelled; because he
offered to prove, before the Ejection, he had paid a great part, and offered
the rest.

The Lords having considered the Instructions of Offense produced, found, that
it was not Special, bearing any Sum of money produced, or offered, and that
there was no Consignation following thereupon; and therefore sustained the
Defense, notwithstanding the Reply.

Earl of Rothes contra Countess of Buck^leuch. December 20. 1661
THE Earl of Rothes; as Donatar to the Waird of the Countess of Buckcleugh,
and the said Countess, for her self, pursued the Tutors of Buckcleugh, for
Exibition of the Charter Chist, and heal Evidences, and Writs therein, that the
Donatar may have Inspection thereof, to the effect he may know^ what Lands are
Waird. The Tutors Compeared, and disclaimed the Pursuit, at the Pupils
Instance, and alleged. First, No Process, till the Countess were called 2dly,
The Lybel is not Relevant, to conclude Inspection of all Writs whereunto the
Donator can pretend no interest 3dly. Non relevat for any Writs, because no
body is oblidged edere Instrumenta contra se. 4thly, If there were any ground
for this Pursuit, the Lands holden in Waird, behoved to be particularly
Lybelled.

The Lords Repelled the first Defense, inrespect the Countess was in processu,
and found the second Defense to restrict the Inspection, only to the Countess
and her Sister and Father, there Retours, and Warrants thereof, and no more,
unless the Pursuer condescend particularly of other Waird Lands, and appointed
one of their number to have Inspection of the Charter Chist, who should show
the the Procutators of either Party such of the Writs as they found were Waird.

Hew^ Montgomerie contra Lord Kirkcudbright. Eodem die.
HEw Montgomerie of Grainshaw, and Meclellane his Spouse, pursues the Lady
Kirkcudbright, for Ejecting them out of the five pound Land of Overlaw, and
craved Re-possession, and payment of the Maills and Duties intrometted with.
The Defender alleged no Process, because it is not alleged, that the
Pursuers was in Natural Possession; for only the Natural Possessors can have
Decree of Ejection, because, if there be no deed of violence Lybelled, but
only Intrometting with the Maills and Duties, Ejection is not competent, nor
any Violent Profits, but only Action for Maills and Duties, against the
Tennents, or Intrometters. The Pursuers answered, That Ejection may be
Competent, though the Pursuer was not in Natural Possession, when a Tennent is
Ejected, and a Stranger, without Interest, enters in the Natural Possession;
albeit the Tennents should Collud, or neglect, the Heritor having but civil
Possession, by uplifting of Maills and Duties, needs not warn the Ejecter; but
may crave to be Entered, to the Natural Possession, and the Violent Profits.
The Defender alleged, the Case is not here so, unless it were alleged, the
Tennents were cast out; but the Defender may Defend the Right, to the Maills
and Duties, upon a better Right then the Pursuer. The Pursuer answered, That he
declared, he craved only Re-possession, to the ordinar Profits. The Lords
Ordained the Parties to Dispute their Rights to the Maills and Duties, and
Possession, as in a Double Poynding, and as if the Duties were yet in the
Tennents hands. The Defender alleged further, that she has right to the
Maills and Duties; because she offered her to prove, that the Pursuers Father
in Law granted a Back-band, oblidging himself, and his Heirs, to Re-dispone
these Lands to Umquhile Robert Lord Kirkcud^right, from whom the said Lands
were Appryzed, to which Apprysing the Defender has Right, and thereby has
Right to the Back-bond, and that the Defenders Wife represents her Father as
Heir, or at least as Lucrative Successor after the Back-bond; and so as he
might thereupon have debarred the grant of the Back-bond, so might the Pursuer,
as Representing him. The Pursuer alleged, 1. Non Relevat, because the said
Back-bond is but a Personal Obligation, and the Defender had thereupon no Real
Right, but only to the Superiority; because, by discharges of the Few-dutie
produced, he acknowledged the Pursuer to be Proprietar. 2dly, If any such
Back-bond was (no way granting the same,) he offered him to prove, that it was
Conditional; so soon as the said Umquhile Robert Lord Kirkcudbright should
require: Ita est, he has never required. The Defender alleged, he had done
the equivalent, because in a Double Poynding formerly pursued be the Tennents,
he had craved Preference, and the Pursuer alleged, upon the Condition of
Requisition in the Back-bond, and also that be the Back-bond, the granter, and
his Wifes Liferent was preserved: whereupon the Defender was excluded.

The Lords ^^und the Alleadgeance of the said Double Poynding was not
Equivalent to the Requisition; and therefore found the Replies Relevant, and
Assigned a day, to the Defender, to produce the Back-bond, and to the Pursuer
^^^^prove the Qualitie^ thereof, and so found the Reply not to acknow^^ge the
Defense, but reserve it to either Party to allege contra ^oducenda, and
found the Personal Obligdement sufficient to d^bar the Pur^^^^ albeit the
Defender had no other Real Right, seeing thereby she was oblidged to grant a
Real Right to the Defender.

Alexander Barns contra Applegirth. January 1. 1662.
ALexander Barns having (Conform to the Act made by the Judges,) obtained
Letters of Horning Summarily, at his Instance, as Heir to his Brother James
B^rns, upon production of his Retour, and a Bond granted by Iohnstoun of
Applegirth; and thereupon, having Denunced him, and Apprized his Lands;
Applegirth Suspends, on this Reason, because the foresaid Act of the Judges was
now Void, and by the late Act of Parliament, confirming their Judicial
Proceedings, liberty is granted to quarrel and reduce them upon Iniquity, and
this was Iniquity to charge him Summarily, contrair to Law. The Charger
answered non Relevat, because he followed the Order in use at that time; and
the liberty of Quarrelling is, for Unjustice in the Matter, and not in the
Order of Procedor; for then all their Debates would be null, because they
proceeded not upon Continuation, and Letters.

The Lords sustained the Charge, as a Libel, to the effect, the Suspender might
have his Defenses, (if he any had) to be proven not i^stantlie, but upon Terms,
but declared the Apprysing should stand valid, for whatsomever was found due,
but prejudice to the Horning, as accords.

Sir Alexander Hoom of St. Bathanes contra Orr and Pringle. January 3. 1662.
SIr Alexander Hoom of Saint Bathanes, having pursued Improbation and
Reduction, upon Inhibition against John Orr, and Wate^ Pringle, and insisted
for all Writs of the Lands in Question, made to the Defenders Predecessors, and
Authors of the Lands in Question, and the Defender having alleged no Process,
for Writs made to his Authors; unless they were called; and having
condescended particularly on, the Authors to be called. The Pursuer offered him
to prove, that these Authors were fully denuded, in favors of the Defender,
and that the Writs were in the Defenders own hands. The Defender answered non
Relevat, though they were in his hands; because his Authors being liable for
warrandice, ought to be called, to defend there own Rights. The Pursuer
answered, the Defender might intimate to them the Plea. The Defender answered,
he was not oblidged to Intimate the Plea; but the Pursuers to call the Authors,
in this Case, the Summonds was sustained, for his Authors Writs, in Anno one
thousand six hundred fifty nine Years. And now the Pursuer insisting, for the
Defender, taking a second time to produce. The Defender having a reviewe of the
said Act, and Interlocutor.

The Lords reponed the Defender, and would not sustain the Pursuit, or Act, as
to the Authors Rights uncalled.

Tippertie contra his Creditors. Eodem die.
Innes of Tippertie, being charged by several of his Creditors; Suspends, and
alleged payment made by the Suspenders Son to them. The Chargers answered,
non Relevat; because they declare the Charge to be to that Sons behove, who
paid them, so that they must allege, it was paid by his means. The
Suspender Replied, That seeing they declared it to be to his Sons behove, the
payment was sufficient, because he offered him to prove, by a Transaction, the
Son was oblidged to pay his Debts. The Charger answered (denying any
Transaction,) if it were proven, the Suspender behoved to instruct his part of
it performed.

The Lords found the Reasons and Reply relevant, reserving the said alleadgance
against the Transaction, when produced.

James Seaton contra Anothonie Rosewall. Jannuary 4. 1662.
JAmes Seaton and others, pursue Anthony Rosewall, to hear it found and
declared, That two Apprysings, to which he had right, were fully Satisfied, by
his, and his Authors Intromission, within the Legalls respective, in the Count.
The Defender alleged, he was only comptable, according to his intromission,
conform to the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred twenty one, anent
Apprysings, and not according to a Rental of the Lands; as they paid, when he
entered. The Pursuers answered that, that they could not charge him by his
Yearly Intromissions, which they could not know, but he behoved to charge
himself with the Rent of the Lands, as they paid at his entry thereto, and if
any Deductions, or Defalcations were in subsequent Years; by necessary setting
of the Lands, at a lower Rate, poverty of the Tennents, or waste, he behoved to
condescend there upon, and their the Reasons, and Veri^ty thereof, for in Law,
an Appryzing giving jus pignoris pratorij, the Appryser is comptable for his
Diligence, having once entered in Possession, and thereby excluded the Debtor,
and Con-creditors from the Possession. It were against Law and Conscience, to
say, That if he should abstain, and suffer the Tennents to keep the Rent, or
Depauperat, or the Lands to be waste, without any Diligence, that his Legal
should thereby expire, and the Debtor and Creditor should be excluded; as was
found in the Case of the Earl of Nithisdale, and Countess of Buckcleugh, and
was several times so found, be the Lords before. The Lords found the Defender
comptable by a Rental, as the Lands paid the time of his Entry, but Prejudice
of his just Defalcations, he clearing a reasonable Cause thereof, and proving
the truth of the same; for they thought, that albeit, Apprizers are only
comptable for their Intromission, That is only for such parts of the Lands, as
they intend only to possess, and not for these they never possessed; yet in so
far as they once entered to possess, they must do Diligence. It was further
alleged, that no allowance ought to be given to the Defender, of a
Composition he had given to the Superior, in respect a prior Appryzer had
given a Composition before, and so he was oblidged for none. The Defender
answered, that both the Prior and Posterior Composition was within a Years
Rent, which was due to the Superior, which the Lords allowed, seeing it was
not alleged that the Composition of a Years Rent was discharged by the
Superior, but only according to the Custom of the Burgh, where the Lands lay,
so much marked upon the Precept received in name of Composition.

Earl of Lauderdail, contra Tennents of Swintoun. January 7. 1662.
EArl of Lauderdail, as having Right to the Forefaulture of the Barony of
Swintoun, pursues the Tennents for Maills and Duties, George Livingstou, one of
them alleadges, that he must be assoilzied from one Years Duty; because he
offers him to prove, That it is the Custom of the Barony of Swintoun, at least
of a distinct Quarter thereof, That the Tennents do always, at their entry, pay
half a years Rent, and are free of Rent at the Term they remove; and so do all
a long pay a Year, at the least half a Year before the hand, and subsumes, that
he has paid accordingly to Swintoun himself, for a Terms Maill, due for the
Crop which is after the pursuers Right. The Pursuer alleged non Rel^^at,
against him a singular Successor, or against the KING his Author; because, that
Party that has Right to the Land, has Right to the Fruits, and so to the
Rents, which is payable for the fruits, which were extent upon the Land, or
growand after that Parties Right^ and no payment before the hand, can liberat
the Possessor, from the Pursuit of a Singular Successor; Therefore it has
been frequently found, that payment before the hand is not Relevant against an
Appryzer, yea even against an Arrester, so that the KING and his Donatar (since
their Right was established and known) cannot be excluded, by payment before
the hand, to a party who had no Right to the Land, or to the Fruits, that
Year, otherwise both the KING, and Creditors might be defrauded, by
Fore-maills, or by Tacks appointing the Fore-mail to be paid, the first Term,
(whatsoever length the Tack be,) Secondly, Any such alleadgances were only
probable scripto vel juramenio. The Defender answered, that the Case here is
not like the Fore-maills instanced, because every Year is paid within it self,
and so the first Year, the half at the beginning thereof, and the half at the
middle thereof, and subsequent Years conform, which must be sufficient to the
Tennent otherways Tennents paying at Whitsonday and Martinmess, should not be
liberat, because the whole Year is not run out, or a Tennent paying his Ferms
at Candlesmass should not be secure, against Singular Possessors for the profit
of Grass thereof, till Whitsonday.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and the Custom of the Barony to be
proven by Witnesses, and likewise the payment of the Duty in so far as in
Victual; and also for the money not exceeding an hundred pounds Termlie.

James Stewart, contra Feuars of Aberbadenoch. January 8. 1662.
JAmes Stewart, as being Heritably infeft in the Milne of Aberbadenoch, pursues
the Feuars of the Barony, for abstract Multures of their Corns, growing within
the Barony; or which tholed Fire and Water within the same. The Defenders
alleged absolvitor; because they are Infeft in their Lands, feu of the KING,
long before the Pursuers Infeftment; which Infeftment bears, cum Molendiuis and
Multuris, in the tenendas. The Pursuer Replied, that albeit that Clause were
sufficient Liberation amongst Subjects, yet this is a Milne of the KINGS
Property, whereunto Thirlage is sufficently Constitute, by long Possession, of
coming to the Milne, and paying in Towns Multures, and Services; (as is Craig's
opinion,) and has been so found by the Lords, February 5. one thousand six
hundred thirty five, Dog contra Mushet. The Defender answered, That albeit
Thirlage to the KINGS Milnes may be Constitute without Writ; yet cannot take
away an express Exemption granted by the KING.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply; because they though^
that this Clause being but in the tenendas, past of Course, and when Sig^a^^^^
are past the KINGS hand, or Exchequar's, they bear only ten^ndas, etc. without
expressing the Particular Clause, which is afterward extended at the Seals.

The Defenders alleged further absolvitor, from the Multure of the Teind,
because that was not Thirled; nor had the KING any Right thereto, when he
granted the Infeftment of the Milne. The Pursuer Replied, the Defense ought to
be Repelled, in respect of the long Possession in Mol^ndo Regio, because the
Defenders, and their Tennents past forty years, paid Multures of all their
Corns, promiscuously, without exception of Teind; likeas there are several
Decreets produced, for abstract Multures of all the Corns without exception.
The Defender answered, That the Reply non Relevat; for albeit long Possession
may make a Thirlage of the KINGS own Baronie, yet that cannot be extended to
other men's Rights, of their Lands and Teinds, which cannot be Thirled without
their own Consent, or Decreets against themselves called, nor do the Decreets
bear Teind per expressum.

The Lords found the Defeuse Relevant, notwithstanding of the Reply, except
such Teinds that thole Fire and Water within the Barony; and likewise
s^stai^^ed the Defense for the Corns, e^ten by the Defenders upon the Ground,
in the Laboring, etc.

Earl of Murray contra Lord of Grant. January 9. 1662.
THE Earl of Murray Pursues the Lord of Grant, to Re-dispone him certain
Lands, which the Earls Father had Disponed to the Defender, and had taken his
Back-bond, that if the Earls Friends should find it prejudicial to the Earl,
then upon payment of 2800. merks, precisely at Whitsonday, he should
Re-dispone, ita est: the Earls Friends by a Testificat produced, found the
Bargain to his loss; therefore he offered the sum to the Defender, in his own
House, which he refused; and now offers to Re-produce it, cum omni causa. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor. First, Because the Back-bond is pactum de retro
vendendo: And so a Reversion, which is strictissimi juris, and not to be
extended beyond the express Terms thereof; which are, that if James Earl of
Murray, should re-pay the Sum at Whitsonday, 1653. precisely, the Defender
should Re-dispone: But there is no mention of the Earls^ Heirs, and so cannot
extend to this Earl, though he were Heir, as he was not served Heir the time of
the offer. The Pursuer answered, that when Reversions are meaned to be
Personal, and not to be extended to Heirs, they do bear, That if the Reverser
in his own time, or at any time during his life, etc. or some such Expression;
but there is nothing such here; and the Pursuer was Retoured Heir to his
Father, who died shortly before the Term of Redemption; and having used all
Diligence, he cannot be excluded, by such an accident, which he could not help.

The Lords Repelled both the Defenses, albeit there was only an offer, without
Consignation, seeing the Back-bond did not bear, Premonition, or Consignation,
but only payment, which the Pursuer now offered.

Baird contra Baird. Eodem die.
BAird in Saint Andrews, having taken the Gift of his Brothers Escheat, upon
his Adultery, Pursues Declarator thereupon. The Defender alleged no
Processes, till the Crime were Cognosced in the Criminal Court, or at least, he
were declared Fugitive and Denunced, for then by the Horning, his Escheat would
fall, but there is no Law, nor Statute, making the Penalty of Adultery, to be
the Adulterers Escheat; for Queen Mary's Statute, anent Adultery, is only
making nottour Adultery Capital; but nothing as to other Adulteries. The
Pursuer answered, that Custom had made the Penalty of Adultery, to be the
single Escheat; and for Probation of the Adultery, in this case, the Defender
had publicly confessed it, and had stood in Sackcloth for it a year, and had
taken Remission from the King. The Defender answered, that Confession in the
Kirk, was necessary to purge Scandel, when such Probation was Adduced, as
Churchmen allowed to infer Confession, which is but extra judicialis confessio,
and cannot prove, ad ^viles aut criminales effectus, neither can the taking of
the Kings Remission, instruct these Crimes; seeing Remissions are frequently
taken to prevent accusations or trouble.

The Lords found the Libel not Relevant, and that no Declarator could pass
unless the Defender had compeared judicially in a Criminal Court, and there
Confessed, or had been Condemned by Probation; but that the Confession in the
Church, or taking Remission, was no sufficient Probation.

Andrew Barclay contra Lord of Craigivar. January 10. 1662.
ANdrew Barclay Pursues the Lairds of Craigivar, as representing his Father
upon all the passive Titles, to pay a Bond due by his Father, and insists
against him, as behaving himself as Heir, by intromission with the Mails and
Duties of the Lands of Craigivar and F^ntrie. The Defender alleged
Absolvitor, because if any Intromission he had (not granting the same) it was
by virtue of a singular Title, viz. an Appryzing led against himself, upon a
Bond due by his Father. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, unless the legal had
been expired; for if the appearand Heir In^romet within the Legal, during
which, the right of Reversion is unextinct, immiscuit se haereditati: and it is
gestio pro haerede.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, albeit the Appryzing was not expired,
unless the Pursuer allege, that the Defenders Intromission was more then
satisfied the whole Appryzing.

Lord of Rentoun contra Mr. Mark Ker. Eodem die.
THe Lord of Rentoun having obtained Decree against Mr. Mark Ker, for the
Teinds of Ferniside, he Suspends on this Reason, that he ought to have
retention of the Annuity of the Teind, which he had paid, and whereto he had
Right. The Charger answered, that there was no Annuity due out of their Teinds,
because he was Infeft, cum decimis inclusis, which are not liable for Annuity.
The Suspender Answered, that there was no exception in the Act of Parliament,
1623. of Teinds included.

The Lords Recommended the matter to be settled, this being a leading Case, in
relation to the Annuity of Teinds included; but they thought that Annuity was
not due of Tei^ds included; because such Lands never having had the Teinds
drawn, there is nothing to Constitute Teind due for them, either by Law,
Paction, or Possession; and so where no Teind is, there can be no Annuity. And
also, because the Ground granting Annuity to the King, was because the King
having an Interest in the Teinds, after the Reformation and the Titulars
pretending also Right, did surrender the same in the Kings favors, and
submitted to Him, who Confirmed the Titulars questionable Rights, and gave the
Heretors the benefit of drawing their own Teinds, upon a Valuation: and
therefore the Annuity was appointed to be paid out of the Teinds to the King,
but the surrender did not bear, Teinds included.

Lord Carnagie. contra January 11. 1662.
LAdy Anna Hamiltoun, eldest Daughter to the Deceast William Duke of Hamiltoun,
having obtained Charter of the Lands of innerw ^ik from the King, as becoming
in his hand by Recognition, in so far as the Lands being holden Ward; the late
Earl of Dirletoun Disponed the same to James Cicil, second Son to his second
Daughter, whereupon the said Lady Anna, and Lord Carnagie her Husband, for his
Interest, Pursues Declarator of Recognition, against the said James Ci^il, and
against James Maxwels Heirs of Line, and Heir-Male to hear and see them
Secluded for ever, and that the Lands were fallen in to the Kings hands, and
belonged to the Pursuer, as his Donatar by Recognition, through the
Ward-vassals alienation thereof, without the consent of the King as Superior.
The Defender alleged no Processes; because all Parties having Interest, are
not called, viz. Sir Robert Fle^cher, who stands publicly Infeft in the Lands
Libelled.

The Lords Repelled the Alleadgence, as super juretertii, in respect it was not
proponed by Sir Robert, and that his Right could not be prejudged by any
Sentence, whereto he was not called.

Secondly, The Defenders alleged no Process, because the Heirs of Line are
not lawfully Called, in so far as three of them are Resident in the Abbey, and
are Minors, and their Tutors and Curators are only called at the Market Cross
of Edinburgh; whereas they Reside within the Regality of Brughtoun, and their
Curators should have been Cited at the Cross of the Canongate, as head Burgh of
that Regality. The Pursu^rs answered, that the Defenders Reside in the Kings
Palace, which is exempt from all Regalities, and must be a part of the Royalty,
being the Kings own House, by his Royal Regative.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply, and found the Kings
House to be Royalty, and so in the Shire, and not in the Regality.

John Nicolson contra Feuars of Tillicutry. January 14. 1662.
JOhn Nicolson, as Baron of the Barony of Tillicutry, and Miln thereof, pursues
the Feuars of Tillicutry, for a certain quantity of Serjant Corns, and for
their abstracted Multures, for which he had obtained Decree in his
Barony-court, which was Suspended. The Defenders alleged, that his Decree is
null, as being in vacant time. Secondly, As being by the Baron, who is not
Competent to Decern in Multures, or Thirlage against his Vassals. Thirdly, The
Decree was without Probation: The Baron neither producing Title, nor proving
long Possession: and as to the Serjant Corn, nothing could Constitute that
Servitude but Writ. The Charger answered, that Barons needs no Dispensation, in
Vacance, and that Baron Courts use to sit in all times, even of Vacance, by
their Constant Privilege: And that the Baron is Competent Judge to Multures,
or any other Duty whereof he is in Possession. And as to the Serjant Corn, in
satisfaction of his Decree, he has produced his Infeftment, as Baron of the
Barony; which gives him Right of Jurisdiction, and so to have Serjants, whose
Fees may be Constitute, and liquidat by long Possession.

The Lords found the Reply Relevant, the Charger having 40. years possession as
to the Multures, and the Pursuer declared he insisted not for the Kings
Feu-duties in kind, but for the Teind, Seed, and Horse Corn.

The Defenders alleged Absolvitor, for as much of the Corns as would pay the
Feu-duties, Ministers Stipends, and all public Burdens, because they behoved
to sell Corns for satisfying of these, and in so far the Corns were not their
own, and so they could pay for no more Corns then their own, neither could they
be liable for dry Multure, unless it were Constitute by Writ; especially seeing
the Charger Libels not upon the Defenders Infeftment, or Bonds of Thirlage, but
upon his own Infeftment, only generally, as Infeft in the Miln of the Barony.

The Lords Repelled these Alleadgences, and Sustained the Decree, for all the
Corns except Seed, Horse-corn and Teind, which tholled not Fire and Water
within the Thirle.

Nicol Harper contra Hoom of Plandergaist. Eodem die.
NIcol Harper pursues Colonel John Hoom of Plandergaist, for payment of a Debt
of umquhil Hoom of Plandergaist his Brother, and condescends, that the Defender
has behaved himself as Heir, at least Successor Lucrative to his Brother, in
so far as his Brother Disponed the Lands of Plandergaist to William Hoom of
Linthil, to the behove of the Defender, then his appearand Heir, whereupon the
Defender is now in possession. The Defender al^eadged, non relevat, to infer
this passive Title, unless the Disposition had been to the Defender himself, or
that he had thereupon been Infeft, but a third Party being only in the real
Right, and the Defunct denuded before his death, albeit there was a personal
obliegment of Trust in Favors of the appearand Heir, if that cannot make him
Lucrative Successor, but the Pursuer may reduce the same, if it was without
Cause onerous.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, to Liberat the Defender from this
passive Title, but would not put the Pursuer to Reduction, but admitted it by
Reply, ad hunc effectum, that the Defender should be countable according to his
Intromission; and that the Pursuer as a lawful Creditor, should be preferred
upon his legal Diligence, to the said Disposition.

But the question arising, whether the Disposition, if in trust, was Lucrative
or not? and what to be Lucrative imported, whether without any price, or within
the half or third of the just price?

The Lords before answer, ordained the Disposition to be produced, and such
Admin^^les, for instructing of the ^nerous Cause, as the Defender would make
use of, reserving to themselves, what the samine should work.

Robert Dickie contra Theoder Montgomery. Eodem die.
RObert Dickie, as Assigney Constitute by Robert Montgomery, to a Contract
betwixt Theoder Montgomerie and the said Robert, Charges Theoder to pay 700.
merks: He Suspends on this Reason, that the Debt was Discharged before the
Assignation, or Intimation, conform to the Discharge produced. The Charger
answered, that the Discharge is null, as wanting Witnesses. The Suspender
replied, he offered him to prove Holograph. The Charger answered, non relevat,
against him, a singular Successor, especially the question being of the Date:
For if Writs proven Holograph, could instruct their own Date, no Assigney, or
any other person using legal Diligence by Arrestment, Appryzing, or otherwise
could be secure: But that their Cedents, and Authors might evacuat the Right by
Discharges, or Renunciatio^ Holograph: And therefore seeing by express Act of
Parliamen^, Writs wanting Witnesses are declared null: The Exception introduced
by Custom of Holographon, ought not to be extended, especially in relation to
the Debtor against singular Successors. The Suspender alleged, the
inconvenience was al^ great on the other hand, it being ordinar for Masters to
give their Tennents Holograph Discharges, and whatever favor necessar
Assignations by legal Diligence might have, yet this is a voluntar Assignation^

The Lords repelled the Reason of Suspension and Reply, in respect of the
answer and dupl^, and found the Holograph Discharge not to prove its own date,
against the Assigney unless the Suspender could instruct it by other Adminicles.

George Grant contra Grant of Kirdels. January 15. 1662.
GEorge Grant pursues Reduction of a Renunciation of a Wodset, made by Grant of
Morinsh to Grant of Kirdels, ex capite inhibitionis, because he had Inhibit
Morinsh the Wodsetter, before he granted the Renunciation. The Defender
alleged, that he had a Reduction of the Bond, whereupon the Pursuers
Inhibition was raised, depending, and declared he held the production
satisfied, and repeated his Reason by way of Defense: that the Bond was null,
wanting a Date, either of Day, Month, or Year. The Pursuer answered, that the
Bond bare, the Term of payment to be Whitsunday 1635. and so instructs that the
Bond was betwixt Whitsonday 1634. and Whitsonday 1635. The Defender answered
non relevat, unless the Month and Day were also expressed, because otherwise the
means of Improbation cease by proving alibi.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, seeing the Year was expressed in re antiqua, but
if Improbation had been insisted on less Reasons in the indirect manner would
be sustained.

The Defender alleged further Absolvitor, because this Bond, albeit it be
assigned to George Grant the Pursuer; yet it is offered to be proven, that the
time of the Assignation, the said George was Pupil, within twelve years of age,
in his Fathers Family: And so in Law it is presumed, that it was acquired by
his Fathers Means, and is all one, as if his Father had taken Assignation in
his own Name, and granted translation to his Son: And it is clear by the
Testament produced, that grant of Ballandallochs Father was Tutor to the
Wodsetter; and during his Tutory, any Right taken by him, of sums due by the
Pupil, are presumed to be satisfied by the Pupils Means, and to accresce to the
Pupil, against whom, he nor his Assigney can have no Action, for any particular
apart, but the whole must come in in the Tutors accounts: and offers to prove
if need beis, that the Tutor, int^s hab^^t, being Debtor in greater sums to
the Pupil then this. The Pursuer answered; First, the Alleadgence is no way
relevant, upon such presumptions, to take away the Right standing in the
Defenders Person. Secondly, The Defense is not liquid, and so can make no
compensation, albeit his Son were expressly Assigney, as he is not.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, unless the Pursuer would condescend and
instruct that the Assignation was granted to him otherwise then by his Fathers
Means.

Thomas Fairholme contra Margaret Bisset. January 18. 1662.
THomas Fairholm as Executor Creditor, Confirmed to Andrew Reid, pursues
Margaret Bisset his Relict, to deliver the Ware in his Chop, contained in the
Pursuers Confirmation. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because she has
Confirmed the Ware in the Shop, specially and particularly for the use of the
hail Creditors; and the Pursuers Confirmation is only general, not
condescending upon the particular Ware: And though the Defenders Confirmation
be posterior, yet it is special, and has attained Possession before any
Pursuit, at the Pursuers instance, upon his prior Confirmation; and
Confirmations do not establish Property, until Possession or Execution; but is
only as a legal Disposition incomplete, as Gifts of Escheat, where the first
Sentence, or Possession, gives the first real Right of Property. The Pursuer
answered, that his Confirmation is special enough, bearing the Ware of the Shop
to be Silks, Stuffs, and others worth 4000. merks; and the Confirmation alone
Constitutes the Property unto the Executor, because he is Haeres mobili^m; and
the Property being before in hereditatae jacent^, ipso facto, by the
Confirmation it is Established in the Executor. Secondly, by the constant
practice of this Kingdom, there could no second principal Confirmation, but
only ad o^issa, and she could never Confirm that which the first Executor had
Confirmed. The Defender answered, that by Act of Sederunt, of the Judges in the
Usurpers time, all Executors Confirming within six Months after the Defuncts
Death, were ordained to come in together; and therefore it was then the Custom,
that all Confirmed principally the same things, seeing they could get no more
then what was in their Confirmation: And the Defenders Confirmation being at
that time, must be sustained. The Pursuer answered, that the Defender cannot
have the benefit of that Act of Sederunt, because she Confirmed not within six
Months after the Defuncts Death. The Defender answered, she Confirmed within
six Months, or six or seven Days more, which is an inconsiderable difference.

The Lords preferred the first Executor to the Goods in the Shop.

Mr. John Veach contra Byel of Bassinden. Eodem die.
MR. John Veach, as Assigney by John Edgar of Wedderlie, to a Reversion,
pursues Declarator against Byel of Bassinden, the Wodsetter; who alleged
Absolvitor, because the premonition is null, being by a Procurator, and not
bearing, the Procuratory produced, neither the Pursuers Assignation to the
Reversion. The Pursuer answered non relevat, unless it were alleged, that
they had been demanded at that time, and had not been shown. Secondly, If need
beis he offers him to prove, by the Defenders oath, that the Procuratory was
then shown. The Defender answered, the Procuratory is not yet produced, and the
Pursuer was obliged to have shown it then, albeit not called for.

The Lords sustained the Order, the Pursuer reproducing the Procuratory, and
proving by the Defenders Oath that the Procuratory was then shown.

Alexander Colquhoun contra his Creditors. Eodem die.
ALexander Colquhoun in Glasgow, pursues Liberation, supercessione bonorum. The
Defenders alleged Absolvitor, because they offer them to prove, that the
Pursuer did wittingly deceive them, in borrowing sums, and taking of Ware from
them, after he knew that he was insolvendo, and Bankrupt. The Pursuer answered,
nonrelevat, against Liberty, which is a favorable Cause, and can be stopped by
nothing, but fraudulent Deeds, since the Incarceration, or offering of Aliment.
The Defenders craved, that if the Lords inclined to grant Liberty, that the
Pursuer might be decerned to sit upon the Dyver-stone; and wear the habit. The
Pursuer answered, that was long since out of Custom.

The Lords before answer, ordained the Pursuers oath to be taken, upon the
Defense, whether he did contract these Debts after he knew himself insolvent
and bankrupt, and they resolved if it was so found, they would not grant him
Liberty without sitting upon the Dyver-stone, and wearing the Habit.

Lord of Polwart contra Hooms. January 21. 1662.
THe Lord of Polwart pursues a Declarator of Redemption against Hooms, who
allege Absolvitor, because the Reversion was not fulfilled, which bore the
sum of a 1000. merks, and a Tack for 19. years after the Redemption. The
Pursuer answered, the Alleadgence ought to be Repelled, because the Lands
Wodset is worth 400. merks by year; and the Tack-duty is only four pounds, and
so it is an Usurary Paction, whereby the Wodsetter will have much more then his
principal sum, and his Annualrent, and so it is null, by the common Law, and by
special Statute, Par. 1449. cap. 19. bearing, that when Wodsetters take Tacks
for long time, after the Bond be out quite; such Tacks shall not be kept
after Redemption, unless they be for the very Mail, or near thereby. The
Defender answered; First, That Statute is but an Exception from the Immediate
preceding Act of parliament, in favors of Tennents, that their Tacks shall
not be broken by singular Successors, buying the Land: and therefore is only
understood in that case, when the Wodset Lands are bought from him that has
right to the Reversion, by a singular Successor: but this Pursuer is Heir to
the granter of the Wodset. 2ly, That Act is long since in desuetude. 3ly.
Whatever the Act might operate amongst strangers, yet it is clear by the
Contract of Wodset produced, that the Wodset was granted by the Lord of
Polwart to his own Brother; and so must be Repute to be his Portion Natural,
and the eldest Brother might well grant a nineteen years Tack to his youngest
Brother, albeit there had been no Wodset. Likeas, in the Wodset there is
Reserved, the Liferent of a third Party; who lived thirty six Years
thereafter, during which time the Wodset got no Rent.

The Lords found the Defense and Reply relevant, and Ordained no Declarator to
be extracted, till the Tack were Produced, and given up to the Wodsetter.

Lord Balvaird, contra Creditors of Annandail. Eodem die.
THE Lord Balvaird, As Heir of Tailzie to David Viscount of Stormont, in the
Lands of Skun, Pursues the Heirs of Line, of the said David and Mungo Viscount
of Stormont, and several their Creditors, Lybelling, That by an Infeftment of
Tailzie of the said Lands, made by the said David Viscount of Stormont. It is
expressly Declared and Provided, That none of the Heirs of Tailzie, shall do any
Deed prejudicial, to the Tailzie; or contract Debt, whereby the Tailzie may be
altered, otherwise the Debt so Contracted shall be null, and the Contracter
shall ipso facto, lose his Right of Property, which shall belong to the
nearest Person of the Tailzie, and subsumes that the late Earl of Annandail
last Heir of Tailzie Contracted Debts; which might effect the said Tailzed
Lands, and concludes; that it ought to be Declared, that thereby he incurred
the Clauses itritant in the Tailzie, and lost his Right of Property; and that
all the Bonds Contracted by him, and Appryzed upon, are null, quoad these
Lands, and that the Pursuer as nearest Heir of Tailzie, may enter Heir in these
Lands, to David and Mungo Viscounts of Stormont, and enjoy the same free of any
Debt Contracted since the Tailzie. The Creditors alleged no Process to Annul
their Bonds, and Apprysing, hoc ordine; by way of Declarator, but the Pursuer
must via ordinaria Reduce; in which Case, the Creditors will have Terms granted
them to produce, the Writs called for to be reduced: which Privilege, being in
their favor ought not to be taken from them in this extraordinar unformal way.
The Lords repelled the Defense, and sustained the Summons; in respect there was
no Bond craved to be produced, or simply reduced; but only that any Bonds
granted to the Defenders since the Tailzie are null, and all following
thereupon, as to the Lands in Tailzie, which is no more then that they affect
not the Lands in the Tailzie, and there is no necessity of Reduction, but where
the Writs must be Produced, before they can be Reduced; and even in that case;
if the Pursuer satisfy the Production himself, the Defender has no delay, and
here the Pursuer produces all that is necessar, and craves the rest to be
Declared null in consequence.

The Lords sustained the Summons.

Glendinning, contra Earl of Nithisdale, January 22. 1662.
GEorge Glendinning of Partoun, pursues the Earl of Nithisdale, for fulfilling
of a Contract of Excambion betwixt the Earls Father, and the Pursuers
Grandfather; and insist against the Earl, as lawfully charged to enter Heir to
his Father. The Earl alleged absolvitor, because he offers him to Renunce to
be Heir: The Pursuer replied, the Defense ought to be repelled, quia res non
est intigra; because the Earl has done a Deed prejudicial to his Renunciation,
viz. he granted a Bond for two thousand pounds sterling to the Earl of
Dirltoun, only simulatlie to his own behove, whereupon his Fathers whole Estate
was adjudged, and that Adjudication assigned to the Earl himself, and so he
having intrometted be that Simulat Title, with the Maills and Duties of his
Fathers Lands, he has behaved himself as Heir, and cannot Renunce: The
Defender duplyed that the Reply ought to be repelled; because he offered not
only to Renunce, but also to Purge that Deed of his, and the Adjudication of
two thousand pounds sterling, and to declare that it should not prejudge the
Pursuer, nor his Fathers lawful Creditors, and that he should be comptable for
the Price of any Lands he had sold, or any Rents he had uplifted. The Pursuer
triplyed, that the duply ought to be repelled; because medio tempore, the Earl
had bought in expired Apprisings, with the Profits of the Lands, The Defender
quadruplyed, that he was content to restrict any such Rights, to the Sums he
truly paid for them, and not to exclude the Pursuer by them. The Pursuer
Answered, That he having once behaved himself as Heir, no Offer, nor
Renunciation could be received. The Defender Answered, that his Intromission
could not be gestio pro herede, because it was singulari titulo, and not as
Heir, and in gestione there must appear animus adeundi aut immiscendi. The
contrair whereof is here, for the granting of the Bond, and the taking right to
the Adjudication thereupon, was of purpose, that his Intromission might not be
as Heir, or as immixtion, which can never be without an illegal, and
unwarrantable Deed; but all that was here done was Legal, there being no Law,
nor Custom to hinder the Earl, to grant a Bond, albeit gratis, and after
Dirltoun had Adjudged the Lands, there was no Law to hinder the appearand Heir
to take Assignation thereto, and bruik thereby, more then a Stranger; and
albeit there were Simulation, or Fraud, that might be a ground to Reduce upon,
but not to infer a general passive Title, to make the Defender liable to all
his Fathers Debts, from which Passive Title, qui res colleratus titulus
excus^^, and albeit this Passive Title be not any where else in the World, but
in Scotland, yet it was never applied to this Case now in question, but by the
contrare, since the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred twenty one, by
which Heirs may be charged to enter Heirs to their Predecessors, not only for
the Defuncts Debts, but their own; any Bond granted by the Appearand Heir
although gratis, would be valid, to Apprize, or Adjudge the Defuncts Estate,
and therefore, there being many Cases, in which the Appearand Heir could not
probably know whether the Heretage would be Hurtful, or Profitable. This has
been ofttimes advised, as the remeid, be Sir Thomas Hope, and many since; That
the Heir Appearand might grant a Bond, and thereupon the Lands being Adjudged,
might take Right thereto. The Pursuer answered, the Defender had intrometted
with the Rents of his Predicessors Land, which albeit not animo adeundi, yet
animo Immiscendi and Lucrandi, which cannot be maintained by a simulat null
Bond, by himself to his own behove, and Adjudication thereupon; and if this
were sustained, no Person would ever after enter Heir to his Predecessor, but
take this indirect way, to the Defraud, and Vexation of Creditors; and entering
so to possess, would buy in other Rights, and maintain his Possession; as this
Defender has done, and would not be obliged, or willing to restrict these
Rights, as he does.

The Lords, after long Consideration and debate in the matter, found the Earls
offers relevant, but resolved to make and publish an Act of Sederunt, against
any such courses in time coming, and declared, that it should be gestio pro
haerede, to intromet upon such simulat Titles.

Adam Hepburn contra Hellen Hepburn. Eodem die.
ADam Hepburn, Brother to the Deceast Thomas Hepburn of Humbie Pursues
Reduction, and Improbation against Hellen Hepburn his Brother Daughter, of a
Disposition made by him to his Daughter on Death Bed.

The Lords granted a third Term for Production, in respect of the Improbation,
albeit there was but a Writ or two called for Nominatim.

Lord of Rentoun. contra Mr. Mark Ker. January 24. 1662.
THE Lord of Rentoun having obtained Decree before the Commissaries of
Berwick, against Mr. Mark Ker, compearing for three Chalders of Victual of
Teind, Mr. Mark Suspends, upon iniquity; because he having proponed a Relevant
Defense, that he ought to have allowance of the Annuitie which he had paid,
which affected the Teinds. It was repelled. The Charger Answered, non relevat,
by way of Suspension, without there were a Reduction. The Suspender Answered,
the Reason was instantly verified, by inspection of the Decree.

The Lords found the Reason not competent by Suspension without Reduction.

Mr. James Ramsay contra Earl of Wintoun. Eodem die.
Mr. James Ramsay, as having Right by translation from George Seaton, Assigny
constitute by my Lady Semple, to a Bond due by the umquhile Earl of Wintoum,
pursues this Earl for payment, who alleged no Process, because the time of
the Assignation taken by Sir George Seatoun, he was one of the Defenders
Tutors, and so it is presumed, that the Assignation was purchased by the Pupils
Means, and as the Tutor could have no Process thereupon against the Pupil, till
he had made his Tutor accounts, so neither can his Assigney; seeing in Person
alibus, all exceptions competent against the Cedent are competent against the
Assigney.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, unless the Pursuer would find Caution
to pay what should be found due by Sir George, by the Tutors Accounts, as they
had done before, betwixt Grant and Grant, January 15. 1662.

Lord of Lamingtoun contra Sir John Chiesly. January 29. 1662.
THE Lord of Lamingtoun pursues Sir John Chiesly, upon the late Act of
Parliament 1661. betwixt Debtor and Creditor, to restrict a proper Wodset,
granted by Lamingtoun to him, of the Lands of Symontoun, to his Annualrent. The
Defender excepted upon a Back-bond granted by Lamingtoun, whereby he expressly
renunced the benefit of the Usurpers Act, betwixt Debtor and Creditor, and all
such Acts, made or to be made; and oblidged himself, upon Honor and
Conscience, not to prejudge Sir John of his bargain, to which no subsequent Law
could derogat, unless it had been specially, notwithstanding any such Paction.
Secondly, The foresaid Act has an express exception: That where such Acts, made
and to be made are Renounced; the benefit of that Act shall not be competent to
such. The Pursuer Answered to the first, That Pactions, or Renunciation of
Parties cannot operat, against a posterior Law. Secondly. The persu^t here, is,
for restricting of a Wodset to the true Annualrent; for all that was done in
the Usurpers Act, was to take Land in satisfaction, and to delay payment, but
this Clause of the Act is nothing such, and so is Casus Incogitatus, which
could not be held to be Renunced, unless it had been expressed, as to the
exception in the Act it is not an Exception general to the whole Act, but to
the Antecedent part of the Act; and this Clause, anent Restricting of Wodsets,
is posterior to the Exception, and not derogat thereby.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply, and found the
Exception not to Derogat to the Posterior Clause concerning Wodsets.

Lord Burly contra John Sime. January 30. 1662.
THE Lord Burly pursues John Sime, for intruding himself in a Coalheugh,
wherein the Pursuers Author was infeft severally, and not in the Land, but only
in the Coal, with power to set down Pits through all the bounds of the Land.
The Defender alleged absolvitor, because he stood Infeft in the Lands
lybelled, with Parts and Pertinents, and be virtue thereof, was seven Years in
Possession, which must Defend him in Possession, until his Right be reduced.
The Pursuer answered, that the Defender could have no benefit of a possessory
Judgment, not being expressly Infeft with the benefit of the Coal, in
prejudice of the Pursuer, who was expressly Infeft, and Seized in the Coal, and
in possession of the Coals past memory. The Defender answered, there was no
necessity of an express Infeftment of the Coal, which is carried as part and
pertinent, as Craig observes in dieg. de investituturis impropriis,, to have
been decided betwixt the Sheriff of Air and Chalmers of Garthgirth, and so
being Infeft, and in possession seven years, he has the benefit of a
possessory Judgment.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, but Repelled the same, in respect of
Interruption within seven years, which was proponed.

Halbert Irwing contra Mckartney. Eodem die.
HAlbert Irwing pursues Mckartney for Spuilzie of ten Oxen. The Defender
alleged Absolvitor, because he Intrometted with the Oxen by Warrant from Mr.
Robert Ferguson, to whom the Pursuer had given a Disposition of all his
moveable Goods, for relief of a Cautionry, for which Mr. Robert first, and now
this Defender is Distressed. Secondly, He offers him to prove voluntar Delivery
of the Oxen, by the Pursuer to him for the cause foresaid. But because the
Pursuer has summoned several other persons as Accomplices, which are necessary
Witnesses, of purpose, that he might exclude them from being Witnesses, he
desires they may be admitted Witnesses, or otherwise Discust. First, that if
they be Assoilzied, they may be Witnesses. The Pursuer answered to the first,
non relevat, a Disposition unless there had been Delivery; and albeit there had
been an Instrument of Delivery, yet it being dispositio omnium bonorum, two
years before the meddling, could be no Warrant for summar meddling, without
Sentence of a Judge, and gave only jus ad rem. But specially the meddling with
the Plough Goods in time of Labourage, when the Pursuer put other Goods before
the Defender.

The Lords found the first Defense Relevant, founded upon the general
Disposition and Instrument of Possession; and that the Disposition alone,
though without any possession, had been sufficient against the Disponer ad
vitandum spolium, unless the Defender had Intrometted by violence, being
resisted by force.

But they proceeded not to the second Defense, which doubtless was Relevant,
and the desire reasonable of Discussing the remnant Defenders; First, that they
might be Witnesses if Assoilzied: Yea, it seems they could not be hindered to be
Witnesses, used for the Defender, though they might be suspect Witnesses
against him, as being Interest, to put the Spuilzie upon him for their own
relief.

Sir James Cunninghame contra Thomas Dalmahoy. February 1. 1662.
SIr James Cunninghame pursues Thomas Dalmahoy, and the Tennents of Pollomount,
to make payment to him of the Mails and Duties of the Lands of Pollomount,
resting at the Death of the late Duchess of Hamiltoun, because she had granted
Bond of 500. pound Sterling to the Pursuer, to be paid after her Death; and
for security thereof, had assigned the Mails and Duties of her Liferent Lands
of Pollomount, which should happen to be due at the time of her Death. It was
alleged for Thomas Dalmahoy her second Husband, Absolvitor, because these
Mails and Duties belonged to him jure mariti, neither can he be liable for this
Debt jure mariti, because it was not Established against him during the Ladies
Life; neither could be, because the term of payment was after her Death. The
Pursuer answered, that he did not insist against Thomas Dalmahoy as Husband,
but as Intrometter with the Rents of Pollomount, due at the Duchess Death,
wherewith he has meddled since: which could not belong to him, jure mariti,
being assigned before the Marriage; and if they could belong to him jure
mariti, yet it must be with the burding of this Debt.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply, for they thought a
Husband, albeit he was not liable simply for his Wifes Debt, post solutum
matrimonij; yet that he should have no more of the Wifes Means, jure mariti,
but what was free of Debt, and so behoved to pay her Debt, so far as he enjoyed
of her Means,

Belshes contra Belshes. Eodem die.
IN an Account and Reckoning betwixt Belshes and Belshes, concerning Executry;
The Lords found that the prices, given up by the Defunct in his Testament, of
his own Goods, should stand, and the Executor be accountable accordingly^ seeing
there was no enorm prejudice alleged, as if the Defunct had prized the Goods,
within a half or third of the true avail, to the advantage of the Executor, and
prejudice of the Wife, Bairns, or Creditors.

The Lords did also allow Aliment to the Wife, out of her Husbands Movables to
the next Term, albeit she Liferented an Annualrent, payable at the next Term.

Lord Melvil contra Lord of Fairin. February 4. 1662.
THe Lord Melvil pursues the Lord of Fairin, for Warrandice of a Disposition
of certain Lands and Teinds, sold to my Lord by him, with absolute Warrandice,
and condescends that the Teinds were affected with 13. Bolls by a Locality to
the Minister in Anno 1641. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because this
Distress was known, or might have been known to the Pursuer the time of the
Bargain, at least to his Tutors who made the Bargain. Secondly, there is no
legal Distress but voluntar payment made all the years bygone.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found, that seeing the Distress by the
Stipend was unquestionable; payment made thereof without Processes, prejudged
not, and that the Pursuers knowledge could work nothing, being then a Pupil.

Lord of Elphingstoun contra Sir Mungo Murray. Eodem die.
THe Lord of Elphingstoun having Charged Sir Mungo Murray, for the price of
some Lands, bought from him, he Suspends, and alleadges, that by the
Disposition the Charger is obliged to relieve him, of all Inhibitions; and now
produces several Inhibitions. The Charger answered non relevat, unless there
were a Distress, seeing the Disposition bears not to purge but only to relieve,
or to warrant against Inhibitions.

The Lords considering that the Chaeger vergebat ad inopiam, found the Reasons
Relevoan, till Cauton were found to warrant the Suspender from these
Inhibitions. They found also, that where the Charger was obliged to pay to the
Suspender, the Composition for his Entry to the Lands. That the Suspender
should have no Composition if he got it Gratis; albeit he alleged he got it
for other good Services.

Skeen contra Lumsdean. Eodem die.
ANdrew Skeen having Charged Alexander Lumsdean for payment of a sum, for which
he was Cautioner for his Brother Mr. Thomas Lumsdean; he Suspends upon this
Reason, that the cause of the Bond was two Bills of Exchange^ which was
Protested. The Suspender answered, he offered him to prove they were paid,
after the Protest, by him who drew the Bills, or by Mr. Thomas Lumsdean, in
whose Favor the Bills were drawn. The Suspender replied, that the Alleadgence
ought to be Repelled, because he was assigned to the protested Bills, for
relief of this Cautionry, and intimat his Assignation to Skeen, who delivered
the Bills, and got the Bond Charged on. The Charger offered him to prove
payment^ before that Assignation, or Intimation, and ad modum probationis,
produced an Instrument under the Seal of Camphire, and a Declaration of the
Conservator there, bearing, that upon inspection of Mr. Thomas Lumsdeans Count
Books; they found that he had acknowledged two or three sums paid, in part of
these Bills, and expressed the Dates thereof, prior to the Assignation. The
Suspender alleged the Count Books could not prove, unless they were produced,
Cognosced and Proven to be Lumsdeans Count Books. Secondly, they could not
prove contra tertium, Thirdly, the Question being de data, and they holograph,
they could not prove their Date. Fourthly, these Testificats can prove nothing,
unless they had been taken upon Processes, or by Commission.

The Lords found the Testificats could not prove, but that the Count Book being
Cognosced, might prove against the Assigney, being Brother to Lumsdean, and the
Books out of his hand, since he was broken, for amongst Merchants Count Books
or Writs without Witnesses, by their Custom, are sufficient, and ordained
Lumsdean and his Brother to Depone, upon the having of the Books, to produce
them if they had them, and if not, granted Commission to the Magistrates of
Camphire, and Conservator, to Cognosce the Books, and to report what they find
of this matter in them.

Marjory Gray contra Dalgardno. February 7. 1662.
MAjory Gray pursues Dalgardno, as vicious Intromettor with the Goods of a
Defunct, to pay his Debt, who alleged Absolvitor, because the Defunct Died
Rebel, and at the Horn, and so nihil fuit in bonis defuncti, seeing by the
Rebellion, all his Movables belonged to the Fisk, ipso jure, without necessity
of tradition, for the King jure coronae, has the right of Lands without
Infeftment, and the right of Movables forefaulted, or fallen in Escheat,
without Tradition or Possession. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, because the
Defender Intrometting without any warrant from the Fisk, is quassi prodo, and
Movables are not ipso facto, in the Property of the Fisk, by the Rebellion:
But if they be Disponed by the Rebel for an onerous Cause; the Disposition
before Rebellion will be valid, or if they be arrested for the Defuncts Debts,
and recovered by Sentence, making forthcoming; or if a Creditor Confirm himself
Executor Creditor to the Defunct Rebel, he will be preferred to the Fisk; by
all which it appears, that the Rebellion transmits not the Property. The
Defender answered, that these Instances do only show that the King prefereth
Creditors, and takes but the benefit of what the Rebel had deductis debitis, or
what was Contracted with him bona fide, but does not say, that the Property of
the Goods were not in the Fisk, but in the Rebel.

The Lords repelled the Defense. The Defender further alleged, that not only
was the Defunct Rebel, but that he had a Gift of his Escheat. The Pursuer
answered non relevat, unless it had been before the vicious intromission, or at
least ante motam litem.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, unless the Defender would allege that the
Gift was ante motam litem; for they thought that the Taking of the Gift was
like the Confirmation of an Executor, which purged vicious Intromission, being
ante motam litem.

John Bonnar contra Robert Foulis. Eodem die.
JOhn Bonnar pursues Robert Foulis, to pay the Debt of a Person Incarcerat by
Act of Warding, whom the Bailzie set at Liberty without Warrant. The Defender
alleged no Processes, because the Person Incarcerat was not Called, who might
have proponed Exceptions against the Debt, that it was paid, etc. Secondly,
that thereafter the Pursuer had taken himself to the Incarcerat Person, and
gotten part of payment from him.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses and decerned: but because there was a
Reduction depending of the Decree, whereupon the Person was Incarcerat, and
that he was set at Liberty in Anno 1659. when there was no Iudicatory sitting,
they superceeded Extracting for the time, till the Reduction was Discust.

Countess of Buckcleugh. contra Earl of Tarras. Eodem die.
THe Countess of Buckcleugh pursuing Reduction of a Contract of Marriage^
betwixt her Sister and the Earl of Tarras.

The Lords would not Sustain incident for the Earl of Tarras, albeit he was
minor, that Contract being his own Writ, and not his Predecessors.

Lockerbie contra Applegirth. Eodem die.
JOhnstoun of Lockerbie, having obtained Decree against Ierdine of Applegirth,
for a Sum paid by the Pursuers author, as Cautioner for the Defenders Father.

The Lords found Annualrent due by the Principal to the Cautioner, by an Act of
Sederunt 1613. and that from the year 1619. until now in respect the Cautioner
had paid upon distress, by Decree of Transferrence, and a Charge of Horning
thereon.

Acheson contra Mcclean. Eodem die.
DAm Iean Acheson pursues the Lord of Mcclean, as representing their
Predecessors, who was Cautioner in a Suspension. The Defender alleged nothing
produced to prove the Suspension Discussed, but Letters of Horning upon a
Protestation, which cannot instruct the Protestation.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the absence of the Register, and
the oldness of the Horning.

Achinbeck contra Mccleud. Eodem die.
IN an Improbation at the Instance of the Lord of Achinbeck, against Mccleud.

The Lords found that the Improbation behoved to be continued, albeit the
samine had an ordinar privilege to pass upon six days, for the first
Summonds, past of course periculo penitentis.

Acheson contra Earl of Errol. Eodem die.
ACheson pursues the Earl of Errol, as presenting his Father, to pay a Debt
wherein his Father was Cautioner for the Earl of Mar; and for instructing
thereof, produced the Extract of a Bond, Registrate by consent in the Books of
Session. The Defender alleged no Process against him; because the Bond was
not Registrat by any Procurator for his Father, because he was Dead before the
Registration, and so cannot prove against him, neither being a principal Writ
Subscribed by his hand, nor being a Decree of Registration, by consent of his
Procurator, nor upon Citation. The Pursuer alleged that it was an authentic
Evident, and bare expressly Sic subscribitur Errol: and seeing by Law and Custom,
the Pursuer was necessitat to leave the Principal at the Register, when the
Registrat the same, and that the Registers are now lost without his fault.

The Lords refused to sustain the Extract against the Earl of Errol, but yet
would not put the Party to an Action of proving the Tenor, but would receive
Admini^les to instruct that Earl was Cautioner; and therefore ex officio,
ordained the other Subscribers of the Bond, or any other person that could be
adduced, for instructing the Truth to be required ex officio.

Thomas Crawford contra Earl of Murray. February 8. 1662.
THomas Crawford as Executor Creditor, Confirmed to Umquhil Robert Ing^is; as
Assigney by his Relict, for satisfaction of her Contract of Marriage, pursues
the Earl of Murray for payment of the Sums Confirmed, addebted by him to the
said umquhil Robert. The Defender alleged compensation; because he had
Assignation to a Debt due by the said umquhil Robert, which as it would have
been relevant against Robert himself; so must it be against his Executor. The
Pursuer replied: First, non relevat, unless the Assignation had been Intimat
before the Confirmation: but an Executor Creditor having done Diligence by
Confirmation; it is not in the power of any of the Defuncts Debitors, by taking
Assignation from any of his Creditors, to prefer that Creditor to any other
Creditor, which is no ways legittimus modus preferendi: But the Creditors must
be preferred, only according to their Diligence. Secondly, This Pursuit being
for Implement of the Relicts Contract of Marriage, and pursued to their behove,
has by our Law and Custom preference to all other personal Creditors, though
having done more Diligence.

The Lords found either of these two Replys Relevant to elide the Defense,
albeit the Assignation was before any Pursuit, moved upon the Pursuers
Confirmation.

Lord Torphichan contra Eodem die.
THe Lord Torphichan and certain of his Feuars, pursue a Reduction of a Decree
of the Sheriff, whereby he set down Marches betwixt their Lands and others,
upon this Ground, that he did not proceed by an Inquest conform to the Act of
Parliament, but by Witnesses. Secondly, That he as Superior was not Called.
Thirdly, That the Sheriff had unwarrantably Sustained the setting down of
Marches foamerly by Arbiters, to be proven by Witnesses. The Defenders
answered, the first Reason was not objected, and the Defenders Compearance it
was competent and omitted: To the second, the Superour could have no Detriment.
To the third, that the setting down of March-stones, being a palpable Fact,
might be proven by Witnesses, whether done by the Parties themselves, or by
Friends chosen in their presence, their being neither Decreet-arbitral, nor
Submission in Writ.

The Lords Repelled the Reasons in respect of the Answer, and declared, that if
the Land fell in the Superiors hands, by Recognition, Non-entry, or otherwise,
The Decree should not prejudge him if he were not Called.

Ramsay of Torbanie contra Mcclellane. February 11. 1662.
DAvid Ramsay of Torbanie having raised Suspension, and Reduction of a Decree
against him, at the I^stan^e of Thomas Mcclellane, in Anno 1658. Insists upon
this Reason, that he being pursued as Heir to his Father, at the Instance of
Thomas Mcclellane, he proponed this Relevant Defense, absolvitor, because the
Bond pursued upon, was granted by his Father after he was Interdicted, without
consent of the Interdictors, and so could not affect the Person Interdicted
Heir, albeit he had succeeded in his Estate. The Defender answered, that the
said alleadgence was justly Repelled, in respect of this relevant Reply, that
the Interdiction has no effect as to Movables, and Personal Execution;
neither as to any other Lands, then such as lay in the Shires or Jurisdictions
where the Interdiction was puplished and Registrat, conform to the Act of
Parliament, ita est: this Interdiction was published and Registrate only at
Linlithgow; and therefore if the Defender has succeeded to any Lands, not
lying in Linlithgow Shire, or if he has meddled with Heirship, Moveable, or be
vicious Intromettor with his Fathers Movables; he is liable for this Sum,
albeit after the Interdiction, ita est, he succeeded to Lands in the Stewartry
of Kirkcudburgh, and Movables, etc. and therefore the Defense was justly
Repelled.

The Lords found the Decree just, and therefore Repelled the Reasons of
Suspension and Reduction.

Bells contra Wilkie. February 12. 1662.
GRissel and Bells raise a Reduction against James Wilkie, of a Decree
obtained at his Instance against them, in Anno 1659. whereby the said James
Wilkie being Executor, Confirmed to his Mother, who was one of the Sisters, and
Executors of umquhil Patrick Bell their Brother, in which Confirmation the said
James gave up the third of the said Patricks Goods, and thereupon obtained
Decree against these Pursuers, as the two surviving Executors, to pay to the
said James, his Mothers third Part of her Brothers Means. The Reason of
Reduction was, that the Decree was unjust, and contrair to the Law and Custom
of this Kingdom, whereby there is no right of Representation in Movables, as
in Heretage, neither does the Confirmation of the Executors, establish in the
Executors, a complete Right, until the Testament be execute, either by
obtaining payment, or Decree; and if the Executor die before Execution, the
Right ceases, and is not Transmitted to the Executors Executor, but remains in
bonis defuncti of the first Defunct, and therefore Executors ad non Executa
must be confirmed, to the first Defunct, which being a constant and
unquestionable custom, one of the three Executors deceasing before Executing
the Testament, her Right fully ceases; and both the Office of Executrie, and
Benefit, accres^es to the surviving Sisters; as if the deceased Sister had
never been Confirmed Executrix. The Defender in the Reduction, Answered, That
this Reason was most justly Repelled, because, albeit it be true, that the
naked Office of Executry, does not complete the Right in the Executors Person,
and does not transmit, yet it is as true, that by the Law of God, and of this
Land (which is cleared by the express Statute, Parliament 1617. anent
Executors) Children surviving their Parents, had always a distinct Right, from
the Office of Executry, of their bairns part of gear, which belonged to them,
without any Confirmation, and could not be prejudged by the Defunct, and was
sufficiently established in their Person jure legittime, if they survive their
Defunct Parent, especially if they owned the same by any Legal D^ligence;
Therefore, after which, if a Child die, the Child of that Bairn will come in
with the Survivers; and yet there is no Right of Representation, because Iure
legittime; it was established in the Bairns Person, by surviving, and owning
the same; as well as the Goods, are e^^ablished in the Person of a Stranger
Executor, by executing the Testament: and by the said Act of Parliament, that
benefit is extended, not only as to the Bairns Part, but to the Bairns; in
relation to Deads Part, whereinto they succeed, as nearest of Kine, and
therefore they have right to the Movables, not by virtue of the Conformation,
or Office of Executry, which before that Act carried the whole benefit; as is
clear, by the Act, but by a several Right, jure agnationis, as nearest of Kine;
and therefore, though the nearest of Kine be not Confirmed Executor, but others
be Nominat, or Datives Confirmed, the Executors are comptable to the nearest of
Kine, who may pursue them therefore, and therefore, if the nearest of Kine do
any Legal Diligence, either by Confirmation, or Process, yea, though they did
none, but only survive, the Right of nearest of Kine ipso facto, establishes
the Goods in their Person, and so transmits; and whereas it was alleged, that
the contrare was found by the Lords, in Anno one thousand six hundred thirty
six, observed by Durie: it is also marked by him, that it being so found by
Interlocutor, it was stopped to be heard again, and never discused; neither can
it be shown by Custom, or Decision, that the Executors of Children, or nearest
of Kine were excluded, from recovering the part of their Parent, which
survived, and owned the benefit of the Succession.

The Lords assoilzie from the Reduction, and adhered to the former Decree.

Kirktouns contra Lord of Hunthil. Eodem die:
ISobel and Kirktouns pursues the Lord of Hunthill, their Tutor, for a Tutor
Count, and payment of all that belonged to their Father, who alleged
absolvitor; because nothing alleged, nor produced, to instruct his acceptance
of the Office of Tutory. The Pursuers opponned their Fathers Testament
Confirmed, bearing the same to have been Confirmed by the Defender, and other
three Tutors, and that the Tutors gave their Oaths de fideli administratione,
in the Office of Tutrie. The Defender answered, non relevat, to instruct, that
the Tutors made faith, because this Confirmation is but the Assertion of a
Nottour, the Commissary Clerk, without a warrant in writ, subscribed by the
Tutors, and can prove in nothing, but what is ordinary the Style of the Court,
in Judicial Process, but the Acceptance, and making Faith of Tutors, is
altogether Extranious, and is neither necessar, nor ordinar to be done by the
Commissars. The Lords sustained the Reply, especially, in respect, that the
Commissarie Clerk, was this Defenders Uncle, and there was no ground of
Suspicion, that he would adject that point without warrant, otherways this were
a dangerous preparative. Secondly, The Defender further alleged absolvitor,
from a Sum contained in the said Testament as due to him, because there was
nothing to instruct it, but the Defuncts Assertion in his Testament, giving up
his Debts. The Pursuer answered, that the Defender has Homologat, by
Confirming the Testament, bearing the same, and not protesting against it,
which is an acknowledgment thereof. The Defender answered, that there being
four Tutors it could not be constant, that they were all present, at the Act of
Confirmation, and saw and knew the Inventar; but as it is ordinar in such
Cases, they might have come at several times, and made Faith. The Pursuer
answered, that some of the four Tutors behoved to do it, and these were thereby
bound to have done Diligence for it, and consequently, all the Tuttors being
liable in solidum; this Tutor is liable therefore.

The Lords found the Reply and Triply relevant, that the Testament so confirmed
instructed the Debt.

Robert Lockheart contra William Kennedy February 13. 1662.
RObert Lockheart, pursues a Declarator of the Redemption of some Lands,
against William Kennedy of Achtefardel, who alleged absolivtor; because,
before the order was used. The Reversion was discharged, and the Discharge
Registrat. The Pursuer Replied, ought to be repelled, because the Granter of
the Discharge was Interdicted, before the granting thereof, and the same not
granted with the Interdicters consent. The Defender answered, non competit by
way of Reply, but only by way of Action of Reduction, as is Ordinar, in the
Case of Inhibition and Interdiction.

The Lords sustained the Reply, in respect that it was not proponed, by defense
to delay the Pursuit, but by Reply, which did only delay the Pursuer himself,
and also, that they thought it hard, to cause the Pursuer quite his Possession,
and then go to a Reduction.

Antonia Birnie contra Liferenters of Rossie: Eodem die.
ANtonia Birnie, as Heir appearant, and having Right to the Fee of the Estate
of Rossie, and Fordel, pursues her Mother and Grandfather, Liferenters
thereof, for a modification of Aliment. The Grandfather made no opposition^ It
was alleged, for the Mother, that the whole Inheretance was not Liferented.
The Pursuer Answered, that what was not Liferented, was affected with
Apprizings for the Defuncts Debts, led after his Death. The Defender answered,
non relevat, unless the Appryzings had been before the Defuncts Death, but
being against the Appearand Heir her self, she ought to sell Land, and pay the
Debt and live upon the remainder. The Pursuer offered her to prove the
Appryzings and Debts equivalent to the Value of all the Land^ not Liferented.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

James Maxwell contra Adam Maxwell. Eodem die.
JAmes Maxwell, pursues Adam Maxwell, for declaring a Disposition of Lands,
granted by the said James his Wife to the said Adam, to have been in trust to
her behove, and after her decease, to her Husband, and for adminicle lybelled a
Bond granted by the said Adam, some Months after the Disposition, whereby he
oblidged himself to grant a Back-bond to the Lady, by the advice of Lawyers,
conform to the Disposition made to him, and oblidged him to deliver the said
Back-bond to the Lady, or to the Ladies Husband after her Death, whereupon it
was alleged, that the Back-bond being to be made by the Advice of both their
Lawyers, the Disposition behoved to be in trust. The Defender opponned the
Tickit, bearing the Back-bond, to be conform to the Disposition, in which there
was an express Reservation of the Ladies Liferent; so that the Back-bond could
import no more, then securing of that Liferent. The Pursuer answered, these
words, conform to the Disposition, were set upon the Margin of the Tickit,
which was all written by the Defenders hand, and might have been added, ex post
facto, 2. The Tickit behoved to import more then the Liferent, because the
Liferent was fully and clearly reserved, and oftimes repeated in the
Disposition, so that Clause had been frustrat. Thirdly, The oblidgment to
deliver the Back-bond to the Ladies Husband after her Death, could not be
understood, to be only in relation to her Liferent, which and the Husbands
interest should cease by her Death.

The Lords found the Tickit sufficient to instruct Trust, but because the Terms
of the Trust were not clear. They before answer, in Relation to the Probation
of the Terms thereof, Ordain the Parties to Count and Reckon upon all Sums, due
by the Lady to the Defender, in contemplation of the Trust, that the same might
be allowed and satisfied to the Defender, before he be denuded.

James Slumond contra Wood of Grange Eodem die.
JAmes Slumond, having charged James Wood of Grange, to pay a Sum wherein he
was Cautioner for the Lord of Balcaskie, to Williiam Smith merchant in
Edinburgh, who constitute Richard Potter Assigny, who transferred the same, to
the said James Slumond, and Suspends. The reason of Suspension was, because
this Bond was paid, and retired by Balscaskie, the principal Debtor; who took
a blank Translation thereto, from Potter the Assigny; which Translation; with
the Bond it self, were surreptitiously taken out of his Coffer, by James Hay,
who filled up this Chargers name therein, likeas, the Suspender produced a
Declaration of Potter, that the Sum was paid ^o him, by Balcaskie, and
therefore the Suspender craved, that the Oaths of this Charger, the said James
Hay, and Potter, and also the Witnesses, who were present at the payment of the
Sum might be taken before Answer.

Which the Lords granted, albeit the Charger had the Translation for an
one^rous cause.

Children of Monsual. contra Laurie of Naxweltoun. February 14. 1662.
THE Children of the Lord Monsuel, as Executor to their Father, pursues Laurie
of Maxwelltoun, for a Sum due by him to the Defunct, who alleged
Compensation, upon a Debt due by the Defunct, Assigned to the Defender, by the
Defuncts Creditor, after the Defuncts Death, and intimat before any Citation,
or Diligence, at the instance of any other Creditor. The Pursuer replied, that
Debt compensed on, cannot take away this Debt pursued for solidum; because the
Defender, as Assigny can be in no better Case then his Cedent, and if he were
now pursuing; he would not be preferred fore his whole Sum, but only in so far
as the Testament is not yet exhausted, or other prior Diligence done, for an
Executor, having but an Office, can prefer no Creditor, but according to his
Diligence, much less can any of the Defuncts Debitors, by taking Assignation
from any of the Defuncts Creditors, prefer that Creditor whose intimation is no
Legal Diligence.

The Lords found that the Defender could be in no better Case then the Cedent,
and could have only compensation, in so far as the Inventar was not Exhausted,
or prior Diligence used, they found also, that a Decree against a Defender for
making arrested Sums forthcoming, at the Instance of an of the Defuncts
Creditors, was null, because the Executor Creditor was not called thereto,
albeit Decree was obtained^ at the Instance of that Creditor, against another
Executor in a former Process.

Lady Muswal Elder contra Lady Muswal Younger. February 15. 1662.
IN a Contention, betwixt the Lady Muswall Elder, and Younger, upon two
Annualrents out of one Barony.

The Lords Ordained the first Annualrenter to do Diligence, within twenty days
after each Term; that after that time, the second Annualrenter might do
Diligence, or otherwise, at her option Ordained the Lands to be divided,
conform to the Rents Proportionably, as the two Annualrents. The second
Annualrent and the first to take her choice.

Lord of Pitfoddels contra Lord of Glenkindy. Eodem die.
IN the Revieu of a Decree in one thousand six hundred fifty nine, at the
Instance of the Lord of Pitfoddels, against the Lord of Glenkindy^ in which
Decree, Glenkindy Cedents Oath, having been taken, that the Cause of the Bond
was, for an Assignation to a Wodset, which was excluded by Apprizing, after
Report whereof, Glenkindy the Assigny alleged, that his Cedents Oath could
not prejudge him; and it being Answered, that he made no Objection before the
Oath taken, neither could make any Just Objection, because the Oath of the
Cedent any time, before Intimation^ is sufficient against the Assigny,
Glenkindy Answered, that his being called in that Process as Assigny, and
compearing; and Insisting as Assigny was an intimation, which was before taking
of the Oath, which was found Relevant in the said Decree, and now rescinded by
the Lords, upon this consideration, that the Citation being ad hunc offectum,
to instruct the cause of the Bond, the insisting in that pursuit could not be
such an intimation, as to exclude the Cedents Oath.

Earl of Bedfoord contra Lord Balmirino. February 18. 1662.
THE Earl of Bedfoord, for satisfaction of his Tocher, due by his Father in
Law; the deceast Earl of Sommerset, caused Adjudge, in the name of a Person
entrusted, all Right compent to the Earl of Summerset, of the Estate of
Iedburgh, and being Assigned to the Adjudication, pursues the Lord Balmirino,
for denuding himself of two Apprisings of the Estate of Jedburgh, conform to
three Back-bonds produced; granted by umquhile Balmirino, to Summerset,
acknowledging, that he had acquired Right to these Apprysings, with Summersets
own Money, and therefore oblidged him to denude himself thereof. The Defender
alleged, that his Father being entrusted by the late Earl of Summerset, to
acquire the Estate of Iedburgh, and having the Fee thereof in his Person, the
Defender is not oblidged to denude himself, until he be Re-imbursed, and
satisfied of all Sums of Money, which after the said Back-bonds he paid for
Summerset, or advanced to Summerset, which can only be accounted, to have been
in Contemplation of the Trust, and is particularly so expressed, in Summersets
Letters produced, bearing, that Balmirino should be satisfied, of what was due
to him, out of Tiviotdale, whre the said Estate of Iedburgh lies. The Pursuer
answered, non rel^vat, against him, as a singular Successor. 2dly. Non
competit, by way of Exception; but the Defender has only Action therefore:
especially this Trust being fidei-comissum; which is a kind of Deposition, in
which there is neither Compensation, nor Retentation competent. 3dly. there can
be here no Compensation, because the Debt is not Liquid. The Defender answered,
his Defense stands must Relevant, which he founds not upon Compensation, but
upon the Exception of Retentation, which is competent in all Mandats, and
Trusts, by which, as there is a Direct Action, in favor of the Mandator,
against the Mandatar, or Person entrusted; so there is a contrare Action, in
favors of the Mandatar; for satisfying of all, that he has expended, by
Reason of the Trust; and which he may make use of, beway of Exception of
Retention, if he be pursued and whatsomever by in Relation to Compensation, in
deposito, by the civil Law, or of the difference of Action, and Exception; yet,
thereby they, and by our un contraverted Custom, whatever is competent by way
of Action, is Competent by Exception, and if this be not receavable by
Exception, it is utterly lost, because there is none to represent Summerset.

The Lords considering, that Balmirino's Estate was disponed, and Apprysed, by
his Uncle, the Lord Couper, and William Purvis, the Reversion whereof was
shortly to expire, which they would not lengthen, and that by an account
running, to the expire of these Reversions, the Pursuer being a Stranger, might
be frustrat; therefore they Repelled the Defense, but declared, that Estate, or
benefit that Bedfoord should make thereby, should be liable to Balmirino, for
what Debt he should instruct to be due by Sommerset, and withal supers^^eded
the Extract f^r a time, that if in the mean time, Balmirino should cause
Couper and Purvis Restrict their Rights, to as much Rents as would pay their
Annualrents, and secure Bedfoord in the rest of his Estate, and in a certain
Bond produced, for what should be found due, They would sustain the Defense by
Exception, and Ordain Count and Reckoning.

Lord Carnagy contra Lord Cranburn. February 19. 1662.
THE Lord Carnagie being Infeft in the Barony of Dirltoun, upon a Gift of
Recognition by the KING; pursues a Declarator of Recognition, against the Lord
Cranburn, because the late Earl of Dirltoun, holding the said Barony Ward of
the KING, had without the KING'S consent, alienat the same to Cranburn, and
thereby the Lands had Re-cognized. The Defender alleged, First, No Process,
because he is minor, and non tenetur placitare super haereditate paterna.
Secondly, The Re-cognition is incurred by the ingratitude, and Delinquence of
the Vassal, yet delicta morte extinguntur, so that there being no other
Sentence, nor Litiscontestation against Dirltoun, in his own Life, it is now
extinct, which holds in all Criminal and Penal Cases, except in Treason only,
by a special Act of Parliament.

The Lords Repelled both the Defenses: The First, in respect that the Defender
is not Heir, but singular Successor, and that there is no question of the
validity of his Predecessors Right in competition with any other Right, but the
Superiors. The other, because Recognition befalls not as a Crime, but as a
Condition, employed in the nature of the Right, that if the Vassal alienat, his
Fee becomes void.

Children of Wolmet contra Mr. Mark Ker. Eodem die.
IN a Declarator of Redemption, at the the Instance of the Children VVolmet,
against Mr. Mark Ker. It was found that the Declarator needed not be continued,
though the Pursuer produced not the Reversion, but an attestat double thereof,
and offered to prove, that the principal Reversion was in the Defenders hands.

Which was sustained, the Pursuers Right being an Appryzing.

Earl of Calender. contra Andrew Monro. February 20. 1662.
THE Earl of Calender pursues Andrew Monro of Beercrofts, for the valued Teind
Duty of his Lands several years: who alleged absolvitor, for the Teinds
intrometted with by his Author, preceding his Right. The Pursuer Replied, that
Teinds being valued, are like an Annualrent, and are debiti fundi, by the Act
of Parliament 1633. anent Valuations. The Teind-masters being appointed to be
Infeft in the Right of the Teind, according to the Valuation.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and found the Teind not to be debitum
fundi, albeit valued.

Halb^rt Irvin contra Mackertnay. February 24. 1662.
THis day, in a Spulzie betwixt Halbert Irvin and Mackertnay. The Defender
principally called, having proponed a Defense, upon a Disposition and Delivery
of the Goods in question, and craving to prove the same, by others of the
Defenders, called as accessory, as necessary Witnesses, alleging, that the
Pursuer had called all that were present upon the ground, as accessories, that
thereby he should get no Witnesses.

The Lords Ordained the Pursuer in the Spulzie, to declare whether he would
insist against these others, as accessory, or as applying any of the Goods to
their own behove, or if he would not, allowed them to be received as Witnesses;
and if he did insist against them, Ordained the Process against the principal
Party to fist till the accessions were discussed, that such of them as were
assoilzied might be used as Witnesses.

Alexander Arbuthnet of Fiddes contra Keiths. February 25. 1662.
ALezander Arbuthnet of Fiddes, pursues Keiths, the two Daughters of John
Keith, and their Husbands, for the avail of their Marriages, belonging to him,
as Donatar by the Earl of Marischal their Superior. The Defenders alleged,
First, No Process, because nothing produced to instruct that the Lands were
Waird, or that the Earl of Marischal is Superior. Secondly, absolvitor from
that Conclusion of the Summons^ craving not only the Ground to be Poynded, for
the avail of the Tocher, but also the Defenders personally to pay the same.
Thirdly, Absolvitor, because the Earl of Marischal consented to the Defenders
Marriage, in so far as he is Witness in the Contract.

The Lords repelled all these Alleadgances: The First, in respect that Waird is
presumed, where the contrair is not alleged, and the Defender did not
disclaim the Earl of Marischal as his Superior. The Second, because they
found, that the avail of the Marriage did not follow the Value of the Land
holden Waird, but the Parties other Means and Estates also; so that the avail
of the Marriage might be much more worth then the profit of the Waird Land:
and therefore behoved not only to affect the Ground, but the Heir, or appearand
Heir personally: And as to the other Defense of the Earls consent, it was after
this Granted, and was only as Witness, neither is the profit of the Marriage,
as to the single avail, taken away by having of the Superiors tacit consent:
but is a Casuality simply belonging to him, which cannot be taken from him,
unless -- id -- ageb^tur, to renunce the benefit thereof, yet it seems that
the Superior, consenting to his Vassals Marriage, can crave no greater Avail
then the Vassal gets of Tocher.

Brown contra Iohnstoun. February 26. 1662.
BRown having obtained Decree against Archibald Iohnstoun of Clachrie for two
hundred pounds Sterling: He raises Reduction and Review upon this Reason, that
the ground of the said Decree was a Bill of Exchange drawn by Johnstoun, to be
paid by Mukgown in Blackainor-fair in England, Ita est, the alleged Bill is
null, not Designing the Writer, nor having any Witnesses, neither has it the
Subscription of Johnstoun, nor the Initial Letters of his Name, but only a
mark, most easily Initiable, which is Written about with an unknown hand:
Archibald Johnstoun his mark, it being reasoned amongst the Lords, whether this
could be accounted a Writ Probative; and it being alleged an Astruction
thereof, that this Johnstoun being a Merchant and a Drover, was accustomed
ordinarily so to Subscribe, and to give Bills for far greater Sums then this.

The Lords thought it would be sufficient amongst Merchants, though it wanted
Witnesses, but being unwilling via ordinaria, to allow of such a Writ, or
Subscription, for which we have neither Custom nor Decision: Yet in respect of
the Decree, and of the alleged Custom so to Subscribe: They before answer,
ordained the Oaths ex officio, to be taken of the Writer of the Bill, if he
could be condescended on by either Party, and of the Witnesses who saw
Johnstoun Write this mark, or receive the Money, for which the Bill was granted.

Creditors of Kinglassie. Competings. Eodem die.
IN a Competition betwixt the Creditors of Hamiltoun of Kinglassie. It was
alleged for William Hume, who had Right to an Annualrent, that he ought to be
preferred to Joseph Lermont, who stood publicly Infeft in the Property, in
Anno 1655. because albeit the Annualrent of it self was base, yet long before,
it was validat by a Decree for Poynding of the Ground. It was answered, that
there was no way to make a base Infeftment valide, but by Possession: here
there could be no Possession, because the Annualrent was granted to take effect
only after the Granters Death, and the Decree thereupon was obtained long
before his Death, and so could be repute no Possession.

The Lords were of Opinion, that the foresaid Decree of Poynding of the Ground
upon the base Infeftment, Ordaining the Ground to be Poynded (the Terms of
payment being come and bygone) was sufficient to validate the base Infeftment:
and that thereby it remained no more a private Clandestine Infeftment, by many
other Questions falling in. The Matter was laid aside without Decision, vide
February 27. 1667. Inter eosdem.

John Kinard contra Lord of Fenzies. Eodem die.
JOhn Kinard pursues a Declarator of Property of a Mire or Marish in the Carss
of Gowrie, against the Lord of Fenzies, who had his Land on the other side
thereof, alleging that he and his Predecessors and Authors, have been forty
years in Possession of the Mire, as proper Part and Pertinent of the Barony of
Rossie, and that the same is severally kend and known by March and Meith, and a
Dyke enclosing it from the Defenders Lands: It was alleged for the Defender,
that he, his Predecessors and Authors, this forty years has been in Possession
of the said Mire, by doing all the Deeds Libelled by the Pursuer, which must
give them Right, at least of common Passurage, Fail and Divot therein: and
therefore craves the Defense to be found Relevant, and admitted to his
Probation, at least that a Cognition might be by an Inquest, conform to the Act
of Parliament, and Witnesses led, hinc inde. The Pursuer Replied, that he
offers him to prove that by the space of forty years, he, his Predecessors and
Authors Possessed the said Mire, not only by the Deeds Libelled; but also did
divide the same in several Parcels to each Tennent in the Barony, and was
accordingly Possessed by them, which is sufficient to show that they bruiked
the same as Property, and not a promiscuous Commonty. And as for the Defenders
Alleadgances of Commonty by common Pasturage, etc. The same ought to be
Repelled; because the Pursuer offers him to prove that he interrupted and
debarred the Defender from time to time, which hindered him to Acquire a Right
of Commonty, by Possession and Prescription, and he cannot allege that he
has any other Right by express Infeftment; and therefore being so much more
pregnant then the Defender, there ought to be no Cognition, but he preferred in
Probation.

The Lords Repelled the Defense in respect of the Libel and Reply, but granted
Commission to one of their number, to Examine Witnesses for the Pursuer, omni
exceptione majores, after which, the Defender passing from his Compearance, The
Lords Declared they would give the Extract of the Interlocutor to the Pursuer,
and give his Libel and Reply by way of Condescendence, and Declaration of the
manner of the Property, and of his Possession to his Probation.

Viscount of Stormount contra Heirs of Line, and Creditors of the Earl of
Annandale. Eodem die.
THE Viscount of Stormont pursues a Declarator against the Heirs of Line, of
Umquhil James Earl of Annandale, and several Creditors of the said Umquhil
Earl, who had Appryzed the Lordship of Skoon, and were Infeft thereupon; to
hear and see it found and declared, that David Viscount of Stormount had
Disponed these Lands, to Mungo Viscount of Stormount his Brother, and the
Heirs-male of his Body, which failzing, to Andrew Lord Balvaird, and the
Heirs-male of his Body, etc. with this express provision in the Charter, and
repeated verbatum in the Seasine, that it should not be leisom to the said
Mungo, or any of the Heirs of Tailzie for the time, to alienate the Lands, or
alter the Tailzie, or to do any Deed, whereby the same may be evicted, or
Apprized, from the Heirs of Tailzie, otherwise their Right should expire, and
should belong to the next Heir of the Contraveener, and that thereby James Earl
of Annandale last Infeft, had contraveened the said Clauses by contracting their
Debts, whereupon the Lands were Apprised: and thereby had lost his Right, and
that the said Creditors Bonds and their Apprizings are thereby null and void:
and likewise that the said James Earl of Annandale, his Retour was null, and
that the Pursuer might yet Enter as Heir to Mungo Viscount of Stormont, as if
the said James Earl of Annandale had never been Infeft. The Defender alleged;
First, No Proses in this Order without a Reduction, without which no Infeftment
can be taken away.

The Lords Repelled this Alleadgence, and found that a Declarator was als
effectual as a Reduction, when all was produced that was necessar to be
produced before the ground of Nullity were Discussed, with which all the rest
will fall in consequence, and that Reduction was only necessar to force tho
Defenders to produce by the Certification, but if the Defender would produce
himself, he might proceed by way of Declarator of Nullity.

Secondly, The Defender alleged no Processes, because by the Co-ception of
the Clauses irritant, the Rights is declared to belong to the nearest Heir of
the Contraveener; and therefore the Pursuer as served Heir-male general to
Andrew Lord Balvaird, has no Interest till he be served Heir-male to James
Earl of Annandale the Contraveener, in which case he cannot quarrel his Deeds
or Debts. The Pursuer answered, that by Heir here cannot be understood the Heir
actually served, but the Person only that might be Heir, for the Pursuer
insisted in this same Processes against the Earl of Annandale, when he was
living, and could not have been then excluded, because he was not his heir; and
therefore as is ordinar in all Clauses in relation to Heirs, which cannot be
effectual, if Heirs served be understood, their Heirs appearing are understood,
verba sumenda sunt cum effectu.

The Lords also Repelled this Defense.

Thirdly, The Defenders alleged absolvitor: Because, first, Clauses de non
alienando, are never understood to extend to necessary alienations, as for
provision of the Feears Wife and Children, for Redemption of him from
Captivity, or any other accident, without his Fault. Secondly, Clauses de non
Contrahendo debitum are against Commerce, and utterly rejected. Thirdly,
Clauses irritant are resolutive, albeit contained in the Infeftment, are but
personal obliegements, and the ground of an Action against the contraveener;
but if the Contraveener be denuded, are not effectual against singular
Successors; Especially Creditors Contracting bonafide, with one standing
Infeft, before the matter became litigious by Processes, upon that Clause,
seeing no Inhibition was used: ita est, their Creditors had Apprized and were
Infeft before any such Processes upon this Clause, or Inhibition used, and no
personal provision could transmit the Right from Annandale to Stormount, upon
contraveening the Clausses, nor could hinder the transmission thereof from
Annandale, who had the only real Right to the Creditors, by virtue of their
Appryzings and Infeftments, which denuded Annandale of the real Right, and
which real Right stands now only in the Person of the Creditors Infeft, so that
there can be no more in Stormounts Person, but a Personal Provision, for the
being within the body of the Infeftment, will not make this Clause real, and to
affect the Right, quo ad singulares successores, more then the Clause of
Warrandice in the Infeftment, which without question, reaches not singular
Successors; and albeit some Provisions in themselves Personal, may aff^ct
singular Successors, as the Provision, that if two years run together, the Feu
shall become void, or the Clauses of Reversion, or the Inherent Clauses, or
quality in Ward holding, but these become real by Law and Statute; for we have
a particular Act of Parliament anent Reversions, to be effectual against
singular Successors; and another anent Feus, ^b non solutum canonem: and there
is no other case that such Provisions are real. The Pursuer answered to the
first; albeit alienations do not comprehend judicial Alienations by Appryzing
in Recognition, and are oftimes not extended to necessar Alienations: Yet here
the Clause bears expressly not to altenat, and also to do no Deed whereby the
Laws may be Evicted and Apprized; without which the Clauses de alienando, were
utterly ineffectual, and repeats the same to the second. As to the third,
albeit de facto, the real Right be in the Appryzers Infeftment, yet it is in
them effected, with that quality in the condition and bosom of it, that gives
good ground, not only against the Earl of Annandale Contraveener, to annul his
Right; But also the Apprizer in consequence, quia resoluto jure dantis,
resolvitur jus accipientis, Especially in Feudal-rights, where provisionis
investiturae, sunt legis feudi, as all Feudists agree, and therefore all such
Pactions and Provisions are equivalent to Law. 2d. This Clause of the
Infeftment is not only resolutive, but also is an Interdiction Prohibiting the
Feear for the time, to alienat, or do any Deed prejudicial, without consent of
such other Persons of the Tailzie, were Majors for the time; and therefore,
though the Pursuer should enter Heir to Annandale, he might annul these Rights,
just as in the Case of an Heir of an Interdicted Person, who may annul all
Rights by his Predecessors after the Interdiction. The Defenders answered, that
as to this Point concerning the Interdiction, it cannot be effectual; because
by a particular Act of Parliament, all Interdictions are appointed to be
published, and to be Registrat in the Registers of Inhibitions, otherways they
are null: This Interdiction is neither published nor Registrat in that
Register. The Pursuer answered, it is als public, because it is not only in
his Infeftment, at the great Seal, but it is verbatum in the first Seasine, and
repeated in the Earl of Annandales Retour and Seasine, so as that the Creditors
ought to have considered his condition when they lent him Money, and known that
he was Infeft, otherwise their mistake, though it might be alleged to be bona
fidae; yet if Annandale hade never been Infeft, their bona fides would have
wrought nothing, seeing therefore they did it on their peril, unless they knew
he was Infeft, and they could not know he was Infeft by inspection of his
Seasine, or of the Register, but they behoved to know this Clause, which is
verbatum in it.

The Lords did also Repel this Defense and Duply, in respect of the Reply and
Triply, and found the resolutive Clause effectual against singular Successors,
especially considering it was so public and verbatim in the Seasine, and that
it was equivalent to an Interdiction.

Thirdly. The Defender further alleged absolvitor, because the pursuer had^
behaved himself as Heir to the Earl of Annandale, by Intromission with the
Mails and Duties of the same Lands.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, because the Pursuer having intented
Declarator against Annandale in his own life, they thought the provision was
equivalent to an Interdiction, which purged that passive Title.

Creditors of Kinglassie. February 27. 1662.
IN the Competition betwixt the Creditors of Kinglassie mentioned the former
Day, the Dispute anent the base Infeftment, made public by the poinding of the
Ground so long before the Term of payment, being reasoned before the Lords in
presentia, they sustained the same as before.

Marjory Chalmers contra William Dalgardno. Eodem die.
MArjory Chalmers pursues William Dalgardno as vicious Intromettor with a
Defuncts Goods, to pay his Debt, who alleged absolvitor, because the Rebel
died at the Horn, and so had no Goods. Secondly, The Defender has the gift of
his Escheat, and also is Executor Creditor Confirmed to him. Thirdly, The
Defender had a Disposition of all the Defuncts Goods, albeit he possessed not
thereby during his Life; yet he might Enter in possession, after his Death, and
not be vicious Intromettor.

The Lords found this Defense Relevant, to elide the passive Title, but
prejudice to either Party, to Dispute their Rights, as to the simple avail of
the Goods; and they Repelled the first Defense, and found the second and third
Defenses Relevant only, if the Gift was before the Intenting of this Cause

William Hamiltoun contra Mcfarlane of Kirktoun. February 28. 1662.
WIlliam Hamiltoun pursues James Mcfarlane of Kirktoun, as Successor titulo
lucr^^ivo to his Father, to pay his Debt, who alleged absolvitor, because he
was not alioqui successurus, in respect that at the time of the Disposition, he
had, and has an Elder Brother, who went out of the Country, and must be
presumed on life, unless the Pursuer will offer to prove that he was Dead
before this Disposition; so that at the time thereof, the Defender was not
appearand Heir and alioqui successurus, because vita presumitur. The Pursuer
answered, the Defense was not Relevant, unless the Defender would be positive,
that the time of the Disposition his Elder Brother was on life; especially
seeing he had been out of the Country twenty years, and was commonly holden and
repute to be Dead.

The Lords sustained the Defense, that the Elder Brother was on life the time
of the Disposition, and reserved to their own consideration the Probation, in
which if the Defender proved simply, that his Brother was actually living the
time of the Disposition, there would remain no question: and if he prove that
he was living about that time, they would consider, whether in this Case, the
presumption of his being yet living, should be probative.

Pa^rick Herron contra Martein Stevenson. June 17. 1662.
PAtrick Herron having obtained Decree of Removing against Martein Stevinson,
he Suspends on this Reason, that the Decree was not upon Litiscontestation;
but a time being Assigned to the Suspender, to find Caution for the violent
Profits, and he failing, was Decerned without being admitted to any Defense;
and now alleadges, that he ought not to remove, because he obtained Decree of
Adjudication of the Lands in question, against the common Author, and thereupon
charged the Superior long before the Chargers Decree of Adjudication or
Infetment. The Charger answered, that the Reason ought to be Repelled, because
the Decree was given against the Defender, compearing and failing as said is.
Secondly, The Charger stands Infeft upon his Adjudication. The Pursuer was
never Infeft, neither did he use all Diligence to get himself Infeft, not
having Denunced the Superior, and in case he had Suspended, Discussing the
Suspension.

The Lords found the Reason Relevant and Proven, and Suspended; because they
found no necessity for an Appryzer to use further Diligence against the
Superior, then the Charge of Horning, unless the Superior had Suspended both,
and that in competition the other Party had done greater Diligence.

Earl of Marischal contra Charles Bray. June 18. 1662.
THe Earl of Marischal having obtained Decree in his own Baron Court, against
Bray, compearing for a years Rent of his Maines of Dunnottor, herein he had
been possessed by the English, Bray Suspends, and alleadges compensation upon a
Bond assigned to him, due by the Charger, who answered competent and omitted,
and so not receivable in the second Instance; especially being Compensation,
which by special Act of Parliament, is not to be admitted in the second
Instance.

The Lords Sustained the Reason of Compensation, and found that a Baron Court
was not such a Judicature, as that Alleadgences competent and omitted, that
should be Repelled in the second Instance.

Mr. John Wallace contra Forbes June 19. 1662.
RObert and William Forbeses and Heugh Wallace, being bound in a Bond as
Co-principals, Heugh Wallace being Distressed for all, consigned the Sum to
this Chargers Son, Forbes Suspends on this Reason, that there is no Clause of
Relief in the Bond, and Wallace being Debtor in solidum, and having gotten
Assignation confusione tollitur obligatio. The Charger answered, that though
there was no Clauses of Relief, hoc i^est, where many Parties are bound
conjunctly and severally, that each is obliged to relieve others.

The Lords Repelled the Reason of Suspension for the Suspenders part, and found
them liable therefore, but not for the other Co-principal Parties.

Isobel Drummond contra Iean Skeen. Eodem die.
ISobel Drummond pursues Iean Skeen as behaving her self as Heir to her Brother
James Skeen, by uplifting the Mails of the Lands, wherein he Dyed Infeft, to
fulfill her Contract of Marriage with James. The Defender alleged absolvitor,
because the uplifted those Duties by virtue of her Infeftment, being Served
Heir to John Skeen, Son to James Skeen, the Pursuers Debtor, who was Infeft,
not as Heir to his Father James, but as Heir to her Good-sire. The Pursuer
answered, in respect to the Defenders Seasine, or to John Skeens, which were
evidently null, seeing James Skeen was Infeft, and so John could not pass over
him to his Goodsire; and if any regard were to such Infeftment, it would open a
Door to all Fraud, and abstracting of Defuncts Creditors Evidents.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant to purge this viticus passive Title,
seeing the f^^^zie was not in this Defender, but in John Skeen his Brother Son,
but prejudice to Reduce as accords, but ordained her to Renunce to be Heir to
James, that Adjudications might be obtained.

Mr. Alexander Vernor contra George Allan. June 24. 1662.
MR. Alexander Vernor as Executor to Mr. David Calderwood, Charges George
Allane, to pay a part of the Defuncts Stipend, as he who intrometted with the
Teinds of the Lands liable therefore, whereupon he had obtained Decree. The
Suspender alleged that the Decree was in absence, and any intromission he
had, was only as a Merchant having bought from Sir Alexander Auchmutty the
Heretor, to whom he made payment bona fida, before any Arrestment, or Pursuit
against him. The Charger answered non Relevat, because the Suspender is
obliged to know, that by Law, the Teinds are liable for the Ministers Stipend.
Secondly, He offers him to prove that the Suspender did not make his Bargain
for so many Bolls of Victual; but that he took Disposition of the Corns ipsa
corpora, before they were drawn.

The Lords found the answer Relevant, to elide the Reason, and found the
Defender liable for the tenth part of the Corns he bought.

Robert Hay contra Hoom of Blackburn. Eodem die.
RObert Hay Tailzior pursues Hoom of Blackburn, as representing his Father upon
all the passive Titles, to pay a Debt of his Fathers. The Defender alleged
absolvitor, because there was nothing produced to instruct the Debt, but an
Extract out of the Register, bearing the Bond to have been Registrated by his
Fathers consent, whereas it is nottour and acknowledged by the Summons, that
his Father was Dead long before the Date of the Registration. The Pursuer
answered, the Extract is sufficient to instruct the verity of the Bond, being
in a public Register of the Session; alb it the Defunct was Dead the time of
the Registration, which might have been the Creditors mistake, and cannot
prejudge them, seeing vitapresumitur, especially now, when through the loss of
the Registers, principal Writs cannot be gotten. The Defender opponed his
Defense, and the Decisions of the Lords, lately in the like case concerning the
Earl of Errol, because nothing can instruct against any man, but either a Writ
Subscribed by him, or the Sentence of a Judge upon Citation or consent, and
this is neither.

The Lords refused the Extract simply, but ordained the Pursuer to condescend
upon Adminicles for instructing thereof, either by Writ or Witnesses, who saw
the Bond, etc.

of Woodhead contra Barbara Nairn. Eodem die.
WOodhead pursues Barbara Nairn, for the Mails and Duties of certain Lands. The
Pursuer alleged absolvitor, because she Defender stands Infeft in Liferent of
these Lands. It was Replied, The Defenders Husband Disponed these Lands to the
Pursuer with her consent, Subscribing the Disposition. It was Duplyed, The
Defenders Subscription and Consent was Extorted, metus causa, whereupon she has
Action of Reduction depending, and holds the production satisfied with the
Writs produced, and repeates her Reason by way of Duply, viz. if she was
compelled by her Husband it was by just fear; because she offered to prove by
Witnesses, that he threatened her to consent, or else he should do her a
mischief, and that he was a fierce man, and had many times beaten her, and shut
her out of Doors, and offered to prove by the Nortar and Witnesses Insert, that
at the time of the Subscription, she declared her unwillingness.

The Lords found the Defense and Duply Relevant.

David Wilkie contra Sir Andrew Ker. Eodem die.
DAvid Wilkie and others, Tacks-men of the Castoms, Charged Sir Andrew Ker for
the Tack-Duty of the Customs of the Border, Anno 1650. Set by them to him, he
Suspends, and alleadges by the public Calamity of the English Entry, in Anno
1650. in July, Traffic was hindered, and by the Kings Proclamation, against
Commerce with these. The Charger answered, it was a Casuallity ex natura rei,
and that they had paid without Defalcation, and the Suspender had profit in
former years.

The Lords before answer Ordained the Suspender to Count upon what benefit he
got in Anno 1650. and what Profit above the Tack-duty in former years.

Adamsons contra Lord Balmerino. June 26. 1662.
ADamsons being Infeft in an old Annualrent out of two Tenements in Leith, and
having thereupon obtained Decree of Poynding the Ground in Anno 1661. and
insisting for poinding one of the Tennents Goods, now belonging to the Lord
Balmerino, for the whole Annualrent; Balmerino Suspends on these Reasons;
First, The Heretor against whom the Decree of poinding was obtained, and all
the Tennents were Dead; and therefore it can receive no summar Execution,
against the present Heretor and his Tennents, but there must be a new Decree
against them. Secondly, Balmerino has peaceably possessed this Tenement twenty
or thirty years, and thereby has the Benefit of a possessory Judgment, by
which his Infeftment cannot be questioned without Reduction and Declarator.
Thirdly, The Englishes possessed this Tenement several years by the public
Calamity of War; and therefore there must be Deduction of these years
Annualrents, as is frequently done in Feu-duties. Fourthly, The two Tenements
being now in the hands of different singular Successors, Balmerino's Tenement
can only be poinded for a part of the Annualrent. The Pursuer answered, that
Poinding of the ground is actorialis, chiefly against the Ground; and therefore
during the Obtainers Life, it is valued not only against the ground, while it
belonged to these Heretors and Possessors, but against the same in whosoever
hands it be, that the Moveable Goods therein, or the Ground Right thereof may
be Apprized. To the second, Annualrents are debita fundi, and a Possessory
Judgment takes neither place for them, nor against them. To the third, though
in some cases Feu-duties ceass by Devestation, that was never extended to
Annualrents, due for the profit of a Stock of Money. To the fourth, the
Annualrent being out of two Tenements promiscuously. The Annualrenter may
Distress any part for the whole, in whosoever hands the Tenement may be.

The Lords Repelled all these Defenses, but superceded Execution for one half
of the Annualrent for a time, and Ordained the Suspender to give Commission to
Balmerino to put the Decree in Execution against the other Tenements for its
proportion, for his relief, medio tempore.

Wilson contra Thomson. Eodem die.
WIlson having obtained Decree against Thomson, for poinding of the Ground of
a Tenement of Land, Thomson Suspends on this Reason, that the Chargers
Infeftment is base, and before it was cled with Possession, the Suspender was
publicly Infeft, and thereby excludes the base Infeftment though prior. The
Charger answered, that the Reason ought to be repelled, because he had used
Citation upon the base Infeftment, before the public Infeftment, by which
Citation, res fuit letigiosa.

The Lords Repelled the Reason in respect of the Answer, and found the base
Infeftment validat by the Citation, whereupon the Decree followed.

Ruthven contra Lord of Gairn. June 27. 1662.
THe Lord of Gairn having Infeft his Son in his Estate, reserving his own
Liferent; after his Sons Death, his Oye pursues him for an Aliment out of the
Estate, conform to the Act of Parliament, appointing the Heir to be Entertained
by the Donatars to the Ward, Conjunct-feears, or Liferenters thereof. The
Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Act of Parliament cannot be extended
to his case, who voluntarly Infeft his Son in his Estate, with the burden of
his Liferent. Secondly, If any Aliment were due, the Mother who is Liferenter
must bear her part. Thirdly, Aliment is only due where the Heir has no other
means; But here the Heir has a Stock of Money, which though Liferented by his
Mother, yet he may Entertain himself out of the Stock. The Pursuer answered:
First, That the Act of Parliament anent Alimenting of Heirs, is generally
against Liferenters without exception. Secondly, The Disposition by the
Defender to the Son, was for a Tocher worth all the Estate he then had;
wherefore no part was Liferented by the Son, or his Wife, the Pursuers Mother,
but only a sum of Money which came by her self, and there is no reason that the
Stock thereof should be exhausted for the Pursuers Aliment, the Defender having
now succeeded to a plentiful Estate.

The Lords Repelled the Defense in respect of the Replies.

Mr. David Watson contra Mr. James Ellies. Eodem die.
MR. David Watson having acquired Right to the Superiority of Stenhouse milne,
pursues the Fevers, for their Feu-duties, who allege, First, no Process, the
Lands in Question, being Kirk-lands, Disponed to a Lord of Erection; and it is
declared, that the Lords of Erection, having only right to the Feu-duty, till
they be Redeemed by the KING, at ten Years purchase, by the Act of Parliament
thereanent, in Anno 1633. And thereby none have Right, but such as subscribed
the submission, surrendering their Interest in the KING'S hands, until the
Pursuer Instruct, that his Author did subscribe the said submission, he has no
Interest. Secondly, absolvitor, from the Feu-duties, 1650. and 1651. Because
the Lands were wasted these Years, by publik calamity of War. Thirdly,
absolvitor from Harrage and Carrage; because all Services are reserved to the
KING, by the said Act of Parliament.

The Lords assoilzied from Harrage and Carrage, but differed for the Feu-duty,
being small, and found no necessity for the Pursuer to instruct, that this
Author did subscribe the Surrender, after so long time, but that the same was
presumed for his so long bruiking the Fee.

Sir William Wilson contra Sir William Murray. Eodem die.
WIlson having Apprysed Sir William Murrays Estate, pursues him and his
Tenants, for Mails and Duties, who alleged, that by the Act of Parliament
1661. anent Debtor and Creditor, the Lords are empowered to restrict Apprysers,
to a part of their Lands Apprysed, sufficient for the Annualrent, and to leave
the rest to the Debtor.

The Lords did accordingly restrict, but give the Appryser his option of any of
the Apprysed Lands, (except the Debitors House and Mains) paying eight per
cent. effeiring to the Sum Apprysed for; the Appryser being comptable for the
superplus above the Annualrent, and public burdens^

Dame Margret Hay contra George Seaton of Barnes. June 28. 1662.
UMquhile Sir John Seatoun of Barnes, having provided George Seaton his son, by
his Contract of Marriage, to his lands of Barnes, some diferences rose amongst
them, upon the fulfilling of some Conditions in the Contract, for settling
thereof, there was a minute extended by a Decree of the Judges, in Anno 1658.
by which the said Dame Margaret Hay, second Wife to the said Sir John, was
provided to an hundred pound sterling in Liferent, and it was provided, that
Sir John might burden the Estate with ten thousand merks to any Person he
pleased, to which George his Son did consent, and oblidged himself, to be a
principal Disponer, Sir John assigned that Clause, and destinat that Provision,
for Hendrie Seaton his Son, in Fee, and for the said Dame Margaret Hay in
Liferent, whereupon she obtained Decree before the Lords, the last Session,
George suspends the Decree, and raises Reduction, on this Reason^ that the
foresaid Clause, gave only power to Sir John, to burden the Estate with a
10000. merks, in which case George was to Consent, and Dispone, which can only
be understood of a valid Legal and Effectual burden thereof, but this
Assignation is no such burden, because it is done in lecto egreditudinis, and
so cannot prejudge George, who is Heir, at least appearand Heir to his Father.
The Charger answered, that the Reason was no way relevant. First, because this
Provision was in favors of the Defuncts Wife, and Children, and so is not a
voluntar Deed, but an Implement of the natural obligation of providing these.
2dly. This Provision, as to the Substance of it, is made in the Minute, and
extended Contract in the Fathers health; and there is nothing done on
Deathbed, but the Designation of the Person, which is nothing else, then if a
Parent should in his life time give out Sums payable to his Bairns, leaving
their names blank, and should on Deathbed fill up their names. The Suspender
answered, that he opponed the Clause, not bearing de presenti, a burden of the
Land, but a Power to his Father to burden, neither having any mention of
Deathbed, or in articulo mortis, or at any time during his life, and though
the Dead, on Deathbed be in favors of Wife, and Children, it has never been
sustained by the Lords in no time, though some have thought it the most
favorable Case.

The Lords sustained the Provision, and Repelled the Reason of Reduction
assoilzied therefrom, and found the Letters Orderly proceeded.

Dorathie Gray contra Oswald. Eodem die.
UMquhile Mr John Oswald, having Married Dorathie Gray, in England, did at the
time of their Contract, grant an English Bond of a 1000 lib. Sterling to the
said Dorathies Mother, and on Wilson, ad opus and usum dictae Doratheae, the
Condition of which Obligation, is, that if Mr. John shall pay the said
entrusted Person, the Sum of 600 lib. Sterling, or shall secure the said
Dorathie in Lands, or Cattels, worth thesaid Sum of 600 lib. in in his life
time, or be his Testament. Then he shall be free of the 1000 lib. Mr. John
granted Assignation to the said Dorathie of 5500 merk due to him by the Earl of
Lauderdale, bearing expressly the same to be for Implement of the Bond, and
Assigning, both principal Sum, and Annualrent, Dorathie confirmed her self
Executrix to her husband, gives up this Bond, and obtains Decree against
Lauderdale; who calls Dorathie on the one part, and the appearand Heir, and
Creditor, of the said Mr. John on the other part. It was alleged, for the
appearand Heir, and Creditors, that they ought to be preferred to the Stock of
the Sum, because the Clause, ad opus and usum, could only be understood to be
for Dorathies Liferent use, and not in Fee, and as for the Assignation, it was
on Deathbed, and so could operat nothing in their prejudice. It was; answered,
for the said Dorathie, that she opponned the Clause. The meaning thereof was no
other, but that her Mother and Wilson, were Creditors in trust to the use, and
behove of her, and could not be a Liferent Right, because it was provided to
her, her Heirs, Executors, and Assigneys; and as to the Assignation, though on
Deathbed, yet it may very well be used, as an Adminacle, to clear the meaning
of the Parties.

The Lords found the Clause to carry the Stock of the Money, and preferred
Dorathie, and it being thereafter offered to be proven, that by the Custom of
England, such Clauses signify only the Liferent use. The Lords repelled the
alleadgance; in respect of the Clause, being provided to Dorathies Heirs and
Assignies, and in respect of the clearing meaning thereof by the Testament,
would not delay, the Process, upon the proving the Custom of England, the
matter being clear in the contrair.

William Baillie contra Margaret Henderson and Ianet Iameson. July 1. 1662.
BY Minute of Contract, betwixt Umquhile Iameson, and Baillie, Baillie oblidged
himself to Infeft Iameson in a Tenement, for which Iameson oblidged himself to
pay three thousand merks of price, Iameson being dead, without any further
progress upon the Minute. Baillie pursues the said Margaret Henderson, as
Executrix to him, and the said Ianet Iameson, as Heir to pay him the price. It
was alleged, for the Executor, absolvitor, because, the bargain being
incomplete, the Heir must perfect it, and dispone the Tenement, and so can only
be liable for the price; for by the performance of mutual Minute, the Heir will
only get the Land, and therefore the Executor should not be liable for the
price, or at least if the Executrix be decerned to pay the price; The Pursuer
must dispone to her the third part of the Tenement in Fee, and the two part to
the Heir, she being the only Child, and having Right to the two third parts of
the Movables, which Movables being exhausted, by the Price of the Tenement;
the Tenement ought to come in place of the price. The Pursuer answered, that he
could dispone no otherwise, then according to the Minute, but the Executrix
might betake her recourse against the Heir, as she pleased, but both as
representing the Defunct, were liable to him.

The Lords decerned the Executrix to make payment, and would not bring the
Debtor, betwixt the Heir and her in this Process, for the third of the
Tenement, or for her Terce thereof, but reserved the same, as accords.

Breidy contra Breidy and Muire. Eodem die.
A Contract of Marriage was sustained, both against Principal and Cautioner,
albeit subscribed, but by one Nottar, and by one subscribing Witness, there
being more Witnesses insert, in respect, that Marriage followed thereupon.

Lord Couper. contra Lord Pitsligo. July 3 1662.
THE Lord Couper alleging, That being sitting in Parliament, and taking out
his Watch, to see what hours it was; he gave it to my Lord Pitsligo in his
hand, and that he refuses to restore it; therefore craves to be restored, and
that he may have the Value of it, pretio affectionis, by his own Oath. The
Defender alleged absolvitor, because the lybell is not relevant, not
condescending, quo modo, the Defender is oblidged to restore, for if the
Pursuer insist upon his Real Right of the Watch, as proprietar, the Lybel is
not relevant; because he subsumes not that the Defender is possessor, or haver
of the Watch, at the time of the Citation, or since, or at least dolo desijt
poisidere; or if the Pursuer insist upon a personal obligation, he ought to
subsume, that the Defender borrowed the Watch, or ^ook the custody thereof, and
thereby is Personally oblidged to keep and restore. Secondly, albeit the Lybel
were relevant, absolvitor, because the Defender offers him to prove, that the
Pursuer having put his Watch in his hand, as he conceives, to see what hours it
was. The Defender, according to the Ordinar Civillity, they being both sitting
in Parliament. The Lord Sinclar putting forth his hand, for a sight of the
Watch; The Defender did, in the Pursuers presence, put it in his hand, without
the Pursuers opposition, or contradiction, which must necessarily import his
consent, and liberat the Defender. The Pursuer answered, that he did now
condescend, that he lent his Watch to the Defender, and that there was betwixt
them, Contractus commodati, because the Defender having put forth his hand,
signifying his desire to call for the Watch. The Pursuer put the same in his
hand, and though there was no words, yet this Contract may be celebrat, by
intervention of any sign of the Parties meaning, which here could be no other
then that which is Ordinar, to lend the Defender the Watch, to see what hours
it was, which imports the Defenders oblidgment to restore the same. To the
second Defense, non relevat, because the Defenders giving of the Watch to the
Lord Sinclar, was so subit an Act, that the Pursuer could not prohibit,
specially they being sitting in Parliament in the time: and therefore in that
Case his silence cannot import a Consent,

The Lords sustained the Lybel, and repelled the Defense, but would not suffer
the price of the Watch to be proven by the Pursuers Oath, but pro ut de jure

Agnes Peacock contra Matthew Baillie. Eodem die.
AGnes Peacock, as Executrix to her Husband, having pursued Matthew Baillie, for
payment of a Sum of Money; he offered to prove payment, and at the Term
produced a Discharge, whereupon the Pursuer took Instruments of the Production,
and offered to improve the same; and craved that the Defender might be Ordained
to Compear Personally, and bide by the same, and a Term being Assigned for that
effect; and the Pursuer Ordained to consigne a Pand, in case she secumb, in the
Improbation; and an Act Extracted thereupon. The Defender coming from the
Country, and appearing Personally. The Pursuer alleged, the Discharge is
null, wanting Witnesses. The Defender alleged non Competit in this state of
the Process, after the exception of Falsehood, quae est exceptoinum ultima; but
if the Defender had alleged the same at the production. The Defender would
have replied, that it was Holographon, and excluded any Improbation.

The Lords found the Exception of nullitie not competent in this state of the
Process.

Allison Kello contra Paxtoun. Eodem die.
IN a Process betwixt these Parties, an exception having been proponed. The
Lords before answer, Ordained the Proponer to produce the Writs, with
certification, that the Defense should be holden as not proponed, in termino
certificatione, being craved, an Incident was produced, because the Writs were
the Proponders Authors Writs, and in their hands. It was answered, that the
Incident was not competent, there being no litiscontestation It was answered,
that it was most competent, wherever there was a certification, as in Acts in
Reduction, and Improbation.

The Lords found the meaning of such Acts, and Certifications to be only, that
the Parties should produce their own Writs, they would make use of, and such of
their Authors Writs, as they had the time of the Act, and that the other Party
might have their Oath thereupon, if they pleased, and therefore refused the
Incident.

Rentoun of Lambertoun contra Earl of Levin. Eodem die.
LAmbertoun having intented an Improbation of Lands, alleged, subscribed by
his Father in Favors of the Umquhile Countess of Levin, and her Daughters, and
others: and having proceeded to the indirect manner Articles of Probation, and
Improbation were given in Writ hinc inde, and a full Dispute thereupon, and all
such Witnesses examined, as either Party craved. The Lords having Perused, and
Read the whole Process, did, upon the Defenders desire, allow them to be heard
viva voce, and both Parties compearing. The Pursuer referred the Dispute to the
Lords, without saying any further. And the Defenders having related the Case,
and Debated in General, anent the taking away of Writs, by Presumptions and
Conjectures, and having entered to Repeat all that was in the written Dispute,
and to answer every alleadgance.

The Lords declared, that it was not their meaning, that the Dispute should be
repeated, but the material, and weighty points, which the Defender thought of
most importance, to have been resumed, and urged shortly; Referring to the rest
the Lords.

Therefore, they Ordained the Defenders, to order their alleadgences, as they
might, for all that they had to say betwixt ten and twelve, the nixt day,
without any further, unless the Pursuer answered.

Thomson contra Mackitrick. Eodem die.
THomson and Mackitrick having Apprysed some Tenements in Drumfriese,
Mackitrick the first Appryser insists for Mails and Duties. Thomson alleged,
Mackitrick's Seasin was null, as being within Burgh Royal, and not given by the
Baillies, and Town Clerk of the Burgh, conform to the Act of Parliament. The
Pursuer answered, that his Seasin was given by the Provost, and by a Nottar,
whom he employed as Town Clerk; not only in that, but in several other Acts:
and that because the Town Clerk was excluded from his Office, for not taking of
the Tender; and upon the same account there was no Baillie; so that to complete
this Legal Diligence, he was necessitat to take Infeftment by the Provost,
which is sufficient in such Cases; because, though the Act of Parliament
mention the Baillies of the Burgh, that it is in opposition to Baillies in that
part, but cannot be understood in opposition to the Provost, who has Major^m
Iurisdictionem, quia majori inest minus, and offers them to prove, that he was
Provost, at least habitus and reputatus Provost and that he did employ his
Nottar, as Town Clerk for the time.

The Lords sustained the alleadgeance to prefer Mackitrick.

The Executors Mr. James Fairly Minister of Leswald. contra the Parochiners.
July 5. 1662.
THE Executors of Mr. James Fairly, having obtained Decree, before the
Comissaries, against the Parochiners, for the Ann, as being the hail Year,
1658. In respect the Minister died in February, in the Year 1658. The Decree
was Suspended, on this Reason, that the Ann could only be half a Year; seeing
the Minister died before the Sowing of the Cropped, or Whitsonday; because, if a
Minister serve after Whitsonday, he has the half of that years Stipend, albeit
he be Transported, or Deposed; otherwise, if a Minister should serve the whole
Year till Michalmass day, and then be Transported, or Deposed, he should get
nothing; so that the Ann being half a years Stipend, more then the Minister
served for, he having only survived till Michalmes 1657. Has only the right to
the Michalmes proprio jurae, and half a Year thereafter, as the Ann. The
Charger answered, That in Teinds and Stipends, there are not two Terms, but
Michalmes for all, and therefore, if the Incumbent be disposed or transported
before Michalmes, he has nothing that Year, but if he die after Michalmes any
time before the beginning of the nixt Year proprio jure, he has the Year he
died in, and the half of the next, as his Ann, but if he live till January in
the year ensuing, he has that whole year, as his Ann.

Which the Lords found relevant; and therefore the Lords found the Letters
orderly proceeded.

Duncan Drummond contra Colline Campbel. Eodem die.
DVncan Drummond pursues Colline Campbel, for payment of a Debt of his Fathers,
because in a Writ betwixt his Father and him. The Father had Disponed all his
movables to him, and he had undertaken his Fathers Debt, whereby the Pursuer,
as Creditor, had interest to pursue him, to pay this Debt. The Defender having
alleged, that the Band and Disposition was never a delivered Evident, either
to the Father or to the Son; but two blanks subscribed by them, both were put
in the hands of a Nottar; to fill up the Bond and Disposition; but before
delivery, both Parties resyled, and desired the Nottar to Cancel and Destroy
them, yet Eight or Nine Years after the Nottar gave them up to this Pursuer;
and neither to the Father nor to the Son, and the Question being how this
should be proven.

The Lords before answer Ordained the Nottar, and Witnesses insert to be
examined ex Officio, which being done their Testimonies proved, as is alleged
before. Then the Question was in jure, whether the Depositation of Writs could
be proven any other way, then by the Oath of the Party in whose favors the
Writs were conceived, he having the same in his hands.

The Lords found, that seeing these two Writs were not produced by the Father,
nor the Son, by and to whom they were mutually granted, but by a third Party,
in whose favors a Clause therein was conceived, in that case, the deposition
probable by the Writer and Witnesses insert, and by the said Testimonies found
the Writs null.

Robert Bones. contra Barclay of Iohnstoun. July 9. 1662.
RObert Bones having arrested certain Goods, and Bestial, as belonging to John
Wood, his Debtor, in the hands of Barclay; pursues for making the same
forthcoming. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Goods Lybelled the
time of the Arrestment, were the Defender proper Goods, Disponed to him, by the
said John Wood, for anterior Rests and Debts, and delivered also before the
Arrestment. It was Replied, The Defense ought to be repelled; because Wood the
Disponer was Rebel, and at the Horn, before the delivery of the Goods, at the
Pursuers instance, and whereby the Tradition being after the Horning, the
Disposition is null, as being incomplete before the Horning, and after the
Horning the Rebel could do nothing to prejudge the KING, or his Donatar, or the
Pursuer, for the Debt, whereupon he was denuded, which by the Act of Parliament
one thousand six hundred twenty one, affects the Escheat Goods ubicunque. The
Defender answered, That the Reply is not Relevant, unless it were alleged,
that the Horning had been before the Disposition; for it is lawful for
Creditors, either to Poynd, Arrest or take Dispositions of their Debitors Goods
though Rebel, being for Debts anterior to the Horning, if the Disposition and
Delivery be prior to Declarator, neither can the Act of Parliament, one
thousand six hundred twenty one, against Dispositions, in defraud of Creditors
operat here; because the Disposition is anterior to the Horning, and for an
onerous cause.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, notwithstanding the Reply.

Lord of Lamertoun contra Hume of Kaimes. July 10. 1662.
HOom of Kaimes being Infeft upon an Appryzing of the Lands of Northfield, led
against Lamertoun, pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties, and obtains
Decree, which was Suspended, and Reduction thereof raised on this Reason, that
it was spreta authoritate judicis, there being an Advocation judicially
produced, before the Sheriff, before pronouncing, at least before the
Extracting of this Decree, in so far as the Suspender came to the Sheriff
Court, at the ordinar time of the Court Day, at eleven hours, and produced the
Advocation, but the Sheriff had fitten down that Day contrair his Custom, at
ten hours, and had pronounced the Decree before eleven hours. The Charger
answered non Relevat, that the Advocation was produced before Extract, not
being before Sentence pronounced, because albeit inferior Judges are
accustomed sometimes to stop their own Decreets, after they are pronounced,
before Extracting, yet sententia definitiva, est ultimus actus judicis, and the
Extract is but the Clerks part, so that it can be no contempt, albeit the Judge
would not prohibit the Extract, and as to the^ other Member, that the Sheriff
sat his Court an hour before the ordinar time, non Relevat, unless he did it of
purpose, to anticipat this Advocation.

The Lord found the first member, of the Reason, that the Advocation was
produced before Extract, after Sentence, non Relevat; and as to the other
member, they found it relevant, as it is circumstantiat, to infer that it was
done of purpose to anticipat the Advocation, without necessity to prove,
otherwise the purpose, and in that case declared, if the same were proven,
they would turn the Decree in a Libel.

John Ker contra Ker of Fernilee and others. Eodem die.
John Ker having granted a Bond, whereupon he being Charged to Enter Heir to
several persons his Predecessors, and having renounced, their Lands were
adjudged, John took Assignation to the Adjudication himself, and pursues the
Defenders for exhibition of the Rights and Evidents of the Lands, and Delivery
thereof. The Defender alleged absolvitor: First, Because the pursuit being
upon the Pursuers own Bond, now again Assigned to himself, confusione tollitur
obligatio.

The Lords Repelled this Defense.

Secondly, absolvitor, because the Pursuer can have no Interest upon these
Rights proceeding against him, as appearand Heir to these predecessors, and now
assigned to him, because there were other appearand Heirs, specially
condescended on, nearer of Blood. The Pursuer answered, non Relevat, to take
away his Infeftment, which behoved to be Reduced. Secondly, Non competit to the
Defenders, unless these nearer appearand Heirs, were compearing for their
Interest. The Defender Replied, that the Infeftments having obtained no
Possession, and having proceeded only upon a Charge to Enter Heir, against the
Pursuer, by Collusion: It was competent by Exception, seeing there was no
Service, nor Possession, nor any thing done that the nearer Heirs were oblidged
to know, and it was also competent to the Defenders, not to deliver the Writs
to any having no Right thereto, they being liable to deliver them to the
nearest Heir of the true owner.

The Lords Repelled this Defense against the Exhibition, reserving it to the
Delivery, in which they found it competent to the nearer appearing Heirs,
without Reduction.

Rentoun of Lamertoun contra Earl of Levin and Alexander Kennedy. July 11. 1662.
JOhn Rentoun of Lamertoun, as Heir to his Father, having charged the Deceast
Earl of Levin, for the Sum of due by him to umquhil Lamertoun: The Earl
suspended upon Compensation, by six Bonds granted by umquhil Lamertoun, to the
umquhil Countess of Levin, four of them to her self; and after her Decease to
her Daughters, and two of them blank, in the Creditors name, which being done
stante Matrimonio, by this Lady, did belong to her Husband jure mariti, and not
to her or his Daughters. These Bonds were produced out of the hands of
Alexander Kennedy, sometime Master Porter of the Castle of Edinburgh, who
declared that he had the foresaid six Bonds in Trust from the umquhil Countess,
and the Lord of Lamertoun, in Anno 1649. Levin being then Captain of the
Castle of Edinburgh, Lambertoun Constable, and the said Alexander, Porter, and
produced a Paper of Trust, subscribed by Lambertoun and my Lady, bearing, that
the Bonds were put in Alexander 's hands, as a faithful Person, whom both
Trusted, to be kept till after the Ladies Death, and then delivered,
according to her direction: against which Writes, Lambertoun raised
Improbation, and Alexander Kennedy abode by the same, and the Earl of Levin
declared, he made use of them upon the ground foresaid, in his Improbation; The
six Bonds being written by Alexander Kennedy and James Rule who is dead, and
the Witnesses being George Watson, Spittel and Young, and in some of them
Alexander himself, all being dead but Alexander the Producer; the direct manner
of Improbation thereof ceased; and therefore they proceed to the indirect
manner, and give in many Articles of Improbation, and the Earls Articles of
Probation. The Relevancy of which being Dispute, to quadruplyes in Write, and
all Persons that either Parties desired, being examined hinc inde, and their
Testimonies published to either Party, and they having thereupon Dispute, both
as to the Relevancy and Probation, in Write, and being heard at last viva voce.

The Lords proceeded to Advise the Cause.

The weight of the whole matter lay in these Particulars mainly; First, For
astriction of the Writs; the said Paper of Trust holding in it, two living
Witnesses and one dead, being true, the Bonds related therein could not be
false. This Paper could not be Improven indirectly, because the direct manner
was competent by two living Witnesses, whereof the one Deponed, that the
Subscription was like his Subscription, as he Subscribed at that time, being
young, and the third Witness being dead, proves. It was answered, that the
Witnesses insert, proved not; because comparatione literarum, Crawford the
Defunct's Subscription, was altogether unlike his true Subscription produced;
Learmont says his Subscription was only like his: and though Kill says it was
his Subscription, yet none of them Depones to have seen it Subscribed by any
Body, or by any Witness, nor to know any thing of the time, place, or truth of
the matter contained in the Writs, being but an Evidence to keep the Witnesses
in remembrance, either of the Matter or of the Subscription, of the Principal
or themselves, albeit they need not be proven here as in England, by the
Witnesses insert: Yet in the case of Improbation, if the Witnesses prove
nothing of the Fact or Subscription, as remembering that they or the Party
Subscribed, but only Deponing that it is their Subscription, which can import
no more of certain knowledge, then that it is like their Subscription, seeing
none can swear that it may not be feigned so like that they cannot know it: and
albeit that would be sufficient, where nothing is in the contrair; Yet where
there is strong presumption in the contrair, as the Writ not being in the
Parties hands, but in the hand of a third Party, malae famae, and who has at
least betrayed his Trust, never having made these Bonds known, till six or
seven years after the Countess of Levins Death; and then offering to sell some
of them to others, and with all the Paper of Trust, the Body thereof being
written with one hand, and the filling up of the Witnesses with another, which
no body has, or can condescend upon, nor are Designed therein; so the same
being null by Act of Parliament, cannot sufficiently astruct the truth of the
other Bonds, being in themselves suspect.

The Lords found the Paper of Trust not sufficiently to astruct, nor the
Testimonies not to prove it sufficient, in respect of the grounds foresaid
being instructed, and the many presumptions against these Writs. Therefore they
improved the said pretended Paper of Trust.

There was further produced for astructing the Bonds, two Holographs alleged,
Written and Subscribed by Lamertouns owns hand, relative to the Bonds and
Trust; and for proving these were Holograph, they produced a Holograph Account
Book of Lambertouns, and six Witnesses, of whom three or four were without
exception, and the whole Deponed that they truly believed that the Holographs
were Lamertouns hand, and Lambertoun and the Lady Levins Subscriptions. The
question then was, whether these Papers were so proven to be Holograph, that
they did sufficiently astrict the Bonds, notwithstanding all the grounds
instructed against them.

The Lords found Negative, upon this consideration, that when the Probation of
Holograph is by Witness, who saw the Holograph Writ, Written and Subscribed,
albeit they be not instruct, it is a full probation, admitting no contrary
probation, but when it is only comparatione literarum; or by Witnesses,
Deponing that they believe, or that positively it is the hand writ of the
Party, that can import no more, but that it is so like, that it is undecernable
for no man who saw it not written, can positively swear with knowledge, that it
is impossible to fenzie the hand so like, that it is undecernable, and
therefore holograph so proven, admits a stronger contrary Probation; and
therefore the Lords found that the Evidents against the Bonds were stronger nor
this Probation of holograph.

There was also produced three Contracts betwixt umquhil Lambertoun and Kennedy
at Striveling, upon the ninth of August 1651. by the last of them, Kennedy was
obliged to deliver Lambertoun the Bonds for such several Sums, he obtaining
the Lady Levins consent, of all these the Writer and Witnesses were dead, and
the Date proven to be false.

In this Process the Lords having considered all the indirect Articles of the
Improbation, in respect that these Writs in question were never in the
alleged Creditors hands; and that there was not one Witness that did Depone,
that either they remembered to have Subscribed any of these Writs themselves, or
that they saw either the Parties, or any other of the Witnesses Subscribe, or
any thing communed, done or acknowledged by either Party, contained in the
Writs, and that the Subscription of Watson, one of the Witnesses in all the
Bonds, was by comparison with other contraverse Writs, about the same time,
altogether unlike his Subscription, and that the Word Witnesses adjoined to the
Subscription, of all the VVitnesses, did appear to be so like, as written with
one hand.

They found sufficient ground to Improve the foresaids writs, besides many
pregnant presumptions from Kennedies inclination and carriage; which being
extrinsick were accounted of less value, and yet the astructions aforesaid, and
presumptions on that part were so strong, that several of the Lords were
unclear simply, to find the Bonds false, but not authentic probative writs.

William VVachope contra Lord of Niddrie. July 15. 1662.
THe said William VVachope pursues Niddrie his Brother, to pay him eleven
pound Sterling for many years, which he promised to pay him by a missive Letter
produced, bearing, a Postscript of that nature. The Defender alleged
absolvitor; First, because the Postscript is not Subscribed, and so no
sufficient Instrument to prove. Secondly, there is no ground for eleven pound
Sterling yearly therein, because the words are, I have sent you five pound ten
shillings Sterling now, and I have sent you five pound ten shillings Sterling
at VVhitsonday, and you shall have as much as long as you live, if you carry
your self as ye do now; which words, as long as ye live, cannot be understood
Termly but yearly, nor can relate to both the five pound ten shillings
Sterling, but only the last, to which is adjected Donations, being of strick
Interpretations. Thirdly, The words foresaid cannot import a Promise, but only
a Declaration of the Defenders resolution to continue the same free kindness to
his Brother; which resolution he may recall at any time. Fourthly, The Promise
is conditional, quamdiu se been gesserit; wherefore the Defender can be the
only Interpreter; and declares, that since his Brother has not carried himself
so well, the meaning of such words being only this, If so long as in my opinion
you carry your self so, and not according to the opinion of any other. The
Pursuer to the first Defense opponed the Letter which is holograph, and albeit
the Postscript be after the Subscription, yet seeing it can have no other
construction, then to be done as a part of the Letter, and not as other
unsubscribed Papers, whereanent it is presumed, the Writer changed his mind
and left them imperfect, and unsubscribed, which cannot be here, seeing the
Letter was sent. To the second, he opponed the terms of the Letter^ To the
third, alleged omne verbum de ore fideli cadit in debitum; and by these
words, can be understood nothing else, but a Promise, which is ordinarily made
in such terms.

The Lords found not the first Defense Relevant per se, but found the remnant
Defenses Relevant, and assoilzied.

William Swintoun contra July 18. 1662.
THe said William Swintoun having used Inhibition against at the Cross where
he lived, she falls Heir thereafter to another Person, and immediately Dispones
that Persons Lands, whereupon William raised Reduction of that Right, ex capite
inhibitionis. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Lands D^poned, ly
not within the Shire where the Inhibition was used: Therefore replied, the Land
fell to the Inhibit Person after the Inhibition; and the Pursuer did all he was
obliged to do, or could do till that time: which if it was not sufficient,
Creditors will be at a great loss, as to Lands acquired or succeeded in alter
Inhibitions.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, that the Inhibition could not extend to
Lands in other Shires, b^falling to the Inhibit after quocunque titulo; but
that the Pursuer ought to have Inhibit de novo, or published and Registrat in
that Shire, seeing all Parties count themselves secure, if no Inhibitions be
Registrat in the Shire where the Lands ly, without inquiring further.

Lord Frazer contra Lord of Phillorth. Eodem die.
THe Lord Frazer pursues Declarator of Property of the Barony of Cairnbuilg
against the Lord of Phillorth, as being Infeft as Heir to his Father, who was
Infeft as heir to his Grandfather, who was Infeft upon the Resignation of
Frazer of Doors; and also upon the Resignation of the Lord of Pitsligo, who
was Infeft upon an Appryzing led against Doors; and also as being Infeft upon
an Appryzing, at the instance of one Henderson, led against Doors, and declared
that he insisted primo loco, upon the two first Rights, flowing from Doors and
Pitsligo. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Defender in an
Improbation against the Pursuer and his Father, obtained Certification against
Doors Seasine; so that it being now improven, all the Rights Libelled on, falls
in consequentiam, because Doors is the common Author to them all: and if he had
no real Right, all their Rights are a non habente potestatem; so that now the
Pursuer has no more in his Person, but a Disposition made by Phillorth's
Grandfather to Doors, and a Charter following thereupon, and is in the same
case, as if Doors upon that ground were craving declarator of Property, which
he could not do, nor would the Lords sustain it, albeit there were no Defender;
because that can be no Right of Property, where there is no Seasine. The
Pursuer answered: 1. That the Defense is no ways Relevant, nor is the Pursuer
in the case of a Declarator, upon a Disposition or Charter without a Seasine,
because he produces a progress of Infeftments, and is not obliged hoc ordine,
to Dispute Doors his Authors Rights, as being a non habente potestatem, which
is only competent by way of Reduction; some representing Doors, his Author
being called. 2ly. The Defense is no way competent to this Defender, unless he
allege upon a better Right then the Pursuers; for the Pursuer has done all
that is requisite to instruct his Declarator, by production of his Infeftments,
and his authors Rights are presumed, and need not be instructed; and albeit the
Defender be called, yet he cannot quarrel the Pursuers Authors Right, or hinder
his Declarator, unless he allege upon a more valide Right in his own Person.
3ly. The Defense ought to be Repelled, as proponed by this Defender; because he
represents Frazer of Phillorth his Grandfather, who Disponed the Lands in
question to Doors, and was obliged to infeft him, and did de facto resign in
the Kings hands, in his favor, and so personally objection, umquhil Phillorth,
Doors Author would be for ever excluded from objecting against Doors Right,
which flowed from him; so neither can the Defender who represents him object
against the Pursuer, who is Successor in Door's Rights. The Defender answered,
that being called, albeit he had no Right in his Person, he might propone a
Defense upon a Nullity in the Pursuers Right, viz. that it is a non habente
potesta^m^ which is very competent here by exception. This Decla^ator ^eing
judicium petitorium, wherein he may well repeat this Defense, without necessity
to call Doors, because Doors being called in the Improbation, all Infeftments
in his Person are Improven for not production: and so the Reason is instantly
verified; and albeit he were Successor to his Grandfather; (which he denis)
yet he may well allege that any Right flowing from his Grandfather is
personal and incomplete, and can be no ground of Declarator of Property.

The Lords repelled the Defenses, and found it not competent to the Defender to
quarrel the Pursuers Authors Right, unless he had a better Right.

Skeen contra Lumsdean. July 19. 1662.
SKeen having Charged Alexander Lumsdean, upon a Bond granted by Mr. Thomas
Lumsdean as principal, and the said Alexander as Cautioner, he Suspends on this
Reason, that the cause of the Bond, was Bills of Exchange, drawn by Verhage
upon Kezar in Camphire, to be paid to Skeen, or his Order; which Bills Skeen
ordered to be paid to Mr. Thomas Lumsdean's Wife; and Mr. Thomas granted the
Bond charged on for the said Bills; which Bills were protested upon Kezar's
not paying of the Bills, as the Protest bears: To which protested Bills Mr.
Thomas Lumsdean assigned the Suspender, and whereupon he now alleadges that he
must have allowance of the Bills protested, being the cause of the Bond, and
therefore Skeen himself is liable for the Bills which must compence the
Charger. The Pursuer answered, that the Reason ought to be repelled, because he
offered him to prove, that albeit the bills were protested, for not payment, by
Kezar, on whom they were drawn; yet Mr. Thomas Lumsdean having gone back to
Verhage who drew them, Verhage paid Mr. Thomas, and that before the Intimation
of the Suspenders Assignation. 2ly. That Mr. Thomas Lumsdean being Factor in
Camphire, in his Factor Book, upon the 109. page thereof, there are four posts
of Payment paid by the said Verhage to Mr. Thomas Lumsdean, at diverse times,
conform to the Magistrates of Camphire their report, upon the Lords Commission,
bearing that the said Factors Count Book is Authentic and unvitiat; and that
Verhage who drew the Bills, and Kezar upon whom they were drawn, had both sworn
before them, that Verhage had paid the same to Lumsdean, so the question was
upon the manner of probation; whereanent the Suspender alleged, 1. That Count
Books not being subscribed, were not probative Writs, even against the Merchant
himself. 2ly. That at least they cannot prove against the Suspender his
Assigney. 3ly. That they could be no better then Holograph Discharges by the
Cedent, which cannot instruct their own Date against the Assigney, and so
cannot prove the same to have been before the Intimation, as for the
Testimonies of Verhage and Kezar, their Testimonies cannot take away Writs and
yet are suspected being both Debitors for the Bills, and that it was not
instructed who write the Book, whether Lumsdean himself, or his ordinar Book
Keeper.

The Lords found the Probation sufficient against the Assigney; the Charger
also proving that the Books were written by Lumsdean himself, or by his ^rdinar
Book-keeper, and thought that the Book proved against this Assigney, being Mr.
Thomas own Brother, and no suspicion he would wrong him; and there being four
several Posts of payment, in several Months, besides the Depositions of the
foresaids persons.

Fiddes contra Jack: July 19: 1662.
FIddes pursues Jack for payment of a Bond of 500. merks, which Jack
acknowledged to have received in custody form Fiddes, to be kept as his own;
Jack alleged that he had but the custody, and did conform to his Obligation,
he sent the Money to Dundee, in Anno 1650. where he lost both it and much more
of his own, at the plunder of Dundee. The Pursuer answered, no way granting
that his Money was lost at Dundee, yet it ought not to liberat the Defender;
because he oft-times required and desired the Defender to pay him his Money
before the plundring of Dundee, and seeing he did not then give it, it was lost
upon the Defenders hazard. The Defender answered, that any requisition was
made, was but verbal without Instrument, and that it was made to the Defender,
being in Edinburgh after this Money: and the Defenders whole means was sent to
Dundee for safety, and that at the time of any such desire, he show the Pursuer
so, and bid him send for it to Dundee, when he pleased he should have it.

The Lords before answer, having ordained Witnesses to be examined, hinc inde,
and having advised the same, found, that the Pursuer did desire his Money, and
at that same time the Defender told him it was at Dundee, and said he might
have it when the pleased to send for it; and Witnesses also proved that he was
at Dundee, and was in esteem as a man of good means then, and that he was there
a^the plunder of Dundee, and ever since was in a poor miserable condition; and
some of them deponed that he had a considerable sum of Money, far above this in
question there.

The Question was, whether this probation was sufficient to assoilzie, albeit
none of the Witnesses did particularly Depone, that they knew the Pursuers
Money to have been at Dundee, and lost there.

The Lords found that the probation was sufficient, the Pursuer giving his oath
in Supplement, that it was there, and lost there; for they considered, that at
the time of the Pursuers Requisition, the Witnesses proved, the Defender
declared it was there; and that ex natura rei, it was hard to prove
particularly, this Money being a Fungible, to have been lost there, but that it
behoved to be presumed so, seeing the man lost his whole means there, and has
been poor ever since.

Montgomery of contra Eodem die.
MR. William Wallace having obtained a Disposition of the Lands of Hagburn from
Thomas Hunter, he gave a Back-bond oblieging him to sell the same at the best
avail, and as a part of the price to pay a Bond of Provision to Thoma's Sisters
and Brother, granted by their Father, and having retained his own Sums, and
such as he was Cautioner for, was obliged to count for the rest; and being
first pursued before the Englishes, and now before the Lords, he was decerned
to take the Lands at sixteen years purchase, and a half, and to count
accordingly, It was alleged; he could not have allowance of the sums paid to
the Brother and Sister, because these could not exclude lawful Creditors. It
was answered for Mr. William, he had paid bona fide a part, and had given Bond
for the rest, and could not now be called in question. It was answered, he was
in mala fide, because the payment was made after intenting of the Reduction
against his Right, at the pursuers Authors Instance. Mr. William answered non
Relevat, unless there had been a Reason Libelled in that Reduction against
these Bonds. The Pursuer answered it was sufficient, that Reduction was used
against the whole Right, to which any Reason might be added.

The Lords found this alleadgence not Relevent to put Mr. William in mala fide,
unless there had been a special Reason of Reduction filled up, and shown to Mr.
William against these Bonds particularly.

Margaret Anderson and John Elphingstoun contra Mary Wachop. July 22. 1662.
MArgaret Anderson and John Elphingstoun, as heir to Anderson, who were the two
Daughters of umquhil Mr. David Anderson of Hills, pursues Mary Wachop his
Relict and Executrix, to fulfill an Article of his Contract of Marriage,
bearing, That if there were no Heirs-male of the Marriage, he band and obliged
him and his Heirs-male and Successors whatsomever, to pay to the Daughters of
the Marriage 3000. merks, and craved that the Executrix as representing their
Father, might pay the same. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because it is
clear by the Clausses of the Contract, that the Father did not bind himself
simply, or himself and his Heirs, but that he bound only himself and his
Heirs-male, which is the more clear that the Narrative of that Clause bears,
because his Estate is provided to his Heirs-male. The Pursuer answered, he
opponed the Clause, by which he did not only obliege his Heirs-male, but
himself and his Heirs-male; and so in oblieging himself, he has obliged all
that Represent him, and he might have been pursued in his own lifetime, if his
Daughters had come to the age appointed by the provision. 2ly. He has not only
obliged himself and his Heirs-male, but his Successors whatsomever, and
therefore his Executors.

The Lords found that by the Tenor of the Clause, and Narrative thereof, the
Defuncts meaning was chiefly to obliege his Heir-male, and albeit Successors
whatsomever was added; yet by the Narrative and the order of the Words, they
found the Heir-male was first burdened, and behoved first to be discussed.
Therefore ordained the Defender to condescend what the Heir-male had to succeed
to, and if he was not Entered Heir-male, and had nothing to succeed to as
Heir-male, they thought the Defender would be liable.

William Montgomery contra Theoder Montgomery. Eodem die.
WIlliam Montgomery as Donator to the Escheat of Theoder Montgomery^ pursues a
general and special Declarator in on Libel; and insists, first, in the general.
The Defender alleadges Absolvitor, because the Horning is null, the
Denunciation being at the Cross of Edinburgh where the Defender had not his
Domicile. The Pursuer opponed the Horning standing, bearing, the Defender to
dwell in Edinburgh, and the Horning could not be taken away by Exception,
alibi, not instantly veryfied.

The Lords Repelled the Defense but prejudice of Reduction thereupon.

Secondly, Absolvitor from the Rents and Duties of the Lands of Whyteslaid in
time coming, because these fell not under single Escheat. It was Replied, the
Defense ought to be Repelled, because the jus mariti, falls under single
Escheat of the Husband, and carrys with it per consequence the Liferent of the
Wife.

The Lords was clear that the Repl^ was Relevant; but the Defense not being
competent, in the general Declarator, which was first insisted in, they give no
Interlocutor on the Reply.

Lord Frazer contra Phillorth. July 23. 1662.
IN the Declarator of Property of the Barony of Cairnbulg, at the Instance of
the Lord Frazer, against the Lord of Phillorth. It was alleged for the
Defender Absolvitor, because the Pursuers Father and Grand fathers Infeftment
is upon the Resignation of Frazer of Doors, Ita est, Frazer of Doors had no
real Right in his Person, never having been Seized, at least there is
Certification granted against Doors Seasin, in the Improbation at the I^stance
of the Defender, against the Pursuer and his Father; so that Doors having no
real Right, his Disposition, Instrument of Resignation, and C^arter granted by
the King, flowing upon the Resignation of the Lord of Phillorth and the Lord
Lovit, who had Right to Pttsligo's Appryzing, of the hail Estate of Phillorth,
can give no Right to declare the Property, especially against the Defenders,
who has a real Right by Infeftment, flowing from Phillorth his Goodsyre, by
Resignation, and flowing from the Lord Lovit, which albeit posterior, yet
having the first Infeftment, is the first and only Right. The Pursuer answered,
the Defense ought to be Repelled, because any Right the Defender has, is from
his own Grandfather, to whom he was alioqui successurus; and thereby the
Defender is Successor titulo lucrativo, to his Grandfather, the common Author,
after the Disposition granted to Doors, and as umquhil Phillorth Doors Author,
personali objectione would be excluded from opposing Doors Right of Property;
which Right he had Disponed to Doors^ and was obliged to warrant; no more can
the Defender, (who by this same Right he Defends, being successor Lucrative to
his Grandfather) be heard to exclude the Pursuer, who is Successor to Doors.
2ly. Albeit there be no Seasine, yet umquhil Phillorth and Lovit were fully
denuded in favors of Doors, by the Resignation made in the Kings hands, and
Charter conform, after which any Right granted by them to this Defender, is a
non ha^ente potestatem. 3ly. Any Right the Defender has flowing from the Lord
Lovit cannot defend him, because it was but an Appryzing against Phillorth the
common Author: and it is offered to be proven that the Appryzing was satisfied
within the Legal, in so far as the Lands of Innernorth were Disponed by
Phillorth and Lovit jointly, to Frazer of Doors for 20000. merks, and the Lands
of Innerallothy were Disponed by them to Lovits own Sons, irredeemable the
price of which Lands being 54000. merks, was the sum appointed for satisfaction
of the Appryzing betwixt the said Parties, and so as to the Lands of
Cairnbulg, and remnant Lands appryzed, the appryzing is extinct. The Defender
answered to the first, that he is not Successor titulo lucrativo to his
Goodsyre, because the time of the Disposition by his Goodsyre to him, and also
the time of his Goodsyres death, his Father was alive, and served Heir to his
Goodsyre. 2ly. There was no Right in his Goodsyre when he Disponed; but all the
Right was in the Lord Lovit by Pits^igoes Appryzing; neither was Lovit denuded
by the Resignation or Charter without Seasine, so but that the second
Resignation with the first Infeftment is preferable. 3ly. Satisfaction of the
Appryzing as it is alleged, is not Relevant, unless it be by Intromission
with the Mails and Duties of the Lands Appryzed, conform to the Act of
Parliament 1621. but no other payment or satisfaction by the Debtor is
sufficient to take away an Infeftment, contra singularem successurum.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, founded upon Lovits Appryzing, in respect of
the Reply of satisfaction thereof, and found no necessity to allege, that the
Person having Right to the Appryzing, was otherways denuded, the by
acknowledgement of payment or satisfaction, and that there needed no form^^
grant ^f Redemption or Renunciation, Registrat conform to the Act of Parliam^n
anent the Registration of Seasings, Reversions, etc. which the Lords found only
to extend to Wodsets, properly so called, and not to Appry^zings; neither yet
to an Infeftment for Relief, whereunto the Rents were not to be only for the
Annualrent of the sum, but to satisfy the Principal, and therefore seeing the
Lords found that the only Right was in the Defenders Grandfather, and that he
Disponed to the Defender, that he could be in no better case then his
Grandfather, as to the Disposition granted by his Grandfather without a Cause
Onerous, being after the Disposition of the same Lands, by that same
Grandfather to the Pursuers Author, but found it not necessar to determine the
Case of lucrative Successor, as it was here stated to make the Successor liable
to all his Predecessors Debts:

James Birsbine contra John Monteith. July 24. 1662.
JAmes Birsbine pursues John Monteith, as Cautioner for John Birsbine, who was
Executor to the Pursuers Father, for payment of the Pursuers Legacy. The
Defender alleged no Process, because the Executor himself is not Discussed,
and the Cautioner is only liable subsidiary: The Pursuer Replied, there is a
Decree obtained against the Executor produced, and there was no further
Discussing requisite, because he is broken, and the Pursuer is content to
assign the Debt to the Cautioner. The Defender answered non Relevat, for a
Decree is no sufficient Discussing, but there must be Registrat Horning at
least, albeit the Executor had neither Lands nor Movables to Poind or Apprise.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and found the Reply not Relevant, till the
Registrate Horning were produced.

Alexander Shed contra Robert Gordon and David Kill. Eodem die.
ALexander Shed pursues Robert Gordon Pupil, as lawfully Charged to enter Heir
to his Father, to pay a Debt of his Fathers, compears David Kill the Pupils
Uncle, who was Tutor nominat to him, but refused to accept, and therefore
shunned to propone any Defense in the Pupils own name^ least it should be an
acceptance, or gestio; and therefore produced a Bond of the Defuncts, and as
Creditor alleged that he would not suffer his Debitors Estate to be affected
in his prejudice, and offered him to prove, that the Debt pursued on was
satisfied. The Question was, whether he had Interest as Creditor to propone
this Defense.

The Lords having considered the Case amongst themselves, found that where
Creditors in this manner compeared, it is not cnmpetent to allow their Defense,
because it may delay the other Creditors pursuing, so that a third Creditor may
be preferred in Diligence; and therefore they Repelled the Defense hoc loco,
but declared that it should be receivable against the Pursuer, whenever he
should pursue for affecting any of the Defuncts Means or Estate, in the same
case as now.

Mr. Patrick Weyms contra Mr. James Cunninghame. Eodem die.
MR. Patrick Weyms having an Order of Parliament for a Terms vacant Stipend of
the Paroch of Leswade, Mr. James Cunninghame alleged that Terms Stipend was
not vacand, but belonged to him as incumbent, viz. Whitsonday 1659. because he
was admitted before Michalmess 1659, and shortly after Whitsonday; and so the
legal Terms of Stipends not being divisable at two Terms, but at Michalmess
jointly, he being incumbent before Michalmess, has the whole year.

The Lords Repelled this alleadgence, but preferred Weyms, and found that
Ministers had Right to their Stipend Termly, and if he entered before
Whitsonday, he had Right to the whole year, and if after VVhitsonday, and
before Michalmess, but to the half:

Barbara Naesmith. contra John Iaffray. July 25. 1662.
BArbara Naesmith pursues John Iaffray her Son, as Heir and Executor to his
Father, for payment to her of her umquhil Husbands hail Means and Eschaeat, by
virtue of a Missive Letter, written by the Defunct her Sponse, bearing, that if
he happen to die before his return, that his Wife should do with what he had
as she pleased, that he thought it too little for her; but he desired her to
Discharge a 1000. Pounds or a 1000. Merks to his Brother Alexander, and 500.
Merks to his Sister Magdalen, if she follow her advice.

The Lords having formerly found, that this Letter was donatio mortis causa, or
a Legacy, and so could only affect Deads part.

It was now further alleged, that by the pursuers Contract of Marriage, he
was obliged to employ 6000. merks on Land, or Annualrent to him and her, and
the longest liver of them two, and to the Bairns to be gotten betwixt them,
which failzing his Heirs. This Obliegement to employ being a Debt, the
Movables must be liable for it primo loco, and the Pursuer can only have Deads
part of the remainder of free Goods. The Pursuer answered, that this
Destination being on Heretable Clauses, cannot affect the Movables, 2ly. The
Bairns cannot have Right thereto till they be Heirs, and so they will be both
Debitors and Creditors, and the Obligation will be taken away by Confusion.

The Lords found this Defense Relevant notwithstanding of the Answer; and that
albeit the Clause was Heretable, quoad creditorem, yet it was Moveable quoad
debitorem, and so behoved to be performed out of the Defuncts Movables, and
that the entering thereto, would not take away the Obliegement by Confusion^
more then one paying a moveable Debt, wherein he is both Debtor and Creditor;
yet he will have action of Relief against the Executors out of the Movables.

It was further alleged, that in the said Missive there are two particular
Legacies left to the Defuncts Brother and Sisters, which must abate the general
Legacy. The Pursuer answered, that both Legacies were only left thus, I wish,
etc. which cannot be obligator, nor constitute an effectual Legacy; but is only
a desire or recommendation left in the Pursuers option: and for Magdalens
Legacy, it was conditional, the following the Pursuers advice, which she did
not, but left her contrair her will. The Defenders answered, that verba
optativa were sufficient in Legacies, at least were sufficient to make a fidi
commissari Legacy; because all fidi commissis, either for restoring the
Inheritance, or for restoring Legacies, in the Civil Law were in such Terms;
and albeit such words would not be sufficient, intor vivos, yet favore ultimo
voluntatis, where the Defuncts will, howsoever manifested, is the Rule, and so
is most extended, such words are sufficient, as to the condition in Magdalens
Legacy, it cannot be understood of being under the Pursuers command all her
life, and so can only be meaned, if Magdalen miscarry contrair to the Pursuers
advice, in some considerable matter of her carriage; and however, it is not a
suspensitive condition, hindering the payment of the Legacy, but oblieging the
Legatar thereafter.

The Lords found the Legacies constitute, and in terms for said valid; and as
for Magdalens Legacy, declared, that in case Magdalen miscarried, and took not
the Pursuers Advice, that she should be liable to refound the Legacy to the
Pursuer, but would not put her to find Caution for that effect, the condition
being so general.

Katharin Kinross contra the Lord of Hunthill.
THe Lord of Hunthill being obliged by Bond to pay a sum to umquhil Mr.
Beverly, and the said Katharin his Spouse the longest liver of them two in
Conjunct-fee, and the Heirs betwixt them, which failzing his Heirs, or any
person he should design, whereupon they were infeft in an Annualrent. The said
Katharin having charged for payment of the sum, Hunthill suspended alleging
that she was but Liferenter, and he could never be in tuto till the Feear were
called. The Lords formerly found the Letters orderly proceeded for the
Annualrent, but superceeded to give answer for the Stock, till some to
represent Beverly, the Feear were called, who now being called and not
compearing, he Debtor alleged he could not be liable to give up the Stock to
the Charger, being only Liferenter, neither would her Discharge, or
Renunciation of the Wodset liberat him and his Estate, but only a Renunciation
of the Heir; neither did the Charge at the Liferenters Instance, take away the
Annualrent, and make the principal sum moveable, unless it had been at the
Feears Instance. The Charger answered, that she being Conjunct-feear, was not a
naked Liferenter, albeit it resolved in a Liferent; and therefore she craved
that it should be declared by the Lords, that she had power to uplift the
Stock, and to reimploy it as formerly, and that her Discharge and Renunciation
should be declared to be sufficient to liberat the Debtor and his Lands, which
being so found by the Lords. The Debitor's appearing Heir being called, would
be an irreduceable and sufficient ground of Liberation.

The Lords declared as aforesaid, but before Extract, ordained the
Conjunct-feear to give Bond for Reimployment of the sum to her self in
Liferent, and to Beverly's Heirs in Fee; which Bond they ornained to be
presently Registrat, and kept by the Clerk, in respect none appeared for the
Heir.

Lady Milntoun contra Lord of Milntoun. July 26. 1662.
LAdy Milntoun pursues probation of the Tenor of a Bond of Interdiction,
granted by her Husband young Calderwood, Interdicting himself to her. It was
alleged no Process, because there was no sufficient Adminicles in Writ
produced, there being no Writ relative to the Interdiction Subscribed by the
Party, but only the Extract of Letters of Inhibition.

The Lords sustained this as a sufficient Adminicle, in respect the question
was not about a Writ that use to be retired, such as Bonds. In this Case also,
the Lords examined some Witnesses, ex officio, before Litiscontestation, being
old and valitudinary.

Margaret Robertson contra William Mcintosh. Eodem die.
MArgaret Robertson pursues an Ejection against William Mcintosh, who alleged
absolvitor, because he offered him to prove, that he had warned the Defenders
umquhile Husband, and that he dying shortly thereafter, he inquired of his
Wife, if she would continue in the Possession, and she declared she would not,
but willingly removed. It was Replied, Relevat scripto vel juramento; but
witnesses cannot be received to prove willingness of Removing, being mentis.

The Lords considering that the Defender alleged no Tack nor Title in Writ,
but mere Possession were inclinable to sustain the Defense probable pro ut de
jure; but withal considering the Parties were Highlanders, and had great
advantage, whoever had the benefit of probation; therefore they ordained the
Pursuer to condescend what Deeds of violence was done in ejecting her; and both
parties to conscend what persons were present at the Pursuers outgoing, and the
Defenders incoming, being resolved to examine all these before answer, so that
there might be no advantage in probation to either party.

Sir John Aiton contra Adam Wat. Eodem die.
ADam Wat being first Infeft in an Annualrent out of Whitlands Estate,
Compryzed for some of the bygone Annualrents. Sir John Aiton being infeft after
him in an Annualrent of the same Lands, alleadges that Adam hinders him to
uplift the Duties, or poynd the Ground for his Annualrent, and yet lets them ly
in the common Debtor, or Tennents hands until his Appryzing expire, and
therefore alleadges that Adam Wat ought either to Intromit, and do exact
Diligence, and impute the same in his Compryzing, or suffer Sir John to do
Diligence, or at least, that both may do Diligence effeiring to their Sums.

The Lords found that Adam Wat ought to be liable for Diligence in time coming,
in uplifting the Rents to satisfy his Appryzing; and as to the Annualrent,
found, that after 40 days after each Term, in which Adam, as the first
Annualrenter, might poynd the Ground; it should be leisom for Sir John, as the
second Annualrenter, to poynd the same, without respect to Adam Wats prior
Infeftment, if he did not Diligence thereon, within 40 days after ilk Term.

Alexander Hamiltoun contra Thomas Harper. July 29. 1662.
ALexander Hamiltoun pursues a Removing against Thomas Harper, who alleged
Absolvitor, because the Pursuer invaded and beat the Defender, in the
Session-house, during the Dependence of this Cause; and therefore by the Act of
Parliament 1584. cap. 219. renewed, 1592. cap. 173. The Pursuer cadit causa,
and the Defender must be Assoilzied.

The Lords having considered the said Acts of Parliament, and finding thereby
that the Invasion must be Cognosced in a Criminal Process, competent to the
Justice, and must be found summarly by an Inquest.

The Question was, whether beating without effusion of Blood, was such a
Criminal Fact? because it seems to be but a Riot: and next whether the Lords
would take probation of it themselves, or if it behoved to be Recognosced by
the Justices.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, For the Act of Parliament anent violence
in the Kings presence, or in the Session House, when the Session is sitting,
make such deads to incur death: and therefore whether they would assign a Term
to the Defender to prove, that in the mean time he might proceed Criminally,
before the Justice, and instruct the Defense by the Sentence of the Justice, or
whether they would receive the Probation themselves, they resolved to hear the
P^rties upon it.

Lord Balnagoun contra July 30. 1662.
THe Lord of Balnaggoun having obtained a Gift of ultmus haeres, of Thomas
from the Exchequer, in Anno 1661. and being thereupon Infeft, pursues Removing
against Rorie The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Defender stands
Infeft, and by virtue of his Infeftment in Possession 7. years before the
warning, by virtue of a Gift of ultimus haeres, granted by the English
Exchequer. The Pursuer answered, ought to be Repelled, because the foresaid
Gift is null, ipso jure, in so far as it is not confirmed by the late Act of
Parliament, anent judicial proceedings in the Usurpers time, wherein Gifts of
Bastardy and ultimus haeres were excepted. The Defendet answered, 1. That his
Infeftment being cled with 7. years Possession, cannot be taken away by
exception, neither is he obliged in hoc judicio possessorio, to Dispute the
validity thereof. 2ly. The said Act of Parliament does not declare it null,
much less null by Exception, such Gifts but does only not confirm them.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, and found the Infeftment null in it self,
seeing it was not confirmed.

The Defender further alleged absolvitor from this warning, because the
Pursuers Gift is not yet decalred. It was answered for the Pursuer, no
necessity of Declarator, because it cannot be ever made appear that any such
thing was required, or was in Custom and Use, more then in the case of a Gift
of Ward, or a Gift of Forefaultry.

The Lords found that this Gift behoved to be declared in the same way as a
gift of Bastardry.

William Zeoman contra Mr Patrick Oliphant.
WIlliam Zeoman as having Right by an Appryzing to the Lands of Newton, pursues
Mr. Patrick Oliphant, to hear and see it found and declared this his Appryzing
was satisfied, by Intromission with the Mails and Duties within the Legal. The
Defender alleged, Appryzing cannot be satisfied by his Intromission, because
any Intromission he had was by virtue of other Rights, viz. Mr. James Oliphant
the common Author, having killed his own Mother, and thereupon he being
declared Fugitive, not only upon the Paricide, but upon a Criminal Dittie
against^ him, upon committing Murder under Trust, which is Treason. The
Defender obtained Gift of his Forefaultry, and thereupon stands Infeft and in
Possession. The Pursuer answered, non Relevat, (...) Because the Act of
Parliament against Paricide, does not declare it to infer Forefaultry, but only
that the committer thereof should be excluded from Succession: and as to the
committing of Slaughter under Trust, the Act of Parliament expresses what it
meaned by Trust, viz. though getting assurance from persons that had been
formerly in variance. 2ly. what ever the cause were, yet the Infeftment upon
the gift of Forefaultry, cannot be respected^ unless there had been a Doom of
Forefaultry pronunced for all, that the Justice General does, is to charge the
party accused to find Caution to underly the Law, and if he appear not he is
Denunced Rebel, and his Escheat only falls, or if having found Caution, he
appear not in causa, he is Denunced Fugitive, which has the same effect, but
none of them can inter Forfaulture, unless Doom of Forfaulture had been
pronounced, which the Justice does not, but when the Defender compears; albeit
the Parliament Forefaults persons absent, having taken probation of the Libel
contra absentes, and unless the Justice had either cited the party with Letters
of Treason, under certification of Treason, and that certification had been
granted, or had cognosced the Crime. The Defender being present, the Gift of
Forfaulture can work nothing.

The Lords found the Reply Relevant, unless the Defender would allege as
aforesaid, because the Defender was not clear in the matter of Fact, they
before answer, Ordained him to produce the Gift and Warrands.

Creditors of Andrew Bryson contra his Son. November 14. 1662.
IN an Account and Reckoning betwixt the Creditors and Bairns of umquhil Andrew
Bryson, the Auditor being warranted to call all Parties, havers of the said
umquhil Andrew his Count Books before him, his Son Mr. Andrew being Called and
Examined upon Oath, Depones that he neither has them, nor had them since the
intenting of the Cause, but refused to Depone upon his having of the same at
any time before, or upon his knowledge who had them.

The Lords having heard the Auditors Report thereanent, found that he ought not
to be examined upon his knowledge, who had them, but that he ought to Depone^f
at any time before the Citation he had the same, and frandfully put the same
away, quia propossessoria habetur qui dolo possidere.

Mr. Thomas Nicolson contra Lairds of Bightie and Babirnie. Eodem die.
THere having been mutual Molestations betwixt Mr. Thomas Nicolson Advocat and
the Lairds of Bightie and Babirnie, anent a common Pasturage in the Muire of
Bighty, lying contigue to all their Lands. It was alleged for Babirny that he
ought to be preferred to Mr. Thomas Nicolson, and the said Mr. Thomas excluded
from all Commonty, because Babirny stands Infeft in the Lands of Babirny, which
infeftment bears, with common Pasturage in the Muir of Bighty, and Mr. Thomas
had no express Infeftment therein. It was answered for Mr. Thomas, that the
alleadgence is not Relevant to exclude him, because he, his Predecessors and
Authors, are, and have been Infeft in his Lands cum communi pastura, and by
virtue of the said Infeftments, in peaceable Possession Immemorially; or by
the space of 40 Years, which was sufficient to establish the Right of
Community with Balbirnie, notwithstanding his Infeftment bears express. It was
answered for Balbirnie, that not only was his Infeftment more express; but Mr.
Thomas Lands and his were holden of diverse Superiors, viz. Balbirnie of the
KING, and Mr. Thomas were Kirk-lands; and albeit the Muire lies contigue to Mr.
Thomas Lands, yet it is not of the same Paroch. The Lords repelled the Reasons
of Preference for Balbirnie in respect of the Answer. It was further alleged
for Balbirnie, that the Alleadgeances and Answers for Mr. Thomas Nicolson ought
to be repelled; because he offers him to prove, that Nicolson was interrupted
since the Year 1610. and condescended, by yearly turning his Cattle off the
ground, and stopping him from casting Peits; and therefore he must say 40 Years
Possession, by virtue of an Infeftment preceding that Interruption. It was
answered for Nicolson, non relevat, unless either a Legal Interruption by
Lawborres, or Summons; or at least a complete and full Interruptio facti, by
debarring him on whole year from any deed of Community, but for turning off his
Goods, which were presently put on again, and he enjoying all his Profit, such
were Attempts, and Incomplete Interruptions, whereof he needed take no notice
thereof, seeing he continued his Possession, otherwise there would be great
inconveniences by such Interruptions, which would be noticed by the Leidges,
and yet would cut off the Probation of the old Possession before the same.

The Lords found that whatsoever the Interruption, 40 Years, or immemoria
possessione before the Interruption behoved to be proven, for they thought that
what Servituds were introduced only by Possession, by the patience and presumed
will of the other Party, being either Proprietar, or having right of
Community, any Interruption was sufficient to show, that the other Party
willed not, nor consented not to the Right; and if by such Interruptions
Parties got wrong, it was their own fault, who did not either declare their
Right, or insist in a molestation debito tempore, or use mutual Interruptions;
but here it was considered, that Possession before the year 1610. would be
equivalent to Immemorial Possession, albeit the Witnesses were not positive,
upon 20. Years Possession before, in respect the Years were 50. Years since.

Children of Wolmet contra Douglas and Cuningham. November 20. 1662.
IN a Persuit at the instance of the Children of Wolmet for the Profit of the
Coal of Wolmet, intrometted with by the said Iean Douglas Lady Wolmet in her
Viduity, by virtue of a Tack of the Coal granted by Umqhile Wolmet to his
Children for their Portions, it was alleged for the Defender. First,
absolvitor, because the said Iean had right to the said Profit of the said
Coal, ever since her Husbands Death, by virtue of the Wodset of the Lands and
Coals of Wolmet granted by Umquhile Patrick Edmonstcun of Wolmet, to James
Loch, wherein there is a Back-tack of the Land and Coal set to the said
Umquhile Wolmet, and the said Iean his Spouse, for the Annualrent of the Money.
It was replied for the Pursuer, that the foresaid Back-tack was taken by Wolmet
stante matrimonio, and so was donatio inter uirum and uxorem null in it self,
nisi morte confirmetur, and was confirmed by Wolmets Death, but Revocked by the
Pursuers Tack granted to his Children after the said Back-tack. It was answered
for the Pursuers, that the reply ought to be repelled, because the Back-tack
was no Donation, but a permutation, in so far as the Lady by her Contract of
Marriage was Infeft in the half of the Lands of Wolmet; which Infeftment she
renounced in favors of James Loch, at the taking of the Wodset, and in lieu
thereof, she got this Back-tack, which therefore can be no Donation, which must
be gra^u^tus without a cause onerous. It was replied by the Pursuers, that the
duply is not relevant; for albeit it be not a pure Donation, yet quoad excessum
the superplus of the benefit of the Back-tack above the benefit of the Contract
of Marriage is gratitude, and a Donation, and the reason of the Law against
Donations betwixt Man and Wife being mutuo amore se spolient, it holds in it,
and it would be easy to allude the intent of that good Law, if Donations
contrived under the way of permutation without any real equality were
allowable. It was answered for the Defender, that the duply stands relevant,
and the superplus of a permutation cannot be called a Donation more then the
benefit of an advantageous Vendition: it is true, that if the Donation of the
Back-tack had been ex intervallo, after the Ladies Renounciation, it would have
been vincus Contractus. but two distinct Donations, or if the matter exchanged
had been aliquid ejusdem specei, as an Annualrent of 500 merk with an
Annualrent of a 1000 lib. the superplus would have been a Donation; or if the
Lady had received a notable excess above the half, yea, above the third of what
she quat, it might have been revocable by her Husband, she being reponed to her
first Condition, by her Contract of Marriage, but here there is no such
exorbitant excess, she having quat a certain Land Rent for the profit of a
Coal, which is most uncertain, for the hail Land Rent would not pay the
Back-tack, and it is now Wodset, and likewise she is personally liable for the
Back-tack Duty.

The Lords repelled the Defense, and Duply, in respect of the Reply and Triply;
and found the Excess so considerable in this case, that it was as a Donation,
and was revocked by the Childrens Tack, but found that before the Defender made
payment of what should be found due by this account she should be reponed and
put in statu quo prius, by her Contract of Marriage.

It was further alleged for the Defender, absolvitor, because that albeit her
Right by the Back-tack were revocked by the Childrens Tack, yet she is bona
fide possessor, and fecit fructus consumptos suos, according to the Law of this
Kingdom, and of most of other Nations necessarily introduced, for the good and
quiet of the People, because as to and profits, they spend as they have, and
therefore what they spend bona fide by a colorable Title; they are secured in
that, albeit their Title be taken away; yet they shall not be called in
question for what they have enjoyed bona fide before Sentence, or Citation. It
was answered, for the Pursuers, that the Defense was not relevant in that case,
where the Question is not of industrial fruit, but of natural fruit, such as
Coal. Secondly, it is not relevant, unless it were cum titulo not ipso jure
null, but here the Defenders Title being a Donation betwixt Man and Wife, is by
the Civil Law, which herein we follow null in se nisi morte confirmetur.
Thirdly, there must be bona fides which is not here; because it is instructed
by a minute of a Contract produced within five months before the Childrens
Tack, that the Lady consented to the providing of the Children by the profit of
the Coal, and she cannot be presumed ignorant of so Domestic an affair in
favor of her own Children done by her Husband, and she has given up an
Article in her account of the expense of Registrating the Childrens Tack; by
her self, and so she must be presumed to have possessed as protutrix for her
Children, and not to Defraud or Exclude them. It was answered, for the
Defender, that the defense stands yet relevant, and the Law makes no difference
betwixt Industrial and Natural Fruits, he who possesses Lands bona fide is no
more comptable for the Grass that grows of it self, nor for the Corn that he
labors for. 4. And Coal is an industrial Fruit, having as much pains and
expense as Corns, and other industrial Fruit, and more uncertainty: as to the
Title albeit be valid, yet sufficit coloratus vel^putativus titulus, and albeit
in the ancient Roman Law, such Donations were null in se nisi confirmentur
morte yet by the subsequent course of the Law, per ora^ionem Antonij they are
declared valid in themselves, unless they be revocked, and therefore are not
null, but Anullantur medio facto, and there are many nullities, which may
consist with a colorable Title, ad hunc affectum lucrari Fructus consumptus,
as if the nulitie be not ex defectu substantialium, but by defect of some
solemnity, as the not Registration of a Seasine will not make it so null, but
that possessor bona fide thereby will employ the Fruits, but if it want
tradition of the symble, it will be null in se, but here such Donations have
all there essentials, but they are only anullable by a subsequent fact; and as
to the Evidence, that the Lady was in mala fide; they are no ways sufficient,
by her consent that the Children should be provided with the Coal, was in
contemplation of her eldest Sons Marriage, which took no effect, and the rest
are meire presumptions, and dato she had known privata notitia non nocet,
unless there had been some Intimation, Citation or Judicial Act to put her in
mala fide; and especially private knowledge infers not mala fide, unless it had
been anterior to her possession. The Pursuer answered to the last point, that
albeit private knowledge in some cases would not infer mala fides among
strangers, yet a mother knowing the right of her own Children, whereof one were
in her womb, it puts her in mala fide, seeing she was thereby oblidged to have
sought Tutors, and preserved their Right.

The Lords found the Evidences sufficient to prove the Defender to have been in
mala fide, and therefore repelled this Defense also, and Ordained the Defender
to comp for the intromission, but found that the charge ought not to be stated
according as the profit of the Coal fell out to be, but as the profit thereof
might be communibus annis, in regard she quat her certain Li^erent of the Lands
for an uncertain Coal, and therefore abated a fourth part of what the free
Profit of the Coal was found to be by the last account.

Alison Wardlaw contra Robert Gray. Eodem die.
ALlison Wardlaw, as Executrix Creditrix confirmed to her Husband, and having
confirmed the Rents due to him by Robert Gray Pursuer therefore. The said
Robert alleged absolvitor, for a part of these Rents, because paid, which he
offered to prove by the Defuncts Compt-book in the Pursuers hands, which
Compt-book is written with the Defuncts own hand, and bears several Recepts
paid by the Defender at several times. The Pursuer alleged, that the
Compt-book cannot prove, because it wants a subscription, and Compt-books do
only prove contra scribentem, in the case of Merchants, who kept exact
current Compt-books, which is a special privilege of theirs, and was never
extended to any other case, nor to any other person, for a discharge subscribed
before Witnesses would not liberat, if it were not delivered to the other
Party, much less can a Compt-book, Secondly, Whatever it could work against
the Writter and his Heirs, yet not against Assigneys or Executors Creditors,
who are in effect singular Successors for their own payment, otherwise no
Assigney could be secure, but after the Assignation, the Cedent might write
Receipts in his Book; but though he should grant a Holograph Discharge bearing
date^ before the Assignation, it would not prove against the Assigney, The
Defender answered, that the Compt-book was sufficient to prove liberation,
being by a Judicious Person, though not a Merchant, for it could be done to no
other intent, then to preserve the memory of the payment made, which though
most ordinar amongst Merchants, is no special privilege of theirs, and albeit
an undelivered discharge would not be sufficient, yet that being but unicum
hirographum, requiring delivery, has no effect without delivery, but a
Compt-book contains many Writs, and requires no delivery, and albeit it should
not prove against an Assigny. as neither would an holograph discharge, yet it
is sufficient against an Executor Creditor, who can leave no Right till the
Defunct be dead, and so their can be no hazard of Recepts posterior to their
Right, and therefore against Creditor, Holograph discharge would prove.

The Lords found that the alleadgeance of the Compt-book written with the
Defuncts own hand sufficient to instruct payment, of the Articles mentioned
therein, but seeing the Defender who paid was on life, and present, Ordained
him to make faith that he truly paid accordingly.

Primrose contra Duij. November 22. 1662.
PRimrose having pursued a Reduction of a Decree Arbitral betwixt him and
Duij. The said Duij alleged homologation of the Decree, by acceptance and
payment of a Precept direct to him by Primrose, for payment of a part of the
Sum contained in the Decree; bearing expressly to be in satisfaction of a part
of the Decree, which was found relevant, and admitted to Duij's probation, for
proving whereof, Duij produced the Precept acceptance and Discharge. It was
alleged, that the Writs produced proved not to the homologation of the
Decree, as to the Article controverted, being the fraught of a Vessel; which
Duij offered to prove, to have been decerned to have been within the third part
of the just avail, and the Precept bare payment of five Dollars, decerned for
the deterioration of the Tackling, by virtue of a promise.

The Lords having considered the Decree Arbitrall, and Precept, found it
proved not the homologation, as to the point in Question, because the Decree
contained diverse heads. The Precept bare to pay the deterioration of the
Tackling, and bare expressly, that the same was uncon^raverse, and founded upon
the Defenders promise.

Sawer contra Rutherfoord November 25. 1662.
SAwer having Wodset some Tenements in Edinburgh, to Rutherfoord, wherein there
was a Clause irritant, bearing, that if Sawer did not put Rutherfoord in
possession of the hail Tenement, the Reversion should expire, whereupon
Rutherfoord obtained Declarator, of the expyring of the Reversion, because
Sawer had detained a part of the Tenement, Sawer raised Suspension and
Reduction of the Decree of Declarator, upon these Reasons. First, The clause
irritant was punctum legis Commissaria in reprobat in Law. Secondly, Because,
by the Act of Parliament 1661. betwixt Debtor and Creditor, It was declared,
that claules irritant^ for not payment of the Sums in Wodsets since 1649.
should not be effectual. The Defender answered to the First Reason, that by Act
of Sederunt of the Lords, in Anno 1642. Clauses Irritant, and Failzies were
declared effectual; and albeit the Lords ex gratia, are in use to suffer
Parties failzeing to purge the failzie, by satisfying Damnage and Interest at
the Bar; yet it could not now be received a Decree in foro contradictorio. To
the second Reason; It was Answered, that the said Act of Parliament was
special, in relation to Clauses Irritant, for not payment of the Sum in the
Wodset, which was stricti juris, and could not be extended to this wilful
Failzie, in the Pursuers not removing, and possessing him, and for the Decree
it was in absence, albeit a Supplication was given in after the Decree,
desiring to be heard, whereupon he was not heard, but the answer to the
Suplication bare, that his desire was only competent, by way of Susppension and
Reduction.

The Lords found the Decree not to be in foro contradictorio; and therefore
reponed the Pursuer to purge the Failzie, by possessing the Defender, and
paying damnage; but found that the Clause in the Act of Parliament reached not
to this Case, but whereas the Pursuer craved count and reckoning of the profits
of the Wodset Tenement, by the said Act of Parliament bearing, That Improper
Wodsets, where the granter of the Wodset, is in the hazard of Public Burden,
etc. being since 1649. The Wodsetter should be comptable for the Profits more
nor the Annualrents, since the Date of the Wodset.

The Lords having considered the Woodset, by which the Wodsetter bare the
public Burden, found the said Clause of the Act not extended, to make the
Defender comptable since the Date of the Wodset, but only since the Date of the
offer, to secure the Wodseter conform to the Act of Parliament, by virtue of an
other Clauses of the said Act, Ordaining all Wodsetters to count for the
superplus, and to possess the granter of the Wodset, he finding Caution for
the Annualrents, or to restrict to his Annualrent.

Lord Burghly contra John Syme. Eodem die.
LOrd Burghly, and his Authors, being Infeft by the Abbot of Dumfermling, in
the Coal-heugh of Keltie, with power to win Coals within the bounds of the
Lands of Cocklaw and Losodie; pursues John Sime Heretor of Losodie, for
declaring his Right to win Coal in Losodie. The Defender alleged absolvitor,
because he and his Authors were Infeft in the Lands of Losodie, with the
pertinents, above the Ground, and under the Ground, long before the Pursuers
Authors Right. The Pursuer answered, that the Defenders Infeftment could not
furnish him Right to the Coal of Losodie; because it bare no power to win Coal,
but being only a Feu, which is a perpetual Location, it reaches not to Coal,
not being expressed: especially, seeing in the Tenendas all the ordinary
privileges were expressed, even of Peit and Turff, and Coal was omitted, and
because the Defenders Chartor bare expressly a reservation to the Abbot, and his
Successors, to win Coal in Losodie, for their own proper use allenarly. The
Defender Answered, that the Right of the Land being Feu, with the Pertinents,
did extend to Coal, albeit not expressed, seeing it was not wholly observed;
according to Craigs opinion, and for the Reservation, it did further clear the
Defenders Right, that seeing the Abbot reserved only power to win Coal for his
own use, exceptio firma^ regulam in non exceptis, whereby the Defender had
Right to the remanent of the Coal, neither could the exception extend to the
Pursuer, but only to the Abbot, and give to his Successors only, to these
Succeeding in the Abbacy, viz. the Earl of Dumfermling. The Pursuer answered,
that the Defenders Infeftment was Confirmed long after the Pursuers, and that
the Defenders Confirmation was not of the first Feu, but of a second Right,
from the first Feuar, and by the Act of Parliament anent Feus, it was declared,
that Feus since March 1658. not confirmed by the King, before 1584. were ^ull,
at least another Act of Parliament bare expressly, that where there were diverse
Feus granted of the same thing, the first, Confirmation with the last Feu,
should be preferable.

The Lords found the Defense founded upon the Defenders Rights, relevant, and
proven thereby; and therefore found the Pursuer had only right to win Coals in
Losodie, for his own use, and found the Pursuer Successor to the Abbots by his
Infefments of the said Privilege of wining Coal in Losodie, for his own use
only, and found the said Acts of Parliament, that by the late Act; the Right
of the ancient Possessors, and kindly Tenants was reserved; so that if they did
not Confirm before the Year 1584. They were only liable for a greater
Feu-dutie, wherein the Pursuer not being Superior, had no interest, and found
the Defenders Infeftment, that his Authors were kindly Tenants, and had a 19
year tack before the Feu.

Patrick and Joseph Dowglasses contra Lindsay of VVormistoun. December 2. 1662.
PAtrick and Joseph Dowglasses pursues Catharine Lindsay their Mother, as
Executrix to their Father, for Count and Payment of their share of the
Executry, and also the said Lindsay of VVormistoun, as her Cautioner found in
the Testament, who alleged no Process against him as Cautioner, till the
Executrix her self were first discussed; Not only by Count and Sentence, but
also by Appryzing of her Estate, Poynding of her Movables, and if nothing can
be condescended upon to Poynd and Appryze, at least by Registrate Horning
against her Person: This being but a subsidiary Action as to the Cautioner.

The Lords Repelled the Alleadgeance, and sustained the Account, against both,
superceeding all Execution against the Cautioner, till the Executrix were
discussed as aforesaid, which is both to the advantage of the Cautioner, who
may concur with the Executor, who is only able to make the Account, and it is
also to the advantage of the Pursuers, that the Cautioner resume not the
Alleadgeances omitted by the Executor, and so make new Process, and new
Probation, as often falls out.

Dam Marion Clerk. contra James Clerk of Pittencrieff. Eodem die.
MR. Alexander Clerk, his Estate being Tailzied to his Heirs Male, he obliged
his heirs of Line to Renunce, and Resign the same in favors of his Heirs Male;
which Disposition he burdened with 20000. Pounds, to Dam Marion Clerk his only
Daughter, and Heir of Line. The Clause bare 20000. Pounds to be paid to her
out of the said Lands and Tenement, whereupon she having obtained Decree,
James Clerk the Heir Male Suspends on this Reason, That the foresaid Clause did
not personally oblige him, but was only a real burden upon the Lands and
Tenement, which he was content should be affected therewith, and offered to
Assign and Dispone so much of the Tenement as would satisfy the same.

The Lords found the Suspender personally obliged, but only in so far as the
value of the Tenement might extend; in respect the Clause in the Disposition
mentioned the Sum to be paid, which imports a personal Obligement, and whereby
the Suspender accepting the Disposition, is obliged to do Diligence, to have
sold the Tenement and paid her therewith; and therefore found the Letters
orderly proceeded, superceeding Execution of the principal sum for a year, that
medio tempore, he might do Diligence to sell and uplift.

George Steuart contra Mr. James Nasmith. December 6. 1662.
GEorge Steuart having obtained the Gift of the Escheat of one Hume, pursues a
general Declarator, wherein compears Mr. James Nasmith, having a Declarator
depending of the same Escheat, and alleged he ought to be preferred, having
his Gift first past the Privy Seal, and had the first Citation thereupon.
George Steuart answered, that his Gift was first past in Exchequer, and the
Composition paid in March, before the Rebel was Denunced on Mr. James Nasmiths
Horning, whose Gift past in Exchequer in June only, and alleged that he being
postponed, through the negligence of the Keeper of the Register, whom he had
often desired to give him out his Gift, it must be esteemed as truly then done;
and as to the Citation, both being now pursuing, he having done full Diligence,
could not be postponed, and produced an Instrument taken against the Keeper of
the Register, bearing him to have acknowledged, that the Gift had been sought
from him formerly.

The Lords having considered the Instrument, and that it was after Nasmiths
Gift was Sealed, although it mentioned former Requisitions, that was but the
assertion of the Nottar, or of the Keeper of the Register, and therefore
preferred Nasmiths Gift.

Andrew Clapertoun contra Lady Ednem. December 11. 1662.
IN Anno 1621. Umquhile Sir John Edmistoun of Ednem, granted a Bond of
Provision to Iean Stirling of two Bolls of Victual, which he obliged himself to
pay to her out of the Mains of Ednem, or any other of his Lands, by virtue
thereof she was in Possession, out of the Mains of Ednem, till the year 1640.
Andrew Clappertoun her Son and Assigney, pursues the Lady Ednem, as Intrometter
with the Rents of the Mains of Ednem, to pay the Pension since. The Defender
alleged Absolvitor, because she stands Infeft in the Mains of Ednem, by
virtue of her Liferent, and thereupon has possessed; and the Pursuers Pension
is merely personal, and does not affect the Ground, nor is valid against
singular Successors, and though conceived in the best way, can have no more
effect, then an Assignation to Mails and Duties, which operats nothing against
singular Successors, unless it had been an Ecclesiastical Pension, clothed with
Possession, having Letters conform, which only is valid against singular
Successors.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant.

John Oglvie contra Sir James Stewart. Eodem die.
PAtrick Leslie, and several Cautioners, granted Bond to Sir James Stewart, who
assigned the same to John Denholme, who used Execution, in his Cedents name,
and took some of the Debitors with Caption, and being in the Messengers hands,
this John Ogilvie assisted to the making of their escape, and thereupon being
incarcerat by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, (which concourse of their Authority,
by their Officers, as use is, in executing Captions within Edinburgh,) by
aggrement; the said John Ogilvie paid 800 lib. to be free, and thereupon
obtained Assignation from Sir James Stewart, to as much of the Bond, with
warrandice from Sir James own deed, and excepting from the warrandice, an
Assignation formerly made by Sir James, to John Denholme, John Ogilvie having
pursued one of the Debitors, he was assoilzied, upon a discharge granted by Sir
James Stewart, and John Denholme, and they both with one consent, whereupon
John Ogilvie charged Sir James upon the Clause of Warrandice, who Suspended,
and alleged, that the foresaid discharge was nothing contrair to his
oblidgement of Warrandice; because, in the Warrandice, John Denholmes
Assignation was excepted, and consequently all deeds done by John, as Assigny.
Ita est, this discharge was granted by John Denholme, and would be valid, by
John Denholme subscription; and there was no prejudice done to this Pursuer, by
Sir James Stewarts subscription, seeing without it, the discharge would exclude
him. The Charger answered, that John Denholme subscribed but as Contenter and
was not mentioned in the discharge as Assigney. The Suspender answered; that
the discharge being with his consent, was as effectual, as if he had been
principal Party, and each of them discharged with others consent.

The Lords found the Reason of the Suspension relevant.

George Loggie. contra Peter Loggie. Eodem die.
GEorge Loggie having borrowed 800 merk from Peter Loggie his Brother, gave a
Wodset therefore. The said George being an old man, without hope of Children,
the Reversion was only granted to George, and the Heirs of his own Body, and
his Liferent of the Wodset Lands was Reserved, without mentioning of any
Back-tack Duty, or Annualrent, George having used an Order and Consigned the
800. merk, obtained Declarator, Peter Suspends, and alleadges no Redemption
ought to have been, till the Annualrent were consigned with the Principal. The
Charger answered, that the Contract of Wodset bare no Annualrent. The Suspender
answered, that albeit it did not, yet he having lent his Money in these Terms,
in hopes of Succession, and his Brother having now Married a young Wife, he
ought not to take advantage of him, seeing the Annualrent is due, in equity,
for the profit of the Money.

The Lords, in respect of the Tenor of the Contract of Wodset, found the
Letters orderly proceeded, without any Annualrent, and that in this case it
could not be due, without (...) had been so pactioned and agreed.

Lord Balmirino contra Town of Edinburgh. December 18.
THe Lord Balmirino pursues the Town of Edinburgh, for Spoliation of the Tynds
of the Aikers of Restalrige, whereof the Towns Hospital had a Tack, which being
expired, Inhibition was used yearly, for several years. The Defender alleged
absolvitor, from any Spuilzie of Teinds, because, since the KING'S Decree
Arbitral, and the Fyfteen and Seventeen Acts of Parliament, 1633. Spuilzie of
Teinds is taken away, especially by the said Fyfteen Act. The Parliament
Ratifies a former deed of the King's, Declaring, every Heretor shall have the
drawing of his own Teynd, and the benefit of a Valuation; and in the mean time,
so long as the Teynds are not Valued, the Heretors are only liable for the Fyft
of the Rent, in name of Teynd, Secondly, By a Contract betwixt the Town and the
Pursuers Father, of the Aikers of Restal^ige lyand runrig with these, are set
for half a boll beer the Aiker, which is by the Contract, Declared to be the
just and true Rate, and Value thereof, which by necestar consequence declares
the Value of the Teynds now in Question, being runrig with the other. The
Pursuer answered to the first, That the foresaid Act of Parliament was only
meaned in relation to the KING'S Annuity, and albeit the foresaid Clause
therein be general, yet it is clear by the 17. Act, which is posterior, that
the first part shall be the Teynd, after the Valuation duly led, which has
been constantly allowed, by Custom of the Commission of Plantations, which gave
only warrant to Heretors to lead their own Teynd during the Dependence of a
Valuation, and therefore Spuilzie of Teynds have been frequently sustained
since the said Acts: As to the second, whatever be the way of conception of
the Tack, for the other Aikers not in question be, though it did acknowledge
the same to be the just Value thereof, yet it cannot extend to other Teynds;
seeing where the Parties agree in the matter, they are not solicitous for the
conception of the words, which cannot be drawn in consequence to any other
matter.

The Lords repelled both these Defenses, but declared they would not sustain
Spuilzie as to the Oath in Litem, but admitted the Value of the Teynd to the
Pursuers probation. Reserving to themselves the modification of the prices, if
they should be exor^itantly proven, but not of the quantaties.

Lady Tursapie contra Lord of Tursapie. December 20. 1662.
THE Lady Tursapie pursues the Lord of Tursapie, who succeeded as Heir to his
Brother, her Husband, for the Aliment of the Defuncts Family, till the next
Term, after his Death, and specially for the Alinent, and to the Pursuers Son,
Heir appearand to his Father. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the
Lybel was no ways relevant against him, as Heir, but by the constant custom,
the entertainment of the Defuncts Families, was ever a burden on their
Movables, and upon their Executry. The Pursuer answered, though it was
ordinarily retained off the Movables, yet the Heir was also liable, seeing the
Defunct was obliged to entertain his Servants and Children, at least to a
Term, but much more when there were no Movables, or where the Defunct was
Rebel, and the Donatar intrometted. The Defender answered, that it was novum to
conveen an Heir on this ground, and that the Alledgiance of there being no
Movables held not here; neither is it relevant that the Movables were gifted,
unless it had been declared before the Defunct's Death and Possession obtained,
otherwise the Relict ought to have Alimented the Family out of the Movables,
which would have liberat her from the Donatar, and is yet ground against the
Donatars. The Pursuer answered, she could not retain, because the Donatar with
Concourse of the Defender did put her brevi manu from the Defunct's House and
all the Movables.

The Lords having amongst themselves considered this Process, did put
difference between the Aliment of the Appearant Heir, and the rest of the
Family: As to the Heir they found, that albeit he was never Infeft, yet as
Appearant Heir, he had Right to the Mails and Duties from his Fathers Death,
until his own Death, though the Terms had been to run before he was born,
being in utero, and that the Defender, in so far as meddling with the Rents, was
liable for the Appearant Heirs Aliment; but for the rest of the Family, the
Lords superceeded to give answer till diligence were done against the Donatar,
or other Intrometters with the Movables.

Thomas Dumbar of Muchrome contra The Vassals of the Barrony of Muchrome. Eodem
die.
THomas Dumbar of Muchrome, pursues Reduction and Improbation against the
Vassals of the Barrony of Mochrume, wherein all the Terms being run, reserving
Defenses. Now at the last Term it was alleged, for Hay of Arriolland, no
Certification contra non producta against him, because he had produced a
Precept of clare constat from the Pursuers Father as Heir, to whom he pursues.
Secondly, It was alleged that he had produced sufficiently to exclude the
Pursuers Right produced, and so till his Rights produced were discust and taken
away, there could be no Certification contra non producta. The Pursuer answered
to the first, that the Precept of clare constat was but in obedience of a
Precept out of the Chancellary. As to the Ancient Rights produced, if the
Defender would rest thereon, he needed not stand that Certification should be
granted against any others not produced, seeing these produced are sufficient;
but if the Certification should be thus stopped, the effect of all Improbations
and Non-entries should be marred by dropping in new Writs from time to time,
and still disputing thereon, and so dispute the Reasons before the Production
were closed, at least the Defender ought to allege that the Writs produced are
sufficient, and declare he will make use of no further in this Process.

The Lords repelled the first Alleadgance on the Precept of clare constat being
for obedience, but found the second Alleadgance relevant hoc ordine, and
ordained the Defender to condescend upon his Rights by way of Defense to the
Pursuer, to answer thereto presently.

Colonel John Fullertoun contra Viscount of Kingstoun. January 8. 1663.
Colonel John Fullertoun having charged the Viscount of Kingstoun, upon a Bond
of borrowed Money, he suspends on these Reasons. That the Colonel granted
Assignation to Umquile Sir Alexander Douglas to a Sum dew by Sir William
Thomson; and notwithstanding of the Assignation he uplifted the Sum himself, at
least his Brother by his order, whereupon the Lady Kingstoun; Daughter and Heir
to the said Sir Alexander, having License to pursue, has pursued the Colonel
upon the Warrandice for Re-payment; which Action being seen and returned, and
ready to be discust, the Suspender craves Compensation thereon. The Charger
answered, That the reason of Compensation is not relevant, because it is not
liquid, the foresaid Sum not being confirmed by any Executor, nor Sentence
thereupon; neither can it be instantly verified, because it must abide
Probation, that the Colonel or his Brother by his order uplifted the Sum, and
there being only a license to pursue, the Debt cannot be established till a
Confirmation. Secondly, Albeit the Compensation were relievable, yet the Reason
ought to be repelled; because, that any such Assignation was granted, it was in
trust, to the Colonels own behove, as is instructed by a missive Letter to the
Charger produced. It was answered for the Suspender, that the Answers founded
upon the missive Letter ought to be repelled, because it was null, neither
being Holograph, nor having Witnesses. Secondly, It is most suspect, being
written upon old blacked Paper. The Charger answered, that Letters amongst
Merchands, though not Holograph, are sustained, and ought much more among
Soldiers, especially between the Charger and Sir Alexander, who then was his
Lieutenant Colonel; which is the more clear, that there was never a question
of it these 20 years, neither was it contained in the Inventar of Sir
Alexanders Papers, though there were insert Papers of less moment, but that it
was gotten from one White, for 40. or 50. Pound.

The Lords repelled the Compensation, as not being liquid, and found the
Letters orderly proceeded, superceeding Execution till Whitsunday 1663. But
upon the other Process against the Charger, The Lords considering the matter
was old and dubious, before Answer, they ordained Witnesses to be examined hinc
inde, upon all Adminicles that could be adduced for, or against the Trust.

Lady Otter contra Lord of Otter. Eodem die.
THe Umquhile Lord of Otter, by his Contract of Marriage, having provided his
Estate to his Heir Male; provided 5000 Merks to his eldest Heir Female, when
she should be capable of Marriage; and an occasion offered, whereupon the said
Heir Female her Mother pursues the Heir Male for payment of the Sum, and for
payment of an Aliment to the Heir Female during the time she has been with her
Mother, and in time coming, till the provision be paid. The Defender alleged
the Libel is no way relevant, for Aliment, he not being oblidged by the
Contract, for any Aliment, but only for the Sum, at such a time; neither is
there any Annualrent due for the Provision, till the Term of payment.

Yet the Lords found, that albeit that was no Annualrent, nor provision for
Aliment, and that de jure Annualrent is but due, ex pacto, they would in this
case allow an Aliment, far within the Annualrent, because it was all that the
Daughters got for a very considerable Estate, which was but a very small
provision.

Patrick Nicoll contra Sir Alexander Hope. Eodem die.
PAtrick Nicoll pursues a Declarator of Property of his Lands, of Grantoun,
and that he had good Right thereto, conform to the Bounds Lybelled. It was
alleged, for Sir Alexander Hope. First, All Parttes having interest are not
called, this being an Action, that in effect terminateth upon a Perambulation,
or Determining of the Marches. It is a Real Action, and there is necessity to
call the Heirs of Sir John Hope, who died last, vest and seized, in the other
adjacent Lands. The Pursuer answered, that he offered him to prove, that Sir
John had Disponed in favor of Sir Alexander, and resigned in his time. It was
answered for Sir Alexander, that Sir John was not Denuded; seeing no Infeftment
followed, and the Disposition is but an incomplete Personal Right, so that some
having the Real Right must be called.

The Lords repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply. It was further
alleged for Sir Alexander, that he had builded a park dyke upon a part of the
Ground in Question, before the Pursuers Right, sciente and astante domino: the
former Heretor having never opposed, nor contradicted, which must necessarily
infer his consent. The Pursuer answered, that it was not relevant, to take away
any part of the Property, upon such a presumptive consent, neither was he
obliged to disassent, seeing he knew that which was builded upon his Ground,
would become his own in edificatum solo cedit.

The Lords repelled this Defense also, but they thought that the taciturnitie
might operat this much, that Sir Alexander might remove the materials of his
Wall, or get from Patrick Nicol quantum partem est lucratus, by the building of
the Wall.

Murray of Merstoun contra Thomas Hunterr. Eodem die.
MVrray of Merstoun pursues Thomas Hunter fot a Spulzie of Malt, who alleged,
that as to that member of the Lybel of the Spulzie of the Malt, by the
Defenders hunding out, or command. It is only relevant scripto vel juramento.
The Pursuer answered, that she qualified the Probation thus, That the Defender
entrusted a Messenger, or Officer, to execute a Precept of Poynding, by
delivering him the Precept, and therefore the Precept, with the execution
thereupon is sufficient Probation. The Defender answered, that the same is not
sufficient; because the Officer execute the Precept extra territorium, whereby
it became a Spuilzie, which ought not to be imputed to the Defender, unless it
were offered to be proven, that he ordained the Officer to Poynd this Malt
without the Jurisdiction, and that only scripto vel juramento. The Pursuer
answered, that as the giving of a Precept of Seasin, is a sufficient warrant,
without any other Procuratry, whatever the effect of the Seasin be, so must the
delivery of the Precept of Poynding be sufficient to instruct the warrant, or
command to Poynd, wherever the Poynding was execute, and the user of the
Poynding should be liable to the deeds done by the person he intrusts;
Especially, seeing not only the Messenger was sent, but other Servants, and
Messengers employed by the user of the Poynding.

The Lords found the giving of the Precept of Poynding to the Messenger, and
his unwarrantable poynding Extra territorium not sufficient only, but found it
relevant, to prove, by the Messenger, and Defenders Servants employed by him,
their Oaths, that they were commanded to Poynd this Malt, or other goods in
this place, being Extra territorium.

Skeen contra Lumsdean. Eodem die.
SKeen having charged Alexander Lumsdean, for payment of a Bond, for which he
was Cautioner for Mr. Thomas Lumsdean his Brother, Alexander Suspends on this
Reason; that the Bond was granted for a Bill of Exchange, drawn by one Dutch
man, upon another to be paid to Skeen, or his Order, which Bill, Skeen
ordained to be paid to Anna Balty Spouse to Mr. Thomas Lumsdean; for which
this Bond was granted: Ita est the said Bills of Exchange were not paid, but
protested; and is assigned by Mr. Thomas Lumsdean, and his Spouse, to the
Suspender; at least, if any payment was made to Mr. Thomas Lumsdean the Cedent,
it was after the Assignation to Alexander Lumsdean the Suspender, and
intimation thereof. It was answered, for the Charger, that the Reason ought to
be repelled, because he offered him to prove, by Mr. Thomas Lumsdean, at that
time Factor at Campheir his Compt-book; that albeit the Bills was once
protested, yet they were paid before Assignation, or Intimation.

The Lords before answer, having granted several Commissions to the Magistrates,
and Conservitor at Campheir, to view and examine the Compt-book which was at
Campheir. They reported, that in such a Page of the Book there was three
Articles of Receipt, in part of payment of the Bills, after which Pages the
Book was containued, and several Compts written therein, and that it was
Authentic, and Unvitiat, and all written with the hand of John Muire Mr.
Thomas Stepson, who was his Book-keeper, and that they had been a long time
since out of Mr. Thomas hands, about the time he Bankerupted, and that they had
examined upon Oath, him who drew the Bill, amd him upon whom the Bill was
drawn, both, who had sworn payment was made, the question was, whether Mr.
Thomas Compt-book could prove against Mr Thomas his Assigney. It was alleged,
It could not, seeing it had no more Effect then as Holograph Discharge, which
might be made up after the Assignation, and therefore proves not against the
Assigney. It was answered, that though a Holograph Discharge will not prove
alone, yet if by other Adminicles, Writs or Witnesses, it appeas that the Date
is true, at least is prior to the Assignation, or Intimation, it will be
sufficient against the Assigney, so the Adminicles here are pregnant and
strong, to prove the time of payment contained in the Compt-Book.

The Lords found the Compt-Book and Adminicles sufficient here against the
Assigney, especially considering, that the Cedent was his Brother, and that it
was not presumable, that he would do any Deed, in making up these Receipts in
his Compt-Book, in prejudice of his Brother.

Thomas Beg contra Sir Thomas Nicolson. January 14. 1663.
THomas Beg charges Sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnock upon his Bond of 4000 Merk;
he Suspends on this Reason, the Charger is only Liferenter, and has no right
to lift the Sum, because the Bond is conceived thus, to Thomas Beg and his
Spouse, the longest Liver of them two in Conjunct-fee, and to the Bairns
procreat betwixt them, which failzing, to two Bairns of a former Marriage,
Thomas and Margaret Begs, and which Bond contains a Precept of Seasife, for
Infefting the said Thomas and his Spouse, and the Bairns of the Marriage, which
failzing, the said Thomas and Margaret, Bairns of the former Marriage,
according to which there was a Seasine taken, not only to the two Spouses, but
to the two Bairns, nominatim, who therefore are Feears.

The Lords repelled the Reason; because having considered the Bond, and
Infeftment conceaved as aforesaid: they found the Husband, by the Conjunct-fee
to be Feear, and the Bairns of the Marriage to be destinat Heirs of Provision;
and the said Margaret and Thomas, to be only substitue as Heirs of Tailzie,
failzing the Bairns of the Marriage; and that therefore, if the Father had died
Infeft in the Annualrent, if there had been Bairns of the Marriage, they, Male
and Female, jointly and equally behoved to be Served, specially as Heirs of
Provision to their Father, and so Infeft, and failzing Bairns, Thomas and
Margaret, behoved also to be so served and Infeft: for albeit there needs no
general Service, where Persons are nominatim substitute in a personal Right,
requiring no Infeftment; yet where there is Infeftment, there must be a special
Service. And therefore found the Father, Feear might uplift the Money, or might
change the Destination thereof, as he pleased; and albeit Thomas and Margaret
were Infeft nominatim, yet they found the Seasine was without Warrant, bearing
only to Infeft them, in case of failzie of Heirs of the Marriage, and the
Infeftment could only be granted to the Conjunct-feears.

John Scot contra Montgomery. Eodem die.
JOhn Scot, as Assigney to certain Bonds granted by Montgomery to Andrew
Robertson, charges Montgomery, who Suspends upon this Reason, that he instantly
instructs by a Back-bond, that the Bonds is for the price of certain Lands, and
by the Back-bond, it is provided, that these Sums should not be paid, till the
Writs of the Lands were delivered, and payment made of some Duties thereof.

The Lords found the Back-bond, being before the Assingation relevant, against
the Assigney, albeit the Bonds were simple, bearing borrowed Money.

Greenlaw contra (...) January 15. 1663.
GReenlaw being pursued by (...) for Spuilzie of two Mares, in May 1654.
alleged Absolvitor, because he was then in Arms for the King; and took these
Mares for the Service, and had warrant from his Officers; which he offered him
to prove by his Pass, and Capitulation produced, expressly including him, with
his Officers, who Capitulate. The Pursuer answered, the Mares were great with
Foal, and altogether unfit for the Service; and if they were specially
commanded to be taken, it might be instructed by Writ.

The Lords considering this Capitulation, being about that same time, found,
that albeit there had been no Order, yet the Defender being then in Arms,
acting modo militari, the Act of Indemnity freed him, and would not give
occasion to such Process, and therefore Assoilzied.

Tennents of Kilchattan contra Lady Kilchattan, Major Campbel, and Baillie
Hamilton. January 16. 1663.
OLd Kilchattan, in his Sons Contract of Marriage, Dispons the Lands of
Kilchattan to his Son young Kilchattan, and his Lady in Conjunct-fee; whereupon
there was Infeftment taken, in favors of the Husband and Wife, to be holden
from the Disponer, and of the King; but the same was not confirmed till the
year 1662. At which time, Major Campbel procures a Confirmation of the
Conjunct-Infeftment, and Seasine thereon; which Confirmation has a Clause
insert; bearing the same to be only in so far as may confirm and establish the
Right of an Annualrent granted by young Kilchattan to the Major: and thereafter
the Lady Confirms the Conjunct-Infeftment simply. In Anno 1654. young
Kilchattan Infefts Major Campbel in an Annulrent out of the Lands: thereafter
Heugh Hamilton Appryzed from young Kilchattan, and was Infeft upon this
Appryzing about that time. It was alleged by the Lady, that she ought to be
pre-ferred, because she being joined with her Husband in the Conjunct-Fee, and
thereupon Infeft; it is sufficient to give her the Right of Liferent, which is
but a personal servitude. It was answered, first, That Major Campbel having
procured the first Confirmation, which is expressly limit unto his Annualrent,
must be preferred to the Lady, and that such limitations might lawfully be,
because it being free for the Superior to Confirm, or not, or to Confirm a
part, and not the rest, he might Confirm it to what effect he pleased; and his
Confirmation being extended no further, the Lady cannot crave preference,
because she is now only Infeft in the Lands in question in Warrandice, that her
principal Lands shall be worth so much, and it is not yet declared in what they
are defective.

The Lords, in respect the Ladies Right was not Confirmed, preferred the Major
as to his Annualrents.

It was alleged for Heugh Hamiltoun, that he must be preferred to the
Annualrenter, because he being publicly Infeft upon his Apprysing, before the
Infeftment of Annualrent, at least before it was cled with Possession, whereby
it became a valid Right, the King's Charter upon the Apprysing, is virtually
and equivalently a Confirmation of Kilchattans Infeftment, especially in
favors of a Creditor, who could not perfectly know his Debitors condition;
which if he had known; and given in expressly a Confirmation to the King, it
would have been accepted, seeing the King respects none, and therefore the
King's granting of a Charter upon the Apprysing must be interpret equivalent.

The Lords found that the Charter upon the Apprysing was not equivalent to a
Confirmation.

It was further alleged for Heugh Hamiltoun, that the Confirmation obtained
by Major Campbel, behoved to accresce to him; who had the first complete Right,
by public Infeftment upon the Apprysing, and albeit that base Infeftment upon
the Annualrent granted by Kilchattan to Major Campbel, was prior, yet it was
null till it was cled with Possession; and therefore if it was not cled with
Possession before Heugh Hamiltouns Infeftment, the Confirmation must accresce
to Heugh Hamiltouns Infeftment.

The Lords found that the base Infeftment was not null for want of Possession,
albeit it might be excluded by a public Infeftment before Possession, but
found that Heugh Hamiltouns public Infeftment was not complete in it self,
because it put Heugh Hamiltoun only in the place of young Kilchattan, who had a
null Right till Confirmation: Which Confirmation they found did accresce to the
base Infeftment, being cled with Possession at any time before the
Confirmation, for at that time it became a complete Right; at which time the
Appryzing and Infeftment was no complete Right, and therefore the Confirmation,
albeit it had not had this restriction accresced to the base Infeftment, as
being the first complete Right in suo genere.

Earl of Roxburgh contra a Minister. Eodem Die.
IN a review of a Decree at the Instance of a Minister against the Earl of
Roxburgh; the point in question was, whether or no the Judges for the time, or
now the Lords of Session, were competent to discuss this Nullity, of a Decree
of Locality, by the Commission for Plantation, in that it called the Earls
Lands expressly designed, to be his Lands, and he was not called.

The Lords found, that albeit they would not decide upon the Nullities of the
Decreets of the Commission competent by way of Reduction, which behoved to be
before the Commission it self; yet this Nullity being palpable and competent by
Exception, or Suspension, that they might thereupon Suspend simpliciter, the
Decree of the Commission.

Earl of Errol contra Parochioners of Ury. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Roxburgh pursues the Heretors for the Teind, from 1648. till 1662.
as he who had Right during that time, by the Act of Parliament, 1649.
Establishing the Right of the Teinds in the Patron, in leu of their Patronage;
and also as he who had Tack thereof, and had since possessed be tacit
relocation. The Defender alleged, as to the first Title, that the Parliament,
1649. was not only annulled, but declared void, ab initio, as a meeting without
any Authority, as to the tacit Relocation, it could not extend any further then
so many years as the Beneficed Person could set. It was answered for the Earl,
that the Rescissorie Act could not prejudge him, as to any thing anterior to
it is date, unless it had born expressly to annul as to bygones.

The Lords found the Lybel, and Reply Relevant, as to bygones before the Act,
albeit there be no salvo in that Act, as there is in the Rescissory Acts of the
remanent Parliaments, and found that the Pursuer had Right, per tacitam
relocationem, till he was interrupted, even for years which the Beneficed
Person could not validly set, as a Liferenters Tack will be validly set, as a
Liferenters Tack will be valide against the Feer, per tacitam relocationem,
after her Death, though she could grant no Tack validly after her Death.

Relict of Mr. Thomas Swintoun Minister of Ednems contra Lord of Wedderburn.
Eodem die.
THe Minister of Ednems Relict Insisting for the reparation of the Manss. It
was alleged for the Heretors, that those who have Right to the Teinds as
Tacks-men, or otherwise, ought to bear a proportion, of the reparation.

The Lords found that albeit these who have right to the Teinds, were
accustomed to Repair the of Kirks, and the Heretors the rest of the Kirk; yet
there was neither Law nor Custom alleged, the Teinds could be burdened with
any part of the Reparation.

Sword contra Sword. Eodem die.
ONe Sword as heir Served and Retoured, to Bailzie Sword of Saint Andrews,
pursues for Intromission with the Moveable Heirship, for delivery of the same,
and produces his Service done at Saint Andrews, and Retoured, whereby he is
Served as Oye to the Defunct Bailzie, his Father Brother; compears another
Party; who is likewise Served Heir to that same Bailzie, at Edinburgh, and
produces his Service Retoured, by which he is served Heir to Bailzie Sword, as
his Father Brother Son, whereupon he has raised a Reduction in Latin, under
the Quarter-seal of the other Service, which was prior, and alleadges, that he
being in a nearer degree of Blood then the other, in so far as he is a Father
Brother Son, and the other Service bears him to be but a Father Brothers Oye.

The Lords having considered both the Retoures, and that they were not
contradictory, inferring manifest Error of the Assize, because it was
sufficient for the Assize to Serve the Father Brothers Oye, if they knew of no
nearer Degree; And also because the Defunct Bailzie might have had two Father
Brothers, one elder then his Father. and the other younger, and thereby two
Heirs, one of Line and another of Conquest, which not being clear by the
Retoures; the Lords will not prefer the first Retour as standing, but would
hear the Parties upon the Reduction.

Mr. James Stuart contra Mr. John Spruile. January 21. 1663.
MR. James Stuart and Robert Stuart Bailzie of Lithgow, as Curator to him, as a
Furious Person, or Idiot, by Gift of the Exchequer, pursues Mr. John Spruile
for Sums of Money due to Mr. James. It was alleged no Process at the Instance
of Robert Stuart, as Curator, because by Law, the Tutors or Curators of Furious
Persons, are conform to the Act of Parliament to be Cognosced by an Inquest,
whether the Person be Furious, and who is his nearest Agnat, of the Fathers
side, past twenty five.

The Lords found Process, Robert Stuart finding Caution to make forth coming,
and declared it should be but prejudice to the nearest Agnat, to Serve
according to the said Act of Parliament, for they thought, that as the Lords
might name Curators, ad litem, in the interim, so might the King, and that the
Exchequer was accustomed to do.

William Zeoman contra Mr. Patrick Oliphant. January 22. 1663.
IN a Competition betwixt Zeoman and Oliphant, anent the Estate of Sir James
Oliphant, who having killed his Mother, was pursued Criminally therefore,
before the Justice, and being Charged to underly the Law, for the said Crime,
under the pain of Rebellion, he compeared not, and the Act of Adjournal was
declared Fugitive, and his moveable Goods ordained to be Inbrought: The
Criminal Libel proceeded, both upon the Act of Parliament against Paricide; and
also upon the Act of Parliament, declaring that killing of Persons under
assurance of Trust, to be Treasonable; Hereupon the King granted a Gift of Sir
James Forefaulture to Sir Patrick Oliphant, who thereupon was Infeft. It was
alleged for William Zeoman, who had Right by Appryzing, that there could be
no respect to the Gift of Forefaulture, because Sir James was never Forefault,
but only declared Fugitive, and Denunced as said is; and that any Doom of
Forefaulture had been pronounced, the Crime behoved to have been proven before
an Assize, else there could be no Forefaulture; neither could the Donator
possess, medio tempore, till the Crime were yet put to the Trial of an Assize,
because Sir James is dead.

The Lords found that the Gift of Forfaultuee could not be effectual for the
Reasons foresaid, and found that the Act against Paricide, could be no
foundation of a Gift, because it only excluded the Murderer, and his
Descendents, to succeed to the Person Murdered, by declaring expressly that the
Murderers Collaterals should succeed, and so there was no place for the King.
And as for the other Act of Murder under Trust, they found that there being no
probation, it could work nothing, and there is no doubt, but though there had
been Probation, that Act of Murder under Trust, does not directly quadrat to
this Case, upon that natural Trust betwixt Parents and Children, but only to
Trust given by express Paction, or otherwise it could evacuat the benefit of
the foresaid other Act anent Paricide, and would prefer the Fisk to the
Collaterals of the Murderer, if he had done no wrong, contrair to the said Act,
anent Paricide, which is not derogat by the other.

Wallace contra Edgar. Eodem die.
James Wallace as Assigney by James Scot, to a Decree obtained against John
Edgar in Drumfreis, having Charged thereupon, Edgar Suspends, and alleadges
Compensation, upon Debts due by Scot the Cedent to the Suspender, before the
Intimation of his Assignation; and therefore according to the ordinary Course,
Debts due by the Cedent, before Intimation, are Relevant against the Assigney,
and condescends upon several Bonds and Decreets against the Cedent, assigned to
the Suspender, before the Chargers Intimation. The Suspender answered, that
albeit any Debt due by the Cedent to the Debtor, before Intimation, will be
relevant to compense against the Assigney; yet that will not extend to Sums
assigned to the Debtor, before the Chargers Assignation, unless that
Assignation had been Intimat, before the Chargers Intimation, because the
Assignation only does not Constitute the Suspenders Creditor, or the Cedent
Debtor, until it be Intimat; and so there being no debiium and Creditum,
before the Intimation, there can be no Compensation, which is contributio
debiti and crediti. The Suspender answered, that the Assignation Constitute the
Right, and the creditum, but the Intimation was only necessar in case of
Competition of other Assigneys, and he needed not Intimat to Scot; quia intus
habet, in respect Scot was owing him as much.

The Lords found no Compensation, unless the Suspender had Intimat his
Assignation to the Cedent, and so had Constitute him his Debtor, before the
Cedent was denuded, by the Chargers Assignation and Intimation.

Children of Netherlie contra The Heir. January 24. 1663.
THe Children of umquhil Edgar of Netherlie, alleging that their Father left
to his Heir a competent Estate, and that he dyed before any Provision or
Aliment appointed to them, and that the Heirs Tutor refused to Aliment them:
Their Mother being also dead, therefore craved an Aliment to be modified, there
being no compearence in the contrair.

The Lords found the Brother, as being Heir to the Father, of a competent
Estate, liable to Aliment the Children being wholly unprovided, but determined
neither the time, nor the quantity, till the Condition of the Estate were
Instructed.

Bain contra Lord of Streichan. Eodem die.
THe Lord of Streichan being pursued by Bain, proponed a Reason of
Compensation, and produced a Writ for instructing thereof, being called at the
advising of the Cause.

The Lords suffered him to Reform the Alleadgence, seeing he instructed it
instantly, by another Writ then was formerly produced.

Sydeserf of Ruchlaw contra Wood. Eodem die.
THere being mutual Contraventions betwixt Ruchlaw and Wood, both relating to a
peace of Ground, upon the Marches of their Lands, which Ruchlaw alleged to be
his Property, and that Wood had contraveened by needful Pasturage thereon,
himself being present, when he was desired to remove his Goods off the same:
and the other alleging Commonty, and that Ruchlaw had contraveened by wilful
debarring him from his Commonty.

The Lords before Answer, granted Commission to Examine Witnesses, hinc inde,
concerning their Possession of Property, and Commonty; and having advised the
Testimonies, found that the Matter was not so clear as to be the ground of a
Contravention; and therefore assoilzied both Parties, but declared it should be
free to them both, or either of them to turn their Libel into a Molestation,
and to reform the same accordingly thereanent. They granted again Commission
before answer, to Examine Witnesses, hinc inde, anent eithers Possession, and
the indurance thereof, which was not cleared by the former Commission.

Robert Grahame contra John Rosse. Eodem die.
IN a Competition betwixt Grahame and Rosse, and a third Party, all Compryzers,
the posterior Appryzers craving to come in pari passu, by virtue of the late
Act of Parliament. It was alleged for Grahame, who had obtained Infeftment,
that he ought to be preferred; because albeit his Appryzing was since January
1652. yet he had been in Possession thereby seven years, and so had the benefit
of a Possessory Judgment.

This was Repelled, because the Act of Parliament was but late, before which
there could be no ground to come in pari passu, and there was no exception in
it, of these who had Possessed or not Possessed, before the Act.

Secondly, Grahame further alleged, that he ought to be preferred; because he
was Infeft in an Annualrent out of the Lands, which is a real Right excepted by
the Act of Parliament. Thirdly, That Rosse could not come in, because Rosses
Appryzing was before 1652. and the Act of Parliament brings in only Appryzing
since December, 1652. Fourthly, None of the Parties could come in with him,
until first they paid him their proportionable part of the Composition, and
Expenses bestowed out by him, conform to the Act.

The Lords found that albeit Grahames Appryzing was not upon the Infeftment of
Annualrent, but upon the personal obliegement for the Principal, and bygone
Annualrents, upon Requisitions, which was a passing from the Infeftment of
Annualrent; yet that he might, pro loco and tempore, pass from his Appryzing,
and might be preferred to his bygone Annualrents, upon his Infeftment of
Annualrent; in this Case of Composition, albeit there was yet no Appryzing upon
the Infeftment of Annualrent; and found that John Rosses Appryzing before 1652.
was not excluded, but behoved to be in the same Case, as if it had been after:
But found that the other Appryzers before they came in, behoved to satisfy the
Composition proportionally by the Tenor of the Act.

Sir Robert Montgomerie of Skelmarlie contra John Broun. January 28. 1663.
SIr Robert Montgomery pursues John Broun, for perfecting a Bargain agreed upon
in word betwixt them, where Sir Rob^rt was to Dispone the Right of an Appryzing
of the Lands of Fordel, for which John was to pay 10000. merks; After which
verbal agreement, John Broun write a Letter to Sir Robert, in relation to the
Bargain, bearing, that he was affrayed not to get the Money at the time agreed
upon; and then bearing the said words, all I can say now is, I am not to pass
from what was spoken betwixt you and me. The Defender alleged, that this
being a Communing in word, anent an Heretable Right, est locus penetentiae,
there being yet neither Minute, Disposition, or other Security, Subscribed. And
as to the Letter, it was not to be respected, because it was no Minute, and
mentionated, that the Writer was not fully resolved, that he would be able to
provide the Money, and keep the Bargain; as for the Word Signifying, that he
would not pass therefrom, it did but express his present resolution, and was
not Obligatory; and though they were, so long as Sir Robert might resile,
notwithstanding of the Letter, John Broun might also resile. It was answered
for the Pursuer, that his Libel stood most Relevant, because there is only
locus penitentiae, when there is no Writ; but if any Party obliege himself to
stand to a former Communing, his own voluntar Deed, has unquestionably obliged
him, unless the other did resile, and the Obligation is as valid in a missive
Letter, as the most solemn Bond: Neither are words, I am not to pass, to be
interpret, to signify a Resolution, but being in materia obligatoria, must
signify an Obligation, otherwise all Minutes must be void, and are ordinarily
expressed in such Terms, as are to do, or shall do such things: and whereas
there was several Practicques, produced, finding locum penitentiae in such
Cases, though they were Earnest, and though there were Possession, and a Letter
whereby the Resiler designed another Party by the Lands Disponed, yet there was
no Obligation in Writ, as in this Letter: and likewise John Brown paid 3000.
merks, of the price, albeit he took a Bond of borrowed Money, till things were
perfected, and got the Keys of the Houses.

The Lords found there was yet place to Resile, and therefore assoilzied.

Margaret Stevenson and her Son contra Ker and others. Eodem die.
MArgaret Stevenson pursues Margaret Ker, as vicious Intromissatrix with the
Goods of her Husband, for payment of a Debt, wherein he was Cautioner. She
alleged absolvitor, because her Iutromission was purged, in so far as she had
Confirmed herself Executrix Creditrix. It was answered by the Pursuer, non
relevat, unless before intenting of the Cause. The Defender answered, it was
sufficient, being within year and day, after the Defunct's Death.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Lord Balnagoun contra M. Thomas Mckenzie. Eodem die.
BAlnagoun as Donator to the Escheat of his Father, pursues Mr, Thomas Mckenzie
for the price of some Lands, sold to him by his Father, and for the annualrents
since. It was answered for the Defender, that there was no Annualrent due by
the Minute; and albeit it was the price of Land, yet Balnagoun had never made
Mr. Thomas a Right to this day, but had forced him to be at a huge Expenses and
Plea, and so was in mora, that the price was not paid: and albeit^he did
possess the Lands, it was by redeeming Wodsets thereupon, contained in the
Minute.

The Lords found Mr. Thomas liable either for the Annualrent, or for the
superplus of the Rents of the Land, more then paid the Annualrent. In this
Process it was found that the Probation of a Tenor, before an Inferior Judge
was null.

Margaret Edgar contra John Murray. January 29. 1663.
MArgaret Edgar having Charged John Murray, as Cautioner for the umquhil
Viscount of Stormont, he Suspends and offers him to prove by her Oath, that she
transacted with him to accept a Decree against the principal to free him. The
Charger answered, that she being a Wife clade with a Husband, could not swear
in his prejudice. The Suspender Replied, that before her Marriage, he had
raised a Pursuit, and Cited her to hear and see it found and declared, he was
free of Cautionry, in respect of the said Transaction, and so the matter being
Litigious, her marrying during the Dependence cannot exclude him from his Oath,
but must work against her Husband, who is only jure mariti, a Legal Assigney.

The Lords found this Reply Relevant.

Scot contra Mr. John Dickson. Eodem die.
SCot as Assigney by her Father to a Bond, Charges Mr. John Dickson to make
payment, he Suspends on this Reason, that the Assignation being while the
Charger was Wife to Scot her Husband, the Sum belonged to the Husband, jure
mariti; and therefore craves Compensation of the like Sums, paid to, or for
the Husband. The Charger answered, that though the Date of the Assignation was
before her Husbands Death, yet her Father kept the same in his Custody, and
it was not Intimate till after the Husbands Death, and so the Right not being
Established in the Wifes Person by Intimation, could not accresce to the
Husband, unless the Suspender would instruct that it was Intimate before.

The Lords found that seeing the Assignation was now in the Wifes hands, they
would not put the Suspender to prove the Delivery thereof, during the Marriage,
but that it was presumed to have been delivered according to the Date, and that
thereby it became the Husbands, jure mariti, though no Intimation was in his
time.

Archibald Stuart contra Bogle and Matthie. January 30. 1663.
BOgle and Matthie being Conveened before Archibald Stuart, as Baillie of the
Regality of Glasgow, for a wrong committed upon two other Persons in the Kirk,
upon the Sabbath, thrusting in upon them in Seat, and beating them, they were
therefore amerciat in 200. Pounds, half to the Party, and half to the Fiskall.
It was alleged the Fine was exorbitant, and that Inferior Courts could not
amerciat above ten Pounds, as it had been found by several Decisions. It was
answered that this Court being a Regality, and the Fact so atrocius, the Fine
was very Competent.

The Lords Sustained the Decree.

Town of Linlithgow contra Inhabitants of Borrowstounness. Eodem die.
THe Town of Linlithgow having apprehended an Inhabitant of Borrowstounness, in
their Town, being an un-free man, and exercising the Trade of Merchandise, they
put him in Prison, he granted Bond to forbear in all time coming: Likeas they
fined him in a 100. merks, he Suspended and raised Reduction on this Reason,
that the Bond was extorted, when so far as he was summarly taken, and put in
Prison, and could not get out till he promised to give the Bond, and immediately
after he was out subscribed the same. The Charger alleged there was no unjust
force or fear, because by the Acts of Parliament, in favors of Free Borrows,
all unfree men are discharged to exercise the Trade of Merchandise, whereupon
they had obtained Decree against the same Suspender to desist and cease
therefrom. Secondly, They and all other free Borrows had immemorially possessed
this privilege, to apprehend persons found within their Town, and forced them
to find Caution as Law will, upon Debt due to any in the Town, and particularly
to put them in Prison, till they give such Bonds in Surety as this. The
Suspender answered to the first, there was no such Warrant by the Act of
Parliament, but only to Charge with general Letters, un-free men to find
Caution; and for the Privilege of Borrows, to arrest un-free persons within
their Towns; it is only in case of Debts, and other Merchandises, due to
Burgesses, but cannot be extended to this Case, where there is a special Order
set down by Act of Parliament.

The Lords found that the Burghs Royal summarly upon Staple Ware of un-free
men, and might judge thereanent, but not summarly Incarcerate their Persons,
but only to Charge them; and found their Custom and Privilege, not to extend
to this Case; and therefore found the Reason of Reduction Relevant.

The Lady Carnagy contra The Lord Cranburn. Eodem die.
LAdy Anna Hamiltoun and the Lord Carnagie her Husband, as having obtained a
Gift of Recognition from the King, of the Barony of Innerweek, and being
thereupon Infeft, pursues the Lord Cranburn to whom the samine was Disponed, by
the Earl of Dirletoun, Grandfather to both, for declaring the Recognition, and
the Donatrix Right, in so far as James Maxwel, late Earl of Dirletoun, holding
the said Lands of His Majesty's Ward, and relief had, without His Majesty's
consent, Alienat and Disponed the same to James Cicile his Oye, then second Son
to the Lord Cranburn, procreat betwixt him and the Earl of Dirletouns second
Daughter. It was alleged for the Defender, absolvitor, because where there
was no Infeftment, there could be no Alienation nor Recognition; and there
could be no Infeftment without the same were granted to the Disponer, or his
Procurator, to the accepter to his Procurator; but here there was no accepter
nor Procurator, because Cranburn being then a Child, and in England, had
granted no Mandat to take this Seasine; and therefore had raised Reduction
thereof, as done without his Warrant. And as to the Procuratory expead in the
Chancellary, Constituting an Acturney to the said James Cicile, the expeading
thereof was without his knowledge or warrant; and therefore the Seasine being
taken without his Warrant, was null, and made no Alienation nor Recognition, as
if any Heretor Disponing Ward-Lands, and giving a Precept of Seasing, if any
third Party should accidentally find, or steal away that Precept, and take
Seasine, the same would be found null, as without Warrant, and would infer no
Recognition. 2ly, Absolvitor, because the Disposition to the Defender, bears
expressly, that Dirltoun Dispones, failzing Heirs-male of his Body, so that it
being conditional, and the Seasine being actus legittimus qui nec recipit, di^m
nec conditionem, the samine is null; for if Di^ltoun had an Heir-male of his
own Body, he would have excluded James Cicile, not by way of Reversion, or
Retrocession, there being none such in the Disposition; therefore it behoved to
be a Suspensive Condition. 3ly. Absolvitor, because though the Seasine had been
accepted warrantably, yet the Accepter was minor, and thereupon Leased, and
ought to be restored and the Seasine annulled, and consequently the
Recognition. The Pursuer answered to the First, non relevat, for albeit there
had been no Acturney out of the Chancellary, the Seasine would have been valid,
because there needs no other Procuratory, for taking of Seasine, but only the
Precept of Seasine, which is an express Mandat of the Disponet, and the having
thereof in the Acturneys hand, is a sufficient evidence of the Warrant or
Mandat to be Acturney, for the Receiver, which proves sufficiently his Warrant,
neither was there ever any more required to a Seasine in Scotland, and if more
were required, all Seasines would be null, it being ordinar to give Seasines to
Infants, or absents out of the Country; but the delivery of the Precept by the
Disponer, to any Person in Name of the Accepter, is a sufficient Mandat, or
Acturney for the Accepter, especially here, where a Grandfather gives
Infeftment to his Oye, he might well give a Warrant to an Acturney for him to
accept. To the second, albeit the Disposition bears, failing Heirs-male of the
Disponers Body: Yet the Precept is directed to give present State and Seasine
without delay; whereby it is clear, that the Disponers meaning was not, that
this condition should be Suspensive to impede the Infeftment: And therefore all
it could operate is, to have the effect of a resolutive Condition, that if any
Heir-male should be Supervenient, he might upon that condition pursue James
Cicile to renunce the Right, or to declare it null, neither is a Seasine actus
legittimus, and though it were, and were incapable of a day or condition, yet
that would not annul the Act, but annul the condition or day, as aditio
haereditatis, is actus legittimus: Yet if any man enter Heir for a time, or
under condition, he is Heir simply; and the time and condition is void, but not
the Entry it self. To the Third, albeit regulariter, Minors Leased may be
Restored, yet that has its Exceptions, as a Minor being Denunced Rebel, and
his Escheat fallen, or thereafter his Liferent, or bearing in Non-entry, either
simply, or through a wrong or informal Infeftment, he would never be restored
against these Casualities, so neither against the taking of Seasine, in so far
as may infer Recognition. 2ly, There could be by the Seasine no Lesion at that
time, Cranburn being then but his Mothers second Son, and not alioqui
succ^ssurus, to the half of the Estate, as now he is; neither is ever Lesion
interpret by the prejudice of any part of a Deed, unless there were Lesion of
the whole, as if Lands were Disponed to a Minor, with the burden of Debts, he
could not reduce the burden of Debts as to his Lesion, unless thereby the whole
Disposition were to his Lesion.

The Lords Repelled these three Defenses.

Rig of Carberrie contra His Creditors. Eodem die.
THE Creditors of Carberrie having obtained a Decree against Carberrie, and
Denunced him thereupon, pursues for Annualrent since the Denunciation, conform
to the Act of Parliament thereanent. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, First,
Because the Horning was manifestly null, he being Denunced in the Name of
Richard the Usurper, after he was out of his pretended Authority. 2dlie,
Because the Decree being Suspended, a fifth or sixth part thereof was taken
away. 3dlie,, The Denunciation was not at the Cross of the Regality of
Musselburgh where he dwells, but at Edinburgh, 4lie, Before the D^nunciation he
had given in a Bill of Suspension, whereupon there was a Deliverance given,
superceeding Execution, till the Bill were seen and answered; in the mean time
these Pursuers getting the Bill to see, proceeded to Denunce. The Pursuers
answered to the first, that it was nottour, and attested by the Keeper of the
Signet, that Richard was repute in Scotland, to be in his Authority till the
18. of May 1659. till which the Signet was open, and many Letters past in his
Name, and this Denunciation was upon the sixth of May, and the Charge in Aprile.

In respect whereof, the Lords Repelled the first Defense; They Repelled also
the second Defense, as to the Annualrent of what was found due by the last
Decree. They Repelled the third Defense, because the Usurper had cried down
Regalities: and found the fourth Defense Relevant, scripto vel juramento, viz.
That there was a Deliverance stopping Execution the time of the Denunciation.

Rickart contra Eodem die.
RICKART being Tacks-man of a Room of the Barony of Lowdoun, set the same to a
Subtennent, for paying the Heretors Rent, and so much superplus, whereupon he
Charged the Sub-Tennent, who Suspended, and alleged that the Charger had
sub-set to him as Tacks-man, and was obliged to produce his Tack to him, and
being Warned by the Heretor, he did by way of Instrument require the Chargers
Tack (if he any had) to Defend himself thereby, which he refused; and the truth
is, he had no Tack unexpired: Whereupon he was necessitate to take a new Tack
from the Heretor, for the whole Duty he was obliged to pay to the Heretor, and
Rickart before. The Charger answered non Relevat, unless as he had been Warned,
he had also been Removed by a Sentence, in which the Charger would have
compeared and Defended: And albeit he had not compeared, the Defender had this
Defense competent, that he was Tennent to the Charg^^, by payment of Male and
Duty, who had Right by Tack, either standing, or at least he bruiked, per
tacitam relo^ationem, and he not Warned nor Called.

The Lords found the Reason of Suspension Relevant, and that the foresaid
Defense of tacit Relocation would not have been Relevant, tacit Relocation
being only effectual against singular Successors of the natural Possessor. The
Warning of whom is sufficient to interrupt the same, not only as to them who
are warned, but any other Tacks-man, whose Tacks are expired, and therefore the
Defense in that Case, must always be, that the Defender is Tennent, by payment
of Male and Duty to such a person, who either is Infeft, or has Tack and Terms
to run after the Warning; but if the Charger had a Tack standing, the Lords
ordained him to produce the same, and they would hear the Parties thereupon.

Charles Oliphant contra Dowglasse of Donnoch. February 3. 1663.
CHarles Oliphant as Assigney Constitute by David Macbrair, Charges Dornoch to
pay the sum of 1800 merks: Compearance is made for an Arrester, as having
Arrested before the Assignation, at least before Intimation. The Assigney
answered, no preference upon this Arrestment, because it was Execute upon the
Sabbath Day, and so is not lawful: for by the Law of all Nations, Judicial Acts
done by Authority of Judges, upon Legal Process, diebus feriates are null; and
there is an Act of Sederunt to that same effect. The Arrester answered, that
there was no Law prohibiting such Executions, or declaring them null; and
though it was a fault and breach of the Sabbath to do so, that annuls not the
Act, fi^ri non debet sed factum valet.

The Lords were all clear that such Executions should be prohibit in time
coming, but quo ad praeterita, some were non liquct; Yet the major part found
the Execution null, for they thought, that albeit Acts of private Parties on the
Sabbath Day, might stand legally valid, as if Extracts were Subscribed that
day, or a Consignation made, (which had been found valid by a former Decision)
yet judicial Acts, authoritate judicis, are null, else Messengers would
ordinarily wait Parties upon the Sabbath Day, for all Execution by Horning and
Caption, etc.

Lord Phillorth contra Lord Frazer. February 4. 1663.
SIR Alexander Frazer of Phillorth, being in Distress for Debt, Disponed his
Barony of Cairnbuilg; to Robert Frazer of Doors, which Lands of Cairnbuilg lies
near to Phillorth, and the House thereof was his Residence, in the Alienation
there is a Clause conceived to this effect, that it shall not be leisom to the
said Robert Frazer of Doors, to Alienate the Lands, during the Lifetime of the
said Sir Alexander Frazer, and if the said Robert Frazer did in the contrary,
he obliged him to pay to the said Sir Alexander, the Sum of ten thousand pounds
for Damnage and Interest, ex pacto convento, and if the said Robert should have
a^do to sell the said Lands, after the death of the said Sir Alexander, he
obliged him to make offer there to the Heirsand Assigneys of the said Sir
Alexander; or any Person he pleased nominat of the Name of Frazer, for 38000
pounds. The said Robert Frazer of Doors, Disponed the said Lands to
Staniewood, during the life of Sir Alexander Frazer: Sir Alexander assigned the
Contract, and the foresaid Clause to this Phillorth, whereupon he raised
Improbation and Reduction, of the Disposition granted by Doors to Staniewood,
the Lord Frazers Grandfather upon this Reason, that he as Assigney by his
Father to the Clause de non alienando, had good interest to pursue Reduction of
the Disposition contraveening the said Clause; and true it is that the said
Disposition granted by Doors to Staniewood, was null; as proceeding a non
habente potestatem, in so far as by the foresaid Clause, in the said alienation
granted by his Grandfather to Doors; it was expressly provided, it should not
be leisom for Doors to sell, etc. Which being a Provision in the Disposition
repeated, at the least generally in the Procuratory of Resignation, is pactum
reale, effectual against singular Successors, as was lately found in the case
of the Lord Stormont, and so must annul the Right made contrair thereto. 2ly,
Albeit it were not a real Paction, yet unquestionably the Obligement not to
Annalize, did personally oblige Doors, and thereupon there was an Inhibition
raised before my Lord Frazers Grandfather Staniewoods Right: And therefore the
Disposition made thereafter ought to be reduced, ex capite inhibitionis. It was
answered for the Lord Frazer, to the first member of the Reason, non relevat;
for such an Obligation, de non alienando^ is reprobat in Law, as being contrair
the nature of Property. 2ly, It is not reale pactum, albeit it were in the
Charter or Seasine, much less being only in the Disposition, and in the
Narrative of the Procuratory of Resignation thus, and to the effect the said
Robert Frazer may be Infeft, upon the provisions and conditions in manner
foresaid, but no further mention thereof; in the Procuratory of Resignation or
Infeftment, and so meets not with Stormonts Case, where the Clause was expressly
resolutive, that in such a Case the Right should be null ipso facto; and return
to the next person who might be Heir of Tailzie. Which Clause was not only in
the Disposition, but in the Procuratory, Charter, and Seasine Registrate; and
thereby equivalent to a Publication of an Interdiction: but here there is no
resolutive or irritant Clause, nor any Right reserved to return in case of
contraveening, nor is it in the Infeftment at all. As to the second, the
Inhibition cannot make the Clause effectual to annul the Alienation, because
Doors was not simply obliged, not to Alienat during Sir Alexanders Life, but if
he did in the contrair, to pay ten thousand pound for Damnage and Interest, ex
pacto convento, which cannot be understood of Damnage by delay, or Expense in
attaining the principal Obligation, seeing it bears not as is ordinar by and
attour performance, and the quantity thereof being so great, it must be
evidently understood of the value of the principal Obligation, so that it
becomes an alternative or restrictive Clause, whereby it was in Doors option,
whether to forbear to sell, or to pay the ten thousand pounds if he did sell,
so that the Inhibition can reach no further then to the ten thousand pounds,
seeing Doors by selling, became obliged for the ten thousand pounds.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and that the Clause or Inhibition could
extend to no further then ten thousand pounds.

It was further alleged for Frazer absolvitor, from the ten thousand pounds,
because it being a Moveable Sum, fell under Sir Alexander Frazer his Escheat,
which was Gifted to one Forbes, and declared expressly as to this ten thousand
Pounds, and assigned to the Lord Frazer. The Pursuer answered that this Sum was
Heretable, because it succeeded in the place of the principal Obligation, not
to alienat for such a time; and after that time to offer the Lands of Phillorth
and his Heirs, for eight thousand pounds, which is clearly an heretable Clause;
and therefore this Sum coming in leu thereof, must belong to the Heir or
Assigney, and so fell not to the Fisk, seeing surrogatum sapit naturam
surrogati, as Sums Consigned for Redemption of Lands before Declarator, are not
moveable, but belong to the Wodsetters Heirs or Assigneys; so in mutual
Obligations, whereby one person oblieges to Dispone, or Resign Lands; and
another is obliged for a price, the price would not belong to the Executor, or
Fisk, but to the Heir; any sums due for Damnage and Interest, not performing a
Disposition, or upon Eviction, belongs to the Heir, not to the Executor. The
Defender answered, that this sum is not in the case of any of the former
alleadgences, neither is the question here, what would belong to the Executor,
but what would belong to the Fisk, for Moveable Heirship belongs to the Heir
and not to the Executor, and yet belongs to the Fisk, so do sums without
Destination of Annualrents, wherein Executors are secluded. So also does the
price of Lands, when they are de presenti, sold by the Defunct.

The Lords found this sum moveable and belonged to the Fisk, and therefore
Assoilzied the Defender from that Member also.

Mr. Ninian Hill contra Maxwel. February 5. 1663.
MR. Ninian Hill pursues Maxwel as heir to his Father John Maxwel, for payment
of a sum due to be paid to Maxwels Relict yearly after his death, and assigned
to the pursuer. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Pursuers Cedent
being Executor her self to the Defunct, was liable for this sum, and intus
habuit. It was answered for the Pursuer, that this being an annual, payment
after the Defuncts death, it was proper for his heir to pay the same, not for
his Executor, and if the Executor had paid it, he would get releif off the
heir.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Grahame contra Ross Eodem die.
THe Parties having Competed upon Appryzings, being decided the 24. of January.

Wherein the Lords found that none of the Appryzers should come in with him who
was first Infeft, till first they paid their proportional part of the
Composition and Expenses; now having considered again the Tenor of the Act of
Parliament, they found that they behoved to satisfy the whole, and that the
obtainer of the first Infeftment should bear no share of it, that being all the
other Appryzers gave, ^to got the benefit of the Act, to come in pari passu.

Lenox contra Lintoun. Eodem die.
LEnox being Married to Margaret Mcgie, who was an Heretrix, she dying, Lenox
Son was Infeft as Heir to her, who dying also without Issue, this Lenox as his
Brother by his Mother, and alleging him to be appearing Heir to his Brother
Lenox, in these Lands, whereunto his Brother succeeded to their Mother, craves
Exhibitions of the Writs of the Lands, ad deliberandum. The Defender Lintoun
alleged absolvitor, because his Son being Infeft in the Lands as Heir to his
Mother, his nearest Agnat on the Fathers side, his apparent Heir, and ^one on
his Mothers side; for we have no intrin succession, neither holds it with us,
materni maternis, paterni paternis.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and that the Father was apparent Heir to his
Son, being once Infeft as Heir to the Mother, and therefore Assoilzied.

Lady Carnagy contra Lord Cranburn. Eodem die.
THis day afternoon the Lords Advised the rest of the Defenses, proponed for
the Lord Cranburn, in the Recognition pursued at the Instance of my Lady
Carnagy, who alleged first, that Recognition was only competent in proper
Ward-holdings, and not in blench Feu, or Burgage; these only being feuda recta
and militaria, and all others but fendastra; But the Lands of Innerweek are not
a proper Military Feu, holding Ward, being only a Taxed Ward, wherein the word
Duties is Taxed yearly, and the Marriage is Taxed to so much, and so is in the
nature of a Feu; neither was it ever yet found in Scotland that a Taxt-ward did
fall in Recognition. The pursuer answered, that the Defense is not Relevant to
rule in our Law, being that alienation of Ward-lands, without the consent of
the Superior, infers Recognition, and neither Law nor Custom has made
exception of Taxt-wards, which have but lately occurred in the time of King
James, who and King Charles were most sparing to grant Gifts of Recognition,
whereby there has been few Debates or Decisions thereanent, and there is no
consequence, that because the Casuality of the Ward, when it falls, is liquidat
and Taxed, or the value of the Marriage, that therefore the Fee is not a
Military Fee, wherein the Vassal is obliged to assist his Superior in Counsel
and in War, in the stoutest Obligations of Faithfulness and Gratitude; and
therefore his withdrawing himself from his Vassallage, and obtaining another to
him, is the greater Ingratitude that the Superior had Taxed the benefit of the
Ward, and Marriage, at low rates, which Casualties, cannot be drawn to prejudge
the Superior, of other Casualties but on the contrair, exceptio firmat regulam
in non exceptis.

The Lords repelled this Defense. It was further alleged, that here was no
offer of a Stranger, but of the Vassals own Grandchild, who now is his
apparent Heir in one half of these Lands, as being the eldest Son of his second
Daughter: and Recognition was never found in such a Case. The Pursuer answered,
that albeit the Defender be now apparent Heir to the Vassal Disponer, yet the
Case must be considered, as it was in the time of the Disposition, when he had
an elder Brother, the then Lord Cranburn living, and was not alioqui
successurus: and the Lords had formerly found; that an alienation of
Ward-lands, by the Earl of Cassils to his own Brother, albeit he was his
nearest of Kin for the time, having no Children, yet seeing he could not be
esteemed alioqui successurus, or Heir apparent, in regard the Earl might have
Children, therefore they found Recognition incurred.

The Lords repelled this Defense: 3ly, It was further alleged, that there
could be no Recognition, where there was no alienation of the Fee, without the
the Superiors consent, here there was no alienation of the Fee; because the
Seasine being taken to be holden from Dirletoun, of the KING, not confirmed,
was altogether null, and therefore Dirletoun was not Divested, nor Cranburn
Invested, for such an Infeftment is ineffectual, and incomplete, till
Confirmation, and could never be the ground of Pursuit, or Defense against any
Party. 2ly, By such an Infeftment, the Superiors consent is a Condition
employed, for an Infeftment to be holden of the Superior, is null till
Confirming, and implies as much as if the Seasine had been expressly granted, si
dominus consenserit, and so can be no obtrusion, or ingratitude. 3ly, Craig in
his Dieges. de recognitionibus, Reports the Decision of the Lords betwixt
Mckenzie and Bane, whereby they found, that the Seasine being unregistrat, was
null, and inferred no Recognition, quia non spectatur affectus, sed effectus;
yet that was but an extrinsick nullity, much more here, the Seasine being
intrinsically null. The Pursuer answered, First, That if this ground hold,
there could be no Recognition, except by subaltern base Infeftments holden of
the Vassal, in which there is far less ingratitude, there being no new Vassal
obtunded, nor the Vassal withdrawing himself from his Clientel, nor any
prejudice to the Superior, because subaltern Infeftments would exclude none of
the Casualities of the Superiority, yet such Alienations, exceeding the half of
the Fee, do unquestionably infer Recognition, though the ingratitude be no more
then this, that the Vassal renders himself unable fitly to serve his Superior,
by delapidating his Fee, or the Major part thereof, how much more, when he does
all that in him is, to withdraw himself from the Superiors Clientel, by
obtruding to him a Stranger, alienating from him the whole Fee, and albeit the
Seasine be null, as to other effects, till it be Confirmed: Yet as Craig
observes in the foresaid place, Vassalus fecit quantum in se erat. 2ly, Though
by our Statute, or peculiar Custom, such Seasins unconfirmed are null; yet by
the Act of Parliament 1633. Anent Ward holdings, Recognition is declared to
proceed according to common Law, which can be no other then the common Feudal
Customs, by which Customs it is sure that the Recognition is chiefly inferred
by the Vassals alienation: As to the employed condition, si Dominus consenserit,
though that were express, yet the Vassal giving Seasine, the Tradition of
Seasine is inconsistant with such a condition, being understood, as a
Suspensive condition, for he that delivers Possession de facto, cannot be said
upon any condition not to deliver the same de facto, and therefore it is but
protestalio contraria facto, and if it be understood as a resolutive condition,
as needs it must, it impedes not the Alienation, but only might resolve the
same. As to the Decision upon the not Registration of the Seasine una herundo
non facit ver, and albeit it might be a rule in that individual Case. It cannot
be extended ad alios casus, although it were a Statute, much less a Practick.

The Lords also repelled this Defense. 4ly, It was further alleged by the
Defender, that Dirletouns Infeftment was granted by the KING, Haeredibus and
assignatis quibuscunque, and thereby the KING consented, that he should dispone
his Right to any Assigney, or singular Successor, and this Clause is equivalent
to the ordinar Feudal Clauses, Vassallo and quibus dederit, which is ever
understood to exclude Recognition, neither can this be understood to be stilus
curiae, as when Assigneys are casten in in Charters passing the Exchequer; but
this is an original Grant under the KINGS own Hand. The Pursuer answered, that
this Defense ought to be Repelled, because such Concessions, contrair to common
course of Law, are stricti juris, and not to be extended ad effectus non
expressos praesertim prohibitos, but the adjection of Assigneys is no ways to
allow Alienations of the Fee, without consent, but to this effect, because
Feuda and Benficia are in themselves stricti juris, and belong not to
Assigneys, unless Assigneys be expressed; and therefore albeit no Infeftment
had been taken, the Disposition, Charter, or Precept could not be Assigned: so
that this is adjected, to the end that those may be Assigned before Infeftment,
but after Infeftment, Assignation has no effect, and this is the true intent
of Assigneys. In Dispsitions of Land, it is clear, when the Disponer is obliged
to Infeft the Acquirer his Heirs, and Assigneys whatsoever, there is no ground
whereon to compel him to grant a second Infeftment to a new Assigney; but only
to grant the first Infeftment to that Person himself, or to any Assigney
whatever, which clears the Sense in this case. It has also this further
effect, that singular Successors thereby might have right to a part of the
Lands, which though it would not infer Recognition if done, yet if there were
no mention of Assigneys it would be null, and as not done in the same Case as a
Tack, not mentioning Assigneys.

The Lords Repelled this also. 5ly, It was further alleged, that Recognition
takes only place, where there is contempt and ingratitude, and so no Deed done
through ignorance infers it, as when it is dubious whether the Holding be Ward
or not; and therefore Recognition cannot be inferred, seeing there is so much
ground here to doubt, this Right being a taxed Ward, and to his Heirs and
Assigneys, and it is not clear, whether it would be incurred through a Seasine
a se, or to one in his Family, whereupon the wisest of men might doubt, much
more Dirletoun being illiterate, not able to read or write. It was answered,
ignorantia juris neminem excusat. 2ly, Vbi est copia peritorum ignorantia est
supina: Here Dirletoun did this Deed clandistenly, without consulting his
ordinar Advocats, or any Lawyers, and so was inexcusable; and if pretense of
ignorance could suffice, there could be no Recognition, seeing it cannot miss
to be ignorance that any should do that Deed that will be ineffectual, and
loss their Right.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, and all the Defenses jointly, and Decerned.

Lord Loure contra Earl of Dundee. February 6. 1663.
THe Lord Loure, pursues a Reduction of a Disposition made by Carnegy of Craig
to the Earl of Dundee, as being posterior to the Pursuers Debts, and in
prejudice thereof, upon the Act of Parliament 1621. against Bankrupts, and for
instructing of the Reason, repeats the Disposition it self, being betwixt
confident Persons, Cusing Germans, and without cause onerous, in so far as it
bears Reservation of the Disponers, and his Ladies Liferent, and Provision to
be null, if Craig have Heirs of his Body, in whose favors Dundee is to denude
himself, upon payment of his expense. The Defender alleged, that the Lybel is
not Relevant. Prim^, because Craig is no Bankrupt, nor any Diligence done
against him, before the Disposition. 2ly, He is not insolvent by the
Disposition, because there is reserved to him a Power to sell as much of the
Land as is worth 80000 lib. for Debt, and so is not in fra^dm crea^ oru^; but
the Pursuer ought to pursue for that Provision, either by Appryzing, or
personal Action.

The Lords found the Reason relevant and proven by the tenor of the
Disposition, and therefore reduced, to the effect, that the Pursuer might
affect the said Lands with all Legal Diligence for his Debt, as if the
Disposition had not been granted; for they thought, seeing, by this Disposition
there remains not Esta^e sufficient, ad paratam executionem, and that there was
no Reason to put the Pursuer to insist in that Clause, to restrict himself
thereby to a part of the Land, but that he ought to have preference for his
Debt, upon his Diligence, affecting the whole Land.

William Montgomery contra Theoder Montgomery and Mr. William Lauder. February,
10. 1663.
WIlliam Montgomery, as Donatar to the Liferent-escheat of Theodor Montgomery,
pursues a special Declarator against the Tennents of Whit slide belonging to
Margaret Hunter in Liferent, and now to Theodor, jure (...), for their Duties.
It was alleged, that the Horning was null, because the D^bt was satisfied
before Denunciation. The Pursuer answered, that it was not competent, in the
special Declarator, to question the nullity of the Horning. 2ly. Though it were
in a general Declarator, it were not competent, not being instantly verifyed
without Reduction. 3ly, It were not probable, but by Writ, before the
Denunciation, and not by the Creditors Oath, or having discharges, being in
prejudice of the KING, but that no hazard might be of ante-dating it, was
required by Act of Parliament, that beside the Writ, the Parties should depone
upon the truth of the Date. The Defender answered, to the first; all Defenses
competent in the general Declarator, are reserved in the special. To the
second, there is a Reduction depending.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, only scripto of the Denuncer.

The Defender further alleged the Horning was null, as being upon a null
Decree, and falling therewith in consequence.

The Lords repelled the Defense, and found, though the Decree were null
through informality, yet the Horning would not be anulled, but the Party was
in contempt, in not Suspending debito tempore.

Compearance was also made for Mr. William Lauder, who alleged he had
Disposition from the Rebel, before year and day run. The Lords found this
Alleadgeance not relevant, unless it were alleged to be for a just Debt,
before the Denunciation. It was further alleged for Mr. William, that the
Pursuer granted Back-bond to the Thesaurer to employ the Gift, by his
appointment, and he offered to satisfye the Donatars Debt, and the whole
expense of the Gift.

The Lords found this not relevant, without a second Gift, or Declaration from
the Thesaurer.

Thomas Crawfoord contra (...) Eodem die.
THomas Crawfoord, as Executor Creditor to Umquhile Robert Inglis Pursues some
of his Debitors. It was alleged no Process; because Thomas, as Factor for
Robert Inglis, had pursued the same Party, for the same Cause, before the
Commissaries of Edinburgh, wherein Litiscontestation was made: and so now it
cannot be pursued elsewhere, but the Process, ought to be transferred and
insisted in. The Pursuer answered, that he pursued then as Factor, but now as
Executor-Creditor, who did not consider what Diligence Defuncts did: but might
insist therein, or not. 2dly, This being a dilator, is not instantly verifyed.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, but would not find it competent, unless
instantly verifyed; and because it behoved to be instructed by an Act Extracted.

Catharine Frazer contra Heugh Frazer. February, 11. 1663.
THe said Catharine only Child of a second Marriage, being provided to eight
thousand merk of Portion, at her age of 14 years, but no oblidgment of Aliment,
or Annualrent till then, pursues her Brother, as Heir to her Fathers Estate,
being of a good condition for Aliment. He alleadges he was oblidged for none,
not being Parent, nor his Father oblidged by Contract, or Bond for it.

The Lords found an Aliment due, for the Pursuers Mother was not alive, and
able to Aliment her.

Lockie contra Patoun. February 12. 1663.
ELizabeth Lockie Spouse to Doctor Patoun, pursues a Reduction of a
Disposition, granted by her Husband, to certain Persons, as prejudicial to her
Contract; in which Contract there was a Clause, declaring Execution to pass at
the instance of certain Persons, who concur with this pursuit.

The Lords sustained the pursuit, though it was not for Implement, but for
Reduction of a Right, impeding the benefit of the Contract, without concurse of
the Husband, seeing the Process was against a Deed of the Husbands, and he
called passive.

Earl of Southesk and Carnegy contra Bromhall. Eodem die.
BRomhall having taken the Lord Sinclar with Caption, Southesk and his Son gave
Bond, to produce him to the Messengers; or to pay the Sum. on the third of
February, betwixt two and ten, whereupon Southesk having reproduced him, craved
by Supplication, his Bond up, or to be declared satisfied, and extinct. The
Defender answered, First, He not being a Member, or Dependent on the College
of Justice, cannot be called thus summarily: especially to declare a Bond void,
which is in effect a Reduction. 2dly, The Bond was not performed, in so far as
the Lord Sinclar was not reproduced till the 4th of February. The Pursuer
answered, that the Defender living in Edinburgh, and not compearing, the Bill,
per modum quaerelae might be sustained. To the second, it being modica mora of
one day, without damnage to the Defender, and there being trysting amongst the
Parties all the time betwixt, it was sufficient.

The Lords sustained the Petition, and found it extinct.

Relict of George Morison contra His Heirs. Eodem die.
THis Relict pursues for Implement of her Contract. It was alleged she had
accepted a Wodset, in full satisfaction thereof, which now being Redeemed, she
could crave no more, but Re-imploying the Money to her in Liferent.

The Lords found, that this acceptance by the Wife, being donatio inter virum
and uxorem, she might now revock it, and therefore found the Heir liable to
make up what was in the Contract.

The Town of Linlithgow contra Unfree-men of Borrowstounness. February 13. 1663.
THe Town of Linlithgow insisted in their Charge, upon a Bond granted by some
Inhabitants of Borrowstounness, oblidging them to disist and cease from us^ing
the Merchant Trade, under the pain of 500, merk which was Suspended, on this
Reason, that the Bond was extorted by unwarrantable force, in so far as the
Suspenders were taken in Linlithgow brevi manu, and incarcerat, till they
granted the Bond. The Charger produced a Decree of the Lords, in Anno 1643.
against several Inhabitants in Borrowstounness, compearand, who having
Suspended the general Letters, upon Act of Parliament, for finding Caution to
desist, etc. The Letters were found orderly proceeded; and the Town of
Linlithgow empowered, not only to seize upon the Merchant Goods of the
Inhabitants of Borrowstounness, if they meddled in Merchant Trading, but also
bearing, with power to put the Persons, using the said Merchant Trade in
Prison, till Justice were done upon them; and thereupon allege, that the
Suspenders being incarcerat, by virtue, and conform to the foresaid Decree
standing, there was no unwarrantable Force used. 2dly, They produced an Act of
the Council of Linlithg^w* Bearing the Suspenders, to have compeared before the
Council, and to have confessed their wronging of the said Town, in the Trade of
Merchandise; and that there was Horning and Caption against them, for the
Cause; and therefore declared their willingness to grant the Bond in Question.
The Suspenders answered to the First, That albeit the foresaid Decree bear
compearance, yet there is no Dispute in it, and it is evident to be by
Collusion, and Surreptitious; because this Conclusion now alleged, is ultra
petita, there being no such thing in the general Letters, nor does the Decree
bear any special Charge given, neither is this Conclusion warrantable, by any
Law, or Act of Parliament. 2dly, This Decree could be no warrant to Incarcerat
the Suspenders, because it is given only against some particular Persons, then
living in Borrowstounness; without calling either of the Barron or Baillies of
the Burgh of B^rronie, and therefore is null, as to any other Persons; and as
to the Second Answer, upon the Act of Council, it cannot prove against the
Suspenders, being only under the Town-clerks hand, not being a Process upon
Citation, nor having a Warrnat subscribed by the Suspenders.

The Lords having considered the Bond in Question, albeit they found the tenor
thereof not to be contrair the Act of Parliament, yet found the same was
unwarranttably taken, if the same was extort^d, as aforesaid, and found the
Decree of the Lords not to militat against the Suspenders, or to warrant that
incarceration brevi manu, and found the Act of Council proved not against the
Suspenders and yet Ordained them to renew a Bond, by the Lords Authority of the
like tenor.

Elizabeth Fleming and Sir John Gibson contra Fleming and Robert Baird.
BY Contract of Marriage betw^xt the said Robert Baird, and his Spouse, he
accepted 12000 merk in name of Tocher in satisfaction of all his Wife could
succeed to, by her Father, Mother, Sister and Brothers, and discharged his
Mother as Executrix, and Tutrix thereof; Yet she having formerly put more Bonds
in the name of Roberts Wife, then this Sum, and there being no Assignation to
the remainder in the Contract, pursues the said Robert and his Spouse, to grant
an Assignation thereof, and to pay what he had uplifted of the Sums, more nor
his Tocher. The Defender alleged the Summons are not relevant, he neither
oblidged ex lege, nor ex pacto to Assign. The Pursuer answered, this being bona
fidei contractus, the meaning and interest of the Parties is most to be
respected, and therefore though it contains but expressly a discharge, which
cannot be effectual, to lift the Sums from the Creditors, but would loss them
to both Parties, he must Assign: especially, seeing his acceptance of full
satisfaction imports an oblidgment, to denude himself of the superplus. And
which the Lords found relevant, and sustained the Summons.

Walter Riddell contra Eodem die.
WAlter Riddell, as Executor dative confirmed to one Liddell in the Ca^nongate,
pursues his Debitors to pay, compears a Donator, as ultimus Haeres, and craves
preference. The Pursuer answered. First, His Gift was not declared. 2dly. He
offered to prove the Defunct had an Agnat, viz. an Uncle, or an Uncles Son.
Which the Lords found relevant to be proven by Witnesses.

Robertson contra Buchannan. February 14 1663.
RObertson pursues Buchannan, to repay to him a sum of Money, who alleged,
that his Bond bearing to pay this Charger, or to Arthur Buchannan his Brother,
it is alternative and electi^ est debitoris, and he has compensation against
Arthur, which is equivalent, as if he had paid him.

The Lords repelled this alleadgance, and found that the Charger being
deliverer of the Money, and now haver of the Bond, it could import no more, but
that the other Brother was adjected for the Chargers behove, and that there is
no option to the Debtor in such cases.

Mr. James Forsyth contra Archibald Patoun. February 17. 1663.
MR. James Forsyth, as Executor Confirmed to his Sister, pursues the said
Archibald Patoun her Husband, for payment of her third of his Free Goods, at
the time of her death. The Defender alleged, First, By the Deceased Wifes
Contract of Marriage with the Defender, she accepted a 1000 lib. for all she
could crave by his decease, in case there were no Bairns of the Marriage, and
albeit there was a Bairn surviving her, yet the Bairn shortly thereafter dyed.

The Lords repelled this Defense, and found that the Bairn surviving the
Mother, never so short was enough.

It was further alleged absolvitor, because the Deceased Wife having a Child
surviving her, her share belonged to that Child, as nearest of Kin, and the
Child being dead, belongs to the Defender, the Child's Father, as nearest of
Kine to the Child, and cannot go back to the Mothers nearest of Kin; because
there is no succession of Cognats in Scotland. The Pursuer answered, that if
the Child had been Executor Confirmed to the Mother ad eundo haereditate, would
transmit the same to the Father, but there being no Confirmation haeredi^as
mobilium jacebat, and the Goods remain yet still in bonis defuncti maritis, and
albeit it was found in the case of Bells contra Wilkies, that it was not
necessar to transmit movables, that the Testament were execute; yet in that
case it was a Confirmation, which was esteemed an addition. The Defender
answered, that he had done diligence to have it Confirmed, but during the
Child's life, all Judicatories were stopped, and he had taken Instruments of his
desire to be Confirmed: and alleged, that as Bairns surviving would transmit
their Legittime though they had done no diligence; so this Bairn surviving
alone was sufficient.

The Lords found, that seeing there was no Confirmation, the Right was not
established in the Child's Person, and that the Right could not fall to the
Father, but fell to the nearest of Kin of the Mother, and found it was not like
a Legittime, which is only of the Fathers means, and not of the Mothers, and
has a special privilege in Law, to be transmitted by more superviving.

Margaret Hay contra Sir Geo^ge Morison. Eodem die.
SIR Geoege Morison having granted a Bond to Umquhile John Bell and Margaret
Hay, the longest liver of them two in Conjunct-fee, and after their Decease, to
the Bairns of the Marriage, the said Margaret, with concurse of the Bairns,
charges for Payment, Sir George Suspends on this Reason; that Margaret is but
Liferenter, and the Bairns of the Marriage are but Feears; and therefore, seeing
there was an Infeftment upon the said Bond, he ought not to pay the Sum, till
the Bairns be Infeft as Heirs of Provision of the Marriage to their Father, and
renunce the Infeftment.

The Lords decerned, but superseded the Extract, until the Bairns were Infeft,
as Heirs of Provision to their Father: and did grant Renunciation, and found,
that all the Bairns, Male and Female, jointly and equally, behoved to be Served
as Heirs of Provision to their Father in this Annualrent, and Infeft
accordingly, and that by Bairns, was not to be understood the Heir of the
Marriage only.

Colonel James Montgomery contra The Heirs of Robert Halliburtoun Eodem die.
IN a Declarator of Redemption of a part of the Lands of Collfield.

The Lords sustained the Order, at the instance of the Colonel, as being a
Singular Successor, albeit he produced not the Reversion, at the using of the
Ordor, nor now, seeing the Defender compeared and he offered to prove by their
Oath, or their Curators, that they had the Contract of Wodset in their hand,
both then and now.

Birsh contra Douglas. February 18. 1663.
BIrsh an Inglish Woman pursues Catharine Douglas, to pay a Bond, wherein she
and her Umquhile Husband were oblidged. The Defender alleged absolvitor,
because it was a Bond stante matrimonio given by a Wife, which is null in Law.
It was replied it is Ratified Judicially, and the Defender oblidged never to
come in the contrare upon Oath Judicially, which is the strongest Renunciation
of that privilege of Wifes, and it has been frequently found, that minors
making faith, cannot be restored lesionem conscientia ex juramento violato.

The Lords having debated the case at large amongst themselves, found the Bond
null notwithstanding of the Oath; for they thought, that where the deed needed
no Restitution, as in the case of minors, these deeds are valid, but the minor
may be restored; but in deeds ipso jure null, where there need no Restitution,
an Oath cannot make, that ane Legal deed which is none, it was win by a Vot
or two, many thinking that such privileges introduced by Custom or Statute
might be Renunced, and much more swear against; but that it were fit for the
future, that all Magistrates were prohibited to take such Oaths of Wifes, or
Minors, who are as easily induced to Swear, as to oblidge, and if they did,
that they should be liable to pay the Debt themselves.

Dumbar of Hemprigs contra Lady Frazer. Eodem die.
MY Lady Frazer, being first married to Sir John Sinclar of Dumbeath, next to
the Lord Arbuthnet, and last to the Lord Frazer, Dumbar of Hemprigs as Executor
confirmed to Dumbeath, pursues her, and the Lord Frazer her Hushand, for his
interest, for delivery, or payment of the Movables of Dumbeath, intrometted by
her. It was answered. That she had Right to the half of Dumbeaths Movables, as
his Relict, and her intromission was within that half. It was Replied, that she
had only right to third, because Dumbeath had a Bairn of the former Marriage,
who survived him, and so the Executory must be imparted. It was duplyed, that
that Bairn was for as familiat, married, and provided before her Fathers Death,
and so was not in familia, and albeit, if there had been any other Bairns in
the Family, that Bairns part would have accresced to them, yet being no other:
It accresced to the Man and Wife; and the Executory is bipartiti.

The Lords found the Defense and Duply relevant, albeit it was not alleged,
that the Tocher was accepted, in satisfaction of the Bairns Part of Gear,
unless those who have Right would offer to confer, and bring in the Tocher
received; in which case, they might crave a third, if the same were not
Renunced, o^ the Tocher accepted instead thereof.

It was further alleged for the Lord Frazer, that he could not be liable as
Husband; because his Lady being formerly Married to the Lord Arbuthnet, he got
the Movables, and his Successors should be ^yable, at least in the first place.

The Lords repelled the alleadgeance, but prejudice to the Lord Frazer, to
pursue the Successors of the former Husband, for repetition, as accords.

Mckenzie contra John Ross. Eodem die.
JOhn Ross having Appryzed certain Lands belonging to Mckenzie, there is a
Pursuit of Count and Reckoning intented, for declaring, that the Apprysing was
satisfied within the Legal. It was alleged, that the Appryzer was not
Comptable for more of the other Parties Minority then seven years, because, in
the Act of Parliament 1621 Anent Appryzing, it is so provided, and albeit the
meaning of the Act of Parliament was declared to be otherwise, by the Act of
Parliament 1641. Yet that Declaration was contrary to the clear meaning, by the
general rescissory Act 1661.

The Lords having considered the Rescissory Act^ and the Reservation therein,
of the Right of Private Parties following upon the deeds of these Parliaments.
In Respect thereof, and of the Custom this 20 years, the Appryser useing to
Count for all, found the Appryser Comptable for the whole Year of the Minority.

William Blair contra Anderson. Eodem die.
William Blair as Assigny, by the Wife and Bairns of Mr. David Anderson, by his
second Marriage, pursues his Daughters, both of the first and second Marriage,
as Heirs of Line, for Implement of the second Contract of Marriage, and the
Daughters of the second Marriage offering to Renunce to be Heirs of Line, but
prejudice of their Provision, by Contract of Marriage, as Bairns of that
Marriage. The Assigney insisted against the Daughters of the first Marriage, as
lawfully Charged, etc. Who alleged no Process, because the Provision, by the
Contract of Marriage, insisted on, run thus, That Mr. David obliged himself,
and his Heirs-male, Successors to him in his Estate, but did oblige no other
Heirs. Ita est, there is an Heir-male. The Pursuer answered, albeit Heirs-male
were only expressed, other Heirs were not excluded: specially, seeing he bound
himself, so that the effect thereof would only be, that the Heir-male should be
liable primo loco.

The Lords found the Heir-male liable primo loco, and the Heirs of Line secundo
loco, and found the Heir-male sufficiently discussed, by an apprizing of the
Clause of the Contract of Marriage, in favors of the Heirs-male, they not
being Infeft as yet, and having no other Right.

Scots contra Earl of Hume. February 19. 1663.
THe four Daughters of (...) Scot pursues an Ejection against the Earl of Hume,
out of some Lands belonging to them. It was alleged for the Earl absolvitor,
because he entered into Possession, by virtue of a Decree of Removing, given
at his instance, Anno 1650. It was Replied, that the Decree was only against
the Pursuers Mother, that they were never called, nor decerned therein. The
Earl answered, First, That the Decree was against the Mother, to remove her
self, Bairns, Tennents, and Servants, and her Daughters were in the Family,
being then young Bairns; and he was not obliged to know them, they not being
Infeft, but having only an old Right; whereupon there was no Infeftment for 40.
years the time of the Decree.

The Lords in respect of the Defense, restricted the Process to Restitution,
and the ordinary Profits, and decerned the Earl to restore them to Possession
instantly, but superceeded payment of Profits till both Parties were heard, as
to their Rights, for they found, that the Decree of Removing could not extend
to their Children; and albeit they were not Infeft, yet they might maintain
their Possession upon their Predecessors Infeftment, how old soever, seeing they
continued in Possession.

Bessie Muir contra Jean Stirling. Eodem die.
THe said Bessie Muir pursues her Mother, as Executrix to her Father, for
payment of a Legacy of 8000. merks left in his Testament, subscribed by the
Defender, and Confirmed by her, after her Husbands Death. The Defender
alleged absolvitor, because she, by the Contract of Marriage, was Provided to
the Liferent of all Sums to be Conquest, and albeit she consented to the
Legacy, it was Donatio inter virum and uxorem, and for her Confirmation, it
cannot import a passing from her own Right, but only her purpose to execute the
Defunc^s Will, according to Law, especially she being an illiterat Person. The
Pursuer answered, that this Donation was not by the Wife, to, or in favors of
the Husband, but of their Children, which, is not revockable, and also the
Confirmation humologats the same, seeing the Wife might have Confirmed, and
Protested to be withont prejudice of her own Rigt.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply.

Cicil Ruthven contra Hay of Balhousie. Eodem die.
CIcil Ruthven having granted a Bond to David Lamb, that thereupon he might
Apprize from her an Annualrent, whereunto she was Apparent Heir; whereupon she
having obtained a Decree, and now seeking Adjudication in Lambs Name; Lamb
produces under his hand a Writ declaring that his Name was but used in Trust,
that he disclamed the Process.

The Lords, notwithstanding Sustained Proc^sse, being so far proceeded, in
respect of the Declaration, bearing the Trust, and found he could not disclaim,
in prejudice of the Trust.

Lady Swintoun contra Town of Edinburgh. Eodem die.
THe Magistrates, and Council of Edinburgh, having granted them to be Debitors
to the Lady Swintoun, by way of Act, conform to their Custom. The Lady
supplicat, that the Lords would grant Letters of Horning upon the said Act,
whereupon the Magistrates being Cited upon twenty four hours; alleged, they
were not Conveenable hoc ordine, by suiting Letters of Horning upon a Bill, but
it ought to have been by an ordinary Summons, either craving payment, or
Letters conform.

The Lords notwithstanding granted Letters of Horning.

Baillies of Edinburgh contra Heretors of East-lothian and Mers. February 20.
1663.
THe Baillies pursue these Heretors for so much allowed of the Maintenance of
these Shires, of the months of August and September, 1650. And insisting on an
Act of Litiscontestation, in Anno 1659. Whereby the Defenders having proponed a
Defense of total vastation, the same was found relevant. The Defenders having
now raised a review, allege that they ought not to have been put to prove
total Vastation, seeing Vastation was Notour, these Shires being the Seat of the
War, where the English Aarmy lay, which ought to have freed them, unless the
Pursuers had replied, that the Heretors got Rent that year, and had been
burdened with the Probation thereof. 2dly, The Order of Sir John Smiths general
Commissar, and also of the Provisors of the Army, bearing the Provisors to have
Furnished such Provisions want Witnesses, and might have been made up since
they were out of their Offices.

The Lords adhered to the Act, and found the Defense of total Devastation, yet
Relevant, in this manner, that the Heretors got no Rent, and granted Commission
to receive Witnesses, at the head Burghs of the Shires, for each particular
Heretor, to prove their particular Devastations, and Sustained the Order of the
General Commissar, he making faith, that he subscribed an Order of the same
Tenor while he was in Office.

Hary Hamiltoun contra William Hamiltoun. February 21. 1663.
HAry Hamiltoun pursues his Brother William, as behaving himself as Heir to
their Father John Hamiltoun Apothecary, to pay six thousand merks of Provision
by Bond, and condescends that William intrometted with the Rents of the Lands
of Vlistobe, whereunto his Father had Heretable Right. The Defender answered,
that his Father was not Infeft, because he Infeft the Defender therein before
his Death, Reserving only his own Liferent. The Pursuer answered, that the
Infeftment was under Reversion, and was Redeemed by the Father, which Order,
though not Declared, gave him the Right to this Land, and was more than
equivalent to an Heretable Disposition, cled with Possession, which would make
the Apparent Heirs intrometting, infer behaving as Heir, for the Declarator non
constituit sed declarat jus constitutum.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and duply, in respect of the condescendence,
and reply of the Order used.

2ly. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because those Lands were Apprized from
the Defunct, and thereby he was denuded, and so the Defender could not be Heir
therein, at least he could have nothing but the Right of Reversion, which
reaches not to Mails and Duties.

The Lords found, that unless the Defender had Title, or Tolerance from the
Apprizer, the Legal not being expired, but the Debtor in Possession, his Heir
intrometting, behaved as Heir, the Apprizing being but a Security, of which the
Apprizer might make no use, or but in Part, as he pleased.

Stirling contra Campbel. Eodem die.
THe same last point was found betwixt these Parties, and also that the Heirs
Intromission with the whole Silver work, so comprehending the best of them,
which is the Heirship, was gestio pro haerede.

Anna Wardlaw contra Frazer of Kilmundi. Eodem die.
ANdrew Wardlaw having a Wodset upon some Lands of the Lord Frarzer; The
Debtor raises Suspension of multiple Poinding, against Anna Sister and Heir to
the said Andrew Wardlaw, and Frazer of Kilmundi pretending Right by a Legacy,
from the Defunct to the same Sum. The Heir alleged, that it could be liable
to no Legacy, being Heretable. The Defender answered, primo, the Legacy was
made in pro^inctu belli where there was no occasion to get advice of the Formal
and Secure way of disposing of the Wodset, but the Will of the Defunct
appearing in eo casu, it must be held as effectual as Testamentum militare in
procinc^u, which needs no solemnities. 2ly, The Heirs Husband has homologat
the Legacy, by discounting a part thereof. It was answered, that no Testament
whatever can reach Heretable Rights with us. 3ly, That the homologation of the
Husband cannot prejudge his Wife, nor himself, quoad reliquum not discounted.

The Lords found the Heirs had only right, except in so far as the Husband had
homologat the Legacy, which they found to prefer the Legator to the whole
benefit, the Husband could have thereby jure mariti, but not to prejudice the
Wife thereaf^er.

James Aikenhead contra Marjory Aikenhead. February 25. 1663.
THe said James insists for the delivery of a Bond granted to his umquhile
Father, and Assignation thereto, by his Father to him, against the said
Marjory, producer thereof. It was alleged no delivery, because the
Assignation, in favors of the Pursuer, was never delivered, but kept in his
Fathers Possession, which cannot be accounted his Possession, seeing the Pursuer
is a Bastard. 2ly, The conception of the Assignation is to the Pursuer and his
Heirs; which failzing, to the said Marjory, and her Heirs, and he being now
Minor, ought not to dispose of the Sum in her prejudice.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses against the delivery, and found that the
Pursuer, during his Minority should not uplift the Sum, till the Defender were
called, and had access to plead her Interest.

Adam Hepburn contr Helen Hepburn. Eodem die.
THe Estate of Humby being provided to Heirs whatsoever; umquhile Tomas Hepburn
of Humby, in his Contract of Marriage. with Elizabeth Iohns^oun, provides the
said Estate to the Heirs-male, and provides 25000. merks for the Daughters,
there is a Clause of the Contract, Bearing, that it should be leisome to the
said Thomas, at any time, during his Life, to alter the said Provision, or to
dispone thereof, according to his pleasure; thereafter, upon Deathbed he
Disponed the whole Estate, in favors of his Daughter of the Marriage, being
his only Child, Adam Hepburn his Brother, as Heir-male, intents Reduction of
that Disposition, as being done in lecto Aegritudinis. It was alleged, for
the Defender, primo, Minor non tenetur placitare de Haereditate Paterna. The
Defender is Minor, and now the Question of Reduction is, upon her Fathers
Heretage. It was Answered, that the maxim holds not, where the Question is of
the Disposition made to the Minor, whether valid or not, but where the Question
is not upon the Minors Right, but upon the Fathers Right; which Right of the
Fathers, or Predecessors, the Minor is not holden to Dispute.

The Lords repelled this Defense, in respect of the Reply. 2dly. It was
alleged absolvitor, because the Pursuer having only a Personal Provision, in
his Favors, conceived in the Contract of Marriage, and there being as yet, no
Infeftment to Heirs Male, the maxim, that no deed upon Deathbed, can be
prejudicial to Heirs, can be extended to none, but such as are Special Heirs,
and not to those who are by destination Heirs, which is less then if a Charter
had been granted to the Heir Male, which according to Craigs Opinion, is but as
nudum pactum, and an uncompleat Right and could not compel the Heirs of Line,
to Resign: The Pursuer answered, that the maxim is general, and there is no
Distinction by Law, or Custom; whatsoever the Heirs be, so that a Person
having a Right to Heretable Bonds, bearing Clause of Infeftment, whereupon no
Infeftment had followed, could do nothing upon Deathbed in prejudice of the
Heirs, who would have succeeded unto those Bonds, as to Craigs Opinion of a
Charter, it is against Law, and the common Opinion now received that a Charter,
or any Provision in Write is effectual against the granter, and his Heirs to
compel them to complete the same.

The Lords repelled this Defense. 3ly. It was alleged, absolvitor, because
the maxim, can be only understood of the Heir of Line, as nearest of blood, so
that nothing can be effectually done in their prejudice, but here the
Diposition, is but in prejudice of an Heir Male, and in favors of an Heir of
Line, in respect of whom the Heir of Male is but a Stranger, which is the more
clear, because this maxim being very ancient, was produced before their was
any Heir Male, or of Tailzie; and because the Reason of the Law is founded upon
the Natural Obligation, Parents and Predecessors have, of providing their
Successors, and so can do them no prejudice: especially, when they are weak,
and on Deathbed. The Pursuer answered, as before, that the maxim is general;
and there is no distinction introduced by Law or Custom of Heirs Male: and
albeit the Law had introduced such Heirs since this Common Law; yet in so far
as it makes them Heirs. It gives them the Privilege of Heirs, to which the
Reason of the Law does well Quadrat, which is not that Natural Obligation, but
this presumption of Law, that Persons on Deathbed are facile, and weaker in
their Capacities then at other times, and therefore the Law disables them at
that time, to alter the Setlment of their Estates, as they were in their
Health; and so allows of no deed, in prejudice of any Heir of whatsoever kind,
although in favors of another.

The Lords repelled this Defense. 4ly. It was alleged, that the Defunct,
having himself constitute this interest of the Heir Male, had reserved this
power to himself, to alter it during his life, can signify nothing, unless it
Empower him to do it on Deathbed, because, without any such Reversion, he
might have altered the Tailzie, during his Leigpoustie. The Pursuer answered,
Pactum privatorum non derogat jure communi; Therefore this being a special part
of our common Law, anterior to either Act of Parliament, or Practique, no
private Provision, or Reversion can capacitat any Person to do that which the
Law declares void; especially, being upon a Reason of weakness and infirmity,
which is presumed in Persons on Deathbed, presumptione juris and de jure,
admitting no contray probation, for it will not be admitted, to prove that the
Disponer was in perfect soundness of mind, and therefore, if any Person should
reserve a Power to Dispone, though he were not compos mentis: the Reservation
would signify nothing, so here neither is the ordinary word adjected, etiam in
articulo mortis, or on Deathbed, and so cannot be extended to that case and
can reach only to what is done lawfully, legittimo tempore and modo, and there
is far less inconvenience, that a Cause should be superfluous, which is very
ordinary, then that it should extend to take away common Law, neither is the
Provision adjected as an express condition upon which the Tailzie was made,
and no otherwise.

The Lords repelled also this defense, in respect of the Reply, and so having
advised all the Defenses, and Disputes in the afternoon, albeit the Parties had
aggreed before hand, and the Heir of Lines Portion doubled, yet the Lords were
generally clear in the Decisions abovewritten, as relevant in themselves.

James Cuthbert of Dragakers contra Robert Monro of Fowls. February 26. 1663.
THe said James pursues the said Robert Monro, as Heir to his Predecessor the
Lord of Fowls, for payment of a Debt due by him, and insists against him as
behaving himself as Heir, by intromission with the Moveable Heirship. The
Defender alleged absolvitor, because it was not condescended, that the
Defunct was a Person who could have an Heir, as to Heirship Moveable, as being
Prelat, Baron or Burgess, and if the Lands of Fowls be condescended on: It is
offered to be proven, that he was denuded by Appryzing, before his Death to
which Appryzing he had Right before he was Apparent Heir, being Tutor to
another, who was Apparent Heir for the time, and therefore the Defender has
neither behaved himself as Heir, by Intrommission with the Moveable Heirship,
or the Rents of the Defuncts Lands. 3dly. The Defender died Rebel, and his
Escheat Gifted, and Declared, and so nihil habuit in se bonis, and could have
no Moveable Heirship. It is answered, for the Pursuer, to the first, non
relevat, that the Lands were Appryzed from the Defunct, unless the Legal had
been expyred, yet semel Baro semper Baro. 3ly. The Pursuer having taken Right
to the Appryzing, while he was Tutor ipso facto, it accresced to the Pupil, and
thereby was extinct, and cannot defend his Intromissions. 4ly. It was for a
small Sum, and satisfied by Intromission of a year or two, so that the
continuance of the Apparent Heir in the Possession, after he was satisfied is
gestio. 5ly. The Gift and Declarator, if it was done during the Rebels Life, it
was simulat ^etenta possessione, and so null.

The Lords found the Appryzing not to purge the Intromission, unless the Legal
had been expired, in Moveable, and his Apparent Heir might behave himself as
Heir, by Intromission with the Rents of the Apprysed Lands; but if the Legal
was expired, they found it sufficient, and that semel Baro semper Baro is only
to be understood presumptive, nisi contrarium probatur, as also they found the
Defender his taking right to the Appryzing, while being Tutor, or continuing in
Possession after satisfaction thereof, by Intromission not to infer the passive
Title, and that the Gift and Declarator did take away the Heirship moveable,
unless it were offered to be proven simul, or retenta possessione during the
Rebels lifetime.

Lady Milntoun contra Lord of Milntoun. February 27. 1663.
THe Lady Milntoun pursues the probation of a Tenor of a Bond granted by Maxwel
of Calderwood, her Husband, bearing, that in respect of his Facility he might
be induced to dispose of his Wifes Liferent, and thereby redact them both to
want and misery; therefore he oblieges himself not to dispose thereof without
his Wifes consent, seeing he had no means but what he got by her, hereupon she
used Inhibition, which she now produces as an Adminicle, and craves the Tenor
of the Bond to be made up by Witnesses. The Defender having alleged. that
there behoved here to be lybelled and proven a special causus omissionis,
because albeit it were proven that such a Bond once was, yet unless it were
also proven how it was lost, it must be presumed to have been given back to the
Husband, granter thereof, whereby he is liberat, and this is the course
observed in the Tenors of all Bonds of borrowed Money. The Pursuer answered,
that this was not like a Bond of borrowed Money, the intent whereof is, not to
stand as a constant Right, but to be a mean to get payment; but this Bond by
its tenor was to stand as a constant Right, to preserve the Dilapidation of the
Liferent, and so cannot be presumed to have been quite by redelivery thereof;
albeit it had been in the Husbands hands.

The Lords before answer to this Dispute^ Ordained the Pursuer to condescend
what the effect of this Write would be, if it were made up; for if it have no
effect, there were no necessity to make it up.

The Pursuer condescended upon the effect thereof thus, that it would be
effectual as an Interdiction published by the Inhibition, to annual and reduce
the Disposition of the Pursuers Liferent, made by her Husband, without her
consent, in favors of Milntoun, her Step-son 2. This Bond being accessory to
the Contract of Marriage betwixt the same, and the Marriage is pactum dotale,
and must have the same effect, as if it were included in the Contract of
Marriage; and so is a Provision for Securing of the Pursuers Liferent to her
self, and that no Deed by her Husband, without her own consent, should be
effectual. The Defender alleged that none of these Condescendences could be
effectual, not the first, because if the foresaid Bond were an Interdiction, it
would have no effect, unless it were instructed that the granter thereof were
prodigus, and if it were Instructed that he was rei suae providus, it could
take away the effect thereof, because an Interdiction is nothing else but
constitutio Car^^torum prodigo; where albeit it is done of course, periculo
facientis sine causae cognitione with us: Yet if it be on an false Ground and
Narrative, its ineffectual. 2ly. Though it could be instructed, that the
Husband was levis; yet the Interdiction is null, being to his own Wife, who
cannot be his Curator, being sub potestate viri: Nor Curator to any other, much
less can her Husband be made her Pupil, contrair to the Law Divine and Humane.
Neither could the Bond be effectual, as a Provision adjected to the Contract of
Marriage, because it being from an Husband to his Wife, so soon as he was
Married, it returned to himself, jure mari^i, because nothing can consist in
the person of the Wife, which belongs not to the Husband, jure mariti, being
moveable, except an Aliment formerly Constitute to her in a competent measure.
The Pursuer answered that she opponed the Bond, and further offered to restore
to the Defender, all that he gave for the Disposition of her Liferent.

The Lords after they had Reasoned the several Points, in jure, and found that
without the offer, the Bond could not be consistent as an Interdiction, in so
far as concerned the Husband to annul the Disposition, but were inclined to
Sustain the same for the Wife, in so far as might extend to a competent Aliment
of her Family to her Self, Daughter and Servants, not excluding her Husband:
Yer they found the offer so reasonable, to Repay the Sum Paid for the
Liferent, being 5000. merks, and the Liferent it self being eight Chalder of
Victual, and eight hundred merks, that they found the effect of the Tenor would
be to Restore either Party, hinc inde, but desired the Pursuer to let the
Defender keep the Possession of the House and Lands, wherein there was many
Woods newly cutted, he finding Caution to pay her eight Chalder of Victual, and
eight hundred merks, which his Father was obliged to make them worth by the
Contract of Marriage.

Sir William Gordoun of Lesmore contra Mr. James Leith. June 10. 1663.
SIr William Gordoun of Lesmore pursues Mr. James Leith of New-lesly, as
representing his Father, on all the passive Titles, and condescended that he
behaved himself as Heir, by meddling with his Fathers Heirship moveable, and
with the Mails and Duties of his Fathers Lands of New-lesly and Side. The
Defender answered to the first, that his Father could have no Heirship
moveable, because he dyed Rebel, and so his hail Goods belonged to the King as
Escheat. 2ly. If need beis, he offers him to prove that he dyed not only Rebel,
but his Escheat was Gifted, and so as a Confirmation takes away vicious
Intromission Movables. So the Gift with the Escheat must purge vicious
intromission with Heirship, being before intenting of this Cause. 3ly. He
offers him to prove that the Heirship moveable was Confirmed promiscuously with
the rest of the movables, and that the Defender had right from the Executor,
which Confirmation, though it could not be effectual to carry the Heirship, yet
it was a collourable Title, to show that the Defender had not (...) miscendi,
but that he meddled by a singular Title, and neither formerly drew an Heirship,
nor meddled therewith, as Heir appearing. The Pursuer answered to the first,
that it was not relevant that he was Rebel, nor that his Escheat, unless it had
been Gifted before his Intromission, as well as before intenting of the Cause,
and that the Defender had Right from the Donator. To the second, it was
answered by the Pursuer, that the promiscuous Confirmation was not sufficient,
because he offered him to prove, the Defender Confirmed his own Servant to his
own behove.

The Lords found that the Defenders Father dying Rebel, was not sufficient,
unless it had been Gifted, and declared before intromission, and they found the
Reply Relevant, that the promiscuous Confirmation was to the Defenders behove.

As to the second Member of the Condescendence, the Defender alleged,. that
albeit his Father was Infeft, yet his Infeftment was only base, not cled with
Possession; and that the Defenders Title was by another Party, Possessing, and
publictly Infeft before his Fathers Death.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

James Allan. contra James Paterson. June 17. 1663.
JAmes Allan charges James Paterson as Cautioner in an Indenter, for a
Prentise, set to the Charger for five years, and insists upon that Article of
paying two days wadges for ilk days absence, and subsumes that the Prentise
left his Service after the first two years, and was absent three years, The
said James Paterson Suspends on this reason, that it must be presumed Collusion
betwixt the Charger and his Prentise, that having gotten the Prentise Fee, and
not learned him the Trade, he had suffered him to escape, never making
intimation to the Suspender, that he might have brought him back to his
Service, while now that he is out of the Country, and not knowing where. The
Charger answered, that there was nothing to obliege him to make such
intimation, neither could a sufficient presumption of Collusion be sustained.

The Lords found the Letters orderly proceeded, either while the Cautioner
caused the Prentise Re-enter, and serve out his time, or otherways paid fifty
pound for damnage and interest, to which they modified the Charge.

Margaret Fleming contra James Gilleis. June 18. 1663.
MArgaret Fleming being Infeft in an Annualrent of 700. merks out of Houses in
Edinburgh, in Liferent, with absolute warrandice from all dangers, perils and
inconveniences whatsomever; pursues Declarator against the said James Gilleis,
as Heretor, for declaring that her Annualrent should be free of all public
burden, since the rescinding of the Act of Parliament 1646. whereby Liferenters
were ordained to bear proportional part for their Annualrents, with the
Heretors. The Defender answered, the Libel was not Relevant, for albeit the Act
of Parliament was rescinded, the justice and equity thereof remained, that
whatever burden were laid upon Land, shouldly proportionably upon every part
thereof, and every profit forth of it.

Which Defense the Lords found Relevant and Assoilzied.

Francis Hamiltoun contra Mitchel and Keith. Eodem die.
SIr Alexander Keith of Ludquharn being obliged by Bond to Robert Mitchel in
Leith, for the price of certain Bolls of Victual, was arrested in Leith, till
he found Francis Hamiltoun Cautioner as Law will, and both being pursued on the
Act, raised Advocation on this reason, that the Baillies of Leith had unjustly
forced him to find Caution as Law will; he not being dwelling in Leith, nor
Leith not being a Burgh Royal, but a Burgh of Barony. It was answered, that the
privilege and custom of the Town of Edinburgh, was to arrest within Leith,
and all other privileges and pendicles thereof.

The Lords found that it behoved to be condescended, in what place of Leith
Ludquharn was arrested, for the Peer of Leith was a part of the Burgh Royal of
Edinburgh, and was served by a Bailie of Edinburgh, called the Water Baillie,
and if he was arrested there, it was valid, but the rest of Leith is but a
Burgh of Barony, and in that part thereof, the Baillie is called Baron Baillie,
it were not valid.

Euphan Hay contra Elizabeth Carstorphine. June 19. 1663.
THe said Euphan having obtained Decree against the said Elizabeth, for
certain Furnitur to her House. She suspended on this reason, that her Husband
was not called. The Charger offered to prove, in ^ortification of her Decree,
that her Husband was 20. years out of the Country, and she repute as Widow.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

George Reid contra Thomas Harper. Eodem die.
THese Parties competing in a double Poinding, George Reid craved preference,
because he was assigned to the Mails and Duties by Thomas Mudie, Heretor of the
Land. Thomas Harper alleged that he had arrested the Duties upon a Debt owing
to him by William Mudy, Father to the said Thomas, and any Right Thomas had,
was fraudulent and null by exception, by the express words of the Act of
Parliament 1621. being betwixt Father and Son, without any onerous Cause, and
he ought not to be put to Reduce in re minima, his Debt being within a 100.
pound.

The Lords found he behoved to Reduce, conform to their constant Custom in
Heretable Rights.

Ferguson contra Ferguson. June 23. 1663.
UMquhil Ferguson in Restalrig, having a Tack set to him by the Lord Balmerino
for certain years, his eldest Brother Son as heir of Conquest, and his youngest
Brother Son as heir of Line, competed for the Mails and Duties of the Lands.

The Lords found the Tack to belong to the Heir of Line, albeit it was Conquest
by the Defender.

Mcdowgal contra Lord Glentorchy. June 24. 1663.
Mcneil having Disponed certain Lands to Mcdowgal, wherein he was Heir apparent
to his Goodsyrs Brother, obliged himself, to Infeft himself as heir therein,
and to Infeft Mcdowgal, at least to renunce to be heir to the Effect, Mcdowgal
might obtain the Lands adjudged, whereupon Mcdowgal having raised a Charge to
enter heir, Mcneil renunces, and thereupon Mcdowgal craves the Land to be
Adjudged, and Glentorchy Decerned to receive and Infeft him; Glentorchy
alleged, that he could not receive him, because he had right to the Property
himself, unless the Pursuer condescend and instruct his authors, in whose place
he craves to be Entered, had Right. The Pursuer answered, that lie needed to
instruct no Right, nor was he obliged to Dispute the Superiors Right, but
craved the ordinar course to be Entered, suo periculo, with reservation of
every man's Right, and the Superiors own Right, as is ordinary in Appryzings
and Adjudications. The Defender alleged, that albeit that was sustained in
Appryzings, where the Superior gets a years Rent; and though it might be
allowed in ordinar Adjudications, proceeding upon a liquid Debt, favore
creditorum; yet not in such a Case as this, where the Vassals apparent Heir
Dispones, and oblieges himself to Renunce of purpose, to Charge his Superior.

The Lords found no Process, till the Pursuer instructed his Authors Titles;
But an Infeftment being produced, he was not put to Dispute the validity
thereof, in this instance.

Menzeis contra Lord Glenurchy. Eodem die.
THe Daughters of Mr. William Menzeis, as Executrix to him, pursues Glenurchy
for payment of a Bond due to their Father, he alleged minority and Lesion,
and that he had Reduction thereupon depending. The Pursuers answered no Lesion;
because this Bond being granted to their Father, for his Stipend by the
Defender, who was Heretor of the Land, he was not leased, because as Heretor he
was liable for the Stipend. The Defender answered that his being Heretor could
not Obliege him, because his Grandfather was then living, whose Liferent was
reserved in his Disposition; who, and the intrometters could only be liable,
Stipends not being debita fundi; and it were of very evil consequence, if the
Heretor were liable, during the whole life of a Liferent.

The Lords found that there being a Liferenter, the Heretor was not liable, and
therefore sustained the Reason.

Elizabeth contra Eodem die.
THe said Elizabeth pursued the Executors of her Husband, and insisted upon
several points; First, she craved the Ann, as belonging wholly to her, seeing
there was no Children, and the Ann being in favors of the Wife and Children,
the nearest of Kin could have no part thereof. The Defenders answered, that the
Ann was introduced the time of Popery, when the had no Wife nor Bairns, and so
did still most properly belong to the nearest of Kin, who would get it, if
there were neither Wife nor Bairns.

The Lords found the Ann to divide betwixt the Pursuer and the nearest of Kin.

The Pursuer insisted next, and alleged, that a Bond bearing Clausses of
Annualrent and Obliegement to Infeft, behoved either to give a Right to the
half of the Stock, or else to a Terce of the Annualrents.

The Lords found the Clausses of Annualrent and Destination, to exclude her
from the Stock as Heretor, and the want of Infeftment to exclude her from the
Terce of Annualrent.

The Pursuer insisted in the next place, and produced a Bond granted by her
Father to her Husband, and here the longest liver of them two, and the heirs
procreat betwixt them, without any addition or termination, failzing these
heirs, and without Clausses of Annualrents or Infeftment, and therefore she
claimed the whole Sum as being the longest liver. It was answered, that this
Bond did Constitute in her only a Liferent, according to the ordinar conception
and interpretation of that Clause, the longest liver of them two betwixt man
and wife; but especially heirs procreat betwixt them, being mentioned, which
behoved to be the man's heirs, who if they had existed, would have had right as
heirs to their Father, not to their Mother; and therefore the Father behoved to
be Feear, and the Mother only Liferenter. It was further alleged, that beside
the Liferent, the Pursuer behoved to have right to the half of the Stock,
because the sum being moveable, albeit the Tenor of the Bond made it payable to
the Relict for her Liferent use, yet she behoved to employ it so, as the Stock
would remain; which Stock would still be divisible betwixt the Relict and
nearest of Kin, as being moveable.

The Lords found that the Pursuer might take her choice of the Liferent, or of
the half of the sum, but would not allow her both.

James Halyburtoun contra Lord Roxburgh. January 25. 1663.
JAmes Halyburtoun as Assigney Constitute by his Father, pursues the Earl of
Roxburgh, for payment of a Debt due to his Father. The Defender alleged no
Process, because the Assignation was not intimate in the Cedents Life, and so
he was not denuded, but the sum remained in bonis defuncti. and behoved to be
Confirmed, especially, seeing this Assignation is a general Assignation, omnium
bonorum, without condescending upon this or any other particular.

The Lords Repelled the Defense and found Process.

Ninian Steuart of Askoege contra Steuart nf Arnhome. Eodem die.
NInian Steuart as heir to his Father Askoege, pursues Reduction of a
Transaction of a Tack, which Tack was Assigned to him by his Wife, and by him
Transferred to John Steuart heir of a former Marriage. The Reason of Reduction
was, because the Translation was on Deathbed, in prejudice of the heir. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Pursuer is Witness in the
Translation, which imports his consent. The Pursuer answered that Subscribing
as Witness, could import no more, but that the Witness saw the Party
Subscribe, but did not obliege to take inspection of the Contents of the Write.
2ly. The Pursuer when he Subscribed was minor. The Defender answered, that in
this Case, the Subscribing as Witness behoved to import consent, because that
very Subscription it self by the Father, being sick, did import a Deed done on
Deathbed; Especially it not being a Testament but a Writ, inter vivos; and for
the minority, the Pursuer was in confinio majoris aetatis, and suffered the
Defender to possess twenty years, long after his anni utiles was past.

The Lords found the Subscription, as Witness in this Case to import consent,
and being quarreled inter annos utiles, they found sufficient to a minor,
though in Confirmation.

Gordon contra Frazer. July 3. 1663.
GOrdon having Confirmed himself Executor Creditor to Forbes of Auchinvil,
pursues (...) Frazer his Relict for Delivery to him of the Movables, who
alleged absolvitor, because the Movables upon the Mayns of Achnivil, were
Disponed to her by her umquhil Husband. it was answered, that the Disposition
was simulat, inter conjunctas personas retenta possessione, and therefore null.
It was duplyed, that the Disposition was upon an onerous Cause without
simulation, because it bears to be in respect that by the Defuncts Contract of
Marriage, he is obliged to Infeft his Wife in five Chalder of Victual out of
Auchnivil, for the Aliment and Intertainment of his younger Children, till the
age of fourteen years; and because he was necessitate to sell that Land,
therefore he Disponed the movables in leu thereof, which is also instructed by
the Contract of Marriage. The Pursuer answered, that this is but a provision to
Children, and could not be preferred to the Defuncts Creditors, especially
being a provision before the Children were existent, and if such should be
allowed, it were easy upon such latent provisions, in favors of Children to
prejudge Creditors. The Defender answered, that if the Pursuers Debt had been
anterior to the Contract of Marriage, he might have had ground upon the Act of
Parliament 1621. but this Debt was posterior to the Contract, and there was no
reason to hinder a Parent to provide his Children, and Dispone Movables to him
in satisfaction thereof. The Pursuer answered, that both being yet but personal
obliegements, not having obtained effectual Possession; the Creditor though
posterior, must be preferred to the Children, especially if the Defunct have
not sufficient Estate to pay both. 2ly. The Disposition is upon a false
Narrative; because the Lands of Auchnivil are yet undisponed.

The Lords found that the Childrens Disposition ought to be preferred, unless
the Father were insolvendo at his death: in which case they preferred the
Creditors, though posterior; and likewise found the alleadgence Relevant, that
the Narrative was false, and so the Disposition without a Cause.

Isobel Mow contra Duchess of Bucleugh. July 7. 1663.
THe said Isobel having Served Heir to William Mow, her Grandsyre Charges the
Duchess as Superior, to receive her; she Suspends, and compearence is made for
certain persons, to whom the Chargers Father had Disponed the Lands in
question, who raised Reduction of the Defenders Retour and Infeftment, upon
this Reason, that the Retour was null, Serving the Charger Heir to her
Grandsyre, as last Vest and Seized, whereas they produced the Infeftments of
their Uncle and Father, as Heirs to their Grandsyre in these Lands; and
therefore instructed that her Grandsyre dyed not as last Invest and Seized, as
of Fee, but her Father their Author. It was answered for the Charger, that the
Retour could not be taken away, hoc ordine, by Reduction, but behoved to be by
a Summons of Error, for Reducing the Service by an Inquest of Error, to be
pursued in Latin, by a Precept out of the Chancellary. It was replied, that
there needed no Service of Error, but the Retour and Infeftment might be
Reduced, unless there had been the question of propinquity of Blood, of a
nearer Heir, which might have made the Inquest an Assise of Error, which could
not be in this case, seeing the Inquest had done their Duty, who (...) produced
one of the Grandsyres Seasine found him to have dyed last Vest and Seized, as
of Fee, and neither could know, nor was obliged to know, that there was a
posterior Infeftment to the Defenders Uncle or Father.

The Lords found the Reduction receivable, hoc ordine.

Hamiltoun contra a Dumb man in Glasgow. July 9. 1663.
THis Dumb Man having Right to an Annualrent of twenty pound yearly out of a
Tenement in Glasgow, thereupon (...) Hamiltoun his Creditor having arrested,
and obtained Decree for payment of this Annualrent, in Satisfaction of the
Dumb-mans Debt. It was alleged for the Person whose Bond was liable for the
Annualrents, Absolvitor for five years thereof, because he had paid these
years to the Dumb-mans Sister by his consent, in so far, as he Delivered the
Money to the Sister in presence of the Dumb-man, and obtained her Discharge
thereupon, in his name; subscribed also by him, with the initial Letters of his
name. It was answered, non relevat, because the Discharge bore not that the
Dumb-man received the same, but his Sister: and bears that she is obliedged to
warrant it at the Dumb-mans hand, and his presence, and seeing of Money
Delivered, and his Subscription cannot import his consent, because he being
Dumb could not know what the extent of the Sum was, nor whatfor years it was.

The Lords Repelled the Defense in respect of the Reply.

Mr. Thomas Kirkcaldy contra Mr. Robert Balcanquhil, and Heretors of Tranent.
Eodem die.
THe Heretors of Tranent raised a double Poynding against Mr. Robert
Balcanquhil, on the one part, and Mr. Thomas Kirkcaldy, on the other part, both
claiming the Stipend of Tranent, 1662. It was alleged for Mr. Robert
Balcanquhil, he ought to be preferred, because he was Minister at Tranent, by
Presentation, and Collation, long anterior to Mr. Thomas Kirkcaldy; and albeit
he was Deposed in Anno 1648. yet he was Reponed by the Bishop of Edinburgh, and
Synod of Lothian, in October 1662. because of that Narrative, that he was
unlawfully Deposed in Anno 1648. and so being Reponed before Martinmass 1662.
he thereby must have Right to the half, due at Martinmass 1662. It was answered
for Mr. Thomas Kirkcaldy, that Balcanquhils Repossession being after
Michaelmess, 1662. which is the Legal Term of Stipends, and he having Served
till that time, by a Title standing, Reposition can operat nothing before its
Date, and so cannot reach to Michaelmass Term:

The Lords preferred Mr. Thomas Kirkcaldy to the hail year.

William Hay contra John Nicolson. June 16. 1664.
JOhn Nicolson having granted an Assignation in Anno 1653. of a Bond granted to
him by James Crightoun, Sheriff of Nithisdail, principal; and umquhil William
Livingstoun Cautioner, the name of the Assigney was left blank till 1663. at
which time William Hayes name was filled up, and which Assignation contained a
Clause of Warrandice against all deadly, as Law will: William Hay having used
Execution on the Assignation, against the Principal and Cautioner in the Bond,
returns upon the Warrandice, and Charges Nicolson, who Suspends on this Reason,
that the Clause of Warrandice, as it is conceived in the Assignation, could
import no more, then that the Debt Assigned, was a real Debt resting, and not
to be Evicted by any other Right, Especially seeing it did not bear expressly, to
warrant it to be good, valide and sufficient, which might infer to warrant, not
only that the Assignation should clear the Right of the Debt, but that the
Debtor should be solvendo. And secondly, considering that there is no onerous
equivalent Cause for granting the Assignation, Nicolson the Creditor might have
Discharged, Livingstoun the Cautioner, and given him an Assignation, that he
might thereupon Charge the Principal. The Charger opponed the Clause of
absolute warrandice, which have ever been esteemed to reach to the Debtors,
being solvendo.

The Lords found the Clause thus concieved, could not extend to the sufficiency
of the Debtor.

Thomson contra Reid. June 15. 1664.
JAmes Thomson in Cryle having Appryzed certain Tenements in Edinburgh, from
James Sinclar, pursues James Reid, as one of the Possessors, for Mails and
Duties, who alleged that he had bruiked by Tack from James Sinclar, before
the Appryzing; which Tack bare 80. pound of Tack Duty, and to continue for
seven years, and bare expressly a provision, that the said James Reid should
retain the Annualrent of 600. merks adebted to him by Sinclar, as a part of the
Tack Duty, and that he should not be removed, until the said 600. merks were
paid. The Pursuer answered, that the alleadgence was no way Relevant, to
account the payment of the 80. pounds of Tack Duty to the Pursuer, out of which
the Defender could have no Retention of his Annualrent, because that is but a
personal provision, adjected in the Tack, and no part of the Tack, and can work
no more, then if such a Provision had been made out of the Tack, in which Case
it would only have been a part of the Tack Duty in Compensation of the
Annualrent, as an Assignation, would not be effectual against a singular
Successor, and would endure no longer then the Land was his, who assigned the
Duties; So now the Land ceassing to be Sinclars, the Assignment or Alocation
thereof, to be retained for satisfaction of the Annualrent, is not Relevant
against this Appryzer, no more then that part of the Clause, by which the
Defender is provided, not to remove till his Sum be paid, which was never
sustained to be effectual against a singular Successor. The Defender answered,
that this Defense stood Relevant, because the Clause of Retention, is adjected
immediately to the Tack Duty, and so is as a part thereof, and so is real and
Effectual against a singular Successor, because if Sinclar had set the Tack for
a grot, it would have been valid; and therefore might more set it for the
satisfaction of the Annualrents, and so much Duty further.

The Lords Sustained the De^ense, that seeing there remained a Tack Duty, over
and above the Retention of the Annualrent, and that the Tack had a particular
Ish of seven years, that it was valid; but found the Case dubious, if there had
been no Tack Duty over and above the Annualrent; but that the Land had been
either set expressly for satisfaction of the Annualrent, or for such a sum
equivalent thereto, to be retained: In which case the Tacks would want a Tack
Duty to the present Here^or; but they ^ound the Clause, for not Removing till
the money were paid, but only to be personal, and not effectual against a
singular Successor.

Murray contra the Executors of Rutherfoord. June 16. 1664.
JAmes Murray pursues the Executors of Katharin Rutherfoord, Wife to Doctor
Guild, to pay a Legacy of 600. merk, left by Katharin in her Testament to
James, in these words, I leave to James Murray 600. merks, whereof 200. merks
is in his hand, due to me by Bond; which Bond I ordain to be delivered up to
him, and four more, to be paid to him. The Defender alleged, that they could
be obliged no further then to Discharge the Bond of 200. merks, with
warrandice from their own Deed. The Pursuer answered that the Bond belonged to
Doctor Guild the Husband, jure mariti, and was recovered by his Heirs and
Executors, already from the Defender; and therefore this being legatum rei
alienae. The Defender behoved to make it effectual, and to pay it out of the
Defuncts free Movables, especially seeing 600. merks was left, and the
Adjection was but the Destination of the manner of payment of it, by
Liberation; and which failzing, the principal Legacy stands, and must be
fulfilled and adduced, a Decision the last Session, betwixt contra whereby a
Legacy of a Heretable Bond was ordained to be made up by the Executor, out of
the Movables. The Defenders answered, that their Defenses stood yet Relevant;
for Legacies being poor Donations, did not carry warrandice, so that a thing
Legate being Evicted, the Legator had it but cum peri^ulo, and that in the Law,
legatum rei alienae est praestandum; because Legacies being favorable, whereby
the Testator leaves there expressly, under the name of that which belongs to
another, his meaning is extended, to purchase that, or the value thereof to the
Lagator; but where he leaved it as his own, and his knowledge of the Right of
another, appears not there, as in all Donations, the Legator has it upon his
peril, without warrandice; as if a Testator should leave a Bond, or sum, to
which he had right by Assignation, if it were found that there were a prior
Assignation intimat, and so the sum Evicted, the Lagator would have no remeid:
Or if he left a sum due by a Bond, defective in some necessar Solemnity, as
wanting Writer and Witness, such Bond failing, the Legator could not return
upon the Executor, and for the instance of an Heretable Bond, that is not
alike, because it was not res aliena, but propria testatoris, though not
test^ble. The Pursuer answered, that Legacies were most favorable, and ever
extended, and that this was lega^um re alienae and ex scientia testatoris, for
the Testatrix that a Bond conceived in her name, during the Marriage, would
belong to her Husband, jure mariti, at least she was obliged to know the same,
for s^ire and scire debere, parificantur in jure. The Defender answered, that
the Action hold not in mulieribus presertim ubi question est in partibus juris;
as in this Case the Testatrix was, and might be ignorant of the Extent of the
jus mariti^.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses, and sustained the Libel and Reply, to make up
the palpable and known Law, that the Testatrix was Repute, as knowing the same,
and that having a half of her Husbands Goods, Testable by her, she might leave
the sum as a part of her half, that there was no necessity to devide every sum,
but the whole, as many Co-executors discharging a Bond, the Discharge is
Relevant, not only for that Co-executors part, but for the whole Bond, if that
Co-executors part exceeded the value of the Bond, but the Lords did not find
that the Executors behoved to make up every Legacy, that were evicted, or that
they were liable, de evictione.

Tulliallan and Condie contra Crawfoord. Eodem die.
TVlliallan and Condie pursues a Declarator of an Appryzing, led against them,
as satisfied and paid within the Legal, by Intromission, and as an Article,
adduces a Discharge of a part of the Sum Appryzed. The Defender alleged, that
the alleadgence was not now competent, because it was res judicata, before the
Lords of Session, in Anno 1637. where the same alleadgence being proponed in a
Suspension.

The Lords found not the same instructed; and therefore found the Letters
orderly proceeded, yet conditionally superceeding Execution of the Decree,
till such a day, that in the mean time, if the same were instructed; the
Instructions should be received, and nothing was produced during that time, so
that it cannot be received more, then 27. years thereafter to take away an
Appryzing cled with long Possession, and now in the Person of a singular
Successor.

The Pursuer answered, that his Declarator founded upon the said Article, was
most just and relevant; it being now evident, that the Sum Appryzed for, was
paid in part, and as for the point of formality, albeit in ordinary Actions,
where Terms are assigned to prove, and so a competent time granted to search
for Writs, if Certification be admitted regularly, it is valide, and yet even
in that case, the Lords will Repone, upon any singular accident in a
Suspension, ubi question non est de jure, sed de executione.

The Lords would not delay Execution, unless the Reasons be instantly verified.

Yet in petitione, will not take away the Right.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and would not sustain the foresaid Article,
in respect of the Decree, in foro contradictorio, though in a Suspension here,
there was no Alleadgence that the Writs were new come to knowledge, or newly
found, nor could be, because it was alleged one in the Decree.

Mr. John Hay. contra the Collectors of the vacant Stipends. June 17. 1664.
THe Parochiners of Manner, which is a Pendicle of the Parsonage of Peebles,
being Charged for the Stipend of the year 1662. Suspends upon double poynding,
and calls the Ministers Collectors of the vacant Stipends, and the Parson of
Peebles; the Minister alleged that he was presented by the Parson of Peebles
Patron, in August 1662. after which he continued to Preach at the Kirk, and was
still upon his Trials till he was Admitted in October 1662. and therefore the
whole years Stipends 1662. belongs to him, because the Legal Terms of Teinds
and Stipends, is not as of other Rents, Whitsonday and Martinmass, but one Term
for all, viz. the separation of the Fruits at Michaelmess; and therefore if he
had had Right to the drawn Teind, he might have drawn the whole, so the whole
Tack Duty must belong to him. It was alleged for the Parson of Peebles, that
this Kirk being a Pendicle of his Parsonage, and some time served for a less,
and some times for a more Stipend, as he agreed; it is not a fixed Stipend, but
as a helper, and therefore the vacancy thereof belongs not to the Collector of
the vacant Stipends, but returns to the Parson who has Right to the whole
Fruits of the Benefice, by his Right of Presentation and Collation. It was
alleged for the Collectors of the vacant Stipends, that his Stipend was not
as the allowance of an helper, but was a several Congregation, separate from
the Parsonage of Peebles, and at the Parsons Presentation, and that no helper
has a Presentation, and that the Incumbent, not being admitted till after
Michaelmess, has no Right to any part of the Fruits of that year, though he was
Presented before, because the Kirk cannot be said to be full, but vacant, till
the Minister be admitted.

The Lords found that this Kirk having a Presentation, could not return in the
vacancy to the Parson of Peebles, and that the Presentation being at Lambas,
and the Incumbent serving at the Kirk, and Entering to his Trials immediately,
till he was Entered, which was in October thereafter, and that he had Right to
the half of that years Stipend, not being presented before Whitsonday, and
found the other half to belong to the Collector of vacand Stipends.

Lairds of Tulliallan and Condie contra Crawfoord. Eodem die.
THe Lairds of Tulliallan and Condie, as having a Right from him, pursues
Declarator of the Expiration of an Appryzing, led at the Instance of Crawfoord,
to which Margaret Crawfoord his Daughter, has now Right, and condescends that
the sum Appryzed for, was satisfied within the Legal by Compensation, in so far
as Tulliallan had Right to a Contract, whereby Crawfoord the Appryzer was
obliged to deliver so many Chalders of Coal weekly, or in Case of Failzie,
four pounds for ilk Chalder. It was alleged for the Defender, that this
Article of Compensation ought to be repelled: First, because the said Contract
is prescribed. 2ly. The Appryzing proceeded upon a Decree of Count and
Reckoning, wherein an Alleadgence being founded upon the same Contract, was
past from, pro loco and tempore, and so can never now be made use of, to take
away that Decree, much less the Appryzing against a singular Successor, who
seeing the same past, in tuto, to take Right without the hazard thereof. 3ly.
The Defender cannot be obliged after forty or fifty years time, to prove the
Delivery of an yearly Duty of Coal. 4ly. The Compensation is not de liquido in
liquidum, because the one is a personal Contract, the other is an Apprysing and
Infeftment; the one has not a liquid price Constitute, but bears expressly,
such a Sum in case of failzie, and not as the price, which being much more,
then the ordinar price then is but a personal failzie, which cannot be liquidat
till Declarator, and modification of a Judge. The Pursuer answered, that he was
evicting the rigor of an Appryzing, in causa maxim favorabili. And as to the
first alleadgence anent the Prescription, offers to prove Interruption by
Arrestments, etc. To the second not Relevant, according to the Custom, before
the years 1649. competent and omitted, was not relevant against Decreets of
Suspension; But Suspenders might either omit, or pass from their Reasons, and
Suspend upon them again, which could not but be alswell effectual against the
Assigney as the Cedent. As to the third, this Article being instructed by Writ,
no presumption, nor less time then Prescription, could take it away. To the
which, the Coals having a liquid Sum in lieu thereof, the Article is liquid,
and as payment within the legal, will annul an Appryzing, so will Compensation,
which is equiparat in Law, though the Case would not be alike in a Wodset,
against a singular Successor.

The Lords found the Defenses against this Article relevant, viz. that the
Article was not liquid by a Sum, Constitute expressly for a price, and that it
being alleged, that in the Decree this alleadgeance was past from, and an
express reservation, that it might be made use of against any other just Debt,
then that which was in the Decree, whereupon the Appryzing proceeded. The
Lords had also consideration, that the Legal of the Appryzing was not yet
expired.

Lion of Muirask contra Lord of Elsick. Eodem die.
Lion of Muirask pursues the Lord of Elsick upon a Debt of his Fathers, as
Successor titulo lacrativo. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because any
Disposition he had from his Father, was in his Contract of Marriage, whereby
10000^ merks of Tocher was received by his Father, and 14000. merks of Debt
more, undertaken for his Father, with the burden of his Fathers Liferent. The
Pursuer answered, the alleadgeance ought to be repelled, because he offered him
to prove, that the Land Disponed, was then worth forty or fifty Chalders of
Victual, so that the Cause onerous was not the half of the value; and therefore
as to the Superplus, he was Lucrative Successor. The Defender answered, that
any onerous Cause, or price, though incompetent, was enough to purge this
passive Title, and albeit the Pursuer might reduce the Right, and make the
Lands liable, because the Cause was not onerous and equivalent, yet he could
not be personally liable in solidum, for all the Defuncts Debts.

The Lords having seriously considered the bussinesse, after a former
Interlocutor the last Session, Assoilzing from the passive Title, but finding
the Lands redeemable by the Pursuer, or any other Creditor, for the sums paid
out, did now find further, that the Defender was liable for the superplus of
the just price of the Land, according to the ordinar Rate the time of the
Disposition, and that the superplus over and above what he paid or undertook,
ought to bear Annualrent, as being the price of Land.

James Justice contra Earl of Queensberry. Eodem die.
James Justice as having right to a Bond of 6000. merks, due by the Earl of
Queensberry, pursues the Earl, and the Lord Drum^anrig his Son, as taking his
Estate, with the burden of his Debt, to pay it; who alleged no Process,
because the Pursuers Right was an Assignation, granted by a Tutrix, not bearing
in Name of the Pupil, or as Tutrix, in his Name, because being in infancy he
could not subscribe: but bearing to be done by her, as taking burden for the
Pupil.

The Lords found the Assignation not formal, not bearing the Pupil Disponer
with his Tutrix, but yet found the Letters orderly proceeded, the Charger
before Extract, producing a Ratification by the Pupil and Tutrix formally done.

Lord of Prestoun contra Nathaniel Ebred. June 24. 1664.
THe Lord of Prestoun pursues Reduction and Improbation, against Nathaniel
Ebred, of all his Rights of certain Lands. The Defender alleged Absolvitor,
because the Lands in question are Abbay-lands, Erected in a temporal Holding,
in favor of Prestoun; and therefore by the Act of Parliament, 1633. all such
Lands are annexed to the Crown, and the Feuduties are only found due to the
Lords of Erection, ay and while they be redeemed, which is repeited in the 30.
Act of Parliament, 1661. and therefore the Pursuer not being Superior, but the
King, he has no interest to Improve of Reduce. The Pursuer answered, that he
opponed his Infeftment of the Lands holden of the King, with the Kings Advocats
concurse. The Defender answered, that the Advocats concurse was but ex stilo
curiae, and he could make no concurse sufficient, for any Improbation and
Reduction, without the Kings special order.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant and Assoilzied, at which time it was
remembered, that Sir Thomas Hope insisting in an Improbation of his Good-son,
the same was not Sustained, because it wanted the Kings express Order.

Town of Cowper contra Town of Kinnothy. Eodem die.
THe Town of Cowper having Charged the Town of Kinnothy to desist from Merchant
Trade. They Suspend, and allege, that they have the Privilege of Burgh of
Barony, in keeping Hostlers, and selling Wine. The Charger answered, that
selling of Wine is one of their chiefest and express Privileges.

The Lords considering, that this dipped upon the Controversy, betwixt Burgh
Royal and Burgh of Barony, which has remained undecided these thirty years,
would not Discuss this particular, but found the Letters orderly proceeded in
general, ay and while the Defenders found Caution to desist from Merchant
Trade, without determining how far that reached.

Moffet contra Black. Eodem die.
THere being a Bargain betwixt the said Moffet and Black, for some Packs of
Plaids, by which it was agreed, that the buyer for satisfaction of the price,
should give Assignation to certain Bonds expressed; but there was no mention what
Warrandice. At the Discussing of the Cause the Seller craved absolute
Warrandice; and alleged, that seeing it was not Communed, that it should be a
restricted Warrandice, it behoved to be an Absolute, being for a Cause onerous,
and for the price of the Goods. 2ly. Seeing the Agreement required an
Assignation in Writ, to Bonds; the Buyer might, re integra resile, seeing
neither the Plaids nor Bonds were Delivered.

The Lords found that the^ Buyer, who insisted, behoved either to give absolute
Warrandice, that the Bond was not only due, but should be effectual, and the
Creditor solvendo, otherways they suffered the Seller to Resile, especially
seeing the Bargain was not made first by words, Absolute for such a price, and
afterward that it had been agreed to give such Bonds for that price; In which
case the Bargain, though verbal, would have stood.

Alexander Falconer. contra Mr. John Dowgal. Eodem die.
ALexander Falconer pursues Mr. John Dowgal, for payment of 1000. merks, left
in Legacy by umquhil John Dowgal, by a special Legacy of a Bond, adebted by the
Earl of Murray, whereupon he conveens the Earl as Debtor, and Mr. John Dowgal
as Executor, for his Interest, to pay the special Legacy. The Exceutor
alleged, that the sum belonged to him, because he had Assignation thereto
from the Defunct, before the Legacy. The Pursuer Answered, that hoc dato, there
was sufficiency of Free-goods to make up this Legacy; and albeit it had been
legatum rei alienae; yet being done by the Testator scienter, who cannot be
presumed, to be ignorant of his own Assignation, lately made before, it must be
satisfied out of the rest of the Free-Goods.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Duke and Duchess of Hamiltoun contra Scots. Eodem die.
DUke and Duchess of Hamiltoun, being Charged for payment of a Sum, due to
umquhil Sir William Scot of Clerkingtoun, and assigned by him to his four
Children, alleged that by Act of Parliament Commission was granted for
deducing so much of his Creditors Annualrents, as should be found just, not
exceeding eight years; and therefore there could be no Sentence against him, as
to that, till the Commission had decyded. The Pursuers answered, that these
Annualrents were not due for the years during the time the Duke was Forefault
by the English, which ended in Anno. 1656. and they insist but for the
Annualrents since that year. It Is answered for the Duke, that albeit he had
paid many of these years Annualrents by force of Law, then standing, yet that
could not hinder the Deduction, but that he would have Repetition or Deduction,
in subsequent years. The Pursuers alleged, he behoved to seek the Heir for
Repetition, and could not deduce from them.

The Lords in respect of the Commission, would not Decide nor Discuss the
Alleadgence, anent the years Annualrent, but Superceeded to give Answer, till
the Commission had determined, even till seven years after the Forefaulture, to
make up these that was paid before.

In this Process, compearence was made for Sir Laurence Scot, the Heir and
Executor Dative, who alleged that there was 2000. merks of the Sum belonged
to him, because his Fathers Assignation to the Children, contained an express
Division of their shares, which was so much less then the hail Sum Assigned.
The Children answered, they opponed their Assignation, which bare expressly an
Assignation to the hail Sum, and Bond it self: and albeit the Division was
short, it was but a mistake of the Defunct, and cannot prejudge the Assigneys.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

George Melvil contra Mr. Thomas Ferguson. June 25. 1664.
GEorge Melvil pursues Mr. Thomas Ferguson his step-son for the value of his
aliment, after the Mothers Decease. The Defender alleadged^ Absolvitor, because
the Defunct was his own Mother, and he had no means of his own, and it must be
presumed that she Entertained him free, out of her Maternal Affection, and that
his Step-Father did the same, after he had Married his Mother.

The Lords sustained the first part of the Defense, but not the second anent
the Step-father after the Mothers decease.

Alexander Allan contra Mr. John Colzier. Eodem die.
ALexander Allan pursues Mr. John Colzier, to pay a sum of ninety two pounds,
adebted for the Defenders Mother, and that upon the Defenders Missive Letter,
by which he obliged him to pay the same

The Defender answered absolvitor, because by the missive produced, he offered
him to become the Pursuers Debtor, for the sum due by his Mother, being about
ninety two pounds; but by a Postcript, requires the Pursuer to Intimat to him,
or his Friends at Falkland, whether he accepted or not, which he did not then
till after the Defenders Mothers Death, and so it being a Conditional offer,
not accepted, is not binding.

Which the Lords found Relevant and Assoilzied.

Cauhame contra Adamson. Eodem die.
THomas Cauhame having Appryzed a Tenement in Dumbar, from Joseph Iohnstoun,
pursues James Adamson to remove therefrom, who alleged Absolvitor, because
this Apprizer could be in no better case, then Iohnstoun from whom he Appryzed,
whose Right is affected with this provision, that he should pay 600. pounds to
any person his Author pleased to nominat; Ita est, he has Assigned the Right
to the Defender, so that it is a real Burden affecting the Land, even against
this singular Successor, and included in his Authors Infeftment. The pursuer
answered, that albeit it be in the Infeftmen, yet it is no part of the
Infeftment, or real Right, but expressly an obliegment to pay without any Clause
Irritant, or without declaring that the Disponers Infeftment should stand
valid, as to the Right of that Sum.

The which the Lords found Relevant, and Repelled the Defense, but superceeded
Execution until some time that the Defender might use any means he could for
making this Sum to affect the Land.

Farquherson contra Gardener. Eodem die.
MR. James Farquherson having obtained a Decree of Spuilzie, against John
Gairdiner and others. Gairdiner Suspends on this Reason, that he meddled with
the Goods in question, as a Soldier in a Party in Arms, being then in the
Regiment of the Master of Forbes, under the Command of the Earl of Midletoun,
and therefore is freed by the Act of Indemnity. The Charger answered, that he
oppons the Act Indemnifying only these who Acted by Warrant of any Committee of
Estates, or Commander, or other Authority, so that it is not Relevant, unless
the Suspender allege, that as he was a Soldier in Arms, so he had such
Warrant, and did apply the particulars to the public use, under which he
served: And it is offered to be proven, that he took the Goods lybelled to his
own House, and made use of them to his private use. The Suspenders answered,
that this Reason stands Relevant as proponed, because it is clear by the Act of
Indemnity, that all things done under any pretended Authority or Command, are
Indemnified; and therefore there is a special Exception of private Thefts and
Robberies, which confirms the Rule as to public Pilledging in any War, and if
there were a necessity to every person to instruct the Command, or Warrant of
his Officer, which was not accustomed to be in Writ, the whole Act would be
elusory; so that it is sufficient, that the thing was done in the way of a
public War; otherwise, all that was taken or converted to private use, of those
that were either with Montrose or Glencairn, might ly open to Pursuits,
notwithstanding of the Act of Indemnity.

The Lords after serious Consideration of this, as a leading Case, found the
Reason of Suspension Relevant, that the Defender needed not to prove that he
had Warrant, but that the Warrant was presumed, if he proved he Acted with a
Party in War, against which, they would admit no contrary Probation, unless it
were offered to be proven by the Defenders own Oath, that he did without any
Warrant, converted the Goods to his own private use.

Margaret Inglis contra Thomas Inglis. Eodem die.
MArgaret Inglis having obtained a Decree before the Commissars of Edinburgh,
against Thomas Inglis, for giving her Security of 1000. pounds in Legacy, left
in her Fathers Testament, and for payment of the Annualrent of the said Legacy.
Thomas Suspends on this Reason, that the Legacy being left to be paid, the one
half at the Chargers marriage, and the other half at the Death of the Defuncts
Wife; buire no Annualrent, as neither does any other Legacy, much less this,
being in diem incertum, which is equivalent to a Conditional Legacy: For if the
Defuncts Wife had Survived the Legatar, or if she never Marry, nothing will
ever be due. The Charger answered, that this Legacy was in effect alimentar,
though not expressly left eo nomine; and therefore ought to be profitable, and
that the Lords had been accustomed to give Annualrent in such cases, as in the
case of the Lady Otter, and her Daughters. The Suspender answered, that the
case was far different, these being lawful Daughters, and their Provisions
being in lieu of an Estate of Land, and this Charger being but a Bastard, and
come to that age that she may serve for her Maintenance.

The Lords considering that the one half of the Sum was payable at the time of
the Chargers Marriage, being a Condition in her own power, and that it was not
favorable to put her to a necessity of Marry: Therefore they sustained
Annualrents for that half, but not for the other.

Brown contra Lawson. July 6. 1664.
ALexander Brown having obtained a Decree against William Lawson, as vicious
Intrometter with the Goods of umquhil William Lawson of New-milns, he Suspends,
and alleadges the Decree was unjustly given, because it bears, that he
excepted upon a Disposition, made by the Defunct for an Onerous Cause, and an
Instrument of Possession of the Goods before his Death. The Charger answered,
that the Decree did bear, that the Suspender did judicially acknowledge, that
there was no true Delivery of the Goods.

The Lords found this collourable Title sufficient to purge the passive Title
of vicious Intromission, providing the Defender Confirmed within four months,
for they thought the Defuncts Disposition, in articulo mortis, was rather as a
Testament or Legacy, in satisfaction of the defenders Debt, then as actus inter
vivos.

John Miln contra Hoom. July 7. 1664.
JOhn Miln Mason, having Charged Sir James Home of Eccles, for payment of a Sum
of Money, due by Bond, he Suspended, and alleged that he had the benefit of
the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, as to personal Execution, seeing he had
paid a years Annualrent, and had consigned a Bond of Corroboration, joining
the rest of the Annualrents to the principal. The Charger answered, the
Suspender could not crave the benefit of the Act, because he had not found
caution for the principal, and annual conform to the said Act for his naked
Bond of Corroboration, without Caution, could not be interpret Security.

The Lords found the Suspender behoved to give security, either by Caution or
Infeftment.

Ogilbie and Grant contra Ker. Eodem die.
THere being a Charge in the Name of James Ogilbie and William Grant, contra
Mr. Andrew Ker Minister, on this ground, that by a minut of Contract of
Alienation, Ogilbie had sold to Ker, certain Lands, and Ker was expressly Bound
by the minut, to pay this Grant and others, in part of the price of the Land,
certain Debts due by Ogilbie to them. Ker Suspends upon this Reason, that he
had satisfied Ogilbie, and obtained his Discharge.

Grant answered, that by the foresaid Clause, contained in the Minut, he had
acquired right to the Sum, in satisfaction of his Debt, which Ogilbie his
Debtor could not take away, without his consent, especially seeing the Minut
took effect; and the Suspender by his Missive Letters, after the Date of this
Discharge, Writ to the Lord of Pitmeddin, who was Cautioner to Grant, that he
would satisfy the Debt. The Suspender answered, that the Clause in favor of
Grant, who was no Contracter, could not give him a Right: First, Because it was
never a delivered Evident to Grant. 2ly. Because it was but a Mandat, whereby
Ogilbie the Contracter, did order a part of the Sum to be paid to Grant, which
Ogilbie might recall at his pleasure, as he might have annulled the Bargain, and
destroyed the Writ; especially seeing nothing had yet followed. And as for the
Letters, they were not Written to Grant, but to a third Party.

The Lords found, that seeing the Bargain took Effect, the Clause in Grants
favor, was not a simple Mandat, but a Delegation, whereby Ogilbie constitute
Ker his Debtor, to be Debtor to Grant his Creditor, which needed no
Intimation, being Contracted by, and so known to Ker himself; and therefore
found Ogilbies Discharge ineffectual.

Town of Edinburgh contra Lord Ley and William Veatch. July 8. 1664.
IN a Double Poynding, raised by the Town of Edinburgh, against my Lord Ley on
the one part, and William Veitch upon the other. The Ground whereof was this;
The Town of Edinburgh being Debtor to umquhil Douglas of Mortoun, in a Sum of
Money, his Son Confirmed himself Executor to his Father, and Confirmed this
Sum, which was Arrested in the Towns hands by William Veatch, first; and
thereafter by my Lord Ley. It was alleged for William Veatch, that he ought
to be preferred, having used the first Diligence by Arresting, several years
before my Lord Ley, and having obtained Decree against the Town, before the
Commissars, but before it was Extracted, my Lord Ley obtained Advocation. It
was alleged for my Lord Ley, that he ought to be preferred, because the sum
Arrested being due to umquhil Douglas of Mortoun. There was never a Decree
obtained at the Instance of this Executor, establishing it in his Person; and
therefore this Competition being betwixt William Veatch, who was only the
Executors proper Creditor, and not the Defuncts Creditor. The Defuncts Money
ought to be applied: First, to pay the Defuncts Debt, before the Executors
Debt, albeit the Executors own Creditor had done the first Diligence.

The Lords found, that the Lord Ley, as being Creditor to the Defunct, ought
first to be preferred, seeing now he appears before the Debt was Established in
the Person of the Executor.

Nisbit contra Lesly. Eodem die.
JOhn Nisbit, as Assigney Constitute by Major Drummond, Charges Lachlan Lesly
to pay four Dollars for ilk Soldier of sixty, conform to a Contract betwixt
Major Drummond and Lodovick Lesly, for whom Lachlan was Cautioner. Lachlan
Suspends on this Reason, that the Charge is to the behove of Francis Arneil,
who was Conjunct Cautioner, and bound for mutual Relief, and therefore he can
ask no more, then his share of what he truly paid in Composition. The Charger
answered, that he nor Francis Arneil, were not Charging on the Clause of
Relief, but on the principal Contract, as Assigney: And though he had gotten
Assignation thereto gratis, he might crave the same, except his own part.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Heugh Kennedy contra George Hutchison. Eodem die.
HEugh Kennedy as Assigney by Sir Mark Ker, to a Bill of Exchange, which was
drawn by George Hutchison, upon William Schaw at London, payable to Sir Mark,
for like value received from him, did obtain Decree against George Hutchison
and one Schaw, as Intrometters with the Goods of William Schaw, both for the
Bill it self, and for the Exchange, and Re-exchange; the Bill being Protested
for not payment. This Decree being Suspended, it was alleged that there
could be no Exchange, or Re-exchange, nor any thing paid for the Bill, because
the Bill was not lawfully protested, but being accepted by Schaw at London, he
shortly after dyed; and it was protested at his house where he dyed, before
none of his Relations, having neither Wife nor Children. The Charger answered,
that he took Instruments on the Defense, and alleged, that he needed not to
prove the passive Title. Secondly, That he had done all that was requisite,
having protested at the Dwelling House where Schaw resided.

The Lords found, that in this Case, that Death Interveening, which was an
Accident, there could be no Exchange nor Re-exchange, because this was no
voluntar Failz^e, nor fault; But found that the Charger, as Assigney, might
either take himself for the single value against the Person drawer of the Bill,
or to his Successors on whom it was drawn.

Earl of Airly contra John Mcintosh. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Airly pursues John Mcintosh for Contravention, and Lybels these
Deeds, that the Defenders Herds had been found Pasturing several times far
within his Ground, for a considerable time: which Ground was without all
Controversy the Pursuers.

The Lords Sustained the Lybel, it being always proven, that the Herd herded by
his Masters Command, or Ratihabition, and referred to themselves, at their
conclusion of the Cause, to consider, whether they would sustain the several
times of hirding, as several Deeds toties quoties, or if only as one Deed made
up of all, and how far the witnesses should be received, as to command, or
direction of the Defender.

Dumbar of Hempriggs contra Frazer. July 11. 1664.
HEmprigs as Executor to Dumbeath, having pursued the Lady Frazer, Relict of
Dumbeath, and the Lord Frazer for his Interest, for payment of Executory,
intrometted with by the Lady, there being Litiscontestation in the Cause:
Dumbeath calls the Act, and craves the Term to be Circumduced against the Lord
Frazer, who alleged that now his Lady was dead, and so his interest being jus
mariti, ceased. It was answered, Litiscontestation being made, the Debt was
Constitute in the Husbands Person, as if he had Contracted to pay it,
Litiscontestation being a Judicial Contract. Secondly, The Lord Frazer was
Decerned to give Bond to pay what his Lady should be found due. Frazar
answered, that no Bond was yet given, and that the Ordinance was only against
him as he was cited, which was for his Interest, which is Seassed.

And which the Lords found Relevant and Assoilzied.

Grahame of Hiltoun contra the Heretors of Clackmannan. July 13. 1664.
GRahame of Hiltoun having obtained a Decree against the Heretors of
Clackmannan, for a sum of Money Imposed upon that Shire, by the Commity of
Estates; the Heretors of the Shire have raised a Revew, and alleged, that
this Decree being obtained before the Commissioners, in the English time, he
has liberty to quarrel the Justice thereof, within a year, conform to the Act
of Parliament, and now alleadges, that the said Commissioners did unjustly
repel this Defense, proponed for singular Successors within the said Shire;
that they ought not to be liable for any part of the said Imposition, having
Acquired their Rights long after the same, and before any diligence was used
upon the said Act of the Committee. It was answered, that there was no
injustice there, because this being a public Burden, imposed upon a Shyre by
Authority of Parliament, it is debi^um fundi, and affects singular
Successors; especially, seeing the Act of the Committee of Estates was Ratified
in the Parliament, 1641. which Parliament, and Committee, though they be now
Rescinded, yet it is with express Reservation of Private Rights acquired
thereby, such as this. The Pursuer answered, that every Imposition of this
nature, though by Authority of Parliament, is not debitum fundi; but does only
affect the Persons having Right the time of the Imposition; whereanent, the
mind of the late Parliament appears in so far, as in the Acts thereof,
ordaining Impositions to be uplifted during the troubles, Singular Successors
are excepted. It was answered exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis, such an
exception had not been needful, if de jure singular Successors had been free.
It was answered, many exceptions, though they bear not so expressly, yet they
are rather Declaratory of a Right, then in being, then statutory, introducing a
new Right.

The Lords found Singular Successors free, and reduced the Decree pro tanto.

Earl of Lauderdail contra Wolmet. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Lauderdail pursues a Spuilzie of the Teynds of Wolmet, against
Major Biggar, who alleged absolvitor, because the Lands of Wolmet were Valued
and approven. The Pursuer replied, that the said Decree of Valuation was
improven, by a Decree of Certification obtained there against, at the instance
of Swinton, having Right to these Teynds for the time, by a Gift from the
Usurper. The Defender duplyed, that no respect ought to be had to the said
Certification; First, because this Pursuer derives no Right from Swintoun,
being only restored to his own Right, and Swintouns Right from the Usurper
found null: so that as the Pursuer would not be burdened with any Deed of
Swintouns, to his prejudice, neither can he have the benefit of any Deed of
Swintouns to his advantage. 2dly. The said Certification was most
unwarrantable, in so far as the Decree of Valuation being in the Register of
the Valuation of Teynds, the Defender was not oblidged to produce it, but the
Pursuer ought to have Extracted it himself. 3dly. All Parties having interest
were not called to the said Certification, viz. Mr. Mark Ker the Wodsetter, by
a public Infeftment, in whose Right Major Biggar, now Succeeds. And last, the
Defender alleged, that he had a Reduction of the Certification, upon Minority
and Lesion, and the unwarrantable Extracting of it. The Pursuer answered to the
first, that seeing Swintoun did use the Pursuers Right, all real advantages
which were not Personal, but consequent upon the Real Right, and which belonged
not to Swintoun personaliter, but as prerended proprietar: do follow the Real
Right it self; and Accresce to the true Proprietar, as if he had acquired a
Servitude, or had reduced the Vassalls Right, ^b non solutum canonem. To the
Second, oppones the Certification, wherein compearance was made, for Wolmet,
and three Terms taken to produce, and no such Defense was alleged, as that
the Valuation was in a public Register. To the Third, the Pursuer needed not
know the Wodsetter, because it was an Improper Wodset, the Heretor Possessing
by his Back-bond, as Heretable Possessor, seeing the Decree of Valuation was at
the Heretors instance, it was sufficient to Reduce it against his Heir; for it
would not have been necessar to have called the Wodsetter, to obtain the
Decree of Valuation, but the then Heretable Possessor: so neither is it
necessar to call the Wodsetter to the Reducing or improving thereof. To the
last, no such Reduction seen nor ready, neither the Production satisfied.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and duplyes, in respect of the Certification,
which they found to accresce to the Pursuer, but prejudice to the Defender, to
insist in his Reduction, as accords; and declared, that if the Defender used
diligence, in the Reduction, they would take it to consideration at the
conclusion of the cause.

Balmirrino contra Sir William, Dicks Creditors. July 14. 1664.
JAmes Gilmor, for the use of the Lord Balmirrino, being Infeft in the Lands of
Northberwick, upon a Right from Sir John Smith, who had Right from Sir William
Dick, pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties. Compearance is made for Sir
Williams other Creditors, Wodsetters and Appryzers, who alleged absolvitor,
because the Pursuers Right is Extinct, in so far as Balmirrino being Debtor to
Sir William Dick, and charged by him, had acquired this Right from Sir John
Smith to compence Sir William, and did actually compence him by alleging the
same reason of Compensation, producing the Disposition then blank in the
Assigneys name; whereupon the Letters were Suspended Simpliciter, and my Lord
assoilzied; and the Disposition given up to Mr. Alexander Dick, which is
instructed by the Testimony of William Douny Clerk at that time, Balmirrino
answered, First, That William Dounys Testimony, could not make up a Minute of
Decree, where there were no Process, nor Adminicle to be seen. 2dly Though the
minute of the Decree were lying before the Lords, not being Extracted, the
Lord Balmirrino might pass from his Reason of Compensation, and take up his
Disposition, which is always permitted before Litiscontestation, or Decree,
and Litiscontestation is never accounted until the Act be Extracted: So that
there being no Act of Litiscontestation Extracted in the said Process, but only
an alleged minute of a Decree without an Act, neither Party might resile.
3dly, Though the Suspender might not resile Simpliciter, yet it is still
competent to him, to propone a several reason of Suspension before Extract;
being instantly verified: and now he propones this Reason, that the Debt awand
by him to Sir. William Dick, is a public Debt, and the Parliament has
Suspended all execution thereupon, till the next Parliament; which by
consequence liberats him from making use of, or instructing his Reason of
Compensation. The Creditors answered, it was most ordinar for the Lords, to
make up Minutes by the Testimonies of the Clerks, when they were lost. So that
William Douny being a famous Clerk, his Testimony must make up the Minute,
after which the Lord Balmirrino cannot resile from his Reason of Compensation,
or take back the Disposition; seeing it was his own fault he did not Extract it,
and cannot make use now of a Supervenient Exception, that was not at that time
Competent, in prejudice of their Creditors; Balmirrino being now in much worse
condition.

The Lords found, that the Lord Balmirrino might now propone a Reason of
Suspension emergent on the late Act of Parliament and pass from his Reason of
Compensation, and take up his Disposition, seeing it did not appear that the
Process was miscarried through Balmirrino's fault, or that the Disposition was
delivered to Mr. Dick, neither of which did appear by William Dounys Testimony.

Thomas Crawfoord contra Prestoun Grange. July 15. 1664.
THomas Crawfoord, as Assigney by the Earl of Tarquair to a Decree of the
Valuation of the Teynds Lethinhops obtained Decree against the Lord of
Prestoun Grange Heretor thereof; who Suspended upon this Reason, that these
Lands were a part of the Patrimony of the Abbacy of New-botle, which Abbacy was
of the Cistertian Order, which Order, did enjoy that Privilege, that they
paid no Teynds for their Lands, while they were in their own Labourage, or
Pastourage, of which Privilege, not only the Abbots, but after them, the Lord
New-botle, and the Defender has been in Possession: and accordingly Sir John
Stewart of Traquair having pursued the Lord Newbotle before the Commissaries of
Edinburgh, in Anno 1587. For the Teynds of the Lands of Newbotle, upon the same
Defense, was Assoilzied, which Decree standing, must be sufficient to the
Defender, ay and while it be reduced; likeas, the Defender stood Infeft in the
said Lands by the King, with express Privileges decimarum more solito. The
Charger answered. First, That the foresaid Privilege, which sometime did
belong to all Monestries, was by Pope Adrian the fourth, limited to the
Cistertian Order Templars, Hospitillars, and that for such Lands only as they
had before the Lateran Counsel: So that the Suspender cannot enjoy that
Privilege. First, because he cannot instruct the Lands to have belonged to the
Abbacy, before that Counsel. 2ly, That being a Privilege granted to
Churchmen, is Personal, and cannot belong to their Successors, being ley men,
and albeit the said Decree, be in favors of the said Lord Newbotle, yet he
was Comendator of the Abbacy, and so in the Title of the Order.

The Lords found the Reason relevant, and instructed, by the said Decree, and
Suspended, for such part of the Lands, a^ were in the Suspenders own hand.

Mr. William Colvill contra the Executors of the Lord Colvill his Brother Eodem
die.
MR. William Colvill pursues the Executors of the Lord Colvill his Brother, for
payment of 2000. merk of Portion, Contracted to him by his brother, incase his
Brother wanted Heirs Male. It was alleged, for the Defender, absolvitor,
because the Contract is null, there being no Witnesses designed therein, to the
Lord Colvills Subscription, but only two Witnesses expressly subscribing as
Witnesses to Mr. William Colvils Subscription, and other two undesigned,
subscribing as Witnesses, but not relating to any particular Subscription. The
Pursuer answered, that he offered to design, the other two Witnesses which was
always found sufficient to take away that nullitie. It were answered, for the
Defender, that albeit the Designation were sufficient, in recenti, where the
Witnesses were on life, because use may be made of these Witnesses, to improve
the Write, which could not hold in re antiqua where both Witnesses were dead.

The Lords formerly found, that the Designation was not sufficient, without
instructing the Write by Witnesses, or Adminicles, for which effect, the
Pursuer produced several Writs, subscribed by the Lord Colvill, and by one of
the two Witnesses, that comparatione literarum might instruct the truth of
their Subscriptions; and alleged further, that this being a mutual Contract,
and unquestionably, Subscribed by the one Contracter, and being of that nature
that he, whose Subscription was unquestionable, did ingadge for a more onerous
cause then the other.

The Lords compared the hand writs, and found them both alike, sustained the
Write. The Pursuer making faith that it was truly subscribed by both Parties.

Hospital of Glasgow contra Robert Campbel. July 19. 1664.
THe Hospital of Glasgow having Appryzed the Lands of Silvercraige, they
thereupon obtained Decree, which being^ Suspended, compearance is made for
Robert Campbel in Glasgow, who alleged that he has Appryzed the Estate of
Lamont, from the Lord of Lamont; and that the Lands of Silvercraige are a Part
and Pertinent of the Lands Apprized by him, whereby he stands in the Right of
the Superior, and offers to prove, that the Lands in question, are Waird, and
that the Appearand Heir from whom the Hospital has Appryzed, is yet Minor,
and therefore the Hospital coming in his place, can be in no better Case nor
the Minor; but the Course of the Waird must run, during the Appearant Heirs
minority. The Charger answered, that the Course of the Waird cannot now run,
because the Lands are full, by the Infeftment of the Appryzer, who stands
Infeft, being received by a prior Appryzer of the Superiority, without any
Exception, or Reservation of the Waird Duties. It was answered, for Robert
Campbel, that George Campbels Appryzing of the Superiority was, extinct, by
Satisfaction with the Males and Duties, before he received the Hospital, and
so there is now place to the Second Appryzer, neither can the filling of the
Fee by the Appryzer stop the Course of the Waird, which began before the
Appryzing; albeit the Appryzer be Infeft simply; seeing all Infeftments on
Appryzings, are in obedience, which never imports a passing from any Right of
the Superiors, albeit he do not reserve the same; and therefore he may make use
of any Right in his Person, not only as to the Casualities of the Superiority,
but as to the Property, and his receiving in obedience, is only to give the
Appryzer Anteriority of Diligence.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Sir. Laurence Scot contra. Lady Shenaltoun Eodem die.
IN an Act of Litiscontestation, betwizt Sir. Laurence Scot, and the Lady
Shenaltoun; a Defense of Payment being found Relevant, Scripto velj^ramento for
Sir Laurence, and not having cited the Lady, to give her Oath, nor produced any
Write; the Term was craved to be circumduced.

The Lords did not circumduce the Term, but found that the Pursuer should have
been still ready to produce his Client to Depone, if the Defender made choice
of his Oath.

Elizabeth Douglass contra Lord of Wadderburn. Eodem die.
ELizabeth Douglass, as Heir to her Goodsire, and Sr. Robert Sinclar of
Loc^ermacus her Husbands, pursue a Spuilzie of Teynds against the Lord of
Wadderburn, who alleged absolvitor, because he had Tack of the Teynds of the
said lands from the Earl of Hoom, and by virtue thereof, was bona fide
Possessor, and behoved to bruik, till his Tack were reduced. 2ly. That he had
Right from the Earl of Hoom, by the said Tack, which Earl of Hoom, albeit his
Right which he had, the time of the granting of the said Tack, was reduced, yet
he has sincepresently in his Person, the Right of the Teynds of the lands from
John Steuart of Coldingham, which being jus superveniens authori, must accresce
to the Defender, and defend him in this Pursuit. The Pursuer answered to the
First Defense, that the Defenders bona fides was interrupted, by Process
against him, long before the Years lybelled. 2ly. Albeit there had been none,
yet this Author, the Earl of Hooms Right being reduced in Parliament, his bona
fides being sine omni titulo; is not sufficient; neither needed the Tacks-man
to be called to the Reduction, but his Right fell in consequentiam with the
granter of the Tacks right. The second Defense, It was answered, that the
general maxim of jus Superveniens, has its own fallancies, for the Reason of
the maxim is, that when any thing is disponed for a cause onerous, equivalent
to the Value thereof: It is always understood, that the Disponer dispones not
only what Right he has already, but whatever Right he shall happen to acquire;
seeing he gets the full Value: and therefore sixione juris, whatever Right
thereafter comes in his Person, though it be after the Acquirers Right, yet it
is holden as conveyed by the Acquirers Right, without any new Deed or
Solemnity, but where that Reason is wanting, it holds not as first, if it
appear, that the Cause of the Disposition is not at the full Value; then it is
presumed, that the Disponer only disponed such Right as he presently had; or if
the Disponer deduce a Particular Right: as an Appryzing, or Tacks. etc. and
either Dispons, but that Right, per expressum, or at least dispones not for all
Right he has or may have, or does not dispone with absolute Warrandice; In
these Cases, the Authors Right supervening, accresces not to the Acquirer, but
himself, may make use thereof against the Acquirer, much more any other having
Right from from him. 2ly. The maxim holds not, if the Authors Right be Reduced
before he acquire the new Right, in which case, the first Right being extinct,
nothing can accresce thereto, but the Author may acquire any other new Right,
and make use thereof. 3ly, The maxim has no place, if the Author do not
acquire a new Right to the land, which could be the foundation and ground of
the Tack granted; as if he acquired but the Right of an Annualrent, which could
be no ground of the Defenders Tack, much more, if he acquire a Right to the
Mails and Duties of the lands, either upon Sentence to make Arrested Goods
furthcommand, or an Assignation, or Disposition of the Mails and Duties made to
the Author, for satisfying of a Debt to him, by the Disponer. This would be no
Right to the land that could accresce to Validat a Tack. The Defender answered,
First, that his first Defense was yet relevant, because, albeit his Authors
Right were reduced, he not being called, his Right would be a sufficient
colorable Title, to give him the benefit of a Possessory judgment, until his
bona fides were interrupted by Process, because his subaltern Right is not
extinct, till either by way of Action, or Exception, it be declared extinct; as
falling in consequence, with his Authors Right reduced, seeing there is no
mention thereof in the Decree of Reduction. 2ly Albeit Diligence had been
used, yet if the user thereof insisted not, but suffered the Defender, to
possess bona fide seven year thereafter, it revives that benefit of a new
Possessory Judgment.

The Lords, as to this Point, found that the Interruption of the bona fides by
Process, did still take the same away, unless it were Prescrived, but found,
that before any Process, the Defense should be relevant; and therefore
sustained only Process, for the year, since the Citation.

As to the other Defense in jure. The Defender answered, that his Defense
stands yet Relevant, notwithstanding all the Fallacies alleged which are
without warrant in Law, and without example with us, where this Maxim has
ever been held unquestionable, that jus Authoris accrescit Successori, unless
the Successors Right be expressly limited, to a particular Right, or to any
Right the Author then had, but the Defender needs not Disput the Equivalence of
the Cause, unless such express Limitation were, added there is no ground to
presume an Exception upon the Personal oblidgment of Warrandice, from fact and
deed, which oftimes is put in Contracts fully onerous, but on the contrair,
there is a several Defense upon that very Clause: that the Earl of Hoom,
whatever Right he should acquire, yet if he should make use of it against this
Defender, he comes against his own Warrandice, whereby he is oblidged, that he
has done, nor shall do no deed prejudicial to the Defenders Tack, neither is
there any ground of Exception; albeit the Authors Right was reduced, before the
new Right acquired from that ground, that the new cannot accresce unto the old
Right, being Extinct, because the Maxim bears, that it accresces Successori,
non jure Successoris; so that albeit the new Right do not Validat the old
Right: yet the new Right becomes the Defenders Right, eo momento, that it
became the Authors Right, per fictionem juris, without deed or diligence, and
cannot be taken away by any subsequent deed of that Author, more then if before
such a deed, he had particularly established his Successors therein; because
the fiction of the Law is equivalent to any such establishment, neither is
their any ground of Exception, that the Authors Right Superveening, is but an
Annualrent, which cannot Validat a Tack; because, if the Author were making use
of that Annualrent to poynd the ground, the Defender upon his Tack and
Warrandice would exclude him, because he could not come against his own d^ed
and oblidgment; yea, albeit it were but a Right to the Mails and Duties,
quocunque modo. The Lords having considered the Earl of Hooms new Superveening
Right, and that it was but the Right of an Annualrent of 300 lib. Starling,
with a Clause, that incase of failzie of payment, he might uplift the hail
Mails and Duties till he were paid, and that the Defenders Tack included only
Personal Warrandice. They repelled the Defense, and found that such a Right
could not accresce to the Defender, to validat his Tack, wherein some of the
Lords had respect to that point that the Right was Reduced before this new
Right; but others, as it seems, on better grounds laid no weight on that if
the cause onerous, had been the full value, and equivalent, or if the Tack had
born for all Right that I have, or shall acquire, which would accresce to the
Successor, as often as ever it was acquired, though all the prior Rights had been
reduced, but in this Case, the Author not acquiring a new Right to the Lands,
but only to the Mails and Duties, which in effect is but Personal, it could not
accresce to the Defender, more then if the Author had been Factor to a third
Part by the new Right, and albeit the Clauses of Personal Warrandice might
have Personally excluded the Earl of Hoom himself, yet seeing, that Right could
accresce to the Defender, the Earl of Hoom having renunced, or assigned it to a
third Party. The Personal Objection against the Earl of Hoom upon the Personal
Clause of Warrandice ceases, neither did the Pursuer insist upon the Earl of
Hooms Right, but his own.

Elizabeth Scrimgeor contra Executors of Mr. John Murray Eodem die.
IN a Count and Reckoning betwixt Elizabeth Scrimgeor relict of Mr. John Murray
Minister, and his Executors, these Queries were reported to the Lords by the
Auditor. First, Whether the Defunct dying Infeft in an Annualrent could have an
Heir, as to moveable Heirship. The Lords found he would, seeing the Annualrent
was Feudum, and he might thereby be esteemed as Baro, as well as a petty Fewer.

Quest. 2. Whether the Defunct, having died the day before Martinmas 1661. He
would have right to any part of the Stipend 1662. As the Annat. The Lords found
he would have the half of 1662. Quest. 3. Whether he would have like right to
the Gleib, as to the Stipend, by the Ann. The Lords found that could not be
debaitable, betwixt the Defuncts Relict and Executors, albeit there was no
compearance for a new intrant in which Case, they thought that so soon as the
intrant (...) were admitted, he would have right to the Manse and Gleib, and
not the Defunct, though the Defuncts Wife would have right to a part of the
Stipend due after his entry. Quest. 4. Whether the Heretable Debt could
exhaust the moveable Estate of the Defunct, to deminish the Relicts part,
especially if their be no Heretable Debt due to the Defunct, or if the
Heretable Debts due by him exceed these due to him.

The Lords found, that seeing the Relict could have no benefit of Heretable
Debts due to the Defunct, being excluded by the Act of Parliament 1641.
renewed, 1662. Therefore she would have no detriment, by such Heretable Debt
due by the Defunct, whether they exceeded the Heretable Debts due him, or no.
In this report, it falling into consideration, whether the Ann would only
belong to the Wife, there being no Children, or half to the Wife, and half to
the nearest of Kin, they thought it would devide equally betwixt them, though
it was not res^lv^d, whether it needed to be confirmed, or would be liable to
the Defuncts Debt.

Lady Clerkingtoun contra Stewart. July 20. 1664.
THe Lady Clerkingtoun, pursues the Heirs of Umquhile David Stewart Son to the
Lord of Blackhall, for the Sum of 2000 merks due to her Husband. It was
alleged, for Walter Stewart Brother to the Defunct, Defender, no Process,
because the Heir of Line, of the Defunct David Stewart was not called, in so
far as David, being the only Son of the second Marriage, and having neither
Brother nor Sister of that Marriage; his Heir of Line could not be Walter
Stewart, youngest Son of the first Marriage, but the Heir of the Eldest Son of
the first Marriage; according to Craigs Opinion, de successionibus.

The Lords found, that in this case, Walter, as the next immediate preceding,
was both Heir and of Conquest, and not the eldest Brother.

In this Process, it was also alleged, that this Sum was a Clandestine
Fraudulent Paction, contrare to the Contract of Marriage, betwixt the Defunct
David Stewart, and the Defenders Daughter, whereby 10000 merks being Contracted
with her in Tochar, and Blackhall granted a proportionable Liferent thereto;
yet under hand, without Blackhalls knowledge his Son was induced to give Bond
for this 2000 merk, to take away 2000 merk of the Tochar: and it was remembered
by some of the Lords, that in the like Case, a discharge of a part of a Sons
Provision granted to his Father, contrair to his Contract of Marriage was found
Fraudulent and null, by exception.

The Lords did not decyde, but rather desired the Parties should agree, but
thought this was an unfavourable Act of dangerous consequence.

Petrie contra Paul. Eodem die.
PEtrie pursues a Removing against Paul, who alleged absolvitor because she
possessed, by virtue of her Infeftment. It was replied, the Infeftment was
null, by exception^ as following upon a Contract of Marriage which Marriage was
dissolved within year and day. It was duplyed, that the Infeftment behoved to
stand valid, being in recompense of her Tochar, until her Tochar was repayed.

Which the Lords found relevant, unless it were alleged, that the Tochar was
not paid to the Husband, but in her own hands, or her Debtor.

Scot of Braid-meadow contra Scot of Thirlstoun. July 21. 1664.
SCot of Braid-meadow pursues Scot of Thirlstain his Curator, for Count and
Reckoning, who alleged absolvitor; because the Pursuer having conveened the
Defender before the Sheriff, to count, and Reckon, and to Renunce his
Curatorie, he was ^hen decerned to Renunce the Office, and did Count for
bygones. The Pursuer answered, no respect to that Decree, because it was
during his Minority. In which time the Defender had a competent defense, that
he was not comptable; and for the Renunciation of the Office. It was a great
Lesion to the Pupil, which the Curator should not have yielded to, but proponed
a Defense against the same, that he could not pursue his Curator to Renunce,
unless he had condescended, and instructed malversation. The Defender answered,
that he had just Reason to suffer Sentence, because his Pupil was Irregular,
and meddled with his own Rents by force, and misspent the same.

The Lords, Notwithstanding of the Decree, ordained Count and Reckoning, and
found, that the Decree could not liberat the Curator, even for his Omissions
after, but reserved to the Defender, before the Auditor to condescend what
deeds the Pupil had done before, as being relevant pro tanto.

Alexander Livingstoun contra Heirs of Line and Daughters of the Lord
Forrester. July 22. 1664.
ALexander Livingstoun, as Assigney to a Debt awand by the deceist Lord
Forrester, having charged his Daughters, and Heirs of Line and they Renunced,
whereupon he pursues Adjudication; Compearance, is made for the Lord Forrester,
who produced his Infeftment, and alleged the Lands therein comprehended could
not be Adjudged; because the Defunct was denuded thereof, before his Death; and
as he could stop the Apparent Heirs, if they were craving themselves to be
entered Heirs to their Fathers, so the Adjudger, in their place could not crave
Infeftment. The Pursuer answered, the Defense was not Competent hoc loco, and
the Defender would not be prejudged by any Infeftment, or Adjudication, if he
had sufficient Right. And therefore, as in an Apprysing, he might Appryse omne
jus, that the Defunct had, and thereupon be Infeft: So he has the like benefit
in Adjudication, which has been ordinarily sustained, periculo petentis.

The Lords sustained the Adjudication, as to all Right the Appearand Heirs
could have had in the Lands, but not as to the Property, and therefore would
not decern the Pu^^uer to be Infeft, but sustained the Decree of Adjudication,
that thereby he may have Right to Reversions, and Clauses resolutive, or other
Personal Clauses, which they thought would be sufficiently carried by the
Decree of Adjudication, without Infeftment, and would not be prejudged by
another Adjudger, obtainer of the first ^nfefment, but this was beside the
Ordinar Course wherein Adjudications use always to be granted periculo
petentis, that thereby omne jus may be carried; and as in Appryzings, it has
been ordinarily found, that the Superior must Infeft the Appryzer, to complete
his Legal diligence, albeit^he Superior instruct, that himself has a Right to
the Lands; Because his receiving of the Appryzer, in obedience, will not
prejudge his Right, and it were unreasonable to force an Appryzer, or Adjudger
to dispute the Point of Right^ when all the Writs and Evidences are in their
Adversaries hands, and the Creditors being meir Strangers, who upon their
Appryzings, or Adjudications can only have Title to exhibition of the Rights,
and afterward be oblidged to dispute, but here the Case was notour to many of
the Lords being near the Town of Edinburgh, that the Lord Forrester had Infeft
his Goodson in his Estate.

Lord Loure contra Lady Craig. Eodem die.
LOrd Loure being Infeft in the Estate of Craig, pursues for Mails and Duties;
Compearance is made for the Lady Craig Liferenter, who alleadges she stands
Infeft, and in Possession of the Lands. The Pursuer answered, that any
Infeftment; as to that part thereof, that was not for fulfilling of the
Contract of Marriage, was Fraudulent, and in Prejudice of lawful Creditors, and
so null by exception, conform to the Act of Parliament 1621. It was answered
for the Lady. They opponed the Lords daily Practique ever since the said Act,
that Infeftments were never taken away thereupon by Exception or Reply.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Montgomerie contra Hoom. Eodem die.
WIlliam Mongomery, pursues Alexander Hoom to Remove, who alleged absolvitor,
because he stands Infeft, and by virtue thereof, in seven years Possession, and
so has the benefit of a Possessorie Judgment. It was Replied, that before any
such Possession, a Decree of Removing was obtained against the Defender, which
made him mala fide Possessor. It was duplyed, that since that Decree, which
was in absence, the Defender had Possessed it seven years without Interruption,
which acquired the benefit of a new Possessorie Judgment. And alleadges that
an Interruption of Possession ceases by seven years, albeit in the Point of
Right, it ceases not till Forty.

The Lords found the Interruption stands for forty Years, and that no
Possession thereafter, upon that same ground could give a new Possessorie
Judgment, the Possession being Interrupted, not only by Citation, but by a
Decree of Removing, which stated the other Party in Civil Pessession.

Earl of Sutherland contra Mcintosh of Conadge. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Sutherland pursues Mcintosh of Conadge for the profit of a
Regality belonging to the Earl. viz. Blood-wyts, Escheats. etc. whereof Conadge
had obtained Gift from the Usurpers, the time that Regalities were Suppressed;
and declared that he insisted for those only that were yet unuplifted, for
which the Parties Fined had not made payment, albeit some of them had given
Bond. The Defender alleged absolvitor, for Blood-wyts, and Amerciaments,
which might have been done by the Justices of Peace because, as to these, the
Inglish had done no wrong; seeing the Justice of Peace might then, and may now
Cognosce and Fine for Blood-wyts, whithin the Regality. The Pursuer answered,
that as he might have Re-pleadged from the Justice General, if he had not been
impeded by the Act of the Usurpers, so much more might he have re-pleadged from
the Justice of Peace, and therefore any Blood-wyts decerned by them, belonged
to him, as Lord of the Regality.

The Lords repel^ed the Defense, and jo^nd the dead of the Justice of Peace
could not prejudge the Pursuer.

M. John Muirhead contra July 21. 1664.
MR. John Muirhead, as Assigney pursuing he alleged, that the Assignation not
being intimat before the Cedents, death, the Sum was in bonis defuncti, and the
Assigney could have no Right without Confirmation.

The Lords Repelled the alleadgance.

James Johnstoun Merchant in Edinburgh, contra The Lady Kincaide November 11.
1664.
JAmes Iohnstoun pursues the Lady Kincaide, as Executrix to her Husband, who
alleged absolvitor, because the Testament was exhausted, and she had obtained
a Decree of Exoneration, which being standing un-reduced, she behoved to be
assoilzied, seeing there was no Reduction thereof raised. 2ly, Albeit the said
Exoneration were quarrallable hoc ordine yet it appears thereby, that the
Testament was exhausted. The Pursuer answered, that the first Defense on the
Exoneration non Relevat, unless the Pursuer had been cited to the giving
thereof; it operats nothing against him, nor needs he Reduce it. 2ly, The
second member of the Defense of exhausting the Testament mentioned in the
Exoneration, non Relevat, unless it were alleged exhausted by lawful
Sentences, before intenting of the Pursuers Cause. The Defender answered, that
it was Relevant to allege, that payment was made of lawful Debts of the
Defuncts instructed by writ, before intenting of the Pursuers Cause, for seeing
the Debt was clear, the Executor ought not to multiply Expenses, by defending
against the same, unless it were alleged there were collusion to prefer the
Creditors paid.

The Lords repelled both members of the Defense, and found that the Executrix
might not, without a Sentence prefer any Creditor; especially, seeing it was not
a Debt given up in Testament by the Defunct, neither was it alleged, that the
Pursuer had long neglected to pursue.

Nicolas Murray Lady Craigcaffie contra Cornelius Neilson Merchant in
Edinburgh. November 12. 1664.
NIcolas Murray pursues a Reduction of a Decree of the Baillies of Edinburgh,
obtained against her, at the instance of Cornelius Neilson upon this Reason,
that she being pursued for the Mournings for her self and Family, to her
Husbands Funerals; which Mournings were delivered to her, by the said
Cornelius, and were bought by her from him, or by her Order sent to her; which
was referred to her Oath, and she deponed, that Cornelius had promised to his
Father, to give necessars for his Funerals out of his Chop, and according to
that promise, had sent unto her.

The Baillies found, that this quality adjected in the Oath, that the
Furniture was upon Cornelius promise to his Father, resulted in ane Exception,
which they found probable by Write, or Oath of Cornelius; who having deponed,
denied any such promise, and therefore they decerned, the Lady to pay: Against
which her Reason of Reduction is, that she ought to have been Assoilzied by the
Baillies, because her Oath did not prove the lybel. viz. That she bought the
Wair from Cornelius, or made her self Debtor, therefore, but only that she
received the same from him without any Contract, or Ingadgment, which would
never make her Debtor, for a Wife, or a Bairn in Family are not liable for
their, Clothes, unless they promise payment, but only the Father; and in the
same manner, the Mourning for the Funerals of the Husband is not the Wifs
Debt, but the Husbands Executors. The Defender answered, that the Reason was no
ways Relevant, seeing the Pursuers Oath proved the receipt of the Goods, which
was sufficient ad victoriam causa. The quality being justly taken away; for
albeit the Husband or his Executors were liable for the Relicts Mournings, yet
a Merchant that gives off the same to the Relict, is not oblidged to dispute
that, but may take himself to the Relict, who received the same without either
Protestation, or Aggreement, not to be liable. The Pursuer answered, that
whatever Favor might be pleaded for a Merchant Stranger, yet this Furniture
being given by the Defuncts own Son to his Relict, could not oblidge her. The
Son being the Fathers ordinar Merchant.

The Lords found, that the Oath before the Baillies proved not the lybel, and
that the accepting of the Mournings, did not oblidge the Relict, but the
Executors seeing the Defunct was a Person of their quality, that his Relict
required mourning and therefore Reduced.

Galbreath contra Colquhoun. Eodem die.
WAlter Galbreath pursues an Exhibition of all Writs made by, or to his
Predecessors, ad deliberandum. The Lords restricted the lybel, to Writs made to
the Defunct, or his Predecessors, or by them to any Preson in their own Family,
or containing any Clause in their ^avour, whereupon the Defender having
Deponed, that he had in his hand a Disposition of Lands made by the Pursuers
Predecessors, Irredeemably; and that he had his Predecessors progress of these
Lands, but that he thought there was no Clause in any of these Writs, in the
Pursuer, or his Predecessors Favors.

The Lords having considered the Oath, Ordained the Defender to produce the
Disposition, denunding the Purs^ers Predecessors, and thought that being
produced simply, without condition of Reversion, it liberat him from producing
the Pursuers Predecessors Progress, though made in their Favors; but because
the Pursuer alleged, that in their Predecessors Progress, there was a Clause
de non alienando, which would work in his Favor, and that the Oath was not
positive, but that he thought. They Ordained the Defender to be examined, if he
had any Tailzie.

Daughters of Balmirrino contra Eodem die.
THe Daughters of Balmirrino having pursued the Heirs Male, for their Portions
contained in their Mothers Contract of Marriage, and for a competent Aliment
until the same were paid. The Defender renunced to be Heir, and was absent.

The Lords advised the Contract, by which they found the Portion payable at the
Daughters age of fyfteen, and Aliment till that time, but no mention of
Annualrent, or Aliment thereafter; yet they found that the Aliment behoved to
be continued till their Marriage, or the payment of their Tochar: They being
Minors, and leised, by not pursuing therefore at the Age of fyfteen, but that
they could not have Annualrent, seeing the Contract bare none.

Dame Elizabeth Fleming contra Fleming and Baird her Husband. November 16. 1664.
IN an Account and Reckoning, betwixt Dame Elizabeth Fleming, and her Daughter,
and Robert Baird her Spouse. The Lords having considered the Contract of
Marriage, in which Robert Baird accepted 12000 merk, in full satisfaction of
all his Wife could claim, by her Fathers decease, or otherwise; and there
being some other Bands in her Name, her Mother craved, that she might be
decerned by the Lords, to denude her Self and Assign to her Mother; seeing she
was satisfied, and she on the other part, craved, that her mother and Sir John
Gibson might be oblidged to warrant her, that her 12000 merk should be free of
any Debt of her Fathers. It was answered for the Mother, that there was no such
Provision contained in the Contract, and the Lords in justice could not cause
her to go beyond the terms of the Contract, there was no Reason for such a
warrandice; seeing Debts might arise to exhauste the hail Inventary. It was
answered for the Daughter, that there was no oblidgment in the Contract, for
her to assign her Mother, but if the Lords did supply that as consequent upon
the tennor of the Contract; they ought also to supply the other. It was
answered for the Mother, that there was no reason for her to undertake the
hazard, unless it would appear, that there was so considerable Adiminition of
her Daughters Portion, in her favors, as might import her taking of that
hazard for that abatement; and albeit such a warrandice were granted, yet^ it
should only be to warrant the Daughter from the Fathers Debt, in so far as
might be extended to the superplus of the Daughters full portion, above the
12000 merk.

The Lords found, that if there was an abatement in favors of the mother, it
behoved to import, that she undertook the hazard of the fathers Debt, not only
as to the superplus, but simply; but seeing it was known to the Lords: They gave
the mother her choice, either to count to the Daughter for the whole Portion,
if she thought there was no benefit without any such Warrandice, or if, she
took herself to the Contract, and so acknowledged there was a benefit. They
found her liable to warrant her Daughter simpliciter.

Lochs and the Earl of Kincairdin contra Hamiltoun. November 18. 1664.
HAmiltoun and her Authors, having obtained Decree against Lochs, as Heirs to
their Father, for a Sum of money; and Annuals thereof, after Count and
Reckoning, and being thrice Suspended, there are still Decreets in foro, Lochs,
and the Earl of Kincardine now Suspends again, and alleged, that in the Count
and Reckoning, there were several Recepts of Annualrent, which were not at that
time in Lochs hands, but in the Earl of Kincardines, whose Father was Co
principal bound conjunctly and severally with Lochs Father. The Charger opponed
her Decreets in foro, and alleged, that Kincairdin had no interest, for
neither could the Letters be found Orderly Proceeded, nor yet Suspended against
him; and whereas it was alleged, that the Clause of mutual Relief, would
force him to Relieve the Lochs prorata, he had a good Defense, that they had
not intimat to him the Plea, and thereby had Prejudged themselves, of the
Defense upon the Ticket in his hands. The Suspenders answered, they were
Minors, and that Kincardin having a clear Interest, might choice whether to
Defend them, or Defend himself against them.

The Lords reponed them to the Tickets now gotten out of my Lord Kincairdins
hands, but declared there should be expense granted against them, for all the
Decreets to which the Chargers were put.

Thomas Guthrie contra Sornbeg. Eodem die.
GVthrie pursues Sornbeg, alleging, that their being a first Wodset of the
Lands of Thriplandhill, and certain Tenements in Edinburgh, to Alexander
Veatch, or his Authors; and a second Wodset of the Lands of Thriplandhill
granted to the Pursuers Father, and by a posterior Contract.

The Pursuers Fathers Wodset was Confirmed, and a certain Sum added thereto,
and for both, some Tenements in Edinburgh, were disponed with this provision;
that Guthrie should possess thereby, and should be comptable for what was more
then his Annualrent, and Sornbeg having redeemed the first Wodset, and taking a
Renunciation thereof, and having Right to the Reversion of the whole, entered
to the Possession of the Tenements in the Town: whereupon Guthrie craves, that
Sornbeg may count and reckon for the Mails and Duties uplifted by him, and
possess him in time coming, to the hail Mails and Duties, aye and while he be
paid of his Principal Sum, and Annualrents, or satisfied by Intromission. The
Defender alleged, First, That he having the Right of Reverson, though
posterior, yet having, first Redeemed, and made use thereof, his Right of
Reversion by his Disposition, being in effect an Assignation to the Reversion:
and Guthries second Wodset being a prior Assignation to the Reversion. The
second Assignation with the first Diligence, or Intimation must prefer the
Defender.

This the Lords repelled, and found no necessity of an Intimation, or Diligence
to consumat Guthries Right to the Reversion of the first Wodset, seeing Guthrie
was Infeft by his second Infeftment, which was equivalent to the Registrating
of a Formal Assignation to the Reversion.

2dly. The Defender alleged, that being Singular Successor; and having
Redeemed the first Wodset: which is now extinct, he possesses by an
irredeemable Right, and so must have the benefit of a Possessory Judgment.

The Lords repelled this Defense, seeing seven years Possession was not
alleged.

3dly. The Defender alleged absolvitor, from the bygone Mails and Duties,
before intenting of this Cause, because, albeit he had not possessed so long,
as to attain the benefit of a Possessory Judgment, which would defend him, not
only for bygones, but in time coming; till his Right were Reduced, yet before
Citation, he was bona fide possessor, and fecit fructus consumptos suos, which
the Lords found relevant. 4ly. The Defender alleged, that by the Pursuers
Contract, he was to be comptable for the superplus of the Mails and Duties of
the Lands, more then paid his Annualrent, and now the Defender coming in place
of the Heretor, the Pursuer is comptable to him for the superplus. The Pursuer
answered, that albeit he was comptable, he might detain those Annualrents, and
impute them in his Principal Sum.

The Lords having considered the Contract, found the Pursuer ought to be
Re-possessed, but that he could not detain the superplus, but that he behoved
to be comptable yearly to the Defender conform to the Contracte.

Margaret Mcgil contra Ruthven of Gairn. November 22. 1664.
MArgaret Mcgil pursues a Reduction of her first Contract of Marriage with
Umquhil Patrick Ruthven younger of Gairn, upon two Reasons, First, because it
was post nuptias, and so donatio inter virum and uxorem stante matrimonio
revocabilis. 2dly. Because she was Minor, and enorlie leised, in so far as she
disponed to her Husband, and the Heirs of the Marriage; which failling, to his
Heirs 8000 lib. of money, and above; and the half of some Tenements in
Edinburgh, worthy 1100 lib. yearly in leiu whereof, her Liferent was only of
8. or 10. Chalders of Victual, and of her own Tenements; but she did not ^etain
to her self the Liferent of the Money, or any Part of the Stock, whereby she is
leised in that, if the Heirs of the Marriage fail the Money, and the Lands goes
to the Heirs of the Husband, and returns not to hers, and that her Provision
being worth 20000 lib. she ought, at least to have had the double of the
Annualrent thereof in joynter. The Defender answered to the first Reason, that
it was no way relevant, seeing this was expressly a Contract of Marriage,
although after the Marriage there being no Contract before it is alike, as if
it had been before the Marriage; and to the second Reason is not relevant,
unless it were enorme lefion; for there being no Portion, or rule in Tochars
and Joynters, but that some get a Joynter equivalent to the Aunualrent of their
Tochar, some half as much more, some double, and it being ordinar, that Tochars
are provided to the Heirs of the Marriage, which failling, to the Man's Heirs,
here was no enorme lesion, or any thing extraordinar, although there were an
equality. The Pursuer being a Burgess Daughter, and her Husband a Gentleman of
an ancient Family, Quality should be compensed with Means. 3dly. The Pursuer,
since she was Major had Homologat the Contract, by setting her Joynter Lands,
and lifting the Rent thereof.

The Lords having, before answer, heard Probation of the Provision, and of the
Jointure, and having at length considered the whole Cause. They first Repelled
the Defense of Homologation, because the Pursuer was not quarrelling what she
got, but what she gave; and therefore requiring Rectification to have more.
They also sustained not the first Reason of Reduction, and found the Contract
not to be a Donation betwixt Man and Wife: and they found the second Reason of
Reduction Relevant, in so far as extended to an enorme lesion beyond the
latitude of Contracts of Marriage amongst such Persons, and therefore found it
not Relevant, to reduce the Fee of the Wifs Provision, but found it Relevant to
add to her a further Conjunct-fee; and therefore Rectified the Contract, in so
far as she had Assigned her Sums of Money, without reserving her own Liferent
thereof: and found, that seeing the Fee returned not to her, she should have the
Liferent of her own Portion, and her Provision out of her Husbands Estate,
which is Eight or Ten Chalder of Victual further.

Malcome Scot contra Lord of Bearfoord. November 23. 1664.
BEarsoord having borrowed 4000 merk from Malcome Scot in Anno 1652. By his
Contract, he is oblidged to pay the Annualrent thereof, and the Sum at certain
Terms, which Contract bears, That for Malcoms better Security Bairford sets to
him certain Aikers of Land, for 53. Bolls of Victual yearly, at Malcolms
option, either to pay the Bolls, or to pay twenty shilling less then the
Candlemess Fires. Bairford alleged, that Malcolm ought to count for the full
Fiars, and that the Diminution of twenty shilling, was Usurary, given Malcolm
more then his Annualrents, indirectly by that abatement; and therefore both by
Common Law, and specially by the late Act of Parliament, betwixt Debtor and
Creditor, that Addition was void. It was answered, that there was here no
Usurary Paction; But it was free to Malcolm Scot, to take the Lands by his
Tack^ for what Terms he pleased, and he might have taken it for half as many
Bolls, or at four merks the Boll, for each Boll which would have been valid.
2ly. The Case of the Act of Parliament meets not, because that is only in
Wodsets; here there is neither Infeftment nor Wodset, but a Personal
Obliegement, and a Tack.

3ly. There is a just reason to abate so much of the Boll, because the Tennent
behoved to be at the Expense of the Selling thereof, and at the hazard of these
that bought, if they failed in payment.

The Lords Sustained the Tack, without Annulling the Abatement, and found it
not Vsurary.

Halyburtoun contra Porteous. Eodem die.
HAlyburtoun having Married a Widow in the Potter-raw, there was no Contract of
Marriage betwixt them, but he gave her first an Infeftment in all the Lands he
had, the time of the Infeftment, and thereafter he gave her a second
Obliegment, providing certain Lands to him and her, and the Heirs betwixt them,
which ^ailzing, to devide betwixt their Heirs: Her Heirs pursuing to fulfill
this Obliegment. Halyburtoun alleged it was donatio inter virum and uxorem,
and now he Revocked.

Which the Lords formerly found Relevant, unless the Pursuer condescended, that
this Infeftment was Remuneratory, for a proportionable Provision, brought by
the Wife, and after condescendence, having considered what the Wife brought,
and what of it was before the first Infeftment, and what interveened betwixt
the first and the second; Albeit whatever fell unto the Wife, was moveable, and
would have belonged to the Husband, jure mariti; Yet if it had been of that
value, to have Served both the first and second Provision.

They would have Sustained both, as Remuneratory in gratitude to the Wife; but
they found no such thing condescended on, or Instructed, and therefore they
Reduced the second Provision.

Collin Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin. Eodem die.
COllin Hay pursues the Magistrates of Elgin, for the Debt of a Rebel, Escaping
out of their Prison. They Alleged Absolvitor; First, Because it was in the
time of Richard the Usurper. 2ly. The Rebel Escaped, by breaking through the
Roof of the Prison, and they searched for him immediately after.

The Lords Repelled both Defenses, seeing the Escape was in day light, during
which the Towns Officer should Guard the Prison.

Elizabeth Nisbet Lady contra Murray. Eodem die.
ELizabeth Nisbit pursues a Poinding of the Ground, of certain Lands wherein
she was Infeft, by James Wood her Husband. Compearance is made for Patrick
Murray, who alleged that he is Infeft by her Husband, his Debtor in the same
Lands, and ought to be preferred. It is answered for the Lady, that she ought
to be preferred, because both their Annualrents being base; albeit her
Infeftment be posterior; Yet her Husbands Possession being her Possession, and
she being Infeft before Patrick Murray's Infeftment was cled with Possession,
must be preferred. It was answered for Patrick Murray; First, That a Husbands
Possession should be the Wifes Possession, cannot be understood in an
Annualrent, because her Husband never Possessed an Annualrent, but the Property.

This the Lords Repelled, and found the Possession of the Property, as jus
nobilius, to contain the Annualrents eminenter.

2ly. Patrick Murray alleged that the Husbands Possession being the Wifes, is
only introduced in favors of Contracts of Marriage, favore dotis; That because
Wives cannot Possess, during their Husbands life; therefore his Possession is
accomp^ed theirs. But this Infeftment in question is not founded upon the
Contract of Marriage, but upon a posterior Charter, of a different Tenor. 3ly.
Patrick Murray used citation before C^nd^esmess, next after the Ladys
Infeftment, and thereupon obtained Decree in March, which must be drawn back
to the Citation. So that the Husband could have no Possession betwixt the Ladys
Charter, and his Diligence, there being no interveening Term. It was answered
for the Lady, that this Privilege is allowed to Wifes, that their Husbands
Possession is theirs during their Marriage, favore datis, which may be without
a Contract.

2ly. The Husband being in present current Possession, from the very Date of
the Wifes Seasine, his Possession is sufficient to validate hers.

The Lords found the Ladies Infeftment to be first validat by Possession.

It was further alleged by Patrick Murray^ that this Infeftment was donatio
inter virum and uxorem, not being founded on the Contract of Marriage, which
was satisfied before, at least it is to the prejudice of him a lawful Creditor,
who was Infeft before the Lady; and therefore seeing the Ladys Infeftment is so
free and lucrative, both parties being now Disputing the Possession and power
therein. The Ladys Infeftment cannot prejudge him. That the Contract of
Marriage was satisfied; he condescends thus, that the Husband was obliged to
Infeft his Wife in certain Lands, and to make them worth 18. Chalders of
Victual, or otherwise at her option, to Infeft her in an Annualrent, ita est,
she made her option, and was Infeft in the Property, after which she cannot
return to this Annualrent in question. It was answered for the Lady, that the
Clause being conceived in her option, must be Interpret her option not to
receive the Infeftment, but to enjoy either of the two she pleased. First, A
Seasine cannot import her choice, which might have been given by her Husband,
without her knowledge upon the Preccept, contained in the Contract of Marriage,
unless it were instructed, that she did accept the same by a Seasine, propriis
manibus, or otherwise; and that her Infeftment, was a valid effectual
Infeftment. 3ly. Albeit that Article of the Contract of Marriage, were
satisfied by taking her choice; yet she being thereafter Infeft upon her
Charter produced, in her Liferent Lands, and in the Annualrent in Warrandice
thereof, or with power to her to make use of the Annualrent it self,
principaliter, at her option, albeit her choice once made, will exclude her
from the annualrent, principaliter; yet not in so far as she is Infeft therein,
to warrant and make up the principal Lands, which can be accounted no Donation
nor Deed, in prejudice of a Creditor, because it does but make real and
effectual the personal obliegement of warrandice^ contained in the Contract. It
was answered for Patrick Murray, that this alleadgance non competent hoc loco,
but he must only poind the Ground, until the Lady obtain a Declarator, of what
is defective of her Liserent Lands, but cannot come in by way of Reply.

The Lords found, that the Ladys acceptance of the Liferent Infeftment,
satisfied the obliegement in the Contract of Marriage, and did not sustain the
posterior Charter, to give her any further choice; but sustained the Right of
annualrent constitute therein, in warrandice of the Liferent Lands hoc loco,
and ordained the Lady to condescend upon the several Rooms, what they paid,
and what was wanting, that she might be preferred in the first place, and
Patrick Murray in the second place.

Alexander Livingstoun and Schaw of Scrnbeg contra Lord Forrester and Creditors
of Grange. Eodem die.
ALexander Livingstoun, as Assigney by Mistress Margaret Forrester and Sornbeg
her Husband, to some Debts owing to her by her Father. The umquhil Lord
Forrester having Charged the remnant Daughters, and Heirs of Line, craves
Adjudication of the Estate of Forrester and Barony of Grange, wherein the Lord
Forrester Died Infeft. Compearance is made for a Creditor of Grange, who
produces a Back Bond, granted by the Lord Forrester to the Lord of Grange,
bearing, that the Infeftment was in trust to the use and behove of the Lord of
Grange, and only to the Lord Forresters behove for Relief of Debts he should be
engaged in for Grange^ and alleged that he being Granges Creditor; and now
insisting against Grange, who has renunced to be Heir for Adjudging of the
Estate of Grange; for Granges own Debt he has good Interest in this Process, to
allege no Adjudication of Grange Estate, because it is only in Trust, except
in so far as may be extended to my Lord Forresters Relief: and if the Pursuer
condescend upon any Distress or Engagement, he will instantly relieve the same.
The Pursuer answered, that he being now in an anterior Diligence to this Party,
ought not to be stopped in his Diligence, but must be admitted to Adjudge from
the Lord Forresters Heirs, whatever was in his Person. And the other Party may
also proceed according to his Diligence, to Adjudge the Back Bond, and when he
pursues thereupon, he shall have an answer. 2ly. There is no reason to stop the
Adjudication, and to force the Pursuer to condescend upon my Lord Forresters^
Debts or Interest, because a Creditor cannot possibly know them; and therefore
Adjudications are always granted, generally of all Right the Debtor had, and
is the only ground upon which the Adjudger can pursue the havers of the
Debitors Rights, to Exhibit and Deliver them, and thereupon to found Processes
and Condescendences, but cannot be urged to condescend before he obtain
Adjdication; and also insinuat that he would take his Adjudication, with the
burden of the Back Bond: But some of his Advocats resiled therefrom.

The Lords having considered the Case amongst themselves, how dangerous it
were, if the Creditors, or Persons entrusted, obtaining Infeftment of an
entrusted Estate; the Back Bond of Trust being personal, would not exclude
them: and albeit the Person entrusted were not solvendo, as in this Case the
Entrusted Estate, as to the Heirs and Creditors, would be inavoidablie lost.

And some being of opinion, that a Personal Exception upon a Back Bond, could
not be competent to burden, or qualify a real Right, or an Action for
obtaining thereof: But the most part were of opinion, that albeit the Right, if
it were complete, would be real; yet this Action for obtaining thereof, is but
Personal; for real Actions are such only which proceed upon real Rights, and
against the Ground, such as upon Annualrents; and therefore this being a
Personal Action, might be excluded, or qualified by a Personal Exception upon
the Back Bond.

And therefore they Adjudged, with the Burden of the Back Bond.

Earl of Sutherland contra Hugh Gordoun. December 1. 1664.
THe Earl of Sutherland pursues a Declarator against Hugh Gordoun his Vassal,
that his Right being holden Feu, two terms has run into the third, and thereby
the Right is extinct, not only by the Act of Parliament, but by a particular
Clause in the Defenders Infeftment, at least in the Disposition, whereupon his
Charter and Seasine proceeds. There is also called an Apprizer, who alleged,
that he being a singular Successor and a stranger to his Authors Rights, during
the Legal unexpyred, is not obliged to possess, and cannot omit his Right by
his Authors fault, or by his own Ignorance.

The Lords having considered this Case, and reasoning amongst themselves, upon
the difference of a Clause Irritant, in an Infeftment Feu, and the benefit of
the Act of Parliament, they found that if the Pursuer insisted upon the Act of
Parliament, the Defender might purge the Failzie by payment at the Bar, but if
he insisted upon the Clause in the Infeftment, it behoved to be considered,
whether that Clause was in the real Right, by the Charter and Seasine, either
specially or generally, under the provisions contained in the Disposition: Or
if it was only in the Disposition.

In which case, though it might operat against the Vassal, or his Heirs, yet
not against the Appryzer, unless the Seasine had been immediately upon the
Disposition. In which case the Disposition serves for a Charter.

And therefore ordained the Pursuer to condescend, and it is like, that in
favors of the Appryzer, being a stranger, they would suffer him to purge at
the Bar, utcunque in this Cause, it was not found necessar to cite all Parties
at the Mereat Cross, albeit the Letters bear so.

Veatch contra Paterson. December 2. 1664.
PAterson having set some Lands to Veatch in Anno 1645. The Tack contained a
Clause, that the Tennents should be relieved of all public Burdens; and having
left the Land in 1653. two or three years thereafter, he raised a Pursuit
against Paterson the Heretor, for payment to him of all the public Burdens he
had paid out, and renews the same Pursuit, and produces the Receipts of the
public Burdens, and alleadges that there was a Penalty in the Tack of an
hundred pound, that he should Possess Veatch, at the Entry of the Tack,
wherein he failzied.

The Defender alleged, that it must be presumed, that all the Tickets and
public burden, was allowed in the Rent, or otherwise past from by the Pursuer,
seeing he voluntarly paid his hail Rent; Or otherwise all the public burdens
in Scotland, paid by Tennent, may infer a Distress upon their Masters to repay
the same. The Pursuer answered, that that presumption could not take away his
Writ, viz. the Tickets produced; but if the Defender gave Discharges, he ought
to have made mention of the allowance of the public Burdens therein.

The Lords having considered the Case, as of Importance for the preparative,
found the Defense upon the Presumption Relevant, unless the Pursuer instruct by
Writ, or the Defenders Oath, that these Tickets were not allowed in the Rent:
And as for the Penalty, the Lords found, that it ought to be restricted to the
damnage, and that the same was not now probable otherwise, then by the
Defenders Oath.

James Wilson contra Alexander Home of Linthill. Eodem die.
JAmes Wilson having pursued Alexander Home of Linthill, as Sheriff of the
Shire, for the Debt of a Rebel, whom he suffered to Escape.

In which, this Defense was found Relevant, that the Rebel in the taking, had
wounded these that were taking him, and had Escaped vi majore,

The Lord of Clerkingtoun contra The Lord of Corsbie^ December 3. 1664.
SIr William Dick having Appryzed some Lands, holden of the Town of Irving, and
charged the Magistrates to receive him. The Lord of Corsbie having Compryzed
the same Lands, some days after, was received by the Town, the next day after
Sir Williams Charge; and about a Month after, Sir William was also Infeft.
Clerkingtoun having Right from Sir William, pursues Corsbie; First, for Mails
and Duties, Corsbie was found to have the benefit of a possessory Judgment, by
seven years Possession, and thereupon was Assoilzied. Now Clerkingtoun insists
in a Reduction on this Reason, that he having first Appryzed, and Charged the
Superior, they Colluded with the Defender, and gave him a voluntar infeftment,
the next Day after his Charge; and therefore his Infeftment, though after,
ought to be drawn back to his Charge and Diligence, and he preferred. The
Defender answered, that the Reason ought to be Repelled, because the weight of
the Reason is the Pursuers Diligence, and the Superiors Collusion, which hold
not, because all the Diligence Sir William Dick did, was the first Charge upon
the Letters of four Forms, which bear only with Certification, that in Case of
Disobedience, Letters of Horning would be direct simpliciter, and this is no
more then a Premonition, and put no Obligation upon the Superior, until the
second Charge, which was Horning: Neither did Sir William ever insist any
further then the first Requisition.

The Lords found that the first Charge was sufficient, in this case, where the
Superior gave an Infeftment before the Expyring of the first Charge, and
before the second Charge could be given, and thereby that a Superior might
prefer an Appryzer, though posterior to a prior, do what Diligence the prior
could. But they found, that seeing Sir William Dick had been silent, until his
Legal Reversion was Expyred, and had not challenged the Defender, who was in
Possession, and thereby had Excluded him from the benefit of Redemption
competent to him, if he had been found to be but the second Right within the
Legal. Therefore the Lords found Sir William Dicks Appryzing Redeemable by
Corsbie, within year and day, after the Sentence.

Mr. James Hutcheson contra Earl of Cassils. Eodem die.
MR. James Hutcheson having Charged the Earl of Cassils for his Stipend. The
Earl Suspends, and alleadges, first, that the Charger had no right to the
Whitsonday Term, 1663. because that Term was past before his Presentation, at
least before his Institution and Collation. 2ly. There being but a Decree of
Modification, and no Locality. The Earl alleged Locality should be first
made, and he liable but for his proportional part of the Stipend.

The Lords found that the Stipend affected the Teinds, and the Minister might
take himself to any of the Heretors^ in so far as he had Teind, and therefore
sustained the Condescendence, and ordained the Charger to prove what Teind my
Lord had, without prejudice to him to crave his Relief.

Lady Craig and Greenhead her Husband contra Lord Luire. December. 7^ 1664.
THe Lady Craig being Infeft in Liferent, pursues her Tennents. Compearance is
made for the Lord Lui^e, who Appryzed the Lands of her Husband, and alleadges
that he ought to be preferred, because he stands publictly I^feft, and any
Right the Lady has, is but base, holden of her Husband; and before she attained
Possession^ he was publicly in^eft. It was answered for the Lady, that her
Husbands Possession is her Possession, and so her Infeftment was cled with
Possession, from the Date thereof: It was answered that that holds only in the
case of an Infeftment to a Wife, upon her Contract of Marriage; but this was
but an additional gratuitous Infeftment, stante matrimonio, she being
competently provided before by her Contract.

In which case such Provisions cannot prejudge Lawful Creditors, neither can
the Hushands Possession give the benefit of a possessory Judgment to the Wife,
unless she had Possessed seven years after his Death.

The Lords found, that such Infeftments as these, being gratuitous and
voluntar, could not be prejudicial to the Husbands Creditors, nor give the Wife
a possessory Judgment: And the case here being with a Creditor of the
Husbands, they did not proceed further to consider, and determine, if the
Husbands Possession, in such a case, would not validat the base Right, as to
any acquired Right thereafter.

Eccles contra Eccles. Eodem die.
IN an Action of a Count and Reckoning betwixt these two Infants. It was
alleged for the Defender, that he being pursued upon his Fathers back-bond,
oblieging him to make Count and Payment of the means of umquhil Fergus Eccles
his Brother, to Thomas Eccles^, and umquhil Andrew Eccles, the Pursuers Father.
It was answered, upon condition that Mr. Hugh, the Defenders Father should have
the third part to himself. The Question was concerning the manner of Probation.
The Pursuer alleged, it was only probable scripto, he being a Pupil and his
Father dead. The Defender alleged, it was probable by the Tutors Oath, being
so likely in it self, that Mr. Hugh being the third Brother, should have the
third share, and that Thomas the Tutor did accordingly allow him the third
share; and there was produced a Testificat of Balloche, that there was an
agreement

Notwithstanding whereof, the Lords refused to take the Tutors Oath, ex
officio, seeing they found, albeit it were Affirmative it could not prove
against the P^pil.

Scot in Cairlyle contra Henderson and Wilson. December 8. 1664.
RItchard Scot having Charged Henderson and Wilson upon their Bonds, they
Suspend, and offer them to prove payment of a part, by Witnesses, and alleadges
that it being the Law of England, that W^tnesses can prove to take away Writ,
that therefore these Bonds being Contracted in England, with English men, the
Suspenders ought to have the same benefit of Probation, they would have had, if
they had been Arrested in England, upon their Bonds, or pursued there, and
adduced a Practick of Dury, in Anno 1628.

The Lords having accuratly Considered and Debated this Case amongst
themselves, and finding that locus contractus, was in England. But the Bonds
bare expressly a Clause of Registration in Scotland: And that such Bonds had
been ordinar betwixt Merchants in England, and Merchants in Scotland; and in no
time such a Probation admitted, and that it would furnish an ordinary delay in
such Cases, to the disadvantage of Merchants, and hindering of Trade, by always
offering to prove payment in England, by Witnesses, which could require long
time.

Therefore they found the reason only probable, scripto vel juramento.

Mr. Cornelius Inglis contra Mr. Rodger Hogg. December 9. 1664.
MR. Cornelius Inglis pursuing a Removing against certain Tennents near Dumbar,
upon an Infeftment and Appryzing. It was alleged for the Tennents, that they
were Tennents to Mr. Rodger Hogg, by payment of Mail and Duty to him, and he
was not called. The Pursuer answered non relevat, unless the Defenders
condescend upon Mr. Rodgers Right, which might defend him and them. The
Defenders answered, first; that they could not be obliged to Dispute their
Masters Right, but he ought to be called to Dispute his own Right. 2ly. It was
insinuat, that Mr. Rodger had an Appryzing, and a Charge against the Superior.

The Lords repelled the Defense, unless the Defenders condescended upon such a
Right as were valide to exclude the Pursuer, being prior to his: but the
Tennents alleged no such Right, and Mr. Rodgers Charge was posterior to the
Pursuers Infeftment.

John Veatch younger of Dawick contra Alexander Williamson. Eodem die.
JOhn Veatch pursues Williamson upon the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, for
paying to him of his proportional part of the Mails and Duties of Appryzed
Lands, as coming in pari passu with the Defender, by an Appryzing, within a
year of his. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because he has Right to the
first Appryzing, led before the Act of Parliament, betwixt Debtor and
Creditor: and therefore he has the benefit of the 21. Act of the last Session
of Parliament, declaring, that where an Appryzer, for his own Security, had
redeemed a prior Apprysing, and gotten Right thereto before the Act, betwixt
Debtor and Creditor. The said first Apprysing should have the same effect, it
would have had before the Act, Debtor and Creditor, and should not come in
pari passu. The Pursuer answered, that behoved only to be understood, where the
second Appryzer had upon necessity to shun the expyring of the legal redeemed,
and gotten Right to the first Apprysing, which could not be said here, because
the Debtor being minor, the legal had, and has a long course to run.

The Lords sustained the Defense without any such limitation, in respect of the
express Tenor of the Act of Parliament.

Robert Learmonth contra Laurance Russel. Eodem die.
RObert Learmonth being pursued by Laurance Russel, for the price of Wines, and
the matter referred to his oath, gave in a qualified Oath, bearing, that the
Wines in question were sent to him, not to be sold till further order, and that
therefore he kept them unsold till the end of the year, and when they were in
hazard of spoilling, sold them for 12 pound Sterling the Tun, and that he that
sent them, was Debtor to him by Bonds and Decreets, in a greater sum. It was
alleged, neither member of the quality was competent; not the first, because
it was offered to be proven, that the Wines at that time gave 20. pound
Sterling; and not the second; because it was an exception of Compensation, and
relative to Writ.

The Lords sustained the first member of the quality, but rejected the second,
and found it relevant to be proven, by way of exception.

Goldsmiths of Edinburgh contra Robert Haliburton. December 10: 1664.
THe Goldsmiths of Edinburgh having obtained Decree against Haliburton, as
Heir to his Father. He suspends upon this Reason, that the Goldsmiths confirmed
themselves Executors Creditors to his Father, and must allow the Inventar,
which either they have in their hand, or at least should have done Diligence
therefore. It was answered for the Executors, that they being Executor
Creditors, are not liable for Diligence, having Confirmed but to their own
behove, for their payment, and as Creditors may arrest, apprize, and do all
Diligence, severally, the one but prejudice of the other, so may they Confirm.
2ly. They found, that having Confirmed in Edinburgh, whereas the Defunct lived
and died within the Diocie of Glasgow, that therefore their Title was null; and
therefore did not proceed. And lastly oppons their Decree in foro. The
Suspender answered, that they can never object against the nullity of their own
Title. 2ly. All that time there was no Commissioriat Constitute for the Shire
of Air, where the man died, and so Edinburgh was communis patria.

The Lords having Debated the general case, whether Executor Creditors were
liable for Diligence, waved the same, but found that in this Case, in respect
of the questionableness of a Title, they would not find them liable upon their
negligence.

Lion of Muirask contra Sir Robert Farquhar. Eodem die.
MVirask having pursued a Declarator of Redemption of the Lands of Balmellie,
against Sir Robert Farquhar, Litis^ontestation was made in the Cause, wherein
the Order was sustained, proceeding upon an Adjudication against Sir John
Vrquhart, as Heir to his Goodsire, and it was offered to be proven, that he
died in the Right of the Reversion of this VVodset, which was but base and
holden of the granter, for proving whereof, his Charter was produced, bearing
the Barony of Craigfintrie and Balmellie, per expressum. At the advising of the
Cause, It was alleged that the Defender having protested for Reservation,
contra producenda. It is now instantly verified, that the Grandfather died not
in the Right of the Reversion, but that he was denuded by Disposition to his
Son, instructed by his Charter produced. The Pursuer answered, that he opponed
the state of the Process. And if such a Defense were now competent, it ought to
be Repelled, because he has Right from Sir John Vrquhart, who is Heir Served
and Retoured to his Father, in whose favors his Grandfather was Denuded, and
has declared, that he consents to the Declarator upon that Ground, and
Renounces all other Right. The Defender answered, that the order having been
only used upon the Adjudication from Vrquhart, as Heir to his Grandfather, if
that be excluded, albeit the Pursuer have another Right, he must use the Order,
de novo, and redeem thereupon. 2ly. Sir John Vrquharts Right produced
Renounces, but does not Dispone any Right to the Pursuer.

The Lords having considered the state of the Process, found that a Reply
instantly verified, is receiveable post conclusum in causa, unless it were
alleged to have been known to the Proponer, and dolose omitted; by which the
Pursuer might be put to a Duply, suffering new Probation. But the Lords found
that the Charter produced, bearing the Grandfather to be Denuded, did not
instantly verify, because it expressed not Balmellie, and would not allow a
Term to prove, part and pertinent.

It was further alleged by the Defender, no Declarator till the Sums
consigned were reproduced at the Bar; especially, seeing it was offered to be
proven, that the Pursuer lifted them himself, and he being at the Bar, it is
instantly verified.

The Lords sustained the same, and Declared, the Sums being Reproduced before
Extract, and that the Pursuer shall be liable for Annualrent, or the Wodsetter
shall retain the Duties effeiring thereto.

Lord Rollo contra His Chamberland. December 13. 1664.
THe Lord Rollo having pursued his Chamberlain for Intromissions, conform to a
particular account libelled. The Defenders have compeared, offered to prove he
was Discharged, which was found relevant; and now producing the same, it proves
but for a part; whereupon the Pursuer craved Sentence for the rest: It was
alleged for the Defender, that there was nothing produced to instruct the
Intromission. The Pursuer answered that the Defender having made
Litiscontestation, upon a Discharge, without denying the Intromission, he has
acknowledged the Libel, and the Pursuer cannot be put to prove the same,
without inverting the Order, and making two Litiscontestations in the same
Cause. The Defender answered, that this being but an omission of the Advacats
or Clerks, of a thing palpable, the Lords might repone the Defender.

The Lords adhered to the Act of Litiscontestation, but referred to some of
their number, to move the Parties to what was equitable; and it was thought,
that if the Defender would allege that he was not Intrometter, for these
particulars, but that they were in the Pursuer, or his other Chamberlains
hands, and were instantly verified by his oath, it were receivable.

Bishop of the Isles contra James Hamiltoun. Eodem die.
THe Bishop of the Isles pursuing Hamiltoun a Merchant in Edinburgh, for his
Teind Fish taken in the Isles, which is a part of the Bishops Patrimony. The
Defender alleged ^ that he being a Merchant, and not a taker of Herring,
cannot be liable for the Teind thereof, no more then if one should buy Corns in
the Market, or out of the Barn-yard; he could be conveened for the Teind. It
was answered for the Pursuer, that it was the immemorial custom that the first
buyer from the Fishers, should be liable to the Bishop of the Isles, for the
Teind of the Fish, bought, and for proving thereof, produced a Decree at his
Predecessors instance, against some Merchants in Edinburgh; which Decree did
bear, that in a former Decree, betwixt the same Parties, the Bishops had
proven immemorial Possession against the Merchants. 2ly. The instance holds not
of buying Corns in the Market, or Barn-yeard; but if any body should buy the
whole Cropped, when it was upon the Land untaken off, being in the Sheaves or
Stoucks, he would undoubtedly be liable as Intrometter for the Teind: so if any
Merchant bought not upon the place, where the Fishes were taken, he was not
liable: but buying the Fish fresh, as they were taken, in whole Boat-fulls, and
selling them there themselves; such Merchants must be liable as Intrometters.
The Defender answered, that the Immemorial custom was indeed Relevant, but a
Decree against some few Persons, could not prove it against others, being
inter alios actum. But here there was only a Decree bearing, that there was a
former Decree, in which that was proven.

The Lords sustained that member against these who bought the hering and salted
them themselves, to be proven by their Oaths, and would not sustain the
Probation of the Custom, seeing the principal Decree was not produced, unless
that at least the Testimonies proving that Custom, were repeated and produced
out of the old Process, that it might appear, whether there were any ground of
Objection against the manner of Probation.

Lady Colvil contra Lord Colvil. December 14. 1664.
THe Lady Colvil pursues the Lord Colvil to relieve her of the whole Debt,
hererable and moveable of the Defunct, his Predecessor, because the Defunct in
his Testament, had named her, his Lady, Executrix and universal Legatrix, with
a special Clause, that she should be free of all his Debt whatsomever. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because no Deed done by a Defunct in lecto, or
in Testament can prejudge his Heir. The Pursuer replied, that this Testament
was made in the Defuncts liege poustie. The Defender answered, that on
Deathbed, and by Testament equiparantur.

Which the Lords found Relevant and assoilzied.

Lord of Phillorth contra Forbes of Aslocon. December 16. 1664.
PHillorth as Donatar to the Escheat of Forbes of Aslocon, and having obtained
general Declarator, insists in his special Declarator. It was alleged
Absolvitor, because the Horning, whereupon the Gift was granted, is null, in so
far as being beyond Dee, it is upon six days, contrair to to the Act of
Parliament 1600. Declaring all Hornings beyond Dee, on less then fifteen days
null, conform to a Decision in Dury, albeit on a Bond, bearing a Clause of
Registration on six days only^ February 14. 1625. Steuart contra Bruce. It was
answered for the Pursuer, that the Acts of Parliament hinder not the agreements
of Parties; but is expressly anent Hornings, on Lawborrows or the like; but
these are on the parties own consent by the Clause of Registration: and if
these should not be valide, all the Hornings and other Executorials thereon
beyond Dee, since 1600. would be null, and such Bonds would have no effect;
seeing upon the Clause of Registration, Horning could not be otherwise direct on
six days, and so they should not have any summar execution. The Defender
answered that the Act is general of all Hornings, and bears a general Reason,
because it is impossible for Parties at such distance, to come to Edinburgh to
Suspend in four days, and private pactions cannot derogat from general Laws,
where the express reason is for public utility, contrair to which, no man can
make himself Rebel, more then he can give power to Incarcerat himself, where
Law gives no warrant, but prohibits.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and sustained the Horning.

Innes contra Forbes of Touchon. Eodem die.
INnes having Charged Forbes of Touchon on an Act of Adjournal, for an
Assythment, for wounding him, and reparation of his Blood. He Suspended, and
allege the Act was null, wanting Citation, Compearance or probation. It was
answered, that being the Act of the Justice General, who is Supreme in
criminalibus, it cannot be recognosced by the Lords.

The Lords having considered the case amongst themselves, thought that in what
was truly Criminal, as to corporal pains or amerciaments in way of punishment,
they would not meddle with the Justice Sentences, but Assythment, being civil
for the Damnage and Interest of the Party, pursuable before the Lords, they
might recognosce thereon, and therefore in respect that the Probation of the
Fact was by a Process before the Baillies, they ordained that Process to be
produced before answer, and the Suspender to condescend if there was any
exorbitancy in the Sum decerned for the Assythment.

Mr. Thomas Paterson contra Watson. December 17. 1664.
MR. Thomas Paterson Charges Watson to remove from his Gleib, who alleged the
Designation is null, because it is not subscribed by the Ministers Designers,
but is only the assertion of a Nottar. 2ly. By the Act of Parliament 1663.
anent Gleibs, there is an exception of Royal Burrows, to which Ministers Gleibs
are not due, ita est, Dysert is a Royal Burgh. The Charger answered to the
first, that the having a warrant from the Bishop and Presbytrie his instrument
of Designation is as sufficient as a Seasine, to give Right to Land. And to the
second, the Royal Burrows excepted, must only be understood of such who have
not a Landwart Congregation, but are chiefly constitute of an Incorporation for
Trade; but this Burgh is notourly known to be but a Burgh of Barony, holden of
the Lord Sinclar; albeit it has the privilege of Vote in Parliament, and is a
Parsonage.

The Lords Sustained the Designation, but before Extract, ordained the
Testificat of the Ministers Designers, under their hands to be produced.

Sarah Blomart contra Earl of Roxburgh.
SArah Blomart pursuing the Earl of Roxburgh: he alleged she could have no
Processes, being of the United Provinces, who are declared enemies to His
Majesty. It was answered, that there was no Denunciation of War by His Majesty,
as King of Scotland, nor any Proclamation in Scotland to that purpose. It was
replied, that there was a Warrant by the King and Council, to cease upon all
the Dutch Vessels in Scotland.

The Lords found that this was but an Imbargo, and no Denunciation of War in
Scotland, and therefore found Process.

Mr. James Reid Minister of North-Leith contra William Melvil. December 20.
1664.
MR. James Reid Charges William Melvil for the Teind of hard Fish, bought by
the said William in the Jews, and imported by him at Leith. He Suspends on
this Reason, that he bought the said Fish from Merchants in the Market, and did
neither take the same himself, nor bought them immediately when they were green
from the Taker, and so can be liable for no Teind. The Charger answered, that
he is decennalis and triennalis Possessor of getting twenty shilling of the
Last, of all Fish imported at New Haven; and for instructing thereof, produces
a Decree in Anno 1634. and another in Anno 1662. and if need beis, offers him
yet to prove Possession. The Defender answered, that these Decreets are
expressly against the Fishers or Takers of Fish, but not against Merchants,
buying and importing the same: and as for the Custom, non Relevat, unless it
were an universal Custom established by Sentences; for if some few Merchants
should have to save themselves trouble, given an uncertain acknowledgement,
according to their own discertion, and no fixed Duty, nor by no compulsive way,
it imports not.

The Lords Suspended the Letters, except only for such Fish as should be taken
by the Boats and Fishers of New Haven.

Agnes Young and her Husband contra Buchanans. Eodem die.
AGnes Young pursues Buchanans, her Children, for her third of her Husbands
Movables, and for her Liferent use of the other two thirds, conform to her
Contract of Marriage, whereby she is provided, to his Liferent of all Goods and
Geir, conquest during the Marriage, moveable and immovable. The Defenders
answered, that the Pursuer cannot both have the third and the Liferent of the
whole, because it must be presumed, that the Liferent of the whole, was given
in satisfaction of the third and all. The Pursuer answered, that this could not
be presumed, unless it had been so expressed, no more then a Terce is excluded by
a provision of Liferent, unless it bear in satisfaction of a Terce.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, that the Pursuer could not both have her
third, and the Liferent of the rest, but gave her her option, either of the
third, provisione legis, or of her Liferent of the whole, provisione hominis.

Earl of Athol contra John Scot. Eodem die:
THe Earl of Athol having obtained Decree against John Scot, before the
Commissar of Dunkeld, for the Teinds of the said John his Lands. He Suspnds,
and raises Reduction on this Reason, that albeit the Decree bear a Defense
proponed, that the Teinds in question are Mortified by the King to a Kirk, and
that the same was found Relevant, and that the said John succumbed in proving
thereof, yet he offers him to prove that before the Term elapsed, he produced
the Mortification before the Commissar, and thereupon took Instruments, which
is produced.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Mr. George Norvel Advocat contra Margaret Sunter. Eodem die.
MR. George Norvel pursuing for Mails and Duties upon an Appryzing. Compearance
is made for Margaret Sunter, who alleged absolvitor because she was Infeft in
Liferent, before Mr. Georges Right; which being found relevant for instructing
thereof, she produced her Seasine.

Which the Lords found not to instruct without an Adminicle, and therefore
sustained the Decree.

The said Margaret raised Reduction of this Decree, on this Reason, that now
she produced an Adminicle, viz. her Contract of Marriage. 2ly. That the Decree
is null, because the quantities are not proven. The Charger answered to the
first, that the Lords having found the Exception not proven, the Pursuer could
not be admitted in the second instance against a Decree, in foro, upon
production of that which she should have produced at first. As to the second,
he needed not prove the quantities; seeing her exception was total, without
denying the quantities.

The Lords found the Decree valide, but ordained some of their number to deal
with Mr. George, to show favor to the poor woman.

Doctor Ramsay contra Mr. William Hogg and Alexander Seton. December 22. 1664.
THese three Parties having appryzed the same Lands, the first Appryzer being
Infeft, the second not being, and the third being Infeft: The first Appryzer
declared he would not insist for the Mails and Duties of the whole, but only
possessed a part. The question came, whether the second Apprizer, not having
Charged, should be preferred to the third, who was Infeft. It was alleged for
the second Appryzer, that he needed not be Infeft, because the first Appryzer
being Infeft in all, he had the only jus proprietatis, and there was nothing
remaining, but jus reversionis, which the Appryzing alone carried: and as the
second Appryzer might redeem the first; as having the right of his Reversion;
so he might force him, either to possess the whole, whereby his Appryzing might
be satisfied, or give warrant to the second to Possess the remainder, so
likewise he might use Redemption. It was alleged for the third Appryzer, that
if the question were of the Redemption of the Land, the second had good Right;
but the question being for the Mails and Duties, a right of Reversion, could
never carry these without a Seasine.

The Lords considering the Point in Law and the great disadvantage the Leiges
should sustain, if all Appryzers were necessitat to take Infeftment, They
prefered the second Appryzer.

Cornelius Inglis contra Mr. Rodger Hog. Eodem die:
MR. Cornelius Inglis being Infest upon an Appryzing, pursues a Removing;
compearance is made for Mr. Rodger Hog: who alleged that he is also Infeft,
and had charged the Superior, though, after the first Appryzer, and had
possessed seven years, by lifting the Mails and Duties; and therefore craved
the benefit of a Possessorie Judgment.

The Lords having considered the Case amongst themselves, whether an Appryzing
and Charge, without Infeftment could give the benefit of a Possessorie
Judgment. They were equally divided in their Votes, and the President resolved
before he gave his Vote to settle the Parties.

contra Edmistoun of Carden. January 6. 1665.
EDmistoun of Carden being pursued by a Creditor of his Fathers, as Lucrative
Successor to his Father, by accepting of a Disposition of his Fathers Lands,
after contracting of the Pursuers Debt, alleged absolvitor; because, being
pursued beforeby another Creditor of his Fathers, he did then allege, that
his Disposition was not Lucrative; but for a Cause onerous, equivalent to the
worth of the Land, which he proved, by instructing the Rental, and Rate of the
Land, at the time of the Disposition, by Witnesses, and the Sums undertaken for
it by Writ, whereupon he was Assoilzyed, and can never be again conveened upon
that ground; nam obest exceptio rei judicatae, for if he had been condemned as
Lucrative Successor^ upon the other Creditors Probation: It would now have
proven against him, and therefore, his beng Assoilzied must be profitable to
him against others; unless Collusion were alleged and Instructed. The Pursuer
answered, that this absolvitor was res inter alios acta: and albeit a
Condemature would have been effectual against the Defender, non sequitur, that
an absolvitor should also be effectual for him; because he was called to that
Condemnature, but this Creditor was not at all called to the absolvitor. 2.
Even in a Condemnature, if the Defender had omitted any thing, that he might
have alleged, in the one case competent, and omitted, would not hinder him to
propone the same against another Creditor. Therefore the Defender can only
repeit the grounds of that absolvitor; which if he do, the Pursuer will
allege. That whereas, in the absolvitor, the Defender was admitted to prove
the Rental. The Pursuer omitted to crave the benefit of Probation, which he
would have gotten; and this Pursuer offers him to prove, that whereas the
Rental was proven to but 18. Chalders of Victual, the true Rental was worth 30.
Chalder. 3dly. A part of the onerous Cause, was the Portion of the Defuncts
Children, which would not Prejudge the Pursuer being an anterior Creditor^

The Lords found, that the absolvitor could not prejudge this Pursuer, as to
these points omitted; and that it could not have effect inter alios, except it
had been in re antiqua, where the Witness had died, that in that case, the
Testimonies out of the former Process, might be repeited; but as to the Rental,
the Lords would not give the Pursuer the sole Probation^ being so lubrick a
point, as not only what it paid, but what the Lands were worth, and it might
have paid; and ordained Witnesses to be examined, hinc inde; and found, that
the Bairns Portions not being paid bona fide, before the intenting of this
Cause, could not prejudge the Creditor: but ordained the Defender to Suspend on
double Poynding, against the Pursuer and the Bairns; but in regard of so much
ground, in the matter, they declared they would not sustain the Passive Title,
to make him Successor universal, but only as to the just Price, and the Cause
Onerous.

Grahame of Blackwood contra Brouns. January 7. 1665.
JOhn and William Brouns, having Appryzed certain Lands; and William Grahame
having Appryzed the same, within a year after, pursues an Account and Reckoning
against the first Appryzer, upon the last Act of Parliament, betwixt Debtor
and Creditor; and craves to come in pari passu with the first Appryzer, not
only as to there Mails and Duties of the Lands Intrometted with by the
Appryzer, since the said Act of Parliament; but also for these Duties that were
Intrometted with before the said Act; and that, because the Act bears expressly,
That such Appryzing shall come in pari passu, as if there had been one
Appryzing led for both. It was answered, for the first Appryzer, that what he
did uplift bona fide, before any Process intented against him, at this Pursuers
instance, he cannot pay back a part thereof to the Pursuer; because he is bona
fide Possessor: and because the Act of Parliament bears; That such Appryzings
shall come in pari passu: which being in the future, must be understood to be
from their intenting of Process, at least from the date of the Act, but not
from the beginning.

The Lords having considered the Tenor of the Act of Parliament, found that
such Appryzings should only come in pari passu, from the date of the Act; but
that the bygones uplifted by the first Appryzer, before the Act should be
accounted to him in his Sum, but no part thereof repeited to the second
Appryzer; and found that the Sums Appryzed for Principal and Annualrent of both
Parties, should be restricted, as they were the time of the Act of Parliament,
in one total Sum; and the Rent to be received from that time proportionally, to
the total Sums; and that the first Appryzer should have allowance in his
preceding Intromission of the expenses of the composition to the Superior,
and the charges of the Appryzing, without compelling the second Appryzer, to
pay him the same.

Normand Lesly contra Gilbert Gray. January 10. 1665.
NOrmand Lesly, charges Gilbert Gray Provost in Aberdeen, to pay 2000 merk, for
which he was Cautioner for William Gray. He Suspends, and alleadges, that the
Charger had gotten an Assignation from the said William Gray, to an Bond
granted by the Earl of Errol, to him and therefore craved, that the Charger
might be decerned to transfer that Assignation to him, being given for the
security of the same Sum. It was answered, that the Charger was only oblidged
to give a discharge to his Cautioner, and not an Assignation of the Bond it
self, and much less of any security ex post facto he had gotten therefore.

The Lords declared, they would not give the Charger Process, till he Assigned
the Bond, and all security gotten therefore to the Cautioner.

William Reid contra John Reid. Eodem die.
WIlliam Reid pursues John Reid, as his Tutor, to deliver all Writs belonging
to the Pupils Father, or which were in his Custody; and Possession quovis modo
Intrometted with, by the Tutor. Who alleged, the Pupil could have no interest
in any Writs, but these which belonged to his Father.

The Lords found, that Pupil had interest to call for Exhibition, and Delivery
of all Writs that were in his Fathers Possession quovis modo, and ordained the
Tutor to exhibit all, but prejudice to any Party having interest, to crave the
delivery of these Writs if they belonged to them.

Campbel contra Mary Bryson. Eodem die.
GEorge Campbel having right by Adjudication, to the Reversion of a Wodset, of
some of the Lands of Newlistoun, Wodset by the Lord of Newlistoun; to Andrew
Bryson Baillie of Edinburgh, whereupon he was publicly Infeft; and thereafter
did dispone the same to his Daughter Marry Bryson, and she was Infeft, holden
of her Father; which Disposition contained a power to the Father, to dispone on
the Sum in the Wodset Right, during his Lifetime, without her Consent; after
all Andrew Bryson obtained a Confirmation of the foresaid Wodset: with Addition
of 16. aikers of Land more, for the same Sum, which was conceived in favors of
himself, and the Heirs of the Marriage, whereupon he was Infeft. The said
George having used an Order of Redemption; craved Declarator. Compearance is
made for the said Mary, who craved the said Sum to be delivered up to her. It
was alleged by the Pursuer, that she could not have up the Sum, unless she
were Infeft, as Heir to her Father, both in the first and last Wodset, and
resigned the same; and so liberat the Land of the Burden thereof; for albeit
she was Infeft proprio nomine, yet it was but base holden of her Father: so
that the Superiority remained with her Father; and she behoved to be Infeft as
Heir to him, and renunce the same. 2. The Corroborative Wodset stood in her
Fathers Person, who by her Disposition had a Power to dispose of the first
Wodset; and so had altered the Fee thereof to himself, and his Heirs. It was
answered, that the second Wodset was taken when Mary's mother was dead; and she
the only child of that Marriage: and so was alike, as if her name had been
expressed. 2. The Declarator it self will sufficiently secure the Redeemer,
albeit there were no Resignation. 3dly. The second Wodset, is but accessory to
the first; so that the said Mary, having power to renunce the first Wodset
proprio nomine, the second may be declared to be extinct in consequence, and
further, offered Caution, if need were, to warrant the Redeemer.

The Lords found the Lands to be Redeemed, but ordained the Money not to be
given up, until the said Mary had Infeft her self, as Heir to her Father, and
Resigned, for they thought, the Redeemer ought to put upon no hazard of
repetition, or of the danger of the Infeftment unrenunced; seeing it was the
ordinar Course to be Infeft, and to renunce.

Magaret Arnot contra Mr. Robert Arnot. January 11. 1665.
MArgaret Arnot pursues a Reduction, of a Decree of Exoneration, obtained by
William Arnot her Uncle, and Executor to her Father. It was alleged, for Mr.
Robert Arnot, Son and Successor to the said William, that all Parties having
Interest were not called. viz, The Creditors, and Legatars, who were concerned
in the event of the Reduction; for if there Sums and Discharges were not
allowed, according to the Exoneration. The Defender behoved to return upon
them, for payment; and therefore they ought to be called to defend their
Interest.

The Lords repelled the Defense, and found no necessity to call the Creditors
and Legatars, but that the Defender might intimat the Plea to them.

Neilson and Calender contra January 12. 1665.
NEilson and Lodovick Calender her Spouse pursue a Transferrence of an old
Summons, on which there was an Inhibition used. It was alleged, that the
Executions, of the first Summons were new, and by ocular inspection false, and
craved the Pursuer might abide thereby, who refused; and so being without an
Execution on the first Summons, but having an Execution on the second were
null, The Pursuer craved them to be Transferred instatu quo, but prejudice to
the Defender, in the cause to allege no Process; because the first Execution
was wanting.

The Lords refused to transfer, but some were of opinion, that a new Summons,
in eadem causa would be sufficient to make the In^ibition effectual, being
raised on the Summons of Registration of a Bond, others thought that albeit the
Style bear, that Inhibitions were not granted, but upon fight of the Summons
execute; yet it was ordinar to give it on an unregistrate Bond, or a Charge to
enter Heir Execute, though there was neither Decree nor Dependence; and
therefore, though Executions be put on to get, these raised; yet they are not
adhered to, but now used so, that this Summons, though without Execution, yet
might be transferred, and thereon Executions might be used, and thereby the
Inhibition stands valid, which was the more clear way, for albeit Summons bear
to cite to such a day next to come and so ordinarily cannot be used, no
citation being thereon within the year; yet the Lords special warrant may allow
a Summons to be sufficient for citation thereafter, as well as they may give
other privileges

Janet Shand contra Charles Charters. January 13. 1665.
CRichtoun of Castelmain, and Crichtoun of St. Leonard, granted a Bond to John
Shand, and Herren his Spouse; the longest liver of them two: and their Heirs,
etc. With a Clause for Infeftment, whereupon there was an Appryzing, led in
John Shands lifetime, against one of the Debitors: thereafter, John Shand
charges the other Debtor for payment; after the Charge; John Shand gives in
the Appryzings, to be allowed, and after his Death, his Wife takes Infeftment
upon the Appryzing, the Bond being now produced before the Lords, in an
Exhibition, pursued by Ianet Schand as Heir to John Shand. There is a
competition for delivery, betwixt Ianet Shand, as Heir to John Shand; as being
Heritable, and Charles Charters, as having right from Herrein, John Shands
Relict, as being moveable. It was alleged by the Heir, that the Sum became
Heretable, by the Superveening of the Appryzing. It was answered, that there
was a Charge after the Appryzing, which returned the Bond to be moveable. It
was answered, that the Charge was not against the Party, whose Lands was
Appryzed, but against the other Party. 2ly. The Charge could only return the
Bond to its first condition, before the Appryzing: So that the Bond being since
1641. the Relict is excluded; and the Charge cannot bring her in. 3ly. Albeit
it could, yet after the Charge the Defunct returned to his Heretable Right, by
obtaining that Appryzing allowed, which allowance, the Relict produced, and
took Infeftment: so that these last Acts being upon the Real Right, the Heir
must be preferred; and therefore the ground of preference of the Executor, or
Heir, is the will of the Defunct, either to make use of his Heretable or
Moveable Right, which is still ambulatorie, and in his power; and whatever
Right he last makes use of, evidences his choice, and according thereto, the
Right is either Heretable or Moveable: but here he did last make use of his
Real Right, by allowance of the Appryzing, after the Charge, which the Relict
homologat, by taking Infeftment conform. It was answered, for the Creditor of
the Relict; that this being on Debt, though due by many Debitors. The Charge
against one, did sufficiently show the purpose of the Defunct, to make use of
his Right; and the Charge does render the Bond simply moveable: and does not
return to the condition it was before the Appryzing. To the 3. passing from the
Charge must either be express, or a Deed of evident consequence, but the
allowance of the Appryzing is not such; which might be done only ad hunc
effectum, that if the Appryzer should pass from his Charge, the Appryzing might
revive, and be secure.

The Lords found the Sum Heretable.

Charles Charters contra a Skipper. Eodem die.
CHarles Charters having fraughted a Ship to Queensburgh, by Charter Party.
The Skipper was to ly so many lie days, and to bring a Fraught thence; he
returned without full Fraught, whereupon Charles refuses full payment; and
being decerned by the Baillies of Leith to pay the rest, he Suspends on this
Reason, that the Skipper ought to get the Fraught only proportionally to the
Loading, and offers to prove the third part less then the full Loading brought
home, and that the Skipper could not have his full Fraught, unless he instruct
that he intimat to the Factor at Queensburgh, to whom he was direct, of his
coming, and that he lay his lie days, and after Intimation to the Factor to
give him any Ware he had, he took Instrument, or protested thereon.

The Lords found, he ought to prove the Intimation, ut supra, by Witnesses but
required no Protest, or Instrument thereon.

Edgar. contra Edgar. January 17. 1665.
ISobel Edgar pursues for 4000 merks, provided in her Mothers Contract of
Marriage, by this Clause; whereby her Father having married her Mother to his
second Wife, oblidged him, and the Heirs of the first marriage; which failzing,
his Heirs and Executors to pay to his Bairns of the second Marriage, 4000
merks, albeit there were but one of them; and if there were more, the same Sum
to be divided among them, the Portions of the Male Children to be paid at
their age of 21. and the Femal at the age of 18. And to pay them five of each
hundredth after his Death, till the Terms of payment. Ita est, the Heirs of the
first Marriage failzied by decease, and there was four Bairns survived of the
second Marriage, whereof two died, before they attained to their age mentioned
in the Clause, and now there remains but two, the Pursuer and her Brother, who
is become Heir; whereupon she alleadges, that she has the benefit of the whole
4000 merks. It was answered, for the Brother, that he has right to the half,
because he is a Bairn of the Marriage as well as she; and albeit he be become
Heir, yet that takes not away his Share, by this oblidgment as a Bairn of the
second Marriage. 2ly. Albeit his being Heir would exclude him, yet the Portions
of the two that are deceased having become Heirs by there survivancy transmit
the same to their nearest of kine, and so he and the Pursuer are equally
nearest of Kin. The Pursuer answered, that the Heirs of the first Marriage
having failled, the Clause stands now as if it had been conceived thus; that
the Father had oblidged himself, and his Heirs, which comprehends all Heirs^ to
pay to the Bai^ns of the second Marriage; which must be understood of Bairns,
beside the Heir; because the Heir is constitute Debtor; and so cannot be
thought to be Creditor in the same Clause.

The Lords found the conception of the Clause, that the Brother, by falling now
Heir, was excluded; seeing it was clear, by the meaning of the Defunct, that his
Heir should have his Lands, and his Bairns of his second Marriage, should have,
though but one, 4000 merks: but here the Heir, of the first Marriage was never
served Heir, They also found, that the Portions of the Children being to an
uncertain day, and not conceived to their Heirs, or Assigneys, that they dying
before that day, had no right to the Stock, but only the Annualrent, medio
tempore, so that the Stock accresced to the surviving Children; as if the
Defuncts had never existed, and that their Assigneys, or Creditors could not
have affected the same: and so found the Brother had no right, as nearest of
Kin to the two deceasing Children, not attaining the Age mentioned in the
Contract.

William Stewart contra Stewarts. January 18. 1665.
WIlliam Stewart pursues a Poynding of the Ground, of the Lands of Errol, upon
an Infeftment of Annualrent, granted to his Grandfather by the Earl of Errol,
by his Bond, and Infeftment following thereupon: in which Bond, there were
Cautioners, the Annualrent was for a Sum of 7000 merk. and a Sum of 8000 merk.
Compearance is made for the Pursuers Brothers and Sisters, who alleged, that
as to the Sum of 7000 merks, it became moveable; and belongs to them, as
nearest of Kine: In so far as their Father made Requisition for the same: It
was answered, the Instrument of Requisition is null; and being disconform to
the Clause of Requisition: in respect, that the Original Bond was to the
Husband and Wife, the longest liver of them two, in Conjunctfee, and their
Heirs, etc. And the Requisition bears expressly, That if the Husband, or his
Heirs required, with consent of the Wife, then the Debtor shall pay, ita est
the Instrumenet bears no consent. It was answered, that albeit some Points of
the Requisition were omitted; yet seeing the mind of the Defunct appears to take
himself to his Personal Right, and consequenly to prefer his Executor to his
Heir, it is sufficient. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, because every
Intimation of the Defuncts Intention is not enough; but it must be haili modo,
and the ground whereupon the Sums become moveable, is, because the Requisition
looses, and takes away the Infeftment; and therefore if the Requisition be
null, the Infeftment is valid: and he Bairns can never have access.

The Lords found the Requisition null, and preferred the Heir.

Stewart contra Stewart. January 19. 1665.
IN the foresaid Cause, it was further alleged, for the 8000 merk, that it
was also moveable; because, as to it, there was no Liferenter, and the Fear
himself did require. It was answered, for the Children, that the Requisition is
null, because it mentions not the production of a Procuratory, nor the
production of the Right it self. 2ly. The Requisition is made to Bogie as
Cautioner for the Earl of Kinnoul, whereas he was Cautioner for the Earl of
Errol, granter of the first Bond. It was replied, oppones the Requisition,
bearing, That the Procurators power was sufficiently known to the Notar. 2ly
non Relevat, unless the Person required, had called for the Procuratory or
Right, and had been refused. 3ly. The Procuratory is now produced, with the
Right, and the Defunct acknowledged the Procuratory; and Right, because he
raised horning thereupon.

The Lords sustained the Requisition, and found the Sum moveable, and preferred
the Bairns thereto.

Shaw contra Lewens. Eodem die.
WIlliam Shaw, being a Factor at London, and dieing there; and having Means
both in England and Scotland: There falls a Competition betwixt his Executors
nuncupative in England, and his nearest of Kine, Executors in Scotland. Anna
Lewens Executrix confirmed in England; produces a Sentence of the Court of
Probat of wills in England, bearing, That upon the Examination of Witnesses,
that Court found, that William Shaw did nominat Anna Lewens his Executrix, and
universal Legatrix. And that being asked by her, what he would leave to his
friends in Scotland. He declared he would leave her all, and them nothing,
because they had dealt unnaturally with him. It was alleged, for the Defuncts
Cusigns, Executors Confirmed in Scotland, that they ought to be preferred,
because as to the Defuncts Means, and Movables in Scotland, the same must be
regulat according to the Law in Scotland, where a nuncupative Testament has no
use at all: and albeit, a Legacy may be left by word, yet it cannot exceed a
100 lib. Scots. It was answered, that as to the Succession, the Law of Scotland
must regulat: so that what is Heretable, cannot be left by Testament, though
made out of Scotland. As was found in the Case of the Successors of Col
Henderson dying in Holland, and in the Case of contra Meldrum; yet as to the
Solemnity of Acts to the Law, and Custom of the Place, where such Acts are
done, takes place, as where an Act is done in Scotland: albeit it be only
probable by Writ, or Oath of Parties: yet being done in England, it is probable
by Witnesses though it were of the greatest moment, and though the Law of
Scotland, in Writs of Importance, requires the Subscription of the Party
before Witnesses, or of two Nottars, and four Witnesses: yet Writs made in
France and Holland, by the Instrument of one Nottar, are valid; so here there
being no difference from the Law of Scotland: which always preferres Executors
nominat, before nearest of Kin; and the difference only as to the Solemnities,
and manner of Probation, that there it may be proven by Witnesses, there was a
Nomination, and here only by Writ.

The Lords having considered the Reasons, and former Decisions, preferred the
Executors, confirmed in Scotland, for they found, that the Question was not
here of the manner of Probation, of a Nomination, In which case, they would
have followed the Law of the Place, but it was upon the Constitution of the
essentialls of a Right, viz. A nomination, which, albeit it were certainly
known to have been by word; yea, if it were offered to be proven by the nearest
of Kin, that they were Witnesses thereto, yet the Solemnity of writ not being
interposed, the Nomination is in it self defective, and null in substantialibus.

Lord Lour contra January 20. 1665.
IN a Process, for making arrested Sums furth-coming, two Arresters, viz. my
Lord Lour, and another Competing. It was alleged, for Lour, that the first
Arrestment, is null, because the Party was out off the Country, when it was
only made at his dwelling house, which is not Legal; seeing all Summonds,
Intimations, Premonitions, Requisitions, and all Denunciations against Parties
out of the Country, must be by Letters of Supplement from the Lords, Execute
at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and Peir, and Shore of Leith: So must
Arrestments, against these who are out of the Country be there.

Which the Lords found relevant, and preferred the second Arrestment Personal.

Little contra Earl of Nithsdail. Eodem die.
Little pursues an Improbation, and Reduction against the Earl of Nithsdaile, of
the Rights of some Lands; Wherein^ the Lords sustained the Pursuers Interest,
on a Compryzing, and Charge, without Infeftment, and though the Appryzing was
on Litles own Band, simulat and assigned to himself; and found such Deeds might
make him liable, as behaving as Heir, if he Intrometted, and were sufficient
Titles any other way.

The Lords also found, that Certification ought to be granted against Retours,
and Charters, though in public Registers, but not against Writs Registrate in
the Books of Session, the date being condescended on, by the Defender, were
sustained against all Writs, granted to the Defender, and his Authors, but such
as Seem to represent them are called, nor against Writs, granted by the
Pursuer, his Predecessors, or Authors, but only his Predecessors, to whom he
does Succeed, jure sanguinis, and such Authors, as he produces Right from, but
they would not admit Certification against Appryzing, if the Infeftment
thereupon were produced.

Sir John Baird contra The Magistrates of Elgine. January 25. 1665.
SIr John Baird pursues the Magistrates of Elgine, for the Debt of a Rebel, whom
they suffered to escape forth of their Prison. It was alleged, for the
Magistrates absolvitor; because they could be oblidged no further, but for their
ordinar diligence of Custody, but not contra vim majorem, and offered to
prove, that about six a clock at night, in the winter time, the Rebels Lady
going in to Sup with him, the keeper opening the Prison Door to let her in, six
or seven Armed men pressed in with her, and that there was sixty more at the
Gate. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, because it was the Keepers fault to
let in any body at that time of night.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, to be proven by Witnesses, above
exception, which were condescended on.

Parson of Dysart contra Watson. Eodem die.
ANderson Parson of Dysart having a designation of four Aikers of John Watsons
Land, which was Bishops Land; charges him to remove^ Watson Suspends on this
Reason, that there are Parsons Lands in the Paroch, more ewest to the Kirk, and
lying about the Parsons Man's, and therefore, according to the Order of the Act
of Parliament: anent Designation of Glebs, the Parsons Lands must be designed
in the first place, before the Defenders Lands, which are Bishops Lands. It is
answered, for the Charger, that the Parsons Lands were Feued out before the
said Act of Parliament, and are all build with houses incorporat within the
Town of Dysart. It was answered, that the said Act of Parliament bears, That
the Parsons Lands shall be first Designed, although they be Feued out before.

Which the Lords found relevant, and Ordained the Parsons Land to be cognosced,
what quantity was wanting thereof to be made out of the Bishops Land.

William Menzies contra Lord of Drum. Eodem die.
WIlliam Menzies, as Executor to Alexander Menzies, and umquhil Margart Gordon
the other Executor; having obtained Decree against the Lord of Drum, for 8000
merk: The said Margaret being dead, William charges for the whole, Margaret
having died at the Horn Compearance is made for the Donatar. It was alleged
for Drum, that he could not be conveened at the instance of this Pursuer,
without concourse of the other Executor, or some to represent her had been
called. For they might have alleged, that this Charger is satisfied of the
half of his Executry.

The Lords found, that seeing the Testament was execute by a Sentence; the other
Executor needed not be called.

2ly. Drum alleged, that he could not be liable to this Executor, but for the
half. It was alleged for the Donatar, that he craved preference for the other
half. It was answered, that the Donatar could have no interest, because the Sum
was Heretable; It was answered, that albeit it was Heretable, yet it became
moveable, by the Executors taking a Decree therefore, in the same Case, as if
Requisition had been used.

In this the Lords did not decide, some being of opinion, that it was Moveable,
others contrair, because an Executor being but a Successor, as a Decree of
Registration, or Transferrence, would not change the Nature of the first Bond,
so neither would this Decree.

The Heretors of the Fishing of Don contra The Town of Aberdeen and their
Fevers. January 26. 1665.
THe Heretors having Salmond Fishing in the Water of Don, above Aberdeen,
pursue a Declarator of their Right of Salmond Fishing; and that they ought to
be Free of the prejudice sustained by the Cruives built at Aberdeen, and insist
upon these Particulars. That the Town of Aberdeen has no Right to Cruives, but
is only Infeft cum piscationibus and piscarijs, and within such a bounds, which
cannot carry Salmond Fishing, being inter regalia, much less Cruives. It was
answered, that such a Clause granted to an Incorporation, or Community, or
being in Baronia, with Immemorial Possession is sufficient; and that there is a
later Right granted to the Town, with power of Cruives, within the said Bounds,
uti possidebantur. It was answered, that the Pursuers had their Cruives
established before that time.

The Lords found the Town of Aberdeens Title to Cruives, albeit conceived, but
conform to the first Clause, with long Possession was sufficient.

2ly. The Pursuers insisted against the Transporting of the Cruives from one
place to another, which they could not do; Cruives being a Servitude,
strictissimi juris: as a way being once chosen, and fixed, cannot be changed:
especially, in respect of the Clauses uti possidebantur. It was answered; that
there being a Bounds expressed, and mentioning Cruives to have been there
before, the meaning can be no other, then that these Cruives should be removed,
if Inundations alter the present stans, and uti possidebantur is only
understood of the way of building, as before.

The Lords found, by the said Clause that the Cruives might be Trasplanted
within the Bounds having but one Cruive Dyck, and the former Dyck demolished,
so that the Fishings above be in no worse condition then formerly.

3ly. They insisted for the wydnesse of the Heeks, whereanent it was alleged,
that by an Act of Parliament King James the fourth, Hecks were appointed to be
five Inches wide; which is confirmed, by an Act 1661. It was answered, that the
Act King James the 4th. did relate to a former Act of King David's, which was
not to be found, but there were two Acts by King James the 3. Relating to the
old Act by King Alexander, which was found to bear three Inch. So that the Act
K. James the 4th. though posterior, being but Relative, and the Act Related not
known.

The Lords found, it was a mistake, in the writing of the Act; and that in the
stead of King David, it should have expressed King Alexander; and so born only
three Inches, seeing otherwise five Inch would let the greatest part of Salmond
pass.

4ly. They Insisted for the Saturndays Slop; and craved, that on Saturnday the
whole Cruives might stand open: So that no Fish might be taken thereby;
according to the old Statute of King Alexander; from the Even Sun on Saturnday,
till the Sun rising on Monday.

The Lords found, that the Saturndays slop ought to be of the whole Cruives,
and that from Saturnday at six a clock, till Monday at Sunrising.

5ly. They Insisted for the Hight of the Cruives, and alleged, that the same
ought to be no higher then the water, in its ordinar Course, neither the time
of the Flood, nor of Drought; otherwise they might build the same as high as
they pleased, and that it ought not to be builded perpendicular, which will
hinder the Salmonds up-coming, but slopping from the Ground to the top.

The Lords considering, that there was no particular Law, as to the hight of
Cruives, and that ^hir Parties had suffered the other to enjoy the Cruives
above 40. Years, that therefore the same should be uti possidebantur, no higher
then the old Cruives were.

6ly. They Insisted for the Liberty of the Midlestream, beside and attour
Saturndays Slop, which is specially contained in the Acts of Parliament of King
Alexander, and King James the third and fourth, and is renewed in the late Act
of Parliament of King Charles the second. The least quantity of which bears,
That five foot of the middle Stream must be constantly free.

It was answered 1. That the old Acts anent the middle Stream were wholly in
desuetude, and were in effect derogate, by the Act of King James the sixth,
anent Cruives; which ordains the Saturndays Slop to be kept, but mentions not
the middle Stream. And as for the late Act of Parliament; it was Impetrat by
these same Parties, and never past in Articles, or noticed by the Parliament,
but as an ordinar Confirmation. It was answered, that there was no prescription
of public Rights, against standing Laws, and albeit the desuetude of such Laws
could be effectual, yet the late Law Revives and Confirms them all, per
expressum, which is not a particular Confirmation; bearing mention of any
particular Party, or particular Right; but as a general Confirmation of
general Laws, anent all the Cruives in Scotland.

The Lords considering that the middle Stream has been long in desuetude, and
that this late Ratification was past without notice; therefore, before answer;
They Ordained the Parties to adduce Witnesses, whether the midestream was
accustomed in any Cruives in Scotland, and whether the same would be
beneficial, or hurtful to the Salmond Fishing of the Kingdom, in general, and
whether it were destructive to the Cruives in Common: and likewise, they gave
Commission to examine the Witnesses hinc inde, whether their new Cruives were
builded upon challes, or they otherways builded then the former Cruives, to the
prejudice of the Fishing above in the water.

George Hutcheson contra Dickson of Lonhead. Eodem die.
GEorge Hutcheson pursues Dickson, for a Sum of money^ and for the Annualrent
since the denunciation of the Horning. Whereupon the Defender answered, that
the Horning was only at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, where the Defender
dwelled not, and so was null, and could not give Annualrent. It was answered,
that albeit such Hornings be not sufficient for an Escheat, yet they are
sufficient for Caption; and so are not null: and therefore Annualrents having
so much ground, in equity, and by the civil Law, being due ex mora; such
denunciations should be sufficient for Annualrent.

The Lords found such Hornings null, and would not allow Annualrent.

Logan contra Galbraith. Eodem die.
LOgan charges Galbraith to remove from a House; who Suspends, and alleadges,
that she is Served, and Kenned to a Terce of the House, which Terce she brukes
pro indiviso, with the two thirds. The Charger answered, the Reason ought to be
repelled, because, albeit the Defense pro indiviso be relevant against such,
who can obtain division: It being their own fault, that they do not first
divide, or they pursue Removing; but where it is a House being unum tenementum
indivisibile, the Heir, or Successor of the Husband, who has two thirds, and
continues in his Possession as well as the Relict in her third, ought to be
preferred in the Possession, quia majus trahit minus.

The Lords found the answers relevant, to elide the Reason, and decerned the
Relict to remove with this quality, that if the Feear did not dwell in the
House himself, the Relict should be preferred, giving as much Mail as any other
Tennant, and giving Caution for the two part.

Lairds of Berfoord and Binstoun, contra Lord Kingstoun. January 21. 1665.
BErfoord and Binstoun pursues the Lord Kingstoun, for Spuilzie of certain
Corns; he alleged absolvitor, because he Legally drew the same, as their
Teynd, by virtue of his Tack from the present Minister, and Inhibition thereon.
It was answered, First, That was not sufficient summarly to draw the Defenders
Teynds, unless there had been a Sentence on the Inhition, which is but as a
warning, and so must not infer Removing, brevi manu ad vitandum tumultum, 2ly.
If he had Legally pursued them for a Spuilzie, they would have alleged, and
now allege, that they have Tacks standing from the Minister for the time,
who, though deposed, yet lives; and all incumbents Tacks serve during their
natural life, and no Tack from the next incumbent Prejudges during the life of
the former, conform to an express Act of Parliament. The Defender duplyed,
that albeit an Act of Parliament required removing not to be summarly, in Lands
it did not so in Teynds. 2ly. The Pursuers Tacks are null, without consent of
the Patron. The Pursuer triplyed, that they are standing cled with seven years
possession, and their Tacks are subscribed by the Patron Quadruplyed, he was
not then Patron, but was standing Fore-faulted unrestored. Quadruplyed, it is
sufficient coloratus Titulus cum possessione, till the Reduction; And the Lord
Bothwells Son Patron, was after restored whereby it revived.

The Lords repelled the Defense, in respect of the Pursuers Tacks, and found
the Defender might not brevi manu intromet, there being any pretense of Title,
but they desired the Pursuer to restrict, to wrongous intromission and without
Oath in litem

Sir John Scot and Walter Scot contra Sir John Fletcher. Eodem die.
WAlter Scot, as being Assigney, by Sir John Scot of Scotstarvet, to an Atlas
Major, of the late Edition; pursues Sir John Fletcher for delivering thereof,
as belonging to the Pursuer, and now in his hand. The Defender answered, non
Relevat, unless it were condescended qu^ Titulo; for if it came in the
Defenders hands, by emption or Gift, it is his own: and in mobilibus possessio
presumit Titulum, seeing in these Writ, nor Witnesses uses not to be interposed,
and none can seek recovery of such, unless he condescend quo modo desijt
possedere, else all commerce would be destroyed, and who ever could prove that
once any thing was his, might recover it per mill manus, unless they instruct
their title to it. 2. Though it should be condescended, that they were lent,
yet it must be proven only scripto vel juramento, being a matter above an
hundred pound. The Pursuer answered, that in liquid Sums, or Promises,
Witnesses are not receivable above that Sum, but in corporibus, or facts, as in
bargains of Victual, made and delivered, Witnesses are sufficient, though for
greater Value.

The Lords found the Pursuer behoved to condescended upon the way the books was
delivered, and found it probable by Witnesses.

Mr. William Kintor Advocat contra John Boyd Baillie in Edinburgh, Eodem die.
MR. William Kintor and John Boyd having both adjudged the Lands of
Mountlouthian pursue mutual Reductions of each others Rights; Mr. Williams
Right was upon a Decree, cognitionis causa, against the Appearand Heir
renuncing: against which John Boyd, alleged, that the Adjudication was null,
proceeding upon a null Decree, cognitionis causa. First, In so far as it was
lybelled at the instance of Kintor, as Assigney by his Brother, who was Heir to
his Father, and Execut-Executor, and neither Retour nor Testament produced, and
so was null, for want of probation. The Pursuer answered, that he had now
produced, in supplement of the Decree, the Writs.

The Lords sustained the Decree only as ab hoc tempore.

2ly. Boyd alleged, that the Decree, cognitionis causa proceeded on six
hundred merks, which was Heretable by Infeftment, and contained Clause of
Requisition, and no Requisition produced.

The Lords found the Decree null pro tanto, and to stand for the rest, being
upon diverse Articles.

3ly. Boyd alleged, that the said Decree ought to be Reduced, in so far as
it proceeded against the Cautioner of a Tutor, for payment of the Annualrent of
his Pupils money, during the Tutorie; and for the Annualrent of that Annualrent
a tut^la finita, because the Tutor had uplifted, at least ought to have
uplifted, and employed the same for the Pupills behove, ex officio. It was
answered, that albeit Tutors are oblidged for their Pupils Rent, which are in
Tennents hands; yet not for the Annualrent of their Money, being in secure
hands then, and now if the Tutor had lifted it, it would have been lost he
being broken; and the Cautioner also: and the Debitors being great men, as the
Marquess of Hamiltoun and Lord Burghlie, they would easily have Suspended, and
lost the Pursuers pains.

The Lords found, that Tutors were oblidged to uplift their Pupils Annualrents,
though the Creditors were secure, and to employ them for Annualrents, but not
for each year they were due, but ante finitam tutelam, because, though he had
them, he was not oblidged every year to employ them severally, and so sustained
the Decree.

4ly. Boyd alleged, that the years of the Tutorie ought to have been proven,
which was not, and so the Decree is null.

The Lords sustained the Decree, seeing it was lybelled in communi forma,
unless it were alleged, that some of these years were post sinitam tutelam,
here a Testificat of the Pupils age was produced.

Lord Borthwick contra. Mr. Mark Ker. January last. 1665.
THe Lord Borthwick pursues a Reduction, ex capite inhibitionis of all Rights
made by Sir Mark Ker, to Andrew or Mr. Marks Ker of Moristoun, of certain
Lands. The Defenders alleged no Process, because none to represent Sir Mark
Ker were called, who being bound in warrandice to the Defenders, ought to be
called; whereas, of old Processes sisted till warrands were first discussed; so
now the warrant ought at least to be called. The Pursuer answered, that he was
not craving Reduction of Sir Marks own Right, but of Moristouns Right, granted
by Sir Mark, who was common Author to both. And as to the warrandice, the
Defender might intimat the plea, if he pleased.

The Lords found no Process till the warrant were called.

Alison Kello^ contra Pringle. Eodem die.
ALison Kello pursues a Reduction against the Lairds of Wadderburn^ and
Pringle; and craves Certification. It was alleged for Pringle, no
Certification; because he was minor, and non tenetur placitare de Haereditate
Paterna. The Pursuer answered, primo non relevat, against the Production, but
the Minor must produce; and may allege, that in the Debate against the
Reason. 2ly. Non constat, that it is Hareditas Paterna, and therefore he must
produce, at least his Fathers Infeftment. 3ly, All he alleadges, is, that his
Father had an Heretable Disposition, without Infeftment; which cannot make
Haereditatem Paternam, else an Heretable Bond were not Reduceable, against a
Minor, or an Appryzing, and Tack. 4ly. Albeit the alleadgeance were proponed,
in the discussing of the Reason; yet the Reason being super dolo and metu, upon
which the Defenders Original Right was granted, and not upon the point of
Preference of Right; the brocard holds not in that Case, as it would not hold
in Improbation, in casu falsi.

The Lords found, that the Defender ought to produce his Fathers Infeftment;
and that a naked Disposition would not be sufficient: which being produced,
they would sustain the Defense, quoad reliqua, against the Production; but that
they would examine Witnesses, upon any point of fact, in the Reason to remain
in retentis, that the Witnesses might not die in the mean time, without
discussing the Reason, but prejudice of their Defenses.

Anderson and Proven contra Town of Edinburgh. Eodem die.
ANderson being Creditor to Proven, arrests in the hands of Gairdner all Sums
due by him to Proven, and thereupon pursues before the Commissaries of
Edinburgh: Gairdner gives his Oath, that he is Debtor to Proven no way, but
for the Tack Duty of the Customs of Edinburgh; whereunto he was Sub-tacks-man
to Proven, conform to his Bond produced; whereupon, the Commissaries decerned,
Gairdner Suspends on double poynding. It was alleged for the Town of
Edinburgh, that the Sum in question, being a Sub-tack duty, they had the
common privilege of all Masters against their Tennents, and Sub-tennents, that
they might pursue either of them, as they pleased, without an Arrestment, or
any Diligence, and were always preferable, for their Tack-dutie to any other
Creditor of the principal Tacksman. It was answered, that Custom was not in the
case of Rents of Lands; wherein their is tacita hipotheca, and that the
principal Tacksman was only their direct Debtor; and the Sub-tacksman paying
to the Principal Tacksman; or which is equivalent, to his Creditor, is for ever
free: and the Town of Edinburgh, has secured themselves, by taking Caution of
the Sub-tacksman.

The Lords found the Town of Edinburgh preferable, for their Tack-dutie, and
that they had immediate Action against the Sub-tacksman, unless he had made
payment, bona fide before, that they might exclude any other Creditor of the
Principal Tacks-man, for their Tack-dutie.

George Baptie contra Christian Barclay. Eodem die.
CHristian Barclay having pursued George Baptie, before the Commissares, of
Edinburgh, for Solemnizing Marriage with her; because he had gotten her with
Child, under promise of Marriage; as was instructed by his Bond produced,
obtained Decree against him; he Suspends, and raises Reduction, on this
Reason, that his Bond was vitiat, in substantialibus, by ocular inspection. 2.
That it was Conditional, so soon as he was in readiness. 3ly. That the Charger
threatened she would drown her self, for preventing whereof, he had granted this
Bond. 4ly. That after the granting thereof, she had carried her self unchastly,
and born another Bairn; albeit it cannot be alleged, that ever he co-habited,
or conversed with her at all after this Bond: which as it would dissolve the
Marriage, though it were Solemnized, multo magis should it hinder the
Solemnization. The Charger answered, to the first, oppons the Bond, wherein
albeit there be three or four words delet in that place, thereof oblidging him
to Solemnize; yet the acknowledgment of the Child's being gotten under promise
of Marriage is clear, and sufficient by it self. To the 2. There is nothing
alleged, that the Suspender is not in readiness. To the 3. non relevat, there
being neither vis nor metus. To the 4th. non relevat, because there being a
second Child born after this Bond, which constituts the essentials of a
Marriage, the Child is presumed to be the Suspenders, nam Pater est quem
matrimonia monstrant, and it cannot be alleged, or proven, that the Child
belongs to any other, or that the Charger used any evil carriage with any other.

The Lords having considered the Case, found that the presumption was not
sufficient, unless it had been a formal Marriage, and therefore Ordained the
Charger to instruct, the second Child was the Suspenders; and if there had been
any familiarity betwixt them since the Bond.

Kirktouns contra Lord of Hunthill. January ult. 1665.
TWo Sisters called Kirktouns, having obtained Decree against the Lord of
Hunthill, for their Mothers Executrie, who left Hunthill her Brother, and two
other, Tutors to her Children, in so far, as concerned the means, left them by
their Mother; Hunthill Suspends, and raises Reduction, on this Reason. First,
That the only ground of the Decree being a Confirmed Testament, bearing, That
Hunthill compeared, and made Faith, and accepted the Office of Tutory; this
cannot be sufficient of it self, to instruct he was Tutor: Seeing Acts of
inferior Courts prove not in any thing, but in points of form of Process,
which are ordinary, ^but in alijs, prove not without a Warrant, and therefore,
unless the Warrant of this acceptance were produced, it cannot prove more then
an Act of Tutorie, or Curatrie, or Cautionrie, will prove without its warrant;
and therefore now they crave Certification against the same. 2ly. Neither their
Subscription to the Act nor the Principal Testament it self, can be found,
though the Registers of that Commissariot, be searched, and others, about that
time found neither can it be astructed with the least Act of meddling any way.
3ly. A mother cannot name Tutors, but the Father only, it being Patriae
potestatis. It was answered, that albeit in Recenti the warrands of such Acts,
ought to be produced, or they are not effectual with out the same: yet it being
thertie seven years since this Confirmation, after so may troubles, the
Chargers are not oblidged to produce the Warrands, being such inconsiderable
Little Papers as they are, but they must be presumed, that they were so done, as
is expressed in the public Record; seeing this Process has lasted these twvelve
years, and before, nor since; till within a year, no mention thereof. It was
answered, that there was no prescription run, during which, if at first, the
Chargers were oblidged to produce, they are still so unless they could
fortify, and astruct the truth aliunde, and their silence says nothing,
because it was the Chargers fault, that pursued not till within these twelve
years, whereas, if they had pursued timeously the Suspender would then have
pursued a Reduction. It was answered, they were Minors, in the Suspenders own
house the former time, who would not have kept and entertained them at all,
if he had not known of the Tutory, and that they had means.

The Lords found that this naked Testament was not sufficient to astruct the
acceptance, without further adminicles.

Elphinstoun of Selmes contra The Lord Rollo, and the Lord of Niddrie. 1
February 1665.
THe Lord Rollo being addebted in a Sum, to umquhil Mr. David Anderson of Hill,
Margaret Anderson his Daughter, gave a Procuratorie to intromet with all
Papers, and to uplift all Sums belonging to her in Scotland, to John Anderson,
whereupon John Anderson discharges the Lord Rollo, and takes a new Bond from
him, and assignesit to Niddrie. Thereafter Selmes getting Assignation from the
said Margaret, Rollo Suspends on double Poynding; Selmes alleged, that he, as
Assigney, had Right to the Sum. It was answered, that Rollo was discharged by
the Procurator, before the Assignation. It was answered, primo, that the
Procuratory was null, because it wanted the Designation of the Writer, and
Witnesses. 2ly. It was offered to be improven as false and fenzied. It was
answered to the first, that the Procuratory was made in Ireland, secundum
consuetudinem loci, where designation of Witnesses is not required, but a writ,
being Sealed, Subscribed and delivered before Witnesses, albeit they be not
designed, the writ is effectual. To the second, the Lord Rollo, having made
payment bona fide to a Procurator, albeit the Porcuratory should be improven;
the Debtor not being accessory, but paying bona fide, could not repeit,
otherwise all commerce would be marred, and no body will be secure to pay to
any Assigney, or Procurator, but as payment made, bona fide to them that have
no Right, is relevant, only because it is done bona fide, and necessarly; so
must it be good, though they have forged the Procuratory. It was answered, that
payment was not yet made, but only a new Bond granted, and that it could not be
bona fide; seeing the Procuratory, wanting the ordinar Solemnity of Witnesses
designed, might have given just ground of doubt, and the Debtor was not to
have paid without Sentence.

The Lords repelled the first alleadgeance, and sustained the Writ, according
to the custom of Ireland; being Nottour to themselves. As to the other point:
the Lords did not decide in it till it appeared, whether Niddrie would prev^^^
upon the new Bond, and make it equivalent to payment: but they thought that
payment made bona fide would be sufficient, albeit the Writ were improven,
where there was no ground to doubt.

Sir John Fletcher Supplicant. February 3. 1665.
SIr John Fletcher having bought the Lands of Crainstoun, and finding that
there was an Appryzing to be deduced thereof for his Authors Debt, which might
cost him trouble; he craved Assessors to be appointed by the Lords, who
considering the matter amongst themselves. It carried by the plurality of one
or two, to name two Advocats Assessors, but many were on the contrary,
conceiving the example of it, would be of great inconveniency, seeing Appryzings
were not with continuation of days, and if Parties compeared, and alleged
they were Infeft, yet there may be Inhibition, anterior Reversion, or Trust, or
nullities in their Right: and if these were denied, they behoved to be
instructed, and so Terms of Probation run, while in the mean time the anterior
Diligence of others, Appryzings in the country, before the Sheriff would
prevent them, and it would hinder any Appryzings ever to be deduced at
Edinburgh, and it were hand to put Creditors, who knew not there Debitors
Charter Chist, to disput their Rights as in an executive Process.

But the Lords inclined, that Sir John's Infeftment should be rather produced,
and reserved out of the Appryzing, then the Appryzing stopped.

Falconer contra Earl of Kinghorn. Eodem die.
FAlconer pursues the Earl of Kinghorn, for payment of a Bond, wherein his
Father was Cautioner. It was alleged the Bond was null, as to Kinghorn;
because it mentioned in the first place, three Witnesses to another Parties
Subscription, per expressum, mentioning two, without their designation, or
expressing whether they were Witnesses to either, or both the two Cautioners:
and therefore the Bond was null, by the Act of Parliament. It was answered,
that according to the ordinar custom, they offered to design. It was Replied,
that the designation behoved to be of living Witnesses; for seeing in it self,
the Bond is null, by the Act of Parliament, and that the Lords, by custom, have
supplied such Bonds, per equivalentiam. The intent of the Act of Parliament
being only, that by the Designation, the Witnesses might be known: and thereby
a means of improbation afforded, if the Writ were quarrelled; but after the
Witnesses are dead, the Degsination of them cannot attain that effect.

The Lords Ordained the Pursuer to Design living Witnesses, or otherways, to
condescend upon other Adminicles, to astruct the verity of the Subscription of
the Bond.

Beg contra Beg. February 4. 1665.
THomas Beg in Edinburgh, having a Son of his first Marriage, and providing his
Children of two subsequent Marriages to his Means. The Son of the first
Marriage pursues his Father, for his Mothers third, and craves Annualrent
therefore, he being Minor, and his Father his Tutor of Law, and therefore
liable, as other Tutors for Annualrent.

Which the Lords found relevant.

Paterson contra Pringle Eodem die.
ISobel Paterson having lent to Pringles Wife a 100. lib. scots, and having
received a Bond of Pringles in Pand thereof, he thereafter seeking a sight of
the Bond, took it away without warrant, whereupon she obtained Decree against
him, before the Commissaries, which He and his Wife Suspended, on this Reason,
that he never borrowed any Sum from the Charger, and if his Wife did borrow the
same, he knew nothing thereof, or that it was applied to his use, and that she
Impignorat his Bond without his knowledge, or warrant.

The Lords found, that her having of the Bond, in her hand did infer a warrant
to borrow the Money, and oblidge her Husband being a matter of small importance.

Peter Pallat contra Thomas Fairholm. ^ February 7. 1665.
THomas Fairholm Merchant in Edinburgh, having written a Letter to Peter Pallat
Factor at Burdeoux, to Laden him 30 Tun of Wine. The tenor of the Letter, is,
that in respect Fairholm was not acquainted with Pallat, he had written upon
the Credit of his Brother Ninian Williamson Factor at London, who was Pallats
ordinar correspondent, to Load these Wines in that Ship, which carried the
Letter, upon Fairholms account; and bore, That Williamson had Provisions to
satisfy the same, and that he would either remit to Pallat, or draw upon him,
as he found convenient. This Letter being sent under a cover of Williamsons to
Pallat, the Wines were sent into Scotland, and Williamson broke about a year
thereafter whereupon Pallat pursues for his Money from Fairholm, who alleged
absolvitor, because he having demanded the VVines, not upon his own Credit, but
Williamsons, and Williamson having sent under his own cover, as Palla^s Letter
bears, the said Order, in which there being mention, that Williamson, had
Provisions in his hand: his sending the Letter of that Tenor, under his own
cover, is an acknowledgment, that he had those Provisions, and thereby he
constitute himself Debtor to Pallat, and freed Fairholm: likeas, Pallat
acquiesced therein, and drew Bills upon Williamson^ which were accepted, but
not paid; and was silent, never demanding Money from Fairholm, till Williamson
was broken, so that first, Fairholm is free, by the tenor of the Letter, and
next, though, thereby he had been bound, yet the damnage sustained by Pallats
silence, till Williamson was broken, whereby Fairholm was hindered to draw his
Provisions out of Williamsons hand, and thereby lost the same through Pallats
fault, ought to compence Pallat, and exclude him. Pallat answered to the first,
that he opponed the Letters; which bore expressly the Wines to be sent for
Fairholms account; so that albeit it mention Williamsons Credit, and that he
had Provisions, it makes him but expromissor, and liberats not Fairholm: as to
the second, anent the damnage, Pallat being secured, both by Fairhlom, and
Williamson, might at his option, take himself to either, or to both; and cannot
be accounted to have done any fault, in forbearance of either, though an
unexpected accident, of Williamsons breaking interveened; so much the more, as
Fairholms Letter does not order to draw upon Williamson; but bears, That
Fairholme would either draw, or remit, at Williamsons convenience: So that
Pallat has not failed, in the strick observance of the Order. And if need be,
Pallat offers him to prove, by the custom of Merchants, in the most eminent
places abroad, that such Letters did never liberat the Writer. And Fairholm
offered to prove, that such Letters did liberat the Writer, unless the receiver
had protested, and intimat to the Writer, that he would not acquiesce therein
simply, but also in the Credit of the Writer.

The Lords found, that the Letter did not liberat Fairholm, notwithstanding of
his forbearance to demand, and therefore repelled the Defenses, and decerned,
but liberat Fairholm from the exchange, and re-exchange: in regard of Pallats
silence, neither would the Lords delay the matter, upon the opinion of
Merchants.

David Graham contra George Bruce and Doctor Mairten. Eodem die.
DAvid Graham, upon the sight of a Bond unregistrat, of George Bruces, obtained
Arrestment; and therewith Arrested a Sum, in Doctor Martines hand, which was
loosed, and after the loosing, Assignation being made by George Bruce, to his
Sister.

In which case, the Lords found, That the Arrestment being upon the Bond,
before Registration might be loosed, and notwithstanding of the loosing, seeing
it was not now paid by the Debtor; they ordained it to be made forthcomand to
the Arrester, and preferred him to the Assigney, albeit it was alleged, that
the tenor of the Arrestment was but till Caution was found, which being found:
albeit the Debtor could not oppose to make it forthcoming; yet an Assigney,
after loosing the Arrestment may let.

The Lords considered, that the Caution found, in loosing Arrestments, is
overlie, and insufficient, and so would not insecure Creditors, doing diligence
by Arrestment.

Lion of Muirask contra Heretors of the Shire. Eodem die.
Lion of Muirask, having been Commissioner in the Parliament 1648. did, by
virtue of the Act of Parliament, 1661. Allowing Commissioners Charges, to these
who served in Parliament 1648. Who adhered to the Engadgment; charges the
^^eretors of the Shyre to meet, and Stent; and their being a Stent made,
conform to the Valuation: he Charges thereupon^ some of the Heretors Suspends,
and allege, that they were not charged to meet, and so the Stent Roll is
null. 2ly. That is not instructed, that the Charger attended all the days in
the Parliament. 3ly. That the Roll ought to be made according to the Retour,
and not to the Valuation, conform to the Custom before the troubles.

The Lords found, that, seeing the Heretors, who met, expressed in the Stent
Roll, that all the Heretors were charged, that it was sufficient, though the
Executions against each on of them was not now produced, and because the
Sed^runts of the Parliament 1648. were not to be found, They found he had right
to the whole Charges during the Parliament, unless for such time, as they shall
prove by his oath, that he was absent, but found, that the Stent Roll ought to
be according to the Retour, and not to the Valuation:

Lady Greenhead conra Lord Loure. February 10. 1665.
THe Lady Craig, and the Lord of Greenhead her second Husband pursues the
Tenants of Craig wherein she is Infeft, for Mails and Duties. In which Process,
my Lord Loure co^^pears for his Interest, and alleadges, that he having
Appryzed the Estate of Craig, and being Infeft, thereupon has raised Reduction
of the Ladies Infeftment, on this Reason, that a Part of his Sumes being
anterior to the Ladies Infeftment, who was competently provided, by her
Contract of Marriage, in 30. Chalder of Victual, and this additional
Infeftment of fifty Chalder of Victual, being betwixt most Conjunct Persons;
Husband and Wife: in so far as it is posterior to the Pursuers lawful Debt;
ought to be Reduced upon the Act of Parliament, 1621. The Pursuer answered, the
Reason ought to be repelled. First, Because the Act of Parliament being only
against gratuitous Dispositions made by Bankerupts, in prejudice of their
lawful Creditors, is not relevant: seeing Craig the Disponer was not a
Bankerupt; 2ly. As he was not a Bankerupt, so neither was he^ insolvendo;
because the Reversion of his Estate is sufficient to pay his Debt, albeit the
Same were affected with this additional Jointure. It was answered, for the
Defender, that albeit the Title, and Narrative of the Act, be against
Bankerupts, yet the Statutory part thereof, is against all gratuitous
Dispositions, by Conjunct Persons: so that the Defender needs not allege,
that either the Disponer was Bankerupt, or insolvendo, but that the Ladies
Infeftment is betwixt Conjunct Persons: without an onerous Cause. The Pursuer
answered, that the Disponer was neither Bankerupr, nor insolvendo; and the
Defender can have no Interest: unless there were fraud or prejudice which the
Defender cannot allege; because the Pursuer is content, that the Defender
have access by his Appryzing to the Jointure Lands, In so far as will satisfy
his Annualrents, and by the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor^ the Lords are
empowered to restrict Appryzings to their Annualrent, and so he can pretend no
prejudice; providing he assign the Lady to his Appryzing, in so far as he
satisfies his Annualrent, out of her Additional Jointure.

The Lords found the answer to the Reduction Relevant, upon purging of the
Appryzers prejudice, not only by admitting him to have access to the Appryzed
Lands upon Assignation, as said is, during the Legal, but with Declaration,
that if the Lady Redeemed not within the Legal, the Lands should be
irredeemable, and the Lady totally excluded

Earl of Lauderdail contra Lord Oxfuird. February 11. 1665.
THe Earl of Lauderdail his Guidsir, being Infeft in the Barony of Musselburgh,
which is a part of the Abbacy of Dumferling by a Gift from King James, in Anno
1584. Excepted by the Act of Parliament, for Annexation of Kirklands, in Anno
1587. And repeited in the Act of Parliamet 1593. His Father got a Gift in Anno
1641. And Oxfuird got another the same year from the King, as Heir to Queen Ann
his Mother, who had a Heretable Disposition of the whole Lordship of Dumferling
from the King, after Lauderdails first Right; Lauderdail obtained Conformation
of his first and subsequent Rights, in the Parliament 1661. Declaring all
Rights formerly granted by the King since Lauderdails first Right, void. Which
Ratification, bears, an express provision, That it shall not be prejudged by
the Act salvo jure cu^uslibet. The Defender alleged, absolvitor in hoc
judicio possessorio; because his Father was Infeft by the King, in Anno 1641.
And by virtue thereof in possession, twenty years before this persuit: and as
for his Ratification, the Defender not being called thereto; it cannot take
away his Right, being founded super jure communi until the Pursuer insist in
Reduction. In which case, the Defender shall answer, but is not oblidged to
answer in hoc judicio, and as for the exception of the Act salvo jur: Its
against the common Law: and the Act salvo jure; is posterior without repeiting
that exception. The Pursuer opponed his Ratificatiom, excepting the Act salvo
jure, which being done upon the King and Parliaments certain knowledge upon
consideration of Lauderdails prior Right. The Lords cannot be Judges to reduce
the Sentence, and Statute of Parliament; as Durie observes to have been found
in the Case of the Earl, of Rothes and John Stewart of coldinghame. The
Defender repei^ed his answer; and for these Decisions, opponed the Tennor of
the Act salvo jure 1633. And repeited, 1661. Whereby the Lords are ordained to
decide, in the Rights of private Parties, according to Law, without respect of
Ratification, or other private Statuts, in favors of particular Persons, such
as this, which being after this decisions, clears and enlarges the power of the
Lords. The Pursuer opponed his Ratification, and exception of the Act salvo
jure, which bears expressly, That it should stand as a public Law, and so was
no private Statute, mentioned in these Acts, Salvo jure.

The Lords having considered the Case, and that such exceptions from the Act
Salvo jure were of dangerous consequence to the Leidges. They ordained the
Parties before answer, to dispute the point of Right as if such an exception of
the Act Salvo jure, had not been granted, but they thought that Defense upon a
possessory Judgment, being but a point of form, whereby the Rights of Parties
were not competent by exception, or reply: the Parliament might dispense
therewith, and also might repone Parties, as to the matter of Prescription, or
quoad minor non tenetur placitare, but if without these and such, the Pursuer
had a prior valid Right. The Lords were loath to enter upon the case of the
exception of the Act Salvo Jure.

Scot of Thirlston contra Scot of Braidmeadow Eodem die.
SCot of Thirlston having right to the Teynd of midshef; and pursues the
possessor for 24. Years bygone, and in time coming, who alleged absolvitor;
because these Teynds are allocal to the Church, co^^or^ to a Decree of
locality, produced: bearing, such a Stipend and locatting, so much of it, and
for the rest^ that the Minister had the Teynds of midshef. It was alleged,
that this could not instruct, that those whole Teynds were allocal; but so
much, as made up that rest: and the Teynd is worth twice as much, and therefore
the Minister had but the twenty Lamb, for the Teynd, which is but half Teynd
and was liable to the Pursuer for the rest. It was answered, that Teynds are
secundum consuetudinem loci, and if Tyends had never been paid, none would be
due, and if the twenty Lambs was all ever paid, they could be liable for no
more:

The Lords found, that before the intenting of the cause, they would not allow
any more nor then what was accustomed to be paid, unless the Pursuer, offer
him to prove, that there was a Tack, or use of payment of more, which they
would allow accordingly.

Sir William Thomson contra Town of Edinburgh, February 14. 1665.
THe Magistrates of Edinburgh, having deposed Sir William Thomson Town Clerk,
from his Office, on this ground, That a Tack of the new Imposition, and Excise
being set to their Tacks-men, (which was to have been subscribed by him, as
Clerk, for the Deacons of the Crafts,) he had given it up to the Tacks-man, and
had not taken their subscription thereto, neither to their own double, nor
taken another double for the Town, albeit the Tack duty was fourscore thousand
merks yearly, for two years; and that it being an uncertain casuality, the
value of it was most difficult to prove, and not but by the Tacks-mens own
Oath. Sir William raised Reduction, on several Reasons, especially that the
sentence was unjust, in so far as it was the putting on of an exorbitant, and
incommensurable punishment, of deprivation from an Office of so great Value,
upon a Fault of mere negligence, or escape: and that before the Sentence, the
Tack-dutie was all paid, but four months, and now all is paid, and that Sir
William was still willing for to have made up the Towns damnage. It was
answered, that here was no Process to put a punishment commensurable on a
Fault, but Sir William having, by the free Gift of the Town had so profitable a
place for his life, upon consideration of his Fidelity and Diligence, there is
employed in it, as effectualy, as if expressed, that it is ad vitam aut ad culpam:
so that the cognoscing of the Fault is the termination of the Gift freely
given, so if their be a fault Justly found by the Town, they might well take
back their Gift, they gave upon that condition employed, for it was not the loss
in eventu; nor dolus in proposito, that made such a Fault; else all negligences
imaginable would not make it up, though a Servant should leave his Masters
House, and Coffers open, if nothing happened to follow; yet the Fault was the
same, and could not be taken away, by making up the damnage, but here was a
Fault of knowledge and importance: for Sir Wil^iam could not by mere
negligence, nor ommission give away the Tack to the Tacks-men, and neither see
them subscribe their own double, or any other, nor subscribe himself, this
Fault was likeas in his Office, he had a particular gratuitie, as Clerk to the
excise.

The Lords repelled the Reason of Reduction, and found the Sentence not to be
unjust, upon this ground; because they thought that Sir William being a common
Servant, who by his Act of admission, had specially engadged never to quarrel
the pleasure of the Magistrates, they, as all Masters have a latitude, in
cognoscing their Servants Faults, wherein, though they might have been wished
to forbear rigor, yet having done it by their power, as Masters over their
Servants; The Lords could not say they had done unjustly, but found that the
committing such a Fault terminat their free Gift, being of knowledge and
importance, but found that if it could be proven, that the Tack was duly
subscribed, and lost thereafter, which was not of knowledge, but of mere
omission, incident to any Person, of the greatest diligence, they would not
find that a sufficient ground to depose him.

Bishop of Dumblain contra Earl of Cassils. February 15. 1665.
THe Bishop of Dumblain pursues the Earls Tennents, for the Teynds of the
Abbacy of Cor^regual, as a part of his Patrimony annexed thereto, by the Act of
Parliament 1617. The Defender alleged no Process, till the Act of Annexation,
being but an Act unprinted were produced. 2ly. Absolvitor, because the Defender
had Tacks from the King, in Anno 1641. And by virtue thereof was in possession,
and could pay no more then the Duties therein contained, till they were
reduced. It was answered to the first, it was nottour, and if the Defender
alleged any thing in his favor, in the Act, he might extract it. 2ly. The
Defender could not claim the benefit of his Tack, 1641. because the Bishops are
restored to all they possessed in Anno 1637. And so not only Right, but
Possession, is restored to them as then, which is as sufficient an interruption
by public Law, as if it were by Inhibition, ot citation.

Which the Lords found relevant, being in recenti after the Act, and never
acknowledged by the Bishops.

Boyd of Pinkill contra Tennents of Cairsluth. Eodem die.
PInkill, as Donatar to the waird of Cairsluth, pursues removing against the
Tennents, whose Master compears, and alleadges, that the Gift was to the behove
of the Minor, his Superior; who, as representing his Father and Guidsire, was
oblidged, in absolute warrandice, against Wairds per expressum.

THe Lords considering, whether that could be understood of any other Wairds,
then such as had fallen before the warrandice, or if it could extend to all
subsequent Wairds, of the Superiors Heir, and so to nonentries, etc. which
they thought hard; seeing all holdings were presumed Waird, unless the contrary
appear, and the Superior could not be thought to secure against subsequent
Wairds, unless it were so specially expressed, all Wairds past and to come: Yet
seeing it was found formerly that if the Superior take such a Gift, and be
bound in warrandice, that the same should accresce to the Vassals paying their
proportional part of the expense, and composition, they found the Defense, that
this Gift was to the behove of the Superior relevant, ad hunc effectum, to
restrict it to a proportional part of the expense.

Hellen Hepburn contra Adam Nisbit. February 16. 1665.
HEllen Hepburn pursues Adam Nisbit, to remove from a Tennement in Edinburgh,
who alleged absolvitor, because he had a Tack standing for Terms to run. It
was replied, that the Tack bore expressly, if two Terms run in the third
unpayed, the Tack should expire and be null, ipso facto, without Declarator. It
was answered, that notwithstanding clauses so conceived. The Lords has been
accustomed to put them to Declarator, in which case they have the privilege to
purge the Failzie at the Bar, and if need beis, the Defender will now purge.

The Lords found the reply relevant, in respect of the conception of the
Clause, and would not suffer the Defender to purge, for albeit in Declarators
against Feues, ob non solutum canonem, the Lords will suffer the Defenders to
purge at the Bar, when the pursuit is upon the Act of Parliament yet they will
hardly suffer them to purgewhere that Clause Irritant is expressed in the
Infeftment: so Proprietars may pursue their Tennents for failzing to pay the
Duties of their Tack, and to find Caution in time coming; else to remove when
there is no such Clauses Irritant, and then they may purge, but when the Clause
Irritant is expressed, there is far less reason they should have liberty to purge
in Tacks then in Feus, where the penalty is much greater.

Pringle of Torsonce contra Ker of Sunderland-hall. February 17. 1665.
PRringle having appryzed the Right of a Wodset, from the Heirs of Sir George
Ramsay, does thereupon require and charge for the Money. It was alleged, that
he cannot have the Wodset Sum, unless he not only Infest himself in the Wodset,
and renounce the same, but put the Defender in peaceable possession, as he did
possess the Wodsetter, from whom the Pursuer appryzed: and who can be in no
better Case, then the Wodsetter himself. The pur^uer answered, that he was
willing to renounce all Right and Possession, but could not put the Defender in
Possession; because a third Party had intruded himself, without the Pursuer,
or his Authors Fault, and the Wodset being but a Pledge, the Hipothecar is not
liable contra vim major^m, but only pro culpa lata and levi. Therefore if a
Pledge be taken away by force, it hinders not the Creditor to demand his Sum.
The like must be in intrusion, which is an Act of force, and the Pursuer, who
has only his Annualrent, is not oblidged to consume the same upon recovery,
but the Defender may do the same. The Defender answered, that whatever might be
alleged, in the Case of Intrusion, if in continent, the Wodsetter had
intimate the same, and required his Money, yet this intruder has continued a
long time.

The Lords found the defense and duply relevant to stop the payment of the
money till the possession were delivered, seeing the intrussion was ex inter
vallo.

James Butter contra Gray of Balbrino. Eodem die.
JAmes Butter having pursued Gray for payment of a Sum of Money, he alleged
prescription, because forty years had run from the date of the Bond, being the
last of December 1624. before any Judicial Act, or other interruption done
thereon. The Pursuer replied, that he had cited the Defender, upon the first
Summons upon the 24 of December. 1664. which was six days within the forty
years, from the date. 2ly. It was much more within the 40 years, from the Term
of payment of the Bond, from which only, and not from the date prescription
runs, quia contra non valentem agere, non currit prescriptio. The Defender
answered, that the citation on the first Summons, was not sufficient, unless
there had been an Act of Continuation or some Judicial Act within the 40 year;
Because the Act of Parliament bears expressly, If the Creditor follow not, and
take document within 40 years, the Bond shall expire.

The Lords found the reply relevant, and that the Citation on the first Summons
was sufficient, being within 40 years of the term of payment.

Sir John Baird contra Magistrates of Elgine Eodem die.
SIr John Baird pursues the Magistrates of Elgine, for the Debt of a Rebel,
escaping out of their Prison, who alleged absolvitor, because the Rebel had
the benefit of the Act, Debtor and Creditor; and produced the Clerk of the
Bills Certificat thereupon, when he was offered to Prison, and being Imprisoned
jointly for an other Debt. The Magistrates protested, that they excepted him not
prisoner for this Debt. It was answered, that the benefit of the Act contains
an express nullitie, if the Annualrents be not paid conform thereto. The
Defenders answered, that they could not be Judge to the discharge, and that
upon the like case, of a Protection of the Kings, the Magistrates of Strivling
were liberat.

The Lords repelled the Defense, unless the Clerks attest, the discharge had
been first produced, or shown to the Magistrates before the Prisoner was let go.
In which case, they might either have refused him, or let him go free.

Marquess of Huntly contra Gordoun of Lesmore. February 22. 1665.
THe Marquess of Huntly, as Donatar to the Forefaulture of the Marquess of
Argyle, as to the Estate of Huntly, obtained Decree of Parliament against
Gordoun of Lesmore, for payment of the Mails and Duties of certain Lands, and
for removing therefrom. He Suspends, on these Reasons, First, That the Decree
was null, not preceding upon lawful Citation, but far fewer days then is
appointed by Law, and that he was absent, and now alleadges, that his Right to
the Lands in question, was by excambion with the Marquess of Argyle, for Lands
holden of the Marquess of Huntly, which he had possessed thirty or forty
years before, and thereefore, if the Pursuer were dispossessed of the Lands in
question, he behoved to possess him in other Lands. 2ly. The Decree is null,
as not proceeding upon trial of an Inquest, cognoscing, the Marquess of Argyle
Heretable possessor five years before; conform to the Act of Parliament: nor
could that be cog^o^^ed, because, the Defender himself was Heretable possessor
these years. 3ly. The Defenders Right from the Marquess of Argyle, albeit it
was post comissum crimen, yet the crime was latent, proceeding upon missive
Letters of his, that was found out of the English hands, which the Defender
could not know. The Pursuer answered to the whole; that he opponed the Decree
of Parliament, which ought not to have been Suspended, by the Lords of Session,
who are not Judges to Decreets of Parliament, who may dispense with the Dyets,
and Solemnities of Law, and the Pursuer insists not upon the benefit of the
five years possession, but upon this ground, that the Defenders Rights from the
House of Huntlie, or from Argyle were holden base of Argyle, and not confirmed
by the King, and therefore by the Forefaulture of Argyle the Superior, who, by
his Right came in Huntlies place, these unconfirmed base Rights fall.

Which the Lords found relevant, and in the same Process, Mails and Duties
being but generally decerned, without expressing the quantities.

The Lords ordained the Pursuer to condescend upon the quantities, and gave him
a term to prove.

Viscount of Kingstoun contra Colonel Fullertoun. Eodem die.
THe Viscount of Kingstoun pursues Colonel Fullertoun, upon the warrandice of
an Assignation, made by the said Colonel, to Sir Arthur dowglass of
whittinghame. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Assignation was
only made in trust, which he offered to instruct by many Adminicles, of which
these were the chief; that by the Witnesses adduced, it was cleared, that this
Assignation remained in the hands of one Cranstoun, who was filler up of the
date, and Witnesses therein; that it was never delivered to Whittinghame, and
that the Right Assigned, was still retained by the Colonel, who thereupon
obtained two Decreets before the Lords, and uplifted the Money from Sir William
Thomson Debtor, Cranstoun, who kept the Assignation, being an Agent in the
house, never questioning the same, nor Sir Arthur, or any of his, owning the
same for the space of 20 year, till of late; Kingstoun gave 300. merk, to get
the Assignation out of the hands of one Ienkin, who got it from Cranstoun, and
that the Money was to have been presently employed for the levying of Soldiers
for a French Regement, whereof Fullertoun was Colonel, and Sir Arthur
Livetenant Colonel, there were also two Letters of Sir Arthurs produced by the
Colonel, acknowledging the trust thereof, the one was alleged to be
holograph, but nothing adduced to prove the same, but three other writs,
subscribed before Witnesses, for comparing the Subscriptions therein, with the
Subscriptions of the Letters. The Pursuer answered, that so solemn a Write,
subscribed before Witnesses, could not be taken away by Presumptions, or
Witnesses, but either by Writ, or Oath of Party; and as to the Presumptions
adduced, there are stronger Presumptions with the solemn Writ then against it:
Fullartoun a most circumspect man, would never have given an Assignation in
trust, without a Back-bond, and that Sir Arthur died shortly thereafter, Anno
1642. and Cranstoun died Auno 1645. And Whittinghams Successors were strangers
to the business, and the missives adduced were not proven holograph, and were
suspect.

The Lords found the Defense founded upon the foresaid adminicles relevant and
proven and therefore assoilzied.

Sir George Mouat contra Dumbar of Hembrigs. Eodem die.
SIr George Mouat, as Assigney to a Tochar of 5000 merk, whereunto umquhile
Dumbaith was contracter, pursues Hemprigs, as representing him for payment. The
Clause of the Contract bore, That the Husband should have the Tochar, out of
the first, and readiest Goods of the wifs Father; and that he should have
Annualrent therefore, but did not expressly oblidge Dumbaith to pay, and
therefore he is not liable personally, unless he had intrometted with the
Defuncts means.

The Lords found the Defender liable, seeing the Clause being in re dotali, it
behoved to be interpret cum effectu, and if it did import only a consent, not
to hinder the Husband, it signified nothing; and because in Cases conceived
passive, where it does not appear, who is oblidged, the Contracter is
understood oblidged.

Campbel contra Campbel. Eodem die.
A Wife pursuing her Father in Law, for employment of her Tochar, conform to
her Contract. He alleged absolvitor, because the Clause bore expressly, that
so soon as the Tochar was paid completely, he should employ it; and so much
more for the Wifs Liferent use, so that, unless it were shown, that the Tochar
was completely paid, he was not oblidged. The Pursuer answered, that she was
not oblidged to pay the Tochar, but her Father, and if any neglect or defect
were therein, it was not her fault, but the Defender ought to have done
diligence, debito ^^mpore, and therefore, albeit the Tochar were not paid, at
least he must employ his own part proportionable to what of the Tochar he has
received.

Which the Lords found relevant, and if the Pursuer had not restricted her self
to that proportion they would have sustained it simply, for all the Defnders
own part.

Kennedy contra Weir February 23. 1665.
KEnnedy of Auchtifardel, having charged William Weir, upon a Bond of 300 merk.
He Suspends, and raises Reduction, upon Minority and Lesion. The Charger
answered, Minority takes no place where the Minor is in dolo, as si minor sein
majorem dixerit, but in this Bond, the Suspender expressly acknowledged himself
to be then Major. The Suspender answered, that eadem facilitate, that he was
induced to subscribe the Bond, he might be induced to insert that Clause, which
therefore cannot prove, unless it were otherways proven, that he did induce the
Charger to lend him Money on that ground.

The Lords found, his acknowledgement in the Bond was sufficient, unless he
instructed, that he was induced to insert that Clause, not on his own motion,
or that the Charger knew that he was Minor, or was oblidged to know the same,
by being his Tutor or Curator, or might have visibly known the same, by the
sight of his age, and thought it not reasonable to put it to the Debitors oath,
to disappoint the Creditor.

Jack contra Pollock and Rutherfoord. Eodem die.
MArion Rutherfoord Married David Clerk, and had no Contract of Marriage with
him, but he having acquired a little ruinous Tennement, took it to her and him
in Conjunct-fee, and in the time of the Plague^ he provided her to the
Annualrent of 5000 merk. His Heirs raises Reduction of the provision, as being
in lecto agritudinis, after he had kept his house upon suspicion of the
plague, of which he died. It was alleged, for the said Marton, that keeping
the house upon suspicion of the plague could not be as in lecto aegritudinis,
unless it were proven, that he was infected with the Desease, before the
provision was granted. 2ly. Even in that Case, Defuncts are not hindered to
give Liferents to their Wives, for which there is a natural obligation,
according to Craigs opinion.

The Lords repelled the first alleadgence, but found the second relevant, in so
far as might extend to a competent provision to the Wife, and therefore having
examined many Witnesses hinc inde, upon the Estate of the Husband, and the
Tochar, and frugality of the Wife, and finding his means did consist in a
Tenement worth 500 merk by year, beside that inconsiderable Tenement, wherein
she was Infeft, they restricted her Annualrent, which came to 300 merk, to 123.
lib. which was about the Terce of the Tenement, albeit Terces of Houses within
Burgh are not due.

In this Process, the Wife and her second Husband, and having repaired the
other little Tenement, which was ruinous, and builded it much better then ever
it was; for which they pursued for the Reparations.

The Lords found, that they ought to have the Reparations decerned, not only in
so far as is necessary, but in quantum, the Heir will lucrari, by getting
greater mail to be paid at the Wifes death, she leaving the Tenement in as
good case as now it is.

Sir James Mersser of Aldie contra William Rouan. February 24. 1665.
SIr James Mersser of Aldie, as Donatar to the Gift of ultimus haeres, of
umquhil John Rouan, pursues a Reduction of the Retour, and Service of William
Rouan, Served Heir to the Defunct, as his Goodsirs Brothers Oye: and having
obtained Certification, contra non producta; there being nothing produced, but
the Retour, Service, Brive and Executions, but no Warrant of the Service,
either bearing the Testimony of Witnesses, adduced to prove the propinquity of
Blood; or bearing, that the Inquest of proper knowledge, knew the same. The
Pursuer now insists in his Reason of Reduction, that the Service is without
Warrant, and without Probation by Writ or Witnesses. It was answered, non
relevat, as it is lybelled, bearing only that it is without probation by Writ
or Witnesses, whereas it might proceed upon the proper knowledge of the
Inquest, or any two of them. The Pursuer answered, that neither were there any
Probation by Writ or Witnesses, nor by the Minutes of Process, bearing, that
the Persons of Inquest, of their proper knowledge did Serve.

The Lords considering, that the Minutes of these Process upon Service, for
Serving general Heirs, which may be before any Judicature, use not to be
exactly kept, would not instantly Reduce for want of the Warrants; but
ordained the Persons of Inquest to be produced, to condescend whether they
proceeded upon proper knowledge, and what was the Reason of their knowledge.

Mc. Gregor contra Menzies. Eodem die.
THere being a question arising betwixt Mc. Gregor and Menzies, upon a Decree
Arbitral.

The Lords found the Decree Arbitral null, proceeding upon a Submission of
this Tenor, submitting to the Arbiters, ay and while they meet, at any Day and
Place they found convenient, with power of Prorogation, without any particular
Day, for giving their Sentence blank, or filled up, because the Decree
Arbitral was not within a year of the Date of the Submission, nor any
Prorogation during that time.

Dam Elizabeth Dowglass and Sir Robert Sinclar of Longformacus contra Lord of
Wedderburn. Eodem die.
THe Lady Longformacus, as Heir to her Goodsire, William Douglas of Eveling,
who was Donatar to the Escheat and Liferent of John Stewart of Coldinghame,
pursues the Lord of Wedderburn, for the Teinds of his Lands, which Teinds
pertained to the Abbots of Coldinghame. The Defender alleged absolvitor,
because he has Tack to run, flowing from the Earl of Hoom, who was Infeft in
the Lordship of Coldinghame^ and before that was Commendator thereof by His
Majesty. 2ly. John Stewart had ratified all Rights, flowing from the Earl of
Hoom; and consequently this Tack after which, the Donatar of his Escheat could
not challenge the same; for the Ratification is equivalent, as if the Tack were
granted by the Ratifier. The Pursuer answered, that the Defense upon the Tack,
and the Earl of Hooms Right ought to be Repelled, because the Earl of Hoomes
Right, is Reduced by the Parliament 1621. on this consideration, that the Earl
of Bothwel being Commendator of Coldinghame, had demitted the same in his
Majesty's hands, whereupon the said John Stewart his Son, was provided by the
King, Commendator of Coldinghame, and thereafter the Earl of Bothwel being
Forefault, the said John and his other Children were Dishabilitate, and
declared incapable to bruik and joy his Land and Heritage, or to succeed to any
Person within this Realm, by Sentence of Parliament; whereupon the King
provided the Earl of Hoom to be Commendator of Coldinghame; and thereafter on
the Earls own Resignation, Infeft him therein, in an erected Lordship, and
thereafter in the Parliament 1621. The King and Estates, upon express
consideration, that John Stewart was an Infant, no ways accessory to his
Fathers Crimes, did therefore annul his Dishabilitation, and Rehabilitate him,
and declared that he should have Right to the Abbacy of Coldinghame, in the
same manner as he had before his Dishabilitation; and Resci^ded all Rights and
Infeftments of the said Abbacy, granted by His Majesty; to any Person of the
said Abbacy, since the said Dishabilitation^ in so far as the samine might be
prejudicial to John Stewart's Provision, that he had before. After all which,
John Stewart upon his own Resignation, was Infeft in the Property of
Coldinghame; so that the Earl of Hoom's Right being Reduced in Parliament, and
falling in consequence with John Stewarts D^shabilitation; whereupon it was
founded: the Defenders Tack following thereupon^ falls also in Consequence, as
was already found by the Lords, in Anno 1628. betwixt the said William Douglas
of Evelen and the Lord of Wedderburn, conform to an Interlocutor, Extracted
and produced; which is sufficient inter easdem parts, and cannot be
questioned, super eisdem deductis now; albeit at that time Wedderburn past from
his compearance, and so the Decree against him was in absence, yet the
Interlocutor was ordained to be Extracted against him by the Lords, which is
sufficient: and as for the Ratification of the Tacks granted by the Earl of
Hoom, the samine was after John Stewart had Resigned his Comendatorship, and
before he was Infeft in Property. The Defender answered; First, That the said
Reduction of the Earl of Hoom's Right, was without calling of the Defender: or
of the Earl of Hoom himself 2ly. It mentions no particular Right, or any
Person, but in general, all Right; and so is but a private Right, impetrat from
the Parliament, without hearing of Parties; and therefore falls under the Act
of Parliament, salvo jure. And as to the former Interlocutor of the Lords. The
reason why the Lords sustained the said Rescissory Act, was because they found
themselves not competent to Judge, as to Sentences of Parliament, or to annul
the same, upon the not calling of the Parties, in respect that the Act salvo
1621. relates to Ratifications; but not to such Sentences as this: but by Act
salvo, 1633. It is expressly declared, that that Act, and all former Acts salvo,
should not only extend to Ratifications; but to all other private Acts impetrat
without hearing of Parties, and prejudicial to other Parties Rights: and
therefore now the Lords ought to proceed upon the Parties Right, without
consideration of that Act Rescissory.

2ly. The Act of Parliament Prohibits and annuls all Restitution of
Forefaulture by way of Grace, in so far as may be prejudicial to these, who
bona fide, acquired Rights from the King, medio tempore: and so the
Rehabilitation of John Stewart, cannot prejudge the Earl of Hoom: or the
Defender who had Right from the Earl. It was answered for the Pursuer, that
there was no difference in the two Acts salvo jure; albeit the last was more
express then the first, containing the same in effect. 2ly. John Stewart being
Dishabilitat by the Parliament, without Citation or Crime, might justly be
Rahabilitate, eodem modo, without Citation, and that not by way of Grace, but
in Justice, as not accessory to the Crimes^ and albeit Forefaultures may not be
taken away by way of Reduction, by the Act of Parliament, 1584. cap. 135. yet
that cannot be extended to the Dishabilitation of their Children, so that the
Parliament doing nothing prejudicial to any Parties Right, but restoring John
Stewart to his just Right, eo ipso, the Earl of Hooms Right fell in
consequence, as founded upon John Stewarts Dishabilitation, and with it the
Defenders Tack.

The Lords Repelled the Defense upon the Tack, in respect of the Reply, for
albeit the Act of Parliament, 1633. be much larger then the Act salvo, 1621. so
that thereby the Lords might have cognosced upon John Stewarts Rehabilitation
as without Citation, if it had wronged any other Persons Right, but finding
that it was an Act of Justice, wronging no Persons Right, they found the same
Relevant.

Town of Edinburgh contra Sir William Thomson. June 6. 1665.
THe ordinar Council of Edinburgh, having Deposed Sir William from his Office
of Town Clerk, he raised a Reduction of the Sentence, on four Reasons; first,
that the samine was null, because it proceeded without Citation, or necessar
Solemnities of Process. 2ly. Because the Town could not be Judge in their own
Cause. 3ly. Because by the Set, or the Kings Decree Arbitral, for the
Government of the Town, no Person could be admitted to any Office or Benefice
therein, but by the great Council consisting of the ordinar Council and their
Deacons; and consequently none could be Deposed from such Offices, but by the
same great Council, and this Sentence was by the ordinar Council. 4ly. That the
Sentence was exorbitant and unjust, in Deposing him for an Omission, sine dolo,
lata culpa, aut damno.

The Lords having discussed the fourth Reason, and heard the whole Dispute at
length in praesentia. The Defender after Interlocutor, but not pronounced on
the fourth Reason, borrowed the Process, and refused to re-deliver it. The Town
called upon a Copy, and represented the manner of abstracting the Process. The
question was, what should be done, and whither Sir William might before
Litiscontestation, or any Interlocutor pronounced, take up his Process.

The Lords admitted Protestation on the Copy, and ordained an Act of Sederunt,
prohibiting the Clerks to give up any Process to the Pursuer, after it was
Dispute to the full in all the Members thereof, though no Interlocutor were
past, or pronounced thereupon, lest after so long Debate, and hearing, the
Lords should at the discretion of Parties, lifting their Process, lose their
time, but what had been Dispute, should be advised, de recenti.

June 8. 1665.
The Lords upon Supplication, ordained an Appryzing to be allowed, albeit not
only the Debtor against whom it was deduced, was dead, but the threescore days
were long since expired, and ordained the allowance to be Registrat, in respect
that the late Act of Parliament, declares that such Appryzings as are not
Registrat within threescore, shall not be preferred to posterior Appryzings
first Registrate, so that the Lords thought, that where the allowance was
Registrate, albeit after the threescore days, it would be preferred to any
other Appryzing Registrat thereafter.

Eodem die.
The Lords intimat to the Writers, Keeper of the Signet, and Clerk of the
Bills, an Act of Sederunt, prohibiting general Letters, upon Presentations or
Collations of Ministers, whether having Benefices, or modified Stipends, until
every Incumbent obtain a Decree conform, albeit they should produce their
Predecessors Decree conform, or a Decree of Locality, containing the Stipend
particularly.

Swintoun contra Notman. June 10. 1665.
SWintoun in his Testament, having named his Wife Tutrix to his Children, and
Notman and others, Overseers. His Relict within a year, was married, and so her
Tutory ended; shortly after Notman received from her a number of several
Tickets, belonging to the Defunct, and gave his Recept Thereof, bearing, that
he had received them in his Custody, and keeping^ thereafter, he uplifted the
Sums, contained in some of the Tickets, and gave a Discharge to the Relict and
second Husband, of some particulars, and consented with the Pupil, to a
Discharge to a Debtor, which expressly boor, him to be Tutor Testamentar, and
did intromet with the Rents of some Tenements, and Disposed upon some Sheep,
whereupon Swintoun the Pupil pursues him as Tutor or Pro-tutor, not only for
all he Intrometted with, but for the Annualrent thereof, and for all the rest
of the Defuncts means, which he ought to have intrometted with, and to have
called the Tutrix to an account therefore, and condescended upon the insight
and plenishing of the Defuncts House, the Goods in his Shop, he being a
Merchant, the Debts in his Count Books, and these due by his Tickets, not only
received by Notman, but by others, and for the remander of his Sheep, and other
Movables, and for the rest of his Rents, not uplifted by Notman. It was
alleged for Notman; 1. That that member of the Libel was not Relevant,
whereby he was pursued, not only for that he Intrometted with, but what he
omitted, because a Pro-tutor is not obliged as far as a Tutor for the Pupils
whole Means, but this far only, that whatsoever he intromets with, as to that
he is obliged as a Tutor, to employ it, and preserve it, and so is liable for
Annualrent therefore, and in that he differs from another, negotiorum gestor,
who is not liable for Annualrent, but he is not liable for other particulars of
other kinds, that he meddled not with, as albeit he had meddled with the Tickets,
yet that would not oblige him to meddle with the Count Books, Plenishing, or
Cattle; there being no Law to oblige him, neither was there any possibility,
that he could meddle therewith, being neither obliged, nor able so to do,
having no active title in his Person; for Overseer, non est momen juris, and by
our Custom, i^ does oblige to nothing, but is as the fidei commissa, were in
the ancient Roman Law in the arbitriment of him, to whom they were committed
without any obligation or legal compulsion, ex mera pietate, so that his being
Overseer^^ could oblige him in nothing, and his meddling thereafter to preserve
the means of the Pupil, when his Tutrix and Mother had superinduced a second
Husband, ought not to be hurtful to him; otherwise no Overseer will ever
meddle in any case, with any thing of the Pupils, whereby their Means may be
destroyed. 2ly. He cannot be liable as Tutor notwithstanding of the Discharge,
subscribed by him, hoc nomine; because albeit that would prove him Tutor, where
the case did not otherwise appear, seeing the contrair is manifest; that
whereas the Discharge bears him Tutor Testamentar. The Testament produced,
bears him only to be Overseer, and fa^sa designatio non obest. 3. The Ticket or
receipt of the Bonds cannot obliege him for all these Bonds, but such thereof,
whereof he uplifted the Money, and only from that time that he uplifted the
same; especially seeing the Ticket bears, that he received them in his
Custody, which any friend might do, especially an Overseer; and does not
import his purpose of Intromission. The Pursuer answered to the first, that his
Lybel was most Relevant, not only for Intromission, but Omission; because a
Pro-tutor in Law is obliged in all points as a Tutor, not only pro commissis
sed p^o omissis: and albeit he had no active Title, whereby to Intromet, that
cannot free him from being liable passive more then a vicious Intromettor, or
one behaving as Heir; but he ought either to have forborne, or procured to
himself a Tutory dative, and unless Pro-tutors be universally liable, Pupils
will be destroyed, because any body will meddle with their Means, knowing they
are liable but for what they meddle with, and the A^nualrent thereof, which
perhaps will not be made out against them; but if they be universally liable,
they will either wholly abstain, or orderly Intromet, by procuring a Title: and
albeit Overseers be not liable in the first place, yet they are tutores
honorari, lyble after the other Tutors are discussed. As to the third, the
receipt of the Bonds, albeit it bear in Custody, yet it is proven by the Writs
produced, quod se immiscuit, by uplifting the sums contained in some of the
Bonds, and therefore is liable for the whole.

The Lords having heard and considered this case at length, found, that seeing
there was no Law nor Custom of ours to make a Pro-tutor liable in all points as
a Tutor, and that the Civil Law oblieges not us, but only we ought to consider
the equity and expediency thereof, and therefore they found, that they could
not condemn the Defender for omissions, seeing there is no Antecedent, Law, nor
Custom: and therefore found, that as Overseer, he was obliged to nothing, and
that as Intrometter, he was liable for what he intrometted with, and the
annualrent thereof, after his Intromission, and found him liable for the hail
Bonds in his Tickets, seeing he meddled with a part of the Money thereof, and
found, that if he had meddled with a part of the Sheep, that would make him
liable for the whole Sheep of that Flock, and the Annualrent thereof, and found
that his being Designed Tutor, contrair to the Testament, did not instruct: but
the Lords Declared, that in cases occurring in all time coming^ they would find
Protutors liable in all points as Tutors, and ordained an Act of Sederunt to be
made thereupon and published in the House, to all the whole Advocats, that none
pretend Ignorance.

Sir Alexander Hoom contra June 10. 1665.
(...) pursues for mails and Duties of certain Lands. It was alleged for the
Tennents, no Process, because they offered them to prove, that they were
Tennents by payment of Mail and Duty to Sir Alexander Hoom their Minister,
before intenting of this Cause, and he was not called. 2ly. Absolvitor, because
they were Tennents to the said Sir Alexander, who had a right of an Appryzing,
and Diligence thereupon, anteriour to the Pursuers Right. The Pursuer answered
to the first, non relevat, in an action of Mails and Duties; albeit it would be
relevant in a Removing. In which two Actions, the Lords have still kept that
difference, that in Removings the Heretor should be called, because thereby his
Possession was to be interverted: but in Mails and Duties, the Tennents might
Suspend on Double Poinding, and thereupon call both Parties: Or if a Tennent
did collude, the master, might use the Tennents name, but double Poinding could
not have place in Removings.

To the second, it is not competent to the Tennents to Dispute their Masters
Right, which is to them jus tertij; but they should have intimate to their
Master, to compear and defend his own Right, who if he will, compear and
produce his Interest, may be heard.

The Lords Repelled both Defenses, unless Sir Alexander compear and produce his
Interest.

A Letter from the KING. June 14. 1665.
THe Lord Ballantine The saurer Depute compeared, and produced a Letter from
His Majesty to the Lords, bearing, that His Majesty having heard a doubt moved
before him, whether Declarators of Ward, Non-entries, etc. should be discussed
before the Lords of Session, or Lords of Exchequer; His Majesty Declared His
Pleasure, that in the mean time, till H^s Majesty got further evidence, and
clearing therein, such Actions should be pursued before the Lords of Session.

Which Letter was ordained to be Recorded in the Books of Sederunt.

Aikman contra June 15. 1665.
AIkman having Charged upon a Bond of borrowed Money. Suspended, and alleged
that the Charge was truly for a Prentis^ fee, for a Royto a Writter, who was
obliged to Educat him three years, and it is offered to be proven by
Witnesses, that he beat the Prentise, and put him away with evil usage, within
a year and an half, and so can have no more at most, then effeirand to that
time. The Charger answered, that he could not devide the Probation, in one
single Defense, both by Oath and Witnesses, and that he could not take away
Writting by Witnesses, in whole or in part.

The Lords sustained the Probation by Oath and Witnesses, as proponed.

Cruikshank contra Cruikshank. June 16. 1665.
GEorge Cruikshank pursues the Rel^ct and Executrix of Cruicksshank his Uncle,
for payment of a Bond of 400. Pound. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because
the Defunct had granted an Assignation of certain Sums of Money to David
Cruikshanks, the Pursuers Brother, wherein there was a Provision in favors of
the Pursuer, that the said David should pay to him a^thousand Pound, which must
be understood to be in satisfaction of this Debt, in the first place, nam nemo
presumitur donare quamdiu deb^t. The Pursuer answered, that the foresaid Rule
has many exceptions, for it being but a presumption, a stronger presumption in
the contrair will elide it as in this case. The Defunct had no Children, and
had a considerable fortone, and the Pursuer and the said David his Brother,
were the Defuncts nearest of Kin: and albeit the foresaid Disposition be not in
the express terms of a Legacy, yet it is donatio mortis causa; for it contains
an express power to the Defunct, to Dispone otherwise, during his life, and in
another Provision therein, it bears expressly, to be in satisfaction of Debt,
due to that other Party, and says not so as to the Pursuer; all which are
stronger extensive presumptions, that the Defunct meaned to Gift no less then
the whole thousand pounds.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

William Wright contra George Shiel. Eodem die.
WIlliam Wright as assigney by John Shiel in Carlowrie, obtained Decree
against George Shiel in Nortoun as Heir to John Shiel his Brother^ for payment
of two Bonds. George Shiel Suspends on this Reason, that the Assignation was
gratuitous, without onerous Cause, which he offered to prove by the Assigneys
Oath, and offered to prove by the Cedents Oath that the Debt was satisfied.

The Lords having at length considered, and Debated this Case among themselves,
whether the Cedents Oath could prove against an Assigney, when the Assignation
was gratuitous, some were of opinion, that it could not, because nothing can
prove but Writ or two Witnesses, or Oath of Party, and the Cedent is not the
party, but the Assigney: and albeit the Cedent could be a Witness, he is but
one; and because it is a Rule with us, that the Cedent cannot Depone in
prejudice of the Assigney, unless the Charge be to the Cedents behove: and we
have no Exception, whether it be gratuitous or onerous; but the most part were
of opinion, that in gratuitous Assignations, the Cedents Oath should prove;
because an Assigney is but Procurator, in rem suam, and does not proceed upon
his own Right, but, utitur jure authoris: and therefore, albeit for Commerce,
our Custom has not allowed the Oath of the Cedent, in prejudice of the
Assigney; Yet the case in a gratuitous Assignation, has neither been Debated
nor decided; and therefore in it, the Cedents should be sufficient, seeing it
cannot be presumed, that he who voluntarly gifted, will swear to his Assigneys
prejudice; and that truly the Cedent is Party, and the Assigney pursues but as
Procurator, in rem suam. And seeing we have no Law regulating this case, equity
and expedience ought to rule it: but in equity no man can put his Debtor in a
worse condition, without his consent, either as to the matter, or as to the
manner of Probation; and in expedience, the excluding of the Cedents Oath in
this case, opens a way for Fraud, that after Debts are paid, they may be
assigned, even freely, and the Debtor is excluded from his Probation of the
payment.

The Lords before answer, Ordained the Assigneys Oath to be taken, whether
Assignation was for a Cause onerous or not.

Bruces contra Earl of Mortoun^ Eodem die.
BRuces pursues the Earl of Mortoun for payment of a Bond, who alleged that
the Bond was assigned by the Defunct, and the Assignation intimat, and a
Decree obtained against him thereupon. The Pursuers answered, that this was
jus tertij to the Defender, who could not Dispute the Assigneys Right. The
Defender answered, that it was exclusio juris agentis.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, as being super jure tertij, and decerned, but
ordained Suspension to pass, without Caution or Consignation, that the Assigney
may be called, and Dispute his Right.

Gideon Murray contra June 17. 1665.
GIdeon Murray having obtained Decree against for certain Merchant Ware,
wherein he was holden as confessed, and thereafter reponed, and the Decree
turned in a Libel. The Receipt of the Goods was found probable, pro ut de jure,
and was accordingly proven, and the Cause being concluded, and the Depositions
advised. It was alleged for the Defender, first, that he produced and
instantly verified, that the Pursuer had granted him a Bond, after the
furnishing of the Account of a greater sum, which must be presumed to have
included satisfaction of the Account, 2ly. The Decree was more then three year
after the furnishing, and so was not probable by Witnesses; but that manner of
Probation was prescribed by the Act of Parliament. The Pursuer answered to the
first, that both those Exceptions were competent and omitted, and now after
Probation taken; there was no reason to sustain that alleadgence, for after
Litiscontestation, no new exceptions can be admitted, unless they be instantly
verified and emergent, or at least new come to knowledge, as this is not, for
it was obvious, being founded upon so known a Law, as to the Prescription: and
as to the other, it is but a weak presumption, no way relevant, unless the
posterior Bond had expressed to have been after Count and Reckoning. The Defender
answered, that the Lords might ex nobile officio, repone Parties to Defenses,
instantly verified, after Litiscontestation^ and albeit they ordinarily repone
them when the Exceptions are emergent, or new come to knowledge: yet in other
Cases, ex officio, they may, as when there is so pregnant a presumption
concurring. 2ly Albeit Prescription hinder Pursuits active: Yet seeing the
Defender was Creditor by Bond, in a greater Sum. The Pursuer needed not pursue
for the Account, quia intus habuit, and the other Party might have compensed
upon the Bond; and therefore, as in the Civil Law, in debitis naturalibus and
non civilibus licet non dat actionem dat tamen exceptionem: so here the Pursuer
may except upon account after three years.

The Lords found the presumption not Relevant, and found that the manner of
Probation being prescribed, it could not be made use of, either by Action or
Exception, albeit there was a compensation competent, yet it befell not, ipso
jure, seeing it was not liquid, but liquidable by the other Parties Oath. But as
to reponing in this state of the Process, though many of the Lords were in the
contrary, yet seeing the exception was but a Prescription, which is but by
positive Law, and odious, so that the Pursuer might as well have craved to be
reponed against the Prescription, as the Defender against his omission of a
palpable Defense, yet in respect of the Prescription, and that the Party was
poor, the Lords Reponed.

Christian Braidie contra Lord of Fairny. June 21. 1665.
CHristian Braidy Relict of James Sword, having Inhibite George Glassfuird upon
his Bond, pursues a Reduction of a Disposition, granted by George to the Lord
of Fairny, of certain Lands, as being done after her Inhibition. Fairny having
produced the Disposition, it bear to be Holograph, whereupon it was alleged,
that it was null by the Act of Parliament, requiring all Writs of importance to
be subscribed before Witnesses; and this Disposition wanted Witnesses. The
Defender offered to prove it was Holograph. The Pursuer Replied, that the
question being de data, not that it was subscribed, but when it was subscribed,
whether prior or posterior to the Inhibition, Witnesses could not be received,
where the question was not against the granter of the Writ, or his heir, but
against a third Party.

The Lords before answer, did appoint Witnesses to be examined, omni exceptione
majores, who being now Examined, both Deponed that they saw the Disposition
subscribed, and that it was long before the Inhibition.

It was then alleged, that this being done, but before answer, it was entire
to Discuss the Relevancy of the alleadgence, whether a Date might be instructed
by Witnesses. 2ly. Albeit Witnesses omni exceptione majores were receivable,
for such an effect, that these Witnesses were not such, the one being but a
Town Officer, and the other Procuratorfiscal of a Sheriff Court, especially
seeing there were strong presumptions of fraud, as that nothing followed upon
this Disposition, that it remained Clandestine for several years, that thereby
the Disponer becoming Bankrupt, had excluded some of his Creditors, and
preferred others, and that there was no penuria testium, seeing both their
Witnesses assert they saw it subscribed, and the one Deponed, that he Dited it
so, that their Names might easily have been insert; and therefore it must be
thought, it was done for some Fraudulent intent, as to be of an anterior Date
to the Inhibition: and therefore in such a case, the Witnesses should be
Persons of Fame, and known Reputation. It was answered, that the Witnesses
adduced, were sufficient, seeing they were above exception. Frst, because they
were publicly called to the Bar, and received without any objection, so that
now none is competent. 2ly. That there is no relevant Exception yet alleged,
for the being a Town Officer, is no legal Exception, neither to be of a mean
condition, nor to be of a small Estate, if he were worth the Kings Unlaw and
for the presumptions, they were but mere conjectures; for it was free for a man
to make his Disposition all with his own hand, or before Witnesses, and what
his motives has been to do it, cannot be known, and so ought not to be presumed
fraudulent, nam nullum vitium presumitur.

The Lords having fully considered this case, and having Debated, whether
Witnesses at all were receivable to astruct the Date of a holograph Writ; and
also, whether these Witnesses adduced were sufficient: they found that in
respect of the presumptions of Fraud, adduced these two Witnesses, were not
sufficient to astruct without further Adminic^es, either by Witnesses of
unquestionable Credit, or by Writ.

Procuratorfiscal of the Commissariot of Edinburgh contra Thomas Fairholm. June
23. 1665.
THomas Fairholm being Charged to give up an Inventar of the Goods and Gear
pertaining to umquhil Alexander Deninstoun, whose Daughter he had married. He
Suspends on this Reason, that the Defunct had granted a Disposition to one of
his Daughters, of his hail moveable Goods, and sums of Money, so that he had
nothing the time of his Death, and there needed no Confirmation, but he might
lawfully possess, by virtue of his Disposition; and there was no Law to force
Persons in such a Case to Confirm, neither had it ever been sustained by the
Lords. It was answered, that it was juris publici, to have the Goods of
Defuncts Confirmed, that nearest of Kin, Children, Creditors, and Legatars,
might know the condition thereof; and this Defuncts movables, albeit Disponed,
yet not Delivered, remained in bonis defuncti, and so behoved to be Confirmed.

The Lords having Read the Disposition, and finding it to be general, omnium
bonorum, that he had, or should have, the time of his Death, and there being
nothing alleged of any onerous Cause, or that it was before his sickness,
albeit the Case was new, yet they found there was necessity of Confirmation in
this Case: But if it had been a Disposition only of special things, as Bonds or
Goods, or had been for any onerous Cause, or had been made in leidg pousti, and
any symbolical Delivery, the Lords were not so clear in it, but resolved to
hear such Cases in their own presence, when they should occur.

Colonel James Montgomery contra Wallace and Bouie. June 24. 1665.
THe Colonel as Heretor of the Miln of Tarboltoun, having pursued Bouie for
abstracted Multures of Drumlie. It was alleged for Bouie and Wallace of
Garricks, who had Disponed to him, with warrandice absolvitor; because Wallace
and his authors were Infeft in the Milns and Multures, before the Pursuers
Infeftment of the Miln. The Pursuer Replied, that the Thirlage was Constitute
by a Decree in Anno. 1569. against the Tennents of Drumlie therein mentioned.
The Defender answered; First, that the Heretor was not called. 2ly. That it did
not appear, that these Tennents did dwell in Drumlie Wallace, there being two
Drumlies lying contigue, one called the Dinks Drumlie, the other called Drumlie
Wallace. 3ly. That for any Possession, they offered them to prove that it was
interrupted from time to time, by going to other Milns. The Lords having
Ordained Witnesses to be Examined, hinc inde, whether the Tennents in the old
Decree, did possess Drumlie Wallace, or the Dinks Drumlie.

2ly. What Possession the Pursuer and his authors had. 3ly. What Interruptions
the Defender and their authors had, many Witnesses being Examined, hinc inde.
It was clear, that since the year 1653. when Capringtoun, the Pursuers author
died, there was no Possession, and there was not above twenty eight years
Possession, proven before, because there was no Witness of that age, that could
have been of Discretion forty years before the year 1653. but they found it
proven, that the Persons mentionate in the old Decree, or some of them were
Possessors of Drumlie Wallace, and also there was a Tack produced, set by the
Pursuers author to one of the Tennents of Drumlie, wherein it was provided,
that the Tennent should relieve him of the Multures, and did not express what
Miln.

The Lords found the old Decree, although the Master was not called thereto,
was not sufficient alone, yet with a long Possession thereafter, they found the
same was sufficient to Constitute the astriction, and found the Interruptions
by going to other Milns, were not so frequent and long, but that they might
have been private and Clandestine, and the Probation during memory, before this
contraversie was found to instruct anterior Possession, to complete
prescription.

Irwing contra Strachan. Eodem die.
ALexander Strachan as Assigney by Patrick Gordon, Charges John Irving to make
payment of a Bond of 500. merks, which being Suspended on this Reason, that the
Cedent was Debtor to the Suspender in a greater sum, being obliged for the
grouth of certain Lands, of the Cropped 1633. and certain Bolls of Meal, as the
Duty thereof. The Charger answered, that this was not liquidat against him, nor
against his Cedent, before his Assignation. The Suspender answered, that it was
liquidate before in so far as there was a Decree of Liquidation obtained
against the principal Party for whom the Cedent was Cautioner in the Contract,
which must be sufficient against the Cautioner, albeit he was not called,
because his obligation was but accessory, unless he could instruct Collusion;
and this Decree of liquidation, proceeds upon Probation of Witnesses.

The Lords sustained the Compensation, and found the Liquidation sufficient,
being against the Cautioner, though he was not called, and against this
Assigney, seeing the Decree was before the Assignation.

Alexander Ferguson contra Steuart of Askeoge. June 27. 1665.
ALexander Ferguson having obtained a Presentation from the King, as one of the
Prebenders of the Chapel-Royal, and thereupon a Decree conform; and having
Charged Steuart of Askeoge, he gives in his special Charge, that the Paroch of
Inchgarth, which is now annexed to Rothesay, belonged to his Pr^bendrie, as
being a part of the Patrimony of the Chapel-Royal. It was answered for Askeoge,
that he bruiks the Teinds by virtue of a Tack granted by Mr. Ninian Steuart
Minister of Rothesay, whereof this Kirk, now annexed is a part, and that there
is nothing appears to instruct that these Teinds were ever Mortified to the
Chapel-Royal, or that the Chapel-Royal was in Possession thereof. The Pursuer
answered, that seeing he had the Kings Gift, and Decree conform, it was
sufficient, unless the Defender would allege, that the said Mr. Ninian
Steuart had a better Right, or was in Possession; for the King being the Common
Author, and Fountain of Rights, His Majesty's Gift is sufficient against any
that show not a better Right: and as for the Tack produced, it is null, being
for nineteen years, without consent of the Patron. The Defender answered, that
albeit both Parties were in acquirenda possessione; yet decimae debentur
Parocho ejusque praesumuntur nisi aliter appareat: and therefore unless these
Teinds have been Transmitted from the Parson of the Paroch, by long Possession,
or Mortification, they are his, and the Kings Gift alone, cannot take them from
his; but here the Parson has been in Possession, by Setting the Tack produced,
which is sufficient, as to Possession, albeit it were null by Exception, as it
is not; and the nullity thereof is only competent to the Person of the granter,
and not to this Pursuer.

The Lords found the Kings Gift and Decree conform, with Institution and
Collation, was not sufficient, unless either the Mortification of these Teinds,
or the Prebenders Possession were instructed.

Mr. Walter Caut contra James Loch. Eodem die.
MR: Walter Caut having pursued James Loch and his Mother as Tutrix, for her
Interest, for the Mails and Duties of some Appryzed Lands, and the quantities
being referred to the Tutrix Oath, she refused to Depone, alleging that she
had forgotten the quantities, whereupon the Pursuer craved her to be holden as
confessed, upon the Rental given in by him, as if she had acknowledged the same.

The Lords found she could not be holden as confessed, being not the Party, but
Tutrix, but they found that she might be forced to Depone, by Horning and
Caption, as other Witnesses.

Alexander Monteith contra Anderson. June 28. 1665.
THere being mutual Reductions betwixt Monteith and Anderson, the former having
Right to an Appryzing, led in Anno 1619. and the other Mr. John Anderson having
adjudged in Anno 1656. Mr. John Anderson insisted on this Reason, that
Monteiths Apprizing proceeded was on a Sum of 5000. Merks, due by James Nisbet,
the common debtor to Gilbert Gourlay, after that James was Rebel, at Mr. John
Andersons authors Instance: after which, no Bond granted, could prejudge the
other Creditor, having used Diligence before, but the Bond is null by the Act
of Parliament 1621. against Bankrupts. It was answered for Monteith, that that
Act was only against Fraudulent Dispositions, between confident Persons,
without Cause onerous^ but here a Bond of borrowed Money, was onerous, and no
man was thereby hindered to borrow Money. Anderson answered, that the Narrative
of the Rebels Bond, bearing borrowed Money, could not instruct against a
Creditor using prior Diligence.

This the Lords Repelled.

Anderson insisted upon this Reason, that Gourleys Bond was granted by James
Nisbet, James and William Arnolds, all Conjunct Principals, without a Clause of
Relief; and this Bond was assigned by Gourley, with this express Provision,
that no Execution should proceed thereupon, or upon the Bond, or Inhibition
against the Arnolds: and so if the Assigney had been pursuing James Nisbit for
all, he might have answered, that the Assigney had accepted his Assignation,
with this provision, that James Nisbet could not use Execution against the
other two Co-principals; and therefore he being excluded from his Relief, could
be only liable for his third part, for he would not have subscribed the Bond,
but upon consideration of his Relief. Monteith answered, that all the three
principals being bound conjunctly and severally, the Creditor might renounce
all Execution against two of them, and yet crave the whole from the third, and
there was no more done in this case: and albeit there be no Clause of mutual
relief expressed, yet hoc in est de natura rei: So that albeit Nisbet, by virtue
of the Assignation, thought it had been transferred to him could not have
pursued the two Arnots, yet by the obliegement of mutual Relief, employed he
might, not as Assigney, but as coreus debendi. Anderson answered, that if the
Clause had born only a Provision, that no execution should pass upon the
Assignation, it might have been consistant; but it bears, that no Execution
should pass upon the Assignation, or Bond.

The Lords found, that the Obliegement of mutual Relief, was employed, where
parties were bound conjunctly and severally, albeit not expressed, and that the
Provision related only to the Bond, quantum ad creditorum, and did not restrict
the employed obliegement of the Co-principal, and therefore repelled this Reason
also.

Robert Keill contra John Seaton. June 28. 1665.
GEorge Seaton as principal, and the said John Seaton his Cautioner having
granted Bond to Robert Keill, and being Charged thereupon, both did suspend,
and having alleged payment, they succumbed, and were Decerned; John Suspends
again, and raises Reduction upon minority and lesion. The Charger answered,
First, That this Reason was competent and omitted in the former Decree. 2ly.
That proponing payment, did homologat the Debt, as if an Heir proponed payment,
he would not be admitted fo renounce thereafter, or to deny the passive Title.
The Suspender answered, that the former Process being in a Suspension, nothing
was competent but what was instantly verified. and so minority and laesion was
not competent. The Charger answered, that the Decree of Registration was
turned in a Libel, as being Registrat at the Assigneys Instance, not having
Intimat during the Cedents Life, and at that time the Suspender had raised his
Reduction, and so it was competent. The Suspender answered, that he was not
obliged to insist in his Reduction, and that the reasons thereof were not
proper, even in an ordinary Action, but only by a Reduction. It was further
alleged, that competent and omitted, took no place in Suspensions.

The Lords had no regard to the last alleadgence, but repelled the alleadgence
upon homologation, and upon competent and omitted, in respect that minority and
laesion is neither competent by way of Suspension or exception, but by way of
Action of Reduction, wherein the Suspender was not obliged to insist.

James Pitcairn contra Isobel Edgar. June 28. 1665.
UMquhil David Edgar by his Contract of Marriage, provided 4000. merks to be
paid by him and his Heir of the first Marriage, which failling, any other his
Heirs, to the Bairns of the second Marriage. The portion of the Daughters
payable at their age of 18. and the Sons at 21. with five merks yearly of
annualrent, after his death, for the Childrens subsistence. Isobel one of the
Children, having married after her Fathers death, James Pitcairn her Husbands
Creditor, pursues for the sum, as belonging to the Husband, jure mariti. It was
answered, that the sum was Heretable, bearing Annualrent, and the Term of
payment of the Annualrent was come before the marriage, and therefore it did
not belong to the Husband, jure mariti. It was answered, that it was not
properly an Annualrent, but an aliment of five percent, and that the Term of
payment of the Annualrent, was after the Act of Parliament 1641. declaring such
Bonds moveable: and albeit the Fisk and Relict be there excluded; yet the jus
mariti is not, but is only added by the Act 1661.

The Lords found, that seeing this Provision bear Annualrent, whether more or
less, and that the marriage was after the Term of payment, that it was
Heretable, and fell not to the Husband, jure mariti, but only the Annualrents
thereof, till his death, albeit there was no Contract of Marriage, nor a
Tocher, and that the Husband had after the marriage given some provision to the
Wife.

Mr. George Norvel contra Margaret Hunter. June 29. 1665.
MR. George Norvel having Apprized certain Lands, pursued for Mails and Duties
against Margaret Hunter Possessor, she compeared, and proponed a Defense, that
she stood Infeft in the Lands, by a Right from her Husband before the
Appryzing, but for proving thereof, she only produced her Seasine.

Which the Lords found not to prove without a Warrant, and therefore Decerned.

She Suspends, and now produces her Contract of Marriage, as the Warrant of the
Seasine, and offers to make Faith, that she had found it out since the Decree:
And farther alleged, that through neglect of the Advocats, or Clerks, her
Defense was not proponed, no ways acknowledging the quantities libelled, which
she offers to prove to be exorbitant. It was answered, first, that praetextu
instrumentorum de novo repertorum sententiae non sunt retractandae. 2ly. The
Contract produced is not the Warrant of the Seasine, but a Bond granted for
Implement of the Contract, and relating to the Seasine.

The Lords Reponed the Suspender, as to the circumduction of the Term, she
making Faith, etc. and found the Contract of Marriage a sufficient Adminicle,
to astruct the Seasine, seeing it related to a Bond for the same Cause, but
refused to Repone her as to the quantities.

Heretors of the Miln of Keithick contra Fevers. Eodem die.
THe Heritors of the Miln of Keithick, pursues certain Fevers for abstract
Multures, who alleged absolvitor, because they are Infeft, ab eodem authore,
without astriction before the Pursuer. It was replied the Pursuer is Infeft in
this Miln, which is the Miln of the Barony, and per expressum in the Multures
of the Lands in question; and offers to prove, that there is a distinct
in-sucken Multure, and out-sucken Multure, and that the Pursuer has been in
Possession of the In-sucken Multure, these 40. years bygone, out of their Lands.
Duplyed the Defender offers him to prove, that the Possession has been
Interrupted by his going to other Milns frequently, and without any challenge,
or Sentence against them: And seeing the coming to a Miln is but voluntatis,
unless they enacted themselves so to do. And that the Pursuers Infeftment,
though express, was latent and unknown to the Defender, all that is alleged
cannot infer an astriction.

The Lords Repelled the Duply, and thought that going to other Milns sometimes,
as is ordinar in all Thirlage, was no sufficient Interruption, if they came
ordinarily to this Miln, and paid in-sucken Multure, and therefore found the
Reply relevant.

Richard Thorntoun contra William Miln. Eodem die.
THorntoun as Assigney by Patrick Seaton, having obtained Decree before the
Baillies of Edinburgh, against William Miln, he Suspends and alleadges
Compensation, upon a Count due by the Cedent, and a Ticket subjoyned by him,
acknowledging the Count to be due, subscribed before Witnesses, which must
prove against this Assigney. It was answered, that the Ticket wanted a date,
and so could not instruct it self to be anterior to the Assignation. It was
replied, that it was offered to be proven by the Witnesses insert, that it was
truly subscribed before the Assignation.

Which the Lords sustained.

Stevenson contra Crawfoord. June 30. 1665.
STevinson being surrogat Executor dative, ad omissa, and having license to
pursue, insists against Crawford for a Debt of the Defuncts, alleged omitted
forth of the principal Testament. The Defense was, no Process, until the
Executor Dative, ad omissa, be Confirmed; but he cannot insist upon a License
to pursue, because the principal Executor having made Faith, that the Inventar
given up by him, is a full Inventar, any that crave to be Dative, ad omissa,
are never admitted, but upon certain knowledge, and so must Confirm, and gets
no License.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, especially seeing the Pursuer was a Creditor.

Younger contra Iohnstoun. Eodem die.
AN Porteous Merchant in Edinburgh, having died Infeft in several Tenements in
Edinburgh, above 50. years ago, his Relict possessing them as Liferenter to
this time. Shortly after his Death, one Patrick Porteous was Served nearest and
lawful Heir to him, and thereupon Infeft, so that his Right came by progress to
Iohnstoun, 40. years after; Younger takes a Right from one Stephen Porteous,
residenter in Polland, and gets him Served nearest Heir to the Defunct, and
thereupon raises Reduction of the first Retour, and all the Infeftments
following thereupon, Defense absolvitor, because the Defenders Author being
Served Heir 40. years before the Pursuers Authors Service. It is prescribed,
and likeways being Infeft 40. years since, all quarrel against, the Infeftment
is prescribed: For the first Point, they condescend upon the second Act of
Parliament, anent Prescription, of the Reduction of Retours, which bears, that
if they be not pursued within 20. year, they shall never be quarrellable
thereafter.

The Lords having considered this case at length, most part thought that the
Retour could not prescrive by the first Act of Parliament, because it excepted
Minors, and absents out of the Country, which they found not to be meaned of
Absents, Reipublicae causa, but of any absence, nor that it fell not directly
within the second Act, which bears expressly, Retours to have been reduced
thereafter, should be only reduceable within twenty year. Others thought the
Act might not be extended; but bearing expressly, to the future, it could not be
drawn back, and the Act of Prescription, 1617. meets not this case; for if
under the prescription of Actions, not pursued within forty year, Serving of
Persons to their Predecessors Heirs; were comprehended, it would impede any
Person to Serve themselves Heir to any Defunct, after forty year, which is yet
ordinar, and as to the Infefment, they fand, that it fell not in the Case of
the Act of Parliament 1617. because it was not cled with Possession, in respect
of the Liferenters life, whose possession behoved to be the possession of the
true Heir of her Husband.

But the Lords did not decide it, seeing the Case was rarely occuring, and
Johnstouns Infeftment very old, unquarrelled; and recomended the parties to
agree.

Mr. James Nasmith contra Alexander Bower. July 1. 1665.
THis being a concluded Cause, a Question arose, upon the Probation; an account
being produced between two Merchants, referred to Bowers Oath, that it was his
hand writ, and yet resting: he deponed it was his hand writ, but not resting.
The question arose, whether he behoved to condescend, and instruct how it was
paid; because, though the account written with his hand unsubscribed, was of
it self sufficient Probation, the quality was not competent; but he behoved to
prove payment, it being alleged that Merchants hand writ is sufficient: and
that a Note upon the back of a Bond, or foot of a Count, by the Debitors own
hand writ, though not subscribed, has been found probative.

The Lords found, that if this had been a current Compt-book, it would have
been probative, but having been only some feu scheduls of Paper, found it not
probative, without subscription, albeit it was acknowledged by the Oath, to be
the deponents hand writ.

John Boyd late Baillie in Edinburgh, contra Mr. William Kintore. July 4. 1665.
THere being mutual Reductions, betwixt Mr. William Kintore and John Boyd as to
the Rights of the Lands of Moutlothian. John Loyd deriving Right from Mr.
Robert Logan, to whom Logan of Coatfield, with consent of Mr. James Raith, and
who, for all Right he had to the Land of Mounlothian, disponed the same. And
Mr. William Kintore having Appryzed upon a Decree against Coatfield, as
Cautioner for a Tutor; and upon the Act of Caution inhibited. It was alleged
for John Boyd, that whereas, by a former Interlocutor the day of he having
objected against Kintor's Decree, that thereby the Tutor, and his Cautioner
were found liable to uplift the Annualrent, of Sums that were in the hands of
secure Creditors, which the Tutors had not uplifted, and to be liable for
Annualrent post finitam tutelam: now he produces a Decision, out of Dury, July
18. 1629. Nasmith contra Nasmith, whereby it was found, that a Tutor having
uplifted his Pupils Annualrent, though very considerable, was not liable for
any Annualrent therefore. 2ly. The reason of the Lords Decision then being,
that albeit the Tutor was not liable to uplift, and employ the Annualrent every
year, as it was due; yet he was liable, once in the Tutory: but it is offered
to be proven, that he died two years before the Tutory expired: in which time,
he might both have upl^fted this Annualrent, and re-imployed it: and therefore
being prevented by death, he ought to be free, both of the Annualrent it self,
and of the Annualrent thereof.

The Lords having considered the Decision, found it so short, and not to hold
forth fully the Case, notwithstanding thereof, they adhered to the former
Interlocutor, and found, that Tutors are oblidged to uplift, and once in their
Tutory, to re-imploy the Annualrents of the Pupil; albeit the Debtor were
secure, but if the Case had been of Rents of Lands, the Lords thought these
ought to have been uplifted yearly, and to be employed on Annualrent; but they
found the second alleadgance Relevant, not to free the Tutor of payment of the
Annualrent it self, though in secure hands, because he ought to have uplifted
it, and had it ready, but found him free of the Annualrent thereof, there being
a competent time, in which he might have given it forth, before the Pupillarity
past, if he had not been prevented by death; but ordained Kintore to assign to
Boyd the Right of the Annualrent, that he might recover the same from the
Debitors.

It was further alleged for Kintore, that Coatfield the common Author, his
Disposition to Mr. Robert Logan, John Boyds Author, was after Kintors Authors
Inhibition. It was answered, that albeit the Disposition by Coatfield to Mr.
Robert Logan be posterior, yet Mr. James Raith had a Disposition of the same
Lands anterior; who, by consenting, and joint Disponing to Mr. Robert Logan,
the Lands of Mountlothian; did in effect constitute him Assigney to his
anterior Disposition, which is now accomplished by the Adjudication, adjudging
the Right of the Lands from Coatfild^ Heirs, and thereupon Infeftment has
followed, by precepts out of the Chancellary, for supplying Coatfilds
procuratory of Resignation, which took no effect in his life. It was answered,
that Mr. James Raiths Right being but a Wodset, his consent cannot import the
transmitting of his Right, albeit he jointly Dispond: seeing he transmits no
part of the Sums in the Wodset; and therefore does no more in effect, but
restrict his Wodset to the remanent Lands: and consents, that Coatfield should
Dispone these Lands to Mr. Robert Logan, and so it imports but non
repugnantiam, and a Provision that he nor his Successor should not quarrel
their Right upon his anterior Right.

Which the Lords sustained.

Mr. Walter Innes contra George Wilson. July 4. 1665.
INnes of Auchbuncart, being pursued as Heir to his Father, upon all the
passive Titles alleged that his Father was denounced Rebel, and his Escheat
gifted, and the Defender had Right, or warrant from the Donatar before
intenting of this Cause. The Pursuer answered, non relevat, except the Gift had
been declared, and that the Defenders Intromission had been after Declarator,
and the warrant, but the Intromission being anterior, cannot be purged, ex post
facto. The Defender answered, that as the confirmation of an Executor, excluds
vicious Intromission, had before the Confirmation ante motam litem: so the Gift
and VVarrand, though without Declarator, purges anterior Intromission, ante
motam litem.

Which the Lords found relevant.

Commissar of S. Andrews contra Boussi. July 4. 1665.
THe Commissar of St. Andrews having charged Hay of Boussi to Confirm his
Fathers Testament, he Suspends, and alleadges his Father had Disponed all his
Moveable Goods and Gear to him, and so nihil habuit in bonis, and offered him
to prove that he was in possession of the whole Goods before his Death. It was
answered, the Disposition was but simulat, in so far as it contained a power to
the Disponer, to dispose upon any part of his Movables, during all the days of
his life, and if such a Disposition were sustained, there should never be
another Testament confirmed; and all people would follow this course: which
would not only exclude the Quot, but keep the Means of Defuncts in obs^uro.

The Lords, in respect of the generality of the Disposition, and the Clause
foresaid, repelled the Reason.

George Dumbar contra Earl of Dundie. July 5. 1665.
GEorge Dumbar having charged the Earl of Dundie as Cautioner for the Lord of
Craig to pay 8000 merks of Tochar, provided by Craigs Sisters Contract of
Marriage, the Earl of Dundie Suspends on this Reason, that he is but liable for
his half, because they were not bound conjunctly and severally. The Charger
answered, that he was bound as Cautioner, and full Debtor, which was
sufficient.

Which the Lords sustained

Mackie contra Stewart. July 5. 1665.
JAmes Mackie, as Assigney by Agnes Schaw, conveens Stewart of Mains as as
representing his Father, who was Cautioner for employing a Sum of Money to her
in Liferent. It was answered, First, the Contract is prescribed. 2ly. It bears
these words that the Tochar being paid: The Principal and Cautioner obligded
them to employ it upon security; so that the obligation is conditional. And if
it be not instructed, that the Tochar was paid, the Defender is not liable.
The Pursuer answered to the first, contra non valentem agere, non currit
prescriptio; she being a Wife cled with a Husband her not pursuing her own
Husband, or his Cautioner, cannot prescrive her Right, To the second, The
prescription is run against the Husband, and his Cautioner, who were free to
have pursued for the Tochar, and did not; and after 40. years she cannot be put
to instruct, that the Tochar was paid, albeit she had been Debtor therefore
her self; much more, when another is Debtor.

The Lords found both these replies relevant.

Mr. John Colvil contra The Lord Balmirino. July 6. 1665.
MR. John Colvil, as Executor confirmed to Umquhil Mr. John Colvil, Minister at
Kirknewtoun, pursues the Lord Balmirino, for the Stipend, the year 1663. and
for the profit of the Gleib. The Defender alleged absolvitor; because payment
is made bona fide to the intrant, before intenting of this Cause. It was
answered, it could not be paid bona fide, because the Minister died after
January 1663. Which being so notour to my Lord Balmirino, to whom the most of
the Paroch belongs; and he being so near it, he ought to have made payment to
no other of that year, which belonged to the Defunct Minister, as his Ann,
extending to the whole years, quia annus inchoatus habe^ur pro completo; as to
the Ann: so that if the Minister lived till the first of January, he has that
whole year. The Defender answered, that an Ann is only due to the Wife, and
Bairns of the Defunct Minister, and this Minister had none. 2ly. That the point
is so dubious in Law, he knew not that it would be his, unless, he had lived
till Whitsunday. 3ly. The benefit of the Gleib must be the intrants, and falls
not under the Ann, as a part of the Stipend, no more then the Manss.

The Lords repelled the Defense, as to the Stipend, and found it belonged to
the Executor, as nearest of kin, and that the Defunct surviving the first of
January, gave him that whole year, but found that the Gleib did not fall under
the Ann nor did belong to the Defunct, but only the Crop thereof; if it were
sown by himself, before he dyed.

Earl of Argyl contra Mcdougalls of Dumolich and Ziner. July 14. 1665.
THe Earl of Argyl having raised a double poynding, in name of the Tennents of
certain Lands, calling himself, on the one part, and Mcdougals on the other, as
both claming right to the Mails and Duties; Mcdougals produce a Decree of
Parliament, whereby they having pursued the late Marquess of Argyl; alleging,
that he had obtained the Right and Possession of these by Force, and Oppression
during the troubles, whereupon his Rights were reduced, and they restored to
their Possession. The Earl of Argyl produced his Seasine, upon the Kings Gift,
with two Dispositions of these Lands, granted to his Father, one in Anno 1632.
and another in Anno 1639. And thereupon craved to be preferred. Mcdougals
produced a disclamation of the Process, in name of the Tennents, and alleged
no Process; because the Tennents, who were pursuers, past from the pursuit. It
was answered, that their names was but used, that the Parties might discuss
their Rights, and so they could not disclame it, being ordinar to use Tennents
names in double poyndings. It was answered, that there was no Reason, that
Tennants should be forced to make use of their names, to intervert their
Masters Possession.

The Lords found, that the Tennants could not disclame; especially the
possession being but late, by Decree of Parliament, and was contraverse.

It was further alleged for Mcdougals, that there was nothing particularly
lybelled, as Rents due by the Tennants; and therefore there could be no
sentence.

The Lords repelled the alleadgeance, and found the Sentence might be in
general, to be answered, of the Mails and Duties, as is ordinar in Decreets
conform.

It was further alleged for Mcdougals, that seeing this double poynding was in
effect, now used as a Declarator of Right, no Process thereupon; because in all
Declarators, Law allows the Defenders 21 days upon the first Summons, and six
on the next, that they may prepare, and produce their Rights; and here there is
but one Summons on 6 days. 2ly. No Process, because Mcdougals being founded
upon a Decree of Parliament; my Lord Argyl produces no Title, but only a
Seasine not expressing these Lands. 3ly. Decreets, especially of Parliament,
cannot be taken away, but by Reduction, and not thus summarly. It was answered,
that my Lord Argyl insisted here for taking away the pretended Decree, in
Parliament, and restoring the King, and Donatar to the possession of the Lands:
so that in effect it is not so much a Declarator of a Right, as a possessory
Judgment. And as for the Title, it is sufficient to produce a Siasine, seeing
in the Decree of Parliament, My Lord Argyls Right and possession is quarrelled
as wrong, and therefore was acknowledged to have been, and seeing Mcdougals
produces no other Right, and the King's Advocat concurres; and if need beis, my
Lord Argyl offers to prove the Lands in question, are parts and pertinents of
the Lordship of Lorn, expressed in his Seasine: and albeit this be pretended to
be a Decree of Parliament, yet by Sentence of Parliament since, it is remitted
to the Lords, and is in it self visibly null, as having been intented against
my Lord Argyl, and pronounced after his death, and Forefaulture without calling
the Kings Officers.

The Lords repelled these Defenses, in respect of the replies.

James Mathison contra Harie Gib. Eodem die.
JAmes Mathison, having obtained a Decree before the Commissars of Edinburgh,
against Gib, he Suspends, and alleadges it was not a cause consistorial, being
a bargain of Victual, and that it was not probable any other ways but by his
Oath, now after 12. or 13. years. In respect of the Act of Parliament, anent
house Mails, and others, which comprehens this case.

The Lords repelled the alleadgeance, and found that bargain of Victual not
comprehended under that Act of Parli^ment.

James Borthwick contra Janet Skeen July 15. 1665.
JAmes Borthwick, being Infeft in the Lands of Oversneip, pursues Reduction,
and Removing against Ianet Skeen the Liferentrix. It was alleged, that the
Feer being minor, non tenetur placitare super haereditate paterna, And for the
Liferenter, that the minor was oblidged to warrant her Liferent-right, and her
Possession was the minors Possession; so that if her Right were reduced, and
she removed, the privilege of the minor were altogether overthrown. It was
answered, That the privilege was personal, and stricti juris, and was to be
extended to Majors; and as for the warrandice, it was never sustained as a
ground, to exclude a Reduction, because warrandice would be inferred against a
Minor, which is but a personal obligement, and not haereditas.

The Lords repelled the alleadgance for the Liferenter. Who alleged further,
that her Right being Reduced, the Fee was absolute in the person of the Minor,
who would not suffer the Liferentrix to be removed, but she did possess by the
Minors tollerance.

It was answered, that the Pursuers Reduction, behoved to accresce to him and
his Right, and not to the Minors Right, that he behoved to enter to the
Liferenters possession, which would not prejudge the Minor; for if the
Liferenter dyed during the Minors Minority, he might return to the possession
in the same way, as if the Liferenter were in possession; but as for the
tollerance, now the Liferenter having entered by the Liferent Right, and it
being reduced in favors of the Pursuer, as the Minor could not thereby attain
possession; so neither can he give tollerance to defend the Liferenter.

The Lords repelled also this second Defense.

Patrick Urquhart contra Thomas Blair. Eodem die.
PAtrick Vrquhart having charged Thomas Blair, upon a Bond granted by him and
William Young, as co-principalls, Thomas Blair Suspends, and alleadges, that
William Young has paid the whole. It was answered, that this was not
instructed, and therefore not receivable, being in a Suspension: It was
answered, that though in a Suspension, yet a term is always granted, where it
is another man's Right. It was answered, that the Suspender is in hazard of
breaking, and has not found a good sufficient Cautioner, and therefore if he
get delay, he ought to give better Caution: It was answered, that he had found
Caution who was accepted, and he was oblidged to do no more.

The Lords ordained him to make faith de calumnia upon the Reason, but would
not put him to find new Caution.

Robert Scot contra Silvertounhill. Eodem die.
RObert Scot pursuing a Poynding of the Ground, for an Annualrent,
Silvertounhill compeared, and alleged possession, by virtue of a prior
Annualrent, and that the Pursuers Infeftment was base, not cled with
Possession. For proving Possession, Robert Scot produced discharges granted by
the Annualrenter to the Hetetor for the time, for himself, and in name of the
Tenants, which had Witnesses, But designed not the Writers name, and being
alleged to be null for want thereof.

The Lords ordained Scot to condescend upon the writer of the discharge in
respect the Annualrent did extend to 80. lib. and it did prefer one Annualrent
to another.

Johnstoun of Scheens contra Alexander Brown Eodem die.
JOhnstoun being pursued to remove from certain Lands. It was alleged, no
Process; because all Parties having interest, were not called, viz. The
Defenders wife, in respect he possessed, but by her Right jure mariti, and she
was not warned.

Which the Lords found relevant.

Mr. Thomas Johnstoun contra Mcgregor. July 19. 1665.
MR. Thomas Iohnstoun having obtained the Gift of Bastardie of one Mcgregor,
and declared in general; insists now, in his special Declarator against Patrick
Mcgregor, for 2000 merks belonging to the Bastard. It was alleged absolvitor;
because there was a Gift granted in the Usurpers time, and declared, whereupon
the Defender had transacted with the Donatar, and satisfied him, and obtained
his discharge. It was answered, non relevat, because in the Act of Parliament,
confirming Judicial Precedor, under the Usurpers, Gifts of Bastardry, and all
following thereupon, are excepted: so that the Defender, had no Defense in the
point of Right, and as for his bona fides, it only relevant for what was truly
paid, but not for what was in his hand.

The Lords repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply.

Mr. James Winerham conra Lady Idingtoun. July 19. 1665.
MR. James Winerham pursues the Lady Idingtoun personally, for Feu-Duties out
of certain Lands Liferented by her. It was answered, non relevat, for any years
before the Ladies possession, because Feu Duties may be Pursued, either really,
by poynding of the Ground, or personally, against the Intrometters with their
profits; and because the Feu-duties are as the yearly Rent; yet that cannot be
extended further, than during the years the Possessors intrometted. The Pursuer
answered, that the whole profits being liable, for the whole Feu-duties,
whether of that, or preceding years, the Lady was liable, not only for the
years of her possession, but for bygones.

The Lords repelled the alleadgeance, and found the Lady liable personally,
only for the years of her possession.

Ryce Gum contra Mckewn. Eodem die.
RYce Gum having obtained Decree before the Baillies of the Cannongate,
against Mckewn, to repone him to an Assignation, he Suspends, on this Reason,
that the Decree was null, wanting Probation, proceeding only upon the
alleged judicial confession of the Suspender, without proponing any defense,
acknowledging the Lybel, and succumbing in the Defense but simply confessing
the Lybel, which cannot prove against him, being under the hand of an Clerk of
an Inferior Court only, without the Suspenders subscription or oath.

Which the Lords found relevant.

Mr. Robert Dickson contra Mr. Mark Ker. July 21 1665.
THere being a competition betwixt Mr. Robert Dickson, and Mr. Mark Ker, as
both having the Gift of the Escheat of Hoom of Garden both past the Seal in one
day; Mr. Robert Dickson had past in Exchequer long before, and his Summons was
raised two days before his Gift was Sealed, and so was not a Regular
Diligence. He alleadges, Mr. Mark Kers was more irregular, because, being a
Declarator, his Summons was not upon 21. days. It was answered, the Summons was
privileged. It was Replied, that the privilege was granted periculo petentis
upon a common Bill, which passes without observation.

The Lords considering, that their Gifts were both past in one day, and that
there diligence was so near, conjoined the Gift, and declared them jointly.

Spreul contra Miller. Eodem die.
BArbara Miller having left two Legaces, and named William Wilson her Executor,
and universal Legatar, he nominats his Wife, and one Giffin his Executors;
Spreul having right to the two Legacies, pursues the Relict, and Executors of
Wilson, who was Executor to Barbara Miller, for payment of the Legacies. He
alleadges absolvitor, because the first Testament was not Execute. 2ly. The
special Legacies must be abated proportionally with the general Legacies:

The Lords repelled both the Defenses, and found the general Legacy not to
come in pari passu with the special, and found that the Executor of the
Executor was liable, unless he could allege, that the first Executor had done
diligence, and had not recovered, or was exhausted.

Lord of Ludquharn contra Lord of Gight. July 21. 1665.
THe Lord of Gight having Married Ludquharns Daughter, who remained in her
Fathers Family, and brought forth a Bairn to Gight, and dyed; Ludquharn, the
Child's Guid-sir kept her in his Family several years, and now pursues Gight
for her Aliment, who alleged absovitor, because the Pursuer never having
required a promise of this Aliment, nor desired the Defender to take home his
Daughter, It must be presumed, that the Pursuer did it animo donandi, for his
own Oye.

The Lords found this Defense relevant, for all years preceding the intenting
of this Cause.

Thomas Rue contra Viscount of Stormont. July 22. 1665.
THomas Rue pursues a Reduction of a Decree obtained by the Viscount of
Stormont, who alleged no Process, because the Citation was not within year
and day of the Summons, the warrant thereof, which bears, to cite the Defenders
to compear the day of next to come.

The Lords found the Defense relevant.

Johnstoun contra Tennents of Achincorse. Eodem die.
JOhnstoun having Appryzed the Lands of Achincorse, and charged the Lord
Dumfries his Superior, to receive him, pursues the Tennents thereof for Mails
and Duties. Compearance is made for the Lord Dumfries, Superior, who alleged
no Process, till a years Rent were paid to him, as Superior. 2ly, It is
offered to be proven that Achincorse the Vassal was in nonentrie, or the
Liferent Escheat fallen by his Rebellion, and therefore the Superior ought to
be preferred. The Pursuer answered to the first, that seeing it was the
Superiors fault, he received not him upon the charge, albeit he offered to
receive him now, he could not have a years Rent, till the Pursuer insisted to
be infeft. To the second, the Defense ought to be Repelled, seeing there was no
Declarator intentit. The Defender answered, that seeing he was to change his
Vassal, and the Appryzer sought possession, before he had access, he behoved to
pay the years Rent, seeing by the Appryzing, and the charge, the Superior will
be excluded from his Casualities: To the second, the Superior being
acknowledged by the charge he might crave the Casualities of the Superiority,
by way of competition, and offered to produce the Horning, cum processu.

The Lords sustained the first Defense, but not the second, seeing there was no
Horning produced, nor Declarator intentit.

Janet Brotherstones contra Ogil and Orrocks. July 26. 1665.
JAnet Brotherstones, by her Contract of Marriage, declaring, that she had in
Money, Bonds and Goods 4000 merks, is provided to all the conquest, and to the
Liferent of the whole Means and Movables, she pursues her Husbands Heirs, for
implement, who alleged absolvitor, because she has not fulfilled her part of
the Contract and instructs not that she delivered to her Husband 4000. merks in
worth or wair. It was answered, it must be presumed, that she has done it after
so long time, seeing all she had came in the Possession of her Husband.

The Lords found the presumption not sufficient, but before answer, ordained
the pursuer to condescend by Witnesses, or otherwise, how she would prove, that
she had that means the time of the Marriage, and ordained these to be examined
ex officio.

Thomas Kennedie of Kirkhill contra Agnew of Lochnaw. July 27. 1665.
KEnnedie of Kirkhill, as Assigney by Thomas Hay of Park, to a Bond of 1000
lib. granted by Andrew Agnew younger of Lochnaw, charges him thereupon, who
Suspends, and raises Reduction on this Reason, that the Bond was granted at the
time of his Contract of Marriage, clandestinelie, without the knowledge of his
Father, who was Contracter, contra pacta dotalia, and contra bonos mores. The
Defender answered, that he having given a very great Tochar, viz. 10000. lib.
above his Estate, which is all paid to his Good Sons Father, he did declare,
that he was not able to give so much, and thereupon he got this Bond, not to
have Execution, till after his death, which he might lawfully do, having given
a Tochar suitable to the condition of the Receiver, and above the condition of
the Giver.

The Lords repelled the Reason, in respect of the Answer.

This was thereafter stopped to be further heard.

Lilias Hamiltoun contra Her Tennents. Eodem die.
LIlias Hamiltoun being Infeft by her Husband, in Liferent, pursues her
Tennents; compearance is made for their present Master, who alleged, that her
Husbands Right was only a Wodset granted by him; and that he had used an Order,
and had Redeemed the Wodset, and paid the money to the Pursuers Husband: and
neither knew, nor was oblidged to know the Pursuers base Infeftment from her
Husband, the Wodsetter, which had never any other Possession, but the Husbands.
It was answered, that the Pursuers Seasine being Registrate, he was oblidged to
know the same, as well as if it had been an Inhibition, especially, seeing there
was no Process of Declarator, in which case, all Parties having intress, should
have been called at the Market Cross, but a voluntar Redemption; albeit upon an
Order.

The Lords sustained the Defense, notwithstanding of the Reply.

Adam Rae contra Heretors of Clackmannan. Eodem die.
UMquhile Colonel Rae, having advanced Victual to the Army, at Leith in Anno
1650. And gotten an Assignation to the Maintenance of August and September,
from Sir John Smith, then General Commissar, in satisfaction thereof, pursues
the Heretors of Clackmannan, for their proportions who alleged, that by their
quartering of the Kings Army, their whole Rents Anno 1650. was exhausted. It
was answered, that it was not our that the exhausting, was after the Battle of
Dumbar, which was upon the third of September, 1650. And so could not extend to
the maintenance of August and September, which was Assigned before, for so
onerous a cause.

The Lords repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply.

Captain Muire contra Frazer. July 27. 1665.
CAptain Muir, having obtained Decree against the Heir of Colonel Hugh Frazer
for 1000 merks, before the Commissioners, in Anno 1658. Charges thereupon. They
Suspend, and raise Reduction, on this Reason; that the Decree was null without
probation, proceeding only upon a Copy, of an obligation alleged taken out of
the Register, by one William Baily, who kept the same at London, which could
not prove, not being under the hand of the Clerk Register, or his Deputes,
which being proponed in the Decree, was unjustly repelled. The Pursuer
answered, First, There was no review raised within a year, conform to the Act
of Parliament, and so the Decree was not quarrellable upon iniquity, 2ly.
Bailies Oath was taken by Commission, that the Extract was subscribed by him.
3ly. The Defender proponed a Defense of payment, and so acknowledged the Debt
Debt. It was answered, that the Suspenders were, and are minors; and in the Act
of Parliament, there is an exception of Minors, that they may Reduce these
Decreets within a year after their Majority. 2ly. They ought to be reponed
against their proponing of payment, being Minors, and as to Bailies Oath,
neither his Subscription, nor Oath can make a probative Extract; unless the new
Extract were now produced; seeing the Registers are returned. The Chargers
answered, that if the Suspender would allege, that any Book of the Register
containing, Writs Registrat about the time of this Extract, were extant, and
returned relevat: but it is known, that several of the Books are lost, and this
amongst the rest.

The Lords would not sustain the Decree upon Bailies extract, simply neither
did they put the Charger to the proving of a tenor, but allowed the charger to
condescend upon the way of his Instruction, that such a Bond was truly
subscribed by the Witnesses, insent, or otherwise, and ordained the Witnesses
to be examined.

Adam Rae contra Heritors of Clackmannan. July 28. 1665.
IN the Cause of Adam Rae mentioned yesterday, some of the Heretors alleged
absolvitor; because they were singular Successors, and by the Act of
Parliament, for the Old Maintenance, Singular Successors were excepted.

The Lords repelled this alleadgeance, and found, that exception only to be
extended to the maintenance contained in that Act.

Bessie Scot contra Somervail. Eodem die.
BEssie Scot having charged Somervail, who was Cautioner in an Suspension, for
payment of an Sum of Money contained in a Bond Suspended. He Suspends on this
Reason; That the Money was consigned in the hands of Mr. George Gibson, Clerk
to the Bills, for the time. It was answered, that Mr. George Gibson was now out
of Office, and insolvent, and the Consignation behoved to be upon the peril of
the Consigner. It was answered, that the the Consignation must be upon the
peril of that Party, who was the cause of Consignation, and that was the
Charger; in so far as it was instructed by an Instrument produced, that the
Suspender offered the Annualrent, and so much of the Penalty as the Charger
would have Declared upon her Oath, that she had truly paid, which she
refused, unless the whole Penalty were paid, whereupon he consigned, through
her Fault.

The Lords sustained the Reason, and ordained the Noltar, and Witnesses to
depon upon the Truth of the Instrument, for Instructing thereof.

Douglas contra Cowan and Russel. July 29. 1665.
PEter Russel, by his Ticket, acknowledged him to have received a certain
Quantity of Wine, and oblidged him to make payment thereof, according to the
Condition agreed upon, Douglas being Assigned to the Ticket, insists for the
ordinary Price of Wine. It was alleged no Process, for the ordinar price of
Wine, but only for the price agreed on, which behoved to be condescended on,
and proven by the Debitors Oath, being above an hundred pounds. It was
answered, that, seeing these Conditions were not adjected; the ordinary price
was to be understood, unless it were proven by the Debtor, what they were,
etc. that they differred from the common Price.

The Lords found, that the Debtor, by his Ticket, behoved to condescend on the
Conditions, qui potuit legem apertius dicere, and not the Pursuer; but they
found Witnesses might prove the condition.

Heretors of Don contra Town of Aberdeen. Eodem die.
THis day Report being made, concerning the Cruives of Don. The Lords found,
that there was no necessity to keep always open a midstream, notwithstanding,
the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent; which upon enquiry through the
Kingdom, they found to be in desuetude, and especially in these Cruives, to be
made past memory, with Saturndayes stop only, and ordained the distance of the
Hecks to be three Inch Scots measure, whereof 27. make an Elle, vide supra.

Lady Knapeirn contra Sir Robert Farquhuar November 9. 1665.
SIr Robert Farquhar, being Infeft in certain Lands, by the Lord of Knapeirn,
with his Ladies consent, pursues the Tennents, and obtains Decree for Mails
and Duties. The Lady pursues Reduction, on these Reasons, that she stood
Infeft, and in possession eleven years after her Husbands death, bona fide,
without any persuit; and so being in judicio possessorio, she was tuta
re^^ptione. It was answered, that the benefit of a possessorie Judgment was
never granted to any party, in prejudice of these to whom that Party had
Disponed, or consented to a Disposition, which includes an Obligation to
possess them; nor can they be in bona fide contrair their own consent, and
deed, to possess.

The Lords repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply. It was further
alleged, that Sir Robert, by a Declarator produced, had acknowledged nothing
of that Wodset due, but what was contained in a fitted account written by him,
and subscribed by both Parties, which did innovat the Wodset, and Sir Robert
could have no Right thereby, but by this Count, which only could touch the
Husband. Secondly, Albeit the Wodset did stand, in so far as the Count extends,
yet Sir Robert ought to have no benefit by the Wodset, till he produce the
Account. It was answered, that the Account was never in his custody, but given
to Knaperin, in whose favors it was introduced; and seeing it was clear, that
his Wodset was not extinct, but restricted, the Pursuer behoved to condescend
in quantum, and to prove it, alliganti incumbit probatio.

The Lords ordained, and appointed Sir Roberts Oath to be taken, before answer
on his having the count, and yet they sound, that he ought to produce (...),
but the Interlocutor was stopped the next day.

Teilzifeir contra Geddes. November 11. 1665.
MArion Geddes, having granted to Samuel Veatch, a blank Bond of 2000. merks,
Tailzifer being Creditor to Samuel Veatch; Arrests all Sums in her hand, owing
to Samuel: she depones, that she was no ways Debtor to Samuel, but by a Bond
given Blank, in the Creditors name, and that she knew not whose name is filled
up therein: compearance is made for whose name is filled up in the Bond, and he
alleadges, he ought to be preferred to the Arrester, because he offers him to
prove his name was filled up in the Bond, and that before the Arrestment, the
Bond was Registrate in his name, and that before the said Marion deponed, he
had used Inhibition thereupon, which she could not but have known. It was
answered, for the Arrester, that he ought to be preferred, because, albeit the
Bond was blank ab initio, yet in rei veritate Samuel Veatch was Creditor, and
so he behoved to be Legaily denuded, which could not be done by filling up any
other persons name, without intimation thereof, made to the Debtor; for seeing
a Direct Assignation was not valid, without an Intimation, much less should
this indirect way by the Creditors filling up another name than his own in the
Blank; which is in effect an Assignation: And seeing the Lords have already
found, that the Debtor acknowledging, that he gave a blank Bond to any person,
and knows not whose name is filled up in it, is liable to any Arrester, albeit
he be under hazard to pay again to that person who has his Board: in justice it
follows, that such Bonds must be intimat, otherwise it will unavoidably
infer double payment. It was answered, that the Law requires Intimation to
Assignation as a necessary Solemnity, but has not required the same to the
filling up of a Blank-bond, the case whereof is not alike with an Assignation,
because, where the Bond is blank, the Debtor cannot pay any thing bona fide,
safely till he see the Bond filled up; but where he knows the name filled up,
he may pay bona fide to the Cedent, not knowing of the Assignation. It was
answered, that the Law did require to all Assignations, Intimation, but the
Case of Blank-bonds was but a late invention, to defraud Creditors, that it
might not be known who was Creditor: but seeing it is truly an Assignation it
deserves no favor more than a Direct Assignation; and so should have as much
Solemnity.

The Lords preferred the Arrester, but because the Case was a leading Case, and
new, after a second Interl^cutor adhering, they allowed the Advocats to offer
by B^ll any new Reasons, and particularly, if it could be alleged, that the
Debtor granter of the Blank-bond, had before the Arrestment, seen the
Blank-bond filled up, and so had deponed, or could depone, that the time of the
Arrestment the Debtor saw himself to be Debtor to another person, filled up
in the Blank, than he for whose Debt it was Arrested, for in that Case, as the
first Creditor that got the Blank-bond might have caused his Debtor retire
that Bond, and give a new one, before any Arrestment, so the showing of the
filling up of the Blank was equivalent, especially, if the Debt could be proven
no otherwise but by the De^^tors Oath.

This Case was not debated, nor was the hazard considered, that the Debitors
Oath might prefer one Party to another; nor was the case alike to a renewed
Bond: because a renewed Bond would bear a new date, and different Witnesses,
that saw the new Creditors name filled up, and would not depend upon the single
Testimony of the Debtor.

Barbara Skeen, and Mr. David Thors contra Sir Andrew Ramsay. November 14. 1665.
BArbara Skeen being provided by her Contract of Marriage with Umquhile David
Ramsay, to 18 Chalders of Victual, or 1800 merks, her Husband having acquired
the Lands of Grange Muire, worth 10 Chalders of Victnal; she pursues Sir Andrew
Ramsay, as Heir to his Brother, to make her up the superplus. The Defender
alleged absolvitor; because he offered him to prove, that the said Barbara
stood Infeft in the Lands of Grange Muire, upon a Bond granted by her Husband,
which Bond bears: In full satisfaction of the Contract of Marriage, by Virtue
of which Infeftment, she having no other Right, she had possessed five or six
years after her Husbands death, and thereby had accepted that Right, and had
Homologat the same. It was replied, that the Bond being a Deed of the Husbands
a Clause foisted thereinto, so far to the detrement of his Wife, and the
Infeftment not being taken by her, but by an Acturney, her possession cannot
import Homologation thereof, because Homologation being a Ta^ite, consent is
not inferred, but where the Homologator cannot but know the Right Homologat,
and can do the Deeds of Homologation no otherwise, but by virtue of that
Right, neither of which holds here, because the personal oblidgement in the
Contract, was a ground for the Wife to have continued her Husbands possession,
and would have excluded his Heirs, if they had quarrelled; and not only the
Clause must be presumed to be without the Woman's knowledge, but the Bond it
self, and the Infeftment especially, considering the simplicity of Wives, and
their confidence in their Husbands, who, if this were sustained, would easily
deceive them. It was duplyed for the Defender, that he offers him to prove,
that the Pursuer did not continue her husbands possession, but did begin
Possession, her Husband being never in possession before his death, and that
she set two several Tacks, expressly as Liferenter, and the third, with consent
of Mr. David Thors her Husband being an Advocat; and so she cannot be presumed
to have been ignorant, but on the contraire she must bepresumed to have known
the Right, and could never denominat her self Liferentrix, by a personal
oblidgement, to Infeft her in so much Victual and Money, without mentioning any
Land in particular, and her acceptance, though to her detriment, may be the
more easily presumed, because she had two Children surviving her Husband, in
whose favor the Restriction did accresce, and her Husband did secure her in
all that he had, but now ex post facto, the Children being dead, she could not
return upon Sir Andrew, her Husbands Brother, contrare to her Homologation.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and Duply; for they thought, albeit ignorance
might be presumed in a Wife, de recente and intra annum luctus, yet she having
continued for so many years, and doing so many deeds, expressly as Liferenter,
and that the Bond was not clandistinely, lying by her Husband, but in a third
Parties hand, who had taken the Infeftment, they thought, in that case,
ignorance was not to be presumed, but knowledge.

Wat contra Russel. November 16. 1665.
JEan Wat being provided by her Contract of Marriage to certain Lands, and
Infeft therein; the Contract contains this Clause, that she shall Aliment, the
Bairns of the Marriage, after the Fathers death, and in case she marry again,
she shall restrict her self to six hundred merks, and the superplus shall remain
to the Bairns, for their Aliment: hereupon she pursues Robert Russel, and the
other Tennents, for the Mails and Duties of the hail Liferent Lands, who
alleged. 1. That she was restricted to six hundred merks, and could crave no
more, especially now being married to a second Husband: compearance was also
made, for the only Child of the Marriage, who claimed the benefit of the
superplus, by virtue of the Clause in the Contract. It was alleged further
for the Defenders, that they were Creditors to the Husband, before the Contract
of Marriage: and in their Tacks, had a Clause, bearing; That they should retain
their Tack duties, while they were paid: and upon their Bonds, they had also
Apprized from the Child, as lawfully charged to enter Heir, all Right he had to
the Lands So that if the superplus belong to the Child proprio jure, it now
belonged to the Defenders, as appryzers. They had also raised Reduction of the
Clause of the Contract, in favors of the Children, as being granted by a
Father in favors of his own Children, after Contracting of their Debt, and so
was fraudulent, and Reduceable, by the Act of Parliament, 1621. Against
Bankerupts. It was answered, for the Child, that as for the Appryzing, and
Decree against him, as charged to enter Heir, he had Suspended, and raised
Reduction, and craved to be reponed; and produced a Renounciation, offering to
renounce all Right he could succeed to, as Heir to his Father, but prejudice of
this Aliment, which belonged to him proprio jure, as a Restriction granted to
him, by his Mother; and as to the Reason of Reduction, upon the Act of
Parliament. There was here neither Fault nor Fraud, their being no Law to
hinder a Husband to give his Wife what Jointure he pleased; which was never
compted in defraud of prior Creditors, nor is their any Restriction, or
proportion thereof, but as the Parties agree, which is always sustained in
favorem dotium and matrimonij, and the Wife might take what Liferent the
Husband was pleased to give her, there was nothing to make her to restrict her
self in favors of her Children, for an aliment with restriction, is no Deed of
the Father, but of the Mother. It was answered for the Defenders, that the
reason of Reduction stood relevant, seeing in this case there was manifest
Fraud, in so far as this Liferent was exorbitant, and unproportionable to the
Fathers Estate, whose hail Lands being only worth 1000. merks, and having
nothing but the Tocher, which was 6000. merks, he Infefts his Wife in the hail,
and yet restricted her to 600. merks, and provided the rest to his Children;
and albeit it appears to flow from the Mother, yet that is but dolose, and in
effect it flows from the Father. 2. Seeing the superplus was appointed to be an
Aliment to the hail Children, seeing there is but one, it ought to be modified,
and what remained above the 600. merks, and a competent Aliment, to belong to
the Creditors.

The Lords found that the Child's Renunciation should repone him^ and found that
if the Provision had been Exorbitant, it might have been counted as fraudulent,
but they found it not exorbitant, seeing the Land was offered to the Defenders
for 900. merks, and there was 200. merks thereof Liferented by another Woman,
so that there r^mained but 100. merks for the Child, and therefore Repelled the
Defenses, and Decerned.

William Dickson contra John Hoom. Eodem die.
WIlliam Dickson having charged John Hoom, upon a Bond of 37. Pounds Scots: He
suspends, and offers to improve the Bond as not subscribed by him, but another
John Hoom. It was answered, Improbation was not receivable, but in a Reduction,
or where the original Writ was produced: But this Bond was Registrate in an
Inferior Court, and the Charger was not obliged to produce, nor was the Clerk
called.

The Lords in respect the matter was of small importance, admitted the Reason
of Improbation, the Suspender Consigning principal Sum and Annualrent, and
declared they would modifie a great Penalty, in case he succumbed, and ordained
Letters to be direct against the Clerk of the inferior Court, to produce the
principal.

Howison contra Cockburn. November 17. 1665.
THe Executors of David Howison pursue James Cockburn, for the price of several
else of Cloth, which the said James, by his Ticket produced, granted him to
have received, in name, and for the use of the Lord of Langtoun, his Master.
It was alleged absolvitor, because by the Ticket, the Defender is not
obliged to pay the Cloth, and does only act in name of his Master, and
therefore the Merchant ought to have called for the Account from his Master,
within three years, which he has not done till many years, long after his
Masters death. It was replied, that the Ticket must obliege him, at least,
docere demandato, for his doing in name of his Master, could not obliege his
Master, so that if he be not so obliged, the Merchant loses his Debt, and no
body is obliged. It was answered, that he who Acts with any Mandatar, should
know his Commission, and if he does not know it, it is upon his own hazard; but
if the Mandatar Act not in his own name but his Masters, he does not obliege
himself; and if Servants who receive in their Masters name, should be thus
obliged to show their warrant, it would be of very evil consequence, seeing
their Receipt can be proven by Witnesses, within three years, and their Warrant
would not be so probable.

The Lords found that post tantum tempus, the Defender was not obliged to
instruct his warrant, but the same was presumed to have been known to the
Merchant, unless it be proven by the Defenders Oath, that he acted without a
warrant, or that he did not apply the Cloth to his Masters use.

Baxters in the Canongate November 21. 1665.
THere being a Contract betwixt two Baxters in the Canongate, to make use of an
Oven, still kept hot for both their uses, the one pursues the other, as
desisting, and obtained Decree before the Baillies of the Canongate for 36.
Pounds of Damnage, which being Suspended. It was alleged ipso jure null, as
having compearance, mentioning Defenses, Replys, etc. And yet expressing none,
but refers the Defenders Action to the Pursuers Probation by Witnesses, who now
offered to prove positive, that he continued in doing his part.

The Lords would not sustain this visible Nullity, without Reduction, though in
re minina, inter pauperes, for preserving of Form.

Laurence Scot. contra David Boswel of Auchinleck. November 22. 1665.
UMquhil David Boswel of Auchinleck, being Debtor to Laurence Scot in 1000.
pounds by Bond: He pursues his Daughters, as Heirs of line, and David Boswel
now of Auchinleck, his Brothers Son, as Heir-mail, or at least lucrative
Successor, by accepting a Disposition of Lands from the Defunct, which were
provided to Heirs-mail, and so being alioqui successurus. It was alleged for
the said David, no Process against him, till the Heirs of Line were first
discu^^. It was Replied, and offered to be proven, that he was obliged to
relieve the Heirs of Line.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

It was further alleged for the Defender, that he could not be conveened as
lucrative Successor, by the foresaid Disposition, because the time of the
Disposition he was not alioqui successurus, in respect that his Father was
living. It was answered, that albeit he was not immediate Successor, yet being
the mediat Successor, the Disposition was precep^^o haereditatis, and the Lords
had already found, that a Disposition to an Oye, made him Lucrative Successor,
albeit his Father who was immediate appearand Heir was living.

The Lords sustained not the Lylel upon that member, for they found it was not
alike, to Dispone to a Brother, as to a Son or a Brothers-son, as to an Oye,
because a Brother is not appearand Heir, nor alioqui successurus, seeing the
Disponer, has haeredes propinquiores in spe; and therefore cannot be presumed
to have Disponed to his Brother, or Brother Son, in fraud of his Creditors,
seeing that by that Disposition, he does also prejudge his own Son, if he should
have one, and this (...) prejudice to the Pursuer, to Reduce the Disposition
upon the Act of Parliament, as accords.

Mr. James Campbel contra Doctor Beaton. November 23. 1665.
DOctor Beaton being Infeft in certain Lands, Wodset by the Lord of Balgillo,
does thereafter by a minute, take an absolute Disposition thereof, for a price
expressed in the Minute, whereupon Mr. James Campbel arrests in Doctor Beatons
hands, all Sums due by him to Balgillo, for payment of a Debt due by Magillo to
Mr. James, and likewise Iuhibits Bagillo, after which there is a Tripartite
Contract, betwixt Bagillo on the first part; the Doctor on the second, and John
Smith who bought the Lands; on the third, the Doctor and Bagillo Dispone with
mutual consent, and the Doctor particularly assigns the Minute to Smith,
Bagil^o Renounces the Minute, as to the price; and Smith is obliged to pay the
Wodset to the Doctor; the Debtor being before conveened, for making arrested
Goods forthcoming, and having Deponed that he was owing no Sums to Bagillo, the
time of the arrestment, but by the Minute, which was an Inchoat Bargain, never
perfected, but was past from thereafter, and that he was not Disponer to Smith,
but only consenter, whereupon he was assoilzied; But Mr. James Campbel, having
now found the Tripartite Contract, pursues the Doctor again thereupon, and
super dolo, that by passing from the Bargain, and yet assigning the Minute, and
not destroying it, he had dolose evacuate Mr. James Inhibition and Arrestment,
seeing Smith would defend himself against the Inhibition upon the Minute, which
was anterior to the Inhibition, Disponing the Land. It was alleged for the
Doctor, that he was tutus exceptione rei judicatae, because he was already
assoilzed, having Deponed upon the Arrestment, and the Pursuer could not make
use of any Writ in that which he had referred to the Defenders Oath. 2. Albeit
the matter were entire, there was nothing to enforce him to perfeit a minute of
the sale of Lands, but that he might pass from it before it was extended, or
might assign it to any other, which could import no Fraud, seeing he was not
obliged to know, or cannot be presumed, that he knew the Inhibition, used
against Bagillo. The Pursuer answered, that for the Defenders Oath, he did not
now insist upon it, nor did the Writ produced contradict it, for when a Party
Depones upon the Tenor of a Writwhich is not his own Writ, it can but be
understood according to his memory; but if thereafter by the Writ it self, it
do appear to be otherways, it does not infer Perjury, nor can it justly exclude
the Pursuer, to make use of that Writ.

2ly. There is not only a different matter of Probation here, but a different
medium from the former Process, viz. damnum and dolus, at least lata culpa dolo
aequiparata, in so far as the Doctor did assign the Minute, and exclude the
Pursuers Inhibition, which is the more clear, that in the said Contract the
Doctor secures himself by Bagilloes obliegement, to warrant the Doctor from any
hazard, by assigning the Minute, ubi nimia cautio arguit dolum; neither can the
Defender pretend ignorance, not only by the Publication, and Registration of
the Inhibition, but upon that very Inhibition, the arrestment being execute
against the Doctor.

The Lords having Read and Considered the Triparti^e ^ontract, they found that
after the Arrestment was laid on, the pri^e of the Land was affected, and no
Discharge nor Renunciation by the Debtor, could take the price Arrested away
from the Arrester; and therefore found the Lybel Relevant, and proven by the
Tripartile Contract, produced and decerned, notwithstanding of the former
Alsolvitor upon the Doctors Oath.

Bishop of the Isles contra The Fishers of Greenock, November. 24. 1665.
THe Bishop of the Isles, as being presented by His Majesty to the Bishopric
of the Isles, and whole Teinds, Rents, and Emoluments thereof, and as thereby
having Right to the great Teind of all Fish, taken in, and about the Isles of
Scotland; Pursues the Fishers of Greenock, for the Teind of Cod and Ling, taken
by them, about the Isles of Arran, Bute and Ilsey; but insists only for these
taken between Arran and Ilsey, or Boot; and not between these and the Shore,
and insists against the Fishers of Greenock, as Fishing in that Bounds: The
Defenders alleged, 1. Absolvitor, because the Bishops Right buire expressly,
according as his Predecessors had been in Possession, and it was not libelled,
nor could it be proven, that ever the Bishop of the Isles was in Possession of
the Teind of any Fish^ taken by the Inhabitants of the main Land, albeit taken
in the place libelled. 2ly. Albeit that Clause were not insert; yet all Teinds
of their own Nature, and by the Custom of this Kingdom, are Local and
Consuetudinar, and so can be craved out of no place, or for no particular,
unless they had been accustomed to be paid of these particulars by that place,
as in some places Teinds are paid, not only of Stirk and Lamb, Wool and Milk,
but of Staigs, Swine, Hemp, Lint, Eggs; and some places of Fruit, and in other
places^ of none of these, and that within the same Parochs: And therefore,
unless it were Libelled, that Teinds had been accustomed to be paid in this
place, they are not due. 3ly. Albeit a Teind here were due of Fish, it could
not be due to the Bishop of the Isles, because such Teinds being personal, and
not predial, follow the Residence of the Takers, and not the place where they
are taken; especially being taken, not in any Bay or Creik of the Isles, but in
mari libero, several miles from any Isle, except Ilsey, which is no Island, but
a Rock inhabited by no body. 4ly. The Defenders offer them to prove, that they
and others upon that Shore of the main-land, has been in Possession 40. years,
of a constant fishing of Cod and Ling, in that place, free from all payment of
Teinds to the Bishop of the Isles, paying only two merks yearly, to the
Tacks-men of the Viccarage of Greenock, granted in Tacks by the Ministers of
Greenock. The Pur^uer answered, that the Clause in his Charter was in his
favor, and is to extend the same to all his Predecessors Possessed, bearing as
amply, etc. and that for the Possession, it was sufficient that which he had
condescended, viz. that he offered him to prove, that through all his Diocie,
the small Teind of Fish belonged to the Ministers as Viccars, but the great
Teind of Killing, Ling and Herring, belonged to the Bishop^ and was possessed by
him and his Predecessors, past memory, but he needs not allege, that he
possessed in every several place, where Fish happen to swim; but possessing
generally about the Isles, not only as to the Inhabitants of the Isles, being
in his Diocie; but also being taken by the Inhabitants of the Main-land
throughout the Kingdom. And as in a Barony, Possession of a part, will be
sufficient for the whole; so it must be in this Benefice, especially seeing it
is but of late that there was any considerable Fishing in the place in
question, and there was no reason, if Herring and other Fish, change the Lochs
where they are ordinarily found, that because there was never Herring Teinded in
that Loch, therefore there was none due there.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, viz. that the Defenders, and others upon
the Main-land thereabout^ had been in immemorial Possession, in the place in
question, of Cod and Ling, free from paying any Teind to the Bishops of the
Isles; But the Lords would not sustain less then immemorial Possession of the
freedom, in respect of the time the Bishops had been out, nor did they
determine the Right of the Ministers of Greenock, whether they had Right to the
hail Viccarage, or that, as a small duty, but reserved that to them as accords,
and they found that the Defense of a constant Fishing, elided the
condescendence that this Fishing was but new.

Mr. James Chalmers contra Lady Tinnel. Eodem die.
MR. James Chalmers Parson of Dumfreis, having obtained a Decree before the
Sheriff, for a part of his Stipend, against this Lady Tinnel, for whom a
Procurator compeared, and took a Term to produce her, and she succumbed,
whereupon she was holden as confessed. She Suspends, and alleadges that the
Decree bears not the Procurator to have produced any Mandat, and therefore
craves to be Reponed to her Oath.

The Lords finding that there was nothing else alleged by the Procurator,
that might infer his being informed, or having Warrant, but only his taking a
day to produce, they would not sustain the Decree, unless the Charger
instructed the same, by proving the quantities.

White contra Horn. November. 25. 1665.
IN a Competition between White and Horn, the one having Right by progress to
the Property of a piece Land, and the other to an Annualrent forth thereof. It
was alleged for the Proprietar, First, That the Annualrent was prescribed, no
Possession being had thereupon, above forty years. 2ly. The Original Right
produced to constitute the Annualrent, is but a Seasine without a Warrant: and
albeit the Common Author have given Charter of Ratification thereof; yet it is
after the Proprietars Seasine, given by the Common Author to his Daughter,
propriis manibus. It was answered for the Annualrenter, to the first, That the
Prescription was interrupted by Citations produced, used upon a Summons of
Poinding of the Ground, before the Baillies of the Regality of Dumfermling,
where the Lands ly. As to the second, that the Confirmation granted to the
Annualrenter, is prior to any Charter, Precept, or other Warrant, granted to
the Proprietar: for as for the Seasine, propriis manibus; that has no Warrant
produced. The Proprietar answered, that the Interruption was not Relevant,
because the Executions were null, in so far as the Warrant of the Summons
bears, to Cite the Defender Personally; Or otherwise upon the Ground of the
Land, or at the Market Cross, or Shore of Dumferm^ing, whereupon such as were
out of the Country, were Cited^ and not upon 60. days, but 25. which Reasons
would have excluded that Decree, and therefore cannot be a legal Interruption.
As to the other, albeit the Pursuers first Seasine want a Warrant, yet it has
been cled with natural Possession, and the Annualrentars has not.

The Lords Repelled both these alleadgences, for the Proprietar; and found the
Executions sufficient to interrupt, albeit there were defects in them, that
might have hindered Sentence thereupon, especially in re antiqua, the Lands
being in Regality, where the custom might have been, even to Cite Parties
absent out of the Country, at the head Burgh of the Regality, and the Shore
next thereto, and as the Proprietars Right was not Established by Prescription,
so they found that Possession could not give a possessory Judgment to the
Proprietar, against an Annual^entar, which is debitum fundi.

Mr. James Peter contra John Mitchelson. Eodem die.
MR. James Peter Minister of Terregh pursues Mitchelson for a part of his
Stipend, due out of the Defenders Lands, who alleged no Process, till the
Pursuer produced a Title to the Defenders Teinds, seeing he brooked them by a
Tack. It was Replied, he offered him to prove seven years Possession, as a part
of the Stipend of Terreghs.

Which the Lords sustained without any Title of Possession.

Bruce contra Earl of Mortoun. November. 28. 1665.
IN an Action for making arrested Sums forthcoming, between Bruc^ and the Earl
of Mortoun.

The Lords found that the Summons behoved to be continued, seeing they were not
past by a special privilege of the Lords, to be without continuation, albeit
they were accessory to the Lords Anterior Decree, against the principal
D^bitor, which they found to be a ground to have granted the privilege of not
Continuation, if it had been desired by a Bill, at the raising of the Summons,
but not being demanded, They found quod non in erat de jure.

Younger contra Iohnstouns. Eodem die.
PAtrick Porteous having a Tenement of Land in Edinburgh, provided his Wife
thereto in Liferent, and dyed before the year 1608. his Wife lives and
Possesses as Liferenter. Yet in Anno 1608. one Porteous his Brother Son, was
Served and Retoured Heir to him, and Infeft as Heir, and Disponed the Land,
which is come through three several singular Successors to Iohnstouns, who are
Infeft therein, as Heirs to their Father, in Anno 1655. Young^r having acquired
a^ Disposition from Stephanlaw, Porteus Residenter in Polland, causes Serve the
said Stephenlaw, as nearest Heir to the said Patrick, whereupon Stephenlaw is
Infeft, and Younger is Infeft. There are now mutual Reductions raised by either
Parties, of others Retours and Rights; wherein Younger alleging, that his
Author Stephenlaw, Porteous was the nearest of Kin, in so far as Patrick the
Defunct had four Brethren, and Stephen Law Porteous was Oye to the eldest
Brother, whereas the other pretended Heir was Son to the youngest Brother,
which he offered him to prove. It was answered for Iohnstouns, Absolvitor from
that Reason of Reduction, because they had Established their Right by
Prescription, in so far as they had a progress of Infeftments, far beyond the
space of forty years cled with Possession, by the Liferenter, whose Possession
behoved to be accounted their Possession, because the Act of Pa^liament anent
Prescription, bears, that the Person Infeft being in Possession by himself, or
by his Tennents, or others deriving Right from him, and therefore the
Liferenters Possession is alwise the Fiars. 2ly. By the first Act of Parliament
anent Prescriptions of Retours, they prescrive, if they be not quarrelled,
within three years. And by the last Act of Parliament 1617. anent the
Prescription of Retours, they are declared to be prescrived, if they be not
pursued within twenty years. And by the general Act of Prescription 1617. There
is a general Clause, that all Reversions, Heretable Bonds, and all Actions
whatsomever, shall prescrive, if they be not followed within forty years. By
all which, Stephenlaw Porteous, not being Retoured till the year 1655. nor
having moved any Action against the first Retour. This Action of Reduction, and
all other Actions competent, are prescribed. It was answered for Younger, that
he being Heir to maintain the right of Blood, which is the most important
Right, competent by the Law of Nations, no Statute, nor positive Law can take
it away, unless it be express and evident, for the right of Blood can never
prescrive, seeing it is certain, that a man may serve himself Heir to his
Predecessor, though he died a 1000. years since, if he can instruct his
Service. And as for the Acts of Parliament alleged upon, they cannot take
away any Right of Blood, for the first Act of Prescription, on three years
expressly, bears, to extend to these within the Country, as Stephenlaw was not:
and the last Act is expressly, only in relation to Retoures, to be deduced
thereafter, but this first Retour quarrelled, was deduced long before, viz. in
Anno. 1608. As for the general Act of Prescription, seeing it mentions not
Retoures, but only Infeftments^ Reversions and Heretable Bonds; The general
Clause of all Actions whatsomever, ought not to be extended to Retoures,
especially, seeing the meaning of the Parliament appears not to have been
extended by them to Retoures, because the very next Act does specially Order
the prescription of Retoures. As to the Iohnstouns Infeftments, they have not
the benefit of Prescriptions, never being cled with Possession: For the
Liferenters Possession, as it was the Defuncts Possession: So it did continue
to be the true appearand Heirs Possession, although none had been Served to
this Day; and therefore the Service or Infeftment following thereupon, cannot
take away from the true Heir the presumptive Possession of Law, which the true
Heir has. 2ly. No Prescription can be valid against others: But these that
know, or are at least obliged to know the Right, whereupon it proceeds; but
the true Heir was not obliged to know their Service, nor was he obliged to
Serve himself, but when he pleased, especially seeing he could get no benefit as
long as the Liferenter lived, and that he was not obliged to know the first
Service, appears, because he was not called thereto, otherways then by a
general Citation at the Market Cross, to all Parties having Interest, which is
but a point of mere form and prejudges no body, and at least could not prejudge
a Stranger, living out of the Country, animo remanendi, there being neither
special nor general Citation, as to Persons out of the Country on 60. days.

The Lords found no weight in this last Point, seeing the Law requires no
Citation on 60. days, in cases of Retoures, but only 15. days generally, at
the Market Cross, which they find every man, origin Scotus, obliged to take
notice of, or to have a Procurator at Edinburgh, as in communi patria, who may
search the Register of Retoures, whether in the public Register, or Town
Books, before they prescribe. They also found that there was no ground for
Prescription upon the first Act of Parliament, as bearing only relation to
these in the Country, nor upon the last Act of Parliament, as bearing only
relation Retoures, to be deduced thereafter, neither did they sustain the
Prescription upon the first part of the general Act of Prescription; for they
found the Liferenters Possession in the Competition of two Heirs, not to be
profitable to either of them, in prejudice of the other, nor yet to be the
Possession of singular Successors, seeing it flowed not from these singular
Successors, but from the Defunct, to whom both Parties pretended to be Heir;
but the Lords found the posterior clause in the Act of Parliament, of all
Actions whatsomever to extend to the Reduction of Retoures, and to be general,
as to all Actions that may concern Heirs, in prejudice of others: And found it
so much the rather to extend to Retoures, that the next ensuing Act finds
Retoures to be Deduced thereafter, only to be Reduceable within twenty years,
and so finds the Reduction thereof to prescrive sooner than other Rights; and
therefore cannot be thought, not to have meaned to reach bygone Retoures, by
the general Act.

Creditors of James Masson Merchant Supplicants. Nov. 30. 1665.
JAmes Masson Merchant in Edinburgh having unexpectedly broke and fled, his
Creditors gave in Supplication to the Lords, bearing, that he had most
deceitfully broken, having the price of the Goods that he had sold, meditatione
fugae, in his hand, and that he either lurked in the Abbay, or was to go out of
the Country; and therefore craved a Warrant to Messengers of Arms, to secure
his Goods, and apprehend his Person wherever the same could be found, until the
matter were heard.

The Lords having considered the case, that the occasion was very extraordinar,
and also the desire, most were of the opinion, that the Lords might grant the
Desire, which was done accordingly, with a Recommendation to the Duke of
Hamiltoun, Keeper of the Kings House, not to suffer him to lurk there, but to
expel him, that he might be apprehended: For albeit ordinarily the Lords grant
not Caption or Warrant of Wairding the Person of the Kings free Leidge, till he
be Denunced Rebel. Yet seeing the Magistrates of Burghs, and the Admiral grant
Acts of Wairding against Parties, until they find Caution to answer as Lawwill.
The Lords who had eminently in themselves these Jurisdictions, they might do
the like in the like case: but some thought that was a special privilege, not
to be extended, and this was of dangerous Example to secure persons unheard,
more proper for the Council, as a case extraordinar, then for the Session.

David Boyd contra Isobel Lauder and John Tailzifer Eodem die.
DAvid Boyd pursues John Tailzifer, as Representing his Father, on all the
passive Titles, and Isobel Lauder his Mother and Tutrix, for her Interest, and
condescends upon his behaving as Heir, by uplifting of the Mails and Duties of
his Fathers Lands, by his said Tutrix. It was answered, that he being a Pupil,
his Tutrix Intromission could not infer that passive Title against him, as has
been frequently sustained these many years. It was answered, that was but since
the Usurpation, but before the Tutors Intromission, did always infer this
Title, and the Pupil could only pursue his Tutor for his damnage.

The Lords found the Pupil not liable on this passive Title, by his Tutors
Intromission.

The Pursuer then insisted against the Tutrix, for paying so far as she had
intrometted. It was answered, that she was but called for her Interest, to
authorize her Pupil, but not to pay, neither could she be liable to pay, unless
a Decree had been first Established against the Pupil^ and then it had been
Arrested in her hands, and pursued to be made forthcoming.

And yet the Lords found the Tutrix, hoc ordine, liable.

White contra Brown. Eodem die.
JOhn White as having Right from James White his Father, Charges Brown for
2000. merks, who suspends on this Reason, that this Translation being by a
Father to a Son, in his Family, at least having no visible Estate to acquire
it: The Suspender cannot be prejudged, as to the manner of Probation, by the
Fathers Oath, by which he offered him to prove, that the Father was Debtor in
a greater Sum. It was answered, that the Cedents Oath could not be taken in
prejudice of the Assigney.

The Lords found that in this case, the Reason was probable by the Cedent Oath.

Telzifer contra Geddes. December. 1. 1665.
THe competition between Telzifer and Geddes, mentioned the eleventh of
November last, being this day again called, Debated and Reconsidered by the
Lords at length. The question being, that Marjory Sandilands having granted a
Bond to Samuel Veatch, blank in the Creditors name, Samuel filled up Marion
Geddes Name therein, whereupon she Registrat the Bond, and Charged him, in the
mean time Telzifer, as Veatches Creditor, having Arrested all Sums in Marjory
Sandilands hands, adebted by her to Samuel Veatch, and pursuing to make the
same forthcoming, she depones that the time of the Arrestment, she was no ways
Debtor to Veatch, but by a Bond blank in the Creditors Name, and that she did
not know whose Name was filled up in it: But now Telzifer the Arrester
compearing, craves to be preferred, because he had arrested the Sum, as
belonging to Samuel Veatch his Debtor, before Samuel Veatch was Denuded, by
filling up Marion Geddes Name, and intimating, or showing the same to
Sandilands the Debtor, and that the filling up of Geddes Name, being but an
Assignation, did necessarly require to accomplish it, to Denude the Cedent, an
Intimation, for seeing express Assignations do necessarly require Intimation, to
prefer them to arrestments; much more ought indirect Assignations, which are
suspect of Fraud, and by which a Debtor may keep all his Estate in the Cloud,
that none of the Creditors can reach the same, by arrestment or otherwise. And
it being answered, that the Bond being delivered blank, there was no present
Creditor, but a power granted to the Receiver of the Bond, to make Creditor
whom he pleased; at least there was no certain Creditor, so that Samuel Veatch
was never Creditor, but had only the power to make the Creditor, and so needed
not to be Denuded, nor was there any Law or custom, requiring intimation of the
Names filled up in blank Bonds, and if any such thing were done upon the
account of Expediency, it ought only to be in time coming.

The Lords adhered to their former Interlocutor, and found Veatch to have been
the true Creditor, and the filling up of the other Name, to be a Transmission
equivalent to an Assignation, and required Intimation, as well for Cases past
as to come; for they thought that if Veatch, before the filling of the Bond had
been Rebel, it would have fallen within his Escheat.

Edward Edgar contra Colvills. December. 2. 1665.
EDward Edgar pursues Colvil Success or Lucrative to his Father. Mr. Alexander
Colvil, in so far as he accepted an Assignation of an Heretable Bond, unto
which Bond he would have succeeded as Heir. It was answered, that this passive
Title was never extended to Bonds of Provision, granted by a Father to his
eldest Son, and if in security and satisfaction of such a Bond of Provision, an
Assignation of a Debt, due to the Father and his Heirs, were granted, could not
infer an universal Title, to make the Accepter liable to his Predecessors whole
Debt, so neither can an Assignation to a Bond, which is no more in effect, and
such odious passive Titles are not to be extended, but the Pursuer may Reduce
upon the Act of Parliament 1621. or at the farthest, may crave by this Process,
the simple avail of what the Defender has intrometted with, by virtue of the
Assignation.

The Lords found the condescendence Relevant, as being preceptio haereditatis,
and as an Assignation to a Tack, or a small Annualrent, has been found
sufficient, so there is like or more Reason for Assignations to heretable
Bonds, which may be more easily conveyed away from Creditors, but they found it
not alike as to Bonds of Provision, whereby the Father became Debtor, and in
satisfaction and security, whereof he might Assign, and would only import
single payment, but not an universal passive Title.

Hugh Mcculloh contra Mr. John Craig. Eodem die.
HVgh Mcculloh having Right to an Apprizing of an Heretable Bond of 2000.
merks, due by Umquhil Mr Robert Craig to Patrick Wood, pursues Mr. John Craig
as Heir by progress, for payment thereof, and produces a new Extract of the
Appryzing, by the Clerk of the Appryzing, together with the said Appryzing, but
so spoiled, that neither the Subscription of the Messenger nor Clerk could be
known. The Defender alleged no Process, till the Principal Appryzing by the
Messenger were produced; because it being in effect the Executions of the
Messenger, to whom more was trusted then to the Clerk: The Extract by the Clerk
without the Messenger was not sufficient. It was answered, that Appryzings of
old were all direct to the Sheriffs of the Shire, and were in effect Judicial
Process, wherein Parties were Cited, Called and Decerned; and now the Messenger
being Constitute Sheriff in that part by the Letters of Appryzing, he may
choice his own Clerk, and the Extract of that Clerk is sufficient, as of all
other Clerks; and albeit for more security, both Clerk and Messenger Subscribe:
yet it has not been determined how far the Messengers Subscription is
necessar: And the Decree of Appryzing is not the Executions of the Appryzing,
which are distinct therefrom, and Instructions thereof.

The Lords thought that the new Extract behoved, either to be astructed with
the Letters and Executions, and other Adminicles, or that they would not
sustain it alone: But the question was, whether it should be astructed, hoc
ordine, or by a proving of the Tenor, in a several Process, which was carried
by the plurality.

Thomson contra Henderson. December. 4. 1665.
THomson having granted a Bond to his Brother of a sum of Money, the same was
assigned to Henderson, who thereupon Charged. The Debtor suspends, and
produces a Discharge by the Cedent of the same Date, and Witnesses with the
Bond, and alleged that the Debt being Discharged before the Assignation,
excluded the Assigney. It was answered, That the Discharge was granted most
fraudulently, so that the fraud betwixt the two Brethren, is manifest to have
been contrived to deceive, any Person should Contract with the Creditor, whom
they saw to have a Bond of a solvendo Person in his hand^ and so might be
induced to lend him Money, or Contract with him in Marriage, or otherwise; and
the Charger having upon that account, lent him Money, and taken Assignation,
cannot be excluded by this Contrivance, which was done pessimo dolo. It was
answered; First, That dolus was not competent by way of Reply. 2ly. That the
Assigney took the Assignation on his own Peril, and he should have asked at the
Debtor before he took it.

The Lords, though the matter was of small Importance, were willing to take the
matter of fraud to consideration by way of Reply; and therefore ordained the
Suspender to condescend upon some reasonable Cause of the granting of the Bond,
and taking back a Discharge thereof at the same time.

Beg contra Beg. December. 5. 1665.
BEg having Disponed some Land to his Son, Redeemable on a Rose-Noble, and
having married a second Wife, he Disponed the same to her in Liferent, and
assigned her to the Reversion. The Father having used an Order, pursues
Declarator. The Son alleadges absolvitor, because he was assigned to an
Appryzing: Which Appryzing carried the Right of the Reversion of that Wodset,
and thereby his Father was Denuded of the Reversion, and could not redeem the
Wodset, till he Redeemed the Appryzing. It was answered, that the Father was
not simply Denuded during the Legal: During which time, the Appryzing was but
like a Right granted in Security, which Denuded not the Fiar; as if the Son for
Security of a Sum, had been assigned to the Reversion, the Father was not
Denuded, but might use the Order, by which the Security was not worse but
better; the same holds in this Case; and therefore it is, that he against whom
an Appryzing is led, may Redeem the first Appryzing, albeit the second Appryzer
has appryzed the Reversion, otherwise no man could redeem an Appryzing, unless
he redeemed all his appryzings at once, which have different legals; and this
Case is as favorable, because the Reversion was only to the Father in his own
life; and therefore the Son endeavored to hinder him to Redeem, by taking
Right to this Appryzing. It was answered, that the Case was not alike in a
Conventional Reversion, as in a legal: And that the Appryzing led against the
Father in his life, would perpetuat the Reversion; and that this Case was
unfavourable, where the Father intended to frustrate his Heir, in favors of
the Wife of the second Marriage, to whom he had assigned the Reversion.

The Lords having upon the first report considered the favourableness of the
Sons Case, sustained the Defense, but afterward upon Bill, ordained them to be
heard again in presentia, and having heard them, The Lords were of different
opinions, so that that came not to a Vot; But the Lords before answer, ordained
the Wife to insist upon her Right, who alleged that she might Redeem, ad hunc
effectum, to enjoy the benefit of her Liferent Right, after her Husbands Death.
It was answered; First, That she wanted the concourse of her Husband. 2ly. That
her Assignation was not intimat. It was answered; First, Her Assignation was
Registrat in the Register of Reversions, conform to the Act of Parliament:
Which Registration being publicandi causa, needed no intimation. 2ly. That she
had a Disposition in Liferent, by her Contract of the Lands, which carried
omnejus, in the Disponer, as to the Liferent Right, during her Life, and so
carried the Reversion, though not expressed, and her Seasine being registrat, it
was equivalent to the Registration of the Assignation.

The Lords sustained the Wifes Interest, and declared in her favors, for her
Liferent use, and found the Disposition with the Seasine Registrat, and the
Assignation also Registrat sufficient.

Cheisly contra Cuthbert. Eodem die.
CHeisly Charges Cuthbert for his Prentis-fee: Who suspends, and alleadges that
he was set Prentise to him as Apothecary, and that he deserted that Employment,
and became a Drogeist, and thereupon the Suspender left him. It was answered,
that, the breeding of him as a Drogeist was sufficient, and that he now
practiced as Apothecary and Cherurgeon.

The Lords found this answer not Relevant, the Suspender being set to him as
Apothecary, to make Drogs, and not as a Drogeisi that buys Drogs, as to the
time after he changed: But the Charger having further offered to prove, that he
constantly in his Chamber, makes, as well as sell Drogs, the Lords found it
Relevant.

Richard Cunninghame contra Duke of Hamiltoun. Eodem die.
RIchard Cuninghame pursues the Duke and Duchess of Hamiltoun, for payment of a
Bond, granted by the late Duke, which being produced, appeared to have been
blank in the Sum, Date and Creditors Name. The Defenders alleged, the Bond
was null, as wanting the Designation of the Writer. It was answered, that they
did now Design him, which has been always allowed by the Lords. It was
answered, that though the Lords have done so, ex officio: Yet in a case of this
nature, where the Debt is so old, never mentioned before, and the Bond in the
substantials blank, in which case the Lords ought to keep by the express words
in the Act of Parliament, that such Writs are null, and not to be supplied by
an equivalent.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and admitted the Designation.

Hellen Hill contra Maxwels. Eodem die.
IN an account and reckoning between Hellen Hill, Relict of John Maxwel in
Glasgow, who was one of the Tutors named by John to his Bairns and Mr. Robert
and George Maxwels his brethren, who succeeded the Daughters, being dead: John
by his Testament leaves his two Daughters, and failing of either of them, by
Decease to the other, his universal Legatars; one of the Daughters dyed Pupil,
and the other shortly after her age of 12. years, nominat the said Hellen her
Mother, universal Legatrix, whereby Hellen craved the universal Legacy of both
the Daughters. It was alleged that the last Daughter, not having Confirmed
her self Executrix to the first; the first share was never established in her
Person, and so could not be Transmitted by her Testament, but belonged to the
nearest of Kin, of the first Daughter, viz. The said Maxwells. It was
answered, That this being a Substitution of each of the two Daughters, to
other, nominatim by the death of the one, it accrest into the other, ipso
facto, without Confirmation, as in the case of Bonds of Provision, payable to
the Father, and by Decease of him, to such a Bairn named, albeit the Father be
Fiar, and the Bairn but Heir substitute, it needs not Confirmation; but the
Bairn may summarly charge or pursue. The Lords found no need of Confirmation,
but that it did accresce to the second Daughter, upon the death of the first,
and so was carried by the seconds Testament: In this account, Mr. Robert as
Heir, pursuing for the Heretable Bonds. The Tutrix answered, that she ought to
have allowance of what was wared out upon repairing of the Tenement in Glasgow.
It was answered, that she as Tutrix, ex officio, was obliged to exhaust the
Movables first, one Person being both Heir and Executor, and not to exhaust
the Heretable Bonds, that bore Annualrent, and to let the other lie
unprofitable, and now to apply it to her own use, by her Legacy. It was
answered, That it was employed upon the Heritage, and so was profitable to the
Heir only, being employed upon the House, and that by a Warrant, the Heir being
then under Tutors, to repair it out of the first and readiest of the Defuncts
Estate.

The Lords found that Article Relevant, to be deduced out of the Heretable
Estate.

Elizabeth Anderson contra Andrew Cunninghame. December 7. 1665.
ANdrew Cunninghames Wife having left a Legacy to Elizabeth Anderson: It was
alleged by the Husband, that his Wifes share of the movables was exhausted.
It was answered, That he having confirmed his Wifes Testament, and given up the
Debts due by him therein, and made Faith thereon, he cannot now be admitted to
adduce any other Debts, especially being so recent before the Testament, within
three or four years. It was answered, that he had only made Faith upon the
Inventar of the Goods belonging to him, but not of the Debts due by him, which
were only given up to abaite the Quot: and albeit it may be presumed that he
knew and remembered his own Debt, yet presumptio cedi^ veritati, seeing the
Creditors now produce their Bond instructing the Debt, and crave preference.

Which the Lords found Relevant, vid. June 9. 1666.

Katharin Smith and William Duncan contra Isobel Robertson. Eodem die.
KAtharin Smith and William Duncan having apprized from Isobel Robertson, and
John Wilson, all Right they had to a Tenement, under which fell the
Liferent-right of Isobel Robertson his Wife, jure mariti, Pursues the said
Isobel, for payment of the Mails and Duties that she had uplifted, and of a
part of the Tenement that she dwelt in her self: She alleged, first, that her
Husbands jus mariti, could not carry her Liferent, seeing immediately after the
marriage he went out of the Country, and was never heard of since, and she had
obtained Decree of Adherence against him, and was going on in a Divorce for
malicious deserting.

The Lords Repelled the Alleadgance, seeing the Divorce was not complete, and
this was four years anterior.

The said Isobel further alleged absolvitor, for the Rents of her
Dwelling House for bygones, and for what she had uplifted, because she had done
it, bona fide cum titulo, viz. her Husbands obliegement to aliment her as his
Wife, and bona fide possessor facit fructus consumptos suos.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and that albeit her Husband would be liable
for these Rents, which alimented his Wife, yet not she.

David Veatch contra John Duncan. Eodem die.
DAvid Veatch as heritor of the Miln of Dersie, pursues John Duncan, for
abstracted Multures, and obtains Decree. He Charges and John Suspends, both
parties being ordained to produce their Rights: the Heritor of the Miln,
instructs that his Author was first Infeft in the Miln, before the Defenders
Author was Infeft in the Land, and produces a Decree of the Lords in Anno
1575. declaring the Thirlage, wherein it was alleged that the Heretor of the
Miln being first Infeft of the Common-author, and producing a Precept from
Cardinal Beaton, then Bishop of St. Andrews Common-author, ordaining the
Tennents of the Defenders Land, to pay the Multure to the Miln of Dersie. It
was alleged, this was not sufficient, seeing the Charter did not Thirle the
Defenders Lands, but was only of the Miln and Multure thereof generally, as for
the Cardinals Precept, it was not with consent of the Chapter, and so could not
extend beyond the Bishops Life: yet the Lords declared the Astriction,
notwithstanding it was now alleged, that the Defender was Infeft, cum
molendinis and muliuris; by virtue whereof, he had prescribed his freedom by
40. years time. It being answered that once being Thirled by the Common-author,
no Charter granted by him thereafter, could prejudge the Feuar of the Miln. And
as for Prescription, offered to prove Interruption, by paying of
Insucken-multures within the space of 40. years.

William Cranstoun contra Walter Pringle. December. 12. 1665.
WIlliam Cranstoun being Vassal to Greenknow, he was amerciat in his Court, for
a Blood committed upon Walter Pringle: and being charged, Suspends upon this
Reason, that Greenknow not being a Baron, or the Kings immediate Tennent, had no
power of Blood-waits, unless he had had an express Deputation from his
Superior, the Marquess of Huntly, who is Baron only having the Jurisdiction.
It was answered, that Greenknow was Infeft, cum curiis and bloodwitis.

Which the Lords found sufficient.

Mr. John Pearson contra Martin and his Son. Eodem die.
MR. John Pearson, by his Contract with Eupham Martin, did conceive the Clause
of his Tochar, in their Terms, that it should be payable to him and her, the
longest liver of them two in Conjunct-fee and Liferent, and to the Heirs of the
Marriage, in Fee; which failzing to return to the Wifes Heirs. By a second
Contract, betwixt the Husband and his Wife, it was agreed that that Clause
should be altered; and that failzing the Heirs of the Marriage, it should
return to the man's Heirs, who thereupon pursue Declarator of Right, by virtue
of the second Contract. The Defender being absent.

The Lords advised the Cause wherein the difficulty appeared to be, that the
Tochar was provided to the Bairns in Fee, So that the Husband and Wife could
not alter the Succession, being both Liferenters, because, that the Clause
bears, to them in Liferent, and to the Bairns in Fee; yet the Lords sustained
the Declarat^r; seeing the Husband and Wife were named Conjunctfeers, so that
either of them behoved to be Fear, and the adjection of, and Liferent could
only be understood of the Person that were Liferentar, and albeit it was
expressed to be the Bairns in Fee, yet that could be but of a substitution, seeing
there were no Bairns then existent.

Christian Barns contra Hellen Young and her Spouse. Eodem die.
HEllen Young being provided to the Annualrent of 800 merks, and to the
Conquest, obtained Decree thereupon, against Christian Barns the Executrix,
who Suspends on this Reason, that the Pursuer was Infeft by the Defunct her
Father, in a Tenement, in full satisfaction of these provisions. It was
answered, nonrelevat, unless it were alleged, that the Charger had accepted.
Whereupon it was alleged, Accepted, in so far as she had uplifted the Mails
and Duties after her Fathers death, and had no other Title ascribe it to. It
was answered, that she had another Title, viz. her Goodsir had Disponed this
Tenement to her Father and Mother, the longest liver of them two, and the
Bairns of the Marriage, be virtue whereof, as Heir Appearand of the Marriage,
she might contiue, and uplift, and miskene the new infeftment given by her
Father.

Which the Lords founds relvant, unless the other Party Insist on that
alleadgeance proponed, that the Pursuer had pursued, and obtained payment upon
the Title bearing, in satisfaction.

John Ramsay contra James Wilson and others. Eodem die.
COlonel Cunningham, having impignorat a number of Jewels of great Value, and
immediately thereafter, went out of the Country, and never returned. These
Jewels were in the Custody of John Ramsay, who, and Mr. Robert Byres had given
Bond, to make them furthcoming to the Colonel, and now John Ramsay having been
Confirmed Executor to the Colonel, pursues James Wilson, and others, for
Exhibition, and Delivery of the Jewels. The Defenders alleged absolvitor,
because the Jewels were Impignorat by Mr. Robert Byres for a considerable Sum
of Money, who having them in his Possession, it was a sufficient ground for the
Defenders to Contract with him, because property of Movables is presumed by
Possession; and therefore it is not relevant to lybel, that once the Jewels
were Colonel Cunninghams, and therefore they must be restored to his Executors,
unless it were also lybeled quomodo desijt possidere, so that the Jewels
behoved to have past from him, without his own Consent, or Alienation,
otherwise it is always presumed, that he sold or gifted them, and needs not be
proven; else no man could be secure of any Moveable: if he who could instruct,
that he bought it, could recover it from all possessors, unless they could
instruct all the ways the same past from the first Owner. The Pursuer replied,
that the Case is not here, as to Movables, that are ordinarily sold in Market,
but in relation to Jewels of great Value, which cannot be presumed to have been
Mr. Robert Byres, because they were never worn by him, as being his proper
Good, nor were they Competent to any of his quality: and therefore the
Defenders were, in mala fide, to acquire them from him, without knowing his
Right.

2ly. It is instructed by Mr. Robert Byres Letter produced, that he
acknowledged them to be Colonels, before the Impignoration: and its offered to
be proven, that he broke up John Ramsays Celler, and took them out. 3dly: The
Colonel Impignorat them by Writ, and so the Presumption of allienating them,
ceased, because he went immediately out of the Country, and never returned. It
was answered, that there is no difference of Jewels, more than any other
Movables, which use to pass without Writ from Jewellers that sell them; and
the Pursuer having possessed them these, 10. or 12. Years, without question, has
right thereto, by usucapion.

The Lords found the alleadgeances jointly relevant to elied the presumption,
and that there is no usucapion in Movables in Scotland, by Possession in less
then 40 years, but only a presumptive Title, which is altogether eleided by the
Answers.

Duke of Hamiltoun contra Lord of Clackmanan. December 14. 1665.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun, as Collector of the Taxations 1633. charges the Lord
of Clackmannan, who Suspends, and produces Discharges of the first three Terms.
It was alleged, these discharges could not liberat, because they were granted
by John Scobie, who was neither Sheriff, Baillie, nor Clerk; nor does it
appear, that he had any Warrant, or Commission nor does his Discharges mention
any Commission, or Warrant. It was answered, that by the Discharges produced,
it appears, that Ormistoun and Humbie, deputed for the Duke, had granted
Discharges to this John Scobie, and offer to prove, that he was in use of
uplifting the Taxations during the Terms themselves, and was commonly repute,
as Collector thereof, which must be sufficient post tantum tempus. It was
answered, that that ground would not oblidge the Sheriff, and so both the
Heretor and Sheriff, being free, the King loses his Right.

Yet the Lords sustained the Reason.

Monteith contra Mr. John Anderson. December 15. 1665.
IN a Reduction, at the instance of Monteith against Anderson, a Reason of
payment being found relevant, Mr. John produced an Incident, at the first
Term, and a Diligence against Witnesses, for proving the having of the Writs,
at the second Term.

Which Incident the Lords sustained, and would not restrict the Terms of
probation in the Incident, to Horning against the Witnesses, and Caption, but
allowed four Terms, and ordained the same to be shorter.

Mr. John Elies contra Keith. Eodem Die.
THere was a Bond of 6000 merks, granted by Wiseheart Parson of Leith, and
Keith his Spouse, to Mr. John Elies containing an oblidgement to Infeft him in
an Annualrent out of any of their Lands, with a Procuratorie. The Wife had then
the Lands of Benholm, belonging to her Heretablie, lying in the Mairns, Mr.
John having Inhibite her Husband and her, she sold the the Lands before the
Inhibition was published at the head Burgh of the Mairns, and having thereafter
right to a Sum of 10000 merks for which she was Infeft under Reversion, in
other Lands, an order of Redemption was used, and the Money consigned; Mr. John
Elies pursues a Declataror, to hear and see it Found and Declared, that the
said Keith was oblidged to infeft him in an Annualrent, out of her Lands, which
she had fraudulently Disponed, contraire her obligation, and therefore was now
oblidged to Infeft him in other her Lands, or to pay the Sum, as damnage, and
interest; and that therefore any other Lands, or Rights belonging to her, might
be affected for his payment, and particularly the Wodset now in question.
Compearance was made for the Defenders Grandchild, who had a Right from her
Grandmother to the Wodset, who alleged, First, That the Bond bearing, an
oblidgement for Debt, granted by the Wife, stante matrimonio was null. It was
answered, that albeit the Personal oblidgment were null, yet the oblidgment, to
Infeft in an Annualrent granted by a Wife, is valid, either against her
Heretage, or Liferent, and alleged several Dicisions therefore. It was
answered, that the Wife might do so, if she had borrowed money for her own use,
or were principally bound to Infeft in an Annualrent, but this oblidgment being
in security of her Personal obligatigation, with her Husband, the principal
obligation being null, the accessory is also null.

The Lords repelled the alleadgeance, and found the oblidgement to Infeft
valid, albeit accessory, because Deeds, and Obligations of Wyfes not to affect
their Persons, but Estates are valid; and albeit she had not been bound for the
principal Debt, she might either have effectually disponed an Annualrent, or
which is all one, oblidged her self to Infeft in an Annualrent out of her
Heretage, and utile per inutile non vitiatur.

It was further alleged, that this Wodset, or Sum disponed to her Oy, could
not be affected, because her Oy, was the youngest of many Oyes, and did no
ways represent her.

The Lords sustained this Member of the Declarator also, upon the Act of
Parliament, 1621. against Dispositions between Conjunct Persons, without a
cause onerous, which they found, might either be a ground to reduce the same,
or to declare the same to be affected, as if the Right were in the Disponers
Person. Herein it was also lybelled, That this Wodset, albeit acquired after
the Inhibition, yet seeing it lay in the same Shire, where the Inhibition was
published, the Grand-child's Right were Reduceable, upon the Inhibition.

The Lords thought so, because Inhibitions being Personal Prohibitions, reach
both acquisita and acquirenda, by the Person Inhibit, in the Shires where it is
published.

Lord Kilbocho contra Lady Kilbocho. December 20. 1665.
THE Lady Kilbocho, by her Contract of Marriage, being provided to certain
Lands, with this provision further, that she should have the Liferent of all
Lands Conquest, during the Marriage, whereupon she obtained a Decree in the
English time, which being now under Reduction. It was alleged, the Clause of
Conquest could only give her the Lands Conquest, with the Burden of the
Annualrent of a Sum due by the Defunct, to a Person from whom he bought the
Land, as being a part of the Price of the Land, especially, seeing by a writ
under the Defuncts hand, he acknowledged, that this Bond was granted for a part
of the Price. It was answered, First, That a Personal oblidgement cannot affect
the Land, neither can it affect the Ladies Person: but if the Defunct had
pleased, he might have granted an Annualrent out of the Lands Conquest, which
then would have affected it, which not being done, his declaring that this Sum
was a part of the price, cannot be effectual, nor can infer a Probation against
his Wife, in prejudice of her anterior Right. Secondly, This alleadgeance might
be proponed as well against the Heir of Conquest, as Liferenter thereof, and
yet it was never found, that the Heir of Conquest behoved to accept the Land
with the Burden of the Sums borrowed to buy it, nor yet to relieve the Heir of
Line thereof; but on the contrair, the Heir of Conquest has relief against the
Heir of Line, for Personal Debt, though borrowed for acquiring the Right.

The Lords found that the Case was not alike with the Heirs of Conquest, whom
Defuncts do Infeft, without any burden; and Liferenters, who having a special
Competent Provision, this general Clause being but adjected, as uncertain, is
not so favorable, or so to be extended; seeing the Husband did not Infeft the
Wife in his own time, in the Conquest. And therefore found her to be liable to
the Annualrent of this Sum, which they found instructed by the Hubands
Declaration, where the Ladies Father is a subscribing Witness.

Sir Rorie Mcclaud contra Walter Young and John Govane Eodem die.
WAlter Young, John Govan and Hendrie Hope, by a Letter written to any that
they should Buy Kows from in the Highlands, desired, that they might use the
Bearer of the Letter kindly, and for whatever quantity of Kows they bought,
they should answer such Bills, as he should draw upon them therefore. Hendrie
Hope being broken, James Gray, as Assigney, pursues the other two for the
whole, who alleged, they were only liable for their own Parts. It was
answered, that they were oblidged to answer such Bills, as the Person entrusted
by them should draw; and they produce a Bill drawn by him, upon them, or either
of them. It was answered, that such Bills can only relate to the Quantity, and
not to the Quality, and manner of oblidging; seeing if they had so intended,
they would have oblidged them, and either of them, or it would have born, what
he should draw upon them, or either of them, should be answered.

The Lords found every one of them liable in solidum, for they thought that the
Clause being dubious, was to be interpret against the Writers, and the Sellers
of the Kows, were bona fide to rest upon the interpretation of the Persons
entrusted.

Sir John Leslie contra Sinclar and Dun. January 22. 1665.
SIr John Leslie, as Assigney constitute by Sir William Dick to a Bond,
oblidging Francis Sinclar as Principal, and young Dun as Cautioner, to deliver
30 Chalders of Bear; at 10 merk the Boll, Dun alleadges absolvitor, because he
was Minor in Familia Paterna, and so his Father was his Curator of Law, and
therefore his subscribing as Cautioner was null, being without his Fathers
consent. It was answered, the alleadgeance was not competent by exception,
against a clear liquid Bond. Secondly, That the Defense is only competent in
the Case of Curators chosen.

The Lords found the Defense Competent by way of Exception; but before answer
to the Relevancie ordained the Parties to condescend upon Duns age, the time of
his Subscription, and whether he did then administrat, or go about any other
affairs.

Dame Rachel Burnet contra Lepers. December 23. 1665.
BY Contract of Marriage betwixt Mr. John Leper, and his Father, and and Dame
Rachel Burnet on the other part, both Father and Son were oblidged to employ
20000 lib. upon security for the Liferent use of the said Dame Rachel, who,
with concurse of Prestoun her present Husband, pursues the Sisters of the said
Mr. John Leper, as Heirs, and otherwise representing him, and their Husbands,
for their entrests; and likewise Doctor Balfours Wife, only Daughter of an of
the Sisters, as Heir to her Father, and Mother, against whom there was Decree
of Registration obtained, during their Lifetimes together, and on this ground,
That the Defuncts Husband did by Contract of Marriage, Disposition, or
otherwise; obtain Right to the Portion of his Wife, one of the Sisters, and
Heirs, and therefore is liable in payment in quantum lucratus est. It was
alleged for Doctor Balfour and his Wife, that she was willing to renounce to
be Heir, to her Mother, but as for the other passive Title, as representing her
Father, who was locuple^ior factus; it is no ways relevant, for Marriage, is a
cause onerous, and Tochars are granted ad sustinenda onera matrimonij, and
therefore are never counted fraudulent deeds, or without an onerous cause; nor
do they fall within the Act of Parliament 1621. against fraudful alienations;
neither was the Defenders Father liable though there was a Decree of
Registration against him, because before any Execution, the Marriage was
dissolved. It was answered, for the Pursuer, that that member of the Lybel
stands relevant, because the Defenders Mother being Heir to her Brother, the
Contracter could not transmit her Estate to her Husband, without the burden of
her Brothers Debt; and it is a most unquestionable Ground in Law and Equity,
quod nemo debet cum alieno damno locupletari, and therefore Creditors are still
preferred to Portions of Children, though given for their Tochar.

The Lords found that Member not Relevant, that Decree was obtained against
the Husband and Wife, stante matrimonio, seeing it received not Execution; and
as to the other Member, they thought, that if there were but a moderat and
ordinar Tochar, proportionable to the burdens of the Marriage, it would not
infer Repitition, or if the Tochar was great, or an universal Disposition of
all the Heirs Right, they thought the Husband would be liable, in so far as it
was above a proportionable Tochar, and therefore before Answer, Ordained the
Contract of Marriage to be produced, and the Pursuer to condescend, if there
was any other benefit accresced to the Husband by his Wife, then by virtue of
the Contract.

It was further alleged, for the Lady Pitmedden, one of the Sisters on Life,
that she could only be liable for her own sixth part, as one of the six Heirs
Portioners. It was answered, by our Law, that all Heirs were liable in solidum.
There was several Decisions alleged on either hand, on the 7. of February
1632. Hoom contra Hoom: Where the Lords found the Heirs Portioners liable but
for their own share. Another February 15. and March 21. 1634. Watson contra Or,
Whereby one of the Daughters having a Disposition of the whole Estate, was
found liable for the whole Debt. And another January 24. 1642. Where one of the
Heirs Portioners, having Disponed her share to the other, and thereby being
insolvent, that other was found liable in solidum.

The Lords having considered the Case, found the Heir Portioner liable, iprmo
loco, only for her own share, until the rest of the Heirs Portioners were
discust, but determined not whether these who were solvendo, should be liable
in solidum, albeit the Debt exceeded their Portion, or only entirely for their
own share, and for as much more as the value of their Succession could amount
to.

Lord of Cesnock contra Lord Bargany. Eodem die.
THE Lord of Cesnock and the Lord Bargany, and Balcarras, being bound
conjunctly and severally in a Bond; Cesnock being distressed for the whole,
takes Assignation, and pursues Bargany for two thirds, who alleged payment;
and because it was a public Debt, he produced an incident in termino, which
the Lords sustained not, because it buire no warrant to cite Cesnock the
Principal Party, and the Executions were within 48 hours by one Person, in
Kill, Renfreu, Fyfe, and Edinburgh, and so suspect, but they superceeded
Extract of the Decree, to the first of November

contra Wilson and Lodwick Callender her Spouse. January 2. 1666.
(...) pursues a Reduction ex capite Inhibitionis, against Iean Wilson, and
Lodwick Callender her Spouse, of all Dispsitions, of certain Tenements of
Leith, made by the Common Author, since the Inhibition. It was alleged, for
the Defenders, absolvitor from this Reduction, because the Defenders produced
an Appryzing led against the common Author, before the Inhibition, and which is
sufficient to maintain the Defenders Right of the Lands in question; and to
exclude all Rights and Interest the Pursuers can have thereto. It was adswered,
non relevat, seeing the Pursuer is not insisting in a Reduction of all Right
competent to the Defenders, upon general Reasons, either bearing expressly, or
by equivalence that the Pursuer had good Right, and the Defender had no Right;
but the Pertner is insisting specially upon particular Rights called for, and
upon a special Reason. viz. That they were after the Pursuers Inhibition, so
that albeit the Defender have another better Right than the Pursuer, it will
not be prejudged by this Reduction, nor can it hinder the conclusion of this
Summonds. viz. That the Dispositions are null, as being post Inhibitionem. It
was answered, for the Defender, that his Defense is relevant, for he
alleging, and producing a sufficient Right to the Lands whereof the
Dispositions are called for to be Reduced, it takes away all Interest in the
Pursuer to these Lands; and therefore he may justly thereupon exclude the
Pursuer from troubling the Defender in this, or any other Reduction, which can
have no effect. It was answered, that if this ground were laid, no Reduction
could be sustained of any particular Right, called for to be reduced, unless
the Pursuer did reduce all Rights, that the Defender could produce, which is
neither just, nor conform to the Custom; because Pursuers may have necessity to
reduce some Rights, in respect of the probation, which may be lost, as either
Oaths of Parties, or Witnesses: and yet may not be in readiness to insist
against all the Defenders Rights, not having found out theirs, or their Authors
progress, but the Lords may reserve the other Rights, seeing their is no
possession, or other effect craved, but only Declaratoria juris.

The Lords, in respect the Defenders were very poor, and their case favorable,
Ordained the Pursuer to insist upon what he had to allege against the
Defenders Appryzing produced, as if it had been contained in the Reduction; but
it is not to be laid as a general Ground, that in no case Reduction may
proceed, albeit it exclude not all the Rights produced in the Defenders person,
especially, if any singularity, as to the probation appear.

George Graham and Jack contra Mr. Andrew Brian. January 3. 1666.
GEorge Grahame, as Assigney by Jack, having charged Mr. Andrew Brian, he
Suspends, and raises Improbation, wherein he insists, and craves, that the
Assigney may abide by the Bond; the Assigney declared, that he would abide by
it, as being delivered to him, as a real true don Deed, without any knowledge
of his in the contrare: and offered to produce the Cedent, to abide by it, who
compearing. It was alleged, that he was a Bankrupt, and had a Bonorum; and
therefore behoved to find Caution, to appear at all the Dyets of Process, or to
enter in Prison, till the Cause were Discust; or at least, that the Assigney
would be oblidged to produce him.

The Lords having considered the Case, found that the^ Assigney was oblidged no
further, then what was offered, and they found the Cedent not oblidged to find
Caution, or enter in Prison; but that he should Enact himself to compear
Iudicially, whenever any Point of the Improbation were referred to his Oath,
which might infer the falsehood of the Writ, if confessed, and that if in that
Case he compeared not, the Bond should be improven, not only to him, but as to
the Assigney, inferring no hazard to the Assigney, as to the Criminal part, if
he were not found accessory.

David and Andrew Fairfouls contra Mr. James Binni. January 4. 1666.
THE Bairns of the Umquhil Bishop of Glasgow, having charged Mr. James Binni to
pay a 1000 merks, he Suspends, and alleadges that they were Minors, not
sufficiently Authorized, in so far as they did choose Mr. John Harper, and
Achmoutie and their Mother to be their Curators; or any two of them, their
Mother always being one; so that their Mother being Dead, who was sine qua
non, there behoved to be a new Election. It was answered; that the Pupils were
willing to compear, and acknowledge their Curators, as their Curators which is
sufficient to Authorize.

Which the Lords found relevant.

Laird^ of Milton contra Lady Milton. Eodem die.
THE Lord of Milton pursuing a Reduction of a Decree of Divorce pronounced by
the Commissaries of Edinburgh, at the instance of the Lady Milton his
Stepmother, against Calderwood her last Husband, upon Adultery, desired that
the Testimonies of the Witnesses might be made private to him, being a matter of
so great Importance, as tending to take away the Right of the Ladies Jointure,
disponed be her Husband to this Milton.

The Lords refused the desire, but Ordained the Clerks to give a Note,
expressing the names, Designations, and the preambulatory questions in the
Depositions, as their age, married, or Not, purged of partial Council, etc.

Lady Bute and her Husband contra Sheriff of Bute. January 5. 1666.
THE Lady Bute and her Husband pursue a Reduction of a Right of a part of her
Conjunct-fee, made in favors of her Son, upon this Ground, that it was done
after her Contract of Marriage with her present Husband, and public
Proclamation in the Kirk thereupon. It was answered. First, That once
Proclamation was not sufficient. 2dly, That it was offered to be proven, that
the Husband knew, that the Right was granted, and yet he proceeded in the
Proclamation, and Marriage, which behoved to proport his acquiescence and
consent; and alleged likewise the Case was most favorable: because the Lady
had married, unsuitably, her Husbands Chapland. It was answered for the
Pursuer, that once Proclamation is sufficient, as has been several times found,
and that there is no weight to be laid upon her Husbands knowledge, who knew
he had a remeed competent in Law, whereby the Deed done by his Wife after the
Contract and Proclamation would be null; and so his going on in the Marriage
did not infer his acquiescence, or Homolagation. And as for the favor of the
cause, it is much more on the Pursuers part, who being provided by her Husband,
to 27 Chalders of Victual, had before the Contract of Marriage, quite 20 to
her Son; and of the seven remaining, he had urged her to quite 100 lib. And 7
bolls of Victual were only now in question.

The Lords found the Reason of Reduction relevant, and repelled the Defense
upon the Husbands knowledge, for they thought, that as Deeds of a Wife cled
with a Husband, without his consent, are null, after the Solemnization of the
Marriage, because she is then in potestate viri, and sub ejus tutela, So that
she is truly Wife, after the Contract of Marriage, becoming public by
Proclamation, and it occurring, as a doubt amongst the Lords, whether the
Reduction ought to be sustained at the instance of the Husband only, in so far
as concerned his interest jure mariti, so that the Right might be valid against
the Lady, if she survived.

The Lords sustained the Reason simply, at the instance of both; and found it
null as to both, as being done without her Husbands consent.

Sir Laurence Oliphant contra Sir James Drummond. January 6. 1666.
THE Lord Roll^, his Liferent Escheat being Gifted in Anno 1658. to Walter
Stewart, He Assigned the Gift, and his own Debt, the Ground hereof, and the
General Declarator obtained thereupon, to Sir James Drum^ ^mond in Anno 1665. A
second Donatar now insists, for special Declarator; wherein compearance is made
for Sir James Drummond, who craved preference upon his first Gift, and on his
General Declarator. It was answered for the Second Donatar, that the first Gift
was simulat, and null by the Act of Parliament 1592. In so far, as the Donatar
suffered the Rebel to continue in Possession until this day, and never
attained Possession of any part of the Lands, nor did any further diligence, but
only the General Declarator in Anno 1658. So, that the Rebel having now possessed
by the space of 6, or 7. Years: The presumption contained in the Act of
Parliament, that upon the said Possession, the Gift is simulat, and null, takes
place. It was answered, that there is no definit time in the Act of Parliament,
by which the Rebels Possession shall presume simulation, and in this ca^e,
there was but few Anni utiles^ in so far, as the Gift being in Anno 1658.
Declarator was obtained that same year, and in Anno 1659. Judicatures ceased,
and began not again till 1661.

The Lords found, that the Donatar suffering the Rebel to possess 4, or 5.
Years was sufficient to infer the presumption of simulation by the said Act of
Parliament, and therefore preferred the second Donatar.

Inter Eosdem. January ^.
AT pronouncing of the former Interlocutor, the first Donatar further alleged,
that the Presumption of Simulation, by suffering the Rebel to possess, could
not take place in this case. First, because the Donatar himself was a lawful
Creditor of the Rebels, whereupon there is a stronger Presumption, that the
Gift was to his behoove, for his own satisfaction: And the Act of Parliament
can be only meant of Donatars, who have no Interest, but their Gift, and are
not Creditors. Secondly, The Lands were Apprized, and the Donatar knew he would
be excluded by the Appryzers.

The Lords repelled the first alleadgeance, and found the presumptio juris in
the Act of Parliament was stronger then the contrair presumption, that the
Donatar was Creditor; because it might be his purpose to apply the Gift to the
Rebels behove, and not to take that way, having other ways of payment,
competent: and also repelled the second alleadgeance, unless it were
alleged, that the Apprizer had been in possession; so that there had not been
3, or 4. Years, in which the Rebel had possessed; and that if the Appryzing had
attained Possession at that time, it would have excluded the Donatar: but seeing
it was offered to be proven, that the Rebel possessed for 3, or 4. Years, which
was contrair to the alleadgeance of the Apprizers possession of the hail.

They adhered to their former Interlocutor.

Elizabeth Broun contra John Scot. Eodem die.
THere being an Infeftment feu granted, of the Lands of Inglistoun, as
Principal, and of the Lands of Fingland, in warrandice thereof long ago, and
Infeftment taken of both Principal, and Warrandice Lands in on Seasine,
Registrat in the Registers Seasines, Since the Year 1617. Thereafter the
Warrandice Lands were disponed to the Earl of Traquair, and he, being publicly
Infeft, gave a subaltern Infeftment to his Vassal, who assigned John Scot to
the Mails and Duties* who having Arrested, insisted to make forthcoming: And
likewise Elizabeth Broun, having after the eviction of the Principal Lands,
arrested the Rents of the Warrandice Lands, insists to make the same
furthcoming to her. It was alleged, that the Original Infeftment whereupon
the said Elizabeth Brouns right is founded, is a base Infeftment, and as to the
Warrandice Lands never cled with Possession, and the Earl of Traquairs Right,
whereon John Scots Right is founded, is a public Infeftment holden of the
King, which is always preferred to a base Infeftment without consideration,
whether the public Infeftment has attained Possession, or no, or how long, but
much more in this case, where the public Infeftment has attained Possession,
not only by year and day, but many years: And therefore is directly in the Case
of the Act of Parliament 1540. cap. 105. Preferring public Infeftments to
prior base Infeftments, not cled with Possession. It was answered, that base
Infeftments are of themselves valid, and before the said Act of Parliament, the
first Infeftment made always the best Right, whether it was holden of the
Disponer, or of his Superior, but that Act of Parliament is correctory of the
Common Law, and Feudal Custom, which by the Act it self, appears then to have
been constant, and is only altered by the Statute, upon the presumption of
Fraud, which is clear, both by the Title against double Fraudful alienations,
and by the Narrative, that diverse persons after they have given private State
and Seasine to their Bairns, or Friends; do thereafter give for Causes onerous,
Infeftment to other persons, and therefore such onerous posterior Infeftments,
if they attain Possession year and day, are preferred to the said private
Infeftments; but in this Case, there is no Presumption of Simulation. 2dly. By
several Decisions alleged and produced, it is clear, that the Lords did
prefer base Infeftment of Annualrent to posterior public Infeftments of
Property, which interveened before the next Term; so that the Infeftment of
Annualrent could not attain Possession; but if base Infeftments without
Possession, were unvalid Rights; The Lords could not have found so. 3dly. The
Lords have allowed Indirect, and Interpretative Possession to be sufficient,
not only in the Case when Liferents are reserved, that thereby the Liferenters
Possession is the Feears, though he never possessed himself, but even when
Liferents are not reserved; but that the base Infeftment is thereby excluded
from Possession: so base Infeftments granted to wyfes are preferred to
posterior public Infeftments, though the Wyfes do not, nor cannot possess,
during the Husbands Life, yet the Husbands possession is counted the Wifes
possession, and if a Person Infeft by a base Infeftment should pursue for
Mails, or Duties, or Removing; and were excluded by a prior Liferent,
constitute by the Pursuers Author^ though not reserved in his Right; that very
Action would be sufficient to validat the base Infeftment without Possession.
4thly, Whatever might have been alleged, before the Act of Parliament 1617.
For Registration of Seasines, there is neither Law, nor Favor since, for
posterior acquirers, who might have known the prior Infeftments. And therefore
in Infeftments of Warrandice Lands, the Possession of the principal Lands is
accounted Possession of the Warrandice Lands; neither is there any ground to
oblidge a Person who takes a Feu of Lands, to demand a more public infeftment
of the Warrandice Lands, then of the principal. It was answered, that albeit
the Narrative of the Statute mention Fraudful alienations, yet the dispositive
words are General, that wherever an Infeftment has been public, by
Resignation, or Confirmation, and has attained Possession year and day, the
same shall exclude any prior base Infeftment, attaining no Possession, and if
the said Act were only to be measured by Fraud then if it could be alleged,
and astructed, that the first Infeftment, though base, was for a cause onerous,
and without Fraud, it should be preferred; which yet never has been done. And
for the Practiques, they meet not this Case, nor the Act of Parliament, because
the posterior public Infeftment had attained no Possession. It was answered,
that now consuetude had both Interpret and Extended the foresaid Act; for
thereby posterior public Infeftments, though they be not for cause onerous, or
cled with Possession year and day, are ordinarily preferred contrair to the
tenor of the Statute, and base Infeftments, retenta possessione, where the
obtainer of the Infeftment is negligent, are accounted Simulat presumptione
juris, and de jure but where there is no delay, nor ground of ^imulation, the
base Infeftment is preferred, whether the posterior public Infeftment attain
Possession for year and day, or not.

The Lords having heard this Case at length, and debated the same accuratly
amongst themselves, in respect they found no preceding Decision, whether base
Infeftments of Warrandice, where there was possession of the Principal Lands
were valid, or not; against posterior public Infeftments. They found this base
Infeftment of Warrandice valid against the posterior public Infeftment. The
Infeftment in Warrandice being Simul with the Principal, and not ex intervallo,
and being after the Act of Parliament 1617. but did not decide the Case to be
of general rule for Warrandice, ex intervallo before the said Act.

Grissell Seatoun and Lord of Touch. contra Dundas. January 11. 1666.
GRissall Seatoun, and the Lord of Touch younger her Assigney, pursues Dundas,
as charged to enter Heir to Mr. Hendrie Mauld, for payment of a Bond of 8000
merks granted to the said Grissall, by the said Mr. Hendrie her Son. It was
alleged that the Bond was null, wanting Witnesses It was Replied, That the
Pursuer offered him to prove it Holograph. It was duplyed, that albeit it were
proven Holograph, as to the body, yet it could not instruct its own date to
have been any day before the day that Mr. Hendrie died, and so being granted in
lecto aegritudinis, cannot prejudge his Heir whereupon the Defender has a
Reduction. It is answered, that the Reduction is not seen, nor is there any
Title in the Defender produced as Heir. It was answered, that the nullitie as
wanting Witnesses, was competent by exception, and the the duply, as being
presumed to be in lecto, was but incident, and was not a Defense, but a Duply.

The Lords Repelled the Defense upon the nullitie of the want of Witnesses in
respect of the Reply and found the Duply not competent, hoc ordine, but only by
Reduction, and found there was no Title produced in the Reduction.

Executors of William Stevinson contra James Crawfoord. January 12. 1666.
THE Executors of William Stevinson, having confirmed a Sum of 3000. and odd
Pounds due by Bond, by John Ker, to the said William, and also by James
Crawfoord, who by his missive Letter, became oblidged to pay what bargain of
Victual should be made between the said John Ker, and John Stevinson for
himself, and as Factor for William Stevinson. And subsums, that this Bond was
granted for a Bargain of Victual. It was answered, that albeit this Bond had
been in the name of William Stevinson, yet it was to the behove of John
Stevinson his Brother, who having pursued upon the same ground, the Defender
was Assoilzied, and that it was to John's behove alleged, First, That John
wrote a Letter to his Brother William, to deliver up his Bond, acknowledging,
that it was satisfied, and that John having pursued himself, for the other Bond
granted in place of this, The said Umquhil William Stevinson compeared, or a
Procurator for him, before the Commissars, and did not pretend any Interest of
his own; neither did William, during his Life, which was ten years^ thereafter,
ever move question of this Bond, nor put he it in the Inventar of his
Testament, though that he put most considerable Sums therein. It was answered.
1. That the presumptions alleged, infer not that this Bond was to John
Stevinsons behove; because, by James Crawfoords Letter, there is mention made
of several Bargains of Victual, both with John and William: so that the Bond,
and pursuit at John's instance might be for one Bargain, and at Williams, for
another, especially, seeing the Sums differ. 2dly, Writ cannot be taken away, by
any such Presumptions. It was answered, That if the Defender James Crawfoord
had subscribed this Bond, it could more hardly have been taken away by
Presumptions, but he has not subscribed the Bond, but only his missive Letter,
which is dubious, whether it be accessory to this Bond, or if that Bond was for
this Bargain, and therefore such a writ may well be ^lided, by such strong
Presumptions.

The Lords found the Presumption Relevant, and that they instructed, the Bond
was to John's behove, and therefore in respect of the ahs^lvitor at Crawfoords
instance, they Assoilzied.

William Dick contra Sir Andrew Dick. January 13. 1666.
WIlliam Dick pursues Sir Andrew Dick his Father, for a modification of his
Aliment, whereupon the question was, whether Sir Andrew Dick himself being
indigent, and having a great Family, of small Children, and the Pursuer having
been Educat a Prentice, whether the Pursuer should have a Modification.

The Lords considering the great Portion the Pursuers Mother brought, and that
he was a Person of no ability to Aliment himself by his industry, decerned Sir
Andrew to receive him in his House, and to entertain him in meat and Cloth, as
he did the rest, or else two hundred merks, at Sir Andrews option.

James Crawfoord contra Auchinleck. January 17. 1666.
THE Heirs of Line, of Umquhile Sir George Auchinleck of Balmanno being
provided to a Portion payable by the Heirs Male, did thereupon charge the
Appearand Heir Male, and upon his Renounciation to be Heir, obtained Decree
cognitionis causa, after which that Appearand Heir dyed, and the Decree being
Assigned to James Crawfoord Writer, he now insists in in a Summons of
Adjudication, containing a Declarator, that he having charged the next
Appearand Heir, to enter to the last Appearand Heir against whom the Decree
cognitionis causa was obtained, that that Decree should be transferred against
him, and it should be declared, that the Adjudication should proceed against
the next Appearand Heir. It was alleged, for the Defender, that the former
Appearand Heir having dyed before Adjudication, and so the Diligence being
incomplete, there could be no Process thereon, till this Defender were again
charged to enter Heir to the first Defunct, especially, seeing he had Annum
deliberandi competent to him, of the Law which would be taken from him, if this
order were sustained, and as an Appearand Heir, charged, though the days of
the Charge were run before his death, the same would be void, if no Decree had
followed thereupon: And the obtainer behoved to obtain his Diligence thereupon
renewed, so it ought to be in this Case. It was answered, the Case was not
alike, for here there is a Decree obtained upon the Heirs Renounciation; and
there is no reason to put the Creditor to do diligence again, especially now,
since the late Act of Parliament, whereby, if he get not Adjudication within a
year, he will be excluded, and there are other Appryzings already deduced.

The Lords Sustained the Process, hoc ordine, with this provision, that if this
appear and Heir entered, and Infeft himself within year and day, the
Adjudication should be redeemable to him within the Legal Reversion of 10.
years, by which, neither the Creditor was prejudged of his diligence, nor the
Heir of his Privilege.

Lord Rentoun Justice Clerk contra Fewars of Coldinghame. Eodem die.
MY Lord Rentoun, as being Infeft in the Office of Forrestrie, by the Abbot of
Coldinghame, containing many special servitudes upon the whole Inhabitants of
the Abbacie, as such a duty, out of Waith Goods, and out of all Timber cutted
in the Woods of the Abbacie, with so many Woods, H^ns and a Threave of Oats,
out of every husband Land yearly; pursues Declarator of his Right, and payment
of the bygones, since the year 1621. And in time coming; both Parties being
formerly ordained before answer, to produce such Writs, and Rights, as they
would make use of; and these being now produced, The Pursuer insisted. prim^
Loco for Declaring his Right as to the Threave of Oats. It was alleged, for
the Defenders, absolvitor, because they had produced their Fews granted by the
Abbots of Coldinghame, prior to the Pursuers Infeftment, free of any such
burden. It was answered, The Defense ought to be Repelled, because the Pursuer
has not only produced his own Infeftment, but his Predecessors, and Authors
Infeftments, and his progress to them. viz. The Infeftment granted to David
Evin, of the Forrestrie, containing all the Duties a foresaid, which is before
any of the Defenders Infeftments produced. It was duplyed for the Defender,
that the Infeftment granted to the said David Evin is no original Infeftment,
but bears, to be granted on his Mothers Resignation, and has no special
reddendo, but only relative to the former Infeftments: And therefore, unless
the former Infeftments were produced, or it were instructed, that the Resigner
had Right, the Infeftment upon Resignation can operat nothing, especially never
being cled with Possession, as to the Threaves of Oats in question^ for there
is great odds betwixt Infeftments granted by Kirkmen, who are but
administrators of the benefices, and others, who have plenum dominium, so that
Infeftments upon Resignation of Kirkmen are to be understood to confer no more
Right than the Resigner had, and not to constitute any original Right where
there was none before, in the same way, as Infeftments granted by the King,
upon Resignation, are but periculo petentis, and give no Right further then the
Resigner had, even against the King. It was answered, for the Pursuer, that his
Reply stands relevant, and he produces sufficiently to instruct his
predecessors Right; for there is no Law nor Reason to compel Parties to
produce the old Original Feus granted by Kirkmen, but Infeftments upon
Resignation are sufficient, neither is the Case alike, as to the King, and
Kirkmen, because things pass not by the King ex certa scientia, which no other
can pretend; but in this Case, declaring a Right granted by an Abbot, with
consent of the Convent; it must be considered what made a Right, the time that
it was granted, when there was no more required then his Concession, with
consent foresaid, which is sufficient against him, and his successors, neither
can they pretend, that such grants are salvo jure suo. And if in matters so
Ancient, Original Infeftments from Kirkmen behoved to be produced, that neither
Precepts of clare constat, nor Infeftments upon Resignation were sufficient;
Few rights of Kirk-lands in Scotland, would be found valid.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply, and found this
Infeftment upon Resignation sufficient.

John and Joseph Heriots contra James Fleming Messenger and Cautioners. January
19. 1666.
JOhn and Joseph Heriots having obtained Decree before the Lion, against James
Fleming Messenger, and his Cautioners, depryving the Messenger upon
Malversation; in so far, as being employed to execute a Caption, he had taken
the Debtor, and had Denounced, and Appryzed his Lands, and suffered the
Debtor to escape, and would not subscribe the Decree of Appryzing, whereupon
he was depryved, and decerned to pay 500. merks, conform to the Act of
Parliament 1587. cap. 46. And both he, and his Cautioners were decerned to pay
the Sum, as Damnage, and Interest to the Pursuer. They Suspend, and allege,
that the Decree is null, in so far as it was pronounced by the Lord Lion,
without the concourse of the Heralds, which is required by the said Act. 2dly,
Albeit the Lion be empowered to deprive Messengers by the said Act, yet their
Cautioners are not under his jurisdiction, nor the damnage, and interest of
Parties by Messengers malversation, which is only competent to the Judge
ordinary. It was answered to the first, oppons the Decree wherein the
Cautioners compeared, and so acknowledged the Lions Jurisdiction as he then
sat, likeas the Decree it self bears to be by the Lion, with the Heralds. To
the Second. The Cautioners having enacted themselves in the Lions Books, they
have made themselves liable, and for the damnages, they are consequent to every
Jurisdiction; and the Lions have been constantly in use to determine the same,
as to this Point.

The Lords were of different judgments, for they thought, that by the Act of
Parliament, the Lion had no such power, but as to long Custom, some thought it
was sufficient to give that power, and there was no inconveniencie, seeing his
Decreets might be Suspended. Others, thought that Custom being clandestine,
and without the contradiction of Parties, who might voluntarly submit
themselves to any Authority, could not be sufficient.

The Lords Ordained before answer, the Lions Books to be produced, to see if
there were such a Custom, before it were decided, and how far that Custom
would work.

Christian Braidie contra Lord of Fairney January 20. 1666.
CHristian Braidie, having pursued a Reduction of a Disposition, ex capute
inhibitionis, against the Lord of Fairney, of all Dispositions made by John
Glasfoord to him, after her Inhibition, he produced a Disposition, Holograph,
wanting Witnesses, of a Date anterior. It was alleged, that the Holograph
writ could not prove its own Date, contra tertium.

The Lords, before answer, ordained Fairney to adduce Witness, and adminacles,
for astructing the Date, he adduced fo^^, the Town Clerk, who deponed he dyted
the Disposition, and a Town Officer, who saw it subscribed of the Date it
bears, and a third, who deponed he saw it subscribed on a Market day, at
Coupar, which, as he remembered, was in March or Apryl, 1652. Whereas the Date
bears the first of August, 1652. But that Glasfoord, when he wrote it, laid it
down upon the Table beside himself, and saw it not delivered, and it being
alleged, that the first of August 1652. fell upon a Sunday.

The Lords considering, that Infeftment was not taken upon the Disposition for
three years, and that there was no Witnesses deponed upon the delivery, found
the Witnesses adduced, not to astruct the Date of the Disposition, and
therefore reduced the same.

Clappertoun contra Lord Tarsonce. Eodem die.
CLappertoun raises a Declarator against Tarsonce, for declaring an Appryzing
at his Instance, against the Pursuer, to have been satisfied within the legal,
by payment of the sums by the Debtor, or by Intromission with the Mails and
Duties, either within the seven years of the first legal, or within the three
years thereafter, during which, by the late Act of Parliament, Appryzings not
expired in Anno 1652. were declared Redeemable, or by Sums received from such
as bought from the Appryzer, a part of the appryzed Lands. It was alleged
absolvitor from that member, of satisfaction by the intromission during these
three last years; because the Act of Parliament does not expressly prorogat the
Reversion, but declares the Lands Redeemable within three years; but does
express nothing to whom the Mails and Duties shall belong, which cannot be
imputed against the Appryzer, to satisfy the Appryzing, because he enjoyed
them as his own, the Apprizing by the Law then standing, being expyred; and
bona fide possessor facit fructus consumptos suos, and therefore a subsequent
Law cannot be drawn back, to make him count for that which he might have
consumed the more lavishly, thinking it his own. It was answered, that
Appryzings were odious, being the taking away the whole Right of Lands, for a
sum without proportion to the true value; and therefore all Acts retrenching
them, ought to be favorably interpret, especially where the Appryzer gets all
his own; and therefore the Act declaring them Redeemable, must be understood in
the same case as they were before, and that was either by payment, or
intromission.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and sustained the Declarator, both as to
payment and intromission; and as to the sum, the Appryzer got for a part of the
Land sold by him Irredeemably after the seven years legal was expyred. And
seeing the Acquirer of that Right was called; they found it also Redeemable from
him upon payment of the price paid for it, cum omni causa, and he to be
comptable for the Rents, unless the Pursuer would ratify his Right, as an
irredeemable Right; in which case the price should be accounted as a part of
the sums appryzed for

Lord Rentoun contra Feuars of Coldinghame. Eodem die.
THe Lord Rentoun insisting in the Declarator of his Right of the Office of
Forrestry, and of a Threave of Corn with the Fodder, whereof mention is made,
January 17. The Defenders proponed a second Defense, viz. That the Pursuer
showed no sufficient progress from David Ellen: but only an Infeftment granted
by Ianet Ellen, David's Daughter, and so the Pursuers Goodsir upon Ianets own
Resignation; and albeit there was a Precept of clare constat, produced by the
Abbot in favors of Ianet, yet no Seasine followed thereupon; so that David's
Infeftment was not established in the Person of Ianet; and consequently could
not belong to this Pursuer, and the Defenders having gotten their Fews
immediately after David's Right free of this Burden; the Right could not be
declared, till it were established in the Pursuers Person: and if he should now
infeft himself, the Interruption on the Act of Prescription upon the Summons,
lybelling upon David's Right, and the progress produced from David, would fall.
It was answered, that the Abbot having granted the Infeftment to Ianet, upon
her own Resignation; yet bearing to be expressly to her, as heir to David: It
was equivalent to a Precept of clare constat, which does not necessarly require
the ordinar form, but a Charter infe^ting such a Person, as heir to such
another, who was before infeft, would be as valide; so that in this infeftment
of Ianets, all being materially included to establish David's Right in her
Person, she being acknowledged heir to David, albeit it be upon her own
Resignation, utile per inutile non vitiatur.

The Defenders further alleged absolvitor, because by several Acts of
Parliament, infeftments of Kirk-lands before the Reformation, are required to
be Confirmed by the Pope, or the King thereafter. Ita est, this is Confirmed by
neither before the Fevers Right: And by another Act of Parliament, it is
declared, that the first Confirmation, with the last Feu, shall be preferred.
Ita est, the Defenders has the first Confirmation. It was answered, that no
Law, nor Act of Parliament, required Confirmation of an Office; neither was any
Confirmation absolutely necessar before that Act of Parliament; but the
Kirk-men might always have Feued without diminution of the Rental of the Lands,
as they were the time of the feu; but that Act was made, in regard that at the
time of Reformation, the Kirk-men being out of hopes of preserving of
Monasteries, and Kirk-lands, did Feu them to their nearest Friends; and
therefore the foresaid Act, as being correctory of the common Law, ought not to
be extended to any thing, but what is expressed in the Act, which is only Feues
of Kirk-lands; and so would neither extend to an Office, as a Baillirie,
Forrestrie, etc. nor yet to a Pension, or Annualrent: neither would it extend
to Infeftments, by Kirk-men, Ward, such as most of the Infeftments of this
Abbacy, and many others are. And seeing Confirmation was not requisite, but the
Feu it self was sufficient alone, the last Act preferring the first
Confirmation, takes no place, which can only be understood where Confirmations
are necessar. It was answered for the Defenders, that albeit an Office requires
no Confirmation, where there is nothing given but the Office, and Casualities
thereof; Yet where there is a burden upon Lands given therewith, such as this
Threave of Oats out of every Husband-land, being far above the proportion of a
suitable Fee for the Office, there being above 111. Husband-lands in the
Abbacie, and some Forrester-lands following the Office, besides other
Casualities, Confirmation is necessar, or else the Abbots might have eluded the
Law, and exhausted the Benefice. It was answered for the Pursuer, that he
oppones the Acts of Parliament, requiring only Confirmations of Kirklands; and
albeit the Duties, of this Office affects the Lands nihil est, for if the Abbay
had Thirled the Lands of the Abbacy to a Miln without the Abbacy: for a Thirled
Duty of a far greater value then the Duties of this Office, the constitution of
that Thirlage required no Confirmation.

The Lords Sustained the Pursuers progress, and Repelled the first Alleadgence,
and also Repelled the last Alleadgence, and found no necessity of Confirmation
of the Office, and Duties thereof aforesaid, whether the samine were holden
Feu, or Ward: but did not cognosce, whether the same was Feu, or Ward, etc.
albeit that was contraverted: neither whether Infeftments of Kirk-lands, holden
Ward, needed Confirmation or no.

^contra Earl of Kinghorn. January 23. 1666.
(...) having pursued the Earl of Kinghorn, upon a Bond granted by his Father.
He proponed Improbation, by way of Exception, which was sustained, and a Term
assigned to prove, and that same Term to the Pursuer to bide by his Bond. The
Defender supplicat, that seeing the Act was not extracted, albeit the Term was
come, that he might have yet liberty to propone payment. It was answered, he
could not, because exceptio falsi est omnium ultima, after which no other could
be proponed, much less after the Term was come, and the Pursuer come to bide by
the Write.

Yet the Lords sustained the Defense of Payment.

Colonel James Montgomery and his Spouse contra Steuart. January 24. 1666.
MArgaret Mcdonald and Colonel James Montgomery her Spouse, pursue a Declarator
against Steuart, Oye and appearand Heir to umquhil Sir William Steuart, to hear
and see it found and declared, that umquhil Dam Elizabeth Hamiltoun, Spouse to
umquhil Sir William, had Right to certain Bonds and Household Plenishing from
Sir William, and that the said Margaret had Right thereto, from the said Dame
Elizabeth, by her Assignation, and that the sums, and Goods were Moveable, and
thereby the Assignation granted thereto, albeit on deathbed, was valid. It was
condescended on, that the Bonds were Moveable by a Charge of Horning. It was
answered, that the Charge was but against one of the Cautioners, which was not
sufficient to make it moveable.

The Lords Repelled the Alleadgence.

Eleis of Southside contra Mark Cass of Cockpen: Eodem die.
ELeis of Southside pursues Cass, as Heir to Mr. Richard Cass, or as being
charged to enter heir to him. Compearance is made for Cockpen, who was a
Creditor to the Defender, and had appryzed his Lands; and alleged no Process,
because the Pursuer pursues as Assigney; The Assignation being his Title, is
posterior to the Charge to enter Heir, or Summons which are raised, not in the
Cedents Name, but in the Assigneys. It was answered for the Pursuer, that
Cockpen could not object this, because he was Curator to the Pursuer, and had
appryzed the Lands, and proponed this alleadgence of purpose, to exclude this
Pursuer, from coming in within year and day, because, it this Summons were cast
(the Defender being now out of the Country) before a new Charge to enter Heir,
could proceed upon 60. days, and Citation upon 60. days, and the special
Charge upon 60. days, the year would elapse. It was answered, that Cockpen had
never acted as Curator, and that this Summons was raised by the Pursuer
himself, after his Majority, who was Major more then a year ago. It was
answered, that the Pursuer had but very lately recovered his Writs from his
Curators, though he used all Diligence, and was forced to transume against some
of them.

The Lords sustained the Summons, in respect Cockpen had been Curator, and so
near the time of Minority.

Earl of Eglingtoun contra Lord of Cuninghame head. January 27. 1666.
THe Earl of Eglingtoun pursues the Lord of Cuninghame-head for the Teinds of
his Lands, conform to a Decree of Valuation. The Defender Alleged
absolvitor, because he bruiked by virtue of a Tack, at least by tacit
Relocation, which must defend, ay and while the famine be interrupted by
Inhibition, or Process. It was replied, the Pursuer produces Inhibition, and
craves only the valued Duties for the years thereafter. It was answered, the
Inhibition is direct to Messengers at Arms, and is only execute by a Sheriff in
that part. It was answered, that it was sufficient, seeing the Letters bore
Messengers, Sheriffs in that part.

The Lords found the Inhibition sufficient, to interrupt the tacit Relocation.

Iean Crichtoun and Mr. John Eleis her Husband contra Maxwel of Kirk-house.
Eodem die.
JEan Crichtoun being Served to a Terce of certain Lands belonging to her first
Husband Maxwel of Kirk-house, pursues for Mails and Duties. It is alleged
absolvitor, because the Pursuer has a competent Jointure, more then the third
of her Husbands Estate, as then it was; and a Provision of Conquest: and albeit
it be not expressly in satisfaction of the Terce; yet it is but a minute,
bearing to be extended, and there is a Process of Extension thereof depending:
and therefore it ought to be extended with such Clauses as are ordinar in such
cases, and this is most ordinar, that competent Provisions use to be in
satisfaction of the Terce. It was answered, that the Extension could not be
with alteration of any substantial Point, such as this, but only as to
Procurators of Resignation, Precepts of Seasine, etc. And to show that it was
not Kirk house, his meaning, that the Infeftment should be in satisfaction of
the Terce; the Infeftment it self produced, being extended in ample Form, does
not bear to be in satisfaction.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses, and found the Terce competent in this Case.

Colonel James Montgomery contra Steuart. Eodem die.
IN the Declarator betwixt these Parties mentioned the 24. day Instant. It was
alleged that the Plenishing, and Movables could not be declared to belong to
the Pursuer, by virtue of Dam Elizabeth Hamiltouns Disposition, in so far as
concerns the Moveable Heirship, in respect it was done on Death bed, and could
not prejudge the Defender, who is Heir, even as to the Heirship-moveable. It
was answered, that the said Dam Elizabeth being Infeft neither in Land, nor
Annualrent in Fee, could have no Heirship. It was answered, that her Husband
and she were infeft in certain Lands by Hoom of Foord, which were Disponed to
her Husband* and her in Conjunct-fee^ and to the heirs of the Marriage, which
failzing, to whatsoever Person the said Sir William should assign, or design.
And true it is he had assigned that Sum to his Lady, whereby she had Right of
the Fee, and so might have heirship.

The Lords found that this Designation made the Lady but Heir appearand, or of
Tailzie, whereupon she was never Infeft: and by the Conjunct-fee, she was only
Liferenter; and that the Assignation to the Sums and Right, gave not her heirs
any heirship moveable.

Heugh Dollas contra Frazer of Inveralochie. January 31. 1666.
SIr Mungo Murray having by the Earl of Crawfords means, obtained from the King
a Gift of the Ward, and Marriage of Frazer of Streichen his Nephew, he did
assign the Gift to Mr. James Kennedy, and he to Heugh Dollas, before it past
the Scals; and at the time that the Gift was past in Exchequer, the same was
stopped until Sir Mungo gave a Back-bond, bearing, that he had promised at the
obtaining of the Gift, to be ruled therein at the Earl of Crawfords discretion,
who by a Declaration under his hand, declared that the Gift was purchased from
the King, for the Minors behove, and that only a gratuity for Sir Mungo's
pains, was to be paid to him; and that the Earl Declared, he allowed Sir Mungo
5000. merks. There was a second Gift taken in the name of Sir William Purves of
the same Ward, and Marriage. Heugh Dollas pursuing Declarator of the double
avail of the Marriage, because there was a suitable Match offered, and refused.
Compearance was made for Sir William Purves* and the Lord Frazer his Assigney,
who declared that their Gift was to Streichans behove, and alleged that the
first Gift could only be declared as to 5000. merks. contained in the Earl of
Crawfords Declaration, because of Sir Mungoes Back-bond, the time of passing of
the Gift. It was answered, First; That Sir Mungoes Back-bond, and the Earl of
Crawfords Declaration, could not prejudge the Pursuer, who was a singular
Successor to Sir Mungo; especially, seeing it is offered to be proven, that the
Gift was assigned, and intimate before the Back-bond: after which, no Writ
subscribed by the Cedent could prejudge the Assigney. It was answered, that the
said Assignation being of the Gift, when it was an incomplete Right, and only a
Mandat granted by the King, could not prejudge the Back-bond, granted at the
time the Gift past the Exchequer, and Seals; for then only it became a complete
Right, and notwithstanding of the Assignation, behoved to pass in the Donatars
Cedent; his Name; so that his Back-bond then granted, and Registrat in
Exchequer, behoved to affect, and restrict the Gift, otherways all Back-bonds
granted to the Thesaurer, and Exchequer, might be Evacuat by anterior
Assignations. It was answered; that this Back-bond was granted to the Earl of
Crawford, then, but a private Person, and has not the same effect, a^ a Bond
granted to the Thesaurer.

The Lords found this Back-bond granted at the passing of the Gift, and
Registrat in the Books of Exchequer, to affect the said Gift, and therefore
restricted the Declarator thereto.

In this Process it was also alleged that the first Gift was null, bearing
the Gift of the Ward, and Marriage to be given upon the Minority of Streichen,
and the Decease of his Father; and the second Gift buire, to be upon the
Minority of Streichen, and the Decease of his Goodsire, who dyed last Infeft,
his Father never being Infeft. It was answered, that the Designation was not to
be respected, seeing the thing it self was constant, and that the Fathers
Decease, albeit not Infeft, was the immediate cause of the Vaccation; seeing the
Oye could have no interest, until the Father, though not Infeft, were dead.

The Lords forbore to decide in this, seeing both Parties agreed that the 5000.
merks should be effectual, so that it was needless to decide in this; which, if
found Relevant, would have taken away the first Gift wholly.

Colonel Cuningham^ contra Lyll. Feb. 1. 1666.
IN a Competition between Colonel Cuninghame and Lyll, both being Arresters,
and having obtained Decreets, to make forthcoming in one day; and Colonel
Cuninghams Arrestment being a day prior, he alleged he ought to be preferred,
because his Diligence was anterior, and his Decree behoved to be drawn back to
his Arrestment. It was answered for Lyll, that it was only the Decree to make
forthcoming, that constitute the Right; and the Arrestment was but a Judicial
Prohibition, hindering the Debtor to Dispone, like an Inhibition; or a
Denunciation of Lands to be appryzed, and that the last Denunciation, and first
Appryzing would be preferred: So the Decree to make forthcoming is the
judicial Assignation of the Debt, and both being in one day, ought to come in
together. It was answered, that in legal Diligences prior, tempore est p^tior
jure, and the Decree to make forthcoming is Declaratory, finding the sum
arrested to belong to the Arrester, by virtue of the Arrestment: and as for the
Instance of Appryzings, the first Denunciation can never be postponed, unless
the Diligence be defective; for if the first Denuncer take as few days to the
time of the Appryzing as the other, he will still be preferred.

The Lords preferred the first Arrester, being equal in Diligence with the
second.

contra Mr. John and Henry Rollocks. Eodem die.
IN an Exhibition of Writs, it was alleged that Mr. John and Henry Rollocks,
being Advocat; and Agent in the Cause, was not obliged to Depone in prejudice
of their Clients, or to reveal their secrets; but they ought to pursue their
Clients; for a Servant, Factor, or Person entrusted with the custody of Writs,
ought not to be Examined in prejudice of their Constituent, unless it were as a
Witness. It was answered, that their Client was called.

In respect whereof, the Lords ordained the Defenders to Depone concerning the
having of the Writs.

Fodem die.
AN Executor Dative, ad omissa and mala appretiata, pursuing the principal
Executrix, and referring the Goods omitted, and Prices to her Oath: She
alleged that she had already Deponed at the giving up of the Inventar, and
could not be obliged to Depone again.

The Lords ordained her to Depone, seeing she might have intrometted after, and
more might have come to her knowledge of the worth of the Goods, or a greater
price gotten therefore.

Archbishop of Glasgow contra Mr. James Logan. Eeb. 6. 1666.
THe Archbishop of Glasgow pursues a Declarator against Mr. James Logan, for
declaring he had lost his place, as Commissar Clerk of Drumfreis, because he
had deserted his place, and gone out of the Country, and because he was a
Person insolvent, and denunced Rebel, and had lifted a considerable Sum for the
Quots of Testaments, which he had taken with him, and not paid. It was
answered that the Defender had his Gift from the former Archbishop, with a
power of Deputation, and that his place is, and has always been served by a
Depute; and therefore, neither his absence, nor his being Denunced for Debt,
can annul his Gift, or hinder him to Serve by his Deput. It was answered, that
the principal Clerk, not having, personam standi in judicio, his Depute cannot
sit for him, who could not sit himself, and that he being absent out of the
Country, for a considerable space, must be esteemed to have Relinquished his
Place.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant upon the power of Deputation, which they
found not to be annul^e^ by his absence, or denunciation, sine crimine.

Livingstoun contra Beg. Eodem die
THomas Beg having granted a Bond to Livingstouns his Wife, bearing, that in
respect he thought it convenient that they should live a part, he obliged him
to pay her a certain Sum of Money yearly for her aliment, and obliged him
never to quarrel, or recall that Obligation, being charged thereupon, he
Suspends on this Reason, that it was donatio inter virum and uxorem, and so he
might recall the same, and now offered to Cohabite with his Wife, and aliment
her according to his Means. It was answered, that he had Renunced that
privilege, in so far as he had obliged himself, never to Recall, or come
against this obliegment. It was answered, that though he had expressly Renunced
that privilege, yet the Renunciation was donatio inter virum and uxorem, and
he might therefore Recall, and come against both.

The Lords found the Reason of Suspension, and Reply relevant in time coming:
but not for the bygone time; during which, the Wife had actually lived a part,
and alimented her self.

Lord of Dury contra The Relict and Daughter of umquhil Dury his Brother.
Eodem die.
DVry being Served Tutor of Law to his Brothers only Daughter, pursues her
Mother for delivery of her to be Educat by her Tutors. It was alleged, that
he was to succeed her, and so could not have the Custody of her Person. 2. That
she was but nine years old, and her Mother unmarried, and so she was the
fittest person to Educate her; especially seeing she was the only living Child
of many, and so not likely to be lively. It was answered, that the Tutor
insisted not for the custody of his Pupil himself, but condescended on several
Persons, with whom she might be Educate; and alleged, that she having 40000.
pounds of Provision out of the Family; there was no Reason she should be kept
by her Mother, and Disposed of at the pleasure of her Mothers Friends.

The Lords Decerned the Child to be delivered to Mr. Alexander Gibson, one of
the Clerks, to be Educate with him: but superceeded Execution of the Sentence,
till Whitsonday come a year, that she might be delivered to her Fathers
Friends, before she was eleven years old, and could have any thoughts of
Marriage.

Watson contra Fleming. Eodem die.
THere being an Infeftment of Annualrent granted out of Lands, and Teinds, and
an Assignation to the Teind Duties, in so far as extended to the Annualrent.
The Teinds, and Lands were thereafter appryzed from the common Author, before
the Annualrenter had obtained Possession by his Real Right, of the Annualrent,
but only by his Assignation to the Teind Duties. It was alleged by the
Appryzer, that the Assignation to the Teind Duties could give no longer Right
then the property thereof remained in the Cedents Person; which Ceasing by the
Appryzing, the Assignation ceased therewith, as is ordinarily, and
unquestionably sustained in Assignations to Mails and Duties of Land. It was
answered, that there was great difference betwixt Lands, which require
Infeftment to transmit the same, and Teinds which require none, but are
conveyable by an Assignation; for if this had been by an Assignation to the
Tack of Teinds, protanto, it would have been unquestionably valid; and
therefore being an Assignation to the Teind Duties, it is equivalent as a
Disposition to Lands, which would carry the Right of a Reversion, though not
expressed, and though there were no more to Dispone but the Reversion only. It
was answered, that if the Assignation had been to the Teinds: That is to the
Right, or if it had been to the full Teind Duty in the Tack, or of certain
Lands; then the case might have been dubious; but being, not of the Teind
Duties of any particular Lands, but out of the first and readiest of the Teinds
of several Lands, it was not habilis modus.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Town of Glasgow contra Town of Dumbarton. Eodem die.
THere being mutual Declarators, one at the Instance of the Town of Dumbarton,
for Declaring that they had Right by their Infeftments, that all ships coming
within Clyde, should make their Entries at Dumbarton, and that they should pay
Anchorage, for all Ships Anchoring in the River of Clyde, being within their
Infeftment, even from the Water of Leven, to the head of Lochluny, within which
bounds is the ordinar station of Newwark, Potterig and Inchgrein, and above
which, no Vessel above 24. Tuns goes up Clyde; and likewise for the Measurage,
whereby all Ships casting Anchor there, took the Firlots of Dumbarton and
measured with, paid 8. pennies of the boll therefore; and Weightage, which is
a Duty for their Weights: and also Tunage, being so much out of every Tun of
the Burden of each Ship. And on the other part, Glasgow pursues Declarator of
their Liberty to Traffic freely in the River of Clyde; and to make Entry at
their Burgh, and to be free of any such burden at Dumbarton.

The Lords before answer having ordained either Party to adduce such Writs, and
Witnesses as they will make use of in the Cause, for instructing these Burdens,
the Possession thereof, Interruptions of the same, and Liberty therefrom; which
all being adduced, Dumbarton produced their original Charter, Erecting them in
a free Burgh, by King Alexander, in Anno 1221. and another Charter also by King
Alexander, repeating their Privileges of Burgh, as free as Edinburgh, or any
other Burgh within the Kingdom, cum custumiis and teloniis; and also a Charter
in Anno 1609. Ratifying the former Charter, and particularly expressing all
these Burdens in question, in the novodamus thereof; and also produced their
Entry Books, bearing, the Merchants of Glasgow to have Entered their Ships at
Dumbarton, and to have taken the measures of Dumbarton, for measuring their
Salt, and to have paid the Duties thereof, and obliging themselves to make use
of no others these Voyages, beginning at the year 1616. and continuing till the
year 1657. in the beginning whereof, there was ordinarily one Ship every year,
and thereafter several Ships every year. Glasgow did also produce their ancient
Infeftments by King Alexander, mentioning a prior Infeftment by King William,
Erecting them into a free Burgh, with their Books of Entries, of several Ships,
for diverse years, with an Interlocutor of the Lords, in Anno 1609. wherein
Dumbarton having charged for all the Duties now in question. Glasgow Suspended,
and Dumton insisted for none of these in question, but only for Entries; and
the Lords found, that the Merchants of Glasgow might either Enter at Glasgow,
Dumbarton, or any other free Burgh where the Kings Customers were, and might
break bulk there, with a Contract between Dumbarton and Glasgow, in Anno 1590.
oblieging them to concur against unfree-men, and not to break bulk upon the
River, but in their Towns; and in case of any difference, six of each Town to
meet at Ranfrew, and decide the same, and thereupon alleged, that they being
a free Burgh, and having the precedence of Dumbarton, both in Parliament, and
so acknowledged by the said Contract, and enjoying equal, and free Trade in the
River of Clyde, without any such Burden, whereof no mention is made in the
foresaid Contract, and being charged for, in Anno 1611. there was not so much
as an alleadgence of any Possession of Dumbartons of these Dues at that time,
and the Entry decerned to be free at either Town; and therefore they alleged,
that their Privilege of Trading as a free Burgh, ought to be declared, and
they assoilzied. It was answered for the Town of Dumbarton, that they had good
Right to these Duties, by His Majesty's several Infeftments, granted to them;
for the King having power to impose petty Customs, not only in Ports built, and
preserved by Industry, but in Stations, and Rivers, Creiks and Bays, as is the
Custom of all Kings and Princes, such are the Customs upon the Rivers of
Rhyne, Garonnie, Thaimes, and others, to all Ships that anchor there, or pass
that way: and whereof, there are severals in Scotland, as the Tunnage, due to
Edinburgh of all the Ships breaking bulk at Leith: and the petty Customs of
Alloway, Cockenie, and other places. 2ly. Albeit the Kings grant were not
sufficient alone, yet being cled with immemorial, or 40. years Possession,
instructed by Witnesses, and the Books of Entry, it is more then sufficient. It
was answered for Glasgow, to the first, That petty Duties imposed for Ports,
having a mutual Cause, may be appointed at any time by Kings and Princes; it
being free to these who are burdened therewith, to come in to that Port, or
not: they also appoint petty Customs to be paid to any City, for Goods
Imported, and sold there, in consideration of the upholding of their Harbors,
and Mercats, as the Tunage of the Harbor of Leith, or anchorage at any Shore,
where anchorage is casten upon the Land, or any Goods laid out upon the Land,
or where Imposition for anchorage, or other Dues in a River, or Station, has
been approven by long Custom, and acquiescence; but where Burghs Royal, have
not only by their privilege of Trading, but by immemorial Possession,
prescribed a liberty of making use of Stations, without burding; no Right
granted, or Impetrat by any Party in prejudice thereof, if it be quarrelled
before Prescription can take away the liberty of Trading: Nor is the Kings Gift
any way to be understood, but periculo petentis: and Dumbartons second Charter
did expressly bear, that these petty Customs were due, and accustomed before; so
that the Kings express meaning is, not to Gift them de nova, or to impose a
servitude in their favors, upon a far more eminent City then themselves. And
as to the Point of Possession, nothing is proven thereanent, till the year
1616. and then it is neither universal, seeing more Entered at Glasgow, then at
Dumbarton; nor is it peaceable, nor voluntar, nor is it continual, but
interrupted; and albeit it were uninterrupted, yet it is but by single Persons,
which cannot infer a Servitude upon the Burgh, and if the Kings Gift be
periculo petentis, and be surrepticiously impetrat upon a false Narrative, no
Possession can validat it, as no Possession of it self, without a Title, could
infer such a Servitude.

The Lords having considered the Depositions of the Witnesses, Books of Entry,
and the hail Writs produced; they found that the alleadgence against Dumbartons
Declarator, as founded upon their Charters, without Relation to Possession, was
not Relevant, and that the first Charter could not extend to these particulars,
not being expressed, unless it had appeared that they had been in immemorial
Possession, before the second Charter, and the interruption by the Suspension,
raised by Glasgow, and the Lords Interlocutor thereupon^ in Anno 1611. for
albeit Immemorial, or 40. years Possession immediately preceding, might have
presumed Possession continually before, since the first Charter; yet they found
that Interruption, or Suspending that particular in question, and no alleging
of Possession by Dumbarton then; but on the contrair, an Interlocutor, as to
the liberty of Entry at Glasgow, takes off that Prescription: And likewise they
found, that there was nothing proven as to 40. years Possession, save only 13.
sh. 4. d. for the Anchorage of each Ship, and 8. d. for the use of Dumbartons
Measures of Salt, for each Boll: and seeing that Possession was also proven to
be Interrupted, in that several Ships of Glasgow Resisted, and came away free,
and that they had several Salt Measures of their own there. Therefore they
found the Charter not validat by 40. years Possession uninterrupted, and
Assoilzie from Dumbartons Declarator, and Declared upon Glasgows Declarator of
Liberty.

Earl of Panmuire contra Parochiners. Feb. 7. 1666.
THe Earl of Panmuire having Right to the Abbacy of Aberbrothick, pursues for a
part of the Teinds thereof. It was alleged absolvitor, because they had
possessed their Land 40. years free of Teind to any body: and by the general Act
of Prescription, all Right prescribes, not pursued within 40. years, and so
does the Right of this Teind. It is answered, that the Right of Teind is
founded on Law, and not upon any particular, or private Right; and therefore,
albeit in the case of Competition of private Parties, pretending Right to
Teinds. One Right may be excluded by another; yet the Teinds themselves must
always be due, except where the Lands are decimis inclusis, and did belong to
privileged Churchmen of old, such as the Cistertian Order, or Templars,
Manse, or Gleibs.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Answer, for they thought,
albeit the bygones of the Teind preceding the 40. years, might prescribe; yet
the Right of Teind could not, more then Customs could prescribe, if they were
neglected to be Exacted for forty years, or a Feu-duty.

Ker contra Hunter and Tennents of Cambo. Feb. 8. 1666.
THe Tennents of Cambo raise a Double-poinding against Ker, and Hunter, both
being Infeft in Annualrents, base, where the last base Infeftment within a
month of the former, being cled with Possession, by a Decree of poynding the
Ground, a year after both, and no Diligence on the first.

The Lords preferred the last Infeftment, as first cled with Possession.

It was further alleged, that this Annualrenter had accepted a part of the
Land in satisfaction of his Annualrent. It was answered, that there was Write
there required, viz. a Renunciation of the rest, and till that was done est
locus penitentiae.

The Lords considering the Case, found that if the Promise were only to
restrict the Annualrent to a part of the Land burdened therewith, it was pactum
liberatorium, and there was not locus penitentiae; but if it was a Promise to
accept other Lands, or the Property of a part of the Lands burdened, there was
locus penitentiae, till the mutual Rights were subscribed, whereby the one
Party disponed the Property, and the other the Annualrent.

The Heretors of John's Miln contra The Feuars. Feb. 9. 1666.
THere being an old Thirlage of a Paroch, which was a part of the Barony of
Dumfermling, to John's Miln, the Feu of the Miln being first granted by the
Abbot of Dumfermling, and the Feu of the Land thereafter: there is a Decree in
Anno 1610. pronounced by the Chancellor, as Lord of the Regality, decerning all
the Feuars to pay the five and twenty Curn of all Grains that they brought to
the Miln, and a greater of that they Abstracted. The Feuar of the Miln pursuing
for Abstracted Multures, and for instructing the Quota, producing this Decree.
It was alleged for the Defenders, that they offered them to prove that, past
memory of man, at least 40. years bygone, they have been constantly in use to
pay five Bolls of Bear in satisfaction of all Multure; and so can be liable for
no further, they having prescribed their liberty from any further. 2ly. That no
respect ought to be had to the Decree, in so far as it Decerns a greater
quantity for the Corns Abstracted, then for these grinded, which is without all
Reason; especially seeing this is but a Burn Miln, and not sufficient for the
Thirle. 3ly. They offer them to prove, that the Miln was insufficient, the
years pursued for, and no ways able to serve them, and the rest of the Thirle,
as being but a Burn-miln, dry in Summer, and not having Water enough in Winter.
It was answered for the Pursuer, to the first, that they offered them to prove,
they were in Possession of the Multure Lybelled within these 40. years, at
least that any lesser Duty was accepted by a particular Paction for a time
only. To the second, opponed the Decree standing, against which there has
neither been Suspension, nor Reduction, nor any ground for the same. for its
like the coming to the Miln frees them from a greater quantity, for
abstraction. And seeing the Quota is but the five and twenty Curn, far below the
ordinar Thirle Multures; it was very reasonable, that the samine being abaited
to a less quantity, they should pay a greater if they came not. As to the
insufficiency of the Miln, it was answered non Relevat, unless it were through
the default of the Pursuer, or his Millers, for they being astricted to a Burn
Miln, what defect is therein, without the Pursuers fault, cannot louse the
Restriction.

The Lords found the Replys Relevant, unless the Defenders condescended upon an
insufficiency, through the Pursuers fault.

Here occurred to the Lords, whether the Feuars could by Possession, prescrive
their liberty as to a lesser Multure, seeing the Possession of a part of the
Multure was sufficient to exclude Prescription, as to the whole: some thought,
if the Multure had been a certain Quota in the Infeftment of the Miln:
Possession also not of the hail, would hindered Prescription of any part; but if
the Infeftment of the Miln, was only with the Multures used, and wont, and that
the speciality was but by a Decree, as the use and wont: that in that case,
use and wont might change. Others thought not, but in respect the Pursuer
insisted not on that Point, but offered to prove Possession, conform to the
Dec^eet within these 40. years. The Lords decided not that Point.

Here also it was alleged, that by an Act of the Court of Dumfermling, the
Defender consenting, at least present, it was Enacted, that such of the
Defenders as could not be served, might go to other Milns.

The Lords found this alleadgence only Relevant, that it was by consent of the
Pursuer, or his Authors, but left it to be the Defenders^ after production, to
qualify what way the consent was given; but that his presence and silence was
not enough.

The Collector of the Vaccand Stipends contra Parochioners of Mayboll, and
Girvane. Feb. 10. 1666.
THe Collector of the Vaccand Stipend, having charged the Heretors of Mayboll,
and Girvane, for the Stipend due by them, the year 1663. They Suspend, and
produce the Ministers Discharges, who served these years, and alleged they
made payment bona fide, before this Charge. It was answered, they were in mala
fide by the Act of Parliament, of the last Session of Parliament, declaring the
places of Ministers, Entered since 1649. to be Vacant, if they had not obtained
Presentation, and Collation conform to the Act. It was answered, that the
foresaid Act was not simple, but conditional, if they had not obtained
Presentation and Collation; and there was nothing oblieging the Parochioners to
enquire whether they had done that, which by the Law they were obliged to do;
but seeing there was no Charge against them by the Collector of the Vaccand
Stipends, and that the Patron, or Ordinar did not present another; but suffered
the then Incumbents to preach all that year, they were in bona fide, to think
that they might pay them for the time they Served. It was answered, there was a
Decree produced against the same Ministers, for the year 1662. and therefore
they could have no Right to the year 1663.

The Lords found the Reason of Suspension Relevant and proven notwithstanding
of the Answer; because the Decree was not against the Heretors, and was but
obtained in 1664. after they had made payment of the year, 1663.

The Minister of North-Leith contra Merchants of Edinburgh. Eodem die.
THe Minister of North-leith having pursued some Merchants of Edinburgh
Importers of Herring, of dry Fish, Killing, and Ling, at Leith and New Haven,
to pay twenty shilling of the Last of Herring, and the twentieth part of the
Killing and Ling. It being alleged, that such a burden could not be
allowable, because the Teinds was taken where the Fish was taken. 2ly. That it
could only reach the Parochioners of North-leith, not the Merchants of
Edinburgh. And, 3ly. That they had frequently Traded free of such a Burden.

The Lords having ordained the Pursuer to adduce Evidences by Writ, or
Witnesses, what Possession they had, and the Defenders what liberty they had;
and having heard the Testimonies of the Witnesses, with an old Decree for the
same particulars, but not against the Merchants of Edinb^rgh, nor for dry Fish,
they found 40. years Possession, proven of the said Burden, and therefore
Decerned.

The Lord of Wedderburn contra Wardlaw. Feb. 13. 1666.
WEdderburn pursues a Reduction of a Feu granted to Wardlaw, ob non solutum
canonem, by virtue of a Clause irritant in the Infeftment. The Defender offered
to purge, by payment at the Bar, and alleged several Decisions that it has
been so allowed. It was answered, that was only the case of a Reduction upon
the Act of Parliament, declaring Feus null for not payment of the Feu Duty,
but where there is an express Clause irritant in an Infeftment, that cannot be
purgeable at the Bar; else such Clauses should be useless, seeing without these,
de jure, the Feu Duties behoved to be paid at the Bar; or otherwise the Feu
annulled.

The Lords found, that there was a difference betwixt a Clause irritant, and
upon the Act of Parliament, and so would not admit of purging at the Bar
simply, unless the Defender condescended upon a Reasonable Cause, ad purgandam
moram, and therefore ordained them to Condescend.

Archbishop of Glasgow contra Commissar of Glasgow. Feb. 14. 1666.
THe Archbishop of Glasgow pursues a Declarator, or to hear and see it found
and Declared, that Commissars ought to be persons qualified, and able to judge
according to Law, and that if they be not, they might be deprived by the Act
1609. empowering the Bishops, then restored, to appoint able, and sufficient
men, Commissars in all time coming; and by the Act of Restitution 1661. whereby
the like power is granted, excepting Commissars nominat by the King, unless he
be insufficient, or malversant: and subsumes that Mr. William Fleming is not
sufficient, nor qualified for that Place; and also, that by the injunctions
given to Commissars; mentioned in the Act 1609. there is no place for Deputs,
unless it were by special consent of the Bishops, and craves that it may be
declared, that the said Mr. William may not Serve by a Depute. The Pursuer
insisted on the first member. It was alleged for the Defender, that he had
his Place both from the King, and Bishop Fairfoul confirming the same with a
Novo damus: and therefore, though he might have been questioned before the said
Ratification, and new Gift; yet now he cannot be questioned upon insufficiency,
but only on Malversation, whereof there is no point alleged, nor condescended
on, nor is his insufficiency qualified by any Act of inorderly Process, or
injustice committed by him now these five years, and as Bishop Fairfoul, who
acknowledged him to be a fit, and qualified Person, by his Ratification could
never quarrel him upon insufficiency, neither can this Bishop. 2ly. The
Defender has his Place with power of Deputation; and therefore having given
eight thousand merks to the former Bishop for his Ratification, with power of
Deputation, he cannot be questioned on his sufficiency, being able, per se aut
per deputatum, and no Act alleged of injustice. It was answered by the
Pursuer to the first Defense, that albeit this same Bishop had admitted this
Commissar, upon hopes of his Qualifications, yet if contrair to his
expectation, it appears he is not qualified for so eminent a Judicature. He may
justly quarrel him of insufficiency, as well as a Minister whom he ordained.
2ly. Though the same Person might not, yet his Successor in Office might, and
is not bound to acknowledge what his Predecessor did by mistake, or otherwise
to the detriment of the Sea, which were in his option, without a Rule, or
requiring Qualifications, as the naming of Commissars. To the Second, albeit
Deputs were allowable, as they are not by the Injunctions, yet the principal
Commissar, who must Regulat, and answer for them, must also be qualified, both
by the Act 1609. and the exception 1661. which enervats both the Defenders
Gifts.

The Lords found that Member of the Lybel on the Qualifications, and
sufficiency Relevant.

My Lord Ley contra Porteous. Feb. 15. 1666.
MY Lord Ley, having Right by progress to the Reversion of an old Wodset, uses
an Order, and pursues Declarator thereupon. The Defender alleged no
Declarator, because by the Reversion, there is a Tack to be granted, to begin
after Redemption, and to continue for so many years. It was answered, that Tack
was null, and invalide, not only by Common law, as an usurary Paction, giving
the Wodsetter more then his ordinary Annualrent, but by a special Act of
Parliament, Ia. 2. Par. 1449. cap. 19. whereby such Tacks taken in Wodsets, to
endure long time after the Redemption, for the half mail, or near thereby,
shall not be kept: and as by the late Act of Parliament, between Debtor and
Creditor, it is provided, that where old Wodsets were granted before 1650. when
annual was at ten for ilk hundredth, the Wodsetter may, upon offer of Caution
for the annualrent, take Possession, unless the Wodsetter offered himself to be
comptable for what exceeds his annualrent. It was answered for the Defender,
that his Defense stands yet Relevant, notwithstanding the answer, for as to the
old Act of Parliament, it is in desuetude, and it has been the common custom
to grant such Tacks in Reversions, which have still been observed, and were
never quarrelled, neither are they usurary, seeing the Tacksman has the hazard
of the Fruits, and all burdens, so his TackDuty, how small soever, unless it
were elusory, can be no usurary paction, more then taking Lands in a proper
Wodset, which pay more then the true annualrent, which was never found usurary.
2ly. This Wodset is granted since that old Act, whereby the benefit thereof is
totally past from. As to the new Act, the Clause bears expressly, that during
the none Redemption, or none Requisition, the conditions therein shall take
place, which cannot be extended to a Tack, to be granted after Redemption. It
was answered, that the first Act bears, not only a Regulation of Wodsets
already then granted, but to be granted, bearing expressly, who takes or has
taken Lands in Wodsets, etc. and there is nothing in the Wodset to renunce the
benefit thereof. As for the custom, Acts of Parliament are not derogat by
custom of private parties, a^quiescing in their agreements; But the custom of
the Lords by current Decisions. As to the last Act, it ought to be drawn, ad
pares casus, and the Lands are not effectually Redeemed, till the Tack be ended.

The Lords found the last Act no ground for annulling such Tacks, but found the
first Act a good ground, if it were subsumed according to it, that the ^ands
were set for half Mail or thereby.

Lion of Muiresk contra Gordon and others. Eodem die.
JOhn Lion of Muiresk, having obtained Decree of Spuilzie of certain Goods,
against Gordon and others, they suspend and allege the Act of Indemnity, that
they took these Goods, being under the Command of the Marquess of Hunlly. It
was answered, that the Charger was in friendship with the Marquels, and on his
side, and so they cannot Cloth themselves with the Act of Indemnity, as done
upon hostility. 2ly. The Act Indemnifies only Deeds done by Command, and
Warrant of any pretended Authority; but here no such Order is alleged, It was
answered, that Orders were not given in Writ, and if none get the benefit of
the Indemnity,, but these can shew^ or prove Orders, few, or none will enjoy
it; nor need the Suspenders to Dispute whose side the Charger was on; seeing
they acted by Order.

The Lords found, that it was sufficient to allege that the Charger was, the
time of the Intromission, actually in Arms, and acted it with a Party, being
then in Arms, but needed not prove their Order, or the application of the Goods
to public use; but found it Relevant, if it were offered to be proven by the
Suspenders Oath, that they had no Warrant, or Order, or pro ut de jure, that
they applied them to their own private use, not for any public use.

James Borthwick contra Ianet Skeen. Feb. 16. 1666.
JAmes Borthwick, having obtained Reduction of Ianet Skeens Liferent-right, as
a non habente potestatem, obtained payment of a Terms Rent before the Decree
of Reduction. Ianet pursues for that Term, and alleadges that the Decree of
Reduction could not be effectual till it were pronunced, albeit it bear her
Right to be null, ab initio, yet that is but stylus curiae. It was answered,
that the Tennent paid bona fide, after Reduction obtained, and intimat to him,
and that the Lords may ex arbitrio, find the effect of the Reduction, either to
be asententia, Litiscontestation, or a Citation.

In this Reduction the Lords Assoilzied the Tennent for this Term, though
before Sentence.

Earl of Winton contra Countess of Winton. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Winton pursues a Reduction of an agreement made by his Tutors and
Curators with my Lady, giving her a certain Duty for her Interest in his Coal,
as being minor, and laesed, in so far as by her Contract, she had only Right to
the fourth part of the Coal in his Property; now his Coal for several years,
has been in his Feuars Lands, by Reservation in their Rights. And also craved
the bygons. It was answered, that bona fide possessor facit fructus consumptos
suos, the Lady by the Agreement, could not count for the years Duty she had
gotten. It was answered, that this holds not in the case of Minority, and
Laesion. It was answered, that albeit Minority Repones, as to any principal
Right, yet not as to the Fruits, and accrescences medio tempore.

The Lords Reduced, but Assoilzied the Lady from Repetition.

Sharp of Houstoun contra Glen. Eodem die.
GLen Pursues for Mails and Duties of some Lands. Houstoun compears, and
alleadgesthat he has Right to these Lands, by an Apprizing expired. It was
answered, his apprizing was null, because it proceeded on four Bonds, the Term
of payment of one whereof was not come the time of the Appryzing, and so not
being due, the Apprizing was void, quoad totum. It was answered, the sum was
due, albeit the day was not come, and so being but, plus petitum tempore, he
was willing to admit the apprizing to be longer time by the double, redeemable
after the legal were expired, then all the time he apprized before the hand.

The Lords found the Appryzing void as to that sum. Whereupon occurred to them,
to consider whether the appryzing should fall in totum, or stand for the other
3 Bonds. And if it stood for these, whether a proportionable part of the Lands
appryzed effirand to the Bond, whereof the Term was not come, should be found
free, or if the rest should affect the whole Lands, as if for these only the
appryzing had been led, wherein the Lords were of different opinions, and
recommended to the Reporter to agree the Parties.

Lady Otter contra Lord of Otter. Eodem die.
Lord of Otter having Infeft his Wife in Conjunct-fee, or Liferent, in certain
Lands, cum molendinis, did thereafter build a Miln thereupon, and the question
arising betwixt the Liferenter and the Heir, who should have Right to the Miln?
The Liferenter alleged aedificium solo cedit. The Heir alleged, that a Miln
is distinctum tenementum, that cannot pass without Infeftment, and the Clause
in the tenendo cum molendinis, is not sufficient, not being in the Dispositive
Clause, nor any Miln built then: and he offered to make up all the Liferenters
damnage, by Building on her Ground.

The Lords found that the benefit of the Miln belonged to the Liferenter, as to
the Multures of all that was ground without the Thirlage, but found it not to
extend to Lands of the Defuncts, which he had Thirled to the Miln.

John Hay of Knokondie contra Litlejohn. Eodem die.
JOHN Hay pursues Litlejohn for the damnage sustained by a House belonging to
Litlejohn, falling on the Pursuers House. It was alleged the Defender was
only Apprizer of a Liferenters Right, and this behoved to lie upon the Fiar,
who was obliged to uphold the Liferenters House.

The Lords found the Defender liable, seeing he possessed as Apprizer sixteen
years, and also intrometters with the profits of the House, are liable for the
damnage sustained thereby, seeing both Fiar and Liferenter, were obliged to
uphold it, and are liable de damno.

Lord Salton contra Lord of Park and Rothemay. Feb. 20. 1666.
THe Lord Ochiltry having a Disposition of the Estate of Salton, from the
umquhil Lord Salton in anno 1612. Disponed the same to Park Gordon, Rothemay
and others. This Lord Salton having granted a Bond to Sir Archibald Stewart of
Blackhall, he thereupon apprized all Right that could be competent to the Lord
Salton of that Estate: which Right being now retrocessed to the Lord Salton: he
pursues Reduction of the Lord Ochiltries Disposition, and of all these Rights
founded thereupon in consequence. The reason of Reduction is founded upon an
Interdiction, against the Lord Salton, Disponer, before his Disposition; and
there having been a Process formerly depending at the instance of umquhil Sir
Archibald Stewart, and being Transferred after his Death, the Lords allowed the
Process to proceed upon the Minute of Transferrence, without Extracting the
Decree of Transferrence, which behoved to include the Process, and hail
minutes, which could not be done for a long time, whereupon the Lord Salton, now
insisting in the principal Cause. It was alleged, first, No Process, till the
Principal Cause were wakened: For albeit the principal Cause be Transferred;
yet it is but instatu quo; and therefore being sleeping, there can be no
Process, till after the Transferrence, there be a wakening.

The Lords Repelled this Alleadgence, and found the Transferrence sufficient
without any wakening. It was further alleged Absolvitor, because the Pursuers
Title being an Apprizing, the Defender has an anterior Apprizing, which does
exclude the Pursuer^ ay and while it be Reduced, or Redeemed. It was answered,
that the ground of this Pursuit being a Reduction, upon Interdiction; the
Interdiction cannot be directly apprized, but only the Lands belonging to the
Person Interdicted, being Apprized, all Apprizers or other singular Successors,
coming in the place of the Heirs of the Person Interdicted, may pursue on their
Rights, and thereupon Reduce voluntar Dispositions, made contrair the
Interdiction: which Interdiction is not a Right it self, but medium
impedimentum exclusive of another Right, as an Inhibition, and as a first
Appryzer cannot hinder a second Appryzer to make use of his Right, except in
prejudice of the first Appryzer; so he cannot hinder him to make use of the
Interdiction, to take away a voluntar Disposition^ but prejudice of the first
Appryzers appryzing, as accords: And in the same way a second Appryzer, or any
Creditor might pursue upon an Interdiction or Inhibition against a Creditor.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and declared the Pursuer might Reduce this
voluntar Disposition upon the Interdiction, but prejudice of the Defenders
appryzing.

contra Hugh Mcculloch. Eodem die.
THe Lord of Balnigoun being arrested in Edinburgh, for a Debt due to a
Burges, Heugh Mcculloch became Caution for him in these Terms that he should
present him to the Diets of Process, and should make payment of what should be
Decerned against him, if he did not produce him, within Terms of Law, pendente
lite, Balnigoun raises Advocation, and at the same Diet that the Advocation was
produced Judicially before the Bailzies, Heugh Mcculloch also produced
Balnigoun, and Protested to be free of his Bond as Cautioner: the Bailzies did
not Incarcerat Balnigoun, but refused to Liberat Heugh Mcculloch^ till they saw
the Event of the Advocation. The Cause b^ing Advocat, and Decerned against
Balnigoun, who succumbed in an alleadgence of payment. The Pursuer craved
Sentence against him, and Heugh Mcculloch his Cautioner. It was answered for
Heugh Mcculloch, that he was free, because he had fulfilled his Bond, in
presenting Ballangoun, and Protest^ng to be free, albeit the Bailzies did not
free him, that was their fault. It was answered, that the Advocation being
raised, hindered the Bailzies to Incarcerat, because they might not proceed
after the Advocation; and therefore the Cautionrie behoved to stand, otherwise
all Acts of Caution, to answer as Law will, might be so elided.

The Lords found the Cautioner free, and found that the Bailzies,
notwithstanding of the Advocation, might Incarcerat the principal Party, unless
he had found new Caution, for seeing if he had found no Caution, a principio,
but had been Incarcerat, till the Cause had been Discust the Advocation would
not have liberat him: and whenever the Cautioner produced him Iudicially, and
protested to be free, he was in the same case as if he had been Incarcerat, and
therefore the Bailzies might have detained him in Prison, notwithstanding of
the Advocation, which did sist the Cause.

Mcbrair contra Sir Robert Crichtoun, alias Murray. Eodem die.
DAvid Mcbrair pursues a Removing against Sir Robert Crichtoun, who alleged
absolvitor, because the warning was null, in so far as he being notourly out of
the Country. The Warning proceeded on 40 days, not only at the Ground and
Paroch-kirk, but also at his Dwelling House, whereas it ought to have been on
Letters of Supplement on 60 days, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Peer and
Shore of Leith. It was answered, that the Act of Parliament anent Warning, was
only on 40 days without distinction, being out of the Country, or in the
Countrey^ and it was sufficient that the Summons of Removing upon the Warning,
was upon 60 days; because the Warning at the House, was rather an Intimation
then a Citation, which was sufficient, seeing the Defender had been butshort
while out of the Conntrey, not animo remanendi, and so had still a Domicile
where he was Cited.

The Lords sustained the Warning, but in Respect the Defender had probabilem
causam dubitandi. They superceeded the Execution to the next Whitsonday,
without any violent profits.

Lord Borthwick contra his Wodsetters. Feb. 21. 1666.
THe Lord Borthwick pursues an Account and Reckoning against several
Wodsetters, who had Wodsets from him in the year 1660. to Count and Reckon for
the Superplus of the Wodset, more then their annualrent since the Act of
Parliament between Debtor and Creditor, upon that Clause thereof, appointing
Wodseters, who have proper Wodsets before the year 1650. or since before the
Act to Count, and be liable for the superplus more than their due annualrent.
It was alleged for the Defenders, That the Pursuers had in the Wodsets
expressly Renunced the Usurpers Act in favors of Debitors, and all such Acts
made or to be made: and by the said Act between Debtor and Creditor, there is
an Exception^ where Persons have renunced such Acts. It was answered that that
Exception is insert in the Act before this Clause, in Relation to Wodsets, and
does not relate to it, but unto the former Provisions, of Suspending the Sums,
which was also the Tenor of the Usurpers Act, and therefore the Exception of
the Renuncing such Acts, cannot extend to the Case of accounting for Wodsets,
which could not be thought upon, the time of the Wodset, and of the
Renunciation; this Clause being according to common Law, to hinder Usury, which
might have been indirectly taken by proper Wodsets, though these by the Custom,
use not to be quar^elled.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Reply, and found the
Exception not to extend to the Case of Wodsets.

It was further alleged for the Defenders, that they were not liable to to
count for the Superplus, for all years bygone since the Act of Parliament, nor
at all, except in the Case that they had been required to quite the Possession
of the Wodset, and Security had been offered them for their Money, and they had
chosen rather to retain the Wodset, and to count for the Superplus; for as to
all years preceding, they were bona fide Possessors, and had ground to presume
that the Pursuer did acquiesce in the Wodset, as only proportionable to the
annualrent, and it were unjust and of evil consequence, that if the granter of
the Wodset should forbear to offer Security for 20 years upon his offer then,
the Wodsetter should be obliged to Count from the Act of Parliament. It was
answered, that there was no inconveniency, seeing the Wodsetter might, if he
pleased, quite the Possession, and then was not comptable at all: But if he
would retain the Possession, he could not refuse to count for all bygones,
since the Act of Parliament.

The Lords having considered the Clause of the Act of Parliament, found the
Defenders only liable from the time of the offer of Caution, and Requiring the
Possession, and not from the date of the Act of Parliament, seeing the Clause
bears, they shall have by the Wodset, which looks to be future only; and seeing
the Wodsetters might have Builded or Planted for their own accommodation, and
therefore might rather reain the Possession then other Security.

Ogilby contra Eodem die.
THe like case was decided betwixt Ogilby and where this was further
Represented, that the Summonds could not be Sustained, unless the offer had
been made by way of Instrument before the Summons, yet the Lords Sustained the
offer instantly, made to have effect ab hoc tempore, but not from the Citation.
It was also further alleged for the Defender, that there was now no Caution
offered. It was answered for the Pursuer, that there needed no Caution, if the
Wodsetter choised to retain the Possession; because the Wodset it self was
sufficient Security. It was answered, that they were not obliged to declare
their option, till Caution were first offered by the granter of the VVodset,
and the Statute behoved to be strictly Observed. It was answered, that there
was here no detriment to the VVodsetter, and the granter of the VVodset might
be so poor as not to be able to find Caution.

The Lords found, in respect of the Act of Parliament, that Caution behoved to
be offered, and would not exceed the Terms thereof.

contra The Sheriff of Inverness. Eodem die.
(...) being pursued for Theft-boot before the Sheriff of Inverness, upon the
old Act of Parliament James 2. bearing, that whosoever should compone with a
Thief, for stolen Goods should be liable in Theft-boot, and punishable as the
Thief or Robber. He raises Advocation on this Reason, that the Act was in
desuetude, and the matter was of great moment and intricacy, what Deeds should
be compted Theft-boot, whereinto no inferior Judge ought to decide, because of
the intricacy. It was answered, that the Lords were not Competent Judges in
Crimes; and therefore could not Advocat Criminal Causes from inferior Courts,
and the Earl of Murray being Sheriff, and having sufficient Deputs, both should
concur in the careful Decyding of the Cause. It was answered, that albeit the
Lords did not Judge Crimes, yet it was competent to them to Advocat Criminal
Causes, ad hunc effectum, to remit them to other more competent unsuspect
Judges.

The Lords Advocat the Cause from the Sheriff, and Remitted the same to the
Iustice^ because of the antiquity of the Statute, and intricacy of the Case.

Lockhart contra Lord Bargany. Feb. 22. 1666.
THe umquhil Lord Bargany being adebted in a sum of Money to Sir William Dick,
he appryzed, but no Infeftment nor Charge followed. Thereafter a Creditor of
umquhil Sir William Dicks, appryzes, but before the appryzing, Lockhart upon a
Debt due by Sir William Dick, arrests all sums in my Lord Bargany's hand, and
pursues to make forthcoming. This Lord Bargany takes a Right from the
appryzer, for whom it was alleged, that he ought to be preferred to the
Arrester, because the arrestment was not habilis modu^, in so far as Sir
William Dick having apprized for the sum in question, the apprizing is a
judicial Disposition, in satisfaction of the sum; and so it could not be
arrested, unless it had been moveable by a Requisition or Charge. It was
answered, that the Act of Parliament, Declaring Arrestment to be valid upon
sums, whereon Infeftment did not actually follow, made the Arrestment habile,
and the Apprizing can be in no better case, then an heretable Bond Disponing an
annualrent. It was answered, that the Act of Parliament was only in the case of
Bonds, whereupon no Infeftment followed, but cannot be extended beyond that
case, either to a Wodset granted for the sum, where the Property is Disponed,
where no Infeftment had followed; or to an Apprizing, which is a judicial
Wodset, pignus pretorium. It was answered, that the Reason of the Law was alike
in both cases, to abbrige the Lieges unnecessar Expenses by apprizing.

The Lords preferred the Apprizer.

Bishop of Glasgow contra Commissar of Glasgow. Eodem die.
THe Bishop of Glasgow insisted in his Declarator against the Commissar of
Glasgow; and alleged first, that by injunctions related to in the Act of
Restitution 1609. It was provided, that all Commissars should Reside at the
place where the Commissariot Sat, and should not be absent, but upon necessity,
and with leave of the Bishop, under the pain of Deposition, and that in case of
the absence of the Commissar, through sickness, or other necessity, or through
being declined in these Causes, the Bishop should name a Deput: From whence it
was alleged, first, That the Commissar had already Transgressed the
Injunctions, and deserved Deposition for none Residence, and for appointing
Deputs himself, not appointed by the Bishop; yea, for continuing to make use of
these Deputs, albeit the Bishop did intimat the Injunctions to him, and did
Judicially require the Deput not to sit, and took Instruments thereupon. 2ly.
That in time coming it ought to be De^lared, that the Commissar ought to
Reside, under the pain of Deprivation, and to Act by no Deput, but such as were
authorized by the Bishop. It was alleged for the Defender, Absolvitor from
this Member of the Declarator, because the Defender had his Office from the
King, and the late Bishop of Glasgow, with power of Deputation. And as to the
Injunctions, first, They had no authority of Law; for albeit the Act of
Parliament 1609. related to Injunctions to be made, yet it did not authorize
any Persons to make the same, nor is it constant, that these are the
Injunctions that is alleged to be made by the Bishops in anno 1610. 2ly.
Albeit they had been then so made, they are in de^uetude, because ever since,
all Commissars have enjoyed their place with power of Deputation, and exercised
the same accordingly. 3ly. There is no Injunction against the Bishops, giving
power to the Commissars to Deput; for albeit the Injunctions bear, that in such
cases he could not give Deputation; and therefore the Commissar did not wrong,
to continue his Deput. And it is most necssar, that the Commissar should have a
Power of Deputation, or otherwise, their Office is elusory, seeing the Bishop
may be absent, or refuse to Depute any Person, in case of the Commissars
necessary absence, and so both delay Justice to the Leidges, and Evacuat the
Gift. It was answered for the Pursuer, that first, the Injunctions were
commonly received and known through all the Kingdom, and are Registrat in the
Commissars Books of Edinburgh, being the Supreme Commissariot, and according
thereto, the Lords have decided in Advocations and Reductions; and albeit they
have not been observed, seeing there is no contrair Decision, they cannot go in
desuetude by mere none observance. 2ly, That the Injunctions do import, that no
Deputation can be granted by Commissars, but only by the Bishops in casibus
expressis. It is clear from the foresaid two Injunctions; for to what effect
should the Commissars Residence be required, if he might at his pleasure act by
Deputs; and why were these cases expressed, if Deputation were competent in all
Cases. 3ly. Albeit the power of Deputation granted by Bishop Fairfowl be
sufficient, during his life, and seclude him from quarrelling the same,
personali objectione; yet that Exception is not competent against this
Archbishop. 4ly, The Injunctions being sent up to the King, His Majesty has
Signed and Approven the same, which therefore Revived them, and for the
inconveniency upon the Bishops absence or refusal, is not to be supposed, but
that the Bishops concerned in the Commissariots, would provide remeid in such
Cases. The Defender answered, that Acts of Parliament were not drawn ad pares
casus and consequentias, much less their Injunctions, and though they were now
Revived, yet that cannot be drawn back to the power of Deputation granted
before: Neither can this Bishop be in better condition then his Prececessor, or
quarrel his Predecessors Deed, which he had power to do. The Defender did also
resume the Defense, as to sufficiency and trial, that seeing he had power of
Deputation, he was not liable to Trial, nor to Reside, if his Deput were
sufficient.

The Lords found, that albeit the power of Deputation should absolutely stand;
yet the principal Commissar behoved to be be sufficient, and ordinarily
Resident, seeing his sufficiency was both requisite by the Act of Restitution
1609. and by Exception in the Act of Restitution 1661. and that he ought to
direct and overruled his Deputs, for whom he was answerable; and therefore was
obliged to Reside, that albeit he did not constantly sit, yet he might advise
with his Deputs in important Cases, and the Lieges might have access to him to
complain in case of the Deputs Malversation, and as to the power of Deputation
it self, and the Injunctions.

The Lords found, that the Defender was in bona fide, to enjoy these
Privileges till it was declared, notwithstanding he was required to the
contrair: but as to the future, they found that he ought to reside, and make
use of no Deputs, without the consent of the Archbishop, but whether that
should be only pro re nata, or by a warrant for such Persons, not only upon
necessar occasions, mentioned in the injunctions, but also in others, that the
Deputs might ordinarily sit, and advise with the Commissars, in Cases of
importance. The Lords were of different judgments, and recommended to the
Bishop in common, to consider what was fit in that Case, but declared only
according to the Injunctions without interpretating how far the Deputation
should reach.

Children of the Earl of Buchan contra Lady of Buchan. February 23. 1666.
THe six Children of the Earl of Buchan pursue their Mother for Aliment. It was
alleged absolvitor, because their was neither Law, Statute nor Custom of
this Kingdom, oblidging a Mother to Aliment her Children. 2ly, Albeit there
were, she offers her to admit them in her Family, and to entertain them
according to her means, but can never be oblidged to pay a modification, in
Money out of the Family; for in all Cases of Aliment of Wives, or Children
against Parents, the offer to accept, and Aliment them in the Family, according
to the Parents Means, does always exclude Modification? as was lately found in
the Case of Sir Andrew Dick and his Son. It was answered, that the Law of
Nature is a part of the Law of this, and all other Civil Kingdoms, and
according thereto the Lords do always decide, in Cases now occurring, where
there was neither Statute nor Custom and if Aliment be due, the manner and
measure is in arbitrio judicis, who may justly ordain their Children to be bred
from their Mothers, seeing she has miscarried, and Married a deposed Minister.
It was answered, that the Law of Nature, without our Custom is no sufficient
Law to us, and does not induce obligationem civilem, but only pietatem and
affectum, upon which ground it is, that there was necessity of this Statute to
appoint an Aliment for Heirs against the Wairdatars and Liferenters, which
insinuats that there was no such Law before, and if the Law of Nature, be the
adequat Rule, we are oblidged to entertain the Poor, and all in distress; and
therefore they might pursue us thereupon. 2dly, There is no Reason to put it in
arbitrio judicis, whether a Child should be Educat with the Parent, who must
Aliment him, even upon pretense of the Parents miscarriage, for that being the
indispensable Right of Parents to educat their Children, as they see cause,
especially who demand Aliment of them, it ought not to be in the arbitrament of
any Judge, unless it were a Parliament, and this arbitriment would lay the
Foundations to encourage Children to desert their Parents, and to claim
Aliment out of their Family, and to pretend the Parents miscarriages, as unfit
Persons to be bred with, and not breeding them in a fit way; which accusations
were prohibit by the Civil Law, and never admitted by our Custom; for albeit
the Lords may appoint the way of Education of Pupils, their Parents being dead:
yet Tutors have no such interest, as Parents.

The Lords found the Mother oblidged to Aliment the Children jure naturae,
which was sufficient to infer this Civil Obligation, and Action, but found that
the offer of Alimenting them in her Family, was sufficient according to her
means and they could demand no Aliment, nor Modification extra familiam: For
they found that the Lords had thus sustained Aliment to Children against their
Fathers, not upon the Act of Parliament, which is competent against all
Liferenters and Donatars, without consideration of their being Parents, but
super jure naturae, which they found, would not extend to the obligation of
Charity, and which had no definite rule, but at the discretion of the giver,
and was not allowed as a civil obligation by any Nation

Grant contra Grant. February 24. 1666.
GEorge Crant, having Appryzed a Wodset Right from Grant of Mornithe; and
thereupon obtained a Decree of Removing, and Mails, and Duties, against Grant
of Kirkdails; Reduction was raised thereof, and of the ground of the same. viz,
of the Wodset Right on this Reason, that the one half of the Sum was paid, and
the Wodset renunced pro tanto, long before the Appryzing. It was Replied, that
there was an Inhibition, for the Sum, whereupon the Appryzing proceeded, after
which Inhibition, if any payment was made, or Renunciation granted, the samine
was reduceable, ex capite Inhibitionis. It was answered, that all that the
Inhibition, and Reduction thereupon could work, was in so far, as might extend
to the satisfaction of the Sum; and now they were willing to satisfy the whole
Sum, cum omni causa. It was answered, that no satisfaction could now be
accepted, because Appryzing having followed upon the samine, and being expired,
and no satisfaction being offered within the Legal, or the time of the
Reduction, it cannot now be admitted. It was answered, that the Inhibition
could not only work, that nothing done after the same should be prejudicial to
the Sum, but altered not the Case, as to the Appryzing, led long thereafter;
unless the Inhibition had been raised upon the Appryzing.

The Lords found that Inhibition could not be taken away, or satisfied by
payment of the Sums after the expiring of the Apprizing, wherein the President
remembered of a former Case, that even in the obtaining of the Reduction, ex
capite Inhibitionis, the offer to satisfy the Sum, whereon it proceeded was
repelled: In respect an Appryzing thereupon was expired.

Sir Robert Sinclar contra Lord of Waderburn. Eodem die.
JOhn Stewart Son to the Earl of Bothwell, being Abbot and Commendator of
Coldinghame, the Earl being Forefaulted in Parliament, his Son was dishabilitat
to brook any Lands, or Goods in Scotland; whereby John fell from the Right of
Provision of the Abbacie: Thereafter the King annexed the Abbacie of
Coldinghame, which was excepted from the general Annexation 1587. to the Crown,
excepting the Teinds; and gave Right of Reversion, both of Lands and Teinds, to
the Earl of Hoom, who gave a Tack of the Teinds of Kello and Cumerjame to the
Lord of Wedderburn. Thereafter John Stewart was, by Act of Parliament
restored, and the former Act of Dishabilitation rescinded, whereupon John
Stewart demitted his temporal Provision in the King's hands, and got it Erected
in an Heretable Right: he thereupon Infeft Douglas of Ivleck for relief of
Sums. Sir Robert Sinclars Lady, as Heir to him, pursues for the Teinds of
Kello, and Cumerjame, upon the Infeftment of Relief. He had before obtained
Sentence for the Years preceding John Stewarts death, during which, his
temporal Provision stood, and as to which there was little controversy by the
Act of Rehabilitation; but now the Pursuer insisted for the years after John
Stewarts death. It was alleged for the Defender, First, That he has Right by
his Tack unexpired, from the Earl of Hoom, who had the only Right of Fee, to
the whole Abbacie, by his Infeftment granted to him by the King, long before
the Infeftment granted to John Stewart. It was answered, that the Earls
Infeftment, proceeding upon John Stewarts dishabilitation, that being
rescinded, and he rehabilitat, the Earls Infeftment fell in consequentiam, and
John Stewarts Right, on his own dimission is the only Right. It was answered,
for the Defender, that the Earl of Hooms Right did not proceed solie upon John
Stewarts dishabilitation, but on the Act of Annexation following thereon, Anno
1612. And John's Rehabilitation could put him in no better condition, than
before the Dishabilitation, and so could extend no further, but to the Personal
Provision he then had, It was answered, That in that special Act of Annexation
1612. The Spirituality, or Teind was excepted, as it was in the General Act of
Annexation, and so no Right granted by the King, till the Teinds were dimitted
in his hand by the Titular could be respected, as being a non habente
potestatem, at least not proceeding legitimo modo. It was answered, that the
Teinds, though not Annexed, yet by the suppression of the Popish Clergy, they
returned to the Crown, for the General Act of Annexation, does not give the
King a Right, but acknowledged his Right by the Ceasing, of the ends for which
these Benefices were granted, but the Annexation makes them indissolvable, from
the Crown, and indisposable by the King, and so the Teinds being Annexed, they
cease not to belong to the King, but they are at his Disposal, and he having
disposed of them to the Earl of Hoom, before he disposed of them to John
Stewart, the Earls Right is preferable, and so the Defenders, as his Tacksman.
It was answered, That all the Erections of Benefices, in Temporalities were
only upon Demissions of the Titulars; for though the Popish Clergy was
suppressed, yet the King presented Persons to the Benefices, who had the Titles
of Abbots, and Commendators, and sat in Parliament, but had not the Office, and
in so far they were not suppressed, and so the King could not dispose of the
Benefice, till it were demitted by the Titular, in his hands. It was answered,
that the King could not dispose in prejudice of the Titular incumbent, but that
the Titular, who was a naked Liferenter, his Demission should reach the Fee, it
was against reason, and John Stewart being dishabilitat, when the King granted
the Earl of Hooms Right, so that there could be no Demission, the King being in
the Commendators place, and could not demit to himself the dishabilitation, at
least was equivalent to a Demission, though it had been necessar, as it was
not; for albeit de facto, the King Erected upon demissions, yet that he could
not after the Abbots death, have Erected it, or provided another, or even
during his Life, reserving his temporal provision there could be no doubt, else
the Demission of a Liferenter, or Administrator could never give the King Right
of Fee, which the Resigner had, and here, the King had the Right of Fee, but
not the Resigner.

Yet the Lords found^ that seeing all Erections by Custom, proceeded on
Demissions, that the Earl of Hoom's not proceeding so, and John Stewart's
proceeding upon his Demission, was preferable, and therefore repelled the
Defense.

It was further alleged, that John Stewart had Ratified the Defenders Tack.
It was answered, that was but personal, and could not be Relevant against the
Defender, being a singular Successor. It was answered, that the Pursuers
Interest being but for relief, the Defender could satisfy, and pay erest, upon
Assignation, and so his singular Title not being absolute, might be so purged.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Lord Colvil contra Town of Colross. February 27. 1666.
THE Lord Colvil, being Infeft in the Heretable Office, of the Baillerie of
Culross, by progress from the Earl of Argyl, first Baillie; who was Infeft by
the Abbots, before the Reformation; having full power of all Jurisdictions,
Civil or Criminal; and of all the Amerciaments, Bloods, and Casualities to his
own behove, he does thereupon pursue a Declarator of the Right, against the
Town of Culross, which is within the Lordship of Culross, that he had Right to
the Bloods, and to all Jurisdictions, Civil and Criminal amongst the Burgesses
thereof. It was alleged, for the Defenders, absolvitor; because their Town
was Erected in a Burgh Royal, by the King, with power of Heading and Hanging,
and other privileges of Burghs Royal; by virtue whereof, they have been in
immemorial Possession, in Exercing all Jurisdiction, Civil, and Criminal
amongst their own Burg^sses.

The Lords before answer, having ordained either Party to adduce W^^nesses, as
to the Possession of their Jurisdiction, which being closed, the Debate was
reassumed upon the Towns Right, and Possession.

It was answered, for the Pursuer, that he, and his Authors being Infeft in the
said Heretable Office, long before the Erection, and before the Anuexation of
the Abbacie of Culross, to the Crown, no Right granted thereafter to the Town,
could prejudge his established Right; especially, seeing in the very Act of
Annexation, such Bailleries are expressly reserved, and declared to be
unprejudged: And as to the Towns Possession. It was but clandestine, and not
total, for the Baillies did still exercise Jurisdiction, even upon Burgesses of
the Town, committing Bloods in the Town, and likewise Strangers committing
Bloods, as is instructed by his Court-books, and Witnesses, which is sufficient
to hinder Prescription. It was answered, that the Defense stood yet relevant,
for the granting of the Bailliery could not be exclusive of the granters own
Jurisdiction; but cumulative: and as the Abbots, so the King retained
Jurisdiction, and might dissolve a part of the Barony, which thereby ceased to
be within the Jurisdiction of the Bailly of the Barony^ and might Erect the
same in a Burgh Royal, as he has done in the same way, as the King, after
granting an Heretable Sheriff-ship, may yet Erect a Barony within the same,
which may exclude the the Sheriffs, if the Baron use diligence.

The Lords found, that the Erection of the Burgh Royal being after the
Constitution of the Baillerie, could not exclude the same of its Jurisdiction,
and Casuality, unless it had been by Possession, sufficient to make
prescription, and that the Case was not alike, as if the Barony of a Baron were
constitute within an Heretable Sheriff-ship; because the Casualities of the
Heretable Sheriff-ship belonged to the King himself, and could be only
understood, without prejudice of subordinat Jurisdiction of Baronies, which
were ordinar, and known, but here the Casualities belonging to the Bailli^
proprio jure, the Constitution of the Burgh could not prejudge them, even
albeit the Lord of the Regalities consent was thereto produced, seeing the
Ballie consented not; but as to the Possession, and Prescription, whether the
Town could Prescribe the Right of the Civil Jurisdiction; albeit the Baillie
exercised the Criminal Jurisdiction of Bloods, or whether the Town could
Prescribe their Right of a part of the Civil Jurisdiction, in so far as
concerned Trade: The Lords superceeded to give answer while the first of June,
and that they had time to consider the Depositions of the Witnesses fully.

Creditors of Lord Gray contra Lord Gray. Eodem die.
CErtain Creditors of the Master of Grayes, being Infeft in Annualrent out of
certain of his Lands, pursues Poynding of the Ground. It was alleged, for the
Lord Gray his Son, absolvitor, because he has Right to an Appryzing, and
Infeftment of Alexander Milne; which is expired, and prior to the Pursuers
Infeftments. It was answered, that the Appryzing was satisfied by the Umquhile
Master of Gray, and a blank Assignation thereto, was taken, which was amongst
the Masters Writs, and this Lord filled up his Name, after the Masters death;
this being unquestionably relevant, the difficulty was, concerning the manner
of the Probation.

The Lords before answer, ordained Witnesses ex officio to be examined,
whereupon the Lord Gray's Brother was examined, who acknowledged, he saw the
blank Assignation, by his Brother, and Mr. Robert Prestoun being examined, and
several other Witnesses, above all exception; and also the Lord Gray himself,
who acknowledged he got the Assignation blank after his Fathers death, but not
amongst his Writs, and that he gave a Bond therefore; Many of the Lords
thought, that seeing by the late Act of Parliament, the Appryzing, though
expyred was Redeemable from him, for the Sum he truly paid for it, that it
were more just, and safe, that he should be preferred, unless the Creditors
would purge, and satisfy the Sum, and that it were a dangerous example to find
so important a Writ, as this Assignation, to be taken away by Witnesses; yet
the plurality found the Testimonies so pregnant, and unquestionable: They found
the Reply proven thereby, and found the Appryzing retired, and satisfied by the
Debtor, and so extinct.

Earl of Landerdail contra Viscount of Oxenfoord. last of February 1666.
THE Earl of Lauderdale, being Infeft in the Barony of Muslburgh, which is a
part of the Abbacie of Dumfermling, and was Erected into a Temporal Lordship,
in favor of the Lord Thirlstoun, thereafter Chancellour^ the Lord Lauderdales
Grand-father^ in Anno 1587. Before the Act of Annexation, wherein the Erection
of Musleburgh, to the Lord Thirlstoun is expressly excepted. Thereafter in Anno
1592. the Queen was Infeft by the King, in Liferent, in the Abbacie of
Dumfermling, with the consent of the Lord Thirlstoun, as to Musleburgh, and his
Resign^tion, as that effect: shortly after, that same year, the King gave the
Queen an Heretable, and Irredeemable Right of the whole Abbacie of Dumfermling,
which was Confirmed by a Printed Act of Parliament; the Queen lived till the
Year 1618. After which the King was served Heir to his Mother, in the Abbacie
of Dumfermling, and Infeft therein, being then Prince. The King gave an
Heretable, and Irredeemable Right to the Lord Oxenfoords Authors, of the Teynds
of Coutsland, as a Part of the Lordship of Musleburgh, in Anno 1641. And
shortly thereafter, His Majesty did renew the Earl of Lauderdales Infeftment,
of the Lordship of Musleburgh, with a novodamus; Lauderdale being Forefaulted
by the Usurpers, Swintoun got a Donative of the Lordship of Musleburgh, and
amongst the rest, of the Teyn is of Coutsland; and did raise Inhibition and
Reduction of their Rights. After the Kings Restoration, the Earl of Lauderdale
obtains his Infeftment Confirmed in Parliament, with an express Exception
therein, that it should not be derogat, by the Act salvo jure, raises
Inhibition of the Teynds, and pursues Action of Spuilzie, and also of
Reduction. It was alleged, for the Defender, absolvitor, because he stands
Infeft in the Teynds lybelled by Infeftment, granted by the King, before the
Earl of Lauderdales Infeftment pursued on, and by virtue of his Infeftment,
King Charles the first, and Queen Anne his Authors have been in peaceable
Possession, uninterrupted, since the Year of God 1593 And therefore their Right
is accomplished, and established by Prescription. It was answered, for the
Pursuer, that the Defense ought to be Repelled, because, since the death of
Queen Anne, who died in Anno 1618. Till the Interruption made by Swintoun, by
Inhibition, and Reduction, in Anno 1656. there are not 40^ years run; and till
the Queens death, the Earl of Lauderdales Grandfather could not pursue,
because he had granted Resignation in her favors, for her Liferent, and contra
non valentem agere non currit Prescriptio; So Wyves Provisions in their
Contract of Marriage, Prescribe not from their Date, but from the time of their
Husbands death, all Obligations Prescribe only from the Term of payment, and
Infeftments, and Oblidgements of Relief from the Distress. It was answered,
for the Defender, that this Defense stands still Relevant. First, because, as
to any interruption made by Swintoun, it cannot be profitable to the Pursuer,
because he derives no Right from Swintoun: And as to the Queens Liferent
Infeftment, consented to by Thirlstoun, the Queen never accepted the same, but
an Heretable Right from the King that same Year, by which Heretable Right only
she possessed, and did all Deeds of Property, by entering of Vassalls, and
granting of Fews, which a Liferenter could not do; which Heretable Right,
Thirlstonn could not misken, because, by a special Printed Act of Parliament,
it is Confirmed in Parliament, and past the great Seal, himself being
Chancellor. It was answered for the Pursuer, that the Defense, and Duply ought
to be Repelled, in respect of the Reply, because the Confirmation of the Queens
Heretable Right in Parliament was salvo jure, and he was secured by the Act
salvo jure, in the same Parliament, and that he knew thereof, at the passing of
the great Seal, is but a weak presumption, and such knowledge could not
prejudge him, nor was he in any capacity to pursue upon his own Right, for
attaining possession; seeing the Queens Liferent Right, and Heretable, were both
compatible; and it was evident, the Queen would exclude him, by his Consent, in
the Liferent Right, neither can the Queens acceptance be questioned, after so
long time; seeing the acceptance of the Liferent was to her advantage and
profit, before she got the Fee, and did exclude Thirlstouns prior Right, which
would have undoubtedly reduced the Queens Right; and was excepted in the
General Act of Annexation; and would not fall under the Act salvo jure. It was
also severally alleged, that this Earl of Lauderdales late Right was
Confirmed in Parliament 1661. And all other Rights declared void, and that the
Ratification should have the force of a public Law, and not be derogat by the
Act salvo jure. It was answered, for the Defender, that in Prescriptione
longissimi temporis non requiritur tempus utile, sed continuum, In
consideration whereof the time of the said Presciption is made so long, and
therefore captivity absence reipublicae causa, want of Jurisdiction, or the
like are not respected. 2dly, Thirlstone valebat agere, because he might have
Reduced the Queens Infeftment of Fee, or declared his own Right of Fee to be
effectual after her death. And as to the late Act of Parliament, albeit it does
exclude the Act salvo jure, yet that is part inaudita; and upon the
impetration of a Party suo periculo, but the Parliament have never assumed
power to take away the private Rights of Subjects, except upon another, or
better Right, otherwise, no man in Scotland can call any thing his own, but a
Confirmation in Parliament, with such a clause surreptitiously obtained, shall
take away the Unquestionable Right of any other. It was answered, for the
Pursuer, that the Parliament had not incroached upon the just Right, of any
other, but had only restored the Pursuer to his Grand Fathers Right; and seeing
there is no question, but that Right was prior, and better than the Queens, and
the Defenders, and was in no hazard, but as to the point of Prescription, that
being a rigorous Statute, the Parliament might well excuse the Pursuer, for not
pursuing the King and Queen, but rather patiently to abide their pleasure, till
they were denuded, in favors of private Parties. It was answered, for the
Defender, that all our private Rights, especially of Property, are founded upon
positive Law, and there is none stronger then the Right of Prescription; and
therefore, if the Parliament can take that away, as to one Person, and not
generally, they may annul the Right of any private Person whatsomever.

The Lords were unwilling to decide in the whole points of the Debate, but did
in the first place, consider the Right of the Parties, without the Act of
Parliament, in favors of the Queen, or the late Act, in favors of the Earl
and in the point of Right, they repelled the Defense of Prescription, in
respect of the Duply of Swintouns interruption, which they found to accresce to
the Pursuer cujus jure utebatur, and found, that before the Queens death, the
Prescription could not run, in respect of the Queens Infeftment of Li^erent
consented to by Thirlstoun, which would exclude him from any Action, for
attaining Possession, and they found, that he was not oblidged to use
Declarator, or Reduction, which might be competent in the Cases of Distress, or
the Rights of Wifes, or any other Right, which yet do always exclude
Prescription, till Action may be founded thereupon, that may attain Possession.

Thomas Millar contra Howison. June 5. 1666.
THomas Millar, having pursued the Tennents of one Bailie his Debtor, for
making forthcoming, their Duties arrested in their hands. Compears Howison, and
produces a Disposition, and Infeftments from Baillie of the Tenements, prior to
the Arrestment, and craves to be preferred. It was answered for Millar, that
Howisons Disposition was null, as being in fraudem Creditorum against the Act
of Parliament, being granted after the contracting of Millars Debt; and albeit,
the narrative of the Disposition bears, causes onerous, yet he offered to
prove, by Howisons Oath, that it was not for causes onerous, at least
equivalent to the worth of the Land; which was found relevant, and Howison
having deponed, that his Disposition was granted for a Sum of 300. merks
addebted to himself, and the Sum of 1600. merks adebted to John Burd, for which
he was Cautioner for Baillie, the Disponer. At the advysing of the Cause. It
was alleged, that the Disposition, nor the Disponers Oath could not
sufficiently instruct the cause onerous; seeing the Oath did not bear, that
there was a price made, but only that there was no Reversion, nor promise of
Redemption granted ^ yet the Disposition was truly in Trust, which ofttimes is
tacit, as being the meaning of the Parties, and is not express by Reversion,
or Back-bond; so that if Baillie, or this Arrester would pay these Sums,
Howison could have no further Interest. It was answered, that the points
referred to Howisons Oath were denied, and that he was not oblidged to keep the
Bonds, but might destroy them, as being satisfied.

The Lords found, that as to Howisons own Bond, he needed not instruct the
same, but as to Burds Bond, they found, that he ought to instruct it, by some
adminicles, further then his own Oath, that the Debt was, and was paid by him,
in respect his Oath bore not a price made, and that he was Uncle to Baillie the
Disponer.

Mr. Alexander Nisbit contra Eodem die.
MR. Alexander Nisbit, as Assigney to a Sum, pursues the Debtor for payment,
compears the Arrester, who had arrested it in the Debitors hand, for a Debt due
to him by the Cedent, and whereupon he had obtained Decree before the Sheriff
of Berwick. It was alleged, for the Assigney, that the Decree was null,
because the principal Debtor was not called in the Decree, for making
forthcoming, or at least, at that time, he lived not within that Jurisdiction.
It was answered, that albeit the Arrester had no more, but his naked
Arrestment, he might compear for his Interest, and crave preference to the
Assigney, whose Intimation was posterior. It was answered, he could not be
pursued, hoc ordine^ because he, whose Money was arrested, was not yet called,
viz. The Assigneys Cedent, who is the Arresters principal Debtor; who, if he
were called, might allege, that the Debt whereupon the Arrestment proceeded,
was satisfied, which was not competent to the Assigney, being jus tertij, to
him.

The Lords found the Arrester might compear in this Process, without calling
his Debtor, but they found, that the Assigney might either allege payment in
name of his Cedent, or if he craved a time to intimate to his Cedent, they
would superceed to extract, till that time, that the Cedent might defend
himself.

Earl of Cassils contra Sir Andrew Agnew. June 6. 1666.
THe Earl of Cassils, as Superior of some Lands holden of him, by John
Gardener, obtained Declarator of his Liferent Escheat, and that a Gift of the
said Liferent, granted by the said Earl, to the said John, was null, in so far
as it contained a Clause irritant; that if John Gardener should give any Right
of the Lands to any of the name of Agnew, the Gift should be null, ipso facto,
whereupon in anno 1650. The Earl obtained Declarator of the Clause irritant, by
John Gardeners giving Right to Sir Andrew Agnew, and now insists for the Mails
and Duties since that Declarator. It was alleged, that the said Earl had
accepted the Feu Duty of several Years, since the said Declarator, and thereby
had tacitly past from the Declarator, and could not seek both the Feu-dutie,
and also the whole Mails and Duties by the Escheat. It was answered, for the
Earl, that having both Rights in his Person, he might poynd the Ground for the
Feu-dutie, and his Donatar might pursue for the Maills and Duties. 2dly, His
acceptance of the Feu-dutie, albeit it could not consist with the Maills and
Duties, yet it would only extend to these Years, that the Feu-dutie was
accepted, and to no others.

The Lords found the acceptance of the Feu duty Relevant, only for these
Years, for which it was received, but it occurred to some of the Lords, that if
it were alleged, there were three consecutive Discharges of the Feu-dutie,
that these, as they would presum, all bygone Feu-dutie paid, so they would
extend to the Maills and Duties, for all years preceding the Discharges;
Therefore the Defender was ordained to condescend, if so many Discharges were,
and that this point might be debated.

William Crawfoord contra Andrew Duncan. June 7. 1666.
WIlliam Crawfoord, as Assigney to a Bond of 200. merks, granted by Andrew
Duncan, pursues for payment. It was alleged, absolvitor; because the Bond was
null, having no Date at all, and data est de substantialibus. It was answered,
that the Pursuer offered him to prove by the Defenders Oath, that it was his
true Subscription, which was sufficient, and the Date is only substantial, when
Improbation is alleged, or any Right that might take away the Writ, if it
were of such a Date; as a prior Assignation, or general Discharge.

The Lords found the Reply Relevant, with this provision, that the Defender
might adject, what quality he thought fit, as these mentioned, or that it was
done in Minority, or not delivered, etc. but they found him not oblidged to
depone simpliciter, upon the verity of the subscription, and to prove such
qualities, as they had done before, in a Holograph Writ, wanting Date the last
Session, in the Process betwixt the Earl of Kinghorn and Sir James Murray.

Elizabeth Anderson contra George Cunninghame. June 9. 1666.
THis Cause betwixt Elizabeth Anderson, and George Cunninghame, anent a Legacy
lest by the said George his Wife, to the said Elizabeth Anderson, being debated
the 7. of February last. The Lords then found, that George, by confirming his
Wifes Testament, in giving up his Debts, to exhaust the free Gear, and abate
the Legacy, did not hinder himself to adduce further Debt, for a further
abatement: but now it being further alleged, that immediately, before the
Confirmation, the Bond he would now add, was registrat, and he charged
therewith, he could not be ignorant thereof, at the time of the Confirmation.

The Lords altered their Interlocutor, and found that having scienter omitted
that Deb^, he could not bring it in to the Legatars prejudice.

This was stopped by Bill the next day.

Colin Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin. June 12. 1666.
COlin Hay pursues the Magistrates of Elgin, for the Debt of a Rebel escaping
out of the Prison of Elgin, whom he had arrested there. It was alleged, for
the Defenders absolvitor, because the Rebel was not incarcerat by the Pursuer,
upon his Caption, but being incarcerat by another, was only arrested in the
Tolbooth by the Pursuer, and all that is produced to instruct the same, is only
the Execution of a Messenger, who arrested the Rebel. It was answered, there
was no difference, whether the Rebel had been incarcerat upon the Pursuers
Caption, or had been arrested; for in both Cases the Magistrates are liable: and
the keeper of the Tolbooth ought to have a Book, for certifying the Magistrates
of all incarcerations, and Arrests in Prison; and if they be neglective
therein, it is on their perils; and yet here the Messenger not only Arrested,
but the Executions bore, that he intimat the same to the Provost, and Baillies.

Which the Lords found sufficient, and Repelled the Defense, and found no
difference betwixt Incarceration, and Arresting in Prison.

Sinclar of Bryme Supplicant Eodem die.
SInclar of Bryme gave in a Bill, bearing, that he had obtained Suspension of
all Execution, and specially of Appryzing, which he presented at the time of
the Appryzing, and yet the Messenger, and Writer went on, and Appryzed; and
therefore craved, that the Appryzing might be stopped at the Registers, and Seals.

The Lords refused to grant the desire of the Bill, without there had been a
Summons against the Appryzer past the Signet; but would not upon a Bill cite
Parties out of the Town, having no dependence on the House, nor annull, or
hinder any pretended Right they had, without citing of them, but resolved to
take in consideration the contempt of the Messenger, and Writer, at the
discussing of the Cause.

Sir Hendrie Hoom contra Tennents of Kello, and Sir Alexander Hoom. June 13.
1666.
JOhn Hoom Younger of Kello, being Forefaulted in the Parliament 1661. For
being with the English Army, against the Kings Army, at Worchester, 1651. Sir
Alexander Hoom obtained Gift of the Forefaultry, and thereupon came in
possession. Sir Hendrie Hoom having Appryzed the Lands of Kello, from the said
John Hoom, and his Father Alexander Hoom upon their Bond, and having charged
the Superiout, in 1653. to Infeft him, obtained Decree of Maills and Duties
against the Tennents; which being Suspended upon double Poynding; and Sir
Hendrie and Sir Alexander competing. It was answered, for Sir Alexander, the
Donatar, that he had possessed three years, and offered him to prove, that the
Rebel had possessed five years before; therefore craved the benefit of a
possessorie judgment. 2dly, That he was preferable in point of Right, in so
far as he offered him to prove, that the Rebel was five years in possession,
before the Forefaulture, which gives the King, and his Donatar complete Right
by the Act of Parliament. It was answered, for the Creditor, that he ought to
be preferred, because, there being no retour upon the Act of Parliament,
finding by the Inquest, that the Rebel was five years in possession, as
Heretable Possessor, he can neither have the benefit of a possessory Judgment,
nor stop the Creditors Diligence, who found themselves upon the Appryzing
against the Father, who stood publicly Infeft, and there is no sufficient
Right in the Rebels Person alleged, nor produced. It was answered, that the
five years possession might be proven by Witnesses, by way of Exception. 2dly,
It was offered, to be proven by an Inquest, conform to the Act of Parliament.

The Lords found no benefit of a Possessory Judgment competent; neither would
they sustain the five years possession by way of Defense; but decerned
superceeding Extract, while the 15. of July, within which time, if the Donatar
obtained the retour of an Inquest, he should be heard thereupon.

The Donatar further alleged seperatim that the Rebel was Infeft by the
Father, which was sufficient to prefer him without an Inquest. It was answered,
non relevat, unless he had either been publicly Infeft, or by base Infeftment
cled with possession, before the Superior was charged upon the Creditors
Appryzing, which, being equivalent to a public Infeftment, is preferable to
the Rebels base Infeftment. It was answered, that the King, or his Donatar
needed no possession, nor can be prejudged for want of Diligence.

The Lords found the Creditors alleadgeance relevant.

Jack contra Mowat. Eodem die.
THE Lords found, that Jack having obtained Decree, as Assigney by his Father,
it was relevant for the Debtor, to allege and prove by the Assigneys Oath,
that the Assignation was without a cause onerous, and by the Cedents Oath, that
the Debt was paid before Intimation.

Sir Henry Hoom contra Sir Alexander Hoom. June 14. 1666.
IN the Cause debated yesterday, betwixt Sir Henry Hoom, and Sir Alexander
Hoom. It was further alleged, for Sir Alexander Hoom, that the Rebel had not
only five years possession; but was Infeft by an Infeftment holden of his
Father, which was cled with Possession, before the Appryzers charge against the
Superior, in so far as the Infeftment bore a reservation of the Fathers
Liferent, and so the Fathers Possession was the Rebels Possession, and was
sufficient to validat the base Infeftment; seeing there could be no other
Possession attained, during his Fathers lifetime; or at least, there was
reserved to the Father a yearly Rent, and the Rebel gave his Father a Warrant
in Writ to continue his Possession, of such of the Lands for the same.

The Lords ordained the Donatar to condescend, whether the Rebels Infeftment
proceeded upon his Contract of Marriage; And he declaring that it was by a
distinct Right thereafter.

The Lords found the Possession of the Father not relevant, it being betwixt
Conjunct Persons, private, and suspect: For they thought, if possession by such
Reservation, betwixt Father and Son were sufficient, the Creditors would hardly
be secure.

Dumbar contra Lord Duffus. Eodem die.
THE Lord Duffus having obtained a Decree of removing, against Dumbar, his
Tennent, and having execute the same, by Letters of Possession. The Tennents
raises Suspension, and Reduction of the Decree, and a Summons of Ejection; the
Reason of Reduction was, that the Sheriff had done wrong, in repelling and not
expressing in the Decree a relevant Defense. 2dly, That the Tennent could not
be decerned to remove; because he was already removed irregularly, by Ejection;
and ought not to be put to defend in the removing, till he were repossest,
spoliatus ante omnia est restituendus: which he instructed, by an Instrument
taken in the hand of the Clerk of Court; and where it was replied before the
Sheriff, that he had not found Caution, for the violent Profits. He answered,
that he needed not, seeing the Pursuer himself was in possession, by the
Ejection. It was answered, that the Lord Duffus offered him to prove, that all
he did, was to put in some Corns, and Plenishing in an ou^ house, long after
the warning, of the Tennent that had taken the Roum; and that he continued to
possess all the rest of the house, and the whole Land, by his Cattle, till he
was Legally removed; and neither the Family, nor Goods of the new Tennent came
in, till then. It was answered, that the alleadgeance was contrair to the
Tennents Lybel of Ejection, bearing, that he was dispossessed, both from the
house, and Lands.

The Lords considering, that the Tennents was only positive, in Ejection from
the House, and had once acknowledged, that he was not Ejected from the Land;
they Asso^lzed from the Reduction of the Decree of Removing; but they
sustained the Action of Ejection, and Repelled the Defenses, as contrair to the
Lybell, Reserving to themselves the modification of the violent profits, and
the other party to debate, whether, after the Decree of Removing, the Tennent
should have re-possession, or only the profits, or damnages.

George Tailzor contra James Kniter. Jun^ 15. 1666.
GEorge Tailzor, having Appryzed some Lands in Perth, set a Tack of a part of
it to James Kniter, who, thereafter Appryzed the same. Tailzor now pursues a
Removing against Kniter, who alleged, absolvitor, because he had Appryzed the
Tenement, within year and day of the Pursuer; and so had Conjunct Right with
him. It was answered, that he could not invert his Masters Possession, having
taken Tack from him. The Defender answered, it was no inversion, seeing the
Pursuer, by Act of Parliament had Right to a part, but not to the whole, and
the Defender did not take Assignation to any new Debt, but to an old Debt, due
to his Father.

The Lords sustained the Defense, he offering the expenses of the Composition,
and Appryzing, to the first Appryzer, conform to the Act of Parliament.

Alexander Stevinson contra Lord of Hermishills. Eodem die.
ALexander Stevinson, as Assigney by his Father, pursues Hermishills for
payment of a Bond, who alleged, absolvitor, because the Defender, as Heir to
his Father, had right to a Bond, due by the Pursuers Father, before the
Assignation; after which the Assignation was a Deed, infraudem Creditorum; and
so null. It was answered, non relevat, unless the Cedent had been Bankrupt, or
at least insolvend^.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, in respect of the Answer.

The Defender further alleged Compensation upon the said Bond; which was
relevant^ against the Pursuer, both as Heir to, and as Assigney by his Father.
It was answered, non relevat; against the Pursuer, as Executor, but for his
fourth part, being one of four Executors. 2dly, The Defenders Father was Tutor
to the Pursuer; and nondum reddidit rations.

The Lords found, that Compensation being equivalent to a discharge, taking
away the Debt ipso facto; it might be proponed against any of the Executors, in
solidum: but in regard the Tutors accounts were depending, the Lords sisted his
Process, till he Tutors Compts proceeded.

Sir Robert Sinclar contra Lord of Houstoun. Eodem die.
SIr Robert Sinclar pursues a Poynding of the Ground, of the Lands of Leni,
upon an old Annualrent, of 20. merks. Constitute above a 100. years ago.
Houstoun alleged absolvitor, First, Because he brooked these Lands past
Prescription, peaceably, without any pursuit upon this Annualrent. 2dly,
Because this Annualrent was base, and never yet cled with Possession; and his
Infeftment was public. It was answered to both, that the Pursuer produced a
Decree of Poynding the Ground, in Anno 1608. Since which, the Pursuers
Minority being deduced, it is not 40. years. Likeas, there is produced a
Precept of Poynding, for the said Annualrent. It was answered, that the Decree
in Anno 1608. was only against the Tennents, and Possessors; and so is null,
the ^eretor not being called. It was answered. First, That albeit the Decree
had been defective, for not calling the Master, yet it was sufficient to
interrupt Prescription. 2dly, It was sufficient to give possession, and to
validat a base Infeftment, by a civil possession: for as natural possession, by
the Tennents payment would have been sufficient, though without their Masters
knowledge, or consent: So a Decree, yea, a citation against them, is
sufficient for a possession, as being equivalent to a natural possession: and
albeit the Proprietar could not be prejudged, as to the constituting an
Annualrent, in the point of Right, not being called: yet as to the Point of
Possession the Right being constitute, he might. 3dly, Albeit the Heretor must
be called, when his Ground is first affected with an Annualrent, in attinenda
possessione, yet if the Annualrenter be in possession, he may continue the
same, without calling the Master; as well as in Tyends, Thirlage. etc. And here
the old Precept of Poynding was evidence sufficient of a prior Possession, in
re tam antiqua.

The Lords found, that the Decree was Possession sufficient, to interrupt
Prescription.

Minister of contra Lord Elphinstoun. June 16. 1666.
MInister of pursues the Lord Elphinstoun, for the Viccarage Teinds of his
Lands in his Paroch. It was alleged, absolvitor, because he brooked these
Lands by immemorial possession, without paying any Viccarage, and so had
prescribed Exemption, and Liberty. It was answered, that the Viccarage being
due de jure cummuni; desuetude cannot take them away, nor can any Prescription
give Right to them, unless it were by a Title; as if the Lands had been Templar
Lands, or belonging to these Orders, which paid no Teynds, but were exempted
by the Cannon Law; and therefore, in the last Session, it was found in the Case
of the Earl of Panmoor, that 40. Years did not prescribe the Right of
Parsonage, except for the Years preceding the 40. It was answered, that there
was a great difference betwixt Parsonage and Viccarage, which is Local, and
Consuetudinary, which is therefore only found due, according to what has been
accustomed to be paid; so that the Teynd of Lint, Hemp, Geess, Stags, Swine,
Fruits, Fishes are only due in these parts, where they have been so accustomed:
and therefore, as custom may take away a part, so it may extinguish the whole.

The Lords found the Defender could be no further liable, then for that
Viccarage, which was commonly paid throughout all the Kingdom. viz. Stirk,
Lamb, and Wool; and sustained not the same for Milk, or any other particular.

But the Defender, upon the twenty one of June, having Supplicat to be further
heard, alleging, that it was a common Case, that when the Lands were most in
Labourage, and the Viccarage small, and not considerable, that through the
whole Country Viccarage was never craved, time out of mind.

The Lords stopped Interlocuquutor, till they were further heard.

Thomas Beg contra Patrick Nicoll. June 22. 1666.
THomas Beg gave Commission, bearing, that he had delivered a certain Sum of
Money to Patrick Nicoll, to buy Wair for him in England; whereunto there is
subjoyned the said Patrick his acceptance, bearing Sea hazard excepted. Thomas
Beg now pursues for the Money, or Wair^ Patrick Nicoll alleged absolvitor;
because he offers him to prove, that shortly after the said Commission, he went
upon the Voyage, and that the Ship was taken, and the whole Goods there,
wherein it must be presumed, the Pursuers Money was. It being impossible for
the Defender, to prove that, that individual Money was there, and yet he is
willing to make faith, that it was there. It was answered, that the Defender
had Factor-fee, and should have transmitted the Money by Bill, as he did some
of his own; and at least he might prove, that he had a considerable Sum of
Money in the Ship.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and Repelled the Reply, and that the Defender
being trusted by the Pursuer, he could not refuse his Oath, in Supplement, that
his very Money was taken; seeing he neither might, nor could show, what money he
had, when he entered to his voyage, unless the Pursuer alleged, that he gave
the Defender allowance for the Exchange.

Earl of Eglingtoun contra Lord of Cunninghamhead. June 23. 1666.
THE Earl of Eglingtoun, pursues the Lord of Cunninghamhead for the Teynds of
Peastoun, who alleged absolvitor, for 60. lib^ Yearly, which by Decree of
the Plat, he paid to the Minister of Irving, and produces the Decree. It was
alleged, that where the Decree bore, out of the Teinds, it was mere Error of
the Clerk, and disconform to the ground of the Decree; which was a tripartite
Contract, whereby the Earl of Eglingtoun agreed for so much Victual, out of his
Teynd, beside what was to be paid by the Town of Irving, and Heretors; and the
Heretors oblidged them, and their Heirs, and Successors of these Lands to pay
so much Money; which cannot be understood, out of their Teynd; they being
oblidged, as Heretors, and the Teynd not being theirs; but the Earl of
Eglintouns, who was oblidged so much out of his Teynds, besides these
oblidgments. It was answered, that this being, to lay a burden of Stipend upon
the Stock, is most unfavourable, and the meaning thereof cannot be inferred,
unless it had born expressly, out of the Stock; especially, seeing the Teynd was
under Tack, and it was ex gratia, for them to pay any more then their
Tack-duty, but now when the Tacks are expired, the Earl cannot crave the whole
Teynd, and lay this burden upon the Stock. 2dly, The Lords cannot alter the
express tenor of the Decree of Plat, which was a Commission of Parliament.

The Lords found, that the tripartite Contract; as to this, did not burden the
Teynds, and therefore, seeing the Plat could only decern out of Teynds, they
found that by this Contract, the Heretors behoved to relieve the Teynds of this
burden, out of their Stock.

Arbuthnet contra Mary Keith. Eodem die.
Andrew Arbuthnet, having gotten a Gift to the behove of the Viscount of
Arbuthnet, of the Marriage of the Heirs of John Keith of P^tten, did thereupon
pursue the two Heirs Portioners, one of them being dead, he insists now against
the other, for her part, who alleged no Process, because none was called to
represent the other, who is thus far interessed, that the Probation of the
avail of the Marriage, against the one will prejudge the other.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found it would not prejudge the other,
against whom new Probation behoved to be used.

Patoun and Mercer contra Patoun. Eodem die.
JOhn Patoun, as Heretor of the Miln of Mukart, pursues for the abstracted
Multures, and alleadges, that the Miln is the Miln of the Barony, and the Lands
a part of the Barony, and that they being in immemorial Possession of Intoun
Multures, of one peck of the Boll; and that above thirty years ago, there was a
Decree arbitral, by the Marquess of Argyle, Decerning these Multures. The
Defenders alleged Absolvitor, because they were Infeft before the Pursuers
Right produced, cum molindinis; and as to the Act of Court, the whole Tennents
were not present: and the Decree Arbitral, it is under Reduction.

The Lords sustained the Pursuers Condescendence, reserving the Reduction as
accords.

Masson contra June 27. 1666.
MAsson pursuing a Declarator of Escheat. It was answered, that all Parties
having Interest were not Cited at the Market Cross, conform to the Warrant of
the Letters. It was answered, that was but stilus curiae, long indesuetude, and
it is enough that the Rebel is Cited, and none would be prejudged, who were not
Cited, and any may compear that pleases, for their Entress.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Forefault the amand given thereupon, as
being contrair to the common Custom.

Lord of Philorth contra Lord Fraser. June 28. 1666.
THe Lord of Philorth pursues a Declarator of Property, of Lands lying about
the Kirk-yard of Rathan, and particularly, that a part of the Land within the
Kirk-yard-dyke, is his Property, and that therefore the Dyke ought to be
Demolished, and specially the Lord Fraser's Arms upon the common Entry of the
Kirk-yard-dyke. It was alleged for the Defenders; first, absolvitor, because
the Pursuer had homologat the Right of the K^rk, as to the Kirk-yard-dyke, and
all within it, in so far as he had buried the Dead of his own Family in the
bounds in question; and likewise his Tennents.

The Lords found the former part Relevant; but not the latter, unless he had
been present at his Tennents Burials, or otherwise had consented.

The Defenders further alleged Absolvitor, because the Minister, and
Parochioners of Rathan had possessed the Kirk-yard, and Dyke peaceably, by the
space of 30 years, which is sufficient, to give them a Right upon this Point.

There occurred to the Lords these Points; first, Whether less Possession then
40 years could Constitute the full Right of a Kirk-yard? 2ly. Whether less
Possession, by burying of the Dead, could take away another Property? And
whether simply, or so as to give him Damnage, and Interest? 3ly. Whether an
Interruption, made after the Building of this Dyke, by the Pursuers raising
Summons, shortly thereafter, could operate any thing? if the Defenders had
bruiked, since the Interruption, by that space, that would have been sufficient
to Constitute a full Right before Interruption.

Many were of the opinion that Kirk-yards have as great privilege as any
Kirklands; and that in Kirk-lands, 10. years Possession before the Reformation,
or 30. years after, according to the old Act of Sederunt of the Lords, did
Constitute a full Right; as well as the long Prescription in other Cases; and
likewise that in Ecclesiasticis, 13. years Possession did Constitute a Right,
decennalis and triennalis possessor non tenetur docere de titulo; and that
accordingly the Lords were in use to decide in all such Rights; But the Point
to be decided was, Whether Interruption once used, endured for 40. years? so
that albeit 13. years would suffice; yet the Interruption long before these 13.
would alwyse be sufficient till the Interruption did prescrive by 40. years;
wherein many were in the Negative, that as in a possessoy Judgment on 7.
years, if Interruption were alleged, it was always a relevant Reply, that
since the Interruption, the Defender has Possessed 7. years without Interruption:
so if 10. or 13. years be sufficient to the Kirk, no Interruption preceding,
but only such as are done during these years, can be sufficient; for if 13.
years will take away the Solemnest Rights, and Writs; much more may it a
Citation.

Others were for the Affirmative, on this ground, that in the short
Prescription of 3. years, in Spuilzies, etc. Interruption once used serves for
40. years; so it must in this case; for he that once Interrupts, is alwise
holden as continuing in that Interruption, until it Prescrive, or be otherwise
past from. But it was answered, that it did Prescrive by Possessing 13. or 30.
years in rebus ecclesiae, Churchmen seldom have, or keep Evidents; albeit in
other Cases, Interruption would only prescrive in 40 years.

Yet the plurality found, that after Interruption, no less then 40. years
Possession was sufficient, but reserved to the Lords the Question anent the
ground, in so far as dead were buried therein, after Probation.

John Mcmorlan contra William Melvil. Eodem die
WIlliam Melvil, and one Hatter an Englishman, both Residing in England, gave
Bond to Gawin Lourie Residing there, after the English Form, who Assigns it to
John Mcmorlan. Melvil Suspends upon this Reason, that he had made payment to
Gawin Lourie the Cedent, which he offered to prove by Gawins Oath, and which
could not be refused, because he offered to prove that it was the Custom of
England, that the Cedents Oath can never be taken away by Assignation, as it is
in Scotland, but that Assignations are only as Procuratories, and that payment
might be proven there by Witnesses, to take away Writ. It was answered, that
the Law of Scotland must regulate the case, because the Assignation is
according to the Scots style, and the Debtor, albeit Residing in England, was
a Scots man, and knew the Custom of Scotland.

The Lords found that the manner of Probation behoved to be Regulate according
to the Custom of England, and so, that payment might be proven by witnesses, or
by the Cedents Oath, yet so, as the Cedent could not be holden as confessed, but
the Debtor or Suspender behoved to produce him, and move him to Depone:
Wherein the Lords so Declared, because they were informed, that the Suspender
proponed the Alleadgeance, because the Cedent was Quaker, and would not swear
at all.

Duke of Hamiltoun contra Duke of Buckcleugh. Eodem die.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun, as Collector of the Taxation, having Charged the Duke
of Buckcleugh for the Taxation of the Lordship of Dalkeith. He Suspended upon
this Reason, that the King Possessed these Lands Himself, the years of the
Taxation, and so cannot demand them from the Suspender, who is a Singular
Successor. The Charger answered, that he had the Taxation from the King for a
Cause Onerous, viz. a Debt.

The Lords found the Reason of Suspension Relevant.

Dougal Mcpherson contra Sir Rory Mcclaud. June 29. 1666.
DOwgal Mcpherson pursues Sir Rory Mcclaud, for payment of a Sum, upon his
promise, and the Summons bears a Warrant to Cite him at the Market Cross,
nearest the place of his Residence, being in the lsles: whereupon the Pursuer
craved him to be holden as confessed. The Defender alleged, that he was not
Personally apprehended, and so could not be holden as consest; and that this
Citation at the Market Cross was periculo petentis, and not to be Sustained in
the time of Peace, when there was no Trouble in the Country.

The Lords found, that Warrands for such Citations ought not to be granted by
common Bills, of course, but only by the Lords, upon special Bills in
presentia, but seeing the Defender compeared, they allowed his Procurator a long
time to produce him.

Ianet Kid contra Dickson. Eodem die.
JAnet Kid pursues Reduction of a Disposition of some Tenements in Forfar, made
by her Father on this Ground, that the Disposition is subscribed but by one
Nottar, and one Witness, and the Charter by one Nottar, and two VVitnesses, and
so is null by the Act of Parliament, requiring two Nottars, and four
VVitnesses, in Writs of importance. It was answered, that the Tenements being
small, the price of one expressed, being 200. merks, and the other 300. merks,
the foresaids two Writs were sufficient, cled with many years Possession, in
the Defuncts time. who never challenged the same. 2ly, They are Established by
the Seasine given propriis manibus, conform to the Obligement of the
Disposition, and Charterby a Town Clerk, Registrat in the Town Books.

The Lords having Ordained the Defenders to condescend, upon any Adminicles
they had, for astructing the verity of the Subscription, they condescended only
on seven years Possession, which the Lords found was not sufficient to
Establish the Right, without Reduction: but if the Defender had condescended on
40. years Possession, The Lords Declared they would hear them Dispute, whether
that could be sufficient, or not.

Chalmers contra Bassily. June 30. 1666.
MR. William Chalmers being to go abroad, grants a Factory to Bassily, bearing,
to endure until he returned, and after Discharged the same in Writ; he now
writes a Letter to his Father, bearing, That he would do any thing he could to
recall, and reduce that Factory, whereon a Reduction was raised on this Reason,
That all Factories of their Nature are Revockable at the pleasure of the
Constituent, albeit they contain a Term of endurance. It was answered, that
this Factory, containing such an endurance, cannot be Revocked till the Term
come. 2ly. Albeit Factories be Revockable, yet it must be re integra; but here
the Factor has advanced considerable sums of Money, upon consideration of the
Factory.

The Lords found the Factory Revockable, the Factor being always refounded of
what he profitably Expended upon consideration thereof before he quite
Possession.

Martin Stevinson contra Dobbie. Eodem die.
DObby being Tennent to James Stevinson of certain Lands, he gets an Infeftment
of Annualrent out of the same Lands, before Whitsonday, but the first Terms
payment of the Annualrent was Martinmas thereafter; after Whitsonday and before
Martinmas, Martin Stevenson apprizes the Land, and Charges the Superior, and
thereupon pursues for Mails and Duties. Dobby excepts upon his Infeftment of
Annualrent. The Pursuer answered, that the Infeftment was base, and before it
was, or could be cled with Possession, he had Charged the Superior, which was
equivalent to a public Infeftment. The Defender answered, that a public
Infeftment interveening, before the first term of payment of the Annualrent,
did not prejudge the base Infeftment, which could not be presumed to be private,
or simulat for want of Possession, till the Term came, at which Possession
might be attained, or pursued for. 2ly, The Defender being in Natural
Possession, from the very Date of his Seasine, intus habet, and he may retain
his own Annualrent, which begins to become due from the Date of his Seasine, de
momento in momentum, albeit there be a Term appointed to pay accumulative, so
that as the getting payment from the Possessor of any part of the Annualrent,
or his Obligement for the same, would be a Possession sufficient; so the
Defender having the same in his own hand as Possessor, it is equivalent.

The Lords found this Member of the Defense Relevant, and had no necessity to
decyde the other Point; whether the interveening publict Infeftment, before the
first Term, would exclude the base Infeftment, without Possession, wherein they
thought that there was great odds, if the Appryzers Infeftment, or Diligence
had been before Whitsonday, in respect the first Term of the Annualreni; was
not the next Term after the Seasine, and so if it might pass one Term, by the
same Reason it might pass ten Terms, and be valid; because in neither Case,
could Possession, or Action proceed thereon, and therefore might be suspected
of Simulation, so that if the Appryzers Diligence had been before Whitsonday,
the Annualrenter could have no Right to that Term, and so the Appryzer would
attain to the Possession, and could hardly be excluded thereafter.

Stevin contra Boyd. Eodem die.
STevin pursues his Mother as his Tutrix, and John Boyd as Husband, and Factor,
for an Account of his Fathers means: In which Account these Points were
reported: First, There was some old unfashionable Ware in the Defuncts Inventar
not Sold, whereof the Tutrix offered to the Pursuer his two third parts in
specie. The Pursuer answered, that the Tutrix had priced the same, and behoved
to accept them at that price, and that she ought to have done Diligence to have
Sold them; and Executors are never liberat but upon payment of the price.

The Lords found, that albeit Executors are comptable to Creditors always for
the price; yet not so to the Children; and therefore if it was visible that the
Ware was old, and could not be Sold, wherein the Tutrix was at the loss of her
Third, They found the same should be accepted; but in that Case they found the
Tutrix liable for any greater price she got, then that contained in the
Testament. The second point was, what Diligence the Tutrix should be liable
for, whether Registrat Horning were sufficient, or if Poinding and Apprizing
behoved to be used.

The Lords found, that Horning would not be sufficient in all Cases, but
according to ehe Condition of the Debitors, and therefore ordained the Parties
to condescend thereon.

Fleming contra Fleming. July 3. 1666.
DAm Elizabeth Fleming being Executrix to her Husband, and Tutrix to her
Children, gave out the sum of 6000. merks to the Lord Cardross, and took a
Bond^ bearing the same payable to her self in Liserent, and to Malcolm, and
Andrew Flemings, and failzing the one by Decease, to the other; This Bond by a
former Interlocutor, was found not to be altogether a Donation; but it
satisfied the two Bairns Portions pro tanto. Malcolm being now dead, Andrew the
surviver claimed the sum by the Substitution. Thereafter the Children as
Executors to Malcolm, claimed the same, on this ground, that this sum not being
found a Donation, but to be given in satisfaction of of Andro's Portion, the
Tutor could not Substitute any Heir to Malcolm, but behoved to remain as it had
been lent, as Malcoms own means, in which case it would belong to his whole
Brethren and Sisters, and not to Andrew only. Andrew all eadged, that he being
Substitute by his Mother, who had now Right from the remanent Children, she who
had Constitute this Substitution could never quarrel the same. It was answered
for the Mother, that she did not quarrel the Substitution; but that albeit the
Substitution took place, Andrew was her Substitute, and so was in the same
condition as Malcolm, so that Malcolms half behoved still to be taken away by
Compensation, in so far as she was Creditor to Malcolm, as if Malcolm were
alive. It was further alleged for Andrew, that in such a Clause as this, there
was no Fiar, and Heir, but two conditional, or alternative Fiars, viz. either
of the Children that Survived; and therefore such Clauses would never make the
Substitute Heir to represent the Defunct, and be liable to his Debts.

The Lords found, that by the Clause of Substitution, the Person Substitute was
Heir of Provision, yet not so as to be liable to the Person Substitute his
whole Debt; but quoad valorem, of what the Substitute had obtained by the
Substitution; And therefore found the Sums to belong to Andrew as Heir
Substitute, and yet with the Burden of the Compensation, in the same Case as
was Competent against Malcolm himself.

By which Decision it follows, that the Mothers Substitution to Malcolm was
Effectual, for which there is no reason, but the Error was in the first
Concoction, for this Sum should have been found a pure Donation by the Mother,
not only in respect of her Liferent reserved, which she past from, but in
respect of the Substitution, which she could not pass from, being jus tertij.

Earl of Kinghorn contra Lord of Udney. Eodem die.
THe umquhil Earl of Kinghorn having granted a Wodset to the umLaird of Vdney,
he by his Missive^ acknowledged the Sums to be satisfied, and obliged him to
grant a Renunciation, whereupon the Earl of Kinghorn pursues this Vdney, as
representing his Father to grant Renunciation, and Procuratory of Resignation;
and condescended upon the passive Titles thus, that umquhil Vdney, after the
Receipt of the Sums contained in the Wodset, had Infeft the Defender in the
Estate of Vdney, reserving to himself a power to alienat, and Dispone; after
which Infeftment, this Missive is subscribed, acknowledging the Receipt of the
Sums of before; and thereupon alleged, first, That the Father was obliged by
the Contract of Wodset, upon payment of the Sums to Renunce, and Resign, in
prejudice of which Obliegements, he had Disponed his Estate to the Defender,
who was alioqui successurus, and so as lucrative Successor, is obliged to
grant the Resignation. 2ly, The Letter obliging the Father to grant
Resignation, albeit it be after the Infeftment; yet seeing there is a power
reserved to the Father to Dispone his Obligement, must oblige the Son. It was
answered, that there was nothing before the Defenders Infeftment, to instruct
payment, the Letter being after, and no Obligement therein could burden him
thereafter, unless his Father had Disponed, or had given a Security out of the
Estate, conform to the Reservation.

The Lords found this passive Title new and extraordinary, therefore moved to
the Pursuer to alter this Libel, and Libel therein a Declarator of Redemption,
and to conclude the same, either with a Reduction or Declarator, for declaring
that the Wodset Right being acknowledged by the Wodsetter to be satisfied,
might be declared Extinct; in which case there needed no Resignation; or
otherwise might conclude the Defender to grant Resignation, and the Defender
thereupon Renuncing to be Heir, the Pursuer might adjudge, and thereupon be
Infeft: But others, thought that hardly could a Right be adjudged, which was
satisfied and extinct. The Lords referred to the Pursuers choice, which of the
vvayes he thought fit.

Iean Cuningham contra Lord of Robertland. July 4. 1666.
JEan Cuningham as Donatrix to the Escheat of umquhil Sir David Cuningham of
Robertland, pursued general Declarator against his Son, who alleged
Absolvitor, because the Horning was null, seeing the Charge and Denunciation was
only at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, whereas by the Act of Parliament, 1597.
c. 294. all Hornings Execute against Persons within the Realm, dwelling within
Bailleries, or Stewartries, should be Execute at the head Burgh thereof. Ita
est, umquhil Robertland, had his Dwelling House at Robertland, within the
Baillerie of Cuningham, albeit for a time he was out of the Country, and was a
Prisoner of War for the King.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and sustained the Horning, and found that the
Act of Parliament met it not; seeing neither the Person Denunced was within the
Realm, nor dwelt within the Baillerie at that time; but had remained several
years in England.

Hallyburton contra Hallyburton. Eodem die.
HALLYBURTON pursues a Reduction of an Infeftment, granted by by his Father
upon his Deathbed, to his Sisters, who alleged absolvitor, because he had
consented to the Disposition, in so far as he had Subscribed Witness thereto,
and if need beis, offered to prove that he had read the same. It was answered,
non relevat, because the Subscribing as Witness, relates only to the verity of
the Parties Subscription, and nothing to the matter therein contained, so that
whether the same was Read or not, it can import no Probation.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, reserving to themselves to consider what
the naked Subscription without the Reading of the Writ should work, in case the
Reading thereof were not proven.

Earl of Hume contra His Wodsetters. July 5. 1666.
THE Earl of Hume pursues certain Wodsetters to Count and Reckon for the
Superplus, more then their Annualrents, conform to the late Act between Debtor
and Creditor; Who alleged, first, Absolvitor, because the Reversion produced
is null, not being Registrat conform to the Act of Parliament 1555. c. 29.
Ordaining all Reversions to be Sealed, and Subscribed by the Parties own hand,
or a Notar, which shall make no Faith, if it be not Registrat. It was answered,
that that Act of Parliament was in desuetude, not only upon the Point of not
Registration, but want of Seasine; otherwise the Act of Parliament 1617. Anent
the Registration of Seasines, had dot been necessar.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found the said old Act of Parliament to be
in desuetude.

One of the Defenders further alleged, that the Rights of these Reversions
are prescribed, because they were not pursued within the 13 years appointed by
the Par. 1617. c. 12. It was answered, that the Pursuer, or his Predecessor
were Minors, during the space of 4 or 5 years of the said 13 and prescriptio
non curit contra minorem. It was answered for the Defenders, that in this part
of the Act, there is no exception of Minors; albeit in the former part of the
Act, anent the 40 years, Minority be expressly excepted. and exceptio firmat
regulam in casibus non exceptis, especially seeing Reversions being but pacta de
retro vendendo, and so Bonds were prescribed by the old Act of Parliament, so
the addition of 13 years was ex mera gratia, and ought to be strictly interpret.

The Lords did also Repel this Defense, and found that the 13 years run not
against Minors.

It was further alleged for one of the Defenders, that the Reversion made use
of against him, was since the Act of Parliament 1617. and not Registrat, and so
could not operat against him, who is singular Successor to the Granter thereof.
The Pursuer Replied, that before the Defenders Right, he had used an Order of
Redemption, and had Execute a Summons of Declarator, whereby res fuit
litigiosa; and no Right granted thereafter, can prejudge the Pursuer.

The Lords found the Reply Relevant to elide the Defense.

Laurence Scot contra The Heirs of Line of Auchinleck. Eodem die.
LAurence Scot pursues the Daughters of umquhil David Boswel of Auchinleck, and
the Lord Cathcart, and the Lairds of Adamton, and Sornbeg, for a thousand merks
adebted by him to the Defunct. The Defenders offered to Renunce. The Pursuer
Replied, they could not Renunce, because they had behaved themselves as Heirs,
in so far as by agreement betwixt them, and the Heir-male, they had Renunced
their Interest of the Heretage in his favors, and had gotten sums of money
therefore. It was answered, non relevat, unless they had so Renunced, as to
prejudge the Creditors, or to Assign, Dispone, or Discharge any thing they
might succeed to, but if they only got Sums of Money from the Heir-male, in way
of gratuity for their kindliness to the Estate, and to grant a Renunciation
voluntarly, as Law would compel them, it would not make them liable; and the
truth is, that by the Defuncts Contract of Marriage, the Estate is provided
only to the Heirs-male, and only 10000 merks to the Daughters: Likeas, the
Defunct Disponed the Estate to his Brothers Son, who adjudged both upon the
Clause of the Contract, and Disposition, and the Defenders Renunced to him; as
a Creditor, in common form.

The Lords found that the geting of Sums of Money, for such a Renunciation, by
which the Creditors were not prejudged, did not infer behaving as Heir.

Collin Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin. Eodem die.
COllin Hay insists in his pursuit against the Magistrates of Elgin, for payment
of a Debt due to him by a Debtor, who escaped out of their Prison. It was
alleged by the Defenders, that the Prisoner escapt vimajori, without their
fault, in so far as on a Sabbath, when the People were all at Preaching, the
Officer Keeper of the Prison opening the Door, a Woman did cast a Played over
the Officers head, and pulled him at unawars to the ground, in the mean time
the Rebel escaped, whom the Officer followed, and was wounded by several
persons, whom he had lying darn't in the Town, to assist him.

The Lords found the Condescendence not Relevant, and that the Magistrates
should have had their Tolbooth better Secured, then the same could be forced by
one Woman; for there was no other alleged present, before the Prisoner got
out, neither was it a competent time to open the Tolbooth upon the Sabbath,
when the People could not concur in case of Force.

Parson of Morum. contra Lord of Beirford and Beinstoun. July 6. 1666.
THe Parson of Morum pursues Reduction of a Tack set by the former Parson to
Beirford and Beinstoun, as being granted without consent of the Patron. The
Defenders alleged absolvitor, because the Tacks were set by the Parson, who
had Commission from the Earl of Buckcleugh, Patron to Set Tacks. 2ly, The Tacks
were Set with consent of Francis Steuart, Lord Bothwel expressly, as Patron,
which Francis Steuart had Right to the, Patronage, in so far as this Patronage,
with the rest of the Estate of Bathwel, being Forefault, the Earls of
Buckcleugh, and, Roxburgh got Gifts thereof, but by the Kings Decree Arbitral,
betwixt Francis Steuart and them, Buckcleugh was ordained to denude himself of
this Patronage, and others in favors of this Francis. The Pursuer answered,
first, That no Commission granted by the Patron to the Parson himself, could be
sufficient, because the intent of the Act of Parliament, requiring the consent
of Patrons, was not for any advantage, or Interest of the Patron, to his own
behove, but to the behove of the Benefice, that the Incumbent might meliorat
the same; and so the Patron was by his Right of Patronage, as Curator
Ecclesiae; but Curators cannot authorize their Minors by Commission, at least
the Patron cannot give commission to the Beneficed Parson himself, no more then
he could Renunce the benefit of the Act of Parliament, and leave the Parson to
himself. 2. Before the Tack was Set, the Earl of Buckcleugh, Granter of the
Commission was dead, and morte mandatoris perimitur mandatum. As for Francis
Steuarts consent, he was not Patron, not being Infeft; but the Kings Decree
Arbitral, imported only a Personal obligement for Buckcleugh to denude; so that
if Buckcleugh thereafter should have consented to another Tack, that would have
been preferred.

The Lords found that Member of the Alleadgence, of Buckcleughs, being dead
before the Tack, not Relevant, to annul the same, as depending on his
Commission; but decided not the first Point, whether Commission could be
granted by the Patron, to the Parson himself; but found the last Member
Relevant, to defend the Tack; for the Right of Patronage, being jus
incorporale, might be Transmitted by Disposition, without Infeftment, and
albeit Buckcleugh was not formerly denuded, even by Disposition, so that if he
had consented to another Right, that, as more formal, would have been
preferred, yet, there being no competition, the Parson cannot quarrel the want
of the Patrons consent upon that ground.

Isobel Tosh contra David Crookshank. Eodem die.
ISobel Tosh pursuing Reduction of a Decree, pronunced in foro contradictorio,
and in presentia, on this ground, that it was Extracted by the Clerks
unwarrantably, contrair to what was done by the Lords, which they offered to
prove by the Oaths of the Advocats on the other side. It was answered, this
were a ground to Reduce all the Lords Decreets, in foro.

Yet the Lords sustained the reason to be proven, as said is.

Corbet contra Sterling. Eodem die.
COrbet of Concorse pursues a Spuilzie of certain Goods out of his House at
Glasgow, against William Stirling, who alleged Absolvitor, because he had
lawfully poinded them from his Debtor, in whose Possession they were. The
Pursuer answered, that he offered him to prove, that he had Disposition of
these Goods from that Party, from whom the Defender alleged to have poinded
them, and an Instrument of Possession thereupon; and that he had paid Mail for
the House where they were several years, and still when he came to Glasgow he
did Reside in the House, and made use of the Goods. The Defender answered, that
his Defense did yet stand Relevant, because the Condescendence makes it appear,
that the Pursuers Right was from the Defenders Debtor, and any Possession he
alleadges might be simulat; and the Defender in Fortification of his Legal
Execution, offered him to prove, that his Debtor remained in the natural
Possession of the House, and made use of the Goods, as his own Goods, and so
was in natural Possession thereof, whereby he might lawfully poynd from him.
The Pursuer Repeated his Reply; and further alleged, that one of the Baillies
of Glasgow alleged that they were his Goods, at the time of the poinding, and
offered his Oath. The Defender answered, that that Baillie was neither the
Pursuers Servant, neither had Commission.

The Lords found the Defense for the Poynder Relevant, and more pregnant then
the condescenders alleadgence, and Repelled that Member of the Duply, anent the
Baillies offering of his Oath.

Cranstoun contra Wilkison. July 10. 1666.
IN a Pursuit betwixt Cranstoun and Wilkison; The Defender being conveened as
Heir to his Father, who was Vicious Intrometter with the Pursuers Debitors
Goods and Geir.

The Lords having of their own proper motion, taken this passive Title to
Consideration, as to this Point, whether Vicious Intromission, as it is an
universal passive Title, died with the Intromettor, or if it might be pursued
against his Representatives, they ordained the Parties to be heard thereupon.
which being Reported this day, The Lords found, that no person^ as representing
a Defunct, could be liable universaliter, upon that Defuncts Vicious
Intromission, but only for the true value of his Intromission, and that either
by Action or Exception; upon this Consideration, that albeit ^uch Titles have
been often times Libelled, and sometimes Sentence thereupon, when none opposed;
yet there had never been a Decision, nor Interlocutor for it; and that the
passive Title being poenal, sapiens naturam delicti, non transit in haeredes
delinquentis in quantum penale; for they thought it were of dangerous
consequence, if Persons might be liable, not only to their immediate
Predecessor, but to their Goodsire, Grandsire, or Fore-grandsires, vicious
Intromission; but if the vicious Intromission had been Established against the
Defunct, in his own time, it would be sufficient against all his Successors:
Otherways after his death, they could not be put to purge the Vitiosity. or to
show the manner, or the Warrant of his Possession. But it was not determined,
if Action had been intented against the Defunct, and he dyed before Sentence,
whether his Heir would be liable, there being different Cases as to that Point,
which required different Considerations^ as if the Defunct dyed after
Probation, or if after Litiscontestation, when at least the particulars were
condescended on, and the Defunct compearing, alleged nothing to purge: or if
the Pursuit were de recenti, and not long delayed, but the Defunct dyed, the
Pursuer doing all Diligence; or if Diligence were not used, but the matter lay
over; in which case, it seems little respect could be had to the intenting the
Action only; and it would be as little questionable, that if Probation were led,
the Defunct compearing, it would be as valid against him, as if Sentence were
obtained, the middle Cases are more dark: But none of them were comprehended in
this Decision.

James Thomson contra Binnie. Eodem die.
THere being a Decree obtained against Binnie, his Creditors finding him at
Linlithgow, secured him, and he found two Burgesses Caution as Law will, who
being conveened for payment of the Debt, alleged absolvitor, because they
were only in common Form Obliged as Cautioners as Law will, which does not
import judicio sisti, and judicatum solvi, but judicio sisti, aut judicatum
solvi. Ita est, They sisted the Party for whom they were Cautioners, and put
him in the Provosts hands, who put him in Ward, and Protested to be free
conform to an Instrument produced. It was answered, non relevat, because they
only sisted him judici, but not judicio; they ought to have presented him in
the Court, when that Cause was called; and the Pursuer was not obliged to know,
or take notice what they did otherways, which might be by way of Collusion.

The Lords found the alleadgence Relevant, for there was no Collusion
condescended on, providing the Defenders prove by the Witnesses, insert i^ the
Instrument, that it was so Acted: For they thought, that if the Cautioners put
the Debtor in Ward, at any time during the Process, the Pursuer was not
prejudged; For if he insisted in his Process, and upon not presenting of the
Defender Protested, the Cautioners would either then allege that he was in
Prison, or otherwise it would import Collusion.

Mr. John Hay contra Sir James Douglas. Eodem die.
MR. John Hay of Haistoun, and Sir James Douglas having both Rights of
Appryzing of the Estate of Smithfield, did agree, that Sir James should have
three parts, and Mr. John one, and did obtain a Decree at both their Instances
for removing a Tennent, from some Aikers; but Sir James Labored and did Sow
the whole; Mr. John did thereafter Sow as much Corn upon the Sown Land, as
would have sown his quarter, and now pursues an Intrusion against Sir James,
who alleged absolvitor, because Mr. John was never in natural possession, and
offered to give the 4. part of the Rent the Aikers paid before. The Pursuer
answered, that the removing of the natural Possessor was equivalent, as if Mr.
John had been in natural Possession of his Quarter; and therefore the offering
to him the Rent was not sufficient, yet he was willing to accept the Rent for
this year, so as Sir James would devide for time coming.

The Lords found that in this Process they could not compel Sir James to
devide, but sustained the Process, ad hunc effectum, that Mr. John should have
the 4. part of the Cropped, paying Sir James the Expenses of Labourage.

Dam Margaret Hume contra Crawford of Kerse. Eodim die.
DAM Margaret Hume having charged the Lord of Kerse, who was Cautioner for the
Earl of Lowdoun, for her Liferent, that she had out of the Estate of Lowdoun.
He Suspends, and alleadges that the Charger ought to assign him, seeing the Bond
wants a Clause of Relief, whereby he will have difficulty to have Relief of the
other Cautioners bound.

The Lords found that they could not compel the Charger to assign, but in so
far as of her own consent she would.

Canna contra Eodem die.
THere was a Disposition of some Tenements in Dumbar, containing this
provision, that the Buyer should pay such a sum of Money^ to a Creditor of the
Sellers, under the pain, and penalty, that the said Disposition should be null.
Infeftment followed upon the Disposition, and the Land is now Transmitted to
singular Successors, who pursuing for Mails and Duties. It was alleged for
the Creditor by the Reservation, that this Reservation being a real Provision,
the Creditor must be preferred to the Mails and Duties, ay and while the Sum be
paid. It was answered, first, That this provision was neither in the Charter,
nor Seasine, and any Provision in the Disposition, could only be Personal, and
could not affect the Ground, nor singular Successors; seeing no Inhibition, nor
other Diligence was used on it before their Right. 2ly. Albeit it had been a
Provision in the Investiture; yet it could have no Effect against the Ground;
which can^not be affected but by an Infeftment, and upon a Provision, neither
Action, nor Poynding of Annualrents, nor Mails and Duties could proceed. It was
answered, that real Provisions must necessarly affect the Ground, and there can
none be more real than this, not only being a condition of the Disposition; but
also containing a Clause Irritant.

The Lords having first ordained the Infeftment to be produced, and finding
that the Seasine proceeded upon the Precept in the Disposition, without
Charter, being within burgh, the Lords found that the Provision could give no
present access to the Mails and Duties, until the Clause Irritant were
declared; or that it were declared, that they should have like Execution, by
virtue thereof, against the Lands, as if it were in the hands of the first
Buyer, which the Lords thought would operat, but had not the occasion here to
decide it.

John Scot contra Sir Robert Montgomery. July 12. 1666.
JOHN Scot pursues Sir Robert Montgomery, as vicious Intrometter with the Goods
and Gear of Sir James Scot of Rossie, to pay a Debt due by Sir James to the
Pursuer. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because, any Goods he Intrometted
with, were Disponed to him, for Onerous Causes, by the Defunct, and delivered
conform to an Instrument of Possession produced.

It was answered, that the Disposition bears, Horse, Neat, Insight, Plenishing,
and all other Goods and Gear, which cannot be extended to any thing of another
kind, nor of greater value, as current Money, Jewels, Silver-plate, Chains,
etc. which never past by such general Clauses, unless it be specially Disponed.
It was answered, that albeit there had been such Movables, and the Defender
had Intrometted therewith, though another having a better Right, might Evict
the same; yet the Defender had a probable Ground to Intromet, which is
sufficient to purge this Odious passive Title.

The Lords found the Disposition and Delivery Relevant, to purge the Vitiosity.

Normand Livingstoun contra Lady Glenagies. July 13. 1666.
NOrmand Livingstoun having appryzed the Lands of Glenagies, pursues the
Tennents for Mails and Duties, wherein the Lady compeared, and alleged, that
she ought to be preferred, because she is Infeft in a Liferent in the Lands by
her Contract of Marriage. It was Replied, that the Lady and her Husband, for
all Right that either of them had, had given a Right to their Cautioners to
uplist the Mails and Duties of the Lands in question, for payment of Debts, and
this Debt particularly, whereon this Appryzer proceeds; with power also, to the
Cautioners, to Dispone any part of the Lands for payment of the Debts; which
the Lady Ratified Judicially, and which now Excludes her from hindering any of
these Creditors to get payment. It was answered for the Lady; first, That this
Right was but a Factory, or Commission, and so Expyred by the Lairds Death.
2ly, It was only in favors of the Cautioners, for their Relief; but the
Creditors had no Interest to allege thereupon. 3ly, The Cautioners were never
Distressed; and it was a mistake; being to them as Creditors in the Sum; not
being so in effect.

The Lords having considered the Commission, and that it buir not only the Lady
to consent, but for all her Right, to grant Commission, and that, not only it
was in favors of the Cautioners, in case of Distress; but also in favors of
the Creditors: bearing, to be for payment of the Creditors: Therefore they
found the same Relevant against the Lady; to exclude her Infeftment, ay and
while the Debts were paid. But this occurred to the Lords, that if the Lady
could condescend, that by the Creditors, or Cautioners fault, in not making use
of this Commission, the Lord was suffered to continue in Possession, so that
if they had used Diligence, the Debts would have been paid, in whole, or in
part, and the Ladies Liferent disburdened, pro tanto; they would find the same
Relevant.

Patrick Keith contra Lord Lesmore, Troup and others. July 14. 1666.
PATRICK Keith having Right of Wodset, granted by the Earl of Marischal,
pursues a Reduction against the Lord of Lesmore, of a posterior Right, granted
by the Earl to him; Which Right was Disponed to Muiresk, who was Infeft, and
Dispon'd to Troup, who is present Heretor; who being all Called, and
Litiscontestation made, and the Cause concluded; at the Advising thereof, it
was alleged for Troup, that Muiresk was dead, and there could be no advising
of the Cause, till some Representing him were Called; for as in initio, there
could be no Process against Troup, the present Heretor, till Muiresk his Author
were Called: So neither can there be any procedor now, till some Representing
him be Called. It was answered, the Pursuer declares that he Insists against
Lesmores Right principaliter; against which only the Reasons are Sustained; and
as for Muiresk, and Troops Rights, they will fall in, consequentiam^

The Lords found that the Process behoved to be Transferred against Muiresks
appearand Heir, before it could be advised: For as the declaring that the
Pursuer Insisted principaliter against the first Right, would not have been
Relevant ab initio; seeing the Law allows all mediat Authors to be Called, that
they may defend the Right, whether and Reasons be Libelled against their
Rights, or their Authors; which comes in the place of the old Custom, of
sisting Process until the Defenders Warrant were Called, and Discust: So every
Author has alike Interest, to Object against the Reasons. although Libelled
principaliter, against the first Authors Right.

But the Lords declared, that, seeing the Defender made this unnecessar delay,
they would be more favorable in drawing back the Reduction, ad litem motam,
aut contestatam.

Sharp contra Glen. Eodem die.
IN a Competition betwixt two Compryzers; It was alleged, that the Pursuer,
who Insisted for the Mails and Duties, his Appryzing was extinct, by
Intromission within the Legal; Which was offered to be proven by his Pursuers
Author, his Oath. It was answered, that his Authors Oath could not be Received
against a Singular Successor, standing now Infeft; for as the Cedents Oath is
not Receivable against the Assigney in personal Rights; much less is the
Authors Oath against the singular Successor in real Rights.

It was answered, that before this Pursuers Right, res fuit litigiosa, in so
far, as the Pursuers Author having before pursued Mails and Duties, in that
Process, the Defender offered to prove by his Oath, that the Appryzing was
satisfied, whereupon litiscontestation was made, whereby res fuit litigiosa,
and no posterior Right could prejudge the Defender.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and ordained the Authors Oath to be taken.

Fountain and Brown contra Maxuell of Nethergate. Eodem die.
BRown, as Heir to Mr. Richard Brown, who was Heir to Thomas Brown pursued for
exhibition. and delivery of a Wodset Right, granted in favors of Thomas;
Wherein the Lords having sustained Witnesses to be admitted to prove, not only
the having of the Writs, since the intenting of the Cause, but the having them
before, and the fraudful putting them away, which ordinarily is only probable by
Writ, or Oath; unless evidences of Fraud be condescended on, in respect the
matter was ancient, and the Pursuer had long lived in England, now at the
advising of the Cause; several of the Witnesses were found to Depone, that the
Defender, before the intenting of the Cause, not only had such a Wodset Right;
but was dealing to get the same conveyed in his own Person, which importing
Fraud.

The Lords would not absolutely decern him to exhibit, but found that he
behoved, docere quomodo desijt possedere, or otherwise produce, and therefore
ordained him to compear, that he might be interrogat, and condescend upon the
particular Writs.

Thomas Ogilvy contra Lord Gray. July 17. 1666.
THomas Ogilvie pursues the Lord Gray, as behaving himself as Heir to his
Father, by Intromission with the Mails and Duties, of the Lands wherein his
Father dyed Infeft: as of Fee; for payment of a Debt of his Fathers; who
alleged absolvitor, because any Intromission he had, was by a Warrant, and
tollerance of Sir George Kinnaird, who stood Infeft in the Lands, upon a Gift
of Recognition. It was answered, non relevat, unless the Gift had been
Declared, before the Defenders Intromission; because the Gift would not have
given Right to the Donatar himself, to possess. The Defender answered, that the
Gift was Declared before the Intention of the Pursuers cause, which Declarator,
albeit after Intromission, yet must be drawn back to the Gift, to purge the
vitiosity of the Defenders Intromission, in the same way, that the Confirmation
of a Testament will purge anterior vicious intromission, the Confirmation being
before the intenting of the Cause.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, to elid the passive Title, seeing any
colorable. Title is sufficient, to excuse the vitiosity: but did not find,
that the Declarator, before intenting the Cause, had the same Effect, as a
Confirmation; because by constant Customs, such confirmations, purge the
preceding vitiosity; which has never yet been found in this Case of an Heirs
intromission with the Rents of Lands: but the Lords found the Defender liable
for the single value of his Intromission.

Alexander Burnet contra Iohnstouns. Eodem die.
JOhn Iohnstoun, having disponed the Lands of Fraster-hill, to Gordoun of
Lesmore, whose Right Alexander Burnet having appryzed, and by the appryzing,
having Right to the Clause of Warrandice contained in the Disposition; charges
Iohnstoun the Disponer, to warrant the Right against a posterior Right, granted
by him, to William Iohnstoun, who had obtained first Infeftment. It was
answered, that the Warrandice could have no effect, because there neither was,
nor could be a distress, in so far, as in William Iohnstouns Disposition, John
Iohnstouns, and his Wifes Liferent were reserved, during whose life he could
never distress Burnet. 2ly. It was Burnets authors fault, that for many years,
he did not take Infeftment, having long Right before the second Disposition. It
was answered, that Iohnstoun himself could never object this delay, to excuse
his fraudulent Deed, of granting double Dispositions, whereby Parties become
infamous by the Act of Parliament, 1540. cap. 105. and unto the other point,
albeit there was no present distress, yet there was unquestionable ground of a
future distress, against which the Defender could answer nothing, that could
elid it, and who being but a naked Liferenter, if no execution should pass upon
the Clause of Warrandice during his Lifetime, he would be fully frustrat.

The Lords decerned Johnstoun the Disponer, to purge the posterior Disposition,
granted by him, and found neither of the alleadgeances, in the contrair
relevant.

Brown and Duff contra Bizet. July 18. 1666.
BRown, and Duff, having obtained Decree against Bizet, for a Sum due to
Umquhil Andrew Duff Merchant in Polland, Bizet raises Suspension, and
Reduction, upon this Reason, that this Sum having been in bonis defuncti, the
Charger could have no Right thereto, till it were established in their Persons,
by a Confirmation in Scotland, by the Commissaries of Edinburgh, ut in communi
patria. It was answered, movables sequuntur personam, and therefore,
wheresoever the movables be, they are regulat according to the Law of the
place where the Defunct resides, and it is instructed by the Testimony of the
Consul, and Counsel civitatis Regiae pusensis, that by the Common Law, and Law
of that place, movables belonged to the Wife, and Bairns, and the Pursuers
were so cognosced by them, declaring the said Clares Brown Wife, and the said
Duff, the only Daughter of Andrew Duff, and therefore they have sufficient
Right without Confirmation in Scotland, which appears by the Act of Parliament,
James 1. cap. 89. Par. 1426. And it has been still the Custom so to do, and
that it was so decyded, the 16. of Feb. 1627. Lauson contra Bastil Kello. It
was answered, that it was otherwise decided, in the Case of Rob contra French,
25. Feb. 1637. And there was no reason, that these that lived out of the
Country animo remanendi, should be in better condition, then these that resided
in the same, and behoved to Confirm, and to pay the Quot.

The Lords found, that the Testament behoved to be Confirmed, by the Commissars
of Edinburgh; for having considered the old Act of Parliament, they found, that
the point there ordered was, to what Judicatures the Merchants going abroad to
Trade, should be liable, and that such as went abroad, not animo remanendi,
should be subject to the jurisdiction of that place, where their Testament
would be confirmed. ( viz. where they had their Domicills) but these that went
out of the Country, to remain, are excepted; but nothing expressed where their
Testament should be Confirmed; and for the Decision, the Point in question, was
not whether a Confirmation in England was valid, but whether a Confirmation
without an Inventar, was valid, and therefore, seeing nothing was objected
against the Confirmation it self. The Lords did justly find, that the wanting
of an Inventar, in an English Confirmation, where that was the custom, did not
prejudge it, neither is the Case determined by the Decision betwixt Rob and
French, in respect, that the Executor having Confirmed in England, and rather
being Confirmed by the Legatars, would not own the Confirmation, but renunced
the same; and therefore the Lords found no Consuetude, or Decision in the Case,
but determined the same, ex bono and aequo.

Hellen Millar contra Watson July 21. 1666.
WAtson having obtained a Decree before the Lords, against Hellen Millar, for
the Rent of some Tenements in Glasgow. she Suspends, and raises Reduction, on
these Reasons. First, That the Decree was null, as being ultra petita, in so
far as the half of the Duties was only lybelled, and the whole was decerned.
2dly, That Watson's Right was, as Heir to Watson, who was first Wife to Brown,
who stante matrimonio acquired this Right to him, and her, and the one half to
her Heirs, and the other to his, which was a Donation betwixt Man and Wife,
revocable, and revocked by the Infeftment granted to Hellen Millar, in
Liferent, his second Wife. It was answered, that the Decree being in foro
contradictorio, was irreduceable. 2dly, That the Right was not granted by the
Husband to the Wife; but acquired from a third Party.

The Lords reduced the Decree, finding that it was visibly Extracted by error
of the Clerks, being ultra petita, and therefore sustained the second Reason,
albeit it was omitted, that it was a Donation betwixt Man and Wife, being
acquired to the Man and Wife; and so presumed to be by his means which is
equivalent, as if he had been Author, unless that Watson could condescend, that
it was by the Wifes means.

Gavin Hamiltoun contra Duke Hamiltoun and Bishop of Edinburgh, Eodem die.
GAvin Hamiltoun, as Assigney by the Collector of vaccand Stipends, charges the
Parochiners of Craufoord, Compearance is made for the Bishop of Edinburgh,
alleging, that this was a Patrimonial Kirk of the Bishopric of Edinburgh,
and so was not comprehended in the late Act of Parliament, anent vaccand
Stipends.

The Lords repelled the Defense, and preferred the Collector of the Vaccand
Stipends; for they found the Act was general, without any such exception.

Mr. John Thomson contra Mckitrick, Eodem die.
MR. John Thomson pursues M^kitrick, for reduceing of an Infeftment of some
Tenements in Dumfries, upon an appryzing, on these Reasons; First, That the
appryzing was null, proceeding upon a Bond without Requisition, or Charge;
without which, the Heretable Bond could not become moveable. 2dly, Infeftment,
being within Burgh, was not given by the Baillies, and Town Clerk. 3dly, That
it was neither Registrate in the Town Books, nor in the Register of Seasings of
the Shire. It was answered, to the First, that the Bond bare no Clause of
Requisition, but bore on the contrare to be payable, without Requisition, and
so, as Movables the Defender might have poynded therefore, without Charge, so
might Lands be Appryzed; to the Second, there being no Magistrates, nor Town
Clerk in Office at the time of this Seasine, and the Defender being an
Appryzer, necessitat to do Diligence, took Seasine by the Sheriff Clerk, which
was necessar, and sufficient: To the Third, the Act of Parliament requires no
Registration of Seasines within Burgh, and albeit, they be ordinarily to be
found in the Town Books, yet if that should be neglected, they would not be
null.

The Lords repelled the first Reason, and found no necessity of a Charge: and
they had formerly repelled the second Reason, in respect of the Answer made
thereto, and did also repel the third Reason.

Earl of Southesk contra Marquess of Huntlie. July 23. 1666.
THE Earl of Southesk, and the late Marquess of Argyl, being Cautioners for the
late Marquess of Huntly, for the Tochers of the Daughters of Huntly, they got
an Infeftment of the Lands of Badzenoch, for their relief, bearing, that
according as they should be distressed, they should have access to the Rents of
the Lands, in so far as might pay the Annualrent of the Sum, which they should
be distressed for. whereupon they were Infeft in Anno 1643. And thereafter
Southesk was distressed, in Anno 1653. Whereupon, in Anno 1655. He pursued an
Action of Maills and Duties, upon the said Infeftment of relieff against the
said Lord Argyl, who was in Possession; and my Lord Argyl having long before
granted an Bond of relieff to Southesk, he used Horning, and Caption thereupon,
in Anno 1655. and in Anno 1658. he used Inhibition upon the said Bond against
Argyl, who in Anno 1658 Entered in a new Contract with Southesk, whereby, in
Corroberation of the first Infeftment, he granted him a Wodset of the Lands of
Enzie, with a Back-tack, by virtue whereof, Southesk uplifted several years of
the Back-tack Duty. Southesk now pursues the Marquess of Huntly, and his
Tenants, for declaring of his Right, and payment of the Maills and Duties. it
was alleged for the Defenders. First, absolvitor, because the Marquess of
Argyl has been Retoured, to have possessed the Lands of Badzenoch, peaceably, by
the space of 5 years before his Forefaulture, which was in Anno 1661. Conform
to the Act of Parliament 1584. By virtue thereof, this Marquess of Huntly, as
the King's Donatar, to the Forefaulture, in so far as concerns the Estate of
Huntly, has undoubted Right, and needs not dispute what Right Southesk had,
before the five years. It was answered, for the Pursuer. First, That the Act of
Parliament, 1584, ought not now to take effect, because, by the late Act of
Parliament 1617. Seasine and Reversions are appointed to be Registrat,
otherwise they are null, and therefore the ground of the Act of Parliament
1584. viz. The abstracting of Evidents Ceasing, the said Act it self must also
cease. 2dly. The said Act can only take place, where it is not constant, what
Right the Forefault Person had, but that he was repute to be the ancient
Heretor of the Lands, but where the Forefault Persons Right is known, to have
been Beations Compryzing, or this Conjunct Right, granted to him^ and the
Pursuer, for their Cautionrie, presumptio cedit veritati, and the Right must
only be holden to be such a Right as truly it was. 3dly. The five years
Possession being in effect a Prescription, in favors of the King, and his
Donatar, whatsoever would interrupt any other Prescription; must interrupt
this; as if within the five years, the Pursuer had intented a Reduction of the
Forefault Persons Right; or an Action for Maills and Duties, or had required
for his Sums, and charged thereupon, all these would be sufficient
interruptions, against this quinquennial Possession, and would take away the
presumption of Collusion, or abstracting. 4thly, The five years possession, by
the Act of Parliament bears, expressly, to be peaceable, so that if it was
turbata possessio, it would not be enough, and being once a troubled
possession, by any legal interruption, after the said interruption, that
subsequent possession ceases not to be a troubled possession; though there be
no further interruption, within the 5 years, because interruption once used,
endures for 40. years. Ita est, Argyls possession was troubled, by pursuits, to
count for the Maills and Duties of these Lands, upon this Right, and that
within a year, or two, before the five, and likewise within the 5. year, the
Marquess of Argyl did corroborat this Right, and in corroboration thereof
granted Wodset of the Lands of Enzie, for the Sums accummulat, by virtue
whereof, the Pursuer, within the 5. years, was in Possession^ by uplifting the
Back-tack Duty; which being a Cumulative Right, possession thereon is valid,
for both. The Defender answered, that his Defense upon the Act of Parliament
stood valid, notwithstanding of all the Replies, because the Act is clear, and
unrepealled, that 5. years peaceable possession of the Forefault Person, gives
the King unquestionable Right, it being retoured by an Inquest, as now this is.
And as to the troubling of the possession, no Deed, done before the 5 years,
can have any effect, because, as the 5 years cut off the most Solemn anterior
Rights, much more a Citation, or other Interruption, and as to the
Interruptions, within the 5. years, they are only two, one is an Inhibition
against Argyl, which proceeds not upon this Infeftment, but upon a Personal
obligement, by Argyl, to relieve the Pursuer; neither does it at all relate to
the possession, nor any other Action; but only as an Inhibition, prohibits
Alienation. And as for the Contract of Wodset with Argyl, it is post commissum
crimen, and so cannot prejudge the Donatar. It was answered, that albeit the
Forefault Persons Deeds being voluntar, post commissum crimen, cannot be
effectual; yet where it is upon a cause anterior to the Crime. viz. Argyls
Intromission, by the Infeftment of Relieff^ and the distress occurring against
the Pursuer after the Crime, and he having pursued Argyl for count and
reckoning, in anno 1655. does not constitute any new voluntar^ Right, nor can
it be any way collusive, being for an anterior cause; and after a pursuit: and
therefore it must work this much, to show, that the 5 years was interrupted,
and in the Course thereof, both the Pursuer, and Forefaulted Person
acknowledged this Right in question.

The Lords found the Reply relevant, upon the Deeds of Interruption, alleged
by the Pursuer, jointly, to elid the Act of Parliament.

Mr. John Harper contra his Vassal. July 25. 1666.
MR. John Harper, pursues a Declarator of Non-entry, against his Vassal, who
alleged that he was only liable for theretour Maills, till the Decree of
general Declarator was obtained: It was answered, the common custom was, that
from the Citation in the general Declarator, Mails and Duties were due in the
special, because the general Declarator, declares the Non-entry since the date
of the Summons, and so the Mails and Duties are not due from the date of
obtaining the Decree, but from the years decerned therein, which is from the
date of the Summons.

The Lords found the Mails and Duties due since the time of the Citation, and
not only since the time of the Sentence.

Earl of Southesk contra Marquess of Huntly. July last, 1666.
EArl of Southesks cause mentioned 23 July last, was this day advised, as to
another Defense. viz. That my Lord Argyl had right to Beatouns Appryzing of the
Estate of Huntly, which was long anterior to the Pursuers Infeftment, and
whereunto Huntly has right, as Donatar to Argyl's Forefaulture. This Coutract
of the Cumulative Wodset, being granted, in Anno 1656. It was answered, that
Beatoun, before he was Infeft upon that Appryzing, had renunced all benefit of
the Appryzing, and discharged the same, in so far as it might be prejudicial to
the Pursuers Right; which is presently instructed. It was answered, that
Renunciation was but personal, and was never Registrat; and so could not be
effectual against any singular Successor; much less against the Kings Donatar,
having a real Right. It was answered, that Appryzings are not of the nature of
other real Rights, but they may be taken away, by Intromission, Payment, or
Discharge of the Appryzer, and there needs no Resignation, nor Infeftment. It
was answered, that albeit, by the Act of Parliament 1621. Appryzings may be
taken away by Intromission, and that it has been extended to payment, yet
never to such personal Back-Bonds.

The Lords found the Appryzing to be taken away, by Beatons Back Bond,
renuncing the same, in so far as concerns this Pursuer; and found the same
relevant against the Donatar.

Thomas Crawfoord contra Town of Edinburgh. Eodem die.
THomas Crawfoord, having Gift of ultimus haeres of a person, to whom the Town
of Edinburgh was Debtor, pursues for payment thereof. The Defender alleged
no Process, till the Gift were declared. The Pursuer answered, no necessity of
a Declarator in this case, more then in a Gift of Recognition, and Waird, and
that there was no person that could be particularly cited.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, that this Gift, behoved to ^e declared
albeit it were but upon a Citation generally against all and sundry at the
Market Cross.

Sir Lodovick Gordon contra Sir John Keith. Eodem die.
SIr Lodovick Gordon, being Assigned to a Sum due to Sir Robert Farquhar by Sir
John Keith, pursues Sir John, for payment, who alleged absolvitor, because he
had Right to the Sum himself, as Donatar to Sir Roberts Escheat, and that the
Sum was Moveable, albeit it bare Annualrent, in so far as the Term of payment
was not come. It was answered, that Sums were Heretable, as to the Fisk, by the
Clause of Annualrent, and the only exception was, that if the Term of payment
of the Annualrent was not come, the Same was Moveable; and nothing in relation
to the Term of payment; if the Annualrent was come due, before the Rebellion.

The Lords found, that the coming of the Term of payment of the Annualrents
made the Sum to become heretable, as to the Fisk, and therefore repelled the
Donatars defense.

Merchants in Dundee contra Spruce Englishman. November 3. 1666.
SOme Merchants of Dundee having sold a considerable quantity of Winesto one
Spruce, an Englishman, they pursue him for the price, and because, he
disappeared, and no body came to receive the Wines, they supplicat the Lords,
that they would give warrant to them, to sell the Wines, least they should
perish, and to be liable only for the best price they could get for them: they
did also represent, that Spruce had a Factor in Edinburgh, who being cited by a
Macer, did not appear.

The Lords refused the Supplication, and found, that the day of the appearance
of the Summons, not being come, and the Englishman, neither being present, nor
oblidged to be present, they could do nothing against him, more then if he had
not be in cited, and so could not sequestrat, nor appoint the Wines to be sold:
but they lowed the Party to protest, that they had done all diligence^ that
the Wines might not perish, whereof the Lords would take consideration in any
Process that should occure.

Thomas Canham contra James Adamson. November 7. 1666.
JAmes Adamson, having disponed a Tenement to Joseph Iohnstoun, who married his
Daughter, in Conjunct-fee, and the Heirs betwixt them, which failzing, to
devide between their other Heirs, in the Disposition there was expressly this
Clause, providing that the said Joseph, and his foresaids make payment to the
said James Adamson, or any he shall name, the Sum of six hundred pounds,
wherein, if he failzie, the said Right, and Disposition shall expire, ipso
facto. In the Infeftment the former Clause was repeated, but not the Clause
Irritant. This Canham appryses the Land from Joseph Johnstoun upon Joseph's
debt, and being Infeft, did pursue James Adamson for removing, who objecting
the proviso, was notwithstanding decerned to remove. Now he pursues for the
Maills and Duties, during his occupation. James Adamson alleadges that he ought
to have the 600 lib. because he had disponed with that provision. It was
answered, this was but personal, to pay, and could never oblidge a singular
Successor; and all the Pursuer could do, was to proceed upon the Clause
irritant by way of Declarator.

The Lords, in the end of the last Session, having only seen the Disposition
containing the said Clause, but not the Infeftment, repelled the Defense, but
reserved the Declarator: but now having seen, that the proviso of payment was
in the Infeftment; the cause being so favorable, a person disponing to his own
Daughter, and good Son, and the Disponer yet in possession, they did without
multiplying further Process, sustain it by exception.

George Shein contra James Chrystie. November 15. 1666.
GEorge Shein, having pursued umquhil David Chrystie, as charged to enter Heir
to James Chrystie his Father, for payment of a Debt of his Fathers, David
renunces to be Heir, whereupon George obtained Decree, cognitionis causa; and
David being now dead, he pursues James Chrystie, as now appearand Heir to his
Debtor, for Adjudication of an Annualrent, as belonging to the Defunct
Debtor, out of the Lands of Bassilie. It was alleged for the Defender,
absolvitor, because that Annualrent was but base, never cled with possession,
and the Defender stands validly Infeft, singulari titulo. The Pursuer answered,
that the Defense is not competent hoc loco, when the Pursuer is but suo
periculo, craving Adjudication of his Debitors Right, and cannot be forced to
dispute the same, till after Adjudication, he use diligence for getting of the
same; but this Defense will be Competent, whenever upon his Adjudication, he
shall pursue. The Defender alleged a Pratique betwixt S^haw of Sornbeg and
the Lord Forrester, wherein Forresters public Infeftment was excepted in the
Adjudication.

Yet the Lords showed no Inclination to follow that Pratique, and therefore
Repelled the Defense, and Adjudged.

Mr. John Abercromie contra Anderson. Eodem die.
MR. John Abercromie as Assigney having pursued Anderson, as Debtor for the
Debt Assigned: he alleged no Process, because the Assignation was posterior
to the date of the Summons and Executions; so that the Assignation, being his
sole Title, the Process could not be sustained. It was answered, that the
Defender had no prejudice, and that the Cedent concurred. It was answered that
the Summons was not in the Cedents name, and so his Concourse could operat
nothing, so that the Decree thereupon would be null: For in the like case, the
Lords, last Week, in the Cause betwixt David Hamiltoun and John Kennedy and
Symintoun, Reduced an Appryzing led twenty years since, because the Appryzing
proceeded upon a Charge to Enter Heir; and some of the Debts were Assigned to
the Appryzer, after the date of the Charge, As to which the Lords found the
Appryzing null.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and found no Process, and had respect to the
said Decision of Reduction of the Appryzing, which they found to be, as is
r^a^ed, though it was alleged that after so long time, an Appryzer was not
obliged to produce the Letters of Appryzing, or Charge to Enter Heir, or
Executions; yet seeing de facto these were produced, and deduced in the
Appryzing, and mentioning the dates as aforesaid, the same was Reduced pro
tanto; but there was no debate reported, whether it should stand pro reliquo;
or how far it should extend, seeing the Appryzer, as to the rest, offered to
prove it satisfied by Intromission.

Alexander Downy contra Robert Young. Nov. 17. 1666.
UMquhil Alexander Downy granted an Assignation to his Oye Alexander Downy, of
two Bonds, who finding, that after his Goodsires Decease, Mr. John Hay was
Confirmed Executor to his Goodsire, and had given up these bonds in his
Inventar, but had not recovered payment: He Confirms himself Executor, ad non
Executa, to his Goodsire, and pursues the Debitors for payment of the Bonds.
Compearance is made for Robert Young, who alleadges that he is Executor Da^ive
to Mr. John Hay, who Execute Downies Testament, by obtaining Sentence for
payment of their Bonds; so that the Bonds were no more in bonis of Alexander
Downie, but of Mr. John Hay: and that the Testament being Execute by Decree
there could be no Executor, ad non executa to Downie, the first Defunct. It was
answered that the Testament was not Execute by a Decree, unless the Executor
had obtained payment; especially where the Executor was a mere stranger, and
was neither nearest of Kin, Creditor, nor Legatar.

The Lords found the Testament of Downie Execute by Hay, by the Sentence
obtained in Hayes Name; and therefore found that Alexander Downie, the Oye, his
Confirmation as Executor, ad non executa null.

It was further alleged that Downie being not only Executor, but Assigney by
his Goodsire; the Assignation, though it had been but a Legacy, would have been
sufficient against Mr. John Hay, who is the Cedents Executor: and therefore is
also sufficient against Young, who is the Executors Executor, and so represents
the first Defunct, Downie the Cedent. It was answered, that Young was not only
legitimo modo the Executor, but he is also Creditor of the first Defunct,
Downie, in so far as he is Donatar of the Escheat of John Hilstoun, and
thereupon has obtained Declarator, and so is in the place of John Hilstoun, to
whom umquhil Alexander Downie was Debtor, by his Ticket produced, whereby
Downie acknowledges that he had in his hands, Goods worth 6000 pounds,
belonging to him, and Hilstoun, in Copartinary; and obliged him to be comptable
therefore; which is anterior to the Assignation, granted to Downies own Oye for
Love and Favor; whereupon he has Reduction depending against the Assignation,
as in fraudem Creditorum. It was answered that the Ticket, in relation to the
Copartinary, was not liquid, bearing only an Obligment to be comptable, with
express Exception of desperate Debts, and others.

The Lords found, that in respect the Debt was not liquid, Downie the Assigney
ought to be preferred, and get payment, but Ordained him to find Caution, that
in case Young prevailed, he should refound.

William Blackwood contra Adam Purves. Nov. 20. 1666.
ADam Purves pursues Reduction and Improbation of two Bonds, alleged granted
by him to Ianet Baxter, and of an Appryzing led thereon, against certain
Tenements in Edinburgh, belonging to him, and craved Certification contra non
producta. William Blackwood, to whom by progress, the Right is now come,
produces the Appryzing, and the Extract of one of the Bonds, whereupon it
proceeded, and alleadges no Certification against the Letters, and Executions
of the Appryzing after so long time; the Appryzing being led in Anno 1621. and
no Process of Reduction Raised, till after the year 1650.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Likeas, he further alleged, no Certification for not production of any of
the principal Bonds, because they were Registrat in the Registers of Session,
and the Principals were lost. The Pursuer answered, that there were pregnant
Points of Falsehood, viz. Purves having gone and left the Kingdom in Anno 1618.
And having been a Soldier Abroad, till the year 1630. and these Bonds and the
Appryzing thereon, both in one Month, and the Bonds granted to a Woman who had
no such Estate, but the Servant of a Waiter, of an evil Fame: and one Blair a
Witness who was hanged for Falsehood.

The Lords refused Certification for not production of the principal Bonds, but
prejudice to the Pursuer to insist in his Improbation, by these or other
Evidences, by the direct manner, but they admitted Certification against that
Bond, the Extract whereof was not produced: yet conditionally to a time, that
the Defender might upon the Adminicle of the Appryzing, Insist to prove the
Tenor.

The Parochioners of Port Supplicant. December: 4: 1666:
THe Parochioners of Port having built a Manse upon the Gleib to their
Minister, where there was no Manse before, and having valued the same according
to the late Act of Parliament, and stented the same upon the Parochioners and
others; They did Supplicat the Lords for Letters of Horning, conform to the
stent Roll, in respect that the said late Act of Parliament, being the
twentieth Act of the third Session of the last Parliament, bears no warrant for
Horning.

The Lords ordained Letters of Horning to be past.

Sir Alexander Vrquhart contra Sherem. Eodem die.
IN anno 1636: Sir Thomas Vrquhart of Cromerty gave a Security of a House and
some Lands, and a Salmond-fishing near Bamff, for 4000: merks: and in anno
1637: There was 700: merks eiked and a Back-bond relating to the first Wodset
Renounced, and a full Possession granted on both: There is a Clause of
Redemption and Requisition upon payment of the principal Sums, and Annualrents
resting for the time. Sir Alexander Vrquhart pursues Sherem, as now having
Right to the Wodset, for Count and Reckoning: Who alleged Absolvitor, because
this being a proper Wodset, wherein he had the full Possession, hazard of the
Profits was not comptable, especially, seeing the chief part of the Wodset was a
Fishing, which was most uncertain; and though de facto he happened to get much
more then his Annualrent yet it is no Usurary Wodset, seeing he might have losed
all. The Pursuer Replied, that by the said Clauses of Redemption, and
Requisition, he was not only obliged for the principal Sums, but for the bygone
Annualrents, resting unpayed; so that the Wodsetter had no hazard: and
therefore it is no proper Wodset, and he is comptable. The Defender answered,
that the Clause was only adjected ex stylo, for it did not bear, that what
Annualrent should be resting over and above Intromission, should be Consigned,
but the whole resting Annualrents; or at least it had been adjected, in respect
of the Back-bond, restricting the first Wodset: or in case the Wodsetter had
been excluded from Possession.

The Lords found the Defender comptable in respect of the said Clauses, but
there occurred to themselves this question, whether the Superplus more then the
Annualrent should compense? and abate the principal Sum at the time of the
Intromission, or only now, whereanent the Lords were of different opinions,
many thought that when the meaning of the Parties was not full, and express,
that should be followed, which is most ordinar amongst provident Pers^ns,
hardly could it be thought that any would take a Wodset upon these Terms to
draw out the principal Sum, with excress yearly, but the Lords reserved that
Point to be considered, while it appeared whether there was any excress above
the Annualrent.

Monteith contra Lord of Gloret. Dec: 7: 1666:
IN a Competition between Monteith and the Lord of Gloret. It was alleged
for Monteith, that he ought to be preferred to the Sums in question, because
Glorets Assignation was obtained by Hamiltoun of Kinglass, and was lying by him
blank in the Assigneys name, and by him filled up with Glorets Name, and
delivered to him, so that Kinglass being his true Author, any Discharge granted
by him while the Bonds were blank, and in his power, was relevant against
Gloret his Assigney, Ita est Kinglass, while or before the Bonds were in his
power, did equivalent to a Discharge, viz. obliged himself to pay this Sum,
and relieve the principal Debtor thereof; and instead of the Discharge he took
this blank Assignation, filled up by him in Glorets Name. 2ly, The Charge
though in Glorets Name, is to Kinglass's behove: and if he were Charging his
Obliegment to pay the Debt, would exclude him: And therefore must exclude the
Charger. It was answered that Gloret was in bona fide, to take this
Assignation, knowing nothing of the Back-bond; and that an Obliegment to
satisfy the Debt, was not equivalent to a Discharge: Neither is the having of
the Assignation, though blank, equivalent to an Assignation, unless the Name of
Kinglassie had been filled up and Intimat.

The Lords having taken Glorets Oath before Answer, wherein he acknowledged,
that he got this Assignation from Kinglassy, and paid no money for it, and
that it was on these Terms* Kinglassie being owing him a greater Sum, he was to
allow what he got by this Assignation, in part thereof, but Deponed he knew not
if it was blank when Kinglasse had it or not.

The Lords found that the Assignation being accepted by Gloret in Terms
aforesaid, that it was but a Corroborative Security, and so found the
Assignation to Kinglassies behove, and found the Back-bond Relevant to exclude
him, and therefore preferred Monteith.

Sir George Mckenzie contra Fairholm. Eodem die.
SIr George Mckenzie Advocat pursues a Reduction of a Bond granted by him as
Cautioner for his Father, (the Bond is now Assigned to John Fairholm) on these
Reasons. First, That the Bond is null, as being done by a Minor, being in his
Fathers Family, and not being Authorized by his Father, as lawful
Administrator: And therefore in the same condition as a Minor having Curators,
they not Confirming such Deeds are null, and may be Reduced at any time, though
they have not been quarrelled within the Minors Age of twenty five. 2ly,
Because Curators being chosen as a Security to the Levity of Minors, they
cannot Authorize the Minor to the Curators behove, but such Deeds are null: So
neither could the Pursuers Father Authorize him to be Cautioner for himself.
The Defender answered; First, That albeit a Father, as lawful Administrator,
and Tutor to his Children, excludes all other Tutors, yet he is not Curator
after their Pupillarity, because they may choose other Curators, and that filij
familias, in the Civil Law could not Contract without their Fathers consent. It
was a special Statute, per Senatus consultum Macedonianum, and not as Curator.
2ly, The Father cannot be liable for his Omissions by his unprofitable
Authorizing his Children, for such Actions would be contra pietatem and
obsequium. 3ly, There is nothing more frequent in Scotland, then Sons to have a
distinct Estate, while in their Fathers Families, given by the Father, or
otherwise, whereof they have the full Administration without Authority. 4ly,
Whatever may be alleged for Children residing in the Family of their Father,
yet that cannot be extended to Children, Acting by themselves, far from their
Fathers Family: but the Pursuer was so living, and Acting at Edinburgh,
attending the Tolbooth, and was majori ae^ati proximus, being past 20. The
Pursuer answered, that his Reason stood still Relevant, because by the Law of
Scotland, a Father is lawful Administrator to his Children, and is not
ordinarily designed lawful Tutor, but lawful Administrator, which does not only
endure during their Pupillarity, but during their Minority; but at least, till
they be Married, or Forisfamiliat; or till they have a distinct Subsistence or
Calling. And albeit the Children be not Residing in the Family, yet they are in
familia, so long as they are there, and not separat from the same, as the
Pursuer was: and albeit the Son may choose other Curators, if the Father
permit, or the Judge think fit, and is not conveenable for his Mis-authorizing,
or Omission, that infers only that he is only Curator honorarius. The Defender
did further alleged, that the Father had further Authorized, in so far as he
Subscribed the said Bond, and so consented that his Son should Subscribe, and
neither was the Deed in rem su^m, but in rem credito^is.

The Lords found the Reasons of Reduction Relevant, and Repelled the Defenses:
and albeit many thought that the Father Subscribing with the Son, was
sufficient to Authorize; yet that it was not sufficient, being Caution for
himself, in rem suam but did not proceed to cause the Parties condescend how
near Sir George was to Majority, and what was his way of living.

Earl Cassils contra Tennents of Dalmortoun and John Whitefoord of Blarquhan.
December: 11: 1666:
AN Action of Double Poynding, at the Instance of the Tennents of Balmortoun,
against the Earl of Cassils on the one part: and John Whitefoord of Blarquhan
on the other, both claiming Right to their Multures. It was alleged for the
Earl of Cassils, that the Lands in question being holden Ward of him, is now in
his hands, by reason of the Ward of Knockdaw his Vassal, he had now Right to
their Multures, and they ought to come to the Miln of his Barony, whereof these
Lands were Pertinent, and show his Infeftment, containing the Lands of
Dalmortoun per expressum. It was alleged for John Whitefoord, that he ought
to be preferred, because that Kennedy of Blarquhan, the Earls Vassal, both of
the Lands of Dalmortoun and Blarquhan, had Disponed to him the Lands of
Blarquhan and Miln of Sklintoch, with astricted Multures, used and wont: at
which time Blarquhan caused his Tennents of Dalmortoun, to come to the said
Miln of Sklintoch, whereby the Thirlage was not only Constitute of the Lands of
Blarquhan, but of Dalmortoun. It was answered for the Earl: First, That the
Thirlage of Dalmortoun could not be Constitute by the said Clause; because the
Lands of Dalmortoun being no part of that Barony, whereof the Miln of Sklintoch
is the Miln: But a distinct Tenement holden of a distinct Superior: Such a
general Clause could never have Constitute a Thirlage, unless the Lands had
been expressed. 2ly, Albeit the Servitude had been Constitute never so clearly by
the Vassal: Yet if it was without the Superiors consent, it could not prejudge
him by Ward, or Non-entry. It was answered for John Whitefoord to the First,
That the Clause was sufficient to Constitute the Thirlage: and if it wrought
not that Effect, it was of no Effect, because the hail Lands of the Barony were
Disponed with the Miln, and neither needed, nor could be Thirled: And therefore
the Clause of Thirlage behoved to be meaned of some other Lands. 2ly, Vassals
may lawfully Constitute Servitudes without consent of the Superior which are
not Evacuat by Ward, or Non-entry. 3ly, It is offered to be proven, that the
Earl consented to the Right of the ^^lture, in so far as the Lands of
Dalmortoun being Appryzed from Blarquhan by John Gilmour, he assigned the
Appryzing to John Whitefoord, who Assigned or Disponed the same to Kilkerren:
in which Asignation, there was an express Reservation of the Multurs of
Dalmortoun to the Miln of Sklintoch: upon which Infeftment the Earl received
Kilkerren in these Lands, who is Author to the present Vassal.

The Lords found the Clause aforesaid in John Whitefords Charter not to infer a
Servitude of the Lands of Dalmortoun, not being therein expressed; and holden of
another Superior: Nor no Decreets nor Enrolments of Court, alleged to
astruct the Servitude. And found also the second Reason Relevant, viz. That the
Earl as Superior, not having consented, was not prejudged by any Deed of the
Vassals. But as to the third Point, the Lords found that the Reservation in
Kilkerrens Right, unless it were per expressum, contained in the Charter
Subscribed by the Earl of Cassils, could not infer his consent; albeit the
Charter related to a Disposition, containing that Clause, but if it were
alleged to be expressed in the Charter: they Ordained before answer, the
Charter to be produced, that they might consider the terms of the Reservation.

Sir Henry Home contra Creditors of Kello and Sir Alexander Home. December: 12:
1666:
SIR Henry Home having appryzed the Lands of Kello, before the year 1652.
pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties: Compearance is made for either
Creditors appryzers, who alleged they ought to come in with him pari passu,
by the late Act between Creditor and Debtor; because the appryzings being
since the year 1652. was within a year of his appryzings, being effectual by
Infeftment, or Charge. It was answered* that the Act of Parliament was only in
relation to Compryzings, both being since the year 1652. and the Pursuers
appryzing being led before, falls not within the same. It was answered, that
the Act of Parliament in that Clause thereof in the beginning, mentions
expressly, that Compryzings led since 1652. shall come in pari passu with other
appryzings; but does not express, whether these other appryzings are since
1652: but in that is general, and the Reason of the Law is also general, and
extensive to this Case. It was answered that the posterior part of that same
Clause, clears that point, both in relation to the appryzings, in whose
favors, and against which the Law is introduced, viz. that the Clause is only
meant the appryzings led since 1652: shall come in pari passu, which must both
comprehend these that come in, and these with whom they come in.

The Lords Repelled the alleadgence, quoad other Compryzings, and found that
their Compryzings could not come in with the Pursuer, he having appryzed before
the year 1652. and Charged before their appryzing.

Ianet Thomson contra Stevinson. December: 13: 1666:
JAnet Thomson pursues a Reduction of a Disposition made by her to Stevinson,
upon Minority and Lesion; and also upon this Reason, that the Disposition was
done within some few days after her Pupillarity, and it being of Land, ought
not to have been done without authority of a Judge, especially seeing she had no
Curators. The Defender answered to the first, there was no Lesion, because the
Disposition bears a sum equivalent to the value of the Land. To the second, non
Relevat. The pursuer answered, that the Subscribing and acknowledging the
receipt of Money by a Minor, cannot prove it self, but the Minor is Les'd in
Subscribing the same. The Defender Duplyed, that he offered to prove by
Witnesses, that the price was truly paid, and profitably Employed.

The Lords found not the second Reason of Reduction Relevant, the authority of
a Judge being only required to the alienation of Lands made by Tutors of their
Pupils Lands.

Anna Fairly contra Creditors of Sir William Dick. December 14: 1666:
ANna Fairly alleging that she obtained an Assignation from umquhil Mr.
Alexander Dick, as Factor for his Father, in satisfaction of a Sum due to her
by his Father, pursues for delivery of the assignation. The Creditors alleged
that the assignation being in the hands and custody of Mr. Alexander the
Granter, it must be proven by Writ, he being dead* that it was delivered, and
not by Witnesses; for there is nothing more frequent, then Parties upon
intentions, to subscribe Bonds, Assignations, and other Rights, and yet do not,
de facto, deliver them: or if they have been delivered, to satisfy them and
retire them and if Witnesses were admitted to prove the delivery, or redelivery
of such Writs, the Lieges would be in extreme unsecurity, contrary to our Law,
that admits not Witnesses above an hundred Pounds; and therefore Chirographum
apud debitorem repeatum praesumitur solutum; which presumption cannot be taken
away by Witnesses. The Pursuer answered, that though this holds in Bonds, where
there is a Debtor, and no other adminicle to instruct the Debt; yet this is an
Assignation, and the Cause thereof otherwise instructed, and most likely to be
truly done: and it is offered to be proven, that this Assignation was
delivered back to Mr. Alexander, to be made use of as Agent for the Pursuer.

The Lords refused to sustain this Member of the Probation, but because of the
poverty of the poor Woman, recommended the case to the Creditors, to be
favorable to her, and did forbear to write the Interlocutor.

Hay of Knockondy contra Litlejohn. Eodem die.
HAY of Knockondy pursues Litlejohn for the damnage sustained by him, by the
fall of Litlejohns House, called the Tower of Babylon, whereby the Pursuers
House, adjacent, was broken down. The Defender alleged; First, The Libel was
not relevant, unless he had been required to find Caution, de damno infecto, as
is required by the Civil Law, whereby if that Caution were not required, there
is an express Text in the Title de damno infecto, that there shall be no
Action, but the Party shall impute his loss to his own negligence. Likeas we
have two special Statutes, concerning ruinous Houses, which prescrive the
method of preserving them, and making up the damnage, none of which being
followed, the Defender is not liable.

2ly, Whatsoever might be alleged against the Heretor of the said House, the
Defender is only an Appryzer of a Liferent-Right, for a small Sum; and the
Liferenter was not obliged to repair a Tenement manifestly ruinous, that could
not be preserved, but with great Expense and Rebuilding: much less the Appryzer
who has but a small Sum on it. The Pursuer answered to the first Defense, that
his Libel was most Relevant Damnage upon any fault, being due and Reparable by
the Law of Nature: and as for the Civil Law, it has no Effect with us in this
point, our Custom neither giving nor requiring such Caution; much less refusing
Action, if it be neglected: and as to our own Statutes, though they be very
convenient ways for securing of damnage, yet they are not exclusive, nor have
they any Clause, except in these Cases, and in that method, Damnage shall be
irrecoverable. To the 2d, it was answered, The Pursuer was not obliged to know,
or enquire whether the Defender was Heretor or not: but he finding that he was
a Neighbor, behaving himself as Heretable Possessor, by uplifting the Duties
he did pursue him, and if need beis, offers him to prove, that he did require
him to keep him skaithless, though he took no Instrument thereon. The Defender
answered, that he was not obliged to take notice of such Requisitions, not
being Solemn by Instrument.

The Lords found the Defender liable, albeit there had been no Requisition
verbal or otherwise, it being proven that the Ruinousness of the Tenement that
fell, was notour and manifest to the Defender himself, whereby he was obliged,
either to demolish the House, if it was not Reparable, or to have quite his
Possession, to evite the imminent damnage of Neighbors.

Lord Colvil contra Feuars of Culross. December. 15. 1666.
THe Lord Colvil as Heretable Bailzie of Culross, having Charged the Lord
Kincairn and others for the Taxation of their Lands in Culross, conform to the
stent Roll; They Suspended, and alleged that the stent Roll contained a fifth
part more then the Taxation. It was answered, and offered to be proven, that it
was the Custom of that and other Benefices at their meeting of making the
Stent-roll, to add a fifth part for Expenses and Charges of ingathering the
Taxation. The Defenders answered, that if any such Custom were, it was against
Law, and against the Liberty of the Subject, who could be liable for no
payment, but by Law, or of their own consent; or if any such Custom were, it
has been by the consent of the Vassals, or at least they have not questioned
the same, nor is there any ground for such an addition, for the Kings Officers
being obliged by their Office, to Collect His Majesty's Taxations, they can
demand nothing of them who paid without Process; and if they be put to
Process, the Lords will modifie such Expenses as they see cause. The Charger
answered, That such immemorial Customs have the strength of Law; and that it
was done with the consent of all the Vassals who conveened; and that it was the
Suspenders fault that they conveened not to make the stent Roll, which should
not put them in better case then they had conveened: or if they had conveened,
and disassented, there is no reason, that the dissassent of a few should be
preferred to the consent of the most part, who as they may Vot in the stent
Roll, for the Taxation it self; in which the plurality carries: so must they
for the necessary Expenses: and all that can be alleged with reason is, that
the Lords may modifie the Expenses of a fifth part, if it be too high. The
Suspenders answered, that Law authorized the Feuars, as a Court and Judicature,
to meet and stent, which implies a power to the Plurality, but there is no such
warrant for Expenses; as to which, the consent of a hundred cannot oblige the
dissassent of one, or of one absent, and the absents have loss enough, that
they have not a Vot in their own Stent.

The Lords sustained the Reason of the Suspension, notwithstanding of the
answer; and found that no Expenses, nor any thing more than the Taxation could
be stented, to have effect against these who consented not, but they would
modifie Expenses, in case of Suspension, as the Cause required, but modified
none in this case, because a fifth part was Charged for, more then was due.

Lord Newbeath contra Dumbar of Burgie. December. 18. 1666.
THE Lord Newbeath having right from James Mcken, who had appryzed the Lands of
Burgie, pursues Reduction and Improbation against young Burgie and John Watson;
and insists on this Reason, that any Rights they have are null, and fraudulent,
being Contracted after his Debt, and the Right granted to young Burgie is null,
as being but a base Infeftment, not cled with Possession, before the Pursuers
public Infeftment. The Defender alleged that his Infeftment was cled with
Possession, in so far as his Fathers Liferent was reserved thereby, and his
Father Possessing by virtue of the Reservation, did validat his Infeftment.
2ly, Albert the Fathers own Possession could not be sufficient, yet the Father
having Transmitted his Right to Watson, and Watson Possessing, the Suspicion of
^^mulation ceased, and there is a Disposition produced by the Father to Watson,
which though it bear to be of the Fee, yet can import no more, but to be of the
Liferent, seeing the Father had no more, neither needs it have an Infeftment,
seeing it has but the effect of an Assignation to a Liferent. It was answered,
that if the Father had expressly assigned his Liferent, reserved in the base
Infeftment, it might have been the ground of a question, whether the Assigneys
Possessing so, would have validat the base Infeftment? But since the Father has
not taken notice of the Reservation, but Dispones as Heretor, it clears that he
did not Possess by the Reservation, but by his own prior Right.

The Lords found the Reason of Reduction and Reply Relevant, and that the
Fathers Possessing by himself, or Watsons Possessing by himself, could not
validat the base Infeftment.

Charles Cass contra Mr. John Wat. Eodem die.
DOctor Cass having taken Infeftment of an annualrent, out of the Lands of
Robertland, in name of Cockpen and Adam Wat, Charles Cass as Heir to the
Doctor, pursues Mr. John Wat, as Heir to his Father, for Count and Reckoning of
the Mails and Duties, and Charges him with the hail Rental being intrometted,
or ought to have been intrometted with by him and his Father, by virtue of the
Trust in their Person; and also Adam Wat took a gift of Tutory to the Pursuer,
and so is liable as his Tutor. The Defender answered, that his Fathers Name
being borrowed on Trust, could lay no Obligation on him to do any Diligence,
but what he thought fit, seeing by his Back-bond he was obliged to denude
himself, whenever the Doctor pleased; and the Pursuer has reason to thank him
for what he did, and not burden him with what he omitted, seeing he had no
allowance therefore: and as for the Tutory, there was a multiple Poinding all
the time thereof, depending among five or six Parties, pretending Right by the
dependence whereby the Tutor was excluded. The Pursuer answered, that the
Defenders Name was not borrowed without his knowledge, but that he accepted
thereof, and entered to Possession; and as an Appryzer is not obliged to
Possess, but if he Possess, must be answerable for the Rents of the Lands
conform to the Rental, so must the Defender.

The Lords found the Defender not liable to Diligence. by virtue of the Trust,
albeit he did Possess, but Ordained him to Count for his intromission, and to
condescend what Diligence his Father did as Tutor, that if he be found
deficient therein, there might be an additional Account to what he intrometted
with.

Mr. James Cheap contra Mr. John Philip. December. 19. 1666.
MR. James Cheap charges Mr. John Philip, to fulfill a Minute of Alienanation of
the Lands of Ormestoun, sold by Mr. James to Mr. John, whereby Mr. John was
obliged to pay 25500 merks, as the price, or to assign sufficient Bonds
therefore: He Suspends, and offers to Consign Bonds, and amongst the rest, a
Bond of 8000 merks due by the Town of Edinburgh. The Charger alleged that he
was not obliged to accept that Bond, because at the time of the agreement, and
Subscription of the Minut; the Charger particularly excepted the Town of
Edinburghs Debt, and the Suspender declared, that it should be no part of the
price, which he offered to prove by the Writer and Witnesses insert in the
Minute. The Suspender answered, that Witnesses were not competent in this Case,
where the words of the Minute are not dubious, but clear and general of any
sufficient Debt, for if this were sustained, the alteration of the price, as
well as the manner of payment, might be proven by Witnesses. It was answered,
that it was no way alike, nothing being here in question, but the manner of
payment, and not the quantity of the price.

The Lords Ordained the Writer and Witnesses to be Examined before answer.

Ianet Thomson contra Stevinson. Eodem die.
IN the Reduction on Minority, at the Instance of Ianet Thomson contra
Stevinson.

The Lords Ordained the Pursuers Mother to be received Witness of her Age, cum
nota, there being a Testificat already produced, and there being 30 or 40 years
since the Pursuers Birth: after which time, it was not likely that others would
remember; but she was ordained to Depon^ who were Witnesses at the Birth and
Baptism, and these to be Examined.

Corstorphin contra Martines. December. 21. 1666.
JAmes Corstorphin pursues a Reduction of a Disposition made by his Fathers
Sister, in lecto. It was alleged by Martines, to whom the Disposition was
made, that he could not quarrel the same, because his Father to whom he is
Heir, and the other Brethren and Sisters of the Defunct had approven whatsoever
Testament, Legacy or Disposition, made or to be made by the Defunct, of her
Goods and Gear, Debts and sums of Money, and others whatsoever, that she had,
or should have the time of her Decease; so that she having made this
Disposition, he cannot quarrel the same. The Pursuer answered; First, That the
Ratification in the Terms foresaid, could not be extended to Lands or
Annualrents, Constitute by Infeftment, there being no mention of Lands,
Annualrents or Heretage therein. 2ly, It could not be extended to any
Disposition, but Legally made, and therefore not to Dispositions on Deathbed.
The Defender answered, that the Ratification bearing expressly sums of Money,
did comprehend all sums, although Infeftment of Annualrent were granted for
security thereof, which being but accessory to the sum, follows the same. 2ly,
There could be no other effect of the Ratification, if it were not to exclude
the Heir from quarreling thereof, as being in lecto, for if the same was made
by the Defunct in her liege poustie, it were valide and unquarrelable in it
self, and albeit it bear not mention of Deathbed, yet it expresses Disposition
of all Goods, she should happen to have the time of her Death; so that if she
had acquired Rights after her sickness contracted, she might Dispone the same
validly by this Ratification, and yet behoved to be on Deathbed.

The Lords found this Ratificatiou not to extend to sums whereupon Infeftment
of Annualrent followed, which was carried but by one Vote, and so they came not
to the second Point.

William Yeoman contra Mr. Patrick Oliphant: Eodem die.
WIlliam Yeoman having apprized the Lands of James Oliphant, Son to Sir James
Oliphant; and Mr. Patrick Oliphant having also appryzed the same, William
insists on this reason, that Mr. Patricks appryzing was satisfied by
Intromission within the legal; Mr. Patrick alleged that his whole
Intromission could not be countable to satisfy his Appryzing, because the two
part thereof did only belong to his Debtor, and the third part to Dame Geils
Moncrief, who had right to a Terce thereof, and to whom Mr. Patrick was only
liable and countable, and for a part of the years he was her Tennent, and had
Right from her. It was answered that the Tercer had no complete Right, till she
was Served, and kend to her Terce, which, being done after the years in
question, the Fiar might have Possessed the whole till her Service, and might
have forced the Possessors to pay him, so the Appryzer entering in Possession of
the whole, upon his Appryzing, cannot pretend the Right of the Tercer, and his
taking Tack of her, was unwarrantable till she was Served, and done of purpose,
that his Appryzing might not be fully satisfied, and so the Legal might expyre,
which is most rigorous and unjust, and offered presently to satisfy the Tercer
of her third. It was answered that the Service whenever done, is drawn back
to the Husbands death, and does but declare, and not constitute the Wifes
Right, like the Service of an Heir.

The Lords found that Mr. Patrick could not cloth himself with the Tercers
Right, to cause the legal expyre; but found the offer Relevant, for besides the
favor of the Cause, the case is not alike with an appear and Heir, whose
Right, though not declared, yet he continues in his Predecessors Possession,
and none other has any Interest, but the Fiar might possess the whole, and
exclude the Tercer till she were Served.

Paul Henrison contra Lord Ludquharn. December. 22. 1666.
PAul Henrison Indweller in the Island of Helgilland, being at the mouth of the
Elve, fraughted to Scotland by Hamburgers, was taken by a Privateer, and
declared Pryze at Peterhead by the Lord of Ludquharn, Admiral Depute there,
whereupon he addressed himself to the Admiral Court at Leith, and obtained
Decree for restoring of his Ship upon compearance: Ludquharn gives in a Bill
of Suspension of this Decree, and to dispatch the Stranger, because it was
ordained to be heard upon the Bill: Ludquharn alleged that the Admirals
Decree was unjust, because he offered him to prove by Merchants in Edinburgh,
that Helligilland is a part of the Dominion of Denmark, and albeit it be in the
present Possession of the Duke of Holstein; yet he holds it of the Crown of
Denmark, and as to that, he is Subject to the King of Denmark, and therefore
the Inhabitants of that Island are in the state of enimity with the King, and
so lawful Pryze, It was answered, that the Stranger has produced a Pass of Sir
William Swan, the Kings Agent at Hamburgh, bearing that he had taken trial; and
found the Ship to be free; and it being notour and acknowledged, that this
Stranger is a Subject of the Duke of Holstein, who is a Prince of the Empire,
and in Amity with His Majesty, as is declared by a Letter of the King to the
Lord Commissioner, it must extend to all His present Subjects, who are not
obliged to Dispute how he holds this Islands, or when he got the Right
thereof: and his Pass bears him to be a Natural Subject of the Duke of
Holsteins, and not of the King of Denmark. It was answered, that the Right of
this Island was only in Impignoration, and only in Possession of the Duke of
Holstein within this ten year.

The Lords adhered to the Admirals Decree, and Repelled the Reasons of the
Bill.

Tweeddies contra Tweeddie. Eodem die.
UMquhil Tweeddie of having Disponed his whole Estate to his Eldest Son, at the
same time, his Son gives a Bond to his Mother and her Heirs of six thousand
merks, the Mother being dead, the other five Bairns pursues a Declarator of
Trust against the Heir, that this was the Bairns Provision, put in the Name of
the Mother, and offers to prove the same by the Writer and Witnesses insert. It
was answered, that Trust was not so probable, otherwise all Rights might be
inverted by Witnesses, whose Testimonies, our Law has Restricted to an hundred
Pounds. It was answered, that much more was to be attribute to Witnesses
insert, upon whose Testimonies the Parties condescend, and confide, than to
common Witnesses. 2dly, Albeit Witnesses were not receiveable to prove Trust
alone: Yet where there are strong presumptions concurring, they are admittable
even to annul Writs of the greatest importance, as is ordinarily used in the
indirect manner of Improbations; and here are strong presumptions, viz. That
the Father, at the time of this Bond, did Dispone to the Defender, his Eldest
Son, his whole Estate, without a Reservation of his own Liferent, or any other
thing, and there were five Children beside, who had no Provision: So that
albeit this Bond be conceived to the Wife, her Heirs and Assigneys, yet cannot
be presumed to be intended to have fallen back to the Defender as her Heir.

The Lords in respect of the presumptions, were inclinable to admit the
Witnesses, but they ordained the Pursuers before answer, to what could make a
sufficient Probation to adduce such Witnesses as they would make use of for
astructing these Presumptions and the Trust.

James Hoge in Edinburgh contra James Hoge in Dalkeith. January 2. 1667.
JAmes Hoge in Edinburgh, pursues a Declarator of Redemption against James Hoge
in Dalkeith, who alleged Absolvitor, because the whole sum, contained in the
Reversion, was not Consigned. It was answered, there was Consigned the
equivalent, viz. A Decree against the Defender, for a Liquide sum, which
behoved to compense. It was answered, that Reversions being strictissimi juris,
Compensations are not to be admitted therein: otherwise Wodsetters may be much
prejudgeed by taking Assignations from their Creditors, and Consigning the
same, and frustrating them of their Moneys, which they had designed for other
Creditors, and other uses. It was answered, that this was no Extrinsick
Compensation, but a Decree founded upon an Article contained in the Contract
of Wodset.

Upon which consideration the Lords Sustained the Order, and Declared.

Earl of Murray contra John Hume. Eodem die.
THE Earl of Murray pursues Hume his Tennent to find Caution for his Duties, or
else to Remove: Who alleged Absolvitor, because the Earl was Debtor to him
in a Sum exceeding all the bygone Rents, and this Action has no place, but
when there are some years Rent Resting. It was answered, That the Defender was
at the Horn, and his Escheat taken, and so was manifestly, vergent ad inopiam.

The Lords would not Sustain this Member, unless bygones had been owing, but
Superceeded to give answer, till the Compensation were proven.

Francis Hamiltoun contra Eodem die.
FRancis Hamiltoun having Suspended a Decree, obtained against him for
House-mails, on this Reason, that his Wife only took the Tack, which could not
oblige him. It was answered, that his Wife keeping a public Tavern, was
evidently praeposita huic negotio.

Which the Lords Sustained.

Another Reason was, that the House became insufficient in the Roof, and the
Defender before the Term, required the Pursuer to Repair the same, which he did
not; and the Neighboring House, called The Tower of Babel, falling upon the
Roof, made it Ruinous. It was answered, That was an accident without the
Pursuers fault, and the Tennent ought to pursue these whose Tenement it was
that fell.

The Lords found the Reason was not Relevant to Liberate from the Mail, unless
the Suspender had abstained to Possess, but found it Relevant to abate the
Duties in so far as he was Damnified.

Oliphant contra Hamiltoun of Kilpoty. Eodem die.
WILLIAM OLIPHANT having obtained a Decree for Poynding of the Ground, against
Hamiltoun. He Suspends on this Reason, that he was neither Decerned as Heir,
nor Possessor, but as appearand Heir to the Heretor, and was never Charged to
Enter Heir.

The Lords Repelled the Reason, and found this Action, being real, was
competent against the appear and Heir without a Charge.

William Oliphant contra Hamiltoun. Eodem die.
OLiphant pursuing the foresaid Poinding of the Ground upon an Annualrent. It
was alleged Absolvitor from the bygones before the Pursuers Right, because
his author was Debtor to the Defender in a liquid sum equivalent. It was
answered, that the Pursuer was singular Successor, and no personal Debt of his
Authors could infer Compensation of a real Right against him.

The Lords found that the bygain Annualrents were moveable and compensable with
any liquid Debt of the Pursuers Authors.

contra Brand. January 3. 1667.
Chapman having left his Pack in custody with Brand, In Dundee, about ten or
twelve days after, Brand opened the Pack, and made use of the Ware. The
Chapman now pursues him for a Spuilzie, who alleged Absolvitor, because the
Pack was put in his hands for security of a Debt due by the Pack-man, and he
being informed that the Pack-man would not rerurn, did, by warrant of a Baillie
in Dundee, cause four of the Neighbors, Inventar and Price the Ware. It was
answered non relevat, for though the Pack had been impignorat, the Defender
could not appryze it summarly, but behoved to take a Sentence to Poind the same.

The Lords Repelled the Defense.

It was further alleged, that there could be no Spuilzie, nor Oath in litem
of the Pursuer, because there was no Violence. It was answered that the Oath in
litem is Competent, whether it were a Spuilzie or a breach of Trust, action
depos^^. It was answered, that the Oath in litem being granted mainly, because
Parties injured by breach of such Trusts, cannot be put to prove by VVitnesses,
that which is taken from them, none being obliged to make patent his Pack, or
other private Goods to VVitnesses, yet where there is another clear way to prove
the quantities, viz, the Oaths of the four Persons who opened the Pack, there
is no reason to put it to the Pursuers Oath, especially seeing their Inventar is
not the eight part of what he claims.

The Lords admitted the Pursuers Oath, in litem, reserving their own
Modification, with liberty to the Defender, if he thought fit to produce what
of the Ware he had, and to produce these four Persons, that the Pack-man may
Depone in their presence.

Earl of Sutherland contra Earls of Errol and Marischal. Eodem die.
THere being a Decree of Parliament ranking the Nobility, whereby Earl of
Sutherland was put after the Earls of Errol and Marischal: In which Decree,
there is a Reservation to any to be heard before the Judge Ordinar, upon
production of more ancient Evidents; whereupon the Earl of Sutherland pursues
Reduction of the Decree of Ranking, containing an Improbation of all Writs,
Patents, and other Evidents granted to the Defenders, or their Predecessors,
whereby they are Constitute or Designed Earls: they did produce the Decree of
Ranking, and the Earl of Errols Retour, whereupon the Pursuer craved
Certification contra non producta, after all the Terms were run. The Defenders
alleged no Certification, because they had produced sufficiently, by
producing the Decree of Ranking, and their Retoures, and the Pursuer had only
produced his own Retoure, which was since the Decree of Ranking; so that the
Decree of Ranking was sufficient to exclude all his Titles produced. It was
answered, the Retour being the Sentence of a Court, Serving this Earl as Heir
to his Fore-Grandsire Grandsires Grandsires, Fore-Grandsires Goodsire, who is
Designed Earl by King Alexander the second: It was sufficient in initio litis.
Likeas he did formerly produce the Original Evidents, and which was now in the
Clerks hands, and might have been seen by the Defenders, if they pleased.

The Lords found the Retoures not sufficient alone, and Ordained the rest to be
Reproduced, and seen by the Defenders.

Smeatoun contra Crawfoord. Eodem die.
UMquhil^ Patrick Smeatoun granted a Disposition to Crawfoord his Wife, and
her Heirs, of a Tenement of Land, whereupon nothing followed during her
Lifetime, her younger Brothre James Crawfoord Served himself Heir-General to
her, and obtained a Decree of Implement against John Smeaton as Heir to his
Father, and having used Horning thereon, obtained Adjudication against
Smeatoun, and his Superior, and thereupon was Infeft: which Right was Disponed
by him, with consent of William Crawfoord, elder Brother to the Wife. The said
John Smeatoun Dispones the same Tenement to Alexandor Smeatoun, and he is
Infeft, and thereupon pursues a Reduction of James Crawfoords Retour, and of
all that followed thereupon in consequence on this Reason, that the Disposition
to the Wife belonged not to James Crawfoord her younger Brother, who was Heir
of Line, but to William Crawfoord, her elder Brother, as Heir of Conquest, and
so the Service was null, following thereupon; and the Pursuer being first
Infeft from Smeatoun, he has the only Right, because any Infeftment to William
the Heir of Conquest will be posterior. It was answered, that it was jus tertij
to the Pursuer, whether the Heir of Line was Served or Infeft, or the Heir of
Conquest: likeas the Heir of Conquest did concur, and had consented to the
Disposition.

The Lords found not the Defenses Relevant, but considering the Case as
Calumnious, seeing it was but of late cleared by Decisions, whether the Heirs of
Line, had right to Dispositions without Infeftment, they did superceed to give
answer, but ordained the Defender to give in what Evidences he could give, of
the onerous cause of his Disposition.

Paul Henrison contra Lord of Ludquharn and Captain Seatoun. January 4. 1667.
THe Debate betwixt Paul Henrison and Ludquharn, was this day heard again, and
it was alleged that the Kings Proclamation declared War against the King of
Denmark and his Subjects, Ita est the Owners of the Ship are Subjects to the
King of Denmark, because it is notour that this Isle is a part of the Kingdom
of Denmark, and till of late was in the same condition, as any other of his
Territories; and albeit the Duke of Holstein have now an Interest by
Possession, or Infeodation, that alters not their subjection to the Crown of
Denmark, but the same is still presumed, unless they will positively prove,
that the same is altered, and the Duke of Holstein constitute Sovereign
therein, and they liberat from his Jurisdiction, Tolls, and Imposts for War. It
was answered, that this Stranger was not obliged to Dispute the Right or
Investiture of the Duke of Holstein; but it was sufficient for him to say, that
before this War they did own him as their Prince for simple acknowledgement of
a Superior, or Investitur from him, do not make Subjects, or comprehend them
within the Wars, and Quarrels of their Superiors: yea, though there were a
Tribute or Jurisdiction due to that Superior, yet if the Prince do enjoy the
Privileges of making War and Peace, he is not a simple Subject, but in so far
a Sovereign Prince, as some of the Princess of the Empire, hold of the Emperor
paying him Tribute: and there lies an appeal to the Sovereign Imperial Court;
yet because they can make War and Peace, they are not necessarly involved
within the Emperors Quarrels. So the Duke of Holstein being a Sovereign
Prince, and possessing this Island, so as to make use of the Subjects thereof
in Peace and War; therefore is not comprehended in the King of Denmarks
Quarrel; nor is he, or his Subjects in the Sense of the Proclamation.

The Lords adhered to their former Interlocutor upon the 22 of December, when
this Case was Debated, and Repelled the Alleadgences proponed for Ludquhurn,
unless it were alleged that the Inhabitants of this Island do contribute with
the King of Denmark in this War against the King, and they so alleging.

The Lords Ordained the Ship and Goods to be valued, and delivered to the
Stranger upon Caution; or otherwise to be Sequestrat in some Merchants hands,
that the Ship might be made use of for Fraught, and the Goods sold, and not
made unprofitable: and according to the course of Admirality, the Lords
Ordained Ludquharn to find Caution for Cost, Skaith and Damnage, by the delay
of that alleadgence.

Mr. James Cheap contra Mr. John Philip. Ian. 5. 1667.
THe Lords having Considered the Testimonies of the Witnesses adduced before
answer, betwixt Mr. James Cheap and Mr. John Philip, upon the Debate mentioned
the 19. of December last, found the same to prove, and to qualify the Minute,
they being the Witnesses insert above exception, and it but a Minute, wherein
particulars are not at all, nor fully set down, which will not be drawn in
example, as to any full and extended Writs, either for altering any Clause
therein expressed; or for adding thereunto any omitted.

Lord of Polwart contra Lord of Halyburtoun. Ianu. 16. 1667.
THe Lord of Polwart as Heir to his Father, pursues Hallyburtoun for payment
of a Ticket of 250 merks, due by the Defender to the Pursuers Father, and for a
composition paid by the Pursuers Father, for receiving him in certain Lands,
Disponed to him by the Defender, wherein he was obliged to obtain him Infeft.
The Defender alleged absolvitor from the payment of the Ticket, because it
must be presumed to be paid on these grounds; first, Since the Ticket, the
Defender sold Land to the Pursuer, so that it must be presumed it was Counted
and included in the price, and albeit that presumption were not sufficient
alone, it is fortified by these two, viz. That it is twenty eight years since
the Bond was granted, and no word ever heard thereof: and that umquhil Polwart
in his Testament, gave up an Inventar of the Debts owing to him, wherein no
mention is of the Bond. It was answered, that a Writ could not be taken away by
Witnesses proving payment: much less by presumptions: and as to the
Taciturnity, which is the main one, umquhil Polwart dyed about seven years
after the Bond was granted, and the Pursuer was Minor most of the time since.
It was answered, that Presumptions have been oftimes sufficient to take away
Writs, as was found in the case of the Lady Trabroun.

The Lords Found the Presumptions not Relevant, and that they were nothing so
strong, as these of the Lady Trabroun, which were thus; Trabroun granted a Bond
of 5000 merks to Alexander Peebles, which was taken away on these Presumptions,
that thereafter Trabroun had granted a Bond of 10000 merks to the said Mr.
Alexander, who was his Advocat, with whom he had many Affairs; and therefore it
was to be presumed, the last Bond included the first; especially seeing Trabroun
decaying in his Fortune, Mr. Alexander apdryzed his Lands upon the last Bond,
and not upon the first, which he might have done with the same Expense, and
that he never moved any thing thereupon all his Life, by the space of twenty
six years; and in the Inventar of his Testament, he made no mention of it: and
that his Executors being Examined ex officio, did acknowledge they had found it
amongst old cast Papers. The Defender further alleged absolvitor from the
Composition, because he was never required by Polwart, to procure the
Infeftment from the Earl of Hume, which he could easily have done gratis, he
being his Uncle, especially seeing there was no Term in his Obligation to
perform; and therefore Interpellatio tantum inducit moram.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and Assoilzied from the Composition.
albeit it was alleged that Polwart for several years had not Componed, that
the Composition was much less then a years Rent, and that Halyburtoun was not
in good Terms with the Earl of Hume, which was not respected, seeing Hslyburtoun
was not required.

Reid contra Salmond. Eodem die.
REid pursues Barbara Salmond and James Telz^fer her Husband, for a debt due by
her Father, as behaving her self as Heir, by Possessing a House wherein her
Father died Infeft; and by Setting another House of his to Tennents. It was
answered, that James Telzifer was Tennent in the House Possessed by him, before
the Defuncts Death, and might Possess, per tacitam relocationem: Neither could
he safely leave the House, till he had given it over to some having Right.

Which the Lords found Relevant:

2ly. It was alleged that the Defunct had Disponed the same Tenement to the
defenders Son, his Oye, which disposition, albeit it attained not Infeftment;
yet it was a sufficient Title for Mails and Duties, and to continue Possession,
and to purge the vicious Title of behaving as Heir.

Which the Lords found also Relevant.

Barbara Chapman contra John White. Ianu. 18. 1667.
BArbara Chapman pursues a Reduction ex capite inhibitionis, viz. That Calander
being Charged to enter Heir to his Father, who was the Pursuers Debtor, and
upon the Charge Inhibition was used against him, after which he Disponed to the
Defenders Father. It was alleged by the Defender, that he is minor and non
tenetur placitare de haereditate paterna. It was answered, that Calander, his
Fathers Author, was never Infeft. Secondly, That the Defenders Father did
Dispone the Land to his second Son, by both which, it could not be called
haereditas paterna.

The Lords Sustained the Defense, notwithstanding of the Reply, and found no
Process, till the Defenders majority, and that he was not obliged to Dispute
whether his Fathers Authors were Infeft: or whether his Father had disponed, or
not until his Majority, that he might seek out his Evidences, and defend
himself.

Reid contra Ianu. 19. 1667.
IN a Process betwixt Reid and whereof the Title was a Service of the Pursuer,
as Heir deduced before the Bailzie of Regality, of Spenzie. It was alleged by
the Defender, that this Title was not sufficient, seeing the Service was not
retoured. It was answered, that the Service being within the Regality, and of a
Person dwelling there, neither needed, nor used to be Retoured, in respect the
Service it self was in Record in the Bailzies Books. It was answered, that
albeit a special Service of Lands within the Regality, needed not be Retoured
in the Kings Chancellary, because there was no Precept thence to issue, but the
Service within the Regality was sufficient, that thereupon the Precepts of the
Lord of the Regality might proceed against the Superior within the Regality,
who was Infeft: but in a general Service, which may be before any Judge,
whether the Heir Reside in his Jurisdiction or not; there is no difference
betwixt a Regality and any other Court, but all must be Retoured in the
Chancellary. It was answered, that the Regality having their own Chapel and
Chancellary, were not obliged to Retour it in the Kings Chancellary.

Which the Lords found Relevant and sustained the Service.

Isobel Findlason contra Lord Cowper. Ianu. 22. 1667.
ELphingstoun of Selmes having given a Precept to Isobel Findlason, and direct
to the Lord Cowper, that he should pay to the said Isobel, a Sum owing by
Selmes to her, and receive Selmes Bond from her; upon the foot of which
Precept, the Lord Cowper directs another Precept to James Gilmore, to pay the
said sum: the Woman not being paid, pursues both the Lord Cowper and James
Gilmore, for payment. It was alleged for James Gilmore absolvitor, because he
had not accepted the Precept, neither was there any ground alleged for which
he was obliged to accept, or pay the Lord Cowpers Precept.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

It was alleged for the Lord Cowper, that the giving of the Precept should
not obliege him, seeing it mentioned not value received, or any other Cause; and
therefore resolved into a mere desire. It was answered, that the giving of the
Precept was an acceptance of Selmes Precept, and behoved at least to import a
Donation, to be made effectual by the Drawer of the Precept: or otherwise, an
Intercession, or Expromission for Selmes.

The Lords sustained the Process, and found the Lord Cowper liable by the
Precept, to pay in case of none acceptance, especially seeing it was consequent
to Selmes Precept direct to Cowper.

Mr. John Mair contra Steuart of Shambelly. Eodem die.
MR. John Mair Minister of Traquair, having obtained Decree against
Shambellie, and the Parochioners, to pay him 545. merks, Expended for
Reparation of the Manse, and to meet and Stent themselves for that Effect: upon
which Decree, he took Shambellie with Caption, whereupon he gave him a Bond of
fourscore pounds for his part. Shambellie now Suspends the Bond on this Reason;
that albeit it bear, borrowed Money, he offers to prove by the Chargers Oath,
that it was granted for his part of that Stent, and that his proportion
thereof, casting the Sum according to the Valuation of the Paroch would not
exceed forty merks; and that he granted this Bond for fear of Imprisonment. It
was answered, the Reason was not Relevant to take away the Suspenders Bond,
being major sciens and prudens; and there was here no justus metus, because the
Caption was a lawful Diligence, so that the giving of the Bond was a
Transaction of the Parties, which is a strong Obligation. It was answered, that
the Suspender when he was taken at his House, was sick and unable to travel;
yet the Messenger would carry him away, and being at the Tolbooth, gave the
Bond rather, than in that Case to go to Prison, which was an irregular force,
and a just cause of fear; but this addition was not proponed peremptory.

The Lords Repelled the Reason of suspension, unless the said addition were
also instructed instanter, otherways it could only be reserved by Reduction, ex
metus causa.

Sir Henry Hoom. contra Tennents of Kello and Sir Alexander Hoom. Janu. 24.
1667.
SIR Henry Hoom having Appryzed the Lands of Kello from Henry and John Hooms,
and being Infeft, pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties. Compearance is
made for Sir Alexander Hoom, Donatar to the Forefaultor of the said John Hoom
of Kello, who alleged that the Forefault Person, the time of the Doom of
Forefaultor, was in Possession of the Lands in question, in whose place the
Donatar now succeeds, and by the Act of Parliament 1584. It is Statuted, that
where the forefault Person was in Possession the time of the Forefaulture,
albeit not by the space of five years, which would Constitute a Right to him,
that the Donatar must be put in Possession, and continue five years in
Possession, that in the mean time he may search and seek after the Rebels
Rights. It was answered; First, That this part of the Statute is only in case
the Rebel had Tacks, or Temporary Rights, which neither is, nor can be
alleged in this Case. Secondly, The five years Possession must be reckoned
from the Doom of Forefaulture, after which the Kings Officers or Donatar, might
have attained Possession, and if they did not, their neglect cannot prejudge
others. Ita est, there are five years since the Forefaulture, and the Rents are
Extant, being sequestered. It was answered that the Act Expresses, not only in
Case of Tacks, but also in Possession, and that the five years must be after
the Possession began, and not the Forefaulture.

The Lords found the alleadgance Relevant, that the Rebel was in Possession,
and preferred the Donatar to the five years Rent, after the date of the
Forefaulture.

It was further alleged, that the Pursuers Right being but an Appryzing, the
Donatar would instantly satisfy the same at the Bar. It was answered non
Relevat, to retain by way of Exception, but the Donatar behoved to use an
Order, and pursue a Declarator. It was answered, that in Appryzings, an Order
upon 24 hours Requisition, was sufficient, there being no further Solemnity
required, then that the Appryzer might come to receive his Money.

The Lords found that the Appryzing might be summarly satisfied hoc ordine.

Earl of Argile contra George Campbel. Eodem die.
THE Earl of Argile pursues George Campbel, to remove from certrin Lands, who
alleged absolvitor, because the Warning was null, not being used at the right
Paroch Kirk, where Divine Service at that time was accustomed. It was answered
non Relevat, unless it were alleged that the other Kirk were Erected by
Parliament or Commission thereof, and that thereby the Old Paroch was suppressed
and divided. 2ly, Though that were alleged, it ought to be Repelled, because
it is offered to be proven, that all Warnings and Inhibitions have been used
at the Old Paroch Kirk, and particularly by the Defender himself.

The Lords Repelled the Defense simply, unless the Erection were alleged as
aforesaid, and found in that Case, the Reply Relevant to elide the same.

Earl of Argile contra George Campbel. Ianu: 25: 1667:
THE Earl of Argile insisting in the Removing against George Campbel. It was
alleged no Removing, because the Warning was null, not bearing, to have been
Read at the Kirk Door, either at the time Divine Service uses to be, or at
least before Noon. It was answered, that the VVairning bore, that the same was
affixed on the Kirk Door, and lawfully Intimat there; which does import the
lawful time of the Day. 2ly, The Pursuer offered to mend the Executions at the
Bar, and abide by it as so done. It was answered, that the Defender accepted
the Executions, as produced, after which they could not be amended, and that
lawfully could not supply that Speciality; otherwise if the Warning had only
born, that the Officer had Warned the Party lawfully, it would have been
enough.

The Lords admitted the Pursuer to amend the Execution, he biding thereby, and
Ordained the Defender to see the same.

Hercules Scot contra Gibb. January 29: 1667.
HErcules Scot having given his Horse to John Gib, Stabler in Brunt-Island, to
be kept: pursues Gibb for the price of his Horse. The Defender alleged
Absolvitor, because he having put out the Horse to the Grass, it being in the
Month of July, the Horse fell over a Rock and brake his neck, and the Defender
is not liable pro casu fortuito. It was answered, that the Accident was by the
Defenders fault, because he put the Horse to Grassing above the Craigs of
Brunt-Island, and caused ty his Head and Foot together. 2ly, It is offered to
be proved by Witnesses, that the Pursuer directed him to keep the Horse in the
Stable at hard Meat, and not to put him out to Grass. The Defender answered,
that he was not in culpa, because he had put out the Horse in a place, where
ordinarily other Horses were put out, and had tied him no other way then the
rest of the Horses.

2ly, The Command to keep, is only relevant to be proven, scripto vel
ju^amento, and the emission of words without any Fact, is not otherwise
probable.

The Lords found the Defense and Duply Relevant to elid the Summons, but found
the Reply and Triply Relevant to elide the same; and found it Probable by
Witnesses, in respect it was a part of the Bargain betwixt the Pursuer and the
Stabler.

Henderson contra Henderson. Ianu. 31. 1667.
UMquhil Henderson grants a Writ in favors of Allan Henderson, whereby he
appoints the said Allan to be his Heir, and Donatar to all his Lands and
Estate, and assigns him to the Rights and Evidences thereof; with power to
Enter by the Superior: But in the Narrative, it bears the ordinar Narrative of
a Testament, and has a Clause subjoyned to all, in case of his Return, he may
alter and annul the same, there having nothing followed in his Life. The said
Allan pursues Henderson his appearand Heir, to fulfill the former Writ, and to
Enter Heir, and Resign in his favors, conform to the meaning thereof. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor; First, Because this Writ is no Disposition, but
a Testament, or a Donation, mortis causa, in which no Disposition of Land can
be valid. 2ly, Albeit this could be a Disposition, yet it is not done habili
modo, there being no Disposition of the Right of the Land, or any Obligement to
Infeft, neither can a Person be Constitute Heir, but either by Law or
Investiture; or at least, by an Obligement to grant Investiture. 3ly, This
being dona^io mortis causa, expressly Revocable by the Defunct at his return, it
is ambulatory and conditional: Ita est, he returned and granted Commissions,
and Factories, whereby his mind appeared to be changed.

The Lords Repelled all these Alleadgances, and sustained the Summons, because
though the Writ was unformal, yet they found the Defuncts meaning was to
alienat his Right from his Heirs to this Pursuer, to take effect after his
death; and albeit he returned, seeing he did no Deed to annul, or recall this
Writ, this was effectual against his Heir to complete the same.

Creditors of Sir James Murray contra James Murray. Feb. 1. 1667.
THere being a Wodset of the Lands of Stirling granted by Sir James Murray to
James Livingstoun of the Bedchamber, containing a Clause of Requisition, and
Reversion, on payment at London, the Lands being Appryzed by Sir Iame's
Creditors, they having the Right of Reversion, did use an Order at Edinburgh,
against James Murray, as now having a Right to the Wodset, and pursue a
Declarator. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Order is not conform
to the Reversion, which is strictissimi juris, and behoved to be done at
London. It was answered, the place being adjected in favor of James
Livingstoun, who resided at London: The Pursuers have done more, having
consigned at the present Wodsetters Domicile, London being only appointed, as
it was the former Wodsetters Domicile, wherein he has benefit, and can have no
detriment. It was answered, he was not obliged to Debate his detriment, for if
his Money were in London, he would get six of the hundredth of Exchange to
Scotland.

The Lords sustained the Order, the Pursuers making up what should be modified
by the Lords, for the Interest of the Wodsetters.

Earl Tullibardine contra Murray of Ochtertyre. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Tullibardine having Wodset the Lands of Logie-Almond, to Murray of
Ochtertyre, he did thereafter Discharge the Reversion, and at that same time,
got a Back-bond, bearing, That for payment of 56000. merks, with all other sums
that should happen to be due to him by Tullibardine, and all Expenses, that he
should Dispone the Lands back to Tullibardine, or the Heirs or Assigneys of his
own Body; but with this provision, that if he were not paid before Martinmass
1662. the Bond should be null, without Declartor. Tullibardine premonishes, and
after Premonition, Dispones the Lands to Sir John Drummond, and they both
jointly Consign, and now pursue Declarator. It was alleged for the Defender
Ochtertyre. First, No Declarator upon this Order, because the Back-bond is
Personal to my Lord, and to the Heirs or Assigneys, being of his Body; so that
Sir John Drummond, nor no Stranger can have Right thereby to Redeem. 2ly, The
Back-bond is extinct, and null by committing of the Clause Irritant, in so far
as payment has not been made before 1662. The Purswer answered to the first,
that albeit the Reversion had been Personal to my Lord, only excluding his
Heirs and Assigneys; yet my Lord in his own Lifetime might Redeem, and being
Redeemed, the Right would belong to any to whom my Lord had, or should Dispone.
2ly, This Clause Irritant is pactum legis commissoriae in pignoribus, which by
the Civil Law and our Custom is void, at least may be still purged before
Declarator obtained, as being rigorous and penal, and so abiding the Lords
Modification, as well as Penalties in Bonds Modified of consent of Parties,
especially in this case, where the performance is not of a single liquid sum,
but comprehends a general Clause of all Debts that were, or should be after
due. The Defender answered, that Clauses Irritant in Wodsets, are not rejected
by our Law, but are valide, only, where Declarators are requisite, The Lords may
Reduce them to the just Interest of Parties before Declarator: But here there
needs no Declarator, because the Defender is in Possession, and may except upon
the Clause Irritant committed, and the Clause bears, to be Effectual without
Declarator, and albeit this Clause could now be Reduced to the just Interest,
it is only this, that seeing Tullibardine has sold the Land, the Defender
should give as great a price as it is sold for to Sir John Drummond, which the
Defender is willing to do.

The Lords sustained the Order, in so far as it is at the Instance of
Tullibardine, but not as to Sir John Drummond, but prejudice to Sir John
Drummonds Disposition; They found also that this Clause Irritant might be
purged now at the Bar, or any time before Declarator, which is always necessar,
though Renunced, that medio tempore, Parties may purge; And the Lords inclined,
that Ochtertyre should have the Lands for the Price Sir John Drummond gave,
which is eighty eight thousand merks; but upon Examining him and my Lord, it
appeared that my Lord had offered the Land to him, re integra, and that he had
never been special, as to so great a Price as this; but only general, that he
would give as great a price as any other would give, which they thought not
sufficient, seeing any other thereby would be scarred from Bargaining.

Executors of Lady Pilton contra Hay of Balhousy. Feb. 2. 1667.
MR. Francis Hay granted a Bond to his Wifes Sister, the Lady Piltoun, bearing,
That for good Considerations, he obliged him to pay her a 1000 merks yearly,
during her Life, with this Provision, that it should be Leisum to her to Employ
the same, for the Abuliaments and Ornaments of her Body, or any other use she
pleased; and but any Right and Interest in her Husband thereto, jure mariti;
her Executors do now pursue Balhousie as Heir, for payment, who
alleadged-Absolvitor, because he had paid to Piltoun her Husband; and albeit
it was provided, that it might be leisum to his Wife to Dispose upon the sum,
yet she had not done it, but the Husband had provided her with all Abuiliaments
necessar. It was answered, that the Husbands jus mariti, was excluded by Mr.
Francis himself: And whatever might be alleged of what belongs to a Wife,
proprio jure, that nothing more can remain with her, but her necessary Aliment,
and all the rest being in the Person of the Wife, does return to the Husband
jure mariti; albeit the jus mariti were renunced in her favors; yet the Right
here is freely given by a third Party, excluding the Husband, which third Party
might gift with what Provisions he pleased, and his gift returns to himself,
unless these Provisions be observed, and this must be thought to be a gift,
seeing it bears no Cause onerous. It was answered, that it bears good
Considerations and Expresses not to be a Gift, or done for love and favor.
2ly, If the Gifter were opposing the Husband, or his Creditors Right, and
making use of that Provision, that his Gift might return, seeing the Provision
was not kept, it might have weight; but here the Donators Heir makes not use
of the Provision, but concurreth with the Husband and pays him.

The Lords found the payment made by the Donator, or his Heir to the Husband
Relevant, to exclude the Executors of the Wife.

Pourie contra Dykes. Eodem die.
UMquhil Dykes having Subscrybed a Bond to Pourie, of this Tenor, That he
acknowledged himself to be resting to Pourie 56 pounds yearly, as the
annualrent of a 1400 hundred merks; which sum of 56 pounds, he obliged himself
to pay yearly. This was the Tenor of the Bond, whereupon Pourie pursued Dykes
his Successors, not only for the payment of the annualrent, but for payment of
the principal sum of 1400 merks, alleging that she being but a simple Woman,
had entrusted Dykes with the drawing of the Bond, and he had deceived her, and
not mentioned the payment of the principal, but that the acknowledgement that
the Annualrent was due, as the Annualrent of 1400 merks, behoved to infer that
the 1400 merks was also due; this Ticket being holograph, without Witness,
there was no clearing of the meaning by the Witnesses insert.

Therefore the Lords allowed the Pursuer to adduce such adminicles and
witnesses, as she would use for clearing of the same.

She adduced an Instrument, bearing, Umquhil Dykes upon his Deathbed, to have
acknowledged that he thought the principal sum had been contained in the
Obligatory Clause, and that it was through his neglect, or unskilfulness, all
the Witnesses in the Instrument being now dead, the Nottar, and he who is
mentioned as Procurator, to have taken Instruments in the Pursuers Name, were
Examined, both acknowledged that Dykes had expressed his mind in the matter
before them; but they were contrary in the particular; the Nottar Deponed
conform to the Instrument; but the Procurator Deponed contrary, that the woman
had quite the principal sum, and had taken her to the Annualrent.

The Lords having considered the whole matter: And first, Whether the Ticket
could import that the principal sum was due? They found neither by the Ticket
nor by the Instrument, that that could be Instructed: They considered next,
Whether the Annualrent was due, during the woman's Lifetime only, or as a
perpetual Annualrent, to her, her Heirs or Assigneys? The difficulty was, that
the Obligement bore, that Dykes should pay the Annualrent yearly, but did not
express, neither to her, her Heirs nor Assigneys, but simply in these Terms, To
pay the 56 pounds yearly; Which the Lords found to carry a perpetual
Annualrent, though Heirs and Assigneys were not expressed.

Lady Traquair contra Marion Houatson. Feb. 5. 1667.
THe Lady Traquair pursues Marion Houatson for the Mails and Duties of a part
of the Liferent-Lands; who alleged Absolvitor, because her umquhil Husband,
who was immediate Tennent to the umquhil Earl, had, bona fide, made payment to
him. Likeas the Defender being only Sub-tennent to her Son, had, bona fide,
made payment to her Son of her Duty. The Pursuer answered. that neither of the
Alleadgances were Relevant; because any payment that was made by the Defender,
or her umquhil Husband, was before the Term of payment, and so could neither be
said to be bona fide nam ex nimia diligentia suspecta est fides, neither could
it prejudge the Pursuer.

The Lords were all clear that the payment made by the principal Tacksman,
before the Term, was not Relevant; but as to the payment made by the
Sub-tennent to the principal Tennent. The Lords Debate the same amongst
themselves, some being of opinion, that the Sub-tennents payment bona fide,
before the Term was sufficient, because he was only obliged to the principal
Tennent, and he might have a Tack for a less Duty then he, or for an elusory
Duty, which if he paid, and were Discharged, he was not conveenable: and often
times the Sub-tennents Term was before the principal Tennents Yet the Lords
found that payment made bona fide, by the Sub-tennent to the principal Tennent,
was not Relevant, and that because the Master of the Ground has Action, not
only against the Tennent, but also against the Sub-tennent, or any who enjoyed
the Fruits of his Ground, and may conveen them personally for his Rent, as well
as really, he has an Hypothick in the Fruits; neither can the Sub-tennent
prejudge the Master of the Ground of that Obligation and Action, by paying
before the Term; otherways he might pay the whole Terms of the Tack, at the
very entry thereof, and so Evacuat the Heretors Interest, as to the
Sub-tennent; yea^ though the Sub-tennents Tack-duty were less then the
principal Tennents, it would not Exclude the Heretor, pursuing him as Possessor
for the whole, but only give him Regress for Warrandice against the principal
Tacks-man; but the Term being come, if the Heretor Arrested, nor pursued not
the Sub-tacksman, he might impute it to himself, and the Subtacks-man might
justly presume that the principal Tacks-man had paid, and so might pay him
bona fide.

Countess of Hume contra Tennents of Alcambus and Mr. Rodger Hoge. Eodem die.
THe Countess of Hume being provided by her Contract of Marriage, to the Lands
of Alcambus; Pyperlaw, and Windilaw, extended to 24 Husband-Lands, she gets a
Charter upon her Contract, bearing, For Implement thereof, to Dispone to her
the Lands and Barony of Alcambus, etc. with a Seasine taken at Alcambus; She
thereupon pursues the Tennents. Compearance is made for Mr. Roger Hog, and
other Creditors, who bought these Lands from Wauchtoun, who had bought them
from the Earl of Hume, and alleged Absolvitor from the Mails and Duties of
the Miln of Alcambus, because my Lady by her Contract of Marriage was not
provided to the Miln; neither was she Infeft therein, per expressum; and Milns
do not pass as Pertinents, without a special Infeftment. 2ly, Absolvitor for
the Rents of Pyperlaw and Windilaw, because my Ladies Seasine^ bears, Only
In^eftment in the Lands of Alcambus, and mentions not these Lands which are
particularly in the Contract. The Pursuer answered to the first, That by her
Charter, she was Infeft in the Lands of Alcambus, with the Milns; with other
Lands mentioned therein, etc. 2ly, That Alcambus bore, by her Charter, to be a
Barony, which is nomen universitatis, and carries Milns, albeit not expressed. To
the second, It is offered to be proven, that Alcambus is the common known
Designation, and is commonly known to comprehend Pyperlaw and Windilaw, as
Parts and Pertinents thereof, and that they are all holden of one Superior,
and lies contigue; so that they are naturally unite, and without any further
union in a Barony or Tenement; and a Seasine upon any place of them serves for
all. It was answered for the Defender, to the first Point, That Alcambus was
not a Barony, neither does the Designation thereof by the Earl of Hume, make it
a Barony, unless it were instructed. 2ly, The adding of Milns in the Charter,
if the Lady had not Right thereto by the Contract, is a Donation by a Husband,
and is Revocked by his Disposition of the Lands of Alcambus, and Miln thereof,
to the Lord of Wauchtoun, the Defenders Author. The Pursuer answered, that the
Charter was but an Explication of the meaning of the Parties, that by the
Contract, the intention was to Dispone the Miln, especially, seeing the Miln
has no Sucken but these Husband-Lands of Alcambus, which are Disponed without
any Rest^iction of the Multure; so that the Miln would be of little consequence
without the Thir^e.

The Lords having compared the Contract and Charter, found that by the
Contract, the Lady could not have Right to the Miln, (...) she would be free of
the Multures; and found that the Charter did not only bear for Implement of the
Contract, but also for love and favor, and so found the Adjection of the Miln,
to be a donation Revocked; Nor had they respect to the Designation of the Lands
as a Barony, but they found it Relevan^, if the Lady should ^rove that it was a
Barony, to carry the Right of the Mi^n, or that in my Lords Infeftments, there
was no express men^^^n of the Miln, but that my Lady had them in the same Terms
my Lord had them: They found also, that Reply Relevant, that Alcambus was the
Name of the whole Lands, to extend the Sea sine to the Lands of Pyp^rlaw and
Windilaw, though not named, and that they might be yet Parts and Pertinents of
the Tenement, under one Common Name.

Andrew Smeatoun contra Tabbert. Feb. 7. 1667.
ANdrew Smeatoun being Infeft in an Annulrent out of a Tenement in the
Canongate, pursues a Poinding of the Ground, and produces his own Infeftment
and his Authors, but not the original Infeftment of the Annualrent. It was
alleged no Process, until the original Infeftment were produced, constituting
the Annualrent, especially seeing the Pursuit is for all bygones, since the date
of the Authors Infeftment; so that neither the Pursuer, nor his immediate Author
has been in Possession. 2ly. If need beis, it was offered to be proven, that
before the Rights produced, the Authors were denuded. It was answered, that the
Pursuer has produced sufficiently, and that his Right was cled with
Possession, in the Person of his mediat Author, before the years in question.
To the second, this Pursuer has the benefit of a possessory judgment by his
Infeftment, cled with Possession, and is not obliged to Dispute, whether his
Author were denuded or not, unless it were in a Reduction.

The Lords sustained the Pursuers Title, unless the Defender produced a Right
anterior thereto; in which case they ordained the Parties to be heard
thereupon, and so inclined not to exclude the Pursuer, upon the alleadgeance of
a poss^ssory judgment; but that Point came not fully to be debated: It is
certain that a possessory judgment is not relevant in favors of a Proprietar,
against an Annualrenter, to put him to Reduce, because an Annualrent is debitum
fundi; but whether an Annualrenter possessing seven years, could ex^^ude a
Proprietar, until he Reduce, had not been decided, but in this case the Lords
inclined to the Negative.

Mr. Alexander Foulis and Lord Collingtoun contra Tennents of Innertyle and La.
Collingtoun. Feb. 9. 1667.
SIr James Foulis of Collingtoun, being in treaty of Marriage with Dam Margaret
Erskin, Lady Tarbet, She did dispone 36 Chalders of Victual, of her Jointure in
the North, to a confident Person, that she might make use thereof, for the
benefit of her Children; and Disponed 36 Chalders of her Liferent of the Lands
of Innertyle, to Cuninghame of Woodhal, who transferred the same to Mr.
Alexander F^ulis of Ratho, who granted a Back-bond, bearing, That his Name was
made use of for the use and behove of Collingtoun and his Lady, and that to
this effect, that the profit of the Liferent should be applied to the Aliment
of their Families jointly; and therefore obliged himself to Dispone in their
favors, and de presenti did Dispone. The next day after this Disposition,
there is a Contract of Marriage betwixt Collingtoun and the Lady, wherein there
is this Clause, that Col^ingtoun Renunces his jus mariti, to the Lady's
Liferent, or any other Right he might have thereto by the subsequent Marriage,
and takes his hazard for what he may have any other way. Mr. Alexander pursues
the Tennents upon his Disposition. Compearance is made for the Lady, who
alleadges he has no interest^ because he is denuded by the Back-bond.
Compearance is made for Collingtoun, who declared he concurred with Ratho, and
consented he should have the Mails and Duties, to the effect contained in the
Back-bond, and that he would not make further use of the Re-disposition
contained therein. It was answered for the Lady, that Collingtouns concourse
could not sustain this Process, because Ratho was already de presenit, denuded
in favors of Collingtoun and her; Likeas Collingtoun was denuded by his
Contract of Marriage whereby he renunces his jus ma^iti, and all other Right he
can have to the Liferent Lands, in favors of the Lady, and so renunces the
Clause of the Back-bond, in so far as it is in his favors. It was answered,
that the Contract of Marriage could not derogat to the Back-bond, unless the
Back-bond had been per expressum, Discharged or Renunced therein, because
albeit the Contract of Marriage be a day posterior to the Back-bond, yet both
are parts of one Treaty of Marriage, and so in the same condition, as if they
were in one Writ, so that a posterior Clause in general Terms, cannot take away
a prior special Clause of this moment; yea though it were in a Contract le^s
favorable then a Contract of Marriage, which is ube^^mae fidei, general
Clauses are not extended above what is specially expressed, and the jus mariti
being expressed, and the Back-bond not expressed, it cannot be presumed, that they
changed their minds in one night, to Renunce the benefit of the Back-bond; but
this Conveyance was made of purpose, because Collingtoun being in Debt, if the
Right were Constitute in a third Party, and only to their behove as an aliment,
the Creditors could not reach the same, but it were the greatest Cheat
imaginable, to conceive that the general Clause subsequent, should evacuat the
whole design, and take away the provision of the Back-bond: Neither does the
general Clause renunce all Right that Collingtoun had, or might have to the
Liferent-lands, any manner of way; but only all Right he could have by the
subsequent Marriage, any manner of way. Ita est, that he does not claim Right
jure mariti, nor by the subsequent Marriage; but by the Paction contained in
the Back-bond; and it is most certain that the jus Mariti, which is most
peculiar to this Nation, does not comprehend all Rights a Husband has, in
relation to the Person, or Means of his Wife, but only the Right of moveable
Goods, or Sums, which without any Paction, whatsoever way they come in her
Person, belong ipso facto to him, not by Paction, but by Law; and that jure
mariti, or by virtue of the Marriage: so tha^ albeit he could not have Right,
even by the Paction, except that he were Husband, or that Marriage had
followed, yet his Paction is his Title, and not the Marriage, which is but
tacita conditio, or causa sine qua non, so that Discharging, or Renuncing of
the jus mariti, or the benefit by the Marriage, if it were posterior to the
Contract of Marriage, would not take away the Contract, and being in the
Contract, cannot take away the prior ^action, and Disposition granted by the
Wife, in favors of a Husband, or a third Party to his behove. It was answered
for the Lady, that she adheres to the clear express Terms of the Contract of
Marriage, which Renunces not only the jus mariti, but all other Right to the
Liferent-lands, by the subsequent Marriage, which being a several Writ, and a
Day posterior, most necess^rly take away the Back-bond, without considering the
meaning of Parties, quia in claris non est lo^us conjecturis; at least the
meaning can be no otherways cleared but by Writ, or the Ladies Oath; otherwise
the most clear and solemn Contract shall be arbitrary, and may be taken away by
presumptions or conjectures, and no man shall be secure of any Right. 2ly,
Verba sumendasunt cum effe^^u; i^ this did not take away the Back-bond, it had
no effect for the L^dy, before the Contract was denuded, of her whole Liferent,
both of Inne^tyle and in the North, so that there was no need to Renunce the
jus mariti, or Right by the Marriage to the Liferent-lands. It was further
alleged by the Lady, that albeit the Renunciation could not reach the
Back-bond, in so far as it is a Paction, so that it yet stood effectal for
application of the Liferent right, for the aliment of the Lady and Collingtouns
Family jointly, yet thereby they both had a Communion and Society equally, and
the Husband could pretend no Right in the administration or manadgement, but
only jure mariti, in so far as he is Husband, and therefore he acknowledging
that he has renunced his jus mariti, cannot pretend to the administration of
this aliment, but it must remain entirely to the Lady.

The Lords found that the Claus^ in the Contract of Marriage, did not derogat
to the Back-bond; and as to the Point of administration, they consid^red it to
consist in two things, in uplifting the Rent, and manadging the Liferent-lands,
and in the application thereof to the use of the Family, and manadging the
Affairs of the Family, As to the first, they found th^^ both Parties having
entrusted Ratho, the Trust of manadgement of the Rent, could not be taken from
him without Collingtouns consent; and as for the manadgement of the Family it
self, they found, that it neither was, nor could be re^un^ed by the Husband, in
favors of the Wife, and that any such Paction, though it had been clear and
express, taking the Power and Government of the Family from the Husband, and
^^ating it in the Wife, is contra bonos mores^ and void, and that the jus
mariti^ as it is properly taken in our Law, for the Husbands interest to the
Wifes Movables, being Renunced, cannot be understood to re^^h to the
Renunciation of the Husbands power, to Rule his Wife and Family, and to
administrat the aliment thereof.

Elizabeth Ramsay contra Ker of Westnisbet. Eodem die.
ELizabeth Ramsay having pursued an adjudication of certain-Lands upon the
Renunciation of Barbara Nisbet, insists upon that Member of the Summons against
the Superior John Ker, that he should receive and Infeft her; who alleged no
Process, unless the Pursuer show the Right of the former Vassal, whose Heir had
Renunced, for the Pursuer can be in no better case then the appearand Heir, who
if she were craving to be Entered, behoved to Instruct her Predecessors Right.
The Pursuer answered, that her adjudication against the Defender as Superior,
is in common form, which has been ever sustained upon good ground, because a
Creditor has no Interest to have his Debitors Rights, when he is seeking
adjudication, which must be his Title, to demand the Rights, but the Superior
is obliged by Law to reserve the Adjudger, without Instructing any Right
further then the adjudication, which has been frequently so found in the case
of Appryzers.

The Lords having considered the case and parallel, with that of Appryzers,
found this difference, that Superiors got a years Rent for receiving
Appryzers, but not of Adjudgers; yet in respect of the common custom of these
Summons, they ^epelled the defense, and Decerned the Superior, to receive the
Pursuer, salvo jure ^ujuslibet and suo.

Dam Geibs Moncreiff contra Tennents of Neutoun and William Yeoman Eodem die.
DAm Geils Moncrief being Served to a Terce of the Lands of Newtoun pursues the
Tennents for a third part of the Duties, who having Deponed that they paid so
much for Stock and Teind jointly for Yeards, Parks, and the whole Lands possessed
by them. Compeared William Yeoman, as now having Right to the Fee, who
alleged no Terce of the Teinds, because they fell not under Terce. 2ly, No
Terce of the yeards, because as the Mannor-place belonged to the Fiar without
division, so behoved the closs Gairdens, Orchards, yards, etc.

The Lords found the Pursuer to have no Right to the Teind by her Terce, unless
there had been an Infeftment of the Teinds by Erection, and therefore laid by
the fourth part for the Teind; and found that the years in question being
possessed by the Tennents, and there being nothing alleged nor instructed, that
there was a Tower, Fortalice, or Mannor-place, having a Garden, or Orchard for
pleasure, rather then profit, they found no necessity to decide, what Interest
a Tercer would have in such, but these being set by appearance, as Grass
Yeards, they Repelled the alleadgeance.

Earl Tullibardine contra Murray of Oc^tertyre. Feb. 12. 1667.
IN the Declarator at the Instance of Tullibardine, against Murray of
Ochtertyre, Dispute the first of ^ebruary last, It was now further alleged
for Ochertyre, that Clauses Irritant in Wodsets, not being illegal, or null by
our Law, albeit the Lords do sometimes Restrict the Effect thereof, ad bonum
and aequum, to the just Interest of the Parties, against whom the same is
conceived, they do never proceed any fur^her; But here Ochertyre is content to
make up to the Earl his just Interest, by paying a greater price for the Land
then Sir John Drummond: and whereas it was alleged, that this was not
receivable now, after the Earl had made bargain with Sir John Drummond,
Ochetyre now offered to prove, that before any Bargain was agreed, in Word or
Writ, he did make offer to the Earl of fourscore ten thousand merks, which he
offered to prove by Witnesses, above all exception, who communed betwixt them,
viz. the Lord ^tormount and the Lord of Kylar. It was answered, that the
Pursuers adhered to the Lords former Interlocutor, whereby they have restored
the Earl against the Clause irritant, he satisfying Ochtertyre his whole
Interest, cum omni causae, the same Point being then alleged and Dispute, and
both Parties being judicially called, and having declared their minds
concerning any such offer, whereby the Earl upon his ho^our, declared that
before the agreement with Sir John Drummond: Ochtertyre offered not so much by
4000 merks. 2ly, Any such alleadgence albeit it were competent, it were only
probable s^ripto vel juramento; the Earl now having Disponed to Sir John
Drummond, so that the Effect would be, to draw him into double Dispositions,
which is of great consequence, both as to his Honor and Interest, especially
seeing that Ochtertyre did not take an Instrument upon the Offer. It was
answered for Ochtertyre, that the former Interlocutor cannot exclude him,
especially seeing he did only then allege, that he made a general offer of as
much for the Land as Sir John Drummond would give therefore, but now he offers
to prove, that he offered 90000 merks, which is 2000 merks more then Sir John's
price.

The Lords found that they would only restrict the Clause irritant, to the
Effect that the granter of the Wodset might suffer no detriment, which they
found to be Effectual, if the Wodsetter offered as great, or a greater sum then
the other buyer, before any Bargain agreed between them, either in Word or
Writ; ^ut found it not probable by Witnesses, but by Writ, or the Earls Oath;
and found that a general offer was not sufficient, unless it had Expressed a
particu^ar sum.

Lord Justice Clerk contra Rentoun of Lambertoun. Feb. 13. 1667.
THe Lord Rentoun, Justice Clerk, putsues Rentoun of Lambertoun, as heir to his
Father for Count and Payment of his Rents, Woods and Planting, intrometted with
by Lambertoun, in the beginning of the troubles. It was alleged for the
Defender, absolvitor, because by the Act of Indemnity, the Leidges are secured,
as to all things done by any pretended Authority for the time. Ita est, The
pursuer being sequestered, the Defenders Father meddled by Warrant from the
Committee of Estates, and made Count to them, as appears by his Count produced^
which is balanced by the Committee. 2ly, The said account bears, That
Lambertoun made Faith that it was a true account, nothing omitted in prejudice
of the public; after which he could not be questioned, either for any thing in
the account, or for any thing omitted and not charged. The Pursuer answered,
that the Act of Indemnity contains an express exception of all Persons, that
meddled with any public Moneys, and had not made Count therefore, that they
should yet be comptable. 2ly, The account produced contains two accounts, one
in anno 1641: another in anno 1643. The first is not approven by the Committee,
but adjusted by three persons, who were no members of the Committee, and whose
Warrant is not Instructed: and the second count is only approven, wherein the
Charge is a Rest in the Tennents hands of the former account, and the Oath is
only adjected to the second account, which cannot Import that Lambertoun
ommitted nothing in the first account, but only that he ommitted nothing in the
second, and his Oath is only to the best of his knowledge, and can import no
more, than the Oath of an Executor upon the Inventar, which excludes not the
Probation of super Intromission. It was answered for the Defender, that the
second account being the rest of the first account, the approbation of the
second must approve both, and the approbation is sufficient Warrant for him to
intromet, and the Auditors to count with him.

The Lords Repelled the Defense upon the Act of Indemnity, in respect of the
foresaid Exception contained therein; and likewise found, that the Oath
subjoyned to the second account, could not exclude the Pursuer from insisting,
for the Defenders Fathers intromissions ommitted out of the first account, and
wherewith he Charged not himself, but found that the Defender was secure by the
Act of Indemni^y, so far as he had charged himself with, and compted; and found
that he was not obliged, after so long a time to instruct his Commission, or
the Warrant of the Auditors, that fitted his accounts; but that the approbation
was sufficient to astruct the same.

Lady Diana Maxwel contra Lord Burley and others. Feb. 15. 1667.
LAdy Diana Maxwel, Lady Cranburn and other Executors confirmed to the Countess
of Dirletoun; pursued the Lord Burley, as Representing his Father, for payment
of a Bond granted by his Father and others; to the umquhil Earl of Dirletoun,
for the price of a great quantity of Victual, and that upon these Grounds, that
the Pursuers are Executors surrogat to the Countess, and have license to
pursue; which Countess had an assignation from the Earl to his Household Stuff,
which bore this general Clause, And to his Chattel, and other Moveable-goods
and Gear whatsomever; under which generality, this Bond is Comprehended, being
moveable, and for Victual, and so is a Chattel, as the word is understood by
the Law of England; whereby all that is not by Infeftment of Fee, is
comprehended by the word Chattels, and belong to the Executors, as Laisses,
etc. 2ly, The Countess was nominat universal Legatrix in the Earls Testament,
and thereby has Right to this Moveable-bond: 3ly, As Relict she has Right to
the half. It was alleged for the Defender, no Process upon any of these
Titles. First, Because the assignation cannot be extended to this Bond; neither
is the word Chattels to be Interpret according to the Law of England, the
assignation being made by a Stots-man, and made in Scotland, after the Scottish
manner. 2ly, The Pursuers as Executors to the Countess, cannot pursue upon the
universal Legacy, the Debitors of the Defunct, but only the Defuncts Executors^
because this Bond is yet in bonis primi defuncti, and must be Confirmed. 3ly,
The Relict cannot pursue the Debitors for her half, but at least, she must call
the Executors.

The Lords found both the last Alleadgences Relevant, but as to the first,
before answer they ordained the Pursuer to adduce what Evidences they had to
instruct the signification of the word Chattels, by the Law of Engl^nd, in
respect it was notour to them, that the Lord Dirletoun being a Servant of the
Kings, lived the most part of his time in England, and in Scotland there is no
use of the word Chattels.

Isobel Glen contra John Hume. Feb. 19. 1667.
ISobel Glen as assigney by Mr. Edward Jameson, having obtained Decree against
the umquhil Earl of Hume, for certain by-run Stipends, and thereupon having
arrested in my Lord Whitekirks hands, certain Sums due by him, to the Earl of
Hume: She now pursues to make forthcoming. Compearance is made for John Hume*
who produces an assignation by the Earl of Hume, to the sums due by Whitekirk,
and also produces a Gift of the Earls Liferent-Escheat; and alleadges, first,
No Process at the Arresters Instance, because the Earl of Hume being dead, the
Debt must be first Established by a Decree, against one Representing him, who
must be called principaliter, before the Person in whose hands the arrestment
is made, can be decerned to pay that which was the Defuncts. 2ly, John Hume
must be preferred as Donatar, because the arrestment was laid on after the Earl
of Humes Rebellion, by which his Goods belonged to the King, and no Sums can be
made forthcoming, as belonging to him after the Rebellion, because they
belonged to the King. It was answered to the first; That if the Earl of Hume
had not dyed at the Horn, the Pursuer would have either Confirmed as Ex^cutor
Creditor, or called the Earls Executors, but that is not necessar, seeing the
Earl died at the Horn, and could not have one to Represent him in mobilibus;
and that now the Donatar who succeeds, compears. To the 2. the Pursuer as
Arrester, ought to be preferred* because albeit the arrestment be after the
Rebellion, yet it is before the Gift or Declarator; and it is for a Debt due by
the Earl, before the Rebellion, and so does exclude the Donatar, for which they
produced a Decision marked by Dury, Pilmour contra Gaigie. In which case the
Gift was granted by a Lord of a Regality, having the benefit of the Escheat,
whereanent the Lord Advocat Represented, that this could not be drawn in
consequence, to prejudge the King or his Donatar, because the Lord of Regality
being a Subject, debuit invigilare sibi, by declaring the Rebellion without
delay, but the King cannot so soon know, nor is he prejudged by the neglect of
his Officers.

Yet the ^ords u^animouslie preferred the Arrester, the Advocat forbearing to
Vote, for they t^^ught the c^se of Creditors for Debts before Rebellion were
not to be prejudged, ^^^ng Diligence before Declarator, or if they should
Poind, Arrest, Adjudge, etc.

Cranstoun contra Wilki^on Feb. 20. 1667.
BY Contract of Marriage betwixt Wilkison and his Spouse, he is obliged to
Infeft her in a Tenement, expressed therein, and in all the Conquest during the
Marriage; which Infeftments were to be taken to them, the longest liver of them
two, in Conjunct-Fee, and their Heirs betwixt them: Which failzing, to the
Heirs of the Mars Body: Which failzing, to the Wifes Heirs whatsomever; after
which the Husband purch^sed a piece of Land, but took the Infeftment thereof^
to him and his ^ife, and the heirs betwixt them: Which ^ailzing, to his own
heirs whatsomever, omitting the wifes heirs. This Cranstoun obtains hi^ self
Infeft in this Conquest Tenement, as Heir to the Wife, and thereupon obtained
Decree for Mails and Duties. Wi^^ison as Heir to the Husband, pursues
Reduction of the Decree on these grounds: first, That Cranstouns Infeftment,
as Heir to the Wife^ was null, because the Wife was not Fiar, but Liferenter.
2ly, The Wife having accepted of an Infeftment, posterior to the Contract,
without mention of her Heirs, that innovat the Provision of the Contract, and
excludes her Heirs. It was answered; first That the Man and Wife being Conj^nct
fiars, the Wife was Fiar^ and the Man but Life ^enter, because the last
Termination of Heirs whatsomever, Terminat upon her. 2ly, Albeit Cranstoun had
taken his Infeftment wrong, Wi^kison cannot quarrel the same, because he, as
Heir to Wilkison, was obliged to Infeft him, as Heir to the Wife; and to the
posterior In^eftment, it is contrair to the provision of the Contract of
Marriage, and there does appear no accepting thereof by the Wife. 3ly,
Cranstoun is not obliged to disput the validity of this Right, because he has
been Infeft qua^^ter qunque, and by virtue of his Infeftment, has been seven
years in Possessi^n, whereby he has the benefit of a possessory Judgment, ^ay
and while his Infeftment be Reduced.

The Lords found, that even by the Contract of Marriage, the Husband was Fiar,
and not the Wife: But that the Wifes Heirs of line, were Heirs of Provision to
the Husband, and that if there had been an heir of the Ma^riage, or an ^^ir of
the Man's Body, they could never have been served ^eirs to the Wife: and that by
the deficiency thereof, the condition of the Fee cannot change: and therefore
they found that Cranstoun was wrong i^feft; yet they found the alleadgence of
his seven years Possession Relevant, to give him the b^n^fit of a possessory
judg^ment, without Disputing, whether the Provision of the Contract of
Marriage, in favors of the wife, was derogat, by the posterior Infeftment,
omitting her heirs.

Andrew Litlejohn contra Duchess of Monmouth. Eodem die.
ANdrew Litlejohn pursues the Duchess of Monmouth, and her Curators, for
payment of a Tailor account, taken off by the Duchess for her Marriage Sow; to
the fit whereof, she adjoyns these words, I acknowledge the Account
above-written, and subscrives the same. It was alleged by the Curators, that
the Countess Subscription, being after her Marriage, can neither oblige her
self, nor her Husband, because Wives Obligations are ipso jure, null. It was
answered that the Duchess being persona illustris, and the account for
Furniture to her Body at her Marriage; her account fell not under the Nullity
of Ordinary Obligations by Wives, whose Bonds are null, not so much because
their Subscriptions prove not the Receipt of the Money, as because, being in
potestate viri, they cannot employ it profitably for their own use, which
ceases here, the account being for necessar Furnishing, which both obliges the
Wife, and her Husband, who is obliged to Entertain his Wife.

The Lords Decerned, the Pursuer always making Faith, that it was a just, and
true account, truly Resting, and owing; and would not put the Pursuer to
instruct the delivery by witnesses, who are at London: considering especially,
that the Duchess, being such an illustrious Person, her Subscription could not
be questioned upon so small a Matter, as obtained without delivery.

Helen Iohnstoun contra Robert Johnstoun. Eodem die.
HElen Iohnstoun alleging that there was a Blank-bond in her Brother Roberts
hand, to her use, and that he promised to apply the benefit thereof to her,
does pursue the brother, either to deliver the Bond, or otherwise the sums
therein, and offers her to prove by the Debitors Oath, that the Bond was blank
in the Creditors Name, when it was Subscribed by him, and by Witnesses above
Exception, that it was blank when she delivered it to the Defender; and craved
the Defenders Oath of Calumny concerning the promise. The Defender alleged,
that he was not obliged to give his Oath of Calumny upon one Point of the
Lybel, but upon the whole.

The Lords found, that he was obliged to give his Oath upon one point of the
Lybel; But they found that VVitnesses were not Receiveable to prove the Bond to
have been Blank, to infer Redelivery of the Bond, or Sums; And found likewise,
that s^ing the whole Lybel was only probable by his Oath, he was not obliged
to give his Oath of Calumny, but only his Oath of Verity, seeing he might be
ensnared by denying upon his Oath of Calumny, which was lubrick, and of d^bious
^nterpretation, what it imported, and so might be prompted to wrong himself in
his Oath of verity, least it should clash with his Oath of Calumny. vid. 21.
Feb. 1667. inter eosdem.

Lord Thesaurer, and Lord Advocat, contra Lord Colvil, Eodem die.
THe Lord Thesaurer, and Lord Advocat pursue the Lord Colvil for the single
avail of his Marriage, in so far as he was Married when his Predecessor was on
Deathbed, and was moribundus, and was Married without proclamation, within
seven, or eight days before his Predecessors Death, which precipitation of his
Marriage did manifestly p^esume that it was of fraud, to seclude the King from
the benefit of the Marriage, and so it was in the same case as if he had been
Married after his Predecessors death; and repeated the opinion of Sir John
Skeen in his Explicati^ns upon Quoniam Atachiamenta se Maritagio, bearing that
it was praxis fori, that if the Vassal g^ve his Heir in Marriage upon
Deathbed, it was est^emed a fraud^^ent precipitation, in prejudice of the
Superior, and gave the Superior the single avail of the Marriage; and sets down
three Decisions, whereby it was so found. It was answered for the Defender
Absolvitor, because there is neither Law, nor Custom gives the Superior the
avail of the Vassals Marriage, if he be Married before his Predecessors Death,
but Craig, and other Lawyers do define this casualty to be, the avail of the
appearand Heir of the Vassals Marriage, Marrying after his Predecessors Death:
and as to the ground insinuat of fraud, by precipitation it is no ways
relevant. First, Because, albeit it did appear that the Defunct Vassal had
Married his Heir, of design to prevent the Marriage, yet here is no fraud, but
a warrantable Providence, which is not dolus malus sed do^us bonus; for fraud
is never understood, but when it is contra jus delatum, and not of the
preveening of jus deferendum, for thereby only the Right, and Interest of
another is taken away: as for example, any Heretor may dam, or divert the water
upon his ground, as he pleases, and cannot be hindered, upon pretense that his
Neighbor might thereafter make use of that water for a Miln to be built, and
yet if the Miln were built, he could not thereafter alter the course of the
water; so here the Superior having no present Right, but in spe, the Vassal
endeavoring to prevent the casualty, commits neither fraud, nor fault;
otherwise upon pretense of fraud, a Marriage might be claimed, when the
Predecessors resign in favors of his appearand Heir, or suffers his Land to be
Appryzed, in name, or to the behove of the appearand Heir, which yet was never
challenged, neither has a Marriage been obtained, or demanded upon this ground
by the space of these threescore years. 2ly, Albeit prevention could be fraud,
yet here is nothing alleged to infer fraud, which is never presumed, unless it
be evidently proven, and when any other Cause is possible, the Effect is never
attribute to a fraudulent Cause: But here there is a most probable Cause. viz.
That the Defunct desired to see his Successor Married to his satisfaction, it
being very ordinar that the ruin of Families arises either through the not
Marrying, or Marrying unfitly of the Heir. And as for the presumptions of
fraud; here they are neither evident, nor pregnant: As to the Decisions, no
respect to them; first, Because they are three^core years in desuetude; 2ly,
There is here nothing but the very instancing of the Practiques, without
deducing the Case dispute, and Reason of Decision, neither can Sk^ens
conclusion take place, in all the largeness he sets it down, or else there
shall need no more to infer a Marriage, but that the Vassal was in lecto
egritudinis, albeit he had so continued of a Lent Disease, above a year,
nothing should Capacitat him to Marry his Heir, although he used all the
Solemnities of Treaty, Contract, and Proclamation: so that the Law de lecto
^gritudinis, which is only introduced in favors of Heirs, that their
Predecessors shall not prejudge them, shall now be made use of against the
Heir, that his Predecessor can do nothing to his benefit, on Deathbed. The
Pursuer answered, that the feudal Contract being of its own Nature Gratuitous
and most favorable on the Part of the Superior, that which he has for his
Fee, being ordinarily the Service of the Vassal, and the profit of the Fee when
the Vassal is unserviceable, through Minority (reserving the Vassals own
Aliment) and the profit of the Vassals Tocher; the Vassal ought not to defraud,
or prejudge him therein. And albeit custom has introduced an exception, that
the Tocher is not due to the Superior, which was gotten during the Predecessors
Life, it being ordinarily consumed, and applied to the Predecessors use; yet
that by precipitation the appearand Heir should enjoy the same, and not the
Superior, is against the Gratitude, Amity, and Obliegement of the Vassal:
neither is there any Parity in the Case of a Resignation, to which the Superior
consents, or in the Case of an Appryzing, wherein the Superior must Receive, by
the force of Law; nor can the forbearance of sixty years infer a contrary
Custom, because this is a Case rarely contingent, and often times not known to
the Kings Officers; and though it were, their negligence prejudges not the
King, by an express Act of Parliament; neither is that a Custom which People
use to do, but Customs here are only such as are Judicial, by the Kings
Ministers of Justice, whereanent Skeen expressly says, that this is praxis,
forensis; and albeit the Decisions Adduced by him be not at large, yet the
circumstances of fraud here, are so pregnant, that they cannot be thought to
have been more pregnant in any other Case, where there was no Proclamation, and
where the Defunct was not only in lecto, but was moribundus, Physicians having
so declared, the common Reputation being, that he would not Live, and D^ing de
facto, within a few days after, and there being no singularity in the Match,
nor any pressing necessity of the Marriage, for any other Effect.

The Lords found the Lybel, and Reply relevant; viz. That the Marriage was
done, when the Predecessors Father was moribundus, and done without
Proclamation, and that he Died within eight days after, there being nothing
alleged to take off the Presumption of fraud upon these Circumstances.

Robert Miln contra Clarkson, February 21. 1667.
RObert Miln as Donatar to a Liferent Escheat, having obtained a general
Declarator, insists now in a special Declarator for Mails and Duties. It is
alleged for Clarkson, that the Pursuer has no right to the Mails and Duties,
because he stands Infeft before the Rebellion. It was answered, any Infefetment
Clarkson has, is but a base Infeftment, never clede with Possession till the
Rebellion, and year and day was run, and so is null, as to the Superior, or
his Donatar. It was answered, that the base Infeftment is valide in it self,
and albeit by the Act of Parliament, 1540. A Posterior public Infeftment, for
Causes Onerous be preferable, yet that cannot be extended to the Right of a
Liferent Escheat, or to a Donatar. It was answered, that by the course of
Rebellion, year and day the Superiors Infeftment Revives, as to the Property,
during the Rebels Liferent, and cannot but be in as good condition as any
Posterior public Infeftment; and it was so decided, March 19. 1633. Lady
Rentoun contra Blackader.

The Lords found that the base Infeftment, though Prior to the Denunciation,
not having attained Possession within year and day, could not exclude the
Liferent Escheat.

Helen Iohnstoun contra Robert Iohnstoun, Eodem die.
IN the Cause betwixt Helen Iohnstoun and Robert Iohnstoun her Brother, It was
further alleged for her, that the Pursuit, being a matter of breach of Trust,
and Fraud, betwixt Parties so nigh as Brother and Sister; the same ought to be
Probable by Witnesses above exception, and ought not to be referred to the
Defenders Oath; because its offered to be proven that he did Depone before the
Justices of Peace in Fife, that he had never had the Bond in question, and yet
in this Process it is Judicially acknowledged in the Dispute that he has the
Bond, and that he received it blank from the Pursuers Husband; and its now
offered to be proven by his own Brother, and other Witnesses, above exception,
that the Pursuer delivered the Bond to him blank after her Husbands death,
which being a matter of Fact, and Probable by Witnesses, necessarly infers that
the Bond was not redelivered to her Umquhil Husband.

The Lords before answer ordained the Witnesses ex officio to be examined, upon
the Pursuers delivery of the Bond after her Husbands Death.

Earl of Errol contra Hay of Crimunmogat. February 23. 1667.
THe Earl of Errol Pursues a Declarator of Redemption, against Hay of
Crimunmogot: It was alleged Absolvitor, because the Defender stands Infeft
upon a Charter granted by Barcklay, with the consent of the Earl of Errol,
proomni suo jure, long after the reversion, granted be Barcklay, whereupon this
Redemption proceeds. It was answered for the Pursuer. 1. That the Earl only
consents, and the Charter bears that the Sums were paid to Barcklay, whose
Right produced is a Wodset, granted by the Earl of Errol, and Hay of Vrie,
bearing an Express Reversion to any lawful Eldest Son of Hay of Vrie, which
failzieing to the Earl of Errol. Ita est that the time the Earl Subscrived this
Charter, Hay of Vrie was alive, and had Sons, at least in spe; so that the Earl
of Errol had not thereby the Right of the Reversion, and therefore his consent,
without any Sums received, or any absolute Warrandice, cannot extend to any
superveening Right, which he then had not actually, but in spe et in
apparentia. 2ly, The Earls consent to Barcklayes Disposition, who had only the
Right of Wodset, not bearing irredeemable, or absque reversione, cannot take
away the express Reversion of Barcklayes Right: for albeit an Heritable Right
be presumed Irredeemable, presumptio cedit veritati, and it cannot take away a
Reversion where it is.

The Lords found that the Reversion granted in Barcklayes Right was not taken
away by this Posterior Right, and Charter; but that the Earls consent imported
only his Favor, and Goodwil to transmit the Right to the Defender; in respect
of the alledgeances aforesaid.

Lord of May contra John Rosse. Eodem Die.
UMquhil Dumbaith having Disponed several Lands to his Oy, John Rosse Brother
to Kilraick, the Lord of May, Dumbaiths Heir-male pursues Improbation and
Reduction of the Disposition: and insisted upon this ground that the
Disposition was false in the Date; and that the Defunct was ali^it the time it
appears to have been subscrived, and therefore is false in all. It was
answered that there was only an Error in the Date, in respect, the same Right
having been conceived formerly in formerly in favors of another, Dumbaith gave
order to draw it over in favors of the Defender verbatim, and the Writer
ignorantly Wrote over the Date as it was in that first Disposition, which can
no ways annul the Writ, especially seeing it was offered to be proven by the
Witnesses insert that the Writ was truly subscribed by Dumbaith, and them as
Witnesses, when he was in his Liege-poustie, against which no alledgeance of
alibi by other Witnesses not insert can be respected.

This having been Dispute in the English time* the Witnesses were Examined
before answer, by three of the Judges, and now the Cause was Advised.

The Lords found the Defense relevant to elide the Improbation, that the Writ
was truly subscribed before the Defunct was on deathbed, and found the samen
proven by the Witnesses adduc'd, and thereafter assoilzied.

Lord of Rentoun Justice Clerk, contra Lady Lamberton, Eodem Die.
THe Lord Rentoun insisted in the Cause against Lambertoun mentioned the 13.
February 1667. He now insists on this member, offering to prove that Umquhil
Lambertoun by his Commission or Bond was oblidged to the Estates for exact
diligence; and the Pursuer being now Restored, he is liable to Count to him in
the same manner as to the Estates, not only for his Intromission, but for his
Negligence, whereby he suffered other Persons publicly, and avowedly to cut
the Pursuers Woods of a great value, and did no ways stop nor hinder the same,
nor call them to an Account. 2ly, He himself Intrometred with the said Wood, at
least others by his Warrant; which Warrant must be presumed in so far as he
having a Commission, and oblidged for diligence, did not only suffer the Wood
openly to be cutted, but applied a part thereof to his own use, and was oftimes
present when it was in cutting by others^ The Defender answered, First, That he
could never be liable to the Pursuer for his Omission, because his only Tittle
was his Right of Property, whereby the Defender was liable to Restore to him
what he had Intrometted with, and not Counted for, but for his oblidgement to
do Diligence, it was only personal granted to the Estates; and albeit they
Restored the Pursuer to the Estate, they never Assigned him to that Obligation.
2ly, The Defender is secured by the Act of Indemnity, except in so far as he
Intrometted, and did not duly Count, as was found by the former Interloquitor
in this Cause: and as to the second member, It was answered that the Defender
being only Countable for his Fathers Intromission not Counted for, albeit he
had given warrant to others, except he had received satisfaction from them, it
is not his own Intromission. 2ly, Warrant or Command, is only Probable by Writ
or Oath, and no way by Presumption, upon such Circumstances, which Presumptions
are also taken off by others more pregnant, viz. That these Woods were cutted
by Persons in Power and Interest in the Country, who had no Relation or
Interest in the Defenders Father, whom he was not able to stop or hinder, and
most part thereof was Clandestinly cut and stolen away by meaner Persons. It
was answered for the Pursuer, that he being Restored, Succeeds in place of the
Estates, and as what is done by a negotiorum gestor without Warrant, is
profitable for these for whom he negotiats, so must this be which was done by
the Estates. As to the Act of Indemnity, the meaning thereof can be no more
then that Parties who Acted shall be in no worse case then they would have been
with that Party whom they followed, As to the second member, the Pursuer
answered, that what was done by others, by the Defenders Fathers Commission
must be his Intromission, seeing it is all one to do by himself, or by another;
and seeing it cannot be called Omission, it must be Intromission. 2ly, Though
Command or Warrant is ordinarily Probable by Writ, or Oath. Yet there are casus
excepti, as whatsoever is done for any Party in his presence, is by all Lawyers
said to be ex mandato and inde oritur actio mandati, and non negotiorum
gestorum, so that the presence, or tollerance of a person not only having
Power, but being oblidged for Diligence, must much more infer his Power or
Warrant: And albeit he was not always present, yet the Deeds being public,
and near the place of his abode, it is equivalent:

The Lords inclined not to sustain the first member, both in respect of the Act
of Indemnity which bears in it self to be most amply extended, and in respect
that the Pursuer had no Right to the Personal Obligation, or Diligence: but as
to the second member, the Lords were more clear as to what was done in the
Defenders Fathers presence, but in respect it was more amply proponed. The
Lords, before answer, ordained Witnesses to be Examined by the Pursuer, whether
or not the Woods were publicly cutted, and whether or not Lambertoun was at
any time there present, and applied any thereof to his own use; and Witnesses
also for the Defender to be Examined, wheth^r a part was cut Clandestinly, and
other parts by persons having no relation to Lambertoun, and to whom he used
any Interruption.

Eodem die.
THis day there being a Query formerly given by the Lord Thesaurer, whether or
not there should be a Process of Forfaulture intented against these who rose
in the late Rebellion, before the Justice General, so that the Justice might
proceed against them, though absent, by putting the Dittay to the Trial of an
Assyze, and taking Witnesses thereupon; and upon Probation to proceed to the
Sentence of Forfaulture, or whether Probation in absence could not be admitted
but before the Parliament. There were Reasons given with the Query for the
affirmative, viz. That there was a special Statute for Forfaulture of Persons
after their death, in which case they were absent, multo magis when they were
living and contumacious. 2ly, Because by the Civil Law, albeit Probation,
especially in Criminals, cannot proceed unless the Defender be present. Yet
the chief Criminal Doctors, except the case of lose majesty, as Clarus
Farenatius and Bartolus. 3ly, That the Parliament proceeds to the Forfaulture
in absence, not by their Legislative Authority, but as a Judicature, and what
is just by them, it is just also by the Justice.

The Lords demured long to give their Answer upon their Constable ^erations, that by
Act of Parliament it is Statuted that Probation shall be only led in presence
of the Party, and that there had never been such a Practice for the Justices to
Forefault Absents, but only to declare them Fugitives; whereupon, being
denunced, their Escheat fell, and after their Liferent, and that it was not
proper to the Lords, especially in cases Criminal, to give advice in that which
might predetermine the Justice General, and the Justice Clerk, and Advocat who
had been desired to peruse the Books of Adjournal, and they reported that they
had not found a Forfaulture by the Justices in absence, but that they had found
that a Party accused for Treason in holding out a house against the King, was
declared Fugitive, but they did not find that it was proponed to the Justices
to put an Absent to an Inquest for Treason, and that it was repelled. The
matter being resumed, this day, the plurality resolved for the affirmative,
especially considering that of old Parliaments were frequent in Scotland, and
now are but rare; and that the Lords of Council and Session, were the Kings
Council to give his Majesty their advice in general Cases, what might Legally
be done, whether Civilly or Criminally

Andrew Ker, contra Children of Wolmet. Eodem Die.
UMquhil Wolmet having set a Tack of his Coal to his Children for their
Provision, and Named Andrew Ker of Moristoun and Tarsonce, Overseers; the said
Andrew Intrometted with the Coal for some years, the Children pursued him
before the late Judges for Payment of the Profit of the Coal. In which pursuit
he did allege that he could not Count, nor Pay to the Children the whole
Profit of the Coal, but so much thereof as was free over and above the
Back-tack Duty, due both out of Land and Coal, by virtue of the Wodset granted
to James Loch, who stood thereupon publicly Infeft, and to which Wodset Mr.
Mark Ker his own Son had Right, to whom he had paid the Back-tack Duty, and
obtained his Discharge; this being found relevant by the Judges, he produced
Holograph Discharges granted by his Son; the Judges found that these Holograph
Discharges did not prove Payment made debito tempore, and therefore decerned
without allowance of the Back-tack Duty: Andrew Ker pursues a Reduction of this
Decree as unjust, in so far as the Back-tack Duty was not allowed, as not
paid debito tempore, whereas the Back-tack being a real Burden upon the whole
Profits jure hypothecae; all Intrometters with the Profits were liable to the
Wodsetter; and so Andrew Ker as Intrometter was liable to the Wodsetter, and
was not obliged to employ that part of the Profit for Anualrent to the
Children, although he were obliged to employ their own means, and so might
lawfully have paid the Wodsetter, or kept it in his own hand for his own
relief, and the Wodsetters Discharge at any time was sufficient to free the
Children. It was answered that there was no iniquity committed, because Andrew
Ker could only be liable for the Back-tack Duty as Tutor and Overseer to the
Children, and even in that case he ought not to have paid without a distress,
otherwise he prejudged the Children of their relief against the Heir, who is
obliged to relieve them of the Back-tack Duty, and when ever he were distressed,
he would not he obliged to pay any Anualrent to the Wodsetter for the Back-tack
Duties which was the Wodsetters own Annualrent, so that till the time of the
distress the whole Annualrent should have been put out to the use of the
Children upon Annualrent, so that the Back-tack Duties can only be allowed from
this time, but not yearly as they were due, otherwise the Bairns lose the
benefit of the Anualrent the mean time, but there being no distress Andrew Ker
could never be liable to the Wodsetter. It was answered for the Pursuer, that
the Wodsetter being his own Son, there was no reason to put him to any Action,
especially seeing the Defenders cannot allege that in any such Action they had
a competent Defense, or that the Heir has any Defense whereupon to exclude
their relief: Neither is there any reason that the Children should have
Anualrent for the Back-tack Duty till it was paid, because it was not theirs,
nor might he safely put it out of his hands, albeit the Wodsetter had been a
stranger, and albeit he be now functus officio as Overseer, the Title that made
him liable to the Wodsetter, was as Intrometter which is a perpetual
obligation, the Wodsetter, as all Masters of the ground, having jus hypothecae
upon the Profit; for payment of Tack Duty for which all Intrometters are liable.

The Lords reduced that part of the Judges Decree, and found that Moristoun as
Intrometter was liable to the Wodsetter, and might retain so much of the
Profits in his hands as would pay the Back-tack Duty, and was not obliged to
give out for the Children upon Annualrent: But if de facto he had given it out
in his own name for Annualrent found that the Children should have the benefit
thereof.

Lady Milntoun contra Lord of Milntoun. Feb. 25. 1667.
THe Lady Milntoun having obtained Divorce against John Maxwel younger of
Calderwood her Husband, before the Commissars of Edinburgh, Sir John Whitefoord
of Milntoun, who had gotten a Disposition of her Liferent-right from her
Husband, pursues Reduction of the Decree of Divorce, on these Reasons that the
Decree was in absence, and that he compeared before the Commissars, and craved
to be admitted for his entrest, and was refused, and if he had been admitted he
would have objected against Paterson and Clerk the only two proving Witnesses,
that they were not habile Witnesses, being neither men of Fame nor Estate, and
Paterson by common Reputation of very evil Fame, and that they were not purged
of partial counsel, but suborned by the Lady, and had both received money to
bear Testimony, and promise of more, and were prompted by the Pursuer how to
Depone. 2ly, As they were not habile, so neither did they prove the Commission
of Adultery. The Lords caused produce the Process, and Testimonies before the
Commissars, and finding that the Witnesses were not purged of partial counsel,
they ordained them to be re-examined upon such Interrogators as were not
contrair to their former Depositions, whereupon they were twice re-examined.
Paterson in his first examination before the Commissars, Depones that he knew
John Maxwel and his Lady, and that he saw John Maxwel in naked Bed with
Margaret Davidson lying above her, and that he upbraided John Maxwel for it,
who answered he carried not alwise his Wife about with him. Clerk Deponed that
in another Month, at Edinburgh he saw John Maxwel in naked Bed with Margaret
Davidson, and that the said John was very displeased at his coming in to the
Room. The Goodman of that House being another Witness, deponed that John
Maxwel and another Man, and two Women lay altogether at one time in one Bed in
his House, and that he saw John Maxwel very familiar with one of the Women,
Embracing and Kissing her, and keeping her upon his knee, whereupon he put them
out of his House. Another Witness Deponed, that seeing Margaret Davidson with
Child, she acknowledged to him that it was to John Maxwel, and that it was
commonly reported that she called the Child Maxwel after John Maxwel. Paterson
and Clerk being re-examined by the Lords, did purge themselves of partial
counsel, but at the close of their Deposition, Paterson acknowledged that the
Lady threw down a Dollar and a half upon the Table, which he took up before his
first Testimony; and in his second Re-examination acknowledges that she
offered him five hundredth Merks, and to be a Bairn of the House. And both
acknowledged that she gave them Tokens, to make appear they knew Margaret
Davidson by her Countenance and Clothes, but both adhere to the truth of the
former Deposition, and being asked how they knew that Woman was Margaret
Davidson Deponed that they knew her not, nor saw her ever before nor after, but
that John Maxwels Servant, called Dougal Campbel being in the utter Room told
them several times that that Woman's name was Margaret Davidson.

The Lords having considered the Depositions first and last, ordained the
Parties to Debate, whether Corruption or Subornation of the Witnesses being
acknowledged by themselves in their Re-examination did invalidat their
Testimony, and whether their Testimonies not ag^eeing as in the same individual
Act, but as to diverse Facts, and diverse Times, and Places, were sufficient to
prove.

IT was alleged for the Lady, that whoever adduced Witnesses was obliged to
entertain them, and also denied that ever she gave Money, or promise; and that
it could not be instructed by the Re-examination of the Witnesses, whose
Post^rior Testimony could never invalidat the first, or else there were an open
door for prevarication and bribing of Witnesses to alter their Testimonies, but
the opinion of all Lawyers is, that a Witness may correct himself before his
Testimony be perfected, and subscrived, not after. But the only way was to
protest for Reprobators and by other Witnesses to prove the Corruption of the
witnesses, in which Case it behoved to be Proven, that there was an
undertaking, or at least endeavor, that they should bear witness to that
which they knew not to be true. As to the second point, it was alleged, that
albeit the common rule be that in matters Criminal, the witnesses must be
Contestes, both being witnesses at once to the same indevidual Act, yet it had
these limitations. 1. That though this hold in Criminals specifico, yet not in
crimine generico, which may be perpetrat by reiterable Acts when the pursuit is
not Capital, but either for Tortour, Canonical Purgations, or to any Civil
Effect, as in Adultery it is crimen genericum, by reiterable Acts, and
therefore being pursued civiliter to separat the Marriage, or to restore the
Jointure, it might be proven by two witnesses, though not concurring in the
same individual time and place, and therefore singular, albeit not single
witnesses. And the Lawyers do generally give the instance in Adultery, which is
a secret and transient Fact. And if such proof were not sufficient it would be
impossible to prove it; but if Adultery were pursued Criminally in these Cases
where it is Capital, Probation were required more exact, and agreeing in time
and place. Or if the Case were in Murder, which is not reiterable, witnesses
not agreeing in time and place could not prove, but in Adultery, haeresie
simonie, and such reiterable Crimes, witnesses to diverse Facts being in the
same Crime are sufficient; for which Clarus, Farnatius and Covaruvias were
cited. It was answered, to the first point that Subornation of Corruption of
witnesses is inferred by attempts, or endeavors to prompt the witnesses to
Depone that they know not, albeit they did it not, nor yet undertook it; and
that taking of any Money, not only inhabilitats the Witnesses, but makes the
Takers and Givers falseers, is the opinion of all Lawyers, neither may the
Witnesses take the Expenses of their Travel and Attendance, till it be Decerned
by a Judge; and as to the matter of Corruption the Witnesses own Oath is
sufficient, even by Re-examination, because the Adducer can never quarrel the
Oath of the Witnesses adduced by himself, by which he carries the Cause, but
much more where the Witnesses acknowledge, that at the first Examination they
were not Interrogate if they were free of partial Counsel, and if that be
omitted, or not understood be them, they may be Interrogat specially thereupon
again, as was done in this Case. To the second point, albeit more Witnesses
being singular, but not agreeing to the same Fact, or some times one VVitness
may be receiveable to infer Tortour, or that the several VVitnesses agree not
as to all the same points, and circumstances, as if the VVitnesses look through
a rift or hole, albeit they cannot see all at the same instant, yet all of them
see the same individual Fact, or if one VVitness Depone in the case of Murder,
that he saw the Party accused with a bended Pistol, or drawn Sword go in to a
Room, but going out saw no further, and another hear the Shot and the Strokes,
and saw the accused coming out alone, or with a bloody Sword, and a third saw
the slain lying Dead in a Room, and no more then these, although they agree not
as to the same points and minutes of Time, yet all agree in one Fact, but the
VVitnesses not agreeing to one Fact, are all single VVitnesses, and are not
Contestes, and so cannot be Confronted, Confirmed, or Redargued each by other,
which is the great ground of Faithfulness, and Trust of Testimonies; but if one
person alone can bear VVitness where he knows none can gainsay him, it would
prompt him to Perjury, or Mischief, and here the two VVitnesses are only ex
auditu, seeing neither of them knew Margaret Davidson but only by the Report of
Dougal, so that both did not positively know that the Person with whom they
found John Maxwel was not his Lady, seeing Clerk neither knew the Lady nor
Margaret Davidson. It was answered for the Lady, that whatever may infer
Subornation or Corruption, it cannot be proven by the Testimonies, to derogate
their former Depositions, unless it were proven by others upon Reprobators, and
as to the other point in facto reiterabili, to a Civil effect, VVitnesses
though not agreeing in the same Fact, yet agreeing in diverse Facts of the same
Crime were sufficient.

The Lords found that Subornation or Corruption of the Witnesses could be
instructed by their own Posterior Testimony, and found the Adultery
sufficiently proven by the Testimony of the Witnesses, and Assoilzied from the
Reduction, and found the Letters orderly proceeded, used against Milntoun for
Removing. But Milntoun gave in a new Bill, offering him to prove by other
Witnesses, the Subornation and Corruption of the Witnesses in the Divorce,
being in effect a Reason of Reprobator, which is very competent in his
Reduction, and yet the Lords refused the same in hoc statu Processus, not being
Libelled or Insisted in before, but superceeded Execution in the Removing, and
as to the House and Mains Possessed be Milntoun till Martimass, that in the mean
time he might Insist in his Reprobators, as he would be Served.

Countess of Carnwath contra Earl of Carnwath, February 22. 1667.
THe Countess of Carnwath Insists in her Action of Poinding the ground. It was
alleged for the Defender, that the Countess Seasing was null, not being
Registrate conform to the Act of Parliament; It was answered, that nullity
cannot be proponed, either be the Granter of the Infeftment, or any
Representing him, or by any person who is obliged to acknowledge the
Infeftments; but the Earl is such a Person, that albeit he Brooks by a
Disposition from his Father, yet his Infeftment contains this Express
Provision, that his Father at any time during his Life may Dispone the Lands,
or any Part thereof, and grant Infeftments, Tacks, or Annualrents thereof; so
that this being unquestionably an Infeftment, he cannot quarrel the same upon
the not Registration, but if his Father had granted an Obliegment to Infeft,
the Defender could not have opposed the same, much more the Infeftment being
Expede. It was answered, that the Provision did not contain an Obligation upon
the Defender to Dispone, Ratify, or do any Deed, but left only a Power to his
Father to Burden the Lands, which can only be understood, being done legitimo
modo, and therefore the Infeftment wanting the solemnity of Registration is in
the same Case, as if there were no Infeftment, and so is null.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found the Seasine valide, as to the
Defender, in respect of the foresaid Provision in his Infeftment.

Earl of Southesk contra Lady Earls-hall, Eodem die.
THe Earl of Southesk being Infeft in certain Lands upon the Water of Eden, and
the Salmond Fishing, peruse Declarator that Earls-hall has no Right thereto.
The Pursuer produces an Infeftment, in Anno 1558. in which after the Land is
Disponed, there follows a Clause, una cum Salmonum in piscationibus in aqua de
Eden, with a novo damus; it was alleged for the Defender, that he has the
^like Declarator against the Pursuer, which he repeats by way of Defense, and
produces an infeftment of the same year of God, bearing in the dispositive
Clause, una cum Privilegio piscandi in aqua de Eden solito and consuet, and
alleadges that by virtue thereof, he has good Right to Fish in the Water, and
that he had been in Immemorial Possession by virtue thereof. It was answered,
First, That this Clause cannot carry Salmond Fishing, which is inter Regalia,
and must be specially Disponed. 2ly. The Defenders Right, though in the same
year of God, is yet some Months Posterior to the Pursuers, and as to the
Defenders Immemorial Possession, it cannot consist nor give Prescription,
without a sufficient Title by Infeftment, and it has been frequently
Interrupted by the Pursuer. It was answered by the Defender, that he and the
Pursuer, and the Lord of Reiris having three Thirds of one Barony, all lying
Rin-ridge, the Kings granting the Pursuer his Third cum Salmonum piscationibus,
added to the Lands as a Pendicle thereof, it cannot be understood exclusive, of
the other two Third Parts of the same Barony; likeas Reiris has the same
Clause in his Infeftment: and albeit Earls-halls Clause be not so express, yet
it not being the common Clause in the Tenendas cum piscationibus, but in the
Dispositive Clause of this special Tenor, it must needs comprehend Salmond
Fishing, or otherwise it would have no Effect, verba autem interpretanda sunt
cum effectu, and albeit the Clause were dubious, yet it has been in long
possession, Immemorial, which sufficiently Instructs the Accustomed Fishing to
have been before the same. 2ly, As to the Anteriority of the Pursuers
Infeftment, the Defenders offers to prove that his Predecessor was Infeft
before him, with this Clause that is in his own Infeftment produced. 3ly,
Albeit the Defenders Right were Posterior, yet it is sufficient to give him a
Joint Right to the Salmond Fishing, with the Pursuer, because he offers him to
prove that he has forty years peaceably Possessed the Salmond Fishing as the
Pursuer has, when ever they were in the River.

The Lords found that the Clause in the Defenders Infeftment, albeit it had
been prior to the Pursuers, could not give Right to the Salmond Fishing in
prejudice of the Pursuers express Infeftment of Salmond Fishing, unless the
Defenders Infeftment had been clede with Immemorial, and forty years peaceable
Possession, which being so alleged by the Defender, the Pursuer offered to
prove Interruption, and therefore a Term was granted to either Party to prove.

Mr. John Elies contra Wishart and Keith, Eodem die.
MAster John Elies having Inhibit Elizabeth Keith his Debtor, she did
thereafter acquire a VVodset of certain Lands within the Shire, where the
Inhibition was published, and thereafter upon payment of part of the Sums, the
VVodset Right was Renunced pro tanto, and the rest being Consigned, there is
now a Process of Declarator of Redemption, wherein Mr. John Elies Compears, and
produces a Declarator at his Instance for declaring the Sums of the VVodset to
belong to him, and alleadges no Declarator of Redemption till the whole Sums
contained in the VVodset Consigned be given up to him, without respect of the
payment or Renunciation of a part, because it being done after his Inhibition,
it was null, and so is craved to be declared by his Declarator; It was
answered; First, That Inhibitions can reach no further then to the Lands the
Person Inhibit had the time of the Inhibition, but not unto Lands he should
happen to acquire after the Inhibition, because the Inhibition bearing, that
the person Inhibit should not Sell or Alienat to the prejudice of the User of
the Inhibition, albeit she should Sell what thereafter he acquired, the User of
the Inhibition were in no other case, then when the same was published, the
Land being both gotten and gone thereafter; and if that were the effect of
Inhibitions, every provident person would Publish and Registrat them in all the
shires of the Kingdom, because they can only reach Lands lying in the shire
where they are Registrated, which was never done, neither was it ever Decided,
that Inhibitions reached Lands acquired thereafter. 2ly, Inhibitions can never
hinder persons, having Right of Reversion, to pay the Sums, and the Wodsetter
to Renunce, because Inhibitions only Restrain, Debar, and Inhibit to Sell, etc.
But does not hinder him to pay his Debt; or upon payment of the Wodset Sums, to
Discharge the Sums, and Renunce the Lands, these being Deeds necessar, to which
he might be compelled, and if this hold, no man might saflie pay an Heretable
Band, having Infeftment of Annualrent, without searching the Registes, which
the most cautious man never did, and for this alleged the express Opinion of
Craig, that Inhibitions hinder not Discharges of Heretable Sums, or
Renunciations of VVodsets. It was answered, that Inhibitions are personal
Prohibitions, Restraining the Person Inhibit, and the Leiges to Alienat, Buy,
or Sell any Lands in prejudice of the User of the Inhibition, and until he be
satisfied of the Ground thereof. Which Prohibition respects the Person
Inhibit directly, and the Lands; but indirectly as they belong to him, so that
there is no difference whether they belonged to him before or after; for hoc
ipso that they are his, they fall under the restraint: and the alienation
thereof, is to the prejudice of the User of the Inhibition, because if they
were not Sold, they might Appryze the same, so that, albeit he be not in worse
case then he was the time of the Inhibition, yet he is in worse case then he
would be, if the Land had not been sold: And albeit upon uncertainty men will
not Registrat Inhibitions through all the Kingdom, that infers not but they
might, and that they would be effectual to Lands thereafter acquired in these
shires, neither is there any ground to except the Renuncing of Wodsets, which
are Alienations of the Wodset Lands, but the Redeemer, before he declare, or
deliver the Money, and take Renunciation, he ought to search the Registers, and
to call these persons who have used Inhibitions for their Interests.

The Lords found that Inhibitions reached to Lands acquired after the
Inhibition, but were not clear that Inhibition hindered Renunciations of
Wodsets, but superceeded to give answer to that Point till the first of June.

Lord of Dury contra Anna Gibson, Feb. 28. 1667.
UMquhil Sir Alexander Gibson of Dury having given Bond to his three Daughters,
for twenty thousand Merks of portion a Piece, and in case of Decease of any of
them, her Portion to belong to his Heir-male; but upon the Margent there is
added, that the Portion of the Deceasing should accresce to the Survivers. This
Dury, Brother and Heir-male, pursues Reduction, and Improbation of this Bond,
in so far as concerns the Marginal addition, upon these grounds, that the
samine was not Subscribed before the Witnesses insert in the Bond, nor insert
at that time: And that it is written by another Hand, then his that wrote the
body of the Bond. And that it is contrair to the substitution of the body of
the Bond. And that albeit the writer of the body be insert in the Bond, and
that the Bond bears, that the Date and Witnesses are insert by Dury himself,
yet it does not bear that he insert the Marginal addition, which is of greater
importance. It was answered, that Bonds being Subscribed before Witness^s their
Testimony reaches not only to the Subscription on the foot, but to the
Subscription of joining the Sheets, and whole Marginal additions, which are as
valide as any part of the body, unless it were positively proven by the
Witnesses that they remember that there was no addition on the Margent when
they Subscribed; and albeit the Marginal addition be of another Hand, it is
offered to be proven that it is the Handwriting of Dury himself, who insert
the Date and Witnesses, which is more Solemn then any other writer, especially
seeing the writer was not present, or witness, but only drew the draught of the
Bond; and albeit he mentions not the inserting of the Marginal addition, but
only the inserting of Date and VVitnesses that has been, because of the ordinar
Style of Bonds, whereof the Date and VVitnesses are filled in by another Hand,
not being ordinar for these to write Marginal additions; and as for the
importance, or contrariety of the Margent to the Body, that is most ordinar,
especially where the body is but a draught drawn by another Hand, who has
erred in his intention in the Substitution; it was answered for the Pursuer,
that albeit the Marginal addition should be proven to be Holograph, yet unless
it were proven to have been truly written, and subscribed at the Date of the
Bond. It cannot prove that it is of the same Date, or of any Date before the
Defunct was on Deathbed, and so it is null, and cannot prejudge the Pursuer as
Heir, especially seeing the Defunct having then no Sons, might probably adject
this in favors of his Daughters, contrair his former Intention, which if it
should take effect, would ruin the Heir-male.

The Lords having taken the Deposition of the Witnesses insert, and both
Deponing that they did not remember whether the Marginal addition was upon the
Bond when it was Subscribed or no, and that it did appear by inspection, that
the Marginal addition was by another Hand then that that wrote the body, and
that it was not mentioned at the conclusion, where the Defunct expressed, that he
himself was Filler up of the Date and Witnesses, and nothing was adduced to
astruct that it was of a true Date before his taking Bed. Upon all these
considerations jointly, the Lords found that the Marginal addition was not of
the Date of the Bond, and that having no Date of it self, it was not instructed
to have been done before the Defunct was on Deathbed, and so was null as to
the Heir: but the Lords did not find that these alleadgeances severally could
have derogat to the Marginal addition, but only that all jointly was
sufficient, the matter being also accorded amongst the Parties.

Antrobus contra William Anderson Provost of Glasgow, June, 13. 1667.
WIlliam Antrobus having Caption against John Herbertson in Glasgow, the
Messenger having therewith taken Herbertson in his own House, and having
required William Anderson present Provost to Concur and put him in Prison, and
he refusing, pursues now the Provost for payment of the Debt. The Defender
alleged, first, that the Lybel was not relevant, because it did not subsume
that the Rebel was showen to the Defender; 2ly, The Defender was required at an
unlawful time, being betwixt eleven and twelve at night; 3ly, The Defender
offered the concourse of the Town Officers; 4ly, The Army being come to Glasgow
that night, the Provost was taken up at the time he was required, with the
ordering of their Quarters, which being a public Service of greater
Importance: he offering of the Officers was sufficient; 5ly, This subsidiary
Action being but for the Pursuers damnage, he can pretend none, because the
Rebel was Bankrupt, and insolvent long before, and he was Incarcerat within
some few days, where he remained a long time, during which, the Pursuer might
have Arrested him; and the Defender yet offers to put him in Prison in as good
case as he then was. The Pursuer answered that his Lybel was most Relevant,
because the Letters being directed to Provost and Bailies of Burghs; and if
they be required, albeit the Rebel be not in their sight, they must go with the
User thereof, to any place within their Jurisdiction, which they must do in
their own persons, and it will not be sufficient to send their Officers, and as
to the time of requiring, any time that men do use to go about their Affairs is
sufficient, and the Defender was required between seven and eight at night, and
albeit it had been later, that the Defender might be excusable not to come out
of his own House to search, yet here he was in the same house with the Rebel,
and in the next Room to him, and heard the noise of these that deforced the
Messenger, which was done by the Towns Officers; neither can any pretense of
Ordering of Quarters, stop the Execution of the Kings Letters, which might have
been done with so little diversion, and the Quarters might have been Ordered by
the Baillies.

The Lords found the Libel Relevant, but found the Defenses jointly also
Relevant, viz. The Ordering of the Quarters of the Army, the Ordering of the
Officers, and the offer now to put the Rebel in Prison, in as good case, and
the time of night.

Harner contra Haitly, Eodem die.
HArner pursues Haitly as representing her Husband, for proving the Tenor of
her Contract of Marriage, who alleged no Process because there was no
Adminicle produced in write, which was most necessar in any Case, but
especially in this Case, where the Tenor of the Contract was extraordinar,
Constituting the one half of the Fee of the Husbands Estate to the Wifes Heirs,
failzing the Heirs of the Marriage. The Pursuer answered, that albeit
Adminicles in Writ were ordinarily required, especially in Writs that use to be
taken away by Redelivery, or Cancelling; as Bonds, etc. Yet the intent of
Adminicles, is to render it probable that such a Writ was, and thereby to give
ground to admit Witnesses to prove, rei gestae veritatem: But here there was as
strong grounds of probability, there being a Marriage of a Landed Man, and the
Copy of the Contract taken of the Writer thereof, John Nicol, his Style Book,
he and his Servants being Witnesses, who are yet alive, and the Tenor offered
to be proven by them; whereas other Tenors use to be proven by Witnesses that
saw the Writ though they were not the Witnesses insert. Likeas the Husband
having taken the Right of an Infeftment, for a sum, payable to him and his
Wife, and the Heirs betwixt them; which failzing, to his Heirs, he took a
Ratification thereof, from the Pursuer which could have no intent, if in case
of failzie of Heirs of the Marriage, the half had not been appointed to return
to her Heirs. Likeas, it is offered to be proven by Witnesses, that the Husband
acknowledged that he had the Contract in custody from his Wife. The Defender
answered, that our Law had rejected Probation by Witnesses, in matters of
Importance, and therefore Tenors are only Sustained, when their Probation is
partly by Writ, and partly by Witnesses, neither is any other probability
sufficient: and it is offered to be proven, that the Husband Infeft his Wife in
his Houses, of a considerable value, without any mention of a Contract of
Marriage.

The Lords refused to sustain the Libel without Adminicles in Writ, and
assoilz^ed, albeit it was also offered to be proven, that the Husbands whole
means came by the Wife.

Patrick Wat contra William Halyburton. June 14. 1667.
PAtrick Wat as Assigney by Adam Wat his Father, to a Disposition granted by
umquhil Halyburton to him, pursues William Halyburton, as Representing him, to
fulfill that part of the Disposition, obliging him to procure the Pursuers
Father Infeft; and for that effect, that the Defender should Infeft himself,
and grant Procuratory of Resignation, for Infefting the pursuer. It was
alleged for the Defender, that he was not obliged to Infeft the Pursuer,
because it was his Fathers fault he was not Infeft, seeing he had received
Procuratory of Resignation, and Precept of Seasine, with which he might have
Infeft himself; and though the Granter, and he the Receiver, lived for twelve
or fifteen years thereafter, he was negligent. 2ly, Though the Defender were
obliged to Enter, and Denude himself; yet it must be the Pursuer finding
Caution to warrant and relieve him of the hazard of the Ward and Marriage,
because the Lands in question being Ward through the Pursuers Authors fault,
the Defenders Marriage will fall. 3ly, The Defenders Fathers Name was only
borrowed by Hallyburton of Egles-cairn, who acquired the Rights blank; and
filled up the Defenders Fathers Name therein, and moved him to Dispone.

The Lords Repelled these Defenses, but Reserved to the Defender to pursue
Damnage and interest, for any hazard occurred by Adam Wats fault, as being more
proper against his Heir, than against the Pursuer his second Son.

Mr. Heugh Gray contra Forbes Minister of Innerkeithing, and Tennents of
Nether-Horseburgh. June 15. 1667.
THe Tennents of Nether-horseburgh having Suspended these two Ministers upon
double Poynding, they alleged they had made payment, bona fide, of their
Rents conform to their Tacks. It was answered, that they were called to Mr.
Heugh Grays Decree in anno 1656. and Charged thereupon thereafter the same
year, which did put them in mala fide. It was answered, that there having
nothing followed upon the Charge, but the Charger being silent for fifteen
years, the Tennents favore rusticitatis, cannot be thought to continue in mala
fide all that time, to infer double payment, else it might continue for forty
years. It was answered once in mala fide, ay in mala fide, and that their
Tennents did still remember and suspect the Pursuers Right appears because they
took Discharges, bearing warrandice of the same.

The Lords ordained the Defenders to produce their Discharges, that the
warrandice might appear, being loath to decern the Tennents in double payment,
if the Charge could have access to the other Minister, or his Representatives.

It was alleged for the present Incumbent of Innerkeithing, that in a former
double Poynding, raised by the Tennents, he was preferred to the Cropped 1665.
and in time coming. It was answered, that the said Decree was in absence of
Mr. Heugh Gray; and that it was null without Probation, for there was nothing
produced for the Minister of Innerkeithing, but his Presentation and Collation,
which were but merely general, and nothing produced to Instruct, that their
Teinds were of his Paroch, or within his Benefice. It was answered, that he was
secured by the Act of Parliament anent Decreets of double Poynding.

The Lords found that what the Minister of Innerkeithing, had uplifted, by
virtue of that preference, the Act of Parliament would secure him thereanent,
but found he had no Right as to the future.

Iohnstoun contra Cuninghame. June 19. 1667.
JAmes Iohnstoun as Assigney by William Iohnstoun, to a Bond granted by James
Cuninghame, Charges him thereon: he Suspends upon this Reason, that the Bond
bears the sum borrowed from William Iohnstoun and his Spouse, and payable to
them, the longest liver of them two, and their Heirs, there being no Children
betwixt them, the one half must belong to the Heirs of the Wife, to whom the
Suspender is Curator, and which he ought to retain for their use: and albeit in
such Clauses in Rights of Land, or Heretage, potior est conditio masculi: yet
it is not so in Rights Moveable, and this Bond is moveable, being after the Act
of Parliament 1641. which was so found in a Practique produced, observed by
Dury, where the Wife by her Contract of Marriage, Disponing her Goods and Debts
to her Husband, her self; and their Heirs, the same was found to divide betwixt
the Husbands and the Wifes Heirs. It was answered, that here the Bond bore
Annualrent, and so was Heretable, quod fiscum and relictam and there being
nothing to evidence that the sum was the Wifes own Means, the same is presumed
to be the Husbands: and the taking of a Bond of this Tenor, if it did import to
give her the half, is a Donation by a Husband to his Wife Revockable, and now
Revocked.

The Lords found that the Wifes Heirs had no interest in the Sum.

John Watson contra Fevers of Dunkennan June 21. 1667.
JOhn Watson being Superior of a number of Tenements and Roads about the Town
of Kirkaldie, pursues a Declarator against the Vailals, to hear and see it
found and declared, that he might Rive and Plough the Muire of Dunkennan,
leaving as much of the Muire as would be sufficient, and convenient for the use
of the Vassals^ their Roads and Tenements, for Fail and Devot, Clay and Stone,
to the use foresaid. It was alleged for the Feuars, that they had raised a
Declarator of the Right of their Servitude, through the bounds of the Muire,
which they repeated by way of Defense, and alleged that wherever a Servitude
was Constitute it affected the praedium serviens wholly, and every part
thereof, capable of the Servitude, and could not be restricted without the
consent of the Parties, having Right of the Servitude, as if any person had
Right of Pasturage, albeit limited to so many Goods, or to the Goods of such
Land, which is the praedium dominans, beyond which it could not be reached; a
Declarator of this Nature would never be sustained, to astrict him to a portion
of the Muire, that would be sufficient for the Goods of that Town, or of that
number; or if he were Infeft with the liberty of Feuel, though there were two
M^^sses, that could not be exhausted within the bounds he could not be
restricted to the one, so here the Vassals being Infeft with the privilege of
Fail; in this Muire, they may take it out of any place of the Muire they
please, and can be restricted to no particular place. It was answered that this
Servitude being limited to the use of the Roads, and Houses, could not be
thought to be so Constitute, as to make useless the whole Property of the
Muire, the Pasturage whereof is worth nothing, and the only use is, Lyming and
Laboring, that it was hurtful to the common utility, and improvement of Land,
so to extend such a Servitude, and that if there were a Servitude of a way
through the Constituents Ground, it would not import a Liberty to make as many
ways as could be made through the Ground: or to change the way at the Dominants
pleasure. It was answered, that the nature of the Servitude of a way or
passage, is ordinarily limited by Bounds, and is always understood to be one
way, as is most convenient for the Dominant, which having chosen, he cannot
thereafter change; but it is not so in the Servitudes of Feuel, Fail, or Devot;
neither can the consideration of public Utility, or that the Defenders have no
detriment warrant, the Lords to take from him his Right, or to limit it without
his Consent, which were only proper for a Parliament, having not only the
Judicative, but also the Legislative Authority, and the Rights and Securities
of Parties, should not be liable to conjecture, or arbitriment upon the
supposition of convenience, but should be fully enjoyed according to Law.

The Lords found that this Servitude might be astricted to a part of the Muire,
which might be beyond all question sufficient for the use, and with this
quality, in case it failzied, they might return to that which was Labored,
which behoved to be l^ft lie, as far as would be sufficient.

Hay of Strowy contra Fevers. June 22. 1667.
HAy of Strowy being Infeft in the Miln of Strowy, and having lately built a
Walk-miln, and made a new Dam-head therefore, over that Burn, which is the
March betwixt him and the Fevers, thereupon the Fevers demolished the Miln and
the Dam. He now pursues the Fevers to hear and see it found and declared, that
he has Right to enjoy the Walk-miln and Dam, and that they did wrong at their
own hand, to demolish the same. It was alleged for the Fevers, and the Lord
or Ketr, their Superior, Absolvitor, because the building of this Miln, being
novum ^pus, they might lawfully stop the same, and might demolish the Dam, the
end thereof being fixed upon their Ground, without their consent. The Pursuer
answered; First Albeit the Defenders might have impeded while the work was
doing, yet they^ could not after the Walk-miln was a going Miln, demolish the
Miln, or Dam thereof, via facti, albeit they might have used civil
Interruption, and stopped it, via jur^, because its a known and common custom,
that a going Miln cannot be stopped summarly, being an Instrument of Service for
common good. 2ly, The Defenders could have no detriment by putting over the
Dam, because it was a Precipice at their side, to which the Dam was jo^^n^d, so
that they had no detriment, either as to the Inundation of their Ground, or
Watering. The Defenders answered, that cui libet licet uti re^ua ad libitum and
they were not obliged to Dispute, whether they had Damnage or not, but might
cast down the Dam built on their Ground, unless their consent had been
obtained; and that there is no Law nor Decision for such a privilege of Milns,
neither was it ever extended to Walk-milns.

The Lords found the Defenders might hinder the Building of a Dam^ upon their
Ground, without necessity, to allege detriment; but they found if the
Walk-miln was a going Miln forty eight hours^ that the Defenders could not
brevi manu, without the Authority of a Judge demolish the Dam or Miln.

Mr. David Deuar contra Paterson. June 26. 1667.
MR. David Deuar pursues a Transferrence of a Count and Reckoning which
formerly was depending betwixt him and umquhil Henry Paterson, and craves it
may be Transferred against Henry the Heir, and proceed where it left. It was
alleged for the Defender, absolvitor, because the Citation was given before
year and day, after the Defuncts death, contrary to the Defenders privilege of
his annus delibera^di, by which he has inducias legales, and cannot be forced
to own or repudiat the Heretage. The Pursuer answered; First, That annus
deliberandi is only competent, where the appearand Heir is Charged to enter
Heir, and so must either Enter or Renunce^ and so has no place in Reductions,
or Actions Declaratory, or real Actions, which may proceed against the
appearand Heir, without a Charge. The Defender answered, that albeit the annus
deliberandi, be most ordinary in such Cases, yet it is not limited thereto, but
must take place also in all Cases, where the reason of the Law holds, viz.
where the Defender must be either absent, and suffer Sentence; or if he
compear, must found himself upon the Defuncts Right, and so behave himself as
Heir, as in this case, the Defender cannot allege Articles of Deduction or
Discharge, but upon the Defuncts Right; for finding out of which Right, the Law
gives him a year to inquire, and use Exhibitions, ad deliberandum ne incidat
in damnosam haereditatem; and therefore during that year, he cannot be pressed
contestare litem.

The Lords sustained the Defense.

It was further alleged by the Pursuer, that now the annus deliberandi was
past. It was Duplyed for the Defender, that albeit it was now past, the
Citation was used within the year, so that that Citation cannot be sustained.

The Lords refused to sustain the Citation, and found no Process till a new
Citation; but here the day of compearance filled in the S^mmons, was also
within the year, which if it had been after the year, us like the Summons would
have been sustained, especially, seeing the Decision of this case extending the
year of Deliberation, to Declaratorie Actions in Custom had not occurred, nor
been decided.

Minister of Dalrymple contra Earl of Cassils. June 27. 1667.
THe Minister of Dalrymple having Charged the Earl of Cassils for his Stipend,
he Suspends on this Reason, that he offered payment of the Bolls in the
Ministers Decree, conform to Linlithgow Measure, which was the common Measure
of Scotland, by the Act of Parliament, and is by Act of Parliament, the measure
of Ministers Stipends. It was answered, that the Ministers Decree of Locality,
was indefinit, and mentioned no measure, the meaning thereof was sufficiently
cleared, because it was offered to be proven by the Earls Oath, that he paid
ever since the Decree of Locality, being 15 years, conform to the measure of
Air, and that he knew it was the common Custom of that Country, to pay all
Ministers with that measure. The Suspender answered, that his use of payment,
either by mistake; or benevolence of more then what he was due, could not
oblige him to the future, especially where the Minister did not found upon his
decennalis and triennalis possessio; but upon a Decree of Locality, wherein,
though the measure be indefinit, it cannot be understood to be any other
measure, then the common measure of Scotland, seeing the Act of Parliament
anent Ministers Provisions, bears expressly, that they shall have eight Chalders
of Victual, Linlithgow measure.

The Lords having considered the Decree of Locality, and that it did not
extend to eight Chalders of Victual, but to three Chalders of Victual, and 400
pounds, which is the rate of four Chalders of Victual, at 100 pounds the
Chalder, as is ordinarily Rated by the Commission in that place of the Country,
they found the use of payment and common Custom of the Country, sufficient to
declare it to be the measure of Air, seeing by that measure, it would not come
up to eight Chalders of Victual.

Mr. James Douglas contra William Leisk, June 28. 1667.
MR. James Douglas, as Donatar to the Liferent Escheat of William Leisk,
pursues a special Declarator, against the Tennents, for Mails and Duties. It
was alleged for William Leisk, that the Lands in question were Appryzed from
William Leisk the Rebel, and the Superior granter of this Gift, Charged to
Infeft the Appryzer long before the Rebellion; to which appryzing William Leisk
has Right, during his Life, so that the Charge being equivalent to an
Infeftment as to the time, and to the anteriority of the Infeftment, and by
drawing it back to the Charge, does prefer the Appryzer from the time of the
Charge: It was alleged for the Donatar, that albeit a Charge against the
Superior, be equivalent to an Infeftment in some cases: Yet in other things it
is not equivalent, as it is not a Right sufficient for the Appryzer to Remove
Tennents; and therefore the Vassal is not denuded thereby, otherwise the
Superior could have no Casuality after such a Charge, because the Appryzer not
being Infeft, his Liferent could not fall. It was answered for the Defender,
that albeit this consequence should follow, it is the Superiors own fault,
that did not receive the Appryzer. It was answered, non constat, it was his
fault, for he might have just reason to Suspend; and albeit it were his fault,
the Law has not determined this to be his Penalty, to lose his Casualities.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found the charge on the Appryzing did not
denude the former Vassal, but his Liferent fell, and affected the Ground.

Sir Alexander Hume contra Creditors of Kello. Eodem die.
SIr Alexander Hume being Donator to the Forefaulture of John Hume of Kello,
did obtain a Warrant for Retouring the said John five years in Possession of
certain Lands, before the Forefaulture, but the Inquest served Negative^ and
now he pursues a Reduction of the Retour, on this Reason, that it is contrary
the Testimonies of the Witnesses adduced. It was alleged no Process, because
the Reduction of Retours is only competent by a Summons of Error, in Latin,
under the quarter Seal. It was answered, that is only in the Case where the
Assizers are insisted against for their Error, and the constant Custom of the
Lords has been to sustain a Summons of Reduction before themselves of this
method.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and refused Process, albeit it was known to
them, that the Custom has been contrary of a long time before.

Sir John St. clair contra John Cowper. July 2. 1667.
UMquhil Mr. John Rae having two sisters, and Heirs portioners, the one married
to Robert St clair, and the other to umquhil Alexander Cowper, the said
Alexander and his Spouse, as Heir portioner, assigns to Robert St. clair, a
number of her Brothers Bands: And likewise, as Heir, assigns him to the Maills
and Duties of a Tenement of Mr. John's for such Terms, and in time coming. Sir
John St. clair, having appryzed Robert St. clairs Right, pursues John Cowper as
Representing his Father, to hear it declared, that this perpetual assignation
to the Mails and Duties, did import an absolute Disposition of the Lands, and
did carry in consequence an obligment, and all things to make the Disposition
effectual, and so to renew it into a legal Form, containing a Procuratory and
Precept. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because his Father had granted no
Disposition, but only an Assignation, and so the Defender could be obliged to
do no further. The Pursuer answered, that this assignation behoved to be
understood, cum effectu, and to be done to denude the Granter, and to settle
the Right of the Duties in the Purchaser, and therefore, whosoever gives the
Right gives all necessaries in his power to accomplish it, and the Informality
of a Clerk, ought not to Evacuat the Pursuers Right.

The Lords sustained the Process, and found this Right to import a perpetual
Disposition.

George Allan contra Fairie. Eodem die.
GEorge Allan pursues Reduction of a Disposition, granted by him to Fairie,
upon the Reason of Circumvention, in so far as the Disposition, though it was
conceived absolute; Yet it was expressly Communed, that it should contain a
Reversion, and was Read as containing a Reversion at the Subscribing thereof,
which was offered to be proven by the Writer and VVitnesses insert. The
Defender answered, that the Reason was only probable Scripto vel juramento, and
so solemn a Writ, could not be taken away by Witnesses. The Pursuer answered,
that the Writer and Witnesses insert, were most competent to prove a Point in
facto, viz. the fraudulent Reading of that which was not contained; and there
is here also produced an antecedent Adminicle in Writ, to grant a Right
Redeemable.

The Lords before answer, ordained the Writer and Witnesses insert, to be
examined anent the Terms of the Treaty, and whether the Disposition was Read at
the Subscrybing, as an absolute or redeemable Disposition.

William Litster contra Aitoun and Sleich^ Eodem die.
WIlliam Litster having Arrested his Debitors Rent on the fifth of Aprile 1665
he thereupon obtained Decree for making forthcoming in July 1666. which being
Suspended; conpearance is made for Sleich, who had Right to several Appryzings
of the Lands, which were deduced before the Terms of payment of the Rent, and
craved preference to the Arrester^ because his Arrestment was before the Term,
and the time of the Arrestment, there was nothing due, and also before the Term
the Debtor was denuded by an Appryzing, whereupon Infeftment followed, in
December. thereafter, and must be drawn back, ad suam ^ausam, to the Appryzing.
The Arrester answered, that his Arrestment was valid, being laid on c^rrente
termino, for the next ensuing Term, at least as has been often times decided by
the Lords, and is now their constant practice: And as for the Appryzing before
Infeftment, albeit it will carry the Mails and Duties, yet it is an incomplete
Right, and has only the effect of a Judicial Assignation or Disposition, so
that the Competition being betwixt an Assigney, viz. an Appryzer and the
Arrester, the Arrestment being prior, is preferable to any Assignation: Neither
can the Infeftment on the Appryzing, after the Term, give any Right to the
Rent, prior to the Infeftment, but the Right thereto is by the Appryzing, which
is but an naked Assignation.

The Lords preferred the Arrester.

Lord Blantyre contra Wakinshaw. Eodem die.
THe Lord Blantire pursues a Reduction of a Bond, as being granted in his
Minority. It was alleged for Wakinshaw, assigney to the Bond, absolvitor,
because there was no Process intented against him intra annos utiles, till the
Pursuer was past twenty five years. It was answered, that the Defenders Cedent
was Cited, to whom the Bond was granted, and this Defenders Right will fall in
consequence, and there was no necessity to Cite him in the same way, that the
Service of an heir may be reduced, without Calling of his Creditors, or these
that are Infeft by him.

The Defender answered that his Assignation was Intimat before the Citation
against his Cedent, which cannot be miskenned by the Pursuer, to whom the
Intimation was made, after which the Cedent had no Right, and any Citation
against him was of no moment, neither is the Case alike to the Reduction of a
Retour, wherein the Reducer does neither know nor is obliged to know the
Creditors Rights.

The Lords found that the Assigney, after the Intimation, behoved to be Cited
intra annos utiles; but they sustained Improvation against the Citation, made
against the Assigney by way of Defense. In this case it was not urged, whether
the Intimation was personal to the Pursuer, or only at his dwelling House? Or
whether it was Recent before the Citation; for if it were not Personal, or
Recent, it were hard to oblige the Pursuer to remember so transcient an Act, as
an Intimation.

It was further alleged by the Defender, that there was no Lesion; because he
offered him to prove, that the sum was delivered to the Minors Curators, at
least to the Minor and his Curators jointly, who being persons abundantly
solvendo, and very provident, the Minor could have no Lesion, seeing they were
comptable. It was answered non Relevat, unless it were alleged positive, that
the sum were utiliser impensum, for the Minors profit; for the Minor has his
option, either to pursue the Curators, as intrometting, or to Reduce hi^
Obligation, and the Curators not being in this Process, no Probation of the
delivery of Money to them will bind them, but there were necessity, that they
were both Cited, and it instructed by Writ.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, but severals inclined not to sustain
Process, till the Cura^ors were first Discust: And whether the Minor was
laesed or not.

Mr. Roger Hogg, and other Creditors of Wauchtoun contra Countess of Hume. July
3. 1667.
IN an Incident pursued by the Creditors of Wauchtoun, against the Countess of
Hume. It was alleged for the Countess, that the Incident as to several of the
Creditors, could not be sustained; and likewise could not be sustained against
several of the Havers; because as to these, the Incident was without Warrant,
their Names not being contained in the Bill at the Signet. It was answered, the
Bill contained several Names and a blank for others, which is a sufficient
Warrant for the Raisers of the Incident, to insert whom they please. It was
answered, that Incidents being odious, strict form should be observed, in
relation to them, so that a new Pursuer cannot be supplied by the blank, who
did not supplicat by the Bill, and alleged a Decision the last Session, where
it was so found in an Incident, at the Instance of the Fevers of Coldinghame
against the Lord Justice Clerk.

The Lords sustained not the Incident as to any of the Pursuers thereof, whose
Names were not in the Bill, but sustained the same against any of the Havers,
albeit their Names was not contained in the Bill, it being ordinar to get
Summons upon Bills, upon such persons named, and others wherein the persons
Names insert, are always sustained; but it is not so in the Pursuers: and yet
this would hardly been sustained in another Case then an Incident, which is
unfavourable:

Cumming of Alter contra Lumsden. July 4. 1667.
CVmming of Alter having set a Salmond Fishing to Alexander Lumsden, for
payment of 60 pounds Scots of Tack-duty; he pursues Matthew Lumsden, as
intrometter with the Fish, taken for the Tack duty, as having an Hypotheck upon
the Profits for the Rent. It was alleged for the Defender, Absolvitor,
because he intrometted with these Fish, as Donatar to Alexander Lumsden's
Escheat, at least having now the Right of the Escheat, he was not liable for
that privilege, preferring Masters of the Ground, for the Rent cannot take
place against the King and his Donatar, who is more privileged.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found the Donatar liable for the Rent, in
so far as ilk years intromission would extend to the Rent of that year.

George Schine contra James Christie. Eodem die.
GEorge Schine having Adjudged an Annualrent, and having Charged James Christie
his Superior, to receive him; He Suspends and alleadges he had Appryzed the
same Lands before, and that his Author was only Infeft base, never cled with
Possession.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, hoc loco, and ordained him to Infeft,
Reserving his own Right as accords.

Schaw contra Tennents. Eodem die.
SChaw pursues certain Tennents for their Duties, who produced several
Discharges, against which it was alleged, that the Discharges were null,
wanting Witnesses, and were not Written with the Dischargers own hand, and so
were null by the Act of Parliament. It was answered, that Custom had
introduced several exceptions from that Act, as Bills of Exchange, of the
greatest importance, which are valid, being Subscribed without Witnesses,
albeit not holograph: And in like manner the Discharges granted to Tennents,
which by long Custom, through all the Kingdom, use only to be subscribed by the
Landlords, without Witnesses, and written with another hand.

The Lords sustained the Discharges, and would not put the Tennents to prove,
that they were truly subscribed, unless they were offered to be improven; in
which case, though the indirect manner was wanting, they might be improven, by
comparison of Subscriptions, and other Adminicles, wherein less would serve,
then in other Improbations.

Sir Henry Hume and other the Creditors of Kello contra Sir. Alexander Hume.
July 6. 1667.
SIr Henry Hume and others, being both Creditors to Alexander Hume of Kello:
And John Hume his Son Appryzed the Lands of Kello in anno 1649. And in anno
1653. Charged the Superior in anno 1661. John Hume is Forefault upon the
Treasonable Crimes committed in anno 1651. Sir Alexander Hume is Donatar to the
Foresaulture; the case of Alexander Humes Right before the Appryzing was, that
by Contract of Marriage, Alexander Hume had Disponed several Husband Lands to
John, reserving his own Liferent of certain Husband Lands. The Father continued
to possess the Lands Reserved; and the Son of the rest. The Question is now
concerning the Lands Reserved, whereanent the Competition is betwixt the
Creditors Appryzers and the Donatar. It was alleged for the Donatar, that he
ought to be preferred; because any Right the Creditors had, is but an
Appryzing, and a Charge without Infeftment; which Charge, albeit it be
equivalent to an Infeftment, in the Competition betwixt Con-compryzers: yet it
is no way equivalent, as to the King; for after the Charge, all Casualities of
the Superiority, would fall to the Superior, and so must the Casuality of
Forefaulture, fall to the King. 2ly, Though the Appryzers had been Infeft, when
they Charged their Infeftment, would have been long after the committing of the
Crime; and there was nothing before the Crime, but the naked Appryzing, which
was no real Right; so that the Forefaulture, devolving the Fee to the King,
with the burden only of such real Rights, as the Superior had consented to
before the Crime, which cannot extend to this Appryzing, which is no real
Right, or to the Charge and Infeftment thereon; because after the Crime. 3ly,
Albeit the Infeftment of the Son, who was Forefault, was base, holden of the
Father; yet it coming in the Person of the King, or his Donatar, can no more be
a base Right, but becomes public, so soon as it is devolved to the King, which
was at the committing of the Crime, before the Appryzers Infeftment, or Charge.
It was answered for the Creditors, that they ought to be preferred upon their
legal Diligence, for satisfaction of the lawful Debt, contracted before the
Crime; because they had Appryzed before the Crime, and had Charged the
Superior before the Sentence of Forefaulture: Which Charge is equivalent to an
Infeftment, and the King succeeding in the place of the Forefault Person uti^ur
jure privato; and albeit no^ voluntar Deed, after the Committing of the Crime,
would be effectual against the King, or his Donatar: Yet an Appryzing before
the Crime, and a Charge before the Sentence, or Process of Forefaulture, is
sufficient in favors of the Creditors; especially seeing the Superiority being
unquestionably in their Father, they might Charge him when they pleased, and
having Charged him, they become in his place, and cannot Charge themselves as
Superiors of the Forefault Person.

The Lords preferred the Appryzers in respect of their Appryzing before the
Crime, and the Charge after, before the Forefaulture.

It was further alleged for the Appryzers, that the forefault Persons Right
being only base, never cled with Possession, their Appryzing against the
Father, who was not forefault, was preferable. It was answered for the Donatar,
that the Forefault Persons Right was cled with Possession, in so far as the
Forefault Person possessed a great part of the Lands Disponed* lying all
together, and of the rest, the Fathers liferent being reserved the Fathers
Possession was the Sons Possession. It was answered, that Possession of a part,
cannot be sufficient for the whole, where there is an express Reservation,
hindering the Natural Possession of the rest; and where the rest are actually
possessed by another Party, neither can the Fathers Possession be the Sons;
because it is ordinarily found, that Dispositions by a Father to his eldest Son,
and Infeftments thereon, reserving the Fathers Liferent, are not thereby cled
with Possession. And albeit in Reservations in favors of Wives, the Husbands
Possession be the Wifes Possession; yet that is a special privilege, favore
matrimonij and dotis, and is not competent to any other. It was answered for
the Donatar, that a Reservation in favors of a Father, in any gratuitous, and
clandestine Infeftment granted to the Son, does not validate the same: yet the
Infeftment being for a Cause onerous, viz. a Marriage, which is a solemn and
public Act, the Infeftment following thereupon, is void of all suspicion of
Simulation; and as an Infeftment to a Stranger, reserving the Disponers
Liferent; would be valid by the Disponers Possession: So must a Sons upon a
Contract of Marriage; otherwise great prejudice will follow, Sons being
frequently Infeft in their Fathers whole Estate, reserving their Liferent of a
part, and ordinarily, but basely Infeft, to secure the Property, being more
desirous to Enter themselves as Heirs to their Fathers, after their death, if
no posterior prejudicial deeds be done, which is more honorable for the
Family, all the Infeftments would be overthrown, being upon Debts contracted
after the Infeftment.

The Lords being of different Judgments in this Point, were loath to decide
them, because the Case was decided by the former Vote.

Stevin contra John Boid. July 9. 1667.
IN a Tutor Count at the Instance of Stevin, against John Boid, these Queries
were Reported by the Auditor, and determined by the Lords: 1. How soon a Tutor
was obliged for Annualrent of the Defuncts Bonds, that bare no Annualrent.

The Lords found that the Tutor behoved to have a competent time to uplift and
Re-imploy these Sums, for which they allowed him a year, and that he was liable
for Annualrent after that year.

2ly, How soon a Tutor was obliged to do Diligence to uplift his Pupils Means,
so that if the Debtor became Irresponsable, the Tutor was liable.

The Lords found that if the Pupils Sums were in the hands of Debitors,
unquestionably Solvendo, the Tutor was not obliged to lift the same, unless
the condition of some of the Debitors, or Cautioners, became worse, at which
time he was obliged to do all Diligence for uplifting the sums, unless the
Debitors became to be known, to be altogether broken upon a sudden, which he
could not foresee.

3ly, What Diligence a Tutor was obliged to do, whether Horning was
sufficient, or if Caption^ Poynding and Appryzing, were necessary.

The Lords found that in different Cases, different Executions were requisite,
viz. If the Debtor were known to have Lands appryzable, or Goods poyndable, or
Sums arrestable, that the Tutor was obliged to do Diligence accordingly, and if
not to use personal Execution.

4ly, Whether the Tutor should have allowance of such Sums as he paid without
Sentence.

The Lords found such sums allowable, unless a competent Defense could now be
proponed, which was known and probable to the Tutor, at the time of payment.

John Watson contra James Law. July 12. 1667.
JAmes Law having Disponed certain Lands to John Watson, with absolute
warrandice, and after the Disposition, there being a Designation of a part of
the Land for Horse, and Kines Grass, to the Minister, conform to the Act of
Parliament 1661. Watson pursues for Warrandice upon that distress. The
Defender alleged absolvitor, because the distress is by a subsequent Law,
falling after the Disposition. It was answered: first, That absolute Warrandice
does even take place in the case of a subsequent Law, at least in so far as the
Pursuer suffers detriment; because if the Lands had continued, the Defenders
had been so burdened; and therefore is liable in quantum lucratus est. 2ldy,
This is no supervenient Law, because the Act of Parliament 1661 Is a Reviving
of the Parliament 1649. which being Rescinded in the said Parliament 1661. By a
posterior Act thereof, concerning Manses and Gleibs, is declared to be valid,
as if it had been made in the year 1649. It was answered to the first, that
nothing can infer Eviction, or Recourse, but that which had a Cause anterior to
the Warrandice, unless it had been otherwise expressed: Nor is it any ground,
that if the Disponer remained Heretor, he had been liable, otherwise all other
supervenient Burdens would Return, not only upon the Immediate, but upon all the
Disponers; but all such accidental Superveniencies, are upon the Purchasers
hazard, as well as the Advantages are to his benefit. To the second, the time
of this Disposition, the Parliament 1649 was Rescinded, and the new Act was not
Enacted; Neither by the new Act, is it declared to be effectual from the year
1649. As to the Horse and Kines Grass, but only as to the Manse. It was
answered, that was but a mistake of the Draught of the Act of Parliament, there
being no Reason wherefore it should be drawn back as to Manses, more then to
the rest; but it was the meaning of the Act of Parliament, to Revive the former
Act in all points. It was answered that the meaning of Acts of Parliament, may
not be extended contrair to the words, neither can any thing be supplied that
is omitted in a Statutory Act.

The Lords found no Recourse upon the Distress arysing from the Act of
Parliament 1661. and that the drawing back thereof being expressly, as to
Manses, which is adjected as a limitation, could not be extended to the
Ministers Grass, which is statute in a different way in this, then in the Act
of Parliament 1649. From this the Heretors are only to pay twenty pounds of
Money: and in the former, Lands were only to be designed; therefore found, the
Distress that being by a supervenient Law, that the Warrandice did not reach
thereto.

Margaret Scot contra Sir Laurence Scot. July 14. 1667.
SIr William Scot of Clerkingtoun, having granted Assignation to his Daughter
Margaret Scot, of a Sum due by Wauchtoun: Pursues Sir Laurence his Son, as
Haver, to deliver the same. It was alleged for the Defender, that there was a
Clause in the Assignation, reserving a power to Sir William, to alter and
Dispone, during his Life, and that he did Assign this Bond to John Scot. It was
answered, that he took a Back-bond from John Scot, bearing, that the
Assignation was granted in Trust, to this effect only, that John Scot should do
diligence thereupon. It was answered, that the Back-bond bears John Scot to be
obliged to denude in favors of Sir William Scot, his Heirs and Assigneys,
whereby the Assignation is altered. The Pursuer answered, that there appears
nothing of the alteration of the Defuncts mind, more then if he had appryzed in
his own name, whereby the Bond would have been adjudged to him, his Heirs and
Assigneys, which is no more, then if an Assigney should use the name of the
Cedent, which would no ways infer, that by adjudging Land to the Cedent and his
Heirs, they pass from the Assignation.

The Lords found no alteration in the Pursuers Assignation by the Right made to
John Scot in his Back-bond, which also bare the Right to John Scot, was made to
do Diligence, and for no other end.

Mr. John Eleis contra Elizabeth Keith Mary Steuart and Keith. July 16. 1667.
THis Cause at the Instance of Mr. John Eleis against Keiths, being Dispute the
twenty seventh of February last.

The Lords found Inhibitions to reach Lands Acquired after the Inhibition, but
superceeded to give answer to that Point, whether the Inhibitions were to be
extended to take away Renunciations of Wodset Lands, which being now Debated.

It was alleged that an Inhibition could not hinder the Granter of a Wodset
to pay his Debt, and accept of a Renunciation from the Person Inhibit, because
a Renunciation is but a Discharge, and Inhibitions were never found to take
away Discharges of Heretable Bonds, nor to hinder any Party to pay their Debt;
but on the contrair, It was an universal Custom over all the Kingdom, that
Debtors should pay their Debts, and did accept Discharges, and Renunciations,
without looking into the Registers, which has been most frequent, not only in
Wodsets, but mainly in Infeftments of Annualrent upon Heretable Bonds, which no
man ever doubted to pay, till he searched the Registers of Inhibitions, et
communis consuetudo pro lege habetur; It was answered, first, That the
Inhibition bears, expressly a Prohibition to grant Renunciations, but no
Prohibition to grant Discharges, and as to the Custom, it cannot be showen that
persons did pay Wodsets, and take Renunciations from these that were Inhibit,
much less that the Lords by their Decisions did approve the same, which
Decisions can only make a Custom equivalent to Law; 2dly, Albeit where Wodsets
were before the Inhibition, the Debtor might accept Renunciation, because by
the Reversion, the Wodsetter is obliged to grant Renunciation upon payment, so
that the granting of the Renunciation being upon an obligment Anterior to the
Inhibition, could not be prejudged by the Inhibition, as is found in all cases,
but here the Wodset was contracted after the Inhibition. 3dly, The Renunciation
here granted, was voluntarly accepted, and payment was voluntarly made, because
there was a Clause of Premonition and Requisition in the Wodset, which was not
used. It was answered that the Style of Inhibitions is no Rule, seeing it
prohibits the Selling of Goods and Geir, to which no Inhibition is extended,
and there being no Law, nor any Dicision that an Inhibition should be extended
against a Renunciation of a Wodset, the common Opinion, and common Custom of
the Nation to the contrair is sufficient; neither is there any difference in
the Custom, whether the Wodset be contracted after the Inhibition, or before;
and if there were, there is much more reason that Wodsets contracted before,
should rather be subject to the Inhibition, then Wodsets contracted after, by
which the Creditor Inhibiter is in no worse condition when they are Renunced,
then he was the time of his Inhibition, neither was the payment here made
voluntar, albeit Requisition was not used, because there being an obligement to
pay the delay upon the Requisition, being only for a few days, no prudent Man
would suffer himself to be charged upon the Requisition, and it is no more
voluntar, then if a Creditor should pay before the Registration of his Bond,
because he could not be compelled before it were Registrat, and he charged; but
seeing Law and Custom obliged not Debtors to inquire for Inhibitions, they may
pay what way they please, and albeit there had been a Requisition, yea, and a
Consignation, unless the Debtor after Inhibition, had been obliged to call the
Inhibiter, it could operat nothing as to the Inhibiter. It was answered that
there would be a great Detriment to Creditors, if they cannot affect Wodse^s by
Inhibition, seeing these cannot be Arrested. It was answered they might be
Appryzed. It was answered they might be Renunced before the Term of payment of
the Creditors Debt, so that Appryzing could not proceed, and that a Debtors
whole Estate may consist in a Wodset. It was answered that that case could
seldom occur, and that there was neither Law nor Custom introduced upon that
account.

The Lords found that the Inhibition could not operat against the Renunciation
of the Woose, and decided that general point by it self, for clearing the I
ieges, and ordai^ed the Parties to be heard upon some other Points in this
particular Case, as that payment of this Wodset was made after the parties was
in mala fide, after process intented against him, by Mr. John Eleis.

Hamiltoun contra Symintoun, Eodem die.
DAvid Hamiltoun as Assigney by Robert Steel to a Bond granted by Andrew
Symintoun, pursues Grissel Symintoun as representing him, for payment, who
alleged absolvitor, because the alleged Bond is manifestly null, in so far
as on that side where the Subscriptions is, there is only the Clause of
Registration, and all the rest is filled on the other side with another Hand,
and there is not one word on the Subscribed side of the Matter of the Bond,
that might have Connection with the backside, which is unsubscribed, so that
this has been the last Sheet of a Writ taken off, and filled upon the back,
upon which anything might have been filled up, that the Pursuer pleased. The
pursuer answered that he oponed his Bond subscribed by VVitnesses, which he
byds by as a true Deed, and is valide unless it were improven.

The Lords found this Writ null, and yet declared, that if the pursuer could
adduce Writs, or Adminicles to astruct the same, they would Examine the same
ex officio, as the Writer and VVitnesses if they were alive.

The said pursuer did also insist against the Defender for her own Aliment, as
having Right thereto from his own Son, who had Married her Mother. It was
alleged for the Defender that her Mother Liferented her whole Estate, and so
by Act of parliament was obliged to Aliment the appearand Heir. It was answered
the Defender had Renunced to be Heir to the same Pursuer, and so could not
crave that Benefit. It was answered, that as Appearand Heir, She had Right to
the Aliment, and her offering to Renunce, was but to save her from personal
Excution, and it could not prejudge her of her Aliment, which she had received
before she Renunced.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Lady Burgy contra Her Tennants, and Sir John Strachan, July 18. 1667.
THe Lady Burgy pursues the Tennants of her Liferent-lands to Remove.
Compearance is made for Sir John Strachan, who alleadges that he stands
publicly Infeft in this Land, and in Possession, and will not suffer his
Tennents to Remove. It was replied that the Pursuers Infeftment in Liferent is
long before Sir John's, and could take no effect till now that her Husband is
dead. It is answered that the Ladies Infeftment is base, and therefore though
it be prior to Sir John's public Infeftment, it cannot be preferred thereto,
unless it were alleged it was cled with Possession before the public
Infeftment, either by the Ladies own possession, or at least by her Husbands
possession, but she cannot allege either, because these parties were in
possession from the Date of her Infeftment, till the Date of this public
Infeftment. It was answered for the Lady, that she offered her to prove, her
Husband was in possession after her Infeftment and before the Defenderes
Infeftment by himself, or at least by these who derived Temporary, or
Redeemable Rights from him, or his Authors as Liferents, Wodsets, and unexpired
Comprysings. It was answered, that albeit favore Matrimonij the Husbands
possession, though common author be counted the Wifes possession, yet the
possession of a Wodsetter, or Appryzer are neither said to be the Wifes
possession, nor the Husbands, because they possess prop^io jure, and the
Husband had only a Reversion.

The Lords found the alleadgeance Relevant for the Lady, that her Husband
possessed after her Infeftment, and before the public Infeftment, either by
himself, or by any deriving a Temporary Right from him, or his Authors.

Executors of the Earl of Dirletoun, contra Duke Hamiltoun, Earl of Crawford,
and others. Eodem die.
IN August 1645. the Earls of Crawford, Lanerk and several other Noblemen, and
Gentlemen granted Bond to the Earl of Dirletoun, bearing an Obligement therein,
Conjunctly, and Severally to pay ten Merks for ilk Boll of 6000 Bolls of
Victual, that should be Delivered by Dirletoun to James Riddel, or his Deputes,
the said Earl always obtaining James Riddels Receipt thereupon; which Delivery,
and Receipt were to be betwixt and a blank day, and the Receipt to be Delivered
before payment, the Term of payment of the price was Candlemas 1646. Whereupon
Dirletouns Executors pursues the Subscribers of the Bond, who alleged that
this Bond was clearly Conditional, that the Victual should be Delivered betwixt
and such a Time, which though it be blank, yet must be understood to be before
Candlemas, which was before the Term of payment of the price, and upon
obtaining James Riddels, Receipt thereof, Ita est, there is nothing to instruct
the Delivery to James Riddel, or the obtaining his Receipt, Debito tempore. It
was answered that the Condition bears Delivery to James Riddel, or his Deputes,
which Terms signifies only persons under him in Office, and therefore it must
relate to James Riddel as he was then a public person, one of the Commissars
of the Army under Humby, Ita est there is produced Humbies Discharge, and
Receipt of the Victual, which is better then Riddels who was his Depute; and
there is also a Declaration by Riddel, that the Victual was truly Delivered.
It was answered for the Defenders, that their Obligation being Conditional,
must be performed in forma specifica, so that it being in Dirletouns option to
Deliver or not, if he Delivered on other Terms then the Bond bears, it was on
his own peril, neither is there anything to show that this Victual was destinat
for pulick use; and albeit it had been the purpose of the Defenders so to have
employed the Victual, yet they might choice their own way of putting it in the
hands of a Person whom they did Trust, who without their Warrant could have
given it out to none, and whose trust they only followed thus qualified, that a
Receipt were then obtained from him, so that they are not obliged to trust
Humbies. Receipt, nor can that prove against them for his Oath, much less his
acknowledgment could not bind upon them his Debt, neither is Humbies Receipt
Debito tempore; and likewise Humbies Receipt relates not to this Bond, but
bears to be conform to a Contract betwixt Dirletoun and the Committee of
Estates; neither can Riddels Declaration ex post facto prove against the
Defenders, or burden them, because they have qualified Riddels Trust, not to
his Write at any time, yea not to his Oath, but to his Receipt within the time
limited, and there is no reason to enforce the Defenders Contract, to the Tenor
of their Bond, to trust the Declaration of James Riddel Emitted at any time,
for his Condition mighht change, both as to his Estate, and to his Trustiness;
and they were not obliged, though they were to Trust his Receipt within such a
time, therefore to trust his Declaration for ever; and albeit the Victual had
been appointed for public use; yet the Delivery, and Receipt should have been
made forthcoming to the Defenders, that they might have obtained Releif of the
public, but never having been delivered to this day, the Defenders cannot be
burdened therewith. It was answered, that Dirletoun was known to be an
Illiterat Person, and albeit he takes Humbi^es Discharge relative to a Contract
of the Committee of Estates, yet this same Bond is understood for the name of
Contract, may well comprehend a Bond, and the Subscrivers of this Bond, albeit
they be not so Designed in the Bond, yet all of them were Members of the
Committee of Estates, and a Quorum thereof, and the quantity of Victual was the
same, and the Date of that Contract is, the day of August 1645. which shows it
was not then present, and this Bond is in August 1645. and it cannot be
imagined that Dirletoun would have engaged in the same Month, for 6000. Bolls
of Victual twice, and as to the time of the Receipt and Declaration, there is
no Clause irritant upon nor obtaining it at such a time, and that is no
Detriment to the Defenders, neither can it be presumed that they would have
obtained Releif, seeing they attained no Releif of many public Bonds, they were
engaged into at that same time.

The Lords found the Defense founded upon the Conditional Clause relevant, and
the Condition was not fulfilled, chiefly upon this consideration, that James
Riddels Receipts were not obtained in the time limited, after which the
Defenders were not obliged to trust any Declaration of Riddels, or Humbies.

John Ker contra Iean Ker, Eodem die.
John Ker being Executor dative ad omissa et male appreciata, pursues Iean Ker
as principal Executrix for payment, and referred the particulars to her Oath,
she alleged that she had made Faith at the time of the Confirmation, that
nothing was Omitted, or wrong Prized, she could not be obliged to Depone again.
It was answered that this was the ordinar Custom, and was no more then a
Re-examination, and that it would not infer Perjury, though it were different,
because if she had any thing Omitted that had come to her Possession, and
Knowledge after the Inventar, or if she had then possessed it, but did not know,
or remember that it was in her Possession, or in bonis defuncti, and ordinarily
the Prices are made be the Commissar, and but upon Conjecture, and may by much
better known thereafter.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and ordained the Executrix to Depone.

Mr. James Daes contra Kyle, July 10. 1667.
MAster James Daes being Infeft by the Earl of Hadingtoun in certain Husband
Lands, and Aikers in Earlstoun, with a general Clause, of all Lands within such
bounds, pursues Robert Kyle to remove from certain Aikers within that bounds,
who alleged Absolvitor, because he has Tacks standing from the Earl of
Hadingtoun of all the Lands possessed by him, and produces the Tack, bearing, the
Earl to have Set him fourteen Aikers of Land presently possessed by himself, and
declares he has no other then what he possessed before the Tack, and during the
time of the Tack, now by the space of thirty years. The Pursuer answered that
his Tack gave him only Right to fourteen Aikers, so that the Pursuer, by the
general Clause, must have all the rest: It was answered that the Defender was
not obliged now to Dispute the extent or quantity of his Aikers, nor to
restrict to the present extent of Aikers, especially seeing that which he did
possess the time of the Tack, was Set to him by his Tack simply without
Reservation; and albeit designed fourteen Aikers, and were more, it is nothing,
for an Erroneous Designation vitiats not, unless it did appear to be
Restrictive, or Taxative; likeas the Pursuers Aikers in his Infeftment, will be
as large proportionally as the Defenders. The Pursuer answered, that whatever
the extent of his Aikers were, the general Clause gave him all that was not
reserved to the Defender, and he offered him to prove; that there were six
aikers beside the fourteen aikers, severally kend and known, and possessed by
different Possessors before this Tack. The Defender answered, that he opponed
his Tack, bearing the Lands to be then in his own Possession, at the granting
of the Tack, and he having possessed thirty years accordingly hoc judicio, he was
not obliged to Dispute any anterior Possession.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Hans Iurgan contra Captain Logan, July 23. 1667.
CAptain Logan a Privateer having taken Hans Jurgan Citizen of Lubeck obtained
his Ship and Goods, adjudged Prize by the Admiral, upon this ground that he had
carried in Prohibit, or Counterband Goods to the Danes, being then the Kings
Enemies, viz. Hemp and Victual, and that he was taken in the return of that
Voyage, which was instructed by the Oaths of the said Hans and Sailers, Hans
raises a Reduction of the Admirals Decree on these Reasons; First, That the
Victual was no Counterband Goods, but such Goods as the King allowed his own
Subjects to Export out of England, and declared that there should be no
question thereupon, nor upon any Goods, not enumerat in an Act of Council
produced all which are bellicus Instruments and Furniture, and has nothing of
Victual; and albeit Hemp be Prohibit by that Act, and commonly counted
Counterband Goods, yet the quantity Deponed was only sixteen Stones, which is
an unconsiderable quantity, and necessar for Calfing the Ship, and Sowing the
Sails, 2ly, The Pursuer produced the Duke of York his Pass, Warranting this
Ship to come from Bergen, and therefore she could not have been taken in her
return by any Privateer. 3ly, Whatever might have been alleged, if the Ship
had been taken, having unfree Goods in her, there is neither Law nor Custom to
sease upon the Ship in her return, when these Goods are not in her, for the
Sh^p might have been sold to another, then he that did the wrong; and it cannot
appear whether the return was made out of the price of the former Fraught, and
though it were, it might be of a hundredth times more value. And albeit such
seasures in return were allowable, yet they could only be sustained when it is
evident, at the time of the Seasure at Sea, that the Counterband Goods had been
in the Ship that Voyage, either by Bills of Loading, Charter parties, or other
Writs taken in the Ship, or by the O^ths, or acknowledgements of the Company,
otherwise upon that pretense Freedom of Commerce would be altogether stopped,
seeing every Ship might be brought in^ that they may be tried by the Admiral,
whether or not, they had in Counterband Goods that Voyage. 4ly, These Strangers
could not be in culpa before the Indiction of the War could come to their Ears,
but the Indiction of the War, was by the Kings manifesto of the Date the
ninteen of September, 1666. and this Ship Loosed from Lubeck the 24 of
September, within five days after, and so could not possibly know the
Indiction, and they Trading, bona fide, as they were formerly accustomed,
cannot be seized as injuring the King, in assisting his Enemies, and they did,
nor could not know they were such. It was answered for the Defender, that he
had walked exactly according to his Commission, bearing expressly all kind of
Grain to be Counterband Goods, and being empowered to sease upon any Ship in
return, that had carried in Counterband Goods, and that it was in the Kings
power leges imponere bello, and that Victual is Counterband Goods it is
evident, not only because it is the first necessary in War, especially for
Victualling of Ships, Norway being a barren Country that has little Grain of
its own, and produced a Treaty betwixt the King, and the Crown of Sweden,
wherein the Swede has a liberty to carry Counterband Goods; bearing expressly
in the Latin Ann^na, in the Dutch Proviant, which shows, what Goods are
accounted Counterband Goods, not only by the King, but other Nations: and for
this Seasure in the return, it is not only warranted by the Commission, but
upon evident Reason, because the Kings Allies have free Trade, both with Him,
and his Enemies, so that they partake not with his Enemies against Him, by
furnishing them Instruments, or Furniture of War; and any private Party
transgressing the same, might, de rigore juris, be seized upon as an Enemie^
and it is favor and benignity, that the seasure is allowed only in that very
Voyage, in which the wrong is done. As to the Duke of Yorks Pass, Scotland
being a free Kingdom, and the Duke not Admiral of Scotland, his Pass, or
passing from any Delinquents, can only be Operative in England; and that which
is produced, is only an Extract out of the Admirality Court, bearing that such
a Ship was Cognoseed to be a Lubeck Ship, and so that she might freely pass,
which cannot import the Dukes knowledge, much less his passing frae her
carrying of Counterband Goods, as to the pretense of Trading, bona fide, and
the ignorance of the War, no respect ought to be had to the alleadgeance,
because the War was begun, and flagrant long before the Lousing of the Ship,
and there is no necessity of Manifesto's to indict War, but Acts of Hostility
and public fame of a War, are sufficient to hinder Allies of either Parties,
or Neuters to assist against their friends: and here its offered to be proven,
that six Months before this Ship Loused, many Commissions were granted against
the Danes, Prizes taken, and the Kings Subjects taken by the Danes, and
declared Pryze at Bergen, upon the account of the War, which must be presumed
to be known by the Pursuer: and the City of Lubeck being a Hanse Town of Trade,
which keeps Intercourse with London, and other Towns of Trade: and as to the
Act of Council, permitting the Kings Subjects to Trade, even in Corn with his
Enemies, it is a special Indulgence in Favors of England only, and could not
be effectual as to Scotland, and much less to Strangers. The Pursuer answered,
that there Was nothing alleged to show by Law or custom, that Victual is
Counterband Goods, unless it were carried in to an Enemy for Relieving a
Besieged place, but not when it is but in common Commerce, and if the Lubeckers
be hindered to Trade in Corn, or the like, being the only Growth of their
Country, their Trade is altogether marred, contrary to the Kings Interest and
Intention, who has written to the Emperor most favorably in behalf of the
Hanse Towns, for the freedom of their Trade, and acknowledges them his good
Allies, and not merely Neuters, which Letter is produced, neither is the
palpable inconvenience answered, if Privatteers may bring in all the Ships,
whether they carried Counterband Goods in that Voyage, though they find none in
them, neither is there any thing alleged sufficient to instruct, that the
Pursuers knew, or were obliged to know of the War betwixt the King and Denmark,
before they Loused from Lubeck for any Acts of Hostility, before the solemn
Indiction produced, were such Deeds as the Pursuers were not obliged to notice,
for the taking and declaring of Prizes does not include Enimity^ or War, but
may be for reparation of private injuries without intention to make an open War,
although a Pryze of the King of Britains Subjects, had been declared at
Buirran, it does not infer, that Lubeck being a free State, at so far distance,
behoved to know the same; much less, that thereby there was a War betwixt the
King and Denmark.

The Lords having considered the whole Debate, were of different opinions,
whether the Victual could be called Counterband Goods simply, or only when
imported for relieving of Sieges, or for the like Warlike use, and whethe^
Ships could be seized in their return not having actually Counterband Goods in,
but especially whether they could be seized without evidence at the time of the
seizure at Sea, that in that Voyage they had in Counterband Goods, but they did
only Determine the first Reason, and found it relevant, to infer that the
Lubeckers was in bona fide to continue the Commerce, having Loused within to
few days of the Kings Manifesto; and that no other Act of Hostility before,
were to be presumed to have come to the knowledge of Lubeck, or that thereby
they were obliged to know, that there was an actual War, unless these
Strangers: knowledge were instructed by their own Oaths, or that it was the
common Fame notour at Lubeck before they Loused, that there was War betwixt the
King and Denmark, and the Defenders offering to prove the same.

The Lords granted Commission to the Kings Resident at Hamburgh to receive
Witnesses above exception, and in the mean time, ordains the Strangers Ship and
Goods to be Inventared, and Estimate, and delivered again to the Strangers*
upon Caution to make the same or price forthcoming, in case the Defender
proved, and prevailed, and with the burden of the Strangers damnage and
expenses, if they betook themselves to this manner of Probation, and not to the
Oaths of the Strangers who were present, reserving to the Lords the remanent
Points to be Decided, if the Strangers knowledge of the War were known.

In this Process the Lords found also that competent, and emitted before the
Admiral, could not operat against their Strangers, qui utuntur communi jure
gentium.

Sir Harie Hume contra Tenants of Kello, and Sir Alexander Hume. July 23. 1667.
SIr Harie Hume having Comprised the Lands of Kello, compearance is made for
some Annualrenters, who craved preference, because their Infeftments of
Annualrent was before the Apprizing: It was answered that the Infeftment of
Annualrent was base, never cled with Possession: It was answered for the
Annualrenter, that he produced an Antaphocha, bearing the Receipt of a
Discharge granted by the Debtor of the Annualrent, which did instruct the
Annualrenter was in Possession before the Apprizing, by uplifting the
Annualrent from the Debtor: It was answered that the Sum was of fourscore
Merks, which was far within an Terms Annualrent, and that it related only to
the personal Bond, and not to the Infeftment, and that there was more then this
Sum due of Annualrent by the personal Bond, before the Date of the Infeftment,
to which only it behoved to be imputed: It was answered that the Receipt being
general in part of payment of the Annualrent, he that paid the Sum might
impute it to what Term he pleased, and so would impute it to a Term after his
Infeftment: It was answered that before that Discharge, the Pursuers Apprizing
was led, though no Infeftment thereon, after which so small a part of the
Annualrent could not be impute to any, but the first Annualrent due, and could
not validat the base Infeftment.

The Lords found it sufficient to validat the base Infeftment, notwithstanding
of what was alleged on the contrair.

Sir George Mckenzie contra John Fairholm, July 25. 1667.
SIr George Mckenzie Advocat having formerly pursued Reduction of a Bond,
granted to Umquhil John Fairholm, wherein he was Cautioner for his Father, and
Pluscardy, upon this Reason, that he then being Minor* entertained by his
Father, as in his Family; his Father was his Administrator, and in place of a
Curator, so that Deeds done without his Fathers authorizing as Curator, was
null; neither could his Father authorize him to his Fathers own behove, as
Cautioner for his Father, which the Lords found relevant to annul Sir George's
Subscription; and now Sir George desiring the Extract of the Interloquitor. It
was further alleged, that Sir George was not only Cautioner for his Father,
but also for Pluscardy, and that his Father might authorize him to Subscrive
Cautioner for Pluscardy, and therefore the Bond behoved to stand against him as
Cautioner for Pluscardy; It was answered that albeit his Father might authorize
him as Cautioner for Pluscardy, in a Bond apart, wherein his Father was not
concerned; yet if his being Cautioner to Pluscardy were to the behove of his
Father, he could not authorize him therein, but this Bond is of that nature,
for Pluscardy and the pursuers Father being bound Conjunctly, and Severally,
Caution adjected for any of the correi debendi, could not but be to the behove
of both, because in so far the Obligation was strengthened, and the payment made
by the Cautioner would liberat both, and if Sir George should be Decerned
Cautioner for Pluscardy, it would Liberat his Father, and so is clearly to his
behove.

In respect whereof, the Lords repelled also this new Defense, and adhered to
their former Interlocutor, and found Sir George's Subscription for his Father,
and for Pluscardy, to be to his Fathers behove, and that he could not authorize
him therein, neither did he at all directly authorize him, but in so far as
they both Subscrived as Principal and Cautioner in one Bond.

Mr. John Philip contra Mr. John Cheap, July 26. 1667.
MAster John Philip pursues his Tenants upon a Disposition granted by Michael
Philip, Compearance is made for Mr. James Cheap who Apprized from Michael
Philips Heir, who alleged that the Disposition is null, neither being
Subscribed by the Disponer, nor by two Notars for him for albeit it mention the
Subscription of three Notars, yet two of them Subscribed not at the same time
with the third, and neither of these two bear, that they did Subscribe at
command, but that they Subscribed only for Michael Philip, because that he
could not Subscribe himself: and albeit the Body of the Writ mention such
Witnesses to the Command given to these Notars, yet it is written with another
Ink, and does not appear to be Written at the time of the Subscriptions, being
the Hand-writ of him that Wrote the Body, which mentions to be Written by him
at Edinburgh, and the Subscription is at Newburgh, and because the Notars
Subscription must give Faith to the Body of the Writ, and not the Body to it.
It was answered, that they offer to prove by the Witnesses insert, that the
Command was given: It was answered that the Command being the most substantial
point of the Subscription, could not be proven, or supplied by Witnesses, for
the Subscription of the Notar, because the party could not Subscribe signifies
nothing without the Command of the party, for whom they subscribe, and Warrant
or Command in most ordinary Matters is not at all probable by Witnesses.

The Lords found the Disposition null, and that the subscription of these two
Notars not bearing, that it was by Command, could not be supplied by the
Witnesses, insert, unless it had been the subscription of an Connotar
Subscribing at the same time with a Notar, whose Subscription bore Command.
Here it was Debated whether the Subscriptions of Notars at diverse times were
sufficient, or if the Subscription of a Notar who was not authorized by the
English, and did forbear to Act at that time were sufficient, but the former
Vot made these to be undecided, as not necessar, seeing the Writ was annulled by
the former Vot.

Sir George Prestoun contra Sir John Scot, July 1667.
SIr John Scot having pursued for payment of an Annualrent of 500. Merks, out
of Sir John Prestouns Lands, he alleged payment, thereupon Li^^scontislation
being made, he produces three Receipts, each 500 pounds, bearing to an Account;
and alleged that the odd fifty Merks was for public Burden, which
completing three years, must Assoilzie from bygones. It was answered the
Discharges bore to be but granted by a Factor, which was not probative, and
that they wanted Witnesses, and that being given by a Factor, they could not
infer payment of all proceeding: It was answered that Discharges of
Annualrents, or Rents, are sufficient without Witnesses.

The Lords found that Discharges to Tenants were suffi^ient without Witnesses,
but not being granted by an Annualrenter to an Heretor, and found that the
Factors Discharge could not in^er payment of bygones.

The Owners of the Ship called the Castle of Riga, contra Captain Seatoun Eodem
die.
CAptain Seatoun a Privateer having taken a Ship at Sea, she was declared Pryze
at Cromarty; the Owners pursue Reduction of that Decree before the Admiral at
Leith, who Ass^^^zied from the Reduction, and adhered to the D^creet^ the
Owners now pursue a Reduction of both these Decreets upon this Ground, that by
the Treaty betwixt the King, and the King of Sweden; it is expressly declared,
that if any Swedish Ships, having a Pass from the Kings Council, or College
of Trade, or Governor of the Province where frae she Louseth, she shall not be
questioned, nor any Inquiry anent the Goods, or Men, and that because, by the
said Treaty it is Agreed that the said Passes, shall expressly contain that the
Ship and whole Goods, belonging to the Subjects of Sweden, contained no
Counterband Goods, and that upon Oath taken at the obtaining of the Pass, na
est, the Governor of Livinia, wherein Riga lies, has given a Pass, bearing
that the Owners of the Ship called the Castle of Riga, being Citizens of Riga,
did make Faith that Ship, being then at Amsterdam, did truly belong to them,
and was Loaded with their Goods only, and was direct to France for a Loading of
Salt, to be returned to Riga, and that there is produced an Extract out of the
Admirality of ^rance, bearing Faith to have been made, that the Ship, nor
Goods, nor any part thereof did not belong to the French nor Hollanders, and a
Certificat from the Swedish Resident in Holland, Registrat in the Office of
Admirality in England, bearing this Ship to be a ship belonging to the Swedes,
and yet she was declared Pryze, upon this ground only, that the Seamen did
acknowledge they were Inhabitants in, and about Amsterdam, and that some of
them Deponed, that the ship was a Dutch bottom; and one of them Deponed, that
they were paved by the Skipper, who received the Money from a Water Bailzie in
Amsterdam, without proving that the ship or goods belonged to Hollanders, which
could not have been ground, seeing the Pass, and Treaty did Exeem them from
giving an Account, or Inquiry anent their Mariners. It was answered for the
Defenders, that all these Passes and Papers were a mere Contrivance, and ^alls
not in the Case of the Treaty, because the ship Loused not from Riga, but from
Amsterdam, and the Pass did not contain the particular Goods, and Quantities,
according to the Conditions of the Tre^ty, and that the Testimonies proved that
the ship had on a Dutch Flag, that she came hot by the Channel, but about the
Back side of England, and that the Company was afraid to meet with Scottish and
English Privateers; and having met with a ship in their Course, asked for the
Dutch Fleet, calling it their own Fleet, all which were strong Evidences that
the ship belonged to Holland. It was answered that albeit the Pass mentioned
not the particular Goods, which it could not do, the ship being but to be
Laden, the Certificat did abundantly supply that, expressing the Loading, as
for the presumptions they are of no force, because the Skipper, though a
Dutchman, yet was sworn a Citizen of Riga, and might justly be more afraid of
the English and Scots, then of the Dutch, and they might call the Dutch Fleet,
their own Fleet, as being of their Nation; at last they produced a Letter of
the Kings, bearing that His Majesty knew by sufficient Information, that this
was a ship belonging to Sweden; and both by it, and by a former Letter, did
peremptorly Command the Delivery thereof, and the Goods. It was answered the
Kings Letter was impetrat upon false Information; and if His Majesty had known
the true state of the Case as it now stands in the Evidence, He would not have
so Written; nor does His Majesty's Letter, granted inaudita part, prejudge the
private Rights of his Subjects.

The Lords found that the Testimonies of the Witnesses did not prove, that the
ship and goods belonged to any of His Majesty's Enemies, and therefore, in
respect of the Pass, Certificat, Treaty, and His Majesty's Letter, they Reduced
both the Decreets.

July 31. 1667.
THis Cause being again Debated, it was alleged that the former Interlocutor
having proceeded mainly upon His Majesty's Letter, there was no ground to
proceed thereupon, because it was granted inaudita part, and Acts of
Parliament being done by His Majesty, without consent of of Estates, prejudge
no party as to their private Right, but such as are called, much less Letters
thus impetrat upon importunity, and groundless Representation, and this Letter
is Derogat by a posterior general Letter to the Lords, Recorded in the
Sederunt, warranding the Lords to proceed. And as to the Swedish Treaty, it can
never be understood further, then as to Counterband Goods, which are the Native
Commodity of the Swedish Dominions, for albeit some of these be dispensed to
the Swedes, because most of the Growth of their Country is such, yet it cannot
be extended to this Case, where the Swedes Loadned Counterband Goods in Norway,
and carry them to France, both being His Majesty's Enemies, neither can the
Pass be sufficient, except as to such ships as are within Sweden, and where the
particular Goods, upon Oath are Attested, and expressed in the Pass, neither of
which is in this Case. It was answered that they opponed the former
Interlocutor, and that a solemn Treaty, with so considerable an Allie as the
King of Sweden, is not to be Retrenched, nor Limited, but by the exceptions
contained in it self, and in it there is no such exception, but generally the
Pass, as is there qualified, excludes all search or question of Men or Goods,
which is also the Kings meaning, which appears expressly by the foresaid Letter,
which albeit it could not Derogat from a private Right, yet may well clear the
dubious interpretation of a Treaty, and is sufficient in this Case, where the
King alone dat leges bello.

The Lords upon consideration of the last Dispute, did ordain the President to
state the Case, and represent it by the Secretary to the King, both as to the
meaning of the Treaty and the Letters, and specially whether Counterband Goods,
not being the Growth of, nor Laden in Sweden, were privileged to the Swedes
thereby.

November 6. 1667.
THe said Cause being again called, the President presented the Lord
Secretaries Letter, bearing the Kings Answer, that the Treaty, or Letter did
not warrant the Swedes to carry Counterband Goods to the Country of his
Enemies, except their own Country Commodities, Laden within their own
Dominions.

Whereupon The Lords sustained the Admirals Decree, as to that Reason of
Reduction, but gave the Parties a time to be further heard before Ex^ract.

Hend^^son contra Henderson, November 14. 1667.
HEnderson insisted in the Cause mentioned, January 31. 1667. which was again
fully Debated above; and it was alleged that the Writ in question was a
Testament, or at least donatio mortis causa, or at least a Conditional
Donation, to take effect only in case the Disponer died before he returned, so
that his simple returning, without any further, purified the Condition, and
made it null.

The Lords having considered the Writ, found that albeit it was not formal, yet
it had the Essentials of a Disposition, and Donation, interviros, and that it
was not null by the Disponers return, unless he had revocked it; for they
found that the words being, that he Nominat, and Constitute Henderson his Heir,
and Successor, and Donatar irrevockably to certain Tenements in particular,
with power to him (in case the Disponer returned not) to enter by the Superior,
and Enter to Possession, and transferring all Right he had in that case, which
words Constituting him Dona^ar, they found were Dispositive words, and
Effectual, and the adding of Heir, and Successor, could not Evocuat the same;
and found the Condition of his not returning, was not annexed to the Dispositive
words, but to the Executive Clause of Entering by the Superior, and taking
Possession, which was cleared by the Posterior Reservation, to recall it after
his return.

It was further offered to be proven, that the Disponer not only returned, but
recalled the Disposition, in so far as he had it in his own hands, and power
after his return. It was answered that it was no way relevant, unless the
Delivery of it hoc intuitu were proven, for he might have had it in his hands
upon many other accounts. It was answered that the very having of the Writ, did
presume that it was Delivered, unless the other Party would offer them to
prove that it came in his hands alio nomine.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Thereafter it was alleged, that as the Disponers having of it, presumed
Revocation, so the Acquirers having of it hereafter, presumed a passing from
that Revocation, and a Reviving of the Right, and now it is in the Acquirers
hands; as to this point the Parties did not Debate, but it occurred to the
Lords that the Disponers having, might be sufficient to infer Delivery, but
would not infer that the Acquirers having thereafter, would presume passing
from the Revocation, because the Clause reserving to the Disponer a power to
Recall, made the naked Recovery of the Writ sufficient to him, and did annul it,
but it was more dubious, what was requisite to revive it, whether naked Having,
or express Delivery, hoc intuitu, or if something were not requisite in Writ,
and therefore before answer to that point.

The Lords ordained the Pursuers who now had the Writ to condescend, and prove
how they got it.

James Maxwel contra Adam Maxwel, November 15. 1667.
JAmes Maxwel, and the Umquhil Lady Hiltoun his Spouse, having Disponed their
Land to Adam Maxwel, James now pursues a Declarator of Trust, whereupon the
Lords formerly ordained Count and Reckoning, that it might appear what Adam had
Expended upon the account of the Trust. In which Account Adam gives up certain
Bonds by James, whereunto he had taken Assignation, against which, he could
allege no more then what he truly paid out, in respect the time of the
Assignation he was entrusted by the Pursuer. The Defender alleged non
relevant, unless it were alleged he was entrusted to Compone for the
Pursuers Debts; but if it was only a Trust of his Land, and not a general Trust
of all his Affairs, it could not reach their Bonds, and albeit upon the account
of Friendship, or Charity, the Defender might be desired to take no more then
he gave, there lies no Obligation in Law, or Equity upon him so to do; but he
may demand what the Creditors, his Cedents, or any other Assigney might demand.
The Pursuer answered that the intent of his Trust in his Lands, being to
preserve him from the rigor of his Creditors, it was against that Trust, to
the Trusty to use the same rigor himself.

Which the Lords found relevant, and ordained Adam only to get allowance of
what he paid out.

Lord of Culteraes contra Silvester Chapman, November 16. 1667.
CVlteraes having pursued Silvester Chapman for payment of a Bond of two
hundredth Merks, subscribed by the initial Letters of the Defenders Name.

The Lords sustained the pursuit, the Defender being in use thus to subscribe,
and that he did subscribe this Bond, the Notar and three Witnesses insert being
Examined, they proved the Defenders custom so to subscribe, but as to the
Actual subscribing of this Bond, two were affirmative, and two were negative,
denying their subscription, Deponing that they remembered not they saw the
Defender subscribe. The Pursuers own Oath was also taken ex officio, who
affirmed the truth of the subscription, and that the Witnesses insert were
present, the question arose whether the verity of the subscription were proven.

The Lords found that it was sufficiently proven, the Pursuer being a man above
all suspicion, and no improbation proponed.

Chalmers and Gardner contra Colvils, Eodem die.
CHalmers and her Children pursues Hugh Colvil and others, for Ejecting them
out of their House and Lands of Lady kirk, and spuilzy of their Goods therein;
the Lybel being admitted to Probation, not only a Witness Deponed, that he saw
the Defender open the Pursuers Doors, they, being absent in Edinburgh, and the
Keys with them, and cast out their Goods and enter in Possession, who was
admitted, cum nota, as being Interessed as Tennant, and concurring with these
Pursuers, in a pursuit with the same Defenders before the Council, upon the
same Ground, the rest of the Witnesses proved, that the Pursuers were in
possession at, or about the time Lybelled, and that they went to Edinburgh, and
Locked their Doors, and took away the Keys; and some of them Deponed, that the
night before the Defenders Entry, they saw the Doors Locked, and that the next
day after they saw Hugh Colvil, and several others in the House, and several
Goods that were in the House cast out of the Door, and that Hugh continued in
Possession, and took in the Goods again.

Which the Lords found sufficient to prove the Ejection and Spuilzie, seeing the
Defender did not instruct that he entered by Authority of Law.

The Defender alleged at Advising the Cause, that the Pursuer had a Husband,
who within this Month, was seen at Air, and offered to prove by his Oath, that
he had Ceded the Possession, being Warned, and gave Warrant to the Defender to
Enter, and therefore, he being Dominus bonorum, his Wife and Bairns had no
Interest to pursue, and though they had, his Oath was sufficient to instruct
the Lawfulness of the Defenders Possession, and that the Wifes Oath in litem
could not be taken, to Esteem her Husbands Goods. It was answered, that it was
notourly known, that the Husband had been two years out of the Country, and
having gone to Sea, was commonly repute dead, and therefore the Wife being in
Natural Possession, might lawfully pursue this Action, neither was it relevant
that the Husband promised to quite the Possession, which being but an
obligation, could not warrant the Defender, brevi manu, to cast them out,
unless he had been present, or consented to the Entry, or had given a
Renunciation of his Possession, with a Warrant to Enter brevi manu.

The Lords, in respect both Parties acknowledged, that the Husband had been a
great while absent, found the Action competent to the Wife: and found that the
Husbands Ceding the Possession, as was alleged was not relevant, and ordained
the Wifes Oath, as to the quantity and value of the Goods Spuilzied, to be
taken, and granted diligence to the Defender to Cite the Husband, if they could
find him, to the same Diet to give his Oath, reserving to the Lords what the
Wifes Oath could work, as to the estimation of the Goods, without the Husbands
Oath.

White-head of Park contra John Stratoun, Eodem die.
WHite-head of Park pursues John Stratoun for restitution of an Horse, which he
delivered to his servant, to be put in the Park of Holy-roadhouse to the Grass,
and which now cannot be found. The Defender alleged that he was liable for no
Loss or Hazard, because at that time, and long before, there was a placad fixed
upon the Port of the Park, that he would be answerable for no Hazard or Loss of
any Horse put in there, by Stealling or otherwise, which was commonly known at,
and long before that time. It was answered, that this Action being founded upon
the common ground of Law, nautae caupones stabularij, ut quae receperint
restituunt, the same cannot be taken away but by paction; and the putting up of
a placad is no ways sufficient, nor was it ever shown to the pursuer. The
Defender answered, that the Pursuer having only delivered his Horse to his
Servant to be put in the Park, without any express communing or conditions, it
behoved to be understood on such Terms as was usual with others, which were the
Terms expressed in the placad.

Which the Lords found relevant, unless there had been a special agreement, in
which case they found the Defender, or his Servant, should have showen what was
in the placad.

Executors of Isobel Trotter contra Trotter, November 20. 1667.
GEorge Trotter and James Lundy his Cautioner, having granted a Bond of 636.
pounds to John Trotter, and the same being Assigned to Isobel Trotter, and
Confirmed by her Executors, they pursue Lundy, who alleged Absovitor, because
he offered him to prove, that the Bond was granted blank in the Creditors Name
to James Trotter, Father to the said Isobel, who filled up the Name of John
Trotter (his Brother) therein, and took an Assignation thereto, in Favors of
Isobel, who was then in his Family, having no Means of her own, and therefore
it is in the same case, as if it were a Bond of provision, granted by the
Father to the Daughter, or taken in her Name, which may always be discharged
by the Father, or altered by the Father at his pleasure; and true it is that
the Father Submitted the same, and was Decerned to Discharge the same, which is
equivalent to a Discharge. It was replied, albeit Bonds of provision to
Children be alterable by their Fathers before any thing follow, yet if they be
delivered to the Children, or which is more, if they be Registrate, they become
the Childrens proper Right, and cannot be recalled, Ita est, this Bond though
it had been blank, ab origin, it was filled up in John Trotters Name, and
filled up before the Submission; yea Isobel was dead, and the Sum confirmed in
her Testament, so that her Father could not Discharge it proprio nomine, or as
his Administrator. It occurred further to the Lords, that albeit the Bond was
Registrat, the Assignation granted to the Daughter was not Registrat, so that
if that Assignation remained still in the Fathers power, the case would be
alike, as if it were a Bond of provision, taken originally in the Daughters
Name, yet this not being pleaded by the Parties; And that the Asignation was
Intimat that it was not constant, that the Assignation remained in the Fathers
hands.

The Lords repelled the Defense, in respect of the reply.

Colonel Seatoun contra the Lord of Balwhilly, November 22. 1667.
THe Lord of Balwhilly having seized upon a Ship belonging to the Dutch,
during the War, Colonel Seatoun, Governor of the Fort at Brassie sound, meddled
with the Ship and Loadning, brevi manu, for the use of the Garrison; Balwhilly
pursues a Spuilzie before the Admiral: Colonel Seatoun gives in a Bill of
Advocation on this Reason, that Balwhilly having no Commission, albeit he did
sease upon the Ship, yet it belongs to the King, and the Colonel had a Warrant
from the Lord Commissioner to Intromet therewith, for the Garrisons use, and
therefore in the Cause concerning the King, His Majesty's Advocat and Officers
were not obliged to answer before the Admiral, nor could they attend there, and
therefore the Advocation ought to be past. It was answered, that the Reason was
in causa, and not relevant, for the Advocat ought to have a Depute before the
Admiral, which is a Supreme Court, and Process maritime in the first instance
ought not to be Sustained before the Lords, and that whatever they pretended in
the point of right, Spoliatus est ante omnia restituendus.

The Lords having heard the Parties upon the Bill in presentia, ordained the
same to be past.

It was then desired, that as before the Admiral, the Colonel behoved to find
caution, not only judicio sisti, but also judicatum solvi, that he may be
ordained to do the same before the Lords.

Which the Lords refused, but granted the Advocation in common form.

Sir Robert Montgomery contra Alexander Rankein, November 23. 1667.
SIr Robert Montgomery having obtained Decree against Antonia Brown, as
representing Sir John Brown her Father for two thousand Merks, Arrests the
price of a chain due to Antonia, in the hands of the Lord Melvil, and pursues
to make forthcoming; Compears Alexander Rankein and produces a Decree obtained
against Antonia, and thereupon an Arrestment by the Sheriff of Fifes Precept,
and a Decree of the Sheriff thereupon, in July last, the Arrestment being in
the same Month, and craves preference, because he had the first complete
Diligence. It was answered, that Sir Robert having first Arrested in March
last, and first intented Process thereupon before the Lords, and having
insisted therein the last Session, was kept off by the compearance of the Lady
Cullerny, who also pretended Right to the Chain and has failed in no Diligence,
and therefore ought to be preferred to a posterior Arrestment, albeit it have
the first Decree of an inferior Court, both Arrestment and Citation being
after his, for he having affected the Sum by an Arrestment, the matter became
litigious, and no posterior Diligence, nor Sentence of an inferior Court could
exclude him, he using all Diligence before the Supreme Court, and not living
within the Sheriffs Jurisdiction, and the Sheriffs Decree being only in
absence, otherwise no Process upon, any Arrestment before the Lords can be
secure, but others may anticipat them, by obtaining Decreets before inferior
Courts, which are far sooner obtained. It was answered, that it was not the
Arrestment, but the Sentence to make forthcoming, that transmitted the Right,
as being a Judicial Assignation, and therefore the first Decree is preferable,
for as Poinding might have been used upon the Sheriffs Precept, notwithstanding
of a prior Arrestment, and Dependence before the Lords, so must the Sheriffs
Decree which is equivalent, have the same effect, and Sir Robert ought to
impute it to himself, that took not the shortest way in pursuing before the
Sheriff.

The Lords found the first Arrestment, pursued before themselves sine mora, and
the first Citation preferable to a posterior Citation, and Arrestment, though
obtaining the first Decree, and therefore preferred Sir Robert Montgomery, and
would not bring in the Parties pari passu, the first Arrestment and Citation
being several Months before the other.

Lord Justice Clerk contra the Lord of Lambertoun, Eodem die.
THe Lord Rentoun Justice Clerk having pursued Lambertoun for the Spoiling of
his Woods, and Planting in the beginning of the Troubles, the Parties did
agree, that what Detriment of the Wood should be proven by Witnesses to be
Adduced hinc inde, the one half thereof should be paid by Lambertoun.

The Lords granted Commission to five of their Number, who Examined Witnesses
upon the place: three of the Pursuers Witnesses proved the half of the Damnage,
to be eleven thousand Merks, and gave clear Reasons of their knowledge, two of
them were used by the Defender also, and two or three of the Defenders, other
Witnesses Deponed that the whole Damnage was about two thousand Merks, and a
third ex auditu agreed in some points. At the Advising of the Cause, the
question arose whether the Lords might modifie betwixt the two Extremes, or if
they ought to Judge according to any two of the highest Testimonies, or
according to the most pregnant Testimonies, giving the clearest ground of their
Knowledge.

The Lords found the most pregnant Testimonies to be the Rule and Decerned,
according to the least, that the Pursuers Witnesses did prove, as being that
wherein all did agree, and not according to the most quantities that some
proved.

Mr. John Hay of Haystoun contra Mr. John Drummond, and Patrick Hepburn,
November 26. 1667.
MAster John Hay having pursued a Reduction of the Rights of some Lands against
Mr. John Drummond, and called for the Rights made to him by Umquhil Patrick
Hepburn, Mr. John Drummond got three Terms to produce, reserving his Defenses,
and at the last Term, alleged no Certification against the Rights granted by
Patrick Hepburn, because none to Represent Patrick Hepburn were called, a
Diligence was granted Incidenter to the Pursuer to call the Representatives of
Patrick Hepburn, whereupon he Cited Patrick Hepburn his eldest Son, and
appearand Heir, who having gotten one very short Term, and that circumduced
against him. It was now alleged, that all the Terms ought to be granted to
Patrick Hepburn, seeing he was a Party necessar, to be called, and his Rights
were to be Reduced. The Pursuer answered, that this being a single Reduction de
jure, there was no more due but one Term. 2dly, Albeit more were due, yet Mr.
John Drummond having run three Terms already, he can crave no more but one,
upon the account of Patrick Hepburn his Author.

The Lords in respect, the Term Assigned to Patrick Hepburn, was but on six
days, allowed him a second Term, and ordained it to be Intimat by the Ordinar
to the Advocats, that in single Reductions of Rights of Lands, they would grant
two Terms for production, and in Reductions, and Improbations three only.

Captain Bood contra George Strachan, November 28. 1667.
CAptain Bood, Captain of one of His Majesty's Friggats, pursues George
Strachan, who had Commanded that Friggat for a time, and was sent a Voyage
therewith, from Brassie-found to London, to restore a part of the Out-reick of
the Ship, which he had not Delivered, but had excepted in his Discharge as
being worn, stolen or lost; and now it was offered to be proven, that he Sold
and Disponed upon the same particulars he so reserved. The Defender alleged
Absolvitor from such particulars as he condescended upon, because he did waire
out a considerable Sum of Money, fot Repairing the Out-rige, and necessars to
the Ship during the Voyage, for which, in case of necessity, he might have Sold
a part of the Out-rige. 2dly, Albeit he might not have Sold the same, yet he
may retain, or compence the price thereof, with what he waired out necessarly,
and profitably for the Out-rige of the Ship. 3dly He offered him to prove, that
such parts of the Out-rige in question^ as he should condescend upon, were
worn and stolen, which being his Defense, he ought to be preferred in the
Probation, unto the Pursuer, who ought to have no other Probation against him,
being a Person Entrusted but his own Oath, much less a contrair probation by
Witnesses, that they were not Lost, but Disposed upon by the Defender.

The Lords Repelled the first and second Defenses, and found that albeit the
Captain might have Hypothecat his Ship, or Out-rige for the necessar Expenses
waired upon her, yet that he could not Sell the same, and that de facto he did
not Sell the same, because the Pursuer offered to prove he Sold them at Lies
after his Return, and found the same probable by Witnesses, and preferred the
Pursuer in probation thereof, and in respect of so unwarrantable a way of
Disposing, they would neither allow Retention, nor Compensation, but left the
Defender to make his Application to the Exchequher for his payment.

Margaret Pringle and her Spouse, contra Robert Pringle of Stichel, November
29. 1667.
MArgaret Pringle pursues an Exhibition of all Writs granted by, or to her
Umquhil Brother, ad deliberandum. It was alleged no Process, for Writs
granted by him to Strangers, except such as were in his Family conform to the
late Decision, Schaw of Sornbeg contra Tailzifare, which they declared they
would follow as a Rule. The Pursuer answered, that he Insisted for Exhibition
of such Writs as were granted by the Defunct to any person which were in his
possession, or Charter Chist the time of his Death.

Which the Lords Sustained.

Duke Hamiltoun contra the Lord of Allardine, December 6. 1667.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun having Charged the Lord of Allardine for the six Terms
Taxation, Imposed anno 1633. He Suspends on this Reason, that four Terms were
paid by the Earl of Marishal Sheriff, which must Exoner him, and all other
persons of the Shire, and is instructed by the Books of the Clerk to the
Taxations. It was answered, that the Reason is not relevant, because the
Sheriffs did ordinarily Lift a part of all the six Terms, and albeit the Sheriff
completed the first four, yet he might have done it out of his own Money, or
out of the other two; and so when the King Charges for the other two, the
Sheriffs Discharges will Exclude him, so that he shall not want the first four,
but so much of the other two, and therefore unless the Suspender can produce a
Discharge of the first four, the general Discharge granted to the Sheriff
cannot Liberat him. It was answered, that when the King or his Collector
Charges, the Collectors general Discharges cannot but meet himself, and whether
the Suspender had paid or not, the general Collector cannot seek these Terms
twice. It is true, ^f the Sheriff were Charged, the Suspender behoved to show
to him his Discharge, but the Earl of Marishal Sheriff, could not Charge the
Suspender for the Taxation of these Lands, because the Earl of Marishal was
both Sheriff, and Heretor at that time, and Sold the Lands to the Suspender
with Warrandice.

The Lords found the general Discharge sufficient to the Suspender, against the
general Collector, or any authorized by him.

Earl of Lauderdale and John Wachop contra Major Biggar, December 7. 1661.
THe Earl of Lauderdale, and John Wachop Macer, pursue a Reduction and
Improbation of the Rights of the Lands of Hill, against Major Biggar, and
craved Certification, contra non producta. The Defender alleged no
Certification, because he had produced sufficient Rights to exclude the
Pursuers Title, viz. Infeftments long prior to the Pursuers Right. It was
answered, that this could not stop the Certification, unless the Defender would
declare he would make use of no other Rights in this Instance, otherwise the
Pursuers behoved to Dispute with him upon every single Writ he produced, and
behoved to Dispute the Reasons of Reduction with him before the Production were
closed. The Pursuer answered that his alleadgeance, as it is proponed, was
alwise Sustained without declaring that he wo^ld make use of no more.

The Lords found the Defenses (as proponed) relevant, and ordained the ordinar
to hear the Parties Debate upon the Rights produced, and if these should not
prove sufficient, the Lords thought that the Defender might be forced at the
next time to produce all he would make use of in this Cause, that so the
Pursuers were not delayed upon Disputing upon every single Writ.

Earl of Cassils contra Sheriff of Galloway, December 10. 1667.
THe Earl of Cassils pursues, the Sheriff of Galloway, and the Tennents of
Achnotor^ch for abstracted Multures, and Insists on this ground against the
Sheriff, that he being Heretor of the Lands, and Vassal to the Pursuer, did
command them to leave the Pursuers Miln, and come to his own Miln, and so was
Liable. The Defender alleged, that this Member of the Summons is not
relevant, because any man may desire any persons he pleases, to come to his
Miln, and there was never a pursuit Sustained against any others then the
Abstracters and not against these to whose Miln they came. 2dly, It is not
Libelled that the Defender got a greater Duty upon the Tennents coming to his
Miln, and although he had, it were not relevant. 3dly, By the Defenders Rights
he is Liberat of all Multures, except Knavship and Bannock, which is only the
Hire due to the Millers for their Service, and there is no obligement upon him
to cause his Tennents come to the Miln. It was answered, the Pursuer offered to
prove the Defender had gotten a greater Duty upon the Tennents coming to his
miln; and albeit the Astriction be only of Knavship and Bannock, that is not
alone due for the Millers service, but there is a profit thence arising to the
Master, that the Sheriff being Heretor and Vassal, albeit he be not personally
obliged to cause the Tennents come to his Miln, yet the Lands being Astricted
by his Infeftment, it was his fault to remove them.

The Lords Assoilzied from that Member of the Lybel, and found it not relevant
against the Heretor, but only against the Tennents.

Mr. Rodger Hog contra the Countess of Home, Eodem die.
MAster Rodger Hog having Appryzed certain Lands from the Lord of Wauchtoun in
Alcambus, which were Sold to Wauchtoun by the Earl of Home, with absolute
Warrandice: Upon which Warrandice there was Inhibition used, whereupon Mr.
Rodger pursues Reduction, of an Infeftment of Warrandice of these Lands,
granted by the Earl of Home to my Lady, in Warrandice of the Lands of Hirsil,
and that because the said Infeftment of Warrandice is posterior to the
Inhibition. The Defender alleged, that there could be no Reduction upon the
Inhibition, because therewas yet no Distress, which with a Decree of the
Liquidation of the Distress, behoved to preceed any Reduction; and albeit there
might be a Declarator, that my Ladies Infeftment should not be prejudicial to
the Clause of Warrandice, or any Distress following thereupon, yet there could
be no Reduction till the Distress were Existent and Liquidat. The Pursuer
answered, that a Reduction upon an Inhibition, was in effect a Declarator, that
the posterior Rights should not prejudge the Ground of the Inhibition, for no
Reduction is absolute, but only in so far as the Rights Reduced, may be
prejudicial to the Rights, whereupon the Reduction proceeds.

The Lords Sustained the Reduction to take effect, so soon as any Distress
should occur.

Mr. James Straiton contra the Countess of Home, Eodem die.
MAster James Straiton Minister of Gordoun, having obtained Decree conform,
upon an old Locality, Charges my Lady Home for payment, who Suspends, and
alleadges that she must be liberat of a Chalder of Victual contained in the
Decree of Locality, because after the said Decree, a part of the Paroch of
Gordoun was dismembered, and Erected in a new Paroch, and the Earl of Home
burdened with a new Stipend, and the Minister of Gordoun Liberat of a great
part of his Charge; in consideration whereof, the Minister then incumbent quite
a Chalder of his Decree of Locality, and aquiesced in the rest without ever
Demanding any more, and so did his Successors, now by the space of sixteen or
twenty years. The Charger answered, that his Predecessors forbearance to Lift
that Chalder, cannot instruct his Consent, and though he had expressly
Consented, he could not prejudge his Successor, unless that Chalder had been
applied to the new Kirk by Sentence of a Judge.

The Lords found the foresaid Reason relevant against the Pursuer in
possessorio^ ay and while he declare his Right, here it was represented, that
the Minister had a sufficient Stipend beside the Chalder in question.

Mr. Rodger Hog contra the Countess of Home, December* 11. 1667.
MAster Rodger Hog Insisting in his Reduction mentioned yesterday, upon his
Inhibition the Countess of Home alleged, that she had Right from Appryzers,
who would exclude the Pursuers Right and Inhibition, and would Defend her self
thereupon, and not suffer her Right to be Reduced ex capite Inhibitionis, and
might thereby exclude the Pursuer from any Interest. It was answered, that the
Reduction being only upon an Inhibition, there are no Rights called for, but
Rights posterior thereto, and it cannot prejudge any prior Right, which the
Pursuer is content shall be reserved.

Yet the Lords Admitted the Defender to Defend upon any prior Right, that might
exclude the Pursuers Right.

Hunter contra Wilsons, December 13. 1667.
HVnter having Charged Wi^sons for payment of 500 Merks, contained in their
Bond, they Suspended on this Reason, the Bonds bears expressly, that the same
should not be paid, till the Suspender be put in Possession of a Tenement of
Land in Glasgow, for a part of the price whereof the Bond was granted, Ita est,
they neither were, nor can be put in Possession, because the House was burnt in
the Conflagration in Glasgow. It was answered non relevat, because after
perfecting the vendition peculium est emptoris, and therefore this being an
accidental Fire, wherein the Seller was no ways in culpa, nor in mora, in
respect, that at that time there was a Liferenter living, whose Liferent was
reserved in the Disposition. It was answered, that albeit in some cases the
peril be the Buyers, yet where there is an express obligement, that no payment
shall be until Possession, by that express Paction, payment cannot be sought.
It was answered, that the Buyers had taken Possession after the burning, and
had built the House. It was answered, that the Possession of the Ground, cannot
be said the Possession of the House, Terra non est Domus, and therefore this
being but a small part of the price, in such a calamitous Case, the Suspenders
ought to be Liberat thereof.

Notwithstanding of all these Alleadgeances, the Lords found the Letters
orderly proceeded; here the Buyer was Infeft before the burning, and did
voluntarly take Possession after the burning.

Robert Hamiltoun Clerk, contra Lord Balhaven, December 14. 1667.
THe Lord Balhaven having Disponed the Barony of Beill to John Hamiltoun, Son
to Robert Hamiltoun Clerk, reserving Roberts Liferent, with power to dispose of
fou^ty Chalders of Victual at his pleasure, and to set Tacks, for what time and
Duty he pleases, and containing an express Provision, that it shall be leisum
to Robert to do any Deed in Favor of my Lord Balhaven, and that the Fee shall
be burdened therewith, and it is Provided, that all Rights Robert shall
Acquire, shall accresce to his Son, who is to Marry Balhavens Oye, and
failzying of the Sons Heirs, mentioned in the Disposition, Robert and his Heirs
are in the last Termination. Thereafter, Robert enters in a Minut with my Lord
Balhaven, by which he is obliged to Accept an hundredth twenty nine thousand
Merks, and therefore obliges himself, and as taking burden for his Son, and as
Tutor, and Administrator to him, validly, and sufficiently to Denude himself
and his Son of their Rights, to any that he should Nominat: but here is a
Clause irritant, that if Money, or sufficient Persons to grant Bond to Robert,
be not delivered to Robert at Lambmass last, and Payment made of the Money at
Martinmass last, that the Right by the Minute should expire ipso facto, without
Declarator. The Minute was put in the Duke of Hamiltouns Hand, that if these
Terms were not performed, he should Cancel it. Robert Hamiltoun Pursues now a
Declarator against Balhaven, concluding that he has an absolute and
irredeemable Right to the Land, by his first Disposition, and Infeftment
granted to him and his Son, and that the Clause irritant is Committed, and that
thereby the Minute is null, and concludes against the Duke, that the Minut was
put in his Hands upon the Terms foresaid, and that he ought to Cancel, or
Deliver the same; the Dukes Advocats suffered him to be holden as Confessed, but
did not produce the Minute. It was alleged for Balhaven, no Process till the
Minute were produced, for it could not be declared null till it were seen. It
was answered, that the Copy of it was produced, and verbatim insert in the
Lybel, and the Pursuer craved the Minute in the Terms Lybelled to be declared
null, without prejudice to any other Minute, if they could pretend it.

The Lords ordained Process, but ordained the Pursuer before Extract, to
produce the principal Minute.

It was further alleged for Balhaven Absolvitor, because the Minute being
mutual, there could be no failzie in the Defender, because the Pursuer neither
was, nor is able to perform his part of the Minute, in respect the Fee of the
Estate is in the Person of the Son, who cannot be Denuded by any Deed of the
Father, for as Legal Administrator, he has no power, neither can any Father,
or Tutor Denude a Pupil of their Fee, but there must be interposed the
Authority of the Lords in a special Process, instructing a necessar Cause for
the Minors Utility, which cannot be in this Case; and though the Father could
Denude the Son, as he cannot, yet he is Minor, and may Revock, and yet it was
offered to fulfill the Minut, if the Pursuer would Secure the Defender against
the Minors, by real Security, or good Caution. The Pursuer answered, that the
Defense ought to be Repelled, because the Defender, the time of the Minut, knew
his Right and his Sons, and cannot pretend an impossibility to have made any
such Minut upon a ground then palpable and known, and yet contend to keep the
Minut above the Pursuers head, but he must either take it as it stands, or
suffer it to be declared void. 2dly, The Pursuer is in sufficient Capacity to
Denude his Son, by the foresaids Reservations contained in the first
Disposition, whereby he has full power to Dispose of forty Chalders of
Victual, and also power to do any Deed he pleased in favors of Balhaven, and
there could be no Deed more rational, then to give a Reversion of his own
Estate upon payment, of all that the Pursuer had paid to him, or for him. The
Defender answered, that this general Clause cannot be understood to be
prejudicial to the substance of the Disposition, and special Clauses in favors
of his Son, and the Defenders Oye and their Successors.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and declared, but of consent of the Pursuer,
superceded to Extract for a time, and appointed two of their Number, by whose
sight the ^ursuer and his Son should be Denuded, and the Defender Secured, so
that it came to no Debate, whether such a Clause irritant, as this in a
Reversion of that which was truly Bought and Sold irredeemably before, and no
Wodset could be purged.

John Campbel contra Constantine Dougal, Eodem die.
COnstantine Dougal having granted a Bond to John Houstoun, bearing that John
for himself, and as Administrator for his Son, Constantine Campbel had Lent the
sum, and that the same should be payable to the Father, he being on Life, and
failzieing him by Decease, to be payable to Constantine his Son, as being his
own proper Moneys, and to his Heirs or Assigneys. Constantine Assigns this Bond
to John Campbel, who having pursued Exhibition thereof, and it being produced,
insists for Delivery. It was alleged for the Producer, that it ought to be
Delivered back to him, because he had right thereto by Assignation from John
Houstoun, who in effect was Feear of the Sum, it being Lent to him, and payable
to him during his Life, and Constantine his Son was only Heir substitute, as is
ordinarily interpret by the Lords, in such Bonds or Sums Lent by Fathers to be
payable to themselves, and after their Decease to such Bairns. 2dly, The Father
a^ lawful Administrator to his Son, might have Lifted the Sum in his Sons
Minority, and therefore he might Assign the same. The pursuer answered to the
first, that albeit Bonds for Money Lent by Parents, payab^e to themselves, and
such Children after their Death, be so interpret, that the Fathers are Feears,
yet that is only where the Sums are the Parents own, but this Sum is
acknowledged to be the Sons own Money b^ the Bond it self. 2dly, Albeit the
Father as lawful Administrator might have Lifted the Sum, yet cannot Assign,
because that is no proper Act of Administration com^^tent to Tutors, or
Administrators, and Executors may uplift Sums, and yet cannot Assign. The
Defender answered to the first, that the Money is Lent by the Father, not only
as Administrator, but bears expressly for himself, and that these words as being
his own Money did not sufficiently prove that it came not from the Father, but
that after the ^athers Decease, it would be the Sons Money. To the second, that
the conception of the Bond being, expressly to pay to the Father, warranted him
to Assign, and the Assign^y being his Procurator, might Lift as well as he, the
same way as Assigneies can Lift during the Executors Life.

The Lords found the conception of the Bond to constitute the Son to be Feear,
and that at le^st the words as being the Sons own Moneys, presumed the same to
have been so ab initio, unless it were positively proven, that the Money when
Lent was the Fathers, and found that the Fathers Assignation as lawful
Administrator, could not exclude the Son, but that point whether the De^tors
paying to the Fathers Assigney, during the Sons Pupillarity or Minority, was
neither positively alleged by the Parties, nor considered by the Lords.

James Paterson contra Homes, December 17. 1667.
JAmes Paterson having Charged the Earl of Home, in anno 1662. for payment of a
Sum due by his Bond. The Earl suspended, and found one Brunt-field Cautioner,
and at the foot of the Bond of Caution, Home of White-^ig Attested the
Cautioner, in these Terms viz, I Attest the Cautioner to be sufficient, and
subscribes the same, which is Registrat with the Bond it self, and the Extract
produced bearing the same, The Suspension being Discust against the Earl of
Home, and the Cautioner Charged with Horning; Paterson pursues the Attester
subsidiary for payment of the Debt. It was alleged for the Defender
Absolvitor, because he having but Attested the Sufficiency of the Cautioner;
can be holden no further then a Witness, and so can only be found liable if
his Testimony were found false, or that ex dolo, he had Attested a person to be
sufficient, not according to his Judgment, but either contrair to his
knowledge, or without knowledge of his Condition, at least his Attesting can
only oblige him to prove that the Cautioner (when he Attested him) was holden,
and repute a person sufficient for the Sum, and that he had a visible E^^a^e in
Land, Bond, or Movables. The Pursuer answered, that the Attester behoved to be
liable to him, because ejus facto by the Attestation, the Suspension was
obtained, and the Principal being dead without any to represent him, and the
Cautioner insolvendo, the At^ester is obliged, de jure, to make up the Damnage
falling out by his Deed.

The Lords found the Alleadgeance for the Attester relevant, viz. that the
Cautioner was holden, and repute sufficient for such a (...), at the time of
the Attest to be proven, prout de jure.

Lord Abercromby contra Lord New-wark, Eodem die.
THe Lord Abercromby having Sold to the Lord New-wark, the Barony of St.
Ninians; there was a fitted Account subscribed by them both, in anno 1647.
Containing the Sums paid by New-wark, and at the foot thereof, concluding
thirty seven thousand Merks to be Due; but there is no mention made of the
Instructions in the Account; the second Article whereof, bears paid to
Abercrombies Creditor 30. thousand Merks, where^ upon Abercromby alleadges,
that seeing the Account bears not the Delivery of the Instructions, that
New-wark at least must produce the Instructions of this Article which is
general, for the Bonds of these Creditors are yet above Abercrombies Head, and
New-wark makes use of some of them to exhaust the thirty seven thousand Merks
Bond at the foot of the Accomp^^^ It was answered for New-wark, that after 18.
years time, that he was not obliged to Count again; but the foot of the Account
being subscribed by the Pursuer, bea^ing 37. thousand Merks to be only Resting,
was sufficient to Exoner him, and the not mentioning of Instructions Delivered,
cannot presume, or prove against him, that they are in his hand, else the
Account signifies nothing, and he must not only Instruct this Article, but all
the rest; neither did he make use of any Bonds to exhaust the foot of the
Account, but such only, for which Precepts were direct to him, after the
Account.

The Lords found the Defender not liable to Count, or produce the Instructions
of any of the Articles, unless it were proven by his Oath, or Writ, that the
Instructions were retained in his hand.

John Auchinleck contra Mary Williamson and Patrick Gillespy, December 18. 1667.
MAry Williamson, Lady Cumlidge, having taken Assignation to several Debts of
her Husbands, Appryzed the Estate from her Son; and in September, 1662.
Dispones the Estate to her Eldest Son, reserving her own Liferent of the
Maines, and Miln, and with the burden of five thousand Merks, for John
Auchinleck her second Son; at the same time her eldest Son grants a Tack to
Patrick Gillespy, bearing expressly, that because he was to Marry his Mother,
and to possess the Mains at the next Term, therefore he Sets the Land for an
inconsiderable Duty, for a year after his Mothers Death: there was no Contract
of Marriage betwixt the said Mary, and the said Patrick, but they were Married
in December thereafter, and he possessed it till this time, and now John
Auchinleck pursues for Mails and Duties bygone, and in time coming, as having
Assignation, to the Reservation granted by his Mother. It was alleged for
Patrick, that as for bygones Absolvitor, because he was bonae fidei Possessor,
by virtue of the Reservation in favors of his Wife, belonging to him jure
mariti. 2dly, The Assignation made to the Pursuer was most fraudulent, being
granted at the time of the Agreement of Marriage, betwixt the said Patrick and
his Wife, and there being a Provision granted to the Pursuer of five thousand
Merks, the said Mary did most fraudfully at that same time Assign the
Reservation, and so left nothing to her Husband, but a woman past sixty years.
It was answered, that where there is a solemn Contract of Marriage, and
Proclamation, Deeds done thereafter cannot prejudge the Husband, but here there
is neither Contract, nor Proclamation alleged: and albeit there had been
fraud in the Mother, the Son (being a Boy, and absent) was no way partaker
thereof, and cannot be prejudged thereby. It was answered for the Defender,
that he has a Reduction depending of this ex capite fraudis, and if the Wife
could do no fraudful Deed after the Agreement of Marriage, it will thereby be
null, whether the Son was partaker or not, unless he had been an Acquirer for
an Onerous Cause, and albeit there was no Contract of Marriage in Writ, yet the
foresaid Tack evidences an Agreement of Marriage.

At Advising of the Cause, the Lords thought this conveyance a very Cheat, and
it occurred to them that the Marriage, and jus Mariti is a legal Assignation,
and there having been nothing done by the Son to intimat this Assignation, or
to attain Possession thereby before the Marriage, the Husband by the Marriage
had the first complete Right, and was therefore preferable, and likewise they
found the Husband free of bygones, as bonae fidei Possessor, any found that the
Reason of Reduction upon fraud, after the Agreement of the Marriage evidenced
by the Tack, bearing the Narrative of the intended Marriage of the same date,
with the Pursuers Right, and the Disposition to the eldest Son relevant to
Reduce the Pursuers Assignation, in so far as might be prejudicial to the
Husband.

Sir Thomas Nicolson contra the Lord of Philorth, Eodem die.
UMquhil Sir Thomas Nicolson having pursued the Lord of Philorth before the
late Judges, as representing his Grandfather, who was Cautioner in a Bond for
the Earl Marishal, there being an Interlocutor in the Process, Sir Thomas
dying, his Son transfers the Process and insists. The Defender alleged, that
the Bond was prescribed, as to his Grandfather, by the Act of Parliament King
James the sixth, anent prescription of Obligations, bearing that if no pursuit
were moved, nor document taken within 40 years, that these Bonds should
prescribe; Ita est, there was no pursuit, nor document against the Defenders
Grandfather by the space of 40. years, and therefore as to him it was
prescribed. The Pursuer answered, that he opponed the Act of Parliament, and
Interloc^tor of the Judges in his favors, and offered him to prove that the
Annualrent was paid by the Principal Debtor, within these 40. years, and his
Discharge granted thereupon, which was sufficient document, and the Pursuer not
having been negligent, nor at all bound to pursue, or seek the Cautioners, when
he got Annualrent from the Principal, the Obligation of both stands entire. The
Defender answered, that the Principal and Cautioners being bound conjunctly and
severally, albeit in one Writ, yet the Obligations of each of them was a
distinct Obligation, and as the Cautioner might be Discharged, and yet the
principal Obligation stand, so the prescription is a legal Discharge,
presuming the Creditor past from the Cautioner, seeing he never owned him for
40. years, which is most favorable on the part of Cautioners, who otherwise
may remain under unknown Obligations for an hundredth years. The Pursuer
answered, that albeit there might have been some appearance of reason, if the
Persons obliged had been all Co-principals, or bound by distinct Writs, yet
whether Writ and Obligation is one, and the Cautioners Obligation thereby but
accessory, and the Creditor no way negligent, there is no ground of such a
presumption, that the Creditor past from any Party obliged, and the Obligations
mentioned in the Act of Parliament, is not to be meaned according to the
subtility of distinction of different notions of Obligations, but according to
the common Style, and meaning of Obligations, whereby one Writ obliging
Principal, and Cautioners, is always accounted an Obligation, which is
sufficiently preserved, by payment obtained from the Principal.

The Lords adhered to the former Interlocutor, and repelled the Defense of
prescription, in respect of the Reply, of payment made of the Annualrents, made
by the Principal.

Robert D^by contra the Lady of Stonyhil, Eodem die.
THe Lady Stonyhil being Provided in Liferent, to an Annualrent of 2800. Merks,
her Son pursues her for an Aliment, both upon the Act of Parliament, in respect
that the Defuncts Debt was equivalent to all the rest of the Estate, beside her
Liferent, and also super jure naturae, as being obliged to Aliment her Son, he
having no Mea^^, and she having a plentiful Provision.

The Lords in consideration of the newness of the Case, and that the Debts
that might exhaust the Estate, were most part personal, and no Infeftment
thereon, before or after the Defuncts death, recommended to one of their Number
to endeavor to agree the Parties.

Adam Gairns contra Elizabeth Arthur, December 19. 1667.
ADam Gairns as Assigney, Constitute by Patrick Hepburn, pursues Elizabeth
Arthur for the Drogs furnished to her, and her Children at her desire; It was
alleged Absolvitor, because she was, and is cled with a Husband, and the
Furniture could only oblige him, but not her. It was Replied, that she had a
peculiar Estate left by her Father, wherefrom her Husband was secluded, and
which was appointed for her Entertainment, that her Husband was at that time,
and yet out of the Country, and has no Means.

The Lords found the Reply R^levant

Arc^ibald Wils^n contra the Magistrates of Queens-ferry, January 2. 1668.
ARchibald Wilson being Elected on of the Baillies of the South Queens-ferry,
and being Charged to Accept, and Exerce the Office, Suspends on this Reason,
that by the 29. Act, Parliament 5. King James the 3. No Magistrate of Burgh is
to be continued in Office longer then one year, and by a particular Act of that
Burgh, no Magistrate is to continue above two years; and true it is that the
Suspender has served as Baillie two years already. It was answered, that the
Act of Parliament is long since in desuetude; and as to the Act of the Burgh,
the Election of the Suspender being done by them, who have power to make that
Act, is in effect an alterationt hereof, and this Burgh being poor, and penury
of persons to Serve, it will dissolve the same, and discourage all others to
Serve, if the Suspender be Liberat.

The Lords found the Reasons of Suspension relevant^^ and found that the
Suspender could not be compelled to serve longer then one year at once in the
same Office.

Dow of Arnho contra^ Campbel of Calder, January 4. 1668.
DOw of Aricho having pursued Campbel of Calder, as Heir to his Father, for
payment of a Bond, wherein his Father was Cautioner, for the Marquess of Argyl,
the Bond bore but one Witness to Calders subscription; and George Campbel one
of the Witnesses being Examined if he saw him subscribe, Deponed negative, but
that it was Calders hand Writ to the best of his knowledge; there was also
other writs produced, subscribed by Calder, to compare the subscriptions.

The Lords would not sustain the Bond, having but one Witness insert to
Calders subscrsption, upon the foresaid Testimony, and Adminicles.

Mr. John Forbes contra Innis, January 1. 1668:
MAster John Forbes as Assigney to Margaret Allerdes, having obtained Decree
of Removing against Margaret Innis, for Removing from the Lands of Savet,
wherein the said Margaret Allardes is Infeft in Liferent, which being
suspended. It was alleged, first, That this pursu^e is to the behove of
Margaret Allerdes, who could not obtain a Removing against the Defender,
because the Defenders Husband being Infeft, by the said Margaret Allardes
Husband, and Author of the Lands of Savet principally, and of the Lands of
Govan, and others in Warrandice. The said Margaret Allardes did consent to the
Disposition of the Warrandice-lands, by which she obliged her self to do no
Deed in the contrair of that Right, and is also bound in Warrandice with her
Husband, ita est her pursuing this Action is a Deed in prejudice of the Right
of Warrandice-lands, in so far as thereby the Person having Right to the
principal Lands, upon Eviction recurrs upon the Warrandice-lands, and so the
Consenters own Deed prejudges the same. It was answered, that by Deeds contrair
to Warrandice, were only understood, some Right granted by the Disponer, or
Consenter, in prejudice of the Right consented to, but no ways a pursuit upon
any other Right of the Consenter, for it were against Reason and Justice, that
a Purchaser, to make himself secure, requiring a Wifes consent to Lands to
which she had no Right, either Principal, or in Warrandice of other Lands, that
her Consent should prejudge her, as to her Liferent lands, of which there was
no mention; and as to her Personal Obligement to Warrant the Lands wherein she
was never Infeft, it is null, and can never oblige her, being a Wife.

The Lords found that this Warrandice did not oblige the Wife, and that her
Consent did not hinder her to pursue upon her own Liferent, albeit ex
consequente, her pursuit excluded one having a posterior Right to her
Liferent-lands, who thereupon had recourse to the Warrandice-lands, to which
she Consented, seeing she had granted no Right prejudicial to the Right
Consented to.

It was further alleged, that the said Margaret Allardes agreed with the
Person having Right to her Liferent-lands, principally that she should accept
the Warrandice-lands, in stead of her Liferent-lands, which excambion putting
the Right of the Warrandice-lands now in her Person, she who consented to the
Right thereof, can never come in the contrair of her own Consent to prejudge
the same. It was answered, that a Cons^nt cannot exclude any supervenient Right
of the Consenter, but only such Rights as the Consenter had the time of the
Consent, it is true, that a Disponer with absolute Warrandice, if he acquire a
Right, it accresces to his Successor, but it is not so in a Consenter, whose
warrandice is not found to be Obligator, further then as to the Rights in the
Consenters Person at that time.

Which the Lords Sustained.

It was further alleged, that the Pursuit as to the behove of the Heir of the
Disponer, of the Lands in question, whose Predecessor being bound in absolute
Warrandice, he can make no use of no Right prejudicial to his Warrandice. 2dly,
Albeit he be not Heir, yet he has behaved himself as Heir, and thereby is
liable to fulfill the Defuncts Warrandice, and so cannot come against it. It was
answered, that behaving as Heir, being a vicious passive Title, is not
sustainable by way of exception in this case.

The Lords Sustained the same, and found both members of the alleadgeance
relevant.

Margaret Forbes contra (...) Eodem die.
MArgaret Forbes having granted a Tack of her Liferent-lands to (...) bearing
expressly for payment of such a Sum of Money, and bearing to endure for 19.
years; she did receive a Back-bond of that same Date, bearing, that so soon as
the Sum was paid, the Tack should become void; the Tack coming to a singular
Successor, she pursues him for Count and Reckoning, and Removing, and insists
upon the Tenor of the Tack, and Back-bond. It was alleged for the Defender,
that the Back-bond did not militat against him, being a singular Successor,
neither being Registrat, nor Intimat to him before his Right, in respect the
Tack is a real Right, and no Obligement or Provision of the Tacks-man can
prejudge a singular Successor.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Sustained Process against the Defender,
in respect of the Tack, and Back-bond.

The old Lady Clerkingtoun contra Clerkingtoun, and the young Lady, January 9.
1668.
THe old Lady Clerkingtoun being Infeft in an Annualrent of seven Chalders of
Victual, out of the Mains of Clerkingtoun, for thirty six years bygone; she
pursues a Poinding of the ground. It was answered for the Lord and his Mother,
that the Pursuer having been so long out of Possession, cannot make use of a
Possessory Judgment, but must first declare her Right. 2dly, The young Lady is
also Infeft in an Annualrent, and has been (by virtue thereof) more then seven
years in Possession, and so has the benefit of a Possessory Judgment, till
her Right be reduced, and cannot be Dispossessed by the old Ladies posterior
Infeftment.

The Lords Repelled both the Defenses, and found that an Annualrent is debitum
fundi, and is not excluded by Possession of a posterior Right, and needs no
Declarator, and that an Annualrent has not the benefit of a possessory
Judgment, against a prior Annualrent.

The Lord of Glencorsse younger, contra his Brethren and Sisters, January 10.
1668.
THe Lord of Glencorsse having Married his eldest Son, and having Disponed to
him his whole Estate, with Warrandice after the Disposition, he did Deliver
certain Bonds of Provision in favors of his other Children, unto these
Children, whereupon they Appryze the Lands Disponed to his Son: in this
Contract there was a Liferent reserved to the Father, and nine thousand Merks
of Tocher paid to the Father. The Son pursues a Reduction of the Bairns
Infeftment, and Bonds, in so far as might be prejudicial to the Disposition
granted to him, upon this Reason, that the Bonds were no delivered Evidents
before his Disposition. It was answered, that they were valide, though not
Delivered, because the Fathers Custody was the Childrens Custody, especially
they being in his Family, both at the time of the Subscribing of the Bonds, and
of the making of this Disposition; and it was ^ever contraverted, but that
Bonds granted by a Father to his Children, though never Delivered during his
Life, but found amongst his Writs after his Death, were valide both to affect
his Heirs, and Executors. The Pursuer answered, that his Reason of Reduction
stands yet relevant, notwithstanding the answer, because, albeit it be true,
that Bonds, Dispositions, and Provisions in favors of Children are valide when
they are Delivered by the Parents in their Life, or if they have remained
uncancelled in their Hands till their Death, yet till Delivery, or Death, they
are still pendent Ambulatory Rights, and may always be recalled at the pleasure
of the Granter, and any Deed done by him, expressly recalling them, or clearly
inferring his mind to recall them, does annul them before Delivery, ita est,
the Pursuers Disposition bearing express Warrandice against all Deeds done, or
to be done by the Father, granter of these Bonds, does evidently declare his
mind, that his purpose was not, that these Bonds should affect these Lands,
otherwise he would either reserve the Bonds, or a power to burden the Lands,
and if this were Sustained, no Contract of Marriage, Disponing the Fee to a
Son, could be secure, it being easy to grant such Bonds, and to keep them up
above the Sons Head, and therewith to affect the Fee; yea, it would be
sufficient against any Stranger, unless it were for an Onerous Cause. 2kly,
There is not only a Revocation, but these Provisions were no Debt of the
Fathers, prior to the Sons Disposition, or Delivery, for albeit the date be
prior, yet the time of their becoming a Debt, is only Death, or Delivery, and
therefore, all Debt contracted, or Deeds done by the Father before his Death,
or Delivery of the Bonds, are prior as to the Obligation thereof, to the Bonds,
so that the Sons Disposition is truly prior as to its Obligations, to these
Bonds. The Defender answered to the first, that albeit such Bonds be Revocable
before Delivery, yet here there is no express Revocation, but only presumption
inserred, from the Fathers giving a posterior Disposition, which is no
sufficient ground, either from the Disposition, or the Warrandice, for the
Fathers mind might have been, that he would endeavor (out of his Li^erent, or
Movables) to Portion his Children, and so would not absolutely Burden the Fee;
but yet in case he should Die, or not be able to do it, he would not Revock the
Bonds, even as to that Right, which is much rather to be presumed, as being
much more rational, and probable, seeing there is not any Provision, or power of
Provision reserved in the Contract, neither is there any competent way
alleged for providing of three Children, but if this Sole presumption be
sufficient, though a Father should Dispone his whole Estate, without any
Reservation of Children, or to be so inconsiderat, as not to except his
Aliment, all prior Provisions for his Life-rent (undelivered) should cease, and
become ineffectual, contrair to that Natural obligation of Parents to provide
their Children, against which, no presumption can be prevalent. As to the other
ground, Provisions, though not Delivered, can be in no worse case then Bonds
delivered with a Condition, that the Father might recall the same, which would
be valid from their Date, if they were never actually recalled, and so must
Bonds of Provision be, at least as to gratuitous Deeds after their Date, though
before Delivery, as if a Father should grant Bonds of Provision to many
Children at once, and should Deliver some of them before the rest, if he had
not Means sufficient to pay all, the Bonds first Delivered, could not be
thought to exhaust his whole Means, and exclude the other Bonds of Provision,
but all would come in pari passu, according to their Dates, except their
Diligence alter the Case.

The Lords (notwithstanding of what was alleged) found the Reason of
Reduction relevant, and that the undelivered Bonds of Provision, though prior
in Date, yet posterior in Delivery, could not affect the Fee interveening.

Here there was much alleged upon the Onerosity of the Pursuers Disposition,
which came not to be considered in the Decision.

Grant contra Grant, January 11. 1668.
WIlliam Grant of Markinsh pursues a Tutor Count, against John Grant of
Ballandallock his Tutor, in which these points being reported to the Lords,
whether the Tutor were liable for the value of Services of the Pupils Tennents,
by Harrowing, Plowing, and Shearing, etc. And for which the Tutor received no
Money, but the Services in kind.

The Lords found the Tutor not Comptable therefore, because he could not force
the Tennents to pay any price for the same. And as to that point, the Tutor
being super-expended, the Pupil might be Decerned upon the Pupils own Process,
against the Tutor, without a distinct Process at the Tutor instance.

The Lords found he might.

Parkman contra Captain Allan, January 14. 1668.
CAptain Allan having obtained a Decree against Parkman a Swede, Adjudging his
Ship Pryze upon these Grounds, that she was Sailed with three persons of her
Company being Hollanders, and Danes, being then the Kings Enemies, and because
she had carried of the Enemies Goods from Bergen in Norway, to Amsterdam, from
whence, having gone to France with Ballast, and being Laden there with Salt,
she did also carry in to France six Barrels of Tar, which was sold in France,
as appears by an Account betwixt the ^kipper and his Factor in France, bearing
so much to be paid of the Kings and Towns Custom of the Tar, which necessarly
Imports that it was sold there; likewise she carried in Stock Fish, being
Commeatus, and Counterband Goods, so that having sold several Lasts of Tar in
Holland, and these Barrals, and Stock Fish in France, which are clearly
Counterband Goods, and being taken in her return from France, having in her the
product of these Counterband Goods, whereupon she was j^^tly declared Prize,
conform to the Lord Admirals Commission, ordaining Ships of Allies to be taken,
having in Enemies Goods, or Counterband Goods, or the return of Counterband
Goods. Parkman raised a Reduction of this Decree, on these Reasons; first,
That the Crown of Sweden, not only being an Allie to the King, but having a
Solemn Treaty with him; in the second Article whereof it is specially agreed,
that the Subjects of Sweden having Passes from the Governor of the City, or
Province where they Louse, or from the College of Trade, bearing that Faith
had been made, that the Ship, men and Goods did belong to the Swede, and none
other; and that they had therein no prohibit Goods, that such a Pass being
shown in any Ship, there should be no further search, or inquiry in the Men or
Goods, the like whereof is granted to the Kings Subjects, either King trusting
the Governors of the other in that matter; by which Treaty also, Counterband
Goods are determined, amongst which, Tar or Stock Fish are no particulars, ita
est, Parkman had a Pass when he Loused from Sweden, conform to the Treaty,
likeas there is a second Pass sent over-land to him, when he Loused from
Amsterdam to France, which being shown to Captain Allan at the seasure, he
ought not to have taken him, or enquired any further, nor can he now make it
appear that Parkman has transgrest the Treaty, and as to the three Men of his
Company, one was hired in Denmark, and two in Holland upon necessity, so many
being wanting of his necessary Company by Death, or Absence there, so that what
he did of necessity, and not to advance the Interest of the Kings Enemies, can
be no Delinquence. 3dly, Whatever might have been alleged against him, if he
had been taken with Enemies Goods Aboard, or with Counterband Goods, which are
such by the Swedish Treaty, yet he was seized, having none of the Goods Aboard,
nor the product thereof, but of his Fraught, and upon the account of his Owners
in Sweden he could not be Pryze, because there is nothing in the Treaty,
bearing that Ships should be Pryze, not having actually in them Enemies Goods,
nor Counterband Goods, but the product, or return thereof; neither does it
appear that he sold any Tar in France, for the Entering of the Tar, or paying
Custom, will not necessarly Import it was sold, but his Factor might have
unwarrantably put up that Article, which being wholly inconsiderable he did not
contravert, and by the same papers taken Aboard, it did appear, that at his
Lousing from France, he had the same quantity of Tar, which was inconsiderable,
and necessar for the use of his Ship, being an old Ship, and two Barrels was
found Aboard when she was taken, and some part behoved to be allowed for the
use of the Ship, so that at most there could be but one or two small Barrals of
Tar sold, which is inconsiderable, and could be no ground for declaring an
Allie Pryze, nam de minimis non curat lex, and as to the Stock Fish, or any
Commeatus, or Provision, quae habent promiscuum usum in bello and pace, they
are only Counterband, when they are carried in to relieve a beseiged place, or
to these that could not subsist without them, according to the Reason and
Opinion of Grot^us de jure belli, lib. 2. cap. de his quae in bello licent.

It was answered for Captain Allan, that the Reasons of Reduction ought to be
Repelled, because albeit Parkman got a Pass from Sweder, conform to the
Treaty, and according thereto came from Sweden to Denmark, in which Passage he
was not challenged, but having engadged in Denmark to serve the Danes, then the
Kings Enemies, he did unquestionably carry merces hostium, from Denmark to
Holland, and eight or nine Last of Tar, which is Counterband, beside the six
Barrels of Tar carried from Holland to France, and Entered, and sold there, and
the Stock Fish, and albeit Tar be not enumerat as Counterband in the Swedish
Treaty, yet it is comprehended in the general Clause of alia instrumenta
bellica, for there is no more eminent Instrument of War, not only for shipping,
but for all Engines of War, and suppose that (by the Swedish Treaty) Tar were
not Counterband, yet that Treaty can be only extended to the Subjects of
Sweden; Trading to and from Sweden, but not to Warrant them to carry these
things (which de jure communi, are Counterband) from any other Country then
their own, to the Kings Enemies, so to partake with the Kings Enemies to his
Detriment. And as to the second Pass send to Holland, it is no ways conform to
the Treaty, but is most gross and inconsistent, bearing not only the Ship to
belong to the Swedes, but also all the Goods input, or to be input in her to
belong to them, and to be free Goods, without expressing any particular: as to
the return of Enemies Goods, or Counterband Goods, that it is a ground of
seasure, being the immediate return, and the Captains Commission granted by the
Admiral, bearing so much expressly, and the Instructions given by the Council in
a former War, anno 1624. which were sufficient Warrant for the Captain to
sease, and are founded upon evident Reason, viz. That the Kings Allies are
Neuters, having assist his Enemies with Counterband Goods, it is a Delinquence
deserving that the Delinquent should be seized as an Enemy at any time, and
yet the Kings Commission has mitigat it, only to be in the return of that same
Voyage, wherein the Counterband Goods were carried, for if an Allies Ship
having Counterband Aboard, were taken in her Voyage to an Enemies Port, she
might more reasonably pretend that intention was alterable, and no Crime until
actually she had Disloaded in the Enemies Port, but could have no pretense if
she were waited till immediately after she came out of the Port, although then
the Enemies Goods, or Counterband Goods were not Aboard.

The Lords upon a part of this Debate, having formerly written to my Lord
Secretary, to know the Kings mind whether the Swedes, by their Treaty, might
carry from other Countries, that which was de jure communi Counterband, albeit
not Counterband by their Treaty, his Majesty's answer was negative, whereupon
the Lords proceeded to consider whether Tar was Counterband, de jure communi,
they found it was, but did not find the Stock Fish Counterband, except in the
case of a siege, to which point Secretary Morish Letter was produced, in
relation to the Custom of England, and having also considered the Proclmation
of War, in which there is no mention of returns, but only a Warrant to sease
Ships belonging to Enemies, having in them Enemies Goods, or Counterband Goods,
and having also considered the Admirals Commission, which extends only to the
return of Counterband Goods, and not to the return of Enemies Goods; and it
being offered to be proven positive, that by the Custom of England, no seasure
is sustained upon returns, but only when Enemies Goods or Counterband are
actually taken Aboard; they were unclear whether seasure should be sustained in
any other case upon returns, and therefore ordered an other Letter to be
written to the Secretary, to know the Kings Mind, and the Custom of England in
that point before answer, and ordained the opinion of some Merchants to be
taken, whether Parkmans Ship Fraught in Norway to Holland, and Disloaden there,
and thence going to France with Ballast, not upon the account of the former
Fraught, but the Owners, if it should be accounted one Voyage, or two, so that
the return from France, might be accounted the immediate return of the Voyage to
Holland.

In this Process the Lords, by a former Interlocutor, had found the taking on
of the Men, as they were qualified and proven, to be no ground of seasure.

Dowgal Mcferson contra Alexander Wedderburn, Eodem die.
DOwgal Mcferson having Charged Alexander Wedderburn of Kingennie, Provost of
Dundee, for payment of a Sum of Money, he Suspends on this Reason, that the Sum
was payable to Dowgal and his Wise in Liferent, and contained a Clause of
premonition, and Requisition, and the Sum to be Consigned in the Hands of the
Dean of Gild of Dundee, which was Consigned accordingly. The Charger answered,
that he offered to prove by the Suspenders Oath, that he took up the Money from
the Dean of Gild, and therefore he must re-produce the same, with the
Annualrents thereof since the Consignation. It was answered, that it being the
Chargers fault, that the Suspender was put to Consigne, because he had not a
Discharge granted by his Wife judicially, that therefore he could not be liable
for Annualrent, in that he uplifted the Soum, unless it were proven he had
made Profit thereof, but he offered to Depone, that he had all the Money still
lying by him, and got no Profit of the same, and that he ought to have
uplifted, in regard he was liable for the hazard of the Consignation.

The Lords found the Suspender liable to produce the Money Consigned, with the
Annualrent since, seeing he uplifted the same without difference, whether he
made Profit or not.

The Baillie of the Regality of Killimure contra Burgh of Killimure, Eodem die.
THe Heretable Baillie of the Regality of Killimure having Conveened, and
Amerciat a Person in the Burgh, they Suspend on this Reason, that the Burgh
being a Burgh of Regality, having its own Magistrates Inhabitants, are only
liable to the Jurisdiction. It was answered, that the Burghs Jurisdiction being
granted by the Lord of Regality, is only cumulative, and not exclusive of the
Lord of Regality, or his Baillie, in the same way, as the Jurisdiction of all
Vassals is not exclusive of their Superiors Jurisdiction, for the Burgh are
Vassals Holding of him, and therefore est locus preventioni, and the first
Citation, without negligence, is preferable.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Earl of Argyle contra George Campbel, January 15. 1668.
THe Earl of Argyle pursues George Campbel, to Remove from a Tenement of Land
in Inerera, who alleged no Process, because the Pursuer produces no
Infeftment of this Burgh, or Tenement therein. The Pursuer answered, that he
produced his Infeftment of the Barony of Lochow, and offered him to prove, that
this is part and pertinent of the Barony. The Defender answered, that this
Burgh cannot be carried as part and pertinent, but requires a special
Infeftment. first, Because by the late Marquess of Argyls Infeftment, in anno
1610. produced, this Burgh is expressed, and not in the Pursuers Infeftment.
2dly, Because in the Pursuers Infeftment, there is expressed particulars of far
less moment. 3dly, Because a Burgh of Barony is of that nature, that cannot be
convoyed without special Infeftment. The Pursuer opponed his Infeftment of the
Barony of Lochow, which is nomen universitatis, and comprehends all parts of
the Barony, although there were none expressed, and therefore the expressing of
this particular in a former Charter, or less particulars in this Charter
derogat nothing, it being in the Pursuers option to express none, or any he
pleases; and albeit in an Infeftment of an ordinary Holding, without Erection
in a Barony, Milns, Fortalices, Salmond Fishings, and Burghs of Barony cannot
be conveyed under the name of part and pertinent, yet they are all carried in
baronia, without being expressed.

The Lords Repelled the Defense in respect of the Reply, and found that this
being a Barony, might carry a Burgh of Barony, as part and pertinent, though
not expressed, albeit it was expressed in a former Infeftment, and lesser Rights
expressed in this Infeftment.

The Defender further alleged no Process, because the Pursuers Infeftment is
qualified, and restricted to so much of the Estate, as was worth, and paid
yearly fifteen thousand Pounds, and the superplus belongs to the Creditors,
conform to the Kings Gift, likeas the King granted a Commission to clear the
Rental, and Set out the Lands to the Pursuer, and to the Creditors, who
accordingly did Establish a Rental, wherein there is no mention of the Lands of
Innerera, and therefore they cannot belong to the Pursuer. It was answered for
the Pursuer, that he oppones his Infeftment, which is of the whole Estate, and
whatever Reservation be in Favors of the Creditors, it is jus tertij to the
Defender. It was answered, that the Defenders Advocats concurred for a number
of the Creditors, whom they named, and alleged that they would not suffer the
Defender to be Removed, seeing they only can have Interest to these Lands in
question. The Pursuer answered, that the Creditors Concourse or Interest was
not Relevant, because they have no Real Right or Infeftment, but only a
personal Provision, that this Pursuer shall dispone, and Resign the superplus
of the Estate in their Favors, or otherwise pay them eighteen years purchase
therefore at his option, whenever they shall insist Via actionis, the Earl
shall declare his option, but they having no Infeftment cannot hinder the
Donatar to Remove, Parties having no Right, which is the Creditors advantage,
and cannot be stopped by a Few of them, likeas the whole Barony of Lochow is
Set out by the said Commission, to the Pursuer himself, conform to their
Sentence produced.

The Lords did also Repel this Defense, and found that the Provision in Favors
of the Creditors, could not stop this Removing.

Earl of Kinghorn contra the Lord of Vdney, Eodem die.
THe Earl of Kinghorn pursues the Lord of Vdney, as representing his Father,
to Denude himself of a Wodset Right, granted by the late Earl to the Defenders
Father, conform to the Defuncts Missive Letter, acknowledging the Receipt of
the Sums of the Wodset, and obliging himself all written with his own Hand, and
craved that the Defender might Enter, and Infeft^ himself in the Wodset, and
Resign in Favors of the Pursuer, that the Lands might be purged thereof, and
insisted against the Defender* first, As lawfully Charged to enter Heir, who
offered to Renunce to be Heir. The Pursuer answered, he would not suffer him to
Renunce, because he offered him^ to prove that he was lucrative Successor by
the Disposition of the Lands of Vdney, whereunto their is an express
Reservation in Favors of his Father, to Dispone, Wodset, and grant Tacks, and
therefore any Deed done by his Father, behoved to affect him, at least the Fee
of the Estate; so that albeit this Letter be posterior to the Disposition of
the Estate, it must Burden the same, and the Defender quoad valorem. 2dly, The
Letter produced, acknowledges a Wodset, and payment made, and it is offered to
be proven, that the Letter was anterior to the Disposition of Vdney, so that by
the Receipt of the Wodset Sums, the Defunct was (by the Nature, and Tenor of
the Rights of Wodset) obliged to Resign in Favor of the Pursuer, and therefore
the Defender Succeeding to him by this Disposition, after that obligement, to
Denude himself* upon payment is obliged as Successor, titulo lucrativo post
contractum debitum, to Denude himself, and that the Wodset was prior to the
Disposition of Vdney, was offered to be proven. The Defender answered, that the
provisions in his Infeftment could never affect him, nor the Estate, because
there was nothing in the provision, that the Estate should be liable to the
Debts contracted by the Defunct thereafter, but only that he might Dispone, or
Wodset, or Redeem for an Angel, and it cannot be subsumed, that the Letter
produced does import any of these, but at most a personal obligement. 2dly,
Albeit it were notour, that there had been such a Wodset before the Defenders
Disposition of his proper Estate, yet it behoved to be also instructed, that it
was paid before that Disposition, but his Fathers Missive after his
Disposition, could never instruct that it was paid, or paid before, and yet
the Defender offered to Renunce all Right he had to the Wodset Lands, or to
suffer an Certification, and Improbation to pass against the same, seeing they
are not extant or produced, or to consent that the Lords would declare upon the
Letter, that the Wodset thereby was Redeemed, and Extinct, which last the
Pursuer would have accepted, providing the Defender would give a Bond of
Warrandice for his Fathers Deed, and his own, which the Defender refused.

The Lords proceeded to determine the Point in jure; and as to that Point anent
the provision, in the Defenders Infeftment, some were of opinion, that any Debt
contracted by the Father, would affect the Estate, others thought not, there
being no provision to contract Debt, but to Wodset or Dispone, which was not
done, and all agreed, that the Case being new, and now very frequent, required
a more accurat Debate; but the Lords found that the Defenders Father, having by
his Letter acknowledged the Wodset, and the payment thereof, to which Wodset
the Defender had no Right, that any grant of Redemption by the Father (after
his Disposition to his Son) was probative against the Son, and that the Letter
being proven Holograph, did instruct the Wodset to be paid, and therefore
sound it relevant to the Pursuer, to prove that the Wodset was before the
Defenders Disposition, and that it did import a conditional obligement, that
the Father should Resign upon payment, and that the Sons Disposition being
after the Wodset, he was lucrative Successor, after that obligation contracted
by the Wodset.

Captain Strachan contra George Morison, January 17. 1668.
CAptain Strachan having obtained Decree before the Admiral, against George
Morison for wrongous Intromission of a Loadning of Wine, belonging to the
Pursuer, in anno 1638. which was brought home by him, in the Ship called
Stulla, whereof he had an eight part, and the Defenders the rest; and the
Pursuer being Skipper, did upon his own Credit buy the Wine, and having brought
it home, the Ship was broken at Newburgh, and Loadning was meddled with by the
Defenders, whereupon they are Decerned to pay conjunctly and severally. George
Morison raises Reduction on two grounds. first, That the Decree was unjust, in
so far as the Defenders were Decerned in solidum, each for the whole. 2dly,
That there was no probation of any of their Intromissions, but upon the
Testimony of one Witness, and Captain Strachans own Oath taken in Supplement.
It was answered to the first Reason, that the whole Intrometters were justly
Decerned in solidum. first, Because this was in it self a Spuilzie; and albeit
the Defender did not insist within three years, yet he ought not to be
excluded, because he was in the Kings Service all the time of the trouble, and
fled the Countr^y at the time of this Intromission. 2dly, Because the
prescription of the privilege of Spuilzie is only in relation to violent
profits, and the Oath in litem, and these are only lost, if pursuit be not
within three years, but the Parties being all liable in solidum is not lost,
for the Intromission remains still a wrongous Intromission, and is not in the
same case as a Vindication, and Restitution of Goods in the Defenders hands,
without Violence or Vice, and in many cases correi, are liable in solidum, as
Tutors, or where the Intromission is joint, or promiscuous, for it were against
reason, if there were many vicious Intrometters, that the particular
Intromission of each of them behoved to be proven, which often times is
impossible, as in the same case, and likewise socij are liable in solidum, and
here was a co-partnery betwixt these Parties. It was answered for Morison, that
there was three years elapsed since the Kings Restoration before any pursuit,
and though that had not been, there is nothing that can stop that short
prescription, and therefore infancy or minority hinders not the course thereof,
and in this case the Decree in question restricts to wrongous Intromission. As
to the second, all the privileges of Spuilzie are lost by the prescription;
and it was never found at any time, that in wrongous Intromission, the Parties
were all liable in solidum, especially where the thing Intrometted with was
divisible, as Wines; and as to the alleged co-partinery there was nothing
Lybelled thereon.

The Lords did not consider the point of co-partinery, but found that in
wrongous Intromission, each Intromettor was not liable in solidum, but a joint
Intromission proven against many, did in^er against each of them, an equal
share, unless the Pursuer proved that they Intrometted with a greater share,
and found not a necessity to prove against each of them the particular quantity
of their Intromission.

Walter Stuart contra Robert Acheson. eodem die.
WAlter Stuart as being infeft in the Baronie of North-Barwick, and being
charged for the whole Taxation thereof, Charges Robert Acheson for his
Proportion, according to the Stent Roll, who Suspends on this Reason* that his
Interest is only Teinds, which is only applied to the Ki^k, whereof he produces
the Bishops Testificat, and therefore by the exception of the Act of Convention
he is free. The Charger answered non relevat, because the Suspender ought to
have conveened at the Diet appointed, by the Act of Convention, for making of
the Stent Roll, and there have instructed that his Teinds were exhausted,
wherein having failzied, and being taxed, no other could pay for him, neither
could the King lose that proportion. It was answered, that he had no interest
to conveen, the Minist^r having the only Right to his Teinds.

The Lords Repelled the Reason, and adhered to the Stent Roll, but prejudice to
the Suspender, to seek his relief of any Party he pleases, as accords.

Mr. Andrew Brown contra David Henderson, and Thomas George, January 18. 1668.
MAster Andrew Brown granted a Bond of 700. Merks, blank in the Creditors Name
to George Short, wherein the Name of David Henderson is now filled up. Thereon
George having Arrested all Sums due to Alexander Short in the hands of Mr.
Andrew Brown, he raises a double Poynding, wherein the Competition arises
betwixt the Arrester, and the the Person whose Name is filled up in the blank
Bond. It was alleged for the Arrester, that he ought to be preferred, because
he Arrested Shorts Money, and at the time of the Arrestment, this Bond having
been Delivered to Short blank in the Creditors Name, Short was Creditor ay and
while, not only another Name were filled up, but also an Instrument of
Intimation were taken thereupon, for Shorts filling up of the Name of
Henderson, is no more then an Assignation, which requires Intimation, and is
excluded by an Arrestment before the Intimation, albeit after the Assignation.
It was answered for Henderson, that there needed no Intimation to the filling
up of a Creditors Name in a blank Bond, which was never required by Law nor
Custom, and his Bond being now in his own Name, nothing could prove that it was
blank ab initio, or that it did belong to Short, but Hendersons own Oath, in
which case it would be sufficient for him to Depone qualificat^, that the Bond
indeed was blank ab initio; and delivered by the Debtor to Short, and by Short
to him, and his Name filled up therein before the Arrestment, or at least that
before the Arrestment, he had showen the Bond filled up to the Debtor, which is
equivalent, as if he had given back the first Bond, and gotten a new Bond from
the Debtor, after which, no Arrestment (upon account of the prior Creditor)
could be prejudicial to him, ita est, he has done more, for he has proven
that before the Arrestment, the Bond was produced^ and shown to Birny the
Debtor. It was answered, that in a former case, in a Competition of the
Creditors of Alexander Vetch, the Lords found that the Arrestment laid on,
before Intimation of the filling up of a blank Bond, preferred the Arrester,
and that otherwise Collusion could not be evited with these blank Bonds, to
exclude and to save Creditors Arresting.

The Lords preferred Henderson, whose Name was filled up, and presented to the
Debtor before the Arrestment; for in Vetches Case there was nothing to instruct
that the Bond was truly filled up, and presented to the Debtor before the
Arrestment; and they found the filling up, and presenting thereof sufficiently
proven by the Witnesses, taken ex officio.

Pollock contra Pollock and Rutherfoord, Eodem die.
UMquhil John Pollock in the Cannongate, having given a Bond to James Pollock
his Son of 5000. Merks, he pursues Robert Pollock the Heir of Line, and
Pollock, Heir of the second Marriage, for payment. The Heir of Line Compearing,
Renunced: whereupon the Pursuer insisted against the Heir of Provision, who
alleged no Process, till the Heretage be falling to the Heir of Line were
first discust, and condescended upon the Heirship Moveable. The Pursuer
answered, there could be no Heirship in this Case, because the Heir of Line had
Renunced all he might Succeed to by his Father, Heretable, or Moveable, in
Favors of his Father, his Heirs and Executors bearing expressly, that his Wife,
and his Bairns of the second Marriage should have the whole Right: Ita est,
Rutherfoord; the Wife had Confirmed the whole Movables promis^ue, without
exception of Heirship, and therefore the Heir of Line himself (if he were
Entered) could claim none. It was answered, that the Renunciation of the Heir
apparent of Line, being in Favors of his Father, after his Fathers death, it
returned back to him from his Father as Heir of Line again, and could go to no
other Person, neither thereby could the Heretable Movables belong to the
Executor.

The Lords found the Renunciation sufficient to exclude the Heir of Line from
the Heirship Moveable, and that they did thereby belong to the Fathers
Exe^utor, therefore found no further necessity to discuss the Heir of Line,
and Decerned against the Heir of Provision.

Grissel Stuart contra the Lord of Rosyth her Brother, January 21. 1668.
UMquhil Rosyth gave a Bond of Provision to his Daughter Grissel Stuart of
10000. pounds, payable at her age of 17. years, with an Obligement to Entertain
her in the mean time, but no Obligement of Annualrent; she pursues her Brother
(as representing her Father) for Implement, and having Lived with her Uncle a
part of her Fathers time, and alleging that she was hardly used by her
Stepmother, she craves Aliment for that time of her Fathers Lifetime, and for
six, or seven years since his Death, or craved Annualrent for her Sum. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, as to the Annualrent before her Fathers Death,
because she ought to have continued in her Fathers Family, and there neither
is, nor can be alleged any just Cause wherefore she should have deserted the
same. 2dly. Absolvitor from Annualrent, or Entertainment since her age of 17.
years, because the Bond bears Entertainment till that age, and no
Entertainment, or Annualrent thereafter. 3dly, She does not, nor cannot
allege that she paid out any thing for Entertainment, but was Entertained
gratis by her Uncle.

The Lords found this no ground to exclude her from Aliment, and found Aliment
due after the Term of her Bond, as well as before, but not Annualrent, and
modified six hundredth Merkes per annum, without allowing any thing for the year
her Father Lived, but modified the more largely, it being unfit to Dispute the
necessities of her Removal.

Ianet Schaw contra Margaret Calderwood, Eodem die.
JAnet Schaw pursues a Reduction of a Liferent Infeftment, granted to Margaret
Calderwood by the Pursuers Father, as being in lecto. The Defender alleged no
Process, because the Pursuer was not Heir the time of the Disposition, but
another Heir appearand, who never Entered.

The Lords Repelled the Defense.

The Defender alleged that this being an Liferent Infeftment to her by her
Husband, and but of a small value, it was valide, and the Husband might
Discharge that natural Debt of providing his Wife on Deathbed, she having no
Contract of provision before, The Pursuer answered, that the Defender might
take the benefit of her Terce, which is her legal Provision, beyond which, a
Deed on Deathbed (in prejudice of the Heir) is null, and this Liferent is of
the Husbands whole Estate, and yet the Pursuer is willing it should stand, it
being restricted to a third of the Rents of the Lands.

The Lords Sustained the Infeftment only for a third.

Mary Dowglasse Lady of Wamphray, contra the Lord of Wamphray, January 22.
1668.
UMquhil Wamphray having Infeft his Lady in two thousand Merks of Liferent
yearly, by her Contract of Marriage, out of certain Lands therein mentioned;
and being obliged to pay her, as well Infeft, as not Infeft, and to warrant the
Lands to be worth two thousand Merks of Free Rent. She pursues this Wamphray
for payment, who alleged Deductions of public Burdens. It was answered, that
an Annualrent was not liable to public Burdens; for the Act of Parliament,
1647. made thereanent was Rescinded, and not Revived, and this Provision is
payable, not only really, but personally, though there had been no Infeftment,
and that the obligement to make the Land worth two thousand Merks of free Rent,
could be to no other End but to make the Annualrent free, especially the
Contract being in anno 1647. after Maintenance was imposed, which was the
heaviest Burden. It was answered, that an obligement for payment of an
Annualrent, relating to no particular Land, could not be burdened with the
Land, or if it did relate to a stock of Money, the ordinar Annualrent of the
Money behoved to be free, but this Annualrent relates to no stock, and its
first Constitution is out of the Lands mentioned in the Contract; so that
albeit there had been no Infeftment, it must bear proportionably with the Land,
and albeit the Act of Parliament be Rescinded, yet the common ground of Law and
Equity, and the Custom thereupon remains, neither does the provision (to make
the Land worth so much of free Rent) infer, that therefore the Annualrent must
be free, which would have been so expressed at the Constitution of the
Annualrent, if it had been so meaned.

The Lords found this Annualrent liable for the Assesment, notwithstanding the
Act of Parliament was Rescinded, and all that was alleged against the same,
was repelled.

John Justice contra Mary Stirling his Mother, January 23. 1668.
THere was a Bond granted by Stirling of Coldoch, whereby he granted him to
have received from Umquhil John Justice, and Mary Stirling his Spouse, the Sum
of 1300. Merks, and obliged him to pay to the said Husband and his Spouse, and
longest liver of them two, and the Heirs gotten between them, or their
Assigneys, which failzying to the Heirs of the last liver: the said Mary having
survived, did uplift the Sum, and now John Justice (as Heir of the Marriage to
his Father) pursues his Mother to make forthcoming the Sum, and employ the same
to her in Liferent, and to him in Fee. It was alleged for the Defender
Absolvitor, because by the conception of the Bond she is Feear, and so may
dispose of the Money at her pleasure. The Pursuer answered, that the conception
of the Bond did no ways make the Wife Feear, but the Husband, according to the
ordinar Interpretation of Law in Conjunct-fees betwixt Husband and Wife; and as
to the Clause, in relation to the longest liver, their Heirs and Assigneys, the
Fee could not be Constitute thereby, otherwise the Fee behoved to be pendent
and uncertain, and in effect be in no Person so long as they live together, but
after the Death of either, the Fee should then begin to be Constitute in the
Surviver, which is inconsistent, and therefore the Fee behoved to be Constitute
by the first words, obliging to pay the Sum to the Husband and Wife, the
longest liver of them two, whereby the Husband was Feear and might have
disposed thereupon during his Life, but without prejudice of his Wifes
Liferent; there is no doubt but this Sum might have been Arrested for his Debt,
and it could not be then pretended that ex even^u, the Wife by surviving might
become the Feear. It was answered for the Wife, that albeit Conjunct-fees
between Man and Wife do ordinarily Constitute the Husband Feear, yet there are
many Cases in which such Conjunct fees the Wife may be Feear, and here the
termination being upon the Surviver, makes her the Surviver sole Feear,
although both were Conjunct Feears before, and neither of them properly a
Liferenter, till by the event it did appear who should Survive, neither can any
such subtilty of the dependence, or uncertainty of the Fee, render the
intention of the Parties ineffectual.

The Lords found, that by the foresaid Clause, the Husband was Feear, and the
Heirs of the Marriage, were Heirs of Provision to him, and that failzying the
Heirs of the Marriage, the Wifes Heirs were substitute as Heirs of Tailzie, and
therefore ordained the Sum to be so employed, and secured, that if the Pursuer
being the only Heir of the Marriage should Die before he dispose thereupon, it
should return to the Heirs and Assigneys of the Mother.

The Lady Wolmet and Dankeith her Spouse, contra Major Biggar, and James
Todrig, January 24. 1668.
THe Lady Wolmet and Dankeith her Spouse, pursues Major Biggar, and the
Tennents of Wolmet for Mails and Duties. Compearance is made for James Todrig,
who being Assigned to an Annualrent, due out of the Lands of Wolmet, to the old
Lady Wolmet by an Infeftment, long prior to this Ladies Infeftment; upon which
Right there was also raised an Inhibition, whereupon Todrig (as Assigney)
pursues Reduction of the Pursuers Right, and several others, and obtained
Decree thereupon, and now alleadges that the Lady can have no Mails and
Duties, because her Right stands Reduced at the Instance of the said James
Todrig, who has also Appryzed upon his anterior Annualrent. The Pursuer
answered, that the alleadgeance ought to be repelled, because the Right of his
Annualrent, Appryzing, and Reduction has been several years in the Person of
Major Biggar, who has been all that time in Possession of the Lands, and
therefore by his Intromission, Todrigs Appryzing is satisfied within the legal.
It was answered for Major Biggar, albeit the Right was, and had been his, and
he in Possession, yet the Appryzing cannot be satisfied thereby, unless he had
Possessed by virtue of the Appryzing, which cannot be alleged, because he
offers him to prove that he Entered, and continued in Possession many years
before he got this Right, by virtue of other Infeftments. The Pursuer answered,
that by the Reduction at Todrigs Instance, all Major Biggars Rights stands
reduced, so that albeit by them he entered in Possession, yet he cannot ascribe
his Possession to them after they were Reduced. It was answered, that albeit
his Rights were Reduced, there was no Removing, or Action of Mails and Duties
intented against him upon the prevailing Right, and therefore his Possession
behoved to be ascribed to his prior Possession, though Reduced. 2dly, He having
now diverse Rights in his Person, may ascribe his Possession to any of them he
pleases against this Pursuer, from whom he derived not his Possession, nor the
Cause thereof. 3dly, It was answered, that the Pursuer might acquire this
Right, ad hunc effectum to purge it, and the Inhibition, and Reduction thereon,
in so far as it might be prejudicial to his prior Rights, and not to bruik by
it. The Pursuer answered, that albeit Biggar might have acquired this Right, to
evacuat and purge the same, if that had been declared in his acquisition
thereof, or otherwise legally, yet not having done it, he must be understood to
bruik only by that Right that was standing. 2dly, If he should declare that he
did acquire it to purge it, then, as his own Right, revives which was Reduced,
so must this Pursuers Right, which was also Reduced in that same Reduction
revive, especially in casu tam favorabili, that the Pursuer may not be excluded
from her Liferent, which is her Aliment, and seeing the Decree of Reduction was
obtained by mere Collusion, and is offered to be disclaimed upon Oath, by the
Advocats marked, Compearing therein.

The Lords found that Major Biggar behoved to ascribe his Possession to Todrigs
Right, and to none of the Reduced Rights, all being jointly in his Person, and
not having declared quo titulo possidebat, and that he cannot now declare that
he makes no use of Todrigs Right, in so far as may be prejudicial to his own
prior Rights, and makes use of it as it is prejudicial to the Pursuers Rights,
which were reduced together, seeing the Pursuers Rights would have excluded the
Majors other Rights, to which he would now ascribe his Pessession.

Magistrates of contra the Earl of Findlator, Eodem die.
THere was a Bond granted by one Iackson Principal, and a Cautioner which is
also alleged to have been Subscribed by Umquhil Inch-Martin as an other
Cautioner; which Bond being Registrat at the Creditors Instance, he did
thereupon Incarcerat the principal Debtor, whom the Magistrates having suffered
unwarrantably to escape; the Creditor obtained Decree against the Magistrates
for payment of the Debt. The Magistrates pays the Debt, but takes Assignation
from the Creditor, and now as Assigney pursues the Earl of Findlator, as
Representing Inchmartin one of the Cautioners for payment, who alleged
Absolvitor. first, Because the Bond is null as to Inchmartin, wanting both Date
and Witnesses; for it bears to have been Subscribed by the Principal, and the
other Cautioner, at such a place, such a day, before these Witnesses, who are
subjoyned, and designed, and after the Names of these Witnesses says, and
subscribed by Inchmartin, at after which there nothing follows in the Bond, but
the Subscriptions of Parties, none of which subscribe as Witness to Inchmartin,
yet his Subscription is amongst the Subscriptions of the other Parties, but as
to him it has neither place, day, nor Witnesses. The Pursuer offered to
condescend, that the day and place of the Subscription of the Witnesses, were
the same to Inchmartin, as to the Principal and other Cautioner, which they
alleged to be sufficient to make up this nullity, as is ordinar where the
Writer and Witnesses are not Designed, for thereupon the Defender may improve
the Bond by the Witnesses insert. The Defender answered, that albeit the Lords
supply the want of Designation of Writer or Witnesses, by condescending on
their Designation, that means of Improbation may be afforded, which is not the
question here; yet the Lords did never suffer Parties to fill up Witnesses,
where no Witnesses were insert, nor no Date, either as to Year or Month.

The Lords would not Sustain the Bond upon this condescendence, but ex officio
ordained the Witnesses (if they were alive) to be Examined, whether they were
Witnesses to Inchmartins Subscription, that same day, and place with the rest,
reserving to themselves what their Testimonies should ^perat.

The Defender further alleged Absolvitor, because he offers him to prove,
that the^e was a Decree against the Magistrates now pursuing, at the Instance
of the Creditor, for payment of the Debt, because they suffered the Principal
Creditor Incarcerat to escape, so that the Debt being paid by the Magistrates,
coming in the place of the Principal Debtor ex delicto, it is in the same case,
as if the Principal Debtor himself had paid; which necessarly liberats his
Cautioners. It was answered, that the Magistrates are only liable to the User of
the Diligence, pro damno and interesse, and to no other, for the Creditor (User
of the Diligence) might have consented to the escape of the Rebel, or might
discharged the subsidiarie Obligation, or Action competent, against the
Magistrates for suffering him to escape, whether the Cautioners would or not,
and therefore the Magistrates might as well take an Assignation from the
Creditor for payment of the Debt, which implies the Creditor his passing from
them as bound ex delicto, in which case he would only have given them a
Discharge, but here the Magistrates Contracts with the Creditor, and acquires
the Assignation, ut quilibet upon an equivalent Cause. It was answered for the
Defender, that this Assignation is evidently simulat in place of a Discharge,
there having preceeded a Decree against the Magistrates, ita est, that
Assignations granted to persons obliged for a Debt, does operat alwise as to
the Matter only as a Discharge, though more summarly, as when Cautioners pay,
and are Assigned, they must allow their own part, but much more these who are
liable ex delicto, having paid upon a Decree, cannot seek relief, whether
they have Assingation or Discharge, especially against Cautioners, and if this
were Sustained, all Rebels who had Cautioners might be suffered to escape,
where there is any Cautioners, for Messengers might be Deforced, taking
Assignation to the Debt, and proceeding against the Cautioners, and albeit the
user of the Diligence might consent to the Liberation, yet he could not pass
from the Obligation, ex delicto, which accresceth to all Parties having
Interest; and if the Cautioners had been dist^est by the Creditor, they might
pursue the Magistrates, suffering the Principal to escape, ex delicto and damno,
for if he had not been suffered to escape, they would have been paid.

The Lords found this Defense relevant, that the Magistrates pursuers, having
suffered the Rebel to escape, and Decree against them, and having satisfied
the Debt to the Creditor, that they could not have recourse against the
Cautioners, either by virtue of a Discharge; or Assignation. Here it was not
Debated, whether or not they might have recourse against the principal Debtor
escaping, who was principaliter in delicto, and the Magistrates but accessory.

Mr. William Mushate Minister of Hassenden, contra the Duke and Duchess of
Buccleugh, January 28. 1668.
THe Minister of Hassenden having obtained Designation of a Gleib, out of the
Duke of Buccleughs Lands, pursues Removing. The Duke Suspends on this Reason
that the Designation is null, not bearing Citation, nor ^numation to the
Parochiners, neither is the Duke Cited to the Designation upon 60. days, as
being out of the Country. It was answered, that by the constant Custom in such
Cases, there is only Intimation given at the Kirk Door, or out of the Pulpit of
the day of Designation, which the Defender offers to prove, uses to be done in
the like case.

Which the Lords found relevant, albeit the Intimation was not mentioned in the
Designation.

Robert Dobby contra the Lady Stanyhil his mother, Eodem die.
RObert Dobby pursues the Lady Stanyhil his Mother, for an Aliment, upon this
ground, that she being provided to an plentiful Liferent, being an Annualrent
of 2800. Merks yearly, there remains nothing to Aliment him the Heir, of free
Rent, being all exhausted by the Liferent, and Annualrent of the Debt. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because there is no ground in Law nor Custom for
an Aliment to the Heir, except the Rents were exhausted by real burdens by
Infeftment; but here at the Defuncts Death, there was only this Liferent, which
was not the half of the Rent, and there was no Infeftment more. 2dly, Aliments
is only competent to Minors, the Pursuer is Major, and may do for himself. The
Pursuer answered, that it was alike whether the Debts were personal, or real,
for if Apprysings had been used, they would all have been real, but the Pursuer
did prevent the same, by Selling a part of the Land at a great Rate, which was
all applied to the Creditors, and yet the Liferent, and Annualrent of the Debt
is* more then the Rent; neither is there any distinction in the Law as to
Majors and Minors, who were not bred with a Calling; and therefore Carberry
(who was a man of age) got an Aliment, and Anthonia Brown got an Aliment from
her Mother, who had an Annualrent in Liferent, and the Debts were all personal
at her Fathers Death, albeit some of them were Appryzed for, before she got her
Aliment. The Defender answered, that there was a sufficient Superplus, because
she offered to take the Lands, or find sufficient Tennents therefore, for 4300.
Merks yearly, which was a 1000. Pounds above her Liferent, and would exceed the
Annualrents of all the Debts.

The Lords found this last Defense relevant, but did not proceed to determin^,
whether an Aliment would be due, where the burden was but by personal Debt.

Alexander Binny contra Margaret Binny, Eodem die.
MArgaret Binny granted a Bond, obliging her self to Enter Heir of Line to her
Father, and to Resign the Lands in Favors of her Self, and the Heirs to be
Procreat of her own Body; which failzying, to the Heirs of Alexander Binny her
Father, and obliged her self to do nothing contrair to that Succession; and
having Married William Brotherstanes, by her Contract of Marriage, nomine
dotis, she Dispones the Lands to him. This Margaret was the only Child of
Alexander Binnies first Marriage, and there was an Inhibition used upon the
Bond, before her Contract of Marriage: Alexander Binny being Son of the second
Marriage, and Heir of Line to his Father, pursues the said Margaret to fulfill
the Bond, and to Enter, and Resign the Land conform thereto, and thereupon did
obtain Decree, which being now Suspended. It was alleged, that this being
but an obligement to Constitute a Tailzy, could have no effect to hinder her to
Dispone to her Husband in name of Tocher, which is the most favorable Debt, or
to Contract any other Debt, which the Pursuer (who behoved to be her Heir)
could never quarrel. 2dly, It was alleged for the Husband, that he could not
be Decerned as Husband, to consent to this Resignation, contrair to his own
Contract. It was answered, that this was not only a Bond of Tailzy, but an
obligement to do nothing that might change the Succession, and so she could not
voluntarly Dispone, but the Husbands Provision might be Competent enough, seeing
both she has the Liferent, and the Children of the Marriage will succeed in the
Fee^ and albeit the Pursuer must be Heir of Tailzy, yet obligements in favors
of Heirs of Tailzy, are always effectual against Heirs of Line, in relation to
whom the Heir of Tailzy is but as an stranger.

The Lords repelled the Reason, and found the Letters orderly proceeded, till
the Wife Entered, and Resigned with Consent of her Husband, conform to the
Bond, seeing there was Inhibition used before the Contract; but they did not
Decide, whether this Clause would have excluded the Debts, to be Contracted by
the said Margaret, or her Heirs, upon a just ground without Collusion, but
found that she could not make a voluntare Disposition, to exclude that
Succession, in respect of the obligement to do nothing in the contrair.

E^phan Brown contra Thomas Happiland, January 29. 1668.
MArjory Brown being first Married to Happiland, and thereafter to Robert
Brown; she Acquired Right to a Tenement of Land to her self in Liferent, and
Euphan Happiland her Daughter of the first Marriage in Fee; which Infeftment is
given by the said Thomas Brown her Husband, being then Bailly for the time.
Agnes Happiland Dispones this Tenement to Thomas Brown, Heir of the Marriage,
betwixt the said Umquhil Thomas Brown, and Marjory Bruce, and for the price
thereof, gets a Bond relative thereto. Thomas Brown being Charged upon this
Bond, raises Reduction upon Minority and Lesion. To the which it was answered,
there was no Lesion, because the Disposition of the Land was an equivalent
Onerous Cause. It was answered, that the Disposition was no Onerous Cause,
because the Lands Disponed, belonged not to the Disponer, but to the Suspender
himself, in so far as they were Conquest by Marjory Bruce, while she was Spouse
to his Father, so that the Money (wherewith she Acquired the same) belonging to
the Husband jure Mariti, the Land must also be his, unless it were
condescended and instructed, that she had Heretable Sums, not falling within
the jus Mariti, wherewith this Right was Acquired. It was duplyed, that this
was but a ^aked Conjecture and Presumption, which is sufficiently taken off, by
the Husbands giving Seizing as Bailly. It was answered, that this was actus
officij, which he could not refuse, but he knew that the Infeftment in favors
of his Wife, would accresce to himself.

The Lords repelled the Reasons of Suspension and Reply, in respect of the
Answer and Duply, and found that the Fee of the Land belonged to the Wife and
her Daughter, and that there was no Lesion in giving Bond therefore.

Lord Aitoun contra James Fairy, Eodem die.
THe Lord of Aitoun having bought a Horse from James Fairy; pursues for
repetition of the price, and for entertainment of the Horse since, upon this
ground, that he offered to prove by the Witnesses, at the buying of the Horse,
that James Fairy promised to uphold him but six years old, and that he was
truly twelve years old: The question was, whether this was only probable by
Oath, or Witnesses.

But the Lords perceiving an anterior question, how soon the Horse was offered
back by the Pursuer, they ordained him to condescend, that very shortly
thereafter he offered the Horse back, otherwise they would not sustain the
Process.

John Papla contra the Magistrates of Edinburgh, January 31. 1668.
JOhn Papla pursues the present Magistrates of Edinburgh, for payment of a Debt
due to him, by a Person Incarcerat in their Tolbooth, who escaped. The
Defenders alleged no Process, till the Magistrates who then were, especially
Bailly Boyd (by whose Warrant the Rebel came out) be called. 2dly, The present
Magistrates cannot be liable Personally, having done no Fault; neither can they
be liable, as representing the Burgh, at least but subsidiarie after the
Magistrates who then were in culpa, were Discussed now after six or seven years
time. The Pursuer answered, that the Prison being the Prison of the Burgh, the
Burgh was liable principaliter, and if only the Magistrate doing the Fault were
liable, the Creditor might oftimes loose his Debt, these being oftimes of no
Fortune, or sit to Govern, and the Town who Choiseth them, is answerable for
them; neither is the Pursuer obliged to know who were Baillies at that time, or
who did the fault, and so is not bound to Cite them.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses, and found the present Magistrates (as
representing the Town) liable, but prejudice to them, to Cite them who did the
Fault.

Robert Ker contra Henry Ker, February 5. 1668.
RObert Ker of Graden having granted Bond to Robert Ker his Son, for 3000.
Merks of borrowed Money, and 3000. Merks of Portion; for which Sum he did
Infeft him in an Annualrent of 240. Pound yearly, Suspending the Payment of the
one half of the Annualrent till his Death; whereupon Robert pursues a Poinding
of the Ground. It was alleged for Henry Ker (the eldest Son, who stands now
Infeft in the Lands) Absolvitor, because he stands Infeft in the Lands before
this Infeftment of Annualrent being but base, took effect by Possession. The
Pursuer answered, first, That the Defenders Infeftment, being posterior, and
granted to the appearand Heir, without a Cause Onerous, it is perceptio
Haereditatis, and if the Father were Dead, it would make the Defender liable as
Heir, and therefore now he cannot make use thereof, in prejudice of the
Pursuer. 2dly. The Pursuer offered to prove, that his Annualrent was cled with
Possession before the Defenders Infeftment, in so far as he Received the half
of the Annual^ent, which is sufficient to validat the Infeftment for the whole,
seeing there are not two Annualrents, but one for the whole Sum, and seeing the
(...) could do no more, the one half of the Annualrent being Suspended till his
Fathers Death.

The Lords found this second Reply relevant, and found the Possession of the
half was sufficient to validat the Possession for the whole, but superceded to
give answer to the former Reply, till the conclusion of the Cause, not being
clear, that the Defense upon the Defenders Inseftment could be taken away
summarly, though he was appearand Heir without Reduction, upon the Act of
Parliament, 1621.

Mr. George Iohnstoun contra Sir Charles Erskin, February 6. 1668.
THe Lands of Knock^^^, being part of the Lands of Houdon, did belong to
Umquhil Richard Irwing, Umquhile Mr. John Alexander Minister, having Charged
Robert Irwing to enter Heir in special to the said Richard his Grand-sir in
these Lands, he did Appryze the same from Robert as specially Charged to enter
Heir, but Robert died before he was Infeft, or Charged; the Superior, Sir
Charles Erskine, has Appryzed from Mr. John Alexander all Right competent to
him in these Lands, and thereby having Right to Mr. John Alexanders Appryzing,
he is Infeft thereupon. After Robert Irwings Decease, his Sisters served
themselves Heir to Richard their Grand-sir, and are Infeft, do Dispone to Mr.
George Iohnstoun, who is also Inseft. Mr. George pursues for Mails and Duties,
in the Name of Irwings his Authors; Compearance is made for Sir Charles
Erskine, who alleged Absolvitor. First, Because he has been seven years in
Possession of the Lands in question, by virtue of Mr. John Alexanders
Appryzing, and his own, and so is tulus exceptione in judicio possess^rio, and
cannot be quarrelled till his Right be Reduced. 2dly, He is potior jure, and
his Right must exclude the Pursuers, because he having Right to Mr. John
Alexanders Appryzing, which was Deduced against Robert Irwing, as specially
Charged to enter Heir; so Richard, as to him, is in as good case, as Robert had
been actually Entered, and Infeft by the Act of Parliament, declaring that when
Parties are Charged to enter Heir, and lies out, sicklike Process, and
Execution shall be against them, as they were actually Entered; likeas the
Tenor of the special Charge introduced by Custom, to perfect the foresaid Act
of Parliament, bears expressly, that the Person Charged shall enter specially,
and obtain himself Infeft, with Certification, that the user of the Charge
shall have the like Execution against him, as if he were Entered, and Infeft;
and therefore Mr. John Alexanders Appryzing against Robert I^wing, so Charged,
was as effectual to him, as if Robert had been actually Infeft, in which case
there is no question, but the Appryzer might obtain himself Infeft upon the
Appryzing, after the Death of him against whom he Appryzed, and that summarly,
without new Process, and there is no difference whether the Superior were
Charged during the Life of the Debtor, or not. The Pursuer answered to the
first, that no Party can claim the benefit of a Possessory judgment, unless
he have a real Right by Infeftment, at least by Tack; but a naked Appryzing,
thoug it may carry Mails and Duties, as a naked Assigation, and is valide
against the Debtor or his Heir, ^et in it self it is an incomplete Right, and
not become real. It was answered, that the Appryzing alone was sufficient, as
was lately found in the Case of Mr. Rodger Hog, against the Tennent of
Wauchtoun.

The Lords repelled the first Defense, and found there was no grond for a
Possessory judgment; here there was neither Infeftment, nor Charge upon the
Appryzing.

The Pursuer answered to the second Defense, that it was not relevant to
exclude him, because Richard Irving having Dyed last, vest and seized in the
Lands, and Robert Irving never having been In^eft, the Pursuers, Roberts
Sisters, who were Heirs appearand, buth to Richard their Grand-sir, and Robert
their Brother, could not possibly obtain themselves Infeft as Heirs to their
Brother, becuse the Inquest could not find that Robert Dyed last, vest and
seized as of Fee, but Richard and any Appryzing against Robert (who was never
Infeft) evanished, seeing no Infeftment was obtained upon the Appryzing, nor no
Charge used against the Supperior, during Roberts Life, so that the Appryzer
ought to have Charged de novo these Pursuers to Enter Heir to Richard, and
ought to have Appryzed from them, as lawfully Chaged, and to have obtained
Infeftment upon the Appryzing in their Life, and as the Sisters would exclude
the imperfect Diligence against the Brother, so much more may Mr. George
Iohnstoun, who is their singular Successor. It was duplyed by the Defender,
that Mr. George Iohnstoun, albeit he be singular Successor, yet he is Infeft
after Sir Charles Erskin; and therefore the question now is only betwixt the
Appryzer, having Charged the Brother in special, to Enter to these Lands to his
Grand-sir, and these Sisters being Infeft as Heirs to the same Grand-sir, and
albeit they could only Infeft themselves as Heirs to the Grand-sir, the Brother
never having been Infeft, to the effect, that they might either Reduce, or
Redeem the Appryzing led against their Brother, because the Charge to Enter
Heir, did state their Brother Charged, as if he had been actually Infeft, only
in relation to, and in favors of the Appryzer, who Charged him, yet as to that
Appryzer, he is in the same condition, as if Robert had been actually Infeft,
and there is no Law requiring him to obtain Infeftment, or to Charge the
Superior during the Life of Robert, who is specially Charged; but as in other
Appryzings, so in this, he may Charge the Superior, or obtain Infeftment when
ever he pleases. It is true, that if a singular Successor had obtained
Infeftment upon the Resignation of Richards Heirs, Entered and Infeft before
the Appryzer had obtained Infeftment, the Appryzers delay might have prejudged
him, and preferred the first complete Right, but the Heirs themselves could
never exclude him, though their Infeftment were prior.

The Lordi found the second Defense and Duply relevant, and found the
Infeftment upon the Appryzing (against the appearand Heir) specially Cla^ged,
and the Appriyzing it self to be as valide, as if the appearand Heir had been
actually In^eft, and that the Compryzing became not void through want of
Infeftment, or Charge against the Superior, during that appearand Heirs Life.

Alexander Chisholm contra Renies, Eodem die.
ALexander Chisholm as Executor to John Graham of Orchel, pursues William and
Archibald Renies for a Bond, granted by them to the Defunct, in anno 1635. who
alleged that the true cause of the Bond was by Transaction of a Blood-wit,
made by the Lord of Gloret, and Mr. James Row, in whose Hands this Bond (then
being blank) was put, and which unwarrantably came in the Hands of Orchel the
Party, who in stead of 400. Merks, filled up 2000. Merks, which is offered to
be proven by the Arbiters Oaths, yet on Life. The Pursuer answered, that his
Bond could not be taken away by Witnesses, especially extrinsick Witnesses,
there being no Writ relative to this Bond, or of the same Date, or Witnesses
that might give any presumption of the Cause thereof. The Defender answered,
that there were here far stronger presumptions, viz. That this Bond has been
Dormant 33. years, albeit it bore no Annualrent, and Orchel was known to be in
great necessity, and by ocular inspection, it appears to be filled up with
another Hand, and blotted, which presumptions, being so singular, give ground
enough to the Lords to Examine Witnesses, ex nobili officio.

The Lords ordained the Witnesses and Arbiters to be Examined ex officio,
reserving to themselves what these Testimonies should operat, in respect of the
antiquity and singularity of the Case.

Captain Coningsby contra Captain Mastertoun, Feb. 7. 1668.
CAptain Coningsby, Captain of a Privateer, pursues Captain Mastertoun for his
share of two Prizes, taken upon the 5th. of August 1666. upon two grounds,
first, upon concourse, because both these Privateers being in view of the first
Prize, did both make up to her; Coningsby being nearest, and that when they
came to near distance, within half a Mile, Coningsby fired the first Gun,
Mastertoun the second, and Coningsby the third; at the firing of which the
Prize streekt Sail, which signified her surrender without more resistance; and
albeit Mastertoun being to the Windward, came first Aboard, yet it was without
resistance, the Prize having rendered before, by streiking Sail; Coningsby
being within a small distance, came presently up, and Demanded his share,
according to the proportion of the Men and Guns of both Friggats, being the
ordinar Rule of division of Prizes, betwixt concurring Friggars. 2dly, Upon the
ground of consortship, or society made up betwixt the two Captains, after
taking of the first Prize, and by the same consortship, craved the share of a
second Prize, taken that same day, it having been agreed, that both should be
sharers in all Prizes that should be taken by either, till their Victuals were
spent. The Defender, Mastertoun and his Owners, alleged Absolvitor, from both
these grounds, for as to the concourse, it is not relevant, unless the Pursuer
had alleged that he had a real influence upon the Capture, for as to any Guns
he shot, they were without a Miles distance, and Mastertouns Friggat being much
lighter and swifter, did Oversail Coningsby, and when the Prize streikt Sail,
Coningsby was a Mile behind, and at the same distance when she was taken, and
therefore was neither concurrent in the force, nor in the fear, and as to the
consortship, it was answered, first, that albeit there was a communing of
consortship, yet there was no concluded agreement, for Coningsby claimed a
share according to Men and Guns, which Mastertoun denied, having far fewer Men
and Guns, whereby he that took the Prize would have had the smallest share, so
that it evanished. 2dly, Albeit there had been a consortship made by the
Captain, yet that could not be effectual, until it had been concluded in Writ.
3dly, It could not be effectual in prejudice of the Owners; the Captain having
no power to make any such consortship, either by his office, or special
Commission. The Pursuer answered, that his alleadgeance upon concurrence was
most relevant, he being nearer when the Chase began, and within a small
distance when the Pryze streiked Sail, and was taken; and it cannot be doubted
but the Prize had terror of both, to the second, Masters of Ships by their
Office, may in many cases impignorat, or Sell the Ship, or Outreik, and
Captains of Privateers having Commission to make Prize, have eo ipso, the power
to use the most conducible means, and so to make consortship for that end: and
albeit the first Prize was taken before the consortship, yet the Pursuer having
upon his concourse demanded a proportion, conform to his Men and Guns, and
being far stronger nor Mastertoun, and able to master him, and his Prize both,
he might in such a case transact, and make this Co-partinary, which was useful
to his Owners, making them to have the half of the first Prize, whereof they
would not have fallen above a third or fourth Part, so that it was utiliter
gestum, et transactum in re dubia, and whereas it is alleged to have been but
a communing, the contrair is evident, by the putting in of Coningsbies Men both
in Mastertouns Ship, and in the Prize; neither is there any necessity of Writ
in such Transactions made in procinctu belli, et in alto mari.

The Lords having before answer^ Examined Mastertoun and Witnesses hinc inde,
for clearing the matter of Fact, Mastertoun himself did acknowledge the
consortship to have been agreed upon, but affirmed that when they came to
Subscribe the Writ, Coningsby craved a proportion, by Men and Guns, which he
refused without an equal division, and several of the Witnesses having Deponed,
that that difference was referred to the Owners without dissolving the
consortship; Mastertoun himself having also Deponed, that in contemplation of
the consortship, Coningsbies Men wa^ put Aboard of him and the Prize, and the
Witnesses having variously Deponed anent the distance, when the first Prize
streiked Sail, and was taken.

The Lords found a consortship sufficiently proven, and that there was a
concourse as to the first Prize, and therefore found Coningsby to have a Right
to a share, which they found to be the equal share, seeing Mastertoun was most
instrumental, and did actually seize upon both Prizes.

The Minister of Cockburns-path contra his Parochiners. Eodem die.
THe Minister of Cockburns-path having obtained a Designation of a Horse, and
two Kines Grass, conform to the Act of Parliament 1661. pursues a Declarator
of his Right thereby. It was alleged Absolvitor, because the Designation was
null, in respect it was by the Bishops Warrant direct to three Ministers
Nominatim, and it was performed only by two, the third not having come, and a
Commission to the three must be understood jointly, and not to empower any two
of them, unless it had been expressed, likeas the Act of Parliament anent the
Grass, requires the Designation of three Ministers. The Pursuer answered, that
by the Act of Parliament, 1661. the Designation of Grass is appointed to be
according to the old standing Acts, anent Manses and Gleibs, which do not
require three Ministers, that number being only required by the Act of
Parliament 1649. which is Rescinded, and not revived as to that point, and
seeing three Ministers are not neces^ar, but that two are sufficient, the
Designation done by two is sufficient.

The Lords Sustained the Designation, unless the Defender show weighty Reasons
of prejudice upon the matter.

Sir John Weyms contra the Lord of Touchon, February 8. 1668.
SIr John Weyms having a Commission from the Parliament to lift the
Maintenance, when he was General Commissar, Charges the Lord of Touchon for
his Lands, who Suspended on this Reason, that by that Act and Commission,
singular Successors are excepted. The Pursuer answered, that the Act excepteth
singular Successors, who Bought the Lands, but the Suspender is appearand Heir,
and Bought in Appryzings for small Sums; and as Wodsetters are not freed as
singular Successors, nor Appryzers within the legal, so neither can the
Suspender; for albeit the legal, as to the Appryzer be expired, yet the Act of
Parliament between Debtor and Creditor, makes all Apprizings Bought in by
appearand Heirs Redeemable from them, on payment of the Sums they Bought them
in for, within ten years after they Bought them, and therefore as to Touchon,
who is apperand Heir, he is in the same case with an Appryzer, within the legal.

Which the Lords found relevant, and Decerned against Touchon.

Andrew Greirson contra Patrick Mcilroy, Messenger, February 13. 1668.
ANdrew Greirson having employed Patrick Mcilroy Messenger, to use Inhibition,
and Arrestment against Sir James Mcdougal of Garthland, and having failed to
make use thereof in time before he Disponed, did pursue him, and Houstoun of
Cutreoch his Cautioner, before the Lord Lion, whereupon the said Patrick and
his Cautioner were Decerned to make payment of 500 Merks of Penalty, and of the
Damnage and Interest sustained by the Pursuer, to the value of the Sums,
whereupon the Inhibition and Arrestment should have been used. The Messenger
and his Cautioner raises Suspension and Reduction, and insists upon this
Reason, that the Decree is null, as a non suo judice, because albeit the Lion
be Authorized by Act of Parliament 1587. cap. 46. to take Caution for
Messengers Discharge of their Office, and upon default, may Summond Messengers
and their Cautioners, and may Deprive the Messengers, and Decern them, and
their Cautioners, in the pains and penalty for which they became Cautioners,
yet the Lion is not warranted thereby to Determine the Damnage of Parties,
through Default of Messengers, which may be of the greatest Moment and
Intricacy; and would be of dangerous consequence to give the Lion such
Jurisdiction over all the Kingdom. The Charger answered, that the Messenger was
unquestionably liable to the Lions Juridiction, and that both he and the
Cautioner had made themselves liable thereto, by Enacting themselves in the
Lions Books, and granting Bond Registerable therein and it would be great
inconvenience to pursue Messengers before the Lion only for Deprivation and
Penalty, and have need of another Process for Damnage, and Interest, and that
the Lion has been accustomed to Decern Cautioners so before.

The Lords found the Reason of Reduction relevant, and turned the Decree into
a Lybel, but Sustained the Decree as to the Penalty of 500. Merks, in which
the Messenger was Enacted, but not for the Damnage and Interest, ne^^her
against the Messenger nor Cautioner.

William Borthwick contra Lord Borthwick, February 14. 1668.
WIlliam Borthwick having Charged the Lord Borthwick for payment of a Sum of
Money, he Suspends, and alleadges that William is Debtor to him in an
equivalent Sum, for the price of the Lands of Hal^eriot, Sold by my Lord to the
Charger, conform to a Minut produced. The Charger answered, that the Reason was
not relevant, unl^sse the Suspender would extend and perfect the Minut, which
my Lord refuses especially, and particularly, to Subscribe a Disposition of the
Lands, with common Pasturage in Borthwick Moor. The Suspender answered, that he
was most willing to extend the Minut, but would not insert that Clause, because
the Minut could not carry, nor import the same, bearing only a Disposition of
the Lands, with Parts, Pendicles, and Pertinents thereof, which he was content
should be insert in the extended Disposition, and it was only proper after the
Infeftment was perfected, that the Charger should make use of it, so far as it
could reach, which he was content should be reserved as accords. 2dly, If he
were obliged to Dispute the effect of it, it could not extend to Pasturage in
the Moor of Borthwick^ first, Because a special servitude of a Pasturage in
such a Moor, requires an express Infeftment, and cannot be carried under the
name of Pendicles, Parts, or Pertinents, albeit the Moor were contiguous, and
the common Moor of a Barony: but, 2dly, This Moor lies discontiguous from the
Lands of Halheriot, and my Lords Lands lies betwixt, and does not belong to the
whole Barony, but to some of the Tennents of it only. The Charger answered,
that this being a Minut, beh^ved to be extended in ample form, expressing all
Rights, particularly that the Right de jure, could carry, and there was no
Reason to make him accept of Lands with a Plea, and de jure Pendicles, and
Pertinents, do well extend to common Pasturage, when the said Pasturage is so
Possessed, and it cannot be contraverted, but the Heretors and Possessors of
Halheriot, have been in undoubted Possession of common Pasturage in this Moor,
and that the Rent payable therefore is upon consideration of the Pasturage,
without which, it could neither give the Rent it pays, nor the Price, so that
when my Lord Dispones the Lands, with the Pertinents, and at the time of the
Disposition; this Pasturage is unquestionably Possessed as a Pertinent of the
Land; the extended Charter, and Disposition ought in all Reason to comprehend
it expressly: neither is there any difference whether the Pasturage be of a Moor
contiguous, or belonging to the whole Barony, seeing it cannot be Contraverted,
but it was Possessed as Pertinent of this Room the time of the Bargain; and to
clear that it was so Possessed, the Charger produced a Wodset, granted by the
Lord Borthwick to himself of the same Room, bearing expressly Pasturage in the
common Moor of Borthwick. The Suspender answered, that the Wodset made against
the Charger, in respect this Clause being express in the Wodset, he had not put
it in the Minut, which as jus nobilius absorbed the Wodset, and cannot be
looked upon as a Discharge of the Reversion only, because my Lord was Superior
by the Wodset, and by the Minut he is to Resign, likeas in the minut there is a
Disposition of the Teinds, which is not in the Wodset.

The Lords found that the Minut ought to be extended, bearing expressly the
common Pasturage in the Moor of Borthwick, in respect the same was a Pertinent
of the Lands, Sold the time of the Bargain, and was not excepted.

Sir George Mckenzy contra John Fairholm, Eodem die.
SIr George Mckenzie insisted in the Reduction of the Bond Subscribed by him,
as Cautioner for his Father in his Minority. It was alleged for John
Fairholm, that he could not Reduce upon Minority, because he had Homologat the
Bonds after his Majority, in so far as he had accepted Discharges of the
Annualrent, bearing Deduction of the Bond by his Father as Principal, and him
as Cautioner, and Discharging them both, which Discharges Sir George himself
did Receive from John Fairholm, and paid the Money. Sir George answered, that
the Discharges do not bear that he paid the Money, but bears that the same was
paid by the Principal Debtor, and his Receiving of a Discharge, not having
paid, cannot import his Homologation, or acknowledgement of the Bond, for to
prevent question and trouble, one may take Discharge of what he denies to be
Due, and the Bond being then standing Unreduced, he may well accept a
Discharge, not knowing the event of the relevancy, or probation of his Minority.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found that the Discharges imported no
Homologation, unless it were instructed that Sir George, out of his own Money,
paid the Annualrent.

The Lord of Haining contra the Town of Selkirk, February 15. 1668.
THere being mutual Pursuits betwixt the Town of Selkirk, and the Lord of
Haining, the Town pursuing a Declarator of the Right of Property of the
Commonty of Selkirk, and Haining pursuing a Declarator of his Right of
Pasturage in the said Commonty, by virtue of his Infeftments of the Lands of
Haining, which Lands are a part of the Kings Property of the Barony of Selkirk,
and that this Common is the Commonty of the said Barony, Possessed by all the
adjacent Fewars of the Barony, and whereof they have been in immemorial
Possession.

The Lords did, before answer, ordain both Parties to produce all Rights,
Writs, or Evidents they would make use of in the Cause, and also to adduce
Witnesses, hinc inde, of both their Possessions, and interrupting others.

Haining produced a Charter by the King, in anno 1505. of the Lands of Haining,
being a part of the Kings Property, bearing cum partibus et pertinentibus, cum
pascuis et pasturis, but not bearing in communi pastura, or cum communiis,
generally or particularly in the Common of Selkirk; he did also produce
posterior Charters of the same Land, bearing cum communi pastura, and did
adduce several Witnesses, proving 40. years continual Possession, but some of
his Witnesses proved Interruptions, by the Town of Selkirk's, cutting of
Divots, cast by him and his Predecessors upon the Moor. The Town of Selkirk
produced their Charter of the Burgh, posterior to Hainings first Charter,
bearing that their Ancient Evidents were burnt by the English, and therefore
the King gives them the Privilege of the Burgh of Selkirk, with the Burgage
Lands thereof, cum communiis ad dictum Burgum spectantibus, which the King
confirms by a posterior Charter, giving the Town warrant to Ryve out 1000.
Aikers of Land of the Common; they did also produce several Instruments of
interruption, not only by cutting of the Fail and Divots, cast by Haining or
his Tennents, but by turning their Cattle off the Moor, as proper to
themselves, and turning off all the Heretors Cattle they found thereupon, and
by yearly Riding about the whole Marches of the Moor. They did also produce a
Decree at the Towns Instance against the Tennents of Haining, Decerning them
to Defist and Cease from the Moor; in which Decree, Hainings Predecessor was
Provost of Selkirk, and is Pursuer of the Cause; they also produced two
Missives, Written by Umquhil Haining, acknowledging that the Town had cut his
Divots, Casten upon the Head Room, and making apollogy for Casting of the same,
denying it to be by his Warrant or Knowledge; they did also produce two Acts of
the Town Court, bearing Haining to have desired liberty to draw Stones off the
Common to Build a Park Dike, and to Cast some Divots for his Tennents Houses;
they did also adduce several Witnesses, proving their continual, and
uninterrupted Possession of the Moor this forty years and more, which proved
also frequent interruptions against Haining, especially by cutting of Divots,
and also by turning off his Cattle, upon which probation it was alleged for
the Town that they had instructed sufficient Right to the Property of this
Moor, and that they had debarred the Lord of Haining and his Tennents
therefrom, whenever they heard they came upon the same. It was answered for
Haining, that he did not deny the Town of Selkirks Right of Pasturage in the
Moor, but did deny they had Right of Property therein, but that the property
did yet remain in the King, as a part of the Barony of Selkirk, being of the
Kings annexed Property, but that the said Property (as to the Moor) was now
burdened with a Common Pasturage, belonging to the Town of Selkirk, and also
belonging to the Lord of Haining, and the other Feuars of the Barony of
Selkirk, and therefore alleged that his Charter in the year of God 1507.
being long before any Charter, granted by the King to the Town, did Feu to his
Predecessors, the Lands of Haining, cum pertinentibus, cum pascuis and
pasturis, and this Common being the Commonty of the Barony of Selkirk, the King
Feuing a part of the Barony, cum pertinentibus, et pascuis, did certainly
thereby grant all that belonged to these Lands, as Pertinent thereof; as it was
the time of the Feu, being then Possessed by the Kings Farmorers, but that they
had Common Pasturage in the Moor of Selkirk, is not only presumed (because it
is the Common of the whole Barony, and Possessed by all the adjacent Feuars
thereof) but also by their continual Possession since; for Possession 40. years
is sufficient to prove all bygone Possession, since the Right capable of that
Possession, it being impossible to adduce Witnesses to prove Possession eight
score years since otherways, and therefore as in the Case of the Lord
Borthwick, and William Borthwick, Decided the 14th of this Instant. The Lord
Borthwicks Minut, Disponing the Lands cum pertinentibus, without any word of
Pasturage, was found to carry Common Pasturage in the Moor of Borthwick, as
being a Pertinent of the Lands Disponed the time of the Minut, and not
Reserved, much more the King Disponing the Lands of Haining, not only cum
pertnen^tibus, but cum pascuis, et pasturis did carry to Haining the Right of
Common Pasturage in the Common of Selkirk, being then the Commonty of the
Barony, so that any Interruptions done since, cannot take away the Right of
Common Pasturage once constitute by the King: and albeit the King had
unquestionably granted the Right of Property to the Town thereafter, yet that
could not prejudge the Common Pasturage of another Constitute before. For if
Haining claimed this Common Pasturage only by Possession, and Prescription,
Interruptions might be Sustained to exclude the famine, but he claims it
chiefly by virtue of his Infeftment, as having Right thereto the first day he
was Infeft, so that his Possession since, albeit troubled by this Commonalty,
yet preserves his Right, that the Town cannot allege a total and complete
Possession, excluding him, and thereby taking away his Right by Prescription in
their Favor; and as to the Towns Charter, cum communiis, it contains nothing
per expressum of this Moor, or Pasturage therein, nor gives any thing de novo,
but bears cum communiis ad^urgum spectantibus, which the King might have given,
though there had not been a Commonty within 40. Miles, in the same manner, as
the common Clauses in all Charters, bearing Coal, and Chalk, Cuningars, or
Ducats, whether there be any or not, and the most the Town can pretend by their
Charter, is, that they being a Burgh, Erected within the Barony of Selkirk, cum
communiis, may therefore claim Pasturage with the rest of the Feuars of the
Barony, but cannot exclude them as to the Liberty granted by the King, to Ryve
out a 1000. Aikers, it clearly evinceth that they had not the Property before,
neither did that take any effect, nor could it, because the common Pasturage
(constitute to the Feuars before) would have hindered any posterior power of
Tillage: As to the Decree against the Tennents of Haining, it is in absence,
the Heretor for the time not being called, and albeit it bears Hainings
Predecessor, as Provost to be present, that will neither import his Consent,
nor Knowledge, Country Gentlemen being then ordinarily Provosts of Towns, who
lived not with them, their Affairs at Law were Managed by their Town Clerk and
Baillies, though the Provosts Name behoved to be insert; neither did this
Decree take effect, for Hainings Tennents never ceased to pasture: as to the
Letters they do only acknowledge the towns Head Rooms, because in great
Commonties, it is ordinar for several proprietars, to have peculiar Places,
most convenient for them where they law their Cattle, and casts Fail and Divot,
and which does sufficiently consist with the Commonty; as for the Acts of
Court, they can prove nothing against Haining.

The Lords found that the Town of Selkirk had undoubted Right of P^sturage,
Fuel, Fail and Divot in this Commonty, and that they had immemorial Possession
thereof, without any interruption, and found that Haining had no Right by
virtue of Possession, and Prescription, but found that by virtue of his
Charter, anterior to the Towns Right, he had Right to common Pasturage in this
Moor, it being the Common Moor of the Barony; but seeing he did not sufficiently
prove Possession of Fail and Divot, but was therein continually interrupted,
much more then in the Pasturage, and that nothing appeared, that in the time of
his Original Right, the Feuars had privilege of Fail and Divot. Therefore the
Lords found that he had no Right thereto, albeit common Pasturage does
ordinarily carry therewith Fail and Divot, yet they found that it was a several
Servitude, separable therefrom, either by Consent, or Custom, and found that
the Town should enjoy their Head Rooms, excluding Haining therefrom.

James Colquhoun contra Watson, Eodem die.
JAmes Colquhoun Pipe-maker in Glasgow, having gotten a tollerance from George
Blair (Heretor of Lunloch) to dig Clay for Pipes there for certain years,
excluding all others; there being an anterior Tack of the Lands, the Tennents
grants license to one Watson, for digging Clay there for Pipes: the Heretor
also concurrs with Watson. Colquhoun pursues Watson for Intrusion, and to
desist from meddling with any Clay there, and for paying the value of what he
had meddled with. Watson alleged Absolvitor; First, Because the license
granted to the Pursuer, being exclusive of all others, was contra bonum
publicum. 2dly, The license was posterior to the Tennents Tack, who thereby had
Right to the whole profits of the Ground, and accordingly gave tollerance to
the Defender. 3dly, The Heretor having granted the Tack, could not in prejudice
thereof, give power to the Pursuer to break the arable Ground, and there being
much more Clay nor the Pursuer could make use of, ought to give power to the
Defender to make use thereof for that effect. The Pursuer answered, that a
total and negative license was legal, as well as any other total and sole
Right, and it was free to the Heretor to grant the same, but could do no
posterior Deed contrair thereto, because he had bound up his own hands thereby
^ and as to the Tack, whether posterior or anterior to the license, it can only
give Right to the Tennent, uli fruiut colonus, to Manure the Ground, and reap
the profits thereof, but cannot give him Right to any Mineral under the
superfice, whether Coal, Limestone, Clay, etc. which is reserved to the
Heretor, and he may make use thereof, which necessarly imports that he may
break up the Ground to come at it, or else the Right were not reserved to him,
and he is most willing to satisfy the Tennents damnage by opening the Ground;
neither needs any reservation thereof be expressed, because its employed in the
nature of the Tack, which gives only power of the Superfice, Tillage,
Pasturage, and Profits thereof, but the Tennent has no power to take away part
of the Ground, or to give license to any other so to do.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses, and found the Pursuer had the only Right by
the Heretors exclusive license, and that the Tennent by his Tack had no Right
to this Clay; and that albeit his Tack was prior to the Pursuers license, he
could give license to no other.

Mr. John Forbes contra Innes, February 20. 1668.
MAster John Forbes insisted in the Cause against Margaret Innes, mentioned in
the 8th, of January last, for Mails and Duties, as Assigney by Margaret
Allardice, who being Infeft in Liferent in principal Lands, and Warrandice
Lands, and the principal Lands being evicted, she and the Pursuer (her
Assigney) returns upon the Warrandice Lands, wherein Margaret Innes is Infeft
in Liferent by her Husband, who stood publicly Infeft therein, upon the
Resignation of Margaret Allerdices Husband, and who alleged Absolvitor,
because the Defender, and her Husband being Infeft, and in Possession these 20.
years past, have the benefit of a Possessory judgment, and so cannot be put
from her Possession, till her Right be Reduced. The Pursuer answered, that the
benefit of a Possessory judgment can take no place against a pursuit, upon an
Infeftment in Warrandice, unless the Possession had been seven, or more years
after the Eviction; for before the Eviction, there could be no Pursuit upon the
Infeftment of Warrandice in the same case, as an Infeftment of Liferent is not
excluded by a Possession during the Husbands Lifetime, when the Wife could not
pursue. The Defender answered, that the Pursuer ought in a petitory judgment
to have declared the Distress, before he could put the Defender from her
Possession. The Pursuer answered, there was no Declarator required, but only
the Eviction, which gives immediate recourse upon the Warrandice Lands.

The Lords repelled the Defense, and found no need of a Declarator, or
Reduction to attain recourse, and that a Possessory judgment was not compent
upon any Possession, anterior to the Eviction.

The Defender further alleged Absolvitor, because this pursuit is founded
upon Margaret Allardice her Infeftment in Warrandice, which is base holden of
her Husband; and the Defender and her Husbands Infeftment are public, holden
of the Superior, and albeit posterior to the Infeftment of Warrandice, yet is
preferable, the Infeftment of Warrandice being base, never cled with
Possession. The Pursuer answered, that Infeftments in the Warrandice are
sufficiently validat by Possession of the principal Lands, especially now when
all Seisings must be Registrat, as was lately found in the Case of John Scot:
and the said Margaret Allardice has not only been in Possession of the
principal Lands since her Husbands Death, but her Husband was in full
Possession of both, which is more then sufficient. The Pursuer answered, that
in Scots Case this was singular, that in John Scots Case, both the Principal
and Warrandice Lands were granted in an Infeftment, and so the Person Infeft
being in Possession of the principal Lands, his Infeftment could not be partly
public, and partly private, but this Infeftment in Warrandice is ex intervallo.

The Lords repelled also the Defense, and found the Infeftment in Warrandice
(though base) sufficient, the Person Infeft being in Possession of the
principal Lands, albeit the Infeftment in the Warrandice Lands was ex
intervallo.

Farquhar of Tonley contra Gordoun, Eodem die.
FArquhar of Tonley pursues Reduction of a Bond granted by him upon Minority
and Lesion. It was alleged Absolvitor, because he had Homologat the Bond, in
so far as he being Cautioner in the Bond, he had pursued releif, and obtained
Decree for releif, which did necessarly import, that he acknowledged himself
bound, else he could not have craved releif. The Pursuer answered, that seeing
the Bond stood unreduced at that time he might lawfully pursue the principal
Debtor to relieve him, against which he could have no objection, for the
benefit of Reduction upon Minority, is peculiar to the Minor himself, and no
other can make use of it; and in his pursuit of releif he might very well have
declared that, in case he obtained not releif against the principal Debtor, he
might free himself by Reduction against the Creditor, so that Homologation
being a tacit consent, can never be presumed where the Deed done might have
another intent, and his pursuit for relief was not to bind himself, but to
louse himself; he did also allege that the pursuit of releif was at his
Fathers instance, and his own promiscuously, and after the Decree was
thereupon extracted, he gave it in again, and took a new Extract, which bears
not a releif for him of this Debt.

The Lords found the Pursuit, and Decree of releif, to be no Homologation to
exclude this Reduction.

The Defender then offered him to prove that the Pursuer was Major when he
Subscribed, so that the Lybel and Defense being contrary, and great advantage
arising to him, who had the benefit of Probation by Highland Witnesses.

The Lords resolved to prefer neither to probation, but before answer, ordained
to adduce such Evidents, and Adminicles, as they would use to prove the
Pursuers age, that they might prefer the strongest and clearest Probation.

Sir Laurence Scot of Clerkingtoun contra the Lady Clerkingtoun, February 21.
1668.
SIr Laurence Scot of Clerkingtoun having obtained himself to be Executor
surrogat ad omissa et male appreciata of his Fathers Testament, and having
obtained license to pursue, pursues the Lady Clerkingtoun as principal
Executrix, who alleged no Process upon the license, because licenses are
only competent to Executors principal, before there be any Confirmation, after
which the Commissars neither use, nor may give license ad omissa, as was found
the 14. of December, 1621. Halliday contra observed by Dury. The Pursuer
answered, that there was more reason to sustain licenses after the principal
Confirmation, when the best of the Inventar was given up, and what remained was
uncertain, and for the practique the Lords had since allowed licenses after
Confirmation.

The Lords repelled the Defense, and Sustained the Process upon the license.

Bartholomew Parkman contra Captain Allan, Eodem die.
CAptain Allan a Privateer, having taken Bartholomew Parkman an Swede, he
obtained him to be Declared Pryze by the Admiral, upon this ground mainly, that
he had carried Tar, being Counterband Goods, from Norway to Holland, then in
Enmity with the King, and from thence carried ballast to France, and returning
with a Loadning of Salt, was taken, because by the Captains Commission from the
Admiral, he was warranted to to take Ships carrying Counterband Goods, or to
take the said Ships in their immediate return, after they have carried
Counterband Goods to the Kings Enemies, which has always been the Custom of
Scotland, as appears by Commissions granted by the Admiral, Anno 1627. of the
same Tenor, and by a Decree of the Admiral at that time, finding the Lybel
relevant, bearing that a Ship was taken in her return, having taken in
Counterband to the Enemy in that Voyage, which is founded upon evident reason,
because that while Ships are going toward the Enemy, it is but an intention of
Delinquence against the King, and assisting his Enemies, but when they have
actually gone in, and sold the Counterband, it is delictum Commissum, and
though it might infer a quarrel against the Delinquent, when ever he could be
found, yet the Law of Nations, has for the freedom of Trade, abridged it to
the immediate return of the same Voyage, because quarrels would be multiplied,
upon pretense of any former Voyage. Parkman having raised Reduction of the
Admirals Decree, insists on these grounds. First, That by the Kings
proclamation Denuncing the War, it is evident that the King gives only Command
to seize upon Ships having in them Enemies Goods, or Counterband Goods, without
any mention of seizing them in their return, which would destroy the freedom of
all Trade, for upon that pretense, every Ship that were met with at Sea might
be brought up, and therefore the Kings Proclamation did justly and humanly
Warrant the seizure of Ships, only when the Enemies Goods, or Counterband Goods
is found Aboard, in which case, for most part, the cause of seizure is sensible
to the Eye, wherewith there was also produced a Testificat from Judge Ienkins,
Judge of the Admirality Court of England, by the Kings Warrant upon the
Petition of the Kings Resident of Sweden, wherein he having advised with the
Kings Advocat general, who daily attended that Court, declares that none of
them remembers that in this War any Neuter were made Pryze in their return,
with the product of Enemies Goods, and that he knew no Law nor Custom for the
same. 2dly, There was produced the Treaties betwixt the King and the Crown of
Sweden, bearing that the Swedes should be made Pryze, carrying Enemies Goods,
or Counterband Goods, si deprehendantur. It was also answered to the Reasons of
Adjudication, that the Style of a Commission, not granted by the King
immediately, but by the Admiral, could be no ground of Adjudication of Friends
and Allies, who were not obliged to know the same, or what was the Tenor of the
Admiral of Scotlands Commissions, but were only obliged to take notice of the
Law and Custom of Nations, and of the Kings Proclamations of War: and as to the
Admirals Commission, and Decree thereupon, in Anno 1627. It could not evidence
the Custom of Scotland, being but a Decree in absence, and upon a Lybel,
bearing not only the carrying of Counterband, before in that Voyage, but having
actually Aboard Enemies Goods the time of the seizure, which Lybel is found
relevant by the Admiral, but it appears not that he would have found it
relevant alone, upon the product of Counterband, much less that that was
proven, and in Decreets in absence, the Lords themselves suffers Decreets to
pass with far less consideration, and ofttimes of course, so that it were
strange to fortify the Admirals Decreets that are now quarrelled after full
hearing, upon an Decree of the Admirals in absence. It was answered for
Captain Allan, that the Pursuer could not enjoy the benefit of the Swedish
Treaty, because he had transgrest the Treaty, and served the Kings Enemies: and
as to the Testificat of Judge Ienkins, or Custom of England, this being a
distinct Kingdom, is not Ruled by the Custom of England, and Judge Ienkins
Testificat was impetrat by the Pursuer, and not upon any Commission, or
proposal made by the Lords, and the case therein mentioned is only anent the
seisures in the return, with the product of Enemies Goods, and says only that
they do not remember that ever the Case was decided there, but says not that
the Courts of Admirality had found, that upon any Plea or Dispute, that Ships
could not be taken, unless they had Aboard Counterband, or Enemies Goods.

The Lords having formerly in this Cause desired to know the Kings Pleasure,
whether by the Swedish Treaty, which makes far fewer things Counterband, then
what are such by the Law of Nations, and by which Tar is not Counterband, the
Swedes might Laden Tar in Norway, not being their own Growth, and carry it to
the Kings Enemies. The King returned answer negative, in which the Lords
acquiesced; and as to the present Dispute,

The Lords did not find the grounds alleged for the Privat^er relevant, or
sufficient to instruct the Custom of Scotland, or the Rule of the War, and had
little respect to Judge Ienkins Testimony, and therefore were not clear to
approve the Adjudication, but before answer, did declare that the Lords by
their own Commission, would inquire in the Custom of Nations, concerning the
return of Counterband, or Enemies Goods, both by Commissions direct to England,
and other places.

Captain Strachan contra Morison, February 22. 1668.
CAptain Srachan pursues the Heirs of Umquhile George Morison before the
Admiral, for a Ship and Goods m^d^ed with wrongously, by George and others, in
Anno 1638. They raise Reduction on this Reason, that there was no Probation but
one Witness, and Captain Strachans Oath taken in supplement.

The Lords having considered the Probation, in relation to the Ship, found it
sufficiently proven, that Captain Strachan was an Owner of an eight part of the
S^^p, but found that the value thereof was not proven, and seeing Morison, and
the other partners sold the Ship, after they had long made use of her, without
Strachans consent, they found that Strachans Oath in litem ought to be taken as
to the value, and would not put him to prove the same after so long time, and
for the profits thereof, ordained him Annualrent since he was dispossessed. This
question arose to the Lords, whether there being three Partners beside Captain
Strachan, who all meddled whether Morison should be liable in solidum, or only
for his third part, in which the Lords found the Ship being corpus
indivisibile, and all the Partners in a Society, and that Captain Strachan
being absent in the Kings Service, from the time of their meddling to the Kings
return, and the other Parties in the mean time becoming insolvent.

The Lords found George Morison liable in solidum for the eight part of the
Ship; but as to the Wines and others that were in the Ship, whereanent there
was no co-partinery proven, and but one Witness of George Morisons
Intromission, and Captain Srachans own Oath in supplement. The Lords found the
same not sufficient, and yet allowed Captain Strachan in fortification of the
Decree, to adduce further probation.

Gavin Cochran contra (...) Eodem die.
GAvin Cochran as Donator to the Recognition of certain Land, holden Waird of
my Lord Cochran, pursues the Vassal, as having Alienat the Major part, and also
the Subvassal to hear and see it found and declared, that the Lands had
Recognosced by the Alienation, made by the Vassal so the Subvassal. It was
alleged for the Subvassal that he was Minor, and therefore During his
Minority, non tenetur placitari super haereditate paterna. It was answered,
that that holds only in Disputing the Minors Rights, but is not sufficient
against the Obligation, or the Delinquence of the Defunct. 2dly, The Party
principally called in this Process, is the Vassal who is Major, and whose Fee
falls to the Superior by his Alieanation, and the Subvassals Right falls only
in consequence, so that no privilege of the Subvassal, can hinder the Superior
to declare the Recognition of his immediate Vassal.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Sustained Process.

Captain Mastertoun contro the strangers of Ostend, February 24. 1668.
CAptain Mastertoun having taken a Ship of Ostend Pryze, obtained her Adjudged
before Ludquharn, Admiral Deput of Peterhead. The Strangers pursued Reduction
before the High Admiral at Leith, and obtained Sentence, because the Decree at
Peterhead, and Warrands thereof were not produced, by which Sentence there was
Decerned 16000. Dollars for the Ship and Loadning, which was Fish, taken in
Island Mastertoun raises Reduction of the High Admirals Decree on this ground,
that it was merely in absence, and proceeded without valuing the Ship or Goods,
and offered to restore the Ship, or value, and what he got for the Fish, which
was but a Dollar the Barrel, in regard they spoilled the time of the dependence
of the Plea, and craved allowance of what he paid to the King, being the
fifteenth part, and the tenth part to the Admiral, and alleged he could be
liable for no more nor quantum lucratus est, seeing he did bona fide bring up
this Ship, finding Aboard a Pass from the Magistrates of Ostend, which was
defective, not conform to the Articles of Treaty with the King of Spain, in so
far as it bore no mention of the Sailers, that they were the King of Spains
Subjects, and the Sailers did Depone that they did belong to Zurickzea, under
the States of Holland; and albeit now ex post facto, he is informed that they
did reside sometime in Ostend, yet he being in bona fide, can be liable in no
more nor what he got. It was answered for the Strangers, that it being
acknowledged, that the Goods or Persons were free, it cannot be denied in
Justice to restore them to their Ship, and true value of their Goods, that they
might have made thereof in Ostend, and not the price thereof that the Captain
made, for seeing he acknowledges that they were corrupted for want of Salt, it
was his own Fault, for he should have caused raise the Fish in the Barrels, and
Salted them again; and as for the King, and Admirals part, there is no reason
to allow the samine, and put the Strangers to a Process against the King, and
Admiral; but if it be just he have restitution of his Goods, he must have it of
his whole Goods, at the same availls as he could have sold them, with his
Damnage and Interest, and any pretense of bona fide's can operat no more, but
to free him from a spuilzy, and the Pursuers Oath in litem, for the value and
profits, and to restrict the Process to wrongous Intromission, to the true
prices, and true Damnages. It was answered for the Captain, that seeing he was
in bona fide to seize upon the Ship, and seeing he did obtain Decree from the
Judge Ordinar, he was also in bona fide to sell and roup the Goods, as they
gave at Peterhead; and it does not appear that there was Salt there for Salting
them again, nor Men that had skill, nor could they meddle with them till Decree
was pronunced, which was a long time; they were also in bona fide to pay the
King and Admiral, neither are the Kings Officer nor Admiral Cited, but only the
Admiral Deput.

The Lords found, that seeing the Pass did not bear the Sailers to be the King
of Spains Subjects, conform to the Articles, that the Captain was in bona fide
to bring her up, and found him free of any Damnages, and found him liable for
the price of the Ship, and Fish, as they might have been sold at Peterhead by
rouping, as use is, if they had been preserved; and found him obliged to have
preserved them; and repelled the alleadgeance as to the tenth and fifteenth,
but prejudice to the Captain and Owners to seek repetition thereof, and found
no necessity to Cite the Admiral, his Deput being Cited.

Merchants of Hamburgh contra Captain Dishingtoun, February 25. 1668.
CAptain Dishingtoun having taken a Merchant Ship of Hamburgh, and obtained her
to be declared Pryze: the Hamburgers raises Reduction on this Reason, that the
only ground of declaring her Pryze, was, because she carried Counterband Goods
toward the King of Denmarks Domissions, being then in Enmity with the King,
which was no relevant ground, because it is evident the Ship was seized a
Month before the proclamation of War against the Danes. It was answered for
the Captain, that it is not the proclamation of War that makes the War for the
Kings Declaration, is only to give an account to the World, upon what account
the King had made War with the Danes; and it is notour that there were frequent
Acts of Hostility, both by the Danes, and against the Danes before this
Capture. It was answered for the Strangers, that public denunciation makes
only a public and lawful War; but whatever might have been done against the
Danes, the Hamburgers (being the Kings Allies and Friends) were not obliged to
know the same, until such time that the proclamation of War might come to their
Ears, so that they have done no Fault, being in bona fide to continue their
Trade, until the War was made public to the World. It was answered for the
Captain, that he was in optima fide to execute the Kings Commission, bearing
expressly to make Pryze of all carrying Counterband Goods to the Danes, and
therefore he could not be Decerned as praedo, but the most can be Decerned
against him (though the Pursuer should be found to have been in bona fide, to
Trade with the Danes) is to restore in quantum lucratus est; but so it is that
he made no profit, for after the Capture, he being pursued at Sea by the Enemy,
was forced to leave the Ship in question, being Loadned by him, whereby she was
driven a shore, and suffered Shipwreck.

The Lords found that the Hamburgers were in bona fide to continue their Trade
with Denmark, and to carry to them Counterband Goods at the time of the
seizure, and therefore Reduced the Admirals Decree, as to the Restitution of
the Ship and Goods, or what profit the Defender made of them, but for no higher
value nor damnages, in respect the Captain was in bona fide to execute the
Kings Commission, unless it were alleged, the Captain was in culpa in the
loss of the Ship, or misprising the Goods.

Lord Almond contra Thomas Dalmahoy, Eodem die.
THe Lord Almond pursues a Declarator of the Escsheet of Thomas Dalmahoy, who
alleged Absolvitor, because he was Denunced upon a Bond granted by the
Duchess of Hamiltoun, wherein he being only Charged as Husband for his
interest, and Denunced at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and Peir and Shore
of Lies, being then Residenter in England; and now the Marriage being
dissolved by the Duchess Death, his Interest ^e^seth as to all effects, and so
as to this Horning. 2dly, The Denunciation being upon a Bond due to the
Duchess own Mother, done by Mr. John El^is Commissioner for her, it was
without Warrant, and so null.

The Lords repelled both Defenses, and found that the Contumacy incurred by not
paying, or suspending Deb^to tempore, which is the cause of the Denunciation,
was not taken away by the dissolution of the Marriage.

Patrick Dun contra Isobel and Elizabeth Dunes, his Sisters, Eodem die.
UMquhile Doctor Dun having provided 4000. Merks to one of his Daughters, and
10000. Merks to another, and Entertainment during their Minority, that their
Portion might go to the Fore, bearing Annualrent; did thereafter grant to
Isobel another Bond of 2000. Merks, whereof Patrick his Heir raises Reduction,
as being done on Deathbed, after the Defunct had broken his Leg, and the same
was cut off, whereof he took a Fever and Died, and never went out to Kirk or
Market. The Defenders answered, that they offered them to prove, that albeit
the Defunct happened not to come out, yet he was in his liege Pousty, and
perfect health, and did all his Affairs, which did much more evidence his
health, then the stepping out to the Market, 2dly, The Bond in question being a
Provision to a Daughter, it was a Natural Obligation, which the Father might do
on Death-bed^ The Pursuer answered, that the Law allowed no other evidence to
give Capacity to Dispone in liege pousty, but going out to Kirk and Market, and
if any equivalent were accepted, it would render the most Ancient Law Doubious,
and Elusory. As to the second, the Defender having been Portioned before, any
Adition on Deathbed had not so much as the favor of a Portion Natural.

The Lords rep^lled the Defenses, and sustained the Summonds.

The Owners of the Ship called the Castle of Riga, contra Captain Seatoun,
Eodem die.
THis Cause being Debated the 27th. of July last, in which Debate Captain Seat
un did chiefly insist to maintain the Decreets of Adjudication upon the
presumptions, and evidences, that the Ship or Loadning did truly belong to the
Hollande^s; and that their Passes and Bills were but Contrivances, which the
Lords found not sufficiently proven to make her Pryze. Now the Captain insists
upon another ground, contained in the Decreets of Adjudication, viz. That she
was Navigat by Hollanders, the Kings Enemies, and therefore by the Kings
Declaration of the War, the Ship and Goods are lawful Pryze, because the last
Article of the Declaration bears expressly to take all Ships Pryzes, that are
Sailed by the Subjects of the United Provinces; and by the Testimony of the
Witnesses taken at Cromarty. It was evident that the whole Company was
Hollanders, taken on at Amsterdame, and Residenters there. It was answered for
the Strangers, that there was a solemn Treaty perfected betwixt their King, and
the King of Sweden their Sovereign, that Treaty behoved to be the only Rule, as
to the Subjects of Sweden; by which there was nothing provided, that a Ship
should be Pryze, being Sailed with Hollanders; but on the contrair, the Pass
agreed upon by the Treaty, and expressed v^rba^im therein bears, that Oath is to
be made, that the Vessel and Loadning belongs to Swedes, but makes no mention
of what Country the Sailers should be; and bears that the Master of the Ship
may be of any Nation, and therefore mul^o magis, the Sailers. It was answered
for the Captain, that the Treaty with the Swedes cannot be the adequat Rule, in
relation to all Swedish Pryzes, there being multitudes of Cases not touched
therein; and it cannot be thought the intent of the King, in so short a Treaty,
to comprehend all the Laws of Nations at Sea, and all the Cases de jure belli
betwixt their Subjects, but the Treaty does only clear some most important
Cases, and grants special Privileges to either Party, as that such a Pass
should be sufficient, and that there should be no search at Sea, where such a
Pass is found, nisi gravis suspicio subsit, so that these Cases must still be
Regulat by the Law and Custom of Nations, and especially by the Kings
Declaration of the War; so that these making the Rule, the Treaty can make but
the exception, and therefore the King, by the Declaration of the War against
the H^llanders, gave an express Command to make Pryze all Ships belonging to
the Hollanders, or having in them Goods belonging to the Hollanders, or
Counterband Goods going to the Hollanders, or Navigat by any number of the
Hollanders, this must stand as the Rule, seeing there is nothing in the Treaty
to alter the same, neither does the Tenor of the Pass (not mentioning the
Sailers) infer any thing, because the Sailers can be known of what Nation they
are, by their Language, and it were unnecessar to cause the Swedes Depone upon
Oath that they are Swedes, but cannot be so well known to whom the Ship and
Goods belong, and therefore Oath is to be made thereupon; and albeit a Pass be
found Aboard, conform to the Treaty, whereby it is provided, ne quid ulterius
inquiratur in navigium, hon^^ aut homines nulla t^nus inquiratur, it immediately
follows, Quod si gravis aliqua susp^cio subsit, that there may be seizure even
where there is a Pass, or if the Pass were old or vitiat, or appear not to
agree with the Hand, and Seal of the places whence it is directed, seizure
might be made, and therefore in this Case, the whole Company being Hollanders,
as is evident by their Language, although there had been no suspicion of the
truth of the Pass, they might justly have been seized and confiscat, conform
to the Kings Declaration; neither is it a good Argument, that because the
Treaty gives leave to have the Master of any Nation, that therefore all the
Sailers may be of any Nation, and therefore if the Company might have been of
any Nation, there needed no such expression for the Master, exceptio firmat
regulam in non exceptis, which is the more clear, that by the Treaty betwixt
the King, and the King of Spain: there is a special privilege to the
^l^ndrians, that they shall not be questioned, as being Navigat by Hollanders,
in respect of the Identity of their Language, which would never have been
Demanded, if by the Law of Nations, Hollanders the Kings Enemies, might have
been made use of by any in Amity with him.

The Lords found that this Swedish Ship being Navigat by the Sailers, all or
the most part being Hollanders, Residenters in, or about Amsterdam, when they
entered this Voyage, that the same was a sufficient ground of Confiscation, in
respect of the Kings Declaration of War, and that by the Swedish Treaty, there
was no privilege granted to the Swedes as to this matter, and therefore
Assoilzied from the Reduction, having found it sufficiently proven by the
Testimonies at Cromarty; and whereas it was alleged that these Testimonies
were extorted, by holding Swords and Pistols to the Companies Breasts, both at
Sea, and after Landing, to make them confess that they and Goods belonged to
Hollanders.

The Lords found the alleadgeance relevant* that at Land, and about the time of
their Testimony, the Witnesses were so threatened, but would not sustain that
they were so threatened at Sea, when they were taken, unless it were alleged,
that at Sea they were forced to Swear, or Depo^e upon Oath, whereupon it might
have been presumed, that by Reason thereof they would adhere to it when they
came to Land.

George Graham contra Grissel Tours, and the Lord of Kilhead her Husband,
February 26. 1668.
GEorge Graham having obtained a Decree before the Baillie, against Grissel
Tours and her Husband, for Furnishing to her first Husbands Funerals; her
Husband Suspends, and raises Reduction on these Reasons, that albeit he stayed
sometimes in a Chamber in Edinburgh, he was not in this Jurisdiction, and that
his Wifes Oath could infer no burden upon him, and that the Baillies did
unwarrantably hold him as Confessed, for not giving his Oath of Calumny, whether
he had reason to distrust his Wifes Oath.

The Lords found this unwarrantable, and therefore Reduced the Decree as to
the Husband, but Decerned against the Wife, ad hunc effectum, to affect her if
she survive, or her Executors after her Death, or otherwise to affect any other
Goods she had excepted from her Husbands jus mariti.

The Lord of Milntoun contra the Lady of Milntoun, Eodem die.
THe Lady Milntoun having obtained Decree of Divorce against John Maxwel her
Husband, the Lord of Milntoun having Right from her Husband to her Liferent,
which Right fell by the Divorce; pursued a Reduction of the Decree of Divorce,
wherein the Witnesses being Examined, and Re-examined.

The Lords adheres to the Decree of Divorce, and Assoilzies from the
Reduction; at which time the Lords having allowed him to insist as in
Reprobators: he now pursues the same for Convelling the Testimonies of the
Witnesses, because they were corrupted and suborned, both by promises, and
getting of good Deed, and being prompted how to swear, as their Oath on
Re-examination bears. And because their Oath is not only suspicious, but
impossible; because it is offered to be proven, that the Parties were alibi, at
a great distance from the place, where the Witnesses Deponed that they
committed Adultery, and that for several days and nights thereafter, and
before. The Defender alleged that the Lybel was no ways relevant. First, In
so far as it would Convel the Testimonies, as to the principal points referred
to Probation, against which no contrair Testimonies (either of the same, or
other Witnesses) can be admitted by the Law of all Nations, otherwise Plea's
should be infinite: for if the second Witnesses might improve the Testimonies of
the first, third Witnesses might improve their's, and so without end: and the
alleadgeances that the Parties were alibi, are most irrelevant, and is
ordinarily rejected, as being a contrair and incompatible Probation, for this
being a Crime unlawful at all times, and places, albeit the Witnesses should
have forgotten, or mistaken the time, if they be positive in the Act non obest,
and so proving alibi at that time, which is not essential is of no moment.
3dly, The Reprobators in so far as they would improve, and convel the
extrinsick points of the Testimonies, ad hunc effectum, to render the Witnesses
infamous, and their Testimony invalide as to the whole, which is the proper
and only subject of Reprobators, the famine is not now competent, unless first
at the time of the taking of the Testimonies, the Pursuer had protested for
Reprobators, and had not referred his objections against the ability of the
Witnesses, to their own Oaths, but had only interrogat them of their Age,
Marriage, Residence, freedom of partial Counsel, or Corruption, etc. And upon
the reason of their Knowledge, in that case Reprobators might have been
competent to prove the contrair of these extrinsick points, and so infirm the
Testimony, but here the Witnesses being Examined, especially as to the
Interrogators of partial Counsel, and as to the reason of their Knowledge, and
no protestation taken at that time for Reprobators, he cannot now make use
thereof, and albeit that Reprobators were reserved by the Lords, yet that was
not at the taking, but at the advising of the Testimonies, when all that is now
alleged (as to their corruption, arising from the Re-examination) did appear
to the Lords, and yet the Lords adhered to the Decree of Divorce, and first
Testimonies.

The Pursuer answered, that he did not intend to Convel principally the
intrinsic points of the Testmonies, but mainly to prove their partiality and
corruption, and therewith also to prove their Testimonies were false, and
impossible; neither is it essential to protest at the taking of the
Testimonies, nor is there any necessity that the Witnesses Oaths should not be
taken on the extrinsick points, but on the contrair, the intent of Reprobators
being, that their Oaths, as to these extrinsicks being false, they should be
found perjured and infamous, and the whole Testimonies to fall.

There was no Interloqutor at this time, upon this Debate.

Reoch contra Cowan, Eodem die.
REoch pursues Cowan as representing a Defunct to pay a Debt, due by the
Defunct to the Pursuer, who alleged Absolvitor, because Reo^h was vicious
Intrometter with the Defuncts Goods, in so far as he lifted 50. Pound,
belonging to the Defunct, and gave his Discharge, produced and albeit
thereafter he Confirmed himself Executor Dative, yet he wilfully omited that
Sum out of the Confirmation, and so as vicious Intrometter, is both Debtor and
Creditor, and cannot pursue the Heir. It was answered, that this was res
modica, and could not infer the passive Title.

The Lords found that this Sum inferred not a general passive Title, but only
that is made him comptab^e for the Sum.

Maitland contra Lesly, February 27. 1668.
IN a concluded Cause of abstracted Multers betwixt Maitland and Lesly, The
Pursuer being ^nfeft in the Miln, with the Multers and Sequels, and having
proven the astriction of Intown Multers, and Witnesses being adduced concerning
the Services, for upholding the Miln and Dam, and bringing home Milnstones, who
proved that some of the Lands were not in use of these Services, but by two or
three several Acts, as once laying in the Dam, at which the Heretor was
offended, and brake the Tennents Head, and twice going to help home the
Milnstones, whether these Lands were liable to the Services.

Whereupon the Lords considered whether the constitution of a Thirlage, with
Multers and Sequels, did by the nature of the Right, give the ordinary Miln
service without relation to Possession, so that immediately after the
constitution, these might be demanded.

Which the Lords decided affirmative, and then found that these Lands were
liable to the service, unless they had either by Paction, or Prescriptio^,
attained freedom from the service, and found that the Testimonies did not prove
freedom for forty years, and that these Acts were enough to interrupt, and so
Decerned for the ordinary services.

David Henderson contra Mr. Andrew Birny, Eodem die.
MAster Andrew Birny having granted a Bond to Alexander Short, blank in the
Creditors Name, he for an equivalent Cause, delivered the same to David
Henderson, who filled up his Name therein, and Charges Mr. Andrew therefore; he
Suspends on a Reason of Compensation, upon a Debt owing to him by Short, to
whom he delivered the blank Bond, for whom he became Cautioner before he
granted the Bond, and paid the Debt, partly before, and partly after this
Bond, so that Henderson by filling up his Name, being Assigney, and Short
Cedent, payment or compensation against the Cedent, before the Assignation, is
relevant against the Assigney. It was answered, that in this Case compensation
is not relevant, because the very Delivery of a Bond, in a blank Creditors
Name, imports that the Receiver thereof, may put in any Man's Name he will, and
he may never make use of Compensation against him whose Name is filled up,
otherwise why should the Creditors Name have been left blank, which if it had
been filled up, it behoved to have had an Assignation, which is but a
Procuratory in rem suaem, so that the Procurator can be in no better state nor
the Constituent, but the blank makes the Person filled up Creditor principally.

The Lords found Compensation not relevant, against a Person whose Name was
filled up in the blank, being a singular Successor to him, who first received
the Bond.

Mr. William Chalmers contra Wood of Balbegno, Eodem die.
MAster William Chalmers, Parson of Feltercarn, pursues Reduction of a Tack of
the Teinds of the Paroch, granted by his Predecessors, on this ground, that it
is null by Act of Parliament, as wanting Consent of the Patron. The Defender
alleged Absolvitor, because the Pursuer had Homologat his Tack, in so far as
he had received payment of the Duty, conform to the Tack, which was a clear
acknowledgement thereof. It was answered, that this could only be an
Homologation for the years received, and could not Homologat the Tack itself,
because the Tack was a standing Right, valid till it were Reduced, and the
Pursuer could get no more then the Tack-Duty, till he should Reduce the same.

The Lords found this no Homologation, to validat the Tack.

Lord Justice Clerk contra Home of Linthel, the Procurator-Fiscal and Officers,
February 28. 1668.
THe Lord Justice Clerk being Fined in 50. Pound for his absence from the Lord
Homes Head Court of his Barony. The Officers Poinded an Ox, in October after
the Plowing was begun. The Lord Justice Clerk pursues a Spuilzy, as being
Poinded in Laboring time, and insisted against Linthel as Depute, who gave the
Decree, and Precept to Poind, and as he who knew of the Poinding of the Ox by
the Officer, before he was Delivered, and commanded to Deliver him, and against
the Officer who Poinded, and the Procurator Fiscal, who by the Executions of
the Poinding, produced; Received the Ox from the Officer: at the advising of
the Cause, Linthel having Deponed by his Oath, that the Officer had told him an
Ox was Poinded, and he commanded the Officer to Deliver him, and that he knew
not he was a Laboring Ox, so that that member not being proven, the question
was, whether Linthel as Deput, giving a Precept to the Officer to Poind in
common form, was liable for the Spuilzy, if the Officer did illegally Poind,
and so was answerable for the Fault of the Officer.

The Lords found him not liable, and therefore Assoilzied Linthel, and found
that the Execution of the Poinding was sufficient Probation of the Delivery of
the Ox to the Procurator-Fiscal, especially seeing the Defenders defended
themselves with the Poinding, and themselves produced the Execution; and for
the violent profits, the Lords Decerned 5. Shilling for every day, from October
to May inclusive, being Laboring time, and that yearly since the Spuilzy till
the Sentence.

Duke Hamiltoun contra Maxwel of Moreith, February 29. 1668.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun, as Collector-General of the Taxations, having Charged
Maxwel of Moreith, he Suspends upon this Reason, and alleadges that he had
Imparked, and Enclosed a ten Merk Land, since the Act of Parliament, 1661.
anent the Enclosing of Grounds, by which, all Lands to be Enclosed thereafter,
are to be free of all public Burdens. It was answered, that the Act of
Convention was posterior, and had no such exception, but on the contrair, took
away all former exceptions. It was answered, that an Act of Parliament cannot
be Derogat, or Abrogat, by an Act of Convention.

The Lords found the Reason relevant, notwithstanding of the Act of Convention.

Ioanna M^alexander contra Charles Dalrymple, June 9. 1668.
IOanna M^alexander, a Sister Daughter, and one of the nearest of kin of
Umquhile Elizabeth Dalrymple, pursues a Reduction of the said Elizabeth her
Testament, whereby she nominat Charles Dalrymple her Brothers Son, her
Executor, and universal Legator, upon this Reason, that in the time of the
making that Testament she was not compos mentis, but fatuous and insensible.

The Lords having appointed the Witnesses of the Testament, and other Witnesses
to be Examined thereanent, the Witnesses in the Testament, and Writer thereof
being Examined, Deponed that she was in her right Mi^^, and gave order for
drawing of the Testament, and gave order to Subscribe it; the other Witnesses
Deponed that about that time, for several weeks before, and some time after,
the Defunct was fatuous, and not in a right Mind, and to every question
proposed to her, she answered alwise yea, yea, and some words of Ravery, which
she frequently spoke.

The Lords having also caused Re-examine the Testamentar Witnesses, that it
might appear whether she did only answer to Interrogators, as when it was
answered, whether she would have Charles Dalrymple her Executor, and universal
Legator, and whether she said yea^ yea; and whether she gave Direction without
a forgoing question by words that might signify her Sensibility. And having
considered the whole Testimonies, they found that Probation most pregnant, that
she was Fatuous, and insensible at the time of the making the Testament, and
therefore Reduced, albeit the Witnesses were Extraneous that proved, and were
not present at making the Testament, at which time a lucide interval of a
Person Distempered by Disease, not constantly Fatuous, might have been
sufficient.

This was stoped till it were further heard.

Sir John Gibson contra James Oswald, June 13. 1668.
SIr John Gibson and James Oswald having mutual Declarators of Property, of a
piece of contraverted Ground, lying on the M^rch between two Gairs, or Bentish
Strypes of Ground, through a Moor; equal number of Witnesses being Examined for
either Party, one Witness for either side proved 40. years constant Possession
of the Party Adducer, and that they did interrupt the other Party and turned
away their Cattle when they came over: some of the witnesses did prove either
Party to have had Possession above 40. years since, but did not prove that they
knew the same constantly so Bruiked, neither did they know any thing to the
contrary, and many Witnesses on either side proved not only that the ^eithes
Lybeled by the Party who Adduced them, were holden and repute the true Marches
for a very long time, but did not express how long; but some of them Deponed,
that Stones in the meithes were commonly holden and repute to be March Stones,
and so the Testimonies were contrary, and if there had not been mutual
Probation, either Party would have proven sufficiently; and neither Party
having bounding Charters, the question arose whether the ^preg^antest Probation
should be preferred, to give the property to that Party, and exclude the other,
or if both Parties, proving so long Possession, and mutual interruptions, the
Probation should infer a promiscuous Possession, and Right of the contraverted
piece of Land, and so resolve into a Commonty, albeit neither Party Claimed nor
Lybeled Commonty.

The Lords found the Testimonies of the Witnesses to infer a Commonty to either
Party of the Ground in controversy, albeit they found that Sir John Gibsons
Witnesses were more pregnant, yet not so far as to exclude the others, but
declared that if either Party desired that piece to de divided, they would
grant Commission for dividing the same, and setting down of March-Stones

Burnet contra Nasmith, June 19. 1668.
ALexa^ de^ Burnet of Carl^ps, being Creditor to Sir Michael Nasmith of ^osso,
pursues a Declarator against James Nasmith his eldest Son, to hear and see it
found and declared, that an expired Appryzing of the Estate of P^sso, now
standing in the Person of the said James, is Redeemable by the Pursuer as a
Creditor, from the said James, as appearing Heir of the Party, against whom it
was deduced within ten years after the appearand Heirs Right, upon payment of
the Sums, that the appearand Heir truly gave out, conform to the Act of
Parliament betwixt Debtor and Creditor. The Defender alleged Absol^itor,
because the Act of Parliament could not extend as to his Case, because the Act
bears, [where appearand Heirs takes Right to Appyzing of their Predecessors
Lands] but the Defenders Father being living, cannot be said to be his
Predecessor, or that the Defender is his appearand Heir, and Statutes are
stricti juris not to be extended to like Cases. It was answered, that Reason of
the Law, given in that part of the Statute, being the same, and rather more in
this Case, where there may be Collusion betwixt the Father and the Son, there
is no ground to except the same from the Act of Parliament, the words whereof
do bear this Case, for in the ordinar Style it uses to be thus express, such a
person to be eldest Son, and appearand Heir to his Father, and albeit his
Father be not dead, he may well be said to be his Predecessor, not only in
regard of his age, but as being his Predecessor in the Right of these Lands,
whereunto the Son is a Successor, alb^it he be a singular Successor.

The Lords found the Clause of the Act of Parliament to comprehend Rights
acquired by appearand Heirs, in their Predec^ssors Life, and therefore declared.

Agnes Hadden and Mary Lawder contra Shorswood. Eodem die.
THomas Shorswood having granted an Assignation to a Bond of 500. merks in
favors of Agnes Hadden and Mary L^wder, they pursue Magdalen Shorswood, his
nearest of kin, to d^liver the same: who alleged Absolvitor^ because the
Assignation was never delivered, but being made a year before the
Defunctsdeath, remained by him till his death, and was never delivered: and it
is not the Subscribing of a Writ, but the Delivery thereof, that makes it that
Parties, in whose favors it is conceived, unless the Party were in Family, as
a Fathers C^stody is the Child's Custody, and equivalent to Delivery, and unless
the Writ had contained a Clause to be valide without Delivery, which this does
not. The Pursuer answered, that this Assignation reserveth expressly the
Defuncts Liferent, and a power to dispose thereof, during his Life, which
shows his mind, not to deliver the Assignation, even when he made it;
otherwise the Reservation in his own favor, would not have been in his own
hand, which sufficiently shows his mind, that the Writ should be valide, though
not delivered in his life. 2. This being a moveable sum, this Assignation is in
effect d^natio mortis causa, and so must be valide, without Delivery, for a
Testament or Legacy is valide without Delivery. It was answered to the first
Alleadgance, that the Defunct might have Delivered the Assignation, and kept
the Bond; so that the keeping of the Assignation was not necessary, and so did
not import his meaning to be, that the Assignation should be valide without
Delivery. To the second, this Assignation is in the Terms and Nature of a
proper Assignation, and is a Right inter vivos, and not donatio more is c^usa;
because donatio mortis causa, is but as a Legacy, affecting only the Deads
part: but if this Assignation had been Delivered, it would have affected all,
and so could be no donatio mortis causa, and albeit it was not Delivered, it
remains the same kind of Right.

The Lords Rep^lled the Defenses, and decerned Delivery in regard of the Tenor
of the Assignation, and that it was a moveable sum, it being also info^med that
the Defunct had no Children, and the said Agnes Hadden, who was to have 400.
merks of the sum, was Cousin-german to the Defunct.

Relict of Galrigs contra Wallace of Galrigs. Eodem die.
THe Relict of Galrigs pursues for Mails and Duties upon her Seasine, given
propriis manibus. It was alleged for Galrigs no Process, because the Seasine
is but assertio notarij, without a Warrant, there being neither a Contract nor
Obligation to give such a Seasine. It was answered, that Instruments of Seasine
given to a Wife, p^opr^is manibus, have a sufficient Adminicle, and presumption
by the Marriage, and the duty of the Husband to provide the Wife, especially
where there is no Contract, nor other Provision; but most of all where the Wife
Renunced her Jointure she had with a former Husband in favors of the Granter
of the Seasine, and his Creditors, which is a strong presumption, he would give
her something in lieu thereof.

Which the Lords sustained.

Steuart of Torrence contra Feuars of Ernock. June 24. 1668.
JAmes Steuart, as Donator to the Ward of the Lord of Ernock, by the Lord
Semple of whom Ernock held the Lands Ward: pursues the Possessors for Removing,
who alleged absolvitor, because they brooked their Lands by Feues, granted by
the Lord of Ernock. The pursuer answered, non relevat, unless the Feues were
consented to, or Confirmed by the Superior; for by the Feudal Law, no deed of
the Vassal can prejudge the Superior, when the Lands are Ward. The Defenders
alleged, their Feues needed no Confirmation, because they are warranted by
Law, by the 72d. Act K. Iam. 2. which stood valide until the Act of Parliament
1606. Prohibiting Feues granted but by immediate Vassals of the King, Ita est,
The first Act cannot extend to the Kings Sub-vassals, because it bears only
Freeholders, and bears that the King shall accept of the Feu Duty, during the
Ward: but the Ward of his Sub-vassals would never fall in the Kings hand: and
this meaning of the Act of Parliament is evident by the Act of Parliament 1606.
bearing expressly, that there was no warrant by the first Act for any Feues, but
such as were granted by the Kings immediate Vassals. It was answered for the
Defenders, that they oppone the first Act of Parliament, bearing expressly a
general Reason of granting Feues, for the policy of the Kingdom, and that the
King would give Example to the rest; and that the Act no ways restricteth to
Freeholders of the King, but others who hold of Subjects Ward, are called
Freeholders, in opposition to Feues; which is also cleared by the 91. Act
Parliament 1503. The Title whereof bears, (a power to all persons Spiritual and
Temporal, to set their Ward Lands Feu,) which clears the meaning of the
Parliament, and the common custom till the year 1606. which is acknowledged in
the Narrative of the Act 1606. which does only annul Feues set to Sub-vassals,
in time thereafter: and as to the Narrative thereof, the Statutory part, and
not the Narratives of the Acts of Parliament, which the Parliament does not
much notice, are our Rules; and this Narrative is contradicted by the Narrative
of the Act of Parliament 1633. bearing that there is no reason why the Kings
immediate Vassals should grant Feues more then Sub-vassals.

The Lords sustained the Feues, being granted before the Act of Parliament 1606.

Andrew Gray contra Howison and Gray. Eodem die.
ANdrew Gray being Infe^t as Heir to his Grandsire, in certain Lands of the
Barony of Fowls, holden blensh of the House of Gray: pursues a Reduction of a
late Infeftment in Anno 1655. granted to Walter Watson, as long Posterior to
his Right. Compearance is made for William Gray of Haystoun, as being Infeft by
the Lord Gray, and Sir George Kinnard, who was Donator to the Recognition of
the Estate of Gray, by the alienation of this Lords Father; which Recognition
has been declared by the Lords, and alleged that he has the only Right;
because by the Recognition, the old Rights of the House of Gray being void, the
Pursuers Subaltern Right fell in consequence therewith. The Pursuer answered,
that before the Defenders Right, he had obtained a Precept of clare constat,
acknowledging his old Right, whereupon he was Infeft. It was answered, that the
Precept does bear expreslly, to be in obedience of Precepts out of the
Chancellary upon the Pursuers Retour, and so being a necessar Act, and not
voluntar, it could be no acknowledgement, or Ratification of the Pursuers Right.

The Lords having considered the Precept, that albeit it mentioned the Retour
in obedience to the Precept: yet it bore also, and quoniam mihi clare constat,
etc. in the common strain of a Precept of clare constat, acknowledging the
Pursuers Predecessors Right and his Own.

They found that it did exclude the Donator, and all having Right from him
thereafter, and after the Seasine past thereon.

George Heriot contra Town of Edinburgh. June 25. 1668.
GEorge Heriots Father being Infeft in an Annualrent, out of certain Tenements
in the Canongate, obtained himself to be Served Heir in special therein, before
the Baillies of the Canongate, and because the samine is within a Regality,
having a proper Chapel, and was not to be Retoured to the Kings Chancellary;
So that Precepts were not to be had out of the Chancellary, against the Town of
Edinburgh, Superiors, to Charge them to Infeft him; therefore George upon
Supplication, obtained Letters from the Lords to Charge them; and they being
now Charged, he pursues a Poinding of the Ground. It was alleged for the
Town, no Process for poinding of the Ground, till the Pursuer were Infeft in
the Annualrent. It was answered, that he having done Diligence against the
Town, it was equivalent, and did exclude them from proponing that alleadgance.
It was answered, that no personal objection against the Town, could be a
sufficient Title against this Action without a real Right.

The Lords found no Process till Infeftment, but declared that so soon as the
Magistrates should be Denunced, they would grant Warrant to the Director of the
Chancellary to issue a Precept for Infefting the Pursuer, for supplying the
place of the Magistrates, and their Contumacy.

Black contra Scot. Eodem die.
ALexander Black having obtained a Decree before the Commissar of St. Andrews,
against James Scot, for 126. pounds; pursues a Transferrence thereof, against
the Representatives of James Scot, who alleged absolvitor, because the
Decree is ipso jure, null, being given by a Commissar, in a matter not
Consistorial far above the quantity allowed by the Injunctions, and there being
nothing to instruct but the Defenders being holden as confessed, the Decree at
least must be turned to a Libel, and yet proven. 2. If the Defunct had been
obliged to have compeared, he would not only have denied the Receipt of the
Vinegar and Grapes Libelled, but he would have offered to prove, and the
Defender offers yet to prove, that they were refused, and lay publicly upon
the Shore where they were disloaded. 3. It was offered to be proven, the
Defunct was lying on Deathbed, the time he was Cited to Depone, and was holden
as confessed. The Pursuer answered, that albeit these Reasons were relevant to
Repone a Party holden as confessed to their Oath, yet were not sufficient to
annual the Decree, seeing the Pursuer lost his Probation, the Receipt of the
Goods having been two years ago; and albeit this sum exceeded the Commissars
Injunctions; yet the violation thereof does not annual his Sentence, or take
away his power, unless the samine had been objected upon Compearance.

The Lords found not the Defenses Relevant to annul the Decree, or to hazard
the loss of the Pursuers Probation: but seeing the Defender burdened himself
with a contrair Probation, The Lords inclined to admit the same, if it were
sufficiently pregnant; and therefore ordained the Pursuer before answer, to
adduce Witnesses, that the Goods were never taken off the Shore, but Boated
there.

Inglis contra Lord Balfour. Eodem die.
THere being an Un-printed Act of Parliament, for uplifting the Taxt and Loan
of the Shire of Fife, for Relief of some Noblemen engaged for the Shire in Anno
1661. The Council did thereafter give Commission to certain persons in the
Shire, to conveen the persons resting, and accordingly Cited the Lord of
Balfour, and he not compearing, ordered quartering against him: he Suspends on
this Reason, that this being a private and particular Act of Parliament, to
which he was not called, is salvo jure, and could not burden his Lands of
Creik, because he is singular Successor therein to the Lord of Creik. It was
answered, that there is no exception of singular Successors in the Act of
Parliament* so that this Act being a Reviving of the old Rescinded Act, pro
tan^o, it must be in the same case as Taxation and Maintenance, which is ever
accounted debitum fundi. It was answered, that these burdens Imposed by the
Rescinded Parliaments, are not in the same case with other public Burdens,
especially where it is but a particular Act, relating to particular persons and
Shires, without Citation of them, for if they had known of this Act, they would
have petitioned the Parliament, that singular Successors might have been
excepted, as they were in other Acts of this nature.

The Lords Suspended the Decree, and found that as they were singular
Successors they were not liable.

David Dick contra Ker. June 26. 1668.
DAvid Dick as Donator to the Escheat of Ker, insists in a special Declarator,
for payment of a sum due to the Rebel. The Defender alleged Absolvitor,
because it being a Bond, bearing Annualrent, it fell not under the single
Escheat. It was Replied, that Bonds bearing Annualrent, are still holden
moveable, until the first Term of payment of Annualrent, and is Disposeable by
Testament, if the Defunct die before that Term: but here the Rebellion was
before the date of the Bond, and so the sum fell to the Fisk, the day it was
Subscribed. It was answered, that the 32. Act, Parliament 1661. declares Bonds
bearing Annualrent, to exclude the Fisk, without any exception or limitation.

The Lords having considered the Act, found that it left Bonds bearing
Annualrent, in the same case that they were formerly; and found that before the
Term of payment of Annualrent, they were moveable.

Peterson contra Captain Anderson. June 30. 1668.
CAptain Anderson having taken a Ship, whereof Peter Peterson was Master, and
obtained the same declared Prize by the Admiral, upon two grounds; one that the
Ship was sailed, a great part of the company being Hollanders, then the Kings
enemies: The other, that albeit it was pretended that the Ship belonged to
Swedes, yet by several presumptions and evidences, it appeared, that is was but
a conveyance, and that the Ship truly belonged to Hollanders: There is now a
Reduction raised of the Decree, and the first ground thereupon Debated and
Decided. It was alleged for the Strangers, that they being Swedes, their case
was only to be ruled by the Treaty betwixt the King and the Crown of Sweden, by
which it is expressly provided, that the Subjects of Sweden having such Passes,
as are expressed in the Articles, shall not be Seized, or brought up, and
particularly in bona and homines nullo modo inquir^tur, viz. Where such a Pass
is found aboard, and the said Pass being here found aboard, the Ship was
unwarrantably Seized, and unwarrantably declared Prize, upon pretense of being
sailed with Hollanders; because that Article takes away all question about the
men, and so gives liberty to the Swedes, to make use of any Mariners they
please. It was answered, that the Reason of Adjudication was most just; and
this Reason of Reduction ought to be repelled, because the Kings Proclamation,
denuncing the War, gives express warrant to sease all such Ships as had any
number of Hollanders therein, which must stand as the Rule, unless the Swedes
had by their Treaty, a particular exception, derogating from that Rule, which
they have not: but on the contrary, the Treaty contains an express provision,
that they may make use of a Hollands Master, and not unless he became a Citizen
of some City of Sweden, and be sworn Burgess thereof: but upon the former
ground, there needed no such Article for Masters, and all might thereby be
Hollanders. And as to the Article of the Treaty, concerning no further inquiry,
there is subjoyned, quod si gravis aliqua suspitio subsit; in which case,
notwithstanding of the Pass, Seasure might be made; but here there was gravis
suspitio, that the Ship or Goods belonged to the Hollanders, the Master, and
major part of the Company being Hollanders, and the Pass mentioning a Ship of
an hundred Tuns, whereas this Ship was two hundredth Tuns. It was answered for
the Strangers, that the Kings Proclamation could be no Rule to the Subjects of
any other free Prince; but the Law of Nations, or their own Treaties, behoved
to be the Rule: and by the Law of Nations, the King could not hinder his Allies
of any Commerce, or Trade with His Enemies, which they were accustomed, or free
to do before the War, except such Acts only, wherein they partaked with his
Enemies, by furnishing provisions of War, or Counterband Goods; and so the King
by no Proclamation, could hinder the Swedes to hire and make use of Hollanders,
which rather weakened, then strengthened his Enemies: and in this case, the
making use of Hollanders was necessar, because other Sailers could not be had,
when the Ship was bought; and that Article of the Proclamation ought to be
benignly interpret, that when any Ship carries Hollenders as Passengers, the
same should be Seized, but not when these were Servants and Mariners to other
Nations. It was answered for the Captain, that the Kings Proclamation of the
War, behoved to be a Rule to the Kings Judges, and that it was most consonant
to the Law of Nations, and it was impossible without the same, to know what
Ships did truly belong to Allies; and that in the Spanish Treaty with the King,
that privilege was specially indulged to the Flandrians, not to be quarrelled
upon the account of Hollanders, because of the Identity of their Language,
which would have been unnecessar, if by the Law of Nations, all might have so
done.

The Lords Repelled the Reason of the Reduction, and found that ground of the
Adjudication, that the Ship was Sailed, with a great part of the Company being
Hollanders, Relevant alone, and that the same was sufficiently proven by the
Testimony of the Steirsman, and another Witness of the Company, and therefore
Assoilzied from the Reduction.

The Minister of Elgin contra his Parochioners. Eodem die.
THE Minister of Elgin pursues his Parochioners for the Viccarage of some
Yeards in Elgin, which belonged of old to the Canons of the Cathedral Kirk of
Elgin, and were by them Feued to the Defenders, who alleged Absolvitor;
because the Yeards being a part of the Canons Portions, and in effect their
Gleibs had in no time past, ever paid Viccarage, which is consuetudinar, and
local, both as to the payment, and the kinds; for in some places, Teind Lint,
and Hens are paid, and in others not: but the ordinar Viccarage being Stirks,
Wool, Milk and Lamb, there is none of these to be had in these Yeards. It was
answered, that no Prescription could take away Teinds, upon the forbearance of
demanding it by Beneficed Persons, who are but Administrators, and cannot
Delapidat; otherwise all Benefices might be destroyed. 2ly, Lands that have
been always Ploughed, and so paid Parsonage, and becoming Grass, are liable to
Viccarage, albeit it cannot be proven, that ever they paid any before.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, unless the Pursuer could prove that
Viccarage has been paid out of these, or out of any other the Canons Portions
of this Kirk.

George Shein contra James Christie. Eodem die.
G Christison of Bassallie, gave an Infeftment to his eldest Son, of the Lands
of Bassallie, and to his second Son, of an Annualrent of 86. merks forth
thereof, both of one date, and both reserving the Fathers Liferent. James
Christie has Right by Appryzing, led against the eldest Son, in his Fathers
life, to the Lands. George Shein has Right by Adjudication, against the second
Son, to the Annualrent, and pursues a poinding of the Ground. It was alleged
for James Christie, that Sheins Authors Right was base, never cled with
Possession, and so null; whereas his Right was public by an Appryzing, and had
attained to Possession. It was answered, that the Fathers Liferent being
reserved, the Fathers Possession was both the Sons Possession, and did validat
both their Rights. It was answered, that a Disposition by a Father to his own
Children, reserving his own Liferent, though Infeftment follow, is always
accounted simulat, and never accounted cled with Possession, by the Fathers
Possession, as has been frequently decided. It was answered^ that albeit in
Competition betwixt base Infe^tments, granted to Children, and Infeftments
granted to Strangers upon onerous Causes; the Childrens Infeftment, though
prior, and though reserving the Fathers Liferent, uses to be preferred; yet
here that holds not, for both Infeftments are granted to Children, both of one
date, and neither of them to Strangers, or upon onerous Causes; and therefore
the Reservation here is without suspicion of Simulation, and the Fathers
Possession must both validat the second Sons Annualrent^ and the eldest Sons
property.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and that the Fathers Possession by this
Reservation, did sufficiently validat both the Sons Infeftments; and that the
Possession of one after his Death, or of any succeeding in his Right, did not
exclude the other, or his singular Successor.

Mr. Robert Burnet contra Swane. Eodem die.
MR. Robert Burnet Tutor of L^yes pursues for Mails and Duties of a Tenement in
Aberdene. It was alleged for Swane the Defender, Absolvitor, because he
stands Infeft in the Lands; and by virtue of his Infeftment, in Possession; and
albeit the Pursuers Infeftment be prior, it is null, neither being Registrat in
the Register of Seasins, nor in the Town Clerks Books of Aberdene, according to
the custom of all Burghs, but has been latent many years, and no vestige of it
in the Town Books; so that the Defender was in bona fide, to Contract with the
common Author, and Apprize thereafter. It was answered, that the Act of
Parliament excepted Seasins within Burgh; and the Pursuer having the Town
Clerks Subscription was not answerable for his keeping a Prothecal, or Record.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and sustained the Seasine.

Colquhoun and Mcquair contra Stuart of Barscub. July 1. 1668.
THe Lord of Barscub having seued certain Lands to Colquhoun and Mcquair, to
be holden of himself, in the Contract of Alienation, there is a special Clause,
that because the Lands are holden Ward of the Duke of Lenox; therefore Barscub
is obliged to relieve these Feues of any Ward that shall fall in time coming:
Thereafter Barscub Dispones the Superiority of these Lands, and by the Death of
his singular Successor, his Heir falls in Ward, whereupon Sentence was obtained
against the Feuars for the Ward Duties, and the avail of the Marriage, and they
now pursue relief against Barscubs Heir, upon the Clause of Warrandice
above-written. The Defender alleged, that the Libel was no ways Relevant, to
infer warrandice against him, upon the said Clause; because the meaning thereof
can only be, that he as Superior, and so long as he remained Superior, shall
relieve the Feuars, which ceases, he being now Denuded of the Superiority;
otherwise it behoved to have imported, that he should never sell the
Superiority, without the Vassals consent, which no Law does require: or if the
Lands had been Appryzed from him, he could not be liable for the Ward of the
Appryzers Heir, which is cleared by the ordinary Custom, there being nothing
more frequent in Charters, than Clauses of absolute warrandice; and yet none
was ever overtaken thereby, after they ceased to be Superiors. The Pursuer
answered, that his Libel was most Relevant; because this being an Obligement,
conceived in their favors by Barscub, not qualified as Superior, no Deed of
Barscubs, without their consent, can take it from them, unless Barscub, when he
sold the Superiority, had taken the new Superior obliged, to receive the
Vassals with the same warrandice; but now the new Superior, not being obliged
by this personal Clause, Barscub the old Superior, must remain obliged,
especially in a Clause of this nature, which is express for all Wards to come.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Sustained the Libel, and found the
Superior (albeit Denuded) liable for Warrandice.

Thomas Rue-contra Andrew Houstoun. July 3. 1668.
ANdrew Houstoun and Adam Mushet, being Tacksmen of the Excize, did Employ
Thomas Rue to be their Collector, and gave him a Sallary of 30. pound Sterling
for a year, thereafter he pursued Andrew Houstoun upon his promise, to give him
the like Sallary for the next year, and in absence obtained him to be holden as
confessed and Decerned: Which being Suspended, he obtained Protestation, and
therefore raised Caption, and apprehended Andrew Houstoun at Wigtoun, who gave
him a Bond of 500. Merks, and got a Discharge, and being Charged upon the Bond
of 500. Merks, he Suspends on these Reasons, that Thomas Rue had granted a
general Discharge to Adam Mush^t, who was his Conjunct, and co^reus de^endi,
after the alleged Service which Discharged Mush^t, and consequently Houstoun
his Partner. 2dly, The Decree was for Sallary, and it was offered to be
proven, that Rue (for his Malversation) was by warrant from Ceneral Monk,
excluded from Collection that year, and by the Discharge of the Decree, and
this Bond, both of the same Date and VVitnesses, it did appear that this Bond
was granted for the Decree, and if the Decree were Reduced, by the Reduction
thereof depending, the Bond would fall in consequence, as granted for the same
Cause. The Charger answered, that he was now not obliged to Dispute, in
relation to the Decree. First, Because the Suspender had Homologat the same,
by taking a Discharge thereof, and giving a Bond therefore. 2dly, There was not
only a Homologation, but a Transaction upon a Reference, made by the Parties to
^aldone, conform to his Attestation produced; so that that Transaction cannot
be recalled upon any pretense, but is the most firm, and Obligatory Contract of
any. The Suspender answered, that his payment making and taking Discharge, was
no Approbation, nor Homologation, but that he might reduce the Decree, and
repeat if he had paid, or been poynded, and so may retain; especially seeing it
was done metu Carce^is, he being taken with Caption: and as to the Transaction,
he denies the same; neither can it be instructed by Baldones Attestation, but
by the Suspenders O^th or Writ.

The Lords f^und that the granting of the Bond was no H^mologation of the
Decree, but that ^e might quarrel the same; and that the giving of the Bond
was no Transaction, if he paid or gave Bond for the whole Sums contained in
the Decree: but found that ^f in consideration of the Grounds upon which he
might quarrel the same, he had g^^^en an abatement by Arbitration, or otherwise
that he could not quarrel the same, and found it only probable by his Oath, or
^^rit.

James Donaldson contra Harrower. Eodem die.
JAmes Donaldson pursues John Harrower as representing his Father, for whom the
Pursuer became Cautioner to the Lord Rollo for 100. pound, for relief of the
Defuncts Goods that were then a poinding; for which the Defunct promised
payment, and did pay the Lord Rollo, and produces a Testificat of the Lord
Rollo's thereof, and craves payment, and offers to prove the Libel by
VVitnesses, the Libel not being above an hundred pound. It was alleged for
the Defender, that this being a Cautionry, and a Promise it was not probable by
VVitnesses, especially after so long a time, the Promiser being dead, who might
either qualify the Promise, or instruct payment, there being nothing more
ordinar, then to Transact such Affairs without any Writ.

The Lords found the Libel not probable by Witnesses.

Frazer contra Frazer. Eodem die.
JOhn Frazer having obtained a Decree against William Frazer his Brother, to
deliver a Tack of the Lands of Boghead, granted to their Father and his Heirs,
to whom the said John is Heir. William Suspends on this Reason, that he is Heir
to his Father of the second Marriage, and produces his Retour, and produces the
Contract of Marriage, including a Clause, that all Tacks Conquest during the
Marriage, should belong to the Heirs of the Marriage; and this Tack being
Acquired during the Marriage, the same belongs to him: and albeit it he
conceived to the Heirs generally; yet by the Contract, the Pursuer as Heir
general, will be obliged to Assign. It was answered, that this Tack was no new
Conquest, but had been the old Possession of the Father, and the Tack bare the
Lands to be presently possessed by him.

The Lords found this Tack to fall under the Clause of Conquest, unless the
Pursuer prove that there was an old Tack standing, which expyred not till the
second Marriage was Dissolved, in lieu whereof, this new Tack was taken.

Hamiltoun contra Callender. July 7. 1668.
JAmes Hamiltoun having taken his Debtor with Caption, offered him to James
Callender Baillie of Falkirk, to be Incarcerat in the Tolbooth of Falkirk, and
he refusing, he now pursues a subsidiary Action against the Baillie, for
payment of the Debt; who alleged Absolvitor, because he is no Magistrate of a
Burgh Royal, but of a Burgh of Regality, the Baillies whereof were never in
custom to be Charged with Rebels. The Pursuer opponed the Act of Parliament
1597. cap. 279. bearing expressly* Baillies of Stewartries and Regalities,
according to which, the Tenor of all Captions, bears the Letters to be direct
against all Baillies of Regalities. The Defender answered, that for the
Letters, it is but stylus curiae; and for the Act of Parliament, the Narrative
and Reason thereof relates only to Burghs having Provest, Baillies and Common
Good.

The Lords having considered the Act of Parliament, Repelled the Defense and
Decerned here the Rebel was Residenter within the Burgh of Regality, where
there was known to be a convenient Prison.

Relict of William Pattoun contra Relict of Archibald Pattoun. Eodem die.
THE Relict and Executors of William Pattoun, pursues the Relict and Executors
of Archibald Pattoun, for Count and Reckoning of Sums and Goods belonging to
the said umquhil William Pattoun by Archibald, and craves the Defender to
produce Archi^alds Count Books, who alleadgen nemo tenetur edere instrumenta
sua contra se ad fundandam ^item; so that the desire was no ways reasonable,
unless the Pursuer had given in a particular Charge, and Litiscontestation had
been made thereon; in which case, the Defender might have been compelled, ad
modum probationis, to have produced the Books. It was answered, the contrair
was found in the Count and Reckoning betwixt the Children of George Sui^ty
against the Representatives of William Suitty their Tutor, and that there was
as great reason here, the two Defuncts having been Brothers, and being in
Copartnery together, and the one Factor for the other. It was answered, that
the case of a Tutor and his Pupil was no way alike, because the Tutors Count
Book was in effect the Pupils, and the Copartinery, and Factory was denied.

The Lords ordained the Book to be put in the hands of the Auditor, and if he
found by inspection thereof, any Accounts appeared as betwixt Partners and
Factors, he should produce the same to the other Party, even ad fundandam
litem, otherwise that the same should be given back, and not showen to the
Pursuer.

Margaret Alexander contra Lord of Clackmannan. July 9. 1668.
MArgaret Alexander being Infeft in an annualrent out of the Lands of Sauchie,
by a posterior Infeftment, in Corroboration of the former Right, she was Infeft
in that same Annualrent, out of other Lands, whereof she was in Possession; but
this posterior Infeftment being Reduced upon an Inhibition prior thereto; she
pursues poinding of the Ground, of the Lands of Sauchie, upon the first
Infeftment. It was alleged for Clackmannan Absolvitor, because the Pursuers
Right of Annualrent is base, never cled with Possession, and now he is Infeft
in the Lands, either publicly, or by another Infeftment cled with Possession.
The Pursuer answered, that the Infeftment in the Lands of Sauchie was
sufficiently cled with Possession, in so far as the posterior Infeftment of
Annualrent in Corroboration thereof was cled with Possession, and as payment
made by the Heretor, by himself for his Tennents, or by Assignation to Mails
and Duties of other Lands in satisfaction of the Annualrent infers Possession;
so payment made by his Tennents, by the posterior Infeftment in Corroboration,
can be no worse then an Assignation to the Mails and Duties of these Lands;
which as it pays some Terms Annualrent of the first Infeftment, so it must
cloth it sufficiently with Possession. It was answered, that here being two
distinct Infeftments at several times, albeit for the Annualrent of the same
sum, yet the Possession of the last cannot relate to the first.

The Lord Repelled the Defense in respect of the Reply, and found that
Possession by the last Infeftment, did from that time sufficiently validat the
first.

Heugh Boog contra Robert Davidson. Eodem die.
HEugh Boog having arrested Robert Davidsons Fee, as Keeper of Herlots
Hospital, Pursues the Town of Edinburgh to make it forthcoming. It was
alleged for Robert Davidson Absolvitor, because Robert Davidson had made
cessionem bonorum, in favors of this Pursuer and his other Creditors, and
thereupon was Assoilzied. The Pursuer answered, that a Honorum did no ways
secure contra acquirenda, unless the Assignation or Disposition had been
equivalent to the Debt, and satisfied it. The Defender answered, that that
which was here Acquired, was only a Fee for Service, which is Alimentar, and
the Fee will not be due, unless the Defender Serve in suitable condition,
effeirand to his place; and therefore it cannot be made forth coming to any
other use.

The Lords found that a Fee in so far as was necessar for the Servants Aliment
conform to his condition of Service, could not be reached by his Creditors to
whom he had made cessionem bonorum, except as to the superplus, more then what
was necessar, and they found no superplus in this case.

Captain Allan contra Parkman. Eodem die.
CAptain Allan having taken Bartholomew Parkman, and obtained him to be
declared Prize. Parkman raises Reduction, and for fortification of the Admirals
Decree of Adjudication, these Grounds were alleged: First, That by the
Testimonies of the Steirsman and Company, it was proven that three of the
Company were the Kings Enemies; and so conform to the Kings Declaration of War,
Ordaining all Ships to be seized wherein there were any number of men belonging
to the Kings Enemies: this Ship was Prize, as was lately found in the case of
the Ship called, The Castle of Riga. And albeit by a former Interloquitor, the
Lords had not found three men to be a number sufficient for Confiscation: Yet
it was not then considered; that the whole Company consisted but of eight; so
that near the third of the Sailers were the Kings Enemies, and one of them the
Steirsman, which is a considerable proportion. 2dly, This Ship though pretended
to belong to the Swedes, yet she had served the Kings Enemies, the Danes and
Hollanders, two years* and by the Swedish Treaty it is provided, quod naves
nullo modo accommodentur utriusque foederati inimicis. 3dly. It is also proven,
that this Ship carried Counterband-goods, viz. Tar, which was not the product
of Sweden, but carried from Denmark to Holland, and that she was taken in her
return, having in a loadning of Salt from France; so that albeit the Ship had
been empty, she might have been taken Prize in that same Voyage, in which she
did partake with the Kings Enemies: or being taken in the same Voyage, in which
she had carried bona hostium. And lastly, it was also instructed, that the
Cargo with which she was taken, was the product of the Counterband-goods, and
so in the same case as if the Counterband-goods had been actually in her, the
product being surrogatum quod sapit naturam surrogati. It was answered for
Parkman, to the first Ground, that he opponed the Lords Interlocutor, finding
three Sailers no sufficient number for Confiscation. And in the case of The
Castle of Riga, the major part, at least the half were the Kings Enemies. To
the second Ground it was answered, that the Kings Allies making use of their
Ships for Fraught, was no way a lending of them to the Kings Enemies; and as
for the remnant Goods, by the Kings Declaration of War, there is only given
Warrant to sease Ships, having in them Counterband-goods, or Enemies Goods; and
the Swedish ^rety bears expressly si deprehenduntur; so that this Ship having in
her when she was taken, no Counterband nor Enemies Goods, is free. It was
answered, that the Kings Declaration, although it mention some cases of
Seasure, is not full or exclusive, but the Law of Nations must take place, or
the Custom of Scotland, in cases not expressed in the Kings Declaration. And as
for the Swedish Treaty, it cannot be pleaded, unless Parkman had a Pass from
Sweden, in all points conform to the Treaty: but their Passes were in several
things disconform, as being granted when the Ship was in Holland, and sent over
Land. And as for the Custom of Scotland, to take Ships in the return of that
Voyage, in which they carried Counterband, or prohibited Goods; it appears by
the Captains Commission, and former Commissions in Anno 1628. and by a Decree
declaring a Prize, wherein the same ground was Libelled, that she was taken in
the return of that same Voyage, in which she had carried Counterband. And the
Lords having Written to my Lord Secretary, his Letter in return, bears, That
the Lords should decide according to the Law of Scotland. It was answered for
the Stranger, that the particular Custom of Scotland can be no Rule for the
Swedes; but only the Law and Custom of Nations ^ and that England, nor no other
Nation has that Custom, to make Seasure, but in delicto, otherwise all Trade
and Commerce would be destroyed, unless Seasure were only upon what were
visibly Aboard, and not upon the pretense of what had been Aboard: and albeit a
Delinquence once committed by partaking with the Kings Enemies, might endure
for a longer time: Yet the Custom of Nations, for the utility of Trade, has
Abridged it to actual Seasure, in delicto, and accordingly Judge Ienkins, Judge
of the Admirality in England, has Attested, that during this War, after search
of the Records, and Conference with other Judges, he knows not of any Prize
declared, but when the Counterband goods, or Enemies Goods were taken actually
in them. And for the Decree alleged on, albeit that Ground be in the Libel;
yet other Grounds are also therein, and there is no Debate as to that
particular Point; neither does the Probation mentioned in the Decree clear,
that that Point was proven. And as to the Tenor of the Commissions, albeit they
might excuse the Captain from Fine, or Damnages; yet Strangers did not, nor
were not obliged to know the same: but the Law and Custom of Nations, and the
Kings public Declaration of the War, and their Treaties.

The Lords having considered the Debate, and that the several Points were of
Importance and Preparatives, they resolved to take the Grounds jointly, and so
found the Ship Prize, as having so considerable a proportion of her Company the
Kings Enemies. Some also were of the opinion, that she having been taken in the
return was sufficient, especially not having a sufficient Swedish Pass^ but the
plurality wa^ed these Points, whether the returns of Enemies Goods, or
Counterband, or whether the Product, or not Product thereof were sufficient
Grounds of Seasure, seeing it did not so appear by the Custom of Nations, or the
Kings Declaration of War: but by the former Debate it appeared, that she had
Aboard when taken, a small parcel of Tar.

Mr. David Falconer contra Sir James Keith. July 14. 1668.
MR. David Falconer gave in a Complaint against Sir James Keith of Caddam, that
he being in the exercise of his Office, informing the President to stop a Bill
of Suspension, given in by Sir James Keith: Sir James did revile and threaten
him, calling him a Liar and a Knave, and saying if he found him in another
place, he would make him repent what he said.

The Lords having received Witnesses in their own presence, and finding it
proven, sent Sir James to the Tolbooth, there to remain during their pleasure,
and Fined him in 500. Merks.

Earl of Wintoun contra Gordoun of Letterfary. July 15. 1668.
THe Earl of Wintoun having Appryzed certain Lands in the North pursues for
Mails and Duties. It was alleged for Gordoun of Letterfary, that he stands
Infeft in these Lands; and by virtue of that Infeftment, is seven years in
Possession, and thereby has the benefit of a possessory Judgment, and must
enjoy the Mails and Duties till his Right be Reduced. The Pursuer answered,
that he had Intented Process upon his Right for Mails and Duties, Anno 1658.
whereby the matter became litigious, and which stops the course of any
possessory Judgment, till that Citation expyre, by the course of 40. years, in
the same way as it is in Removings or Ejections: where Summons once Intented,
does not Prescribe by three years thereafter, but lasts for 40. years. The
Defender answered, that the case is not alike; for the benefit of a poss^ssory
Judgment is introduced for the Security of Persons Infeft, that they be not
summarly put to Dispute their Authors Rights which are oftimes not in their
hands, but in the hands of their Authors, or Superiors; and there was never
any Reply Sustained against the same, unless it were Vicious or Violent, or
Interrupted: but here the last seven years Possession, after that Citation, is
neither Interrupted, nor Vicious; and these being no stop to take away the
Effect of that Citation: it were of bad consequence, if Persons Infeft 39.
years after a Citation, behoved Summarly to Dispute their Rights.

The Lords Sustained the Defense of the Possessory Judgment, upon seven years
peaceable Possession, before the Citation, and Repelled the Reply.

The Pursuer further Replied, that in the seven years after the Citation, there
were some years wherein there was a surcease of Justice, and no Courts in
Scotland. 2dly, The Citation was by his Tutors and Curators, and he was minor
during the seven years. It was answered, that a possessory Judgment was
competent against minors, and there was no respect of minority therein, which
is only excepted in the great Prescription, extinguishing the Right; but in the
possessory Judgment in Relation to the way of Process, and the Fruits in the
mean time, as in all Prescriptions, tempus contin^um, and not tempus utile, is
respected.

The Lords also Repelled both these Replies, and notwithstanding thereof
Sustained the Exception on the possessory Judgment.

Sir William Steuart contra Murrays. July 17. 1668.
SIr James Murray, his Estate being Appryzed by many of his Creditors; Sir
William Steuart, one of the Appryzers, pursues the rest for Count and Reckoning
of a proportionable part of the Rents, in respect that his Appryzing is within
a year of the first effectual Appryzing, and comes in therewith pari passu, by
the late Act of Parliament, betwixt D^bitor and Creditor. It was alleged
Absolvitor: First, Because the Pursuers Appryzing is incomplete, nothing having
followed thereupon now these 16. or 18. years; and by the Act of the late
Parliament, anent the Registration of the allowance of Appryzings, that is
declared to be a necessar Solemnity for all Appryzings led since June 1652. and
this Appryzing is not yet allowed. It was answered, that by the late Act of
Parliament, the Certification of the want of allowance is not, that the
Appryzing shall be null; but that posterior Appryzings first allowed, shall be
preferred: but the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, brings in Appryzings
together, deduced within a year, according to their Dates, without mention of
allowance, and is posterior to the said other Act, and cannot be Derogat from
thereby; nor does the Act require Infeftment, or any thing else, but takes away
the preference of Appryzings by the former Act, as to such as are led within a
year.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, and Ordained the Pursuer now to allow his
Appryzing, which they found sufficient.

The Defenders further alleged Absolvitor, because the Pursuer had accepted a
Disposition from Sir James Murray, the common Debtor of a Tenement in
Edinburgh, bearing expressly, in satisfaction of his Debt, which is now produced
by himself. The Pursuer answered; First, That he was excluded from the benefit
of that Disposition by Eviction, by the Earl of Panmure, who Appryzed before he
was Infeft. 2dly. That whatever it bear, it was but truly granted for
Security; for there is produced an Assignation by Sir James, of certain sums to
the Pursuer, for the same Debt, which could never have been, if the first had
been made in satisfaction. The Defenders opponed the Disposition, bearing
expressly in Satisfaction, the benefit whereof accrescing to them, upon the
Pursuers Receiving the Disposition, cannot be taken from them by any posterior
Writ of the Common Debtor; nor are they obliged to Dispute, whether it was
valid or effectual, seeing it was accepted, and the Eviction does not annul the
Acceptance, but gives place to the Clause of Warrandice, contained in the
Disposition, which is Personal, and reaches only the Common Debtor, and not
the Defenders: 2dly, It was the Pursuers own fault that he was excluded, in not
Infefting himself upon his Disposition, which he received before Panmuire's
Appryzing. It was answered, that he could not compel the Superior to receive
him, and that the Baillies of Edinburgh required bygone Sess, and Feu-duties to
be paid before he were Infeft, which he was not obliged to pay, seeing by the
Disposition he was to be free of all Incumberances. It was answered, that the
Baillies of Edinburgh refuse no body, as is known, and these Incumberances were
but to be purged by a personal obligement of the common Debitors, neither did
the Pursuer ever give back the Disposition.

The Lords Sustained this Defense, and found the receiving, and retaining the
Disposition in Satisfaction, sufficient to exclude the Pursuer.

It was further alleged for Patrick Murray of Deuchar, that he has Right to
the Lands of Deuchar not only by Appryzing, but by a voluntar Disposition,
whereupon he was Infeft before the Pursuers Appryzing, and has been by virtue
thereof in peaceable Possession these 16. years, and so has the benefit of a
possessory Judgment, and a prior more valide Right. It was answered that this
voluntar Disposition was granted after the Denunciation of the Pursuers
Appryzing; after which, the common Debtor could not prefer any other Creditor
by his voluntar Deed; and so the Denunciation making the matter litigious, any
posterior Possession is Vicious, and cannot give the benefit of a possessory
Judgment; neither is the Disposition being after the Denunciation a valide
Right; but especially it being considered, that the Act of Parliament brings in
this Pursuer with the other prior Appryzers, as if they had been in one
Appryzing, and several of the other Appryzings are led, and Infeftment thereon
before the Disposition.

The Lords Sustained this Defense, and found that the Denunciation did not take
away the benefit of a posterior possessory Judgment.

Lord Dumfreis contra Smart. July. 18. 1668.
THe Lord of Wamphray, being due a yearly Annuity to his Good-mother, the Lady
Wamphray, which now belongs to the Lord of Castlemaines her Husband, jure
mariti, there is a competition thereanent, betwixt.

Factor to the Earl of Dumfress, whose Name was used in the Gift to Dumfreis
behove, as Donator to the Escheat of Castlemaines, and Smart as having appryzed
from Castlemaines the Right to this Liferent, jure mariti, who alleged that
he ought to be preferred to the Donator; because albeit his Appryzing was after
the Rebellion, yet it was upon a Debt anterior to the Rebellion, and was long
before the Donators Gift; and therefore according to the known Custom,
Diligences of Creditors being before the Gift, or Declarator, are always
preferred to the Donators of single Escheat. It was answered for the Donator,
that that Custom was never further extended then to Movables, or Moveable Sums
poynded, or made forthcoming upon Arrestments, but never to Rights having
tractum futuri temporis, which cannot be carried by poynding or Arrestment, but
by Appryzing or Adjudication, as Tacks or Liferents, when Assigned, so that the
jus mariti being a Legal Assignation, and thereby falling under the Husbands
single Escheat, falls to the King and Donator by the Rebellion, and cannot be
taken away by an Appryzing, pesterior to the Rebellion.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and preferred the Donator.

Mr. George Iohnstoun contra Parichloners of Hodony. Eodom die.
MR. George Iohnstoun having Right to a Tack set by the Parson of Hodony* for
his Lifetime and three years thereafter, and having used Inhibition, pursues
the Possessors of the Lands, who alleged Absolvitor, because the Tack is
null, being set for more nor three years, without consent of the Patron, by the
Act of Parliament 1621. It was answered that the Pursuer restricts his Tack to
three years. The Defender opponed the Act of Parliament, declaring such Tacks
simply null, as were set for more then three year.

The Lords Sustained the Tack for three years, as allowed by the Act of
Parliament.

R^bert Thomson contra Earl of Glencairn. July 21. 1668.
RObert Thomson having pursued the Earl of Glencairn for a Count of Wright
Work, wherein he was Employed by the late Earl for his Lodging and Yeards, when
he dwelt in my Lord Oxfoords House. It was alleged for the Earl, that the
Employment being a Direction, was only probable scripto vel juramento.

The Lords before answer, having ordained Witnesses to be Examined, and their
Testimonies being clear and pregnant, that the late Earl did employ the Pursuer
in this Work, and called for him frequently, and ordered the Work from time to
time; they Sustained the Witnesses in the Probation, and found it prove^. It
did not appear that this Pursuer was within three years of the Work, but the
Defender did not insist in any Defense thereupon.

Patoun contra Patoun. Eodem die.
PAtoun in his Son^ Contract of Marriage, Dispones to him his Estate, and the
Tocher was payable to the Father; after the Contract, and before the Marriage
the Father takes a Bond of 2800. Merks from his Son, the Wife and her Brother
pursues a Reduction of this Bond as fraudulent, and contra bonos mores and
contra pacta dotalia. It was alleged for the Father, that he might very
lawfully take a Bond from his Son, for provision of his Children after the
Contract, and before the Marriage, having Infeft his Son in his whole Estate,
which was worth 1000. Merks yearly, and getting but 2500. Merks of Tocher, and
having some Debt and many Children. It was answered, that the Estate was not
worth 600. Merks of Rent, and the Fathers Liferent of 400. Merks reserved, so
that the Annualrent of this Bond would exhaust the remainder, and they would
have nothing to live upon.

The Lords having considered the Contract and Alleadgances, thought that it was
not sufficient to annul the Bond, that it was after the Contract, and before
the Marriage, if there was any reasonable cause. Therefore, and before answer
ordained the Commuuers at the Marriage to be Examined, whether it was communed
and agreed, that the Tocher should be accepted for f^tisfaction of the Debt and
Bairns Portions, and they having Deponed Affirmative.

The Lords Reduced the Bond as contrair to the Communing at the Contract of
Marriage, the Estate being very mean.

Sir John Weems contra Campbel of Ednample. Eodem die.
SIr John Weems having Charged Ednample for Maintenance due in Anno 1648. He
Suspends on this Reason, that upon consideration of the burning of his House in
the time of the Troubles, he got an Exemption and Discharge from the King and
Parliament, Anno 1651. It was answered that that Parliament was Rescinded, and
the Charger had a Commission to uplift all Maintenance in Anno 1648. from the
Heretors, notwithstanding of any exemptions granted by these pretended
Parliaments, and their Committees. The Suspender answered, that the Act
Rescissory has an express Reservation of all private Rights, acquired by
Authority of these Parliaments for the time; and so this Exoneration of his
becoming his private Right, falls not by the Act Rescissory: and as to the Act
of Parliament, and Commission to the Charger, it must be understood salvo jure,
and cannot take away the Suspenders anterior Right acquired.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and Suspended the Letters, and found that the
Suspenders Exoneration was not taken away, either by the Act Rescissory, or by
the Act and Commission in favors of Bogie.

Lord Rentoun contra Lord Lamertoun. Eodem die.
THe Lord Rentoun, Justice Clerk, having pursued Lamertoun, as Representing his
Father, for the Pursuers Rents and Goods intrometted with by the Defenders
Father in Anno 1641. The Defender excepted upon the Act of Pacification in Anno
1641. and upon the Act of Indemnity in Anno 1661. and produced his Fathers
Commission, by which he meddled; so that having done by public Authority for
the time, in relation to the War, and differences of the time, he was secured
by both these Acts. The Pursuer answered, that the Act of Pacification, and
that whole Parliament was Rescinded, and the Act of Indemnity had an express
exception of all that meddled with public Moneys of Fines, Forefaultors, or
Sequestrat Estates, and had applied the same to their own use, and had not duly
counted therefore: and the Pursuer insisted for what the Defenders Father had
applied to his own use, or had not duly counted for. The Defender Duplyed, that
his Father had duly counted for his whole Intromission, and had made Faith to
the Committee of Estates particularly, that he had truly given up his Charge
without omission, and thereupon was Discharged. The Pursuer answered, that he
had instructed much more Intromission, and was content to allow the particulars
in the Count produced, and craved the superplus, which he had now proven by
Witnesses adduced before answer: and as for the Oath, it could only be
understood as an Oath of Credulity, like that of Executors Confirming
Testaments, which does not exclude probation of Super-intromission: and there
being two Compts produced, the Charge of the last Count is the rest of the
former Count, and the Oath relates only to the last Count.

The Lords Repelled the Defense upon the Act of Pacification, which they found
was only unrescinded, in so far as it is contained in the late Act of
Indemnity; and Repelled the Defense upon the Act of Indemnity, in respect of
the Exception; and found that the Father had not Counted duly for his whole
Intromission; and that his Oath extended only to the last Count: and having
considered the Testimonies of the Witnesses, they made a difference betwixt
what umquhil Lamertoun applied to his own use, and what Corns and Cattle were
carried away by Soldiers, by his direction to the Army, that he might be free
of the latter, and liable for the former.

Iohnstoun of Sheins contra Isobel Arnold, July 22. 1668.
James Arnold having granted a Bond of Provision to his Daughter Isobel, became
afterward Debtor to Iohnstoun of Sheins, who Appryzed Arnold's Estate, in
Anno 1638. upon a Debt of his own, and as Assigney to another Debt. Thereafter
Isobel Arnold on her Bond of Provision Appryzes the same Lands; Sheins conies
in Possession of the most part, and Isobel in a small part, till they both
acquire the benefit of a Possessory Judgment, whereupon there are mutual
Reductions; Sheins Reason was, that his Fathers Appryzing was long prior to the
Defenders, and that the ground of the Defenders Appryzing, was only a Bond of
Provision by a Father to his Daughter, which could never exclude the Fathers
Creditors, especially if that Debt was contracted before the Bond of Provision
was granted, and while it remained in the Fathers Custody, and so in his power
to be Reduced at his pleasure. Isobels Reason of Reduction was, that albeit
Shein's Appryzing was prior, yet there was no Infeftment thereon in Shein's
person, bearing to be on an Assignation to the Appryzing by Shein's to
Collingtoun, but any Infeftment produced is in Collingtouns Person, bearing to
be on an Assignation to the Appryzing by Sheins to Collingtoun, which
Assignation is not produced, and so Shein's Infeftment, flowing from
Collingtoun is null, because Collingtouns Right, from Umquhile Shein's is
wanting, which is the mid-cuppling. 2dly, Shein's Appryzing being on two Sums,
the one whereof was to the behove of a Cautioner, who had paid the Debt, and
taken the Assignation in Shein's Name to his own behove; which Cautioner being
conjunct Cautioner with James Arnold, the common Author, and having a Clause of
relief, neither he, nor Shein's entrusted by him, could justly or validly
Appryze Arnold the Cautioners Lands for the whole Sum, but behoved to deduce
the other Cautioners part, and so the Appryzing is upon invalide grounds, and
thereby is null, and albeit prior to Isobel Arnold's Appryzing, yet she has the
only valide Appryzing. It was answered for Shein's that the first Reason was
not competent to the Pursuer, for it was jus tertij to her what progress
Collingtoun had from Umquhile Shein's, seeing she Derives no Right from him.
2dly, This Collingtoun by his Right granted to this Shein's, acknowledges that
aborigine the Infeftment, in Collingtoun his Fathers person, was to Shein's
behove, which is a sufficient Adminicle in place of the Assignation; and to the
second Reason, albeit it were instructed it could not annul the Appryzing in
totum, but restrict it to the Sum truly Due, especially seeing that Shein's was
content to declare his Appryzing Redeemable by payment of the Sums truly
Resting, within such times as the Lords would appoint; and albeit the Lords are
strict in the Formalities of Appryzings when they are expired, and carry the
whole Estate, though improportional, yet during the legal, they allow them in
so far as they are due.

The Lords found Isobel Arnolds first Reason Competent, and Relevant to her,
unless Collingtouns Assignation were produced, or the Tenor of it proven; and
found the second Reason Relevant, to restrict the Appryzing to the Sum truly
due, in respect that Shein's did of Consent declare it, yet Redeemable for the
true Sums. But they found Shein's alleadgeance, that the ground of Isobel
Arnolds Appryzing was a Bond of Provision, posterior in Date or Delivery to
Shein's Debt, Relevant to prefer him as a Conjunct Creditor for his true Debt,
though the Assignation should not be produced, a new one from Collingtoun being
sufficient.

John Boswel contra the Town of Kirkaldy, Eodem die.
John Boswel having some Aikers in the Towns Lands of Kirkaldy, and some Houses
in the Town, but not dwelling within the Town, or Paroch, nor using any Trade
therein: pursues the Town as having unwarrantably Stented him for his Stock and
Trade, he not dwelling in their Burgh. 2dly, For unequal Stenting him as to his
Lands. 3dly, For Stenting him for the Towns Debts, as for the Sums paid for
their Erecting Harbors, and some Teinds they Bought. 4thly, For Stenting him
for the second Ministers Stipend, whereas he paid the whole Teind to the first
Minister, nor dwelt he in the Paroch, nor consented to a second Minister, or to
his Stipend, and for unwarrantable Quartering on him, and his Tennents, and
this since the year 1644. It was answered for the Defenders, that they denied
Stenting of the Pursuer, for any Stock or Trade, seeing he was no Inhabitant; or
that they Quartered on him unwarrantably, but alleged there was now no ground
after so long a time, to quarrel the inequality of their Stent Rolls, which
were made by fifteen sworn Men, especially after so long a time, for this
preparative would be the foundation of a Debate, at the instance of every
Burgess, against every Town in Scotland: neither could there be a clear Rule,
as in Valuations, but behoved to proceed by the Stenters Conjecture, according
to the common esteem of the Means, and Trade of every Burgess; so that unless
the Complaint were against the inhability of the Stenters, in due time made,
there could be no Debate thereafter: And further alleged, that for the Towns
Debts, that such as were contracted for the common benefit of the Town, for
getting their Erection, and Harbor; and for the second Ministers Stipend, the
half of which had been paid by the whole Heretors, since the year 1613. and
the other half since the year 1649. that their new Kirk was Erected, should
burden the Pursuer proportionally, according to his Land Rent. The Pursuer
answered, that he not being an Inhabitant, was not concerned in the Erection or
Harbor, nor in the second Ministers Stipend, seeing he paid his whole Teind to
the first Minister.

The Lords found the Pursuer liable for the half of the Stipend, in regard of
the immemorial use of payment, but found him free for what he had not paid of
the other, unless it had been imposed by Authority, or his own Consent; and
also found him free of the Personal Debt, and would not Sustain Process against
the inequality of the Stent Roll, after so long a time.

Duncan Campbel contra the Lord of Glenorchy, July 25. 1668.
DVncan Campbel pursues the Lord of Glenorchy, for Ejecting him from certain
Lands, and especially, that his Brother, by his Direction, did violently cast
out the Pursuers Children, and Servants out of a part of the Land, Labored by
himself; and persuaded, and enticed his Tennents, to receive Tacks from, and
pay the Mails and Duties to him, and therefore craves Re-possession, and Double
Mail, as the violent Profits of the whole Lands, during the Defenders
Possession. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because he had obtained
Improbation against the Pursuer, of all his Rights of these Lands, and others;
and likewise Decree of Removing. The Pursuer answered, that the Defense ought
to be Repelled, because the Improbation was only by a Certification, when he
was Prisoner in Irland, and the Defender by Articles of Agreement produced, had
acknowledged the Pursuers Right, and obliged himself to Infest him in the Lands
in question. 2dly, Though the Pursuer had but Possession without any Right, he
might not be Ejected, but by a Precept of Ejection from a Judge, which is not
alleged. The Defender answered, that these Articles of Agreement were never
perfected, nor extended, and could only import a Personal Action against the
Defender, for extention, or implement, wherein, when the Pursuer insists he
will get this answer, that he can have no benefit of the Articles, being mutual
until he perform his part thereof, which is not done.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Duply, and Sustained the Ejection.

The Defender alleged, further, that that Member of the Libel, craving
violent profits for that part of the Land Possessed by Tennents, because by the
Defenders persuasion, they became his Tennents, is not Relevant, because
Ejection is only competent to the natural Possess or upon violence, and
persuasion is no violence. The Pursuer answered, that the prevailing with the
Tennents, was consequent to the casting out of the Defender, out of his own
House, and natural Possession, and was as great a fault as Intrusion, and
equivalent thereto. The Defender answered, that the Law has allowed violent*
profits only in Ejection or Intrusion, which can be drawn to no other Case,
though it were as great, or an greater fault.

The Lords sustained the Defense, and found violent profits only competent for
that part, that the Pursuer Possessed naturally; but if the whole Lands had been
an united Tenement, or Laboring, that the Pursuer had been Ejected out of the
principal message of the Barony, and the Ejecter had thereby gotten Possession
of the whole, it is like the Lords would have sustained Ejection for the whole,
but this was not Pleaded.

Lord Rentoun contra Lambertoun, July 28. 1668.
THis day the Lord Rentouns Process against Lambertoun, mentioned the 21.
Instant, was Advised; by the Probation it appeared that the Corns in the
Girnels of Haymouth, and the Cattle in the Mains of Rentoun, and Horses were
taken away by Lambertoun, with a Troop, or Troopers; and that the Corns were
carried to Dunss, the Army being thereabout at that time: whereupon the
question arose, whether or not Lambertoun were liable for these, which by the
Probation did not appear to be applied to his use, but to the use of the Army.

The Lords Assoilzied him therefrom, as they had done in several cases
formerly, upon the Act of Indemnity, whereby whatsoever was acted in the
Troubles, by Warrant of any Authority in Being, was totally discharged; and the
Lords did thereupon find, that the Actors were not obliged to produce, or show
a Warrant, but that it was enough the Deeds were done, man^ militari, unless
the contrair were proven by the Actors own Oath, that what was meddled with, was
not employed to entertainment of Soldiers, or any other public use, but to
their own private use.

Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun, July 30. 1668.
THe Lord of Milntoun infifted in his Action of Reprobator, wherein this point
of the Dispute was only Discust, whether Reprobators were competent, unless
they were protested for at the taking of the Witnesses Testimonies, or whether
it were sufficient to Protest at any time before Sentence, or if there were no
necessity at all, and especially as to this Case. It was alleged there was no
necessity of a Protestation, and if it were, there was a Protestation at the
Re-examination of the Witnesses, and also before Sentence. It was answered,
that a Protestation was most necessar, because the want of it was an
acquiescence in the hability, and honesty of the Witnesses; and if it should
not be necessar, all Process this five years might come in question upon
Reprobation, which were of dangerous consequence; and therefore, as Incidents
are not competent, but when Protested for no more Reprobations; as to the
alleged Protestation, at the Examining of the Witnesses, it is but subjoined
to the Interrogators, only Subscribed by one of the four Examinators, who
Subscribed the Testimonies, and who does not remember of his Subscription, so
that it has been surreptitiously obtained from him; as to the other
Protestation, the same was not when the Witnesses were taken, but at the
conclusion of the Cause. It was answered, that it was in competent time, even
at the conclusion, and that Reprobators were not only not rejected, but
expressly allowed by the Pursuer, by way of Action.

The Lords found this Reprobator competent in this Case, but did not resolve
the point generally, whether they were competent, when not at all Protested
for; as to which the Lords were of different Judgments, but most seemed to
require a Protestation, ante rem Iudicatam, yet so that if it were omitted, the
Lords might repone the Party to Reprobators, if any emergent made the
Testimonies suspect through inhability, or corruption in the same manner, as
the Lords will repone Parties against Certifications, Circumductions of the
Term, and being holden as Confessed.

Sir George Mckenzie contra the Lord of Newhal, Eodem die.
SIr George Mckenzie Advocat, having Married a Daughter of John Dickson of
Hartrie, they pursue a Proving of the Tenor of an Inventar of Har^ries Lands,
wherein he altered the former Substitution of his Children in several Bonds,
and paricularly of a Bond of 5000. Merks, granted by Whitehead of Park, payable
to himself, and after his Decease to Helen Dickson his youngest Daughter, who
was Married to Ballenden of Newhal; and by the Inventar the Substitution was
altered, and the one half of the Bond appointed to pertain to Elizabeth (now
Spouse to Sir George Mckenzie) and the other to Helen and Michael: to prove
that the samine was Holograph, because it wanted Witnesses; there was produced
for Adminicles, the Copy of it, written by John Kelloes Hand, Hartries Nephew,
and an judicial Instrument, containing the Tenor of it by way of Transumpt; but
there was some words of difference between the Instrument and the Copy, which
was Subscribed by John Ramsay, Hartries Good-brother, and Mr. John Pringle,
Hariries Good-son; who, and several others, being adduced as Witnesses, Deponed
that the principal Inventar was produced by Hartrie on his Deathbed, and shown
to his Friends, and by them Read, and that the Subscribed Copy was Collationed
with the principal by them that Subscribed the same, and held in all points;
and that the principal Inventar was all written with Hartries own Hand, except
an alteration, made upon a Bond of Tarbets, which was written by John Ramsay's
Hand, by direction of Hartrie, some hours before he Died, and was not able to
Subscribe it, with some other alterations in relation to Bonds, wherein the
Children Substitute, were Dead; but that this Article in relation to Whiteheads
Bond, was all written with Hartries own Hand.

The Lords found the Tenor proven, conform to the Subscribed Copy, and found
the said Inventar Holograph, except in relation to Tarbets Bond, and these
other particulars written by John Ramsay's Hand, so that Holograph was proven,
without production of the principal Writ, jointly with the Tenor, albeit some
part of the Writ was not Hartries Hand, but written by John Ramsay's Hand; but
these not being Subscribed by Hartrie, were in the same case as if they had
been omitted forth of the Inventar, and the remainder of the Inventar, which
only was Probative was all Holograph.

Patrick Park contra Nicol Sommervel, November 12: 1668.
PAtrick Park pursues a Reduction of a Bond of 1200. Merks Scots, upon these
Reasons, First, Because albeit the Bond bears borrowed Money, and be in the
Name of Nicol Sommervel; yet he offers to prove by Nicols Oath, that when he
received the Bond, it was blank in the Creditors Name, and offers to prove by
Witnesses, that the true Cause thereof was, that

Sommervel, Nicols Brother, having win all the Pursuers Money he had at the
Cards, he being then distempered with Drink, caused him Subscribe a blank Bond,
for filling up what Sum he should win from him, and that this Sum was filled up
in this Bond, which he offers to prove by the Oath of Nicols Brother that wan
the Money, and the other Witnesses insert, so that the Clause of the Bond being
played Money, by the Act of Parliament 1621. the Winner can have no more but
100. Merks thereof. 2dly, Before Nicols Name was filled up, or any Diligence or
Intimation thereof: there was a Decree Arbitral betwixt the Winner and the
Pursuer, wherein all Sums were Discharged^ which Discharge being by the C^dent,
to whom the Bond was Delivered, before the filling up of Nicols Name, or
Intimation thereof, which is in effect an Assignation, excludes the Assigney.
It was answered for the Defender, that he opponed the Bond, bearing borrowed
Money, grantled in his own Name; and though he should acknowledge that the Bond
was blank in the Name, and that thereby his Name being filed up, he is in
effect and Assigney: yet the Bond being his Writ the Bond cannot be taken away,
but by Writ or Oath of Party, and not by his Cedents Oath, or Witnesses insert,
unless it were to the Cedents behove, or without a Cause Onerous, as the Lords
have found by their Interlocutor already. 3dly, Albeit it were acknowledged to
be played Money, the Act of Parliament is in Desuetude, and it is now frequent
by Persons of all quality to play, and to pay a greater Sum then 100. Merks.
4thly. The Pursuer who loses the Money, has no Interest by the Act of
Parliament, because thereby he is appointed to pay the Money, but the superplus
Money, more then 100. Merks, is appointed to belong to the poor, and the
Defender shall answer the poor, whenever they shall pursue, but it is jus
tertij to the loser, who cannot detain the Money thereupon; but whatever was
the cause, the Defender having received the Bond for a Cause Onerous, and being
ignorant that it was for any other Cause but true borrowed Money, he must be in
t^to; otherwise upon this pretense, any Bond may be suspected, and the Cedent
after he is Denuded by Witnesses, may take the same away.

The Lord Advocat did also appear for the Poor, and claimed the superplus of
the Money, more then 100. Merks, and alleged that the Act of Parliament did
induce a vitium reale. which follows the Sum to all singular Successors; and
that though ordinarily the Cedents Oath, or Witnesses be not taken against Writ,
yet where there is Fraud, Force, or Fault, Witnesses are always Receiveable,
ex officio at least, and ought to be in this Case, where there is such Evidence
of Fraud, that it is acknowledged the Bond was blank in the Creditors Name,
when Nicol Received it, and the filling up was betwixt two Brethren, and the
Debtor dwelling in Town, did not ask him what was the Cause of the Bond, and
that an Act of Parliament cannot fall in desuetude, by a contrait voluntar
Custom never allowed by the Lords, but being vicious against so good and so
public a Law.

The Lords found the Act of Parliament to stand in vigor, and that the Loser
was liable upon the same grounds, and therefore ordained the Sum to be
Consigned in the Clerks Hands, and before answer, to whom the Sum should be
given up, ordained Nicols Oath to be taken when his Name was filled up, and for
what Cause.

Margaret Calderwood contra Ianet Schaw, November, 14. 1668.
MArgaret Calderwood pursues Ianet Schaw to pay a Bond* as Heir to John Schaw,
granted by him, who alleged Absolvitor, because the Bond is null, wanting
Witnesses; the Pursuer offered him to prove Holograph. The Defender answered,
that Holograph could not prove its own Date, so that it is presumed the Bond
was granted on Deathbed, unless (...) be proven that the Date is true as it
stands, or at least that it was Subscribed before the Defuncts Sickness. The
Pursuer answered, that Holograph proves its Date, except contra tertium, but it
is good against the granter or his Heir, who cannot be heard to say that his
Predecessors^ Deed is false in the Date. The Defender answered, that an Heir
might very well deny the Date of a Holograph Writ, otherwise the whole benefit
of the Law (in favors of Heirs not to be prejudged by Deeds on Deathbed) may
be evacuat by Antedated Holograph Writson Deathbed. The Pursuer answered, that
he was willing to sustain the Reason founded on Deathbed, which was only
competent by Reduction, and not by exception or reply. The Defender answered,
that where Death-b^d is instantly verified by presumption of Law, and that the
Pursuer must make up a Write, in rigore juris null for want of Witnesses, he
ought without multiplication of Processes, both to prove the Bond Holograph,
and of a Date anterior to the Defuncts Sickness.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

William Duncan contra the Town of Arbroth, November 17. 1668.
WIlliam Duncan Skipper in Dundee having lent the Town of Arbroth three Cannon,
in June 1651. to be made use of for the Defense of their Town against the
English, got from the Magistrates of Arbroth a Bond of this Tenor (that they did
acknowledge them to have Received in borrowing three Guns, and obliged them to
Restore the same within 24* hours after they were Required, without hurt,
skaith, or damnage; and in case of hurt, skaith, or damnage to be done to them,
obliged them to make payment of the Sum of 500. pounds, as the price agreed
upon for them) upon this Bond William Duncan pursues for the price. It was
alleged for the Town of Arbroth Absolvitor, because the Cannon were lost,
casu fortuito and vi majo^i in so far as the English, after they had overcome
the whole Country, and taken Dundee, did seize upon their Cannon after the
Defenders had carried them the length of Bar^i-sands, before they were taken,
and chaste back again by the English Ships, and thereupon buried the Cannons in
the Sand within the Sea Mark, and hid the Carriages in a laigh Cellar, wherein
they were covered, and it being clear by the Tenor and Nature of the Bond, that
the Guns were Received in borrowing, and that it was contractus commoda^^, or
Loan; which by the consent of all Lawyers, does not put the peril of vis major,
or casus fortuitus upon the Borrower, but upon the Lender, who is dominus and
res peri^^^^ Domino. The Pursuer answered, First, That albeit by the nature of
commodatum, the Borrower has not the peril, yet the Law makes this exception,
si commodatum sit estimatum, in which case the peril is the Borrowers, and it
is no proper Loan, but rather Sale, which is clear, l. 5 (...). commodati; but
by this Bond it is evident that it is commodatum estimatum, and here not only a
value agreed upon, but a Sum expressly declared to be the price. 2dly, There is
no question but Loan may consist with that, that the Borrower will undertake
all peril: Ita est by this Bond the Defenders are obliged to Restore, without
hurt, skaith, or damnage, which must import all perils, especially such perils
as was then imminent, viz. The taking of the Cannons by the Enemy, otherwise
this Clause should operat nothing, seeing without it the naked naming of a
Contract would oblige to Restitution. 3dly, Albeit the Borrower were free of
casus fortuitus, yet that is defined, and understood to be qui a nemine potest
praevideri, but no body could have been ignorant of this Chance, to have been
taken by that Enemy who were then imminent, and against whom particularly the
Cannons were borrowed. 4thly, By all consents, commodatarius ten^^ur ^ro
levissima culpa and summa diligentia, whereinto the Defender failed; for they
alleged only an attempt, for carrying back the Cannons to the Pursuer, but
they should have used other attempts, other days, and otherwise; and likewise
they were negligent, that they buried the Cannon to the knowledge of their
whole Town, whereas they should have entrusted some few to have done it in the
night; likeas they failed in this, that they made no application as others did
who got back their Cannon by a public Proclamation by the Usurper, that all
Cannons taken off Ships should be Restored, to enable the Shipping against the
Spainard and Dutch. The Defender answered to the first alleadgeance, that he
did not deny but in commod^^^ estimato, the whole peril was upon the Borrower,
but denied that this was commodatum estimatum, for all Lawyers do define
commodatum estimatum, in the same way as dos estimata, to be where the
obligation is alternative, either to Restore the thing borrowed, or the price,
at the option of the Borrower, so that the Lender is no more dominus, nor can
demand the thing borrowed, which becomes the ^^^rowers, unless he please to
give it back, and res perit s^o d^mino, but where the value is only liquidat in
case of deterioration, or in case of failzie, the Borrower cannot free himself
by offering the price, but the Lender may call for the thing, although it were
deteriorat, but here the liquidation of the price is only in case of
deterioration, and the dominion is unquestionably in the Lender. To the second,
it was denied that the Borrower had here undertaken the peril, for the words of
the Contract being (hurt, skaith, and damnage) in the proper and vulgar use, do
not signify peril or hazard, but only deterioration, and have this equipollent
positive to Restore the Guns in as good case as they Receive them, which would
never import force or accident, and for the expressing of that Clause, nothing
is more ordinar then to express Clauses, quae natura contractus insunt, and the
adjection of this Clause may have these uses, First, It liquidats the value, in
case the Borrower ^ailzie, without putting the Lender to prove the same. 2dly,
Whereas a simple Loan might only have obliged the Borrower to diligence, so
that if without his fault in making the use, for which the thing was borrowed,
it had been deteriorat and lost, the Borrower would not have been liable, as he
that Lends Clothes to be worn, must not demand the deterioration by that
ordinar wearing without fault, or ^he who Lends a Horse to a Battle must not
require Reparation if he be wounded or killed in the Battle, unless he have a
special obligement, to have him Restored without hurt, so in this case, the
Parties having foreseen the ordinary case of the Cannons, being hurt in
defending the Town, by much shooting, or by the shot of the Enemies, has
provided that even the damnage in that use should be repaired, which can never
be extended to an accidental loss of the Cannon, not in defense of the Town,
but after the Enemy had overrun the Nation, and taken Dundee, and Arbr^th was
Dismantled, the Cannons were taken out of the Sand. To the third, casus
fortuitus is not that which cannot be foreseen to be possible, but that which
cannot be foreseen to have a sufficient, at least a very probable Cause,
otherwise there should be no casus fortuitus, but this case which happened had
been most ominous, for any Scots-man to have supposed, as most probable, that
before breaking of the Army, or the English coming over Forth, the Kingdom
should have been lost. To the fourth, the Defenders were no ways in culpa, or
mora, but did more then they were obliged, for they were obliged to Restore but
upon demand, and before demand they endeavored to have Restored, and then they
buried the Cannon within the Sea Mark in the night, and though there was a
Proclamation to give up all Arms under the pain of Death, they did not
discover their Cannon, albeit upon their discovery otherwise, one of their
Magistrates run the hazard of his Life* and as for the Proclamation alleged,
it meets not this case, their Cannon not having been taken off Ships, and if it
was public the Pursuer behoved equally to know it, and should have made his
address for his own Cannon, neither would the Defenders have refused their
concourse, if it had been useful, or desired. The Pursuer opponed his former
Answers, and added, that the Law cited spoke expressly of commoda^um estimatum,
to Transfer the peril on the borrower; and there is no Law adduced to restrict
it, not to take place in that which is estimat, only in the case of
Deterioration, and ubi lex non distinguit nec nos: and as to the meaning of the
Clause, in dutiis interpretatio facienda est contra proferentem qui potuit
legem sibi opertius dixisse. So this Bond being the Defenders words, blame
himself if he made not that clear. The Defender answered, that albeit that be
one Rule of Interpretation, yet there are others stronger making for him, viz.
In dubiis respondendum pro reo, in dubiis pars mitior and aequior sequenda: Now
it cannot be thought, that Parties would have been so unreasonable, as to have
demanded Restitution, if the Kingdom were lost, and the Cannon taken after all
Diligence done to keep them: but this is the most special Rule, In dubiis
respondendum secundum naturam actus ant contractus.

The Lords found that by the Nature and Tenor of this Contract; the Defenders
were not liable for this Accident that happened, and that they were not in
mora, nor culpa; but had done all Diligence, and therefore found the Cannon
lost to the Pursuer and Lender, and Suspended the Letters simpliciter.

Thereafter upon pronuncing of the Interlocutor. The Pursuer offered to prove
by the Writter and Witnesses insert in the Bond, that it was expressly Treated
and Agreed, and that the meaning of the Clause was, that the Defender should be
liable to all hazard, and desired the Witnesses at least to be Examined ex
officio. The Defender alleged that the Pursuer having gotten a Term already
to Examine Witnesses, ex officio; and the Parties being Examined, he could not
now demand a new Term, neither could a clear Clause in a Bond be altered by
Witnesses. The Pursuer answered, that the Clause was at best but dubious; and
so the meaning was not to prove against the Writ, but to clear the same, which
is ordinar.

The Lords would not give any further Term for leading Witnesses, but found
that alleadgance only probable by the Oath of the Party.

Patrick Andrew contra Robert Carse. November 25. 1668.
PAtrick Andrew having sold twelve piece of Wine to Margaret Henderson, who
kept a Tavern after she was Proclaimed to be Married to Robert Carse Flesher,
a part of which Wines was vented before the Marriage, and a part thereof vented
after the Marriage, but the Marriage Dissolving within three or four Months by
the Wifes Death; the most part of the Wine remained unsold at her Death; the
Merchand pursued the Wife for the Price, and the Husband for his Interest, some
days before she dyed; after her Death, her Husband vented no more of the Wine,
but caused the Magistrates Inventar the same, and delivered the Keys to them.
Patrick Andrew who sold the Wine, does now pursue Robert Carse the Husband for
the price of the Wines, who alleged Absolvitor, because there was no ground
in Law to make him liable for his umquhil Wife her Contract and Obligement ex
Emp^o, he being only liable jure mariti; which being Dissolved by her Death, he
is free, for he is neither Heir nor Executor to her. The Pursuer answered, that
the Husband having allowed the Wife to continue the Venting of the Wine, she
was thereby preposita negoliis mariti, and thereby her meddling must be the
Husbands meddling, who must be liable for the whole price, especially seeing he
never made offer of the remaining Wine to the Pursuer, though he knew his
Interest, and had pursued him for the price; so that the VVines having
perished, it must be attribute to his fault; and the Merchant who knew not the
condition thereof, cannot lose the same. 2dly, The Pursuer offered to prove
that the Defender put in his own Nephew to be Taverner, after he Married the
Woman. 3dly, The ground in Law that the Pursuer insists on against the Husband
is, in quantum lucratus est, by his Intromission with the Wine, and price
thereof, and any thing that has been lost through his fault, is alike as he had
been Profiter in the whole. The Defender answered, that he declyned not to be
liable, in so far as he was Profited, viz. for the price of the Wine Vented
during the Marriage, which he was content to refer to the Pursuers Probation,
how much was Vented then, but he could not be liable for what was Vented before
the Marriage, though after the Proclamation, much less for what remained unsold
after the Wife's Death; neither was he in any fault by not offering the Wine
to the Pursuer, nor might he lawfully do the same, because the Marriage
Dissolving within year and day, the property of the whole VVines returned to
the Wife's Executors, and nearest of Kin; and the Husband had no interest
therein, as he would have had if the Marriage had continued year and day;
neither had the Merchant any right to the Wines, (the property whereof was in
the Wife and her Executors) but had only a personal Obligation for the price;
and therefore he could not deliver the Wine, nor meddle therewith, without
vicious Intromission, so that he did the most exact Diligence by Inventaring,
and Delivering the Keys to the Magistrates; so that there being ten piece of
Wine then in the Celler, the Defender could only be liable for so much of two
Piece as the Pursuer should prove sold during the Marriage. The Pursuer
answered, that the Defender having once intrometted and meddled with this parcel
of Wine, he is in so far lucratus, and he can no more sever some Punsheons
unspent from the rest, nor one part of a Punsheon Vented from the remainder: so
that he can offer nothing back of the parcel, re non int^gra, nor can he
allege that the whole ten Piece was of the Pursuers Wine, because the Pursuer
offered to prove, that this Deceast Wife bought other Wine from other persons
at that time; and it were against Law and Reason, to put the Merchand (who is a
stranger) to prove what was Vented during the Marriage, and how much of the
Pursuers Wine remained after the Marriage, for that was the Defenders part to
enquire, and not the Pursuers part who is a stranger.

The Lords found the Defender not liable for that part of the Wine Vented
before the Marriage, nor yet for what remained unspent after the Wifes death,
seeing he Inventared, and abstained: but they found the Husband obliged to prove
both wat was spent before the Marriage, and what of this Wine remained after
the Marriage: If the Pursuer proved there was other Wines in the Celler, and so
found the Defender liable for the whole, except in so far as he proved was sold
before the Marriage, and remained after the Wifes Death.

The Daughters of Mr. James Mortoun Supplicant. November 26. 1668.
THe Daughters and Heirs of Mr. James Mortoun, gave in a Supplication to the
Lords, making mention that the Father being Infeft in an Annualrent, effeirand
to the principal sum, due to him by the Lord Balcombie, they did thereafter
obtain Decree for the principal sum, and thereupon Appryzed the Property,
wherein they stand Infeft, holden of the King: in which Appryzing there is a
Reservation expressed, but prejudice of the Infeftment of Annualrent, and now
being desirous to be Infeft in the Annualrent, as Heirs to their Father, and
that themselves were Superiors by the Infeftment on the Appryzing, and
conceived it not proper for them to Infeft themselves, did therefore desire the
Lords to grant VVarrand to direct Precepts forth of the Chancellary, for the
King to Infeft them.

The Lords having considered the case, and argued the matter amongst
themselves, whether it were more secure and legal, that they should be Infeft
by the King upon their Supplication; or that they as having Right to the
Property by their Infeftment on the Appryzing, should grant Precepts for
Infefting themselves in the Annualrent, as Heirs to the Annualrenter: or
whether their Infeftment in the Superiority would consolidat the Annualrent
without Infeftment: The difficulty against the Kings Infefting of them was,
that the King Infefts none but these that holds immediately of Him, or upon the
disobedience of the immediate Superior, supplendo vices.

To which it was answered, that the King may supply the place of the immediate
Superior, either when he will not, or cannot Infeft his Vassal, and the
Petitioners conceive that in this case they cannot: and both being
extraordinary Remeeds, the Lords may do the same, and have done it in former
Cases. The difficulty as to Infefting themselves was, that the Right of
Property, and jus nobilius, did extinguish the Right of Annualrent; and yet the
Right of Property may be Reduced, and then they would be necessitat to Defend
themselves by the Annualrent; and therefore it is not an absolute Extinction,
but in tali casu; and therefore they have reserved the same in the Appryzing.
The difficulty as to the third way was, that if the Right of Superiority should
be Reduced, they should be without Infeftment at all.

The Lords found that they might either Infeft themselves by their own Precept,
or might get Precepts from the King, as was desired, periculo petentium, or
they might make use of both together.

Mr. Alexander Seaton contra George Seaton of Menzies. December 2. 1668.
MR. Alexander Seaton, Heir and Executor to James Seaton his Brother, pursues
George Seaton as Heir to his Father James Seaton, for making his Fathers Tutor
Accounts, as being Tutor to the Pursuers Brother, and for instructing that he
was Tutor, produced several Writs Subscribed by him, as Tutor Testamentar. The
Defender alleged: First, That the condescendence was not relevant to Instruct
the Defenders Father Tutor, unless the Testament whereby he was nominat were
produced; otherwise his acknowledgement can only make him but Pro-tutor, and
so not liable for all omissions, and no sooner liable, then after the date of
these Writs. 2dly, Albeit the Defenders Father had been Tutor, yet by the Writs
produced, it is evident that he was but one of more Tutors; and therefore no
Process against him, till they be all called. The Pursuer answered, that the
acknowledgement to have been Tutor was sufficient against him, who Subscribed
the same: and that there was no necessity to call all the rest, seeing the whole
Tutors were liable in solidum, and as ordinarily parties bound conjunctly and
severally, may be conveened conjunctly or severally, so may Tutors, who as
others may except upon the performance of other Tutors as well as their own;
neither is the case of Tutors alike with Cautioners, who are not liable in
solidum; for Tutors as they are liable conjunctly and severally for the whole
Office, so are they conveenable conjunctly and severally for the same.

The Lords Repelled the first alleadgance, and found the Writs produced
instructed the Defenders Father Tutor, and not only Pro-tutor; for if the
Testament had been produced, showing other Tutors, so that the Acknowledger
could not have been tutor testamentar, it would have made him but Pro-Tutor,
but that not being, it instructed him Tutor. As to the other point, in respect
the Tutor was dead, and his Heir only but conveened, who could not know the
Administration, the Lords would not sustain Process, till they were also called.

Agnes Goodlat contra George Nairn. December 8. 1668.
AGnes Goodlat as representing the umquhil Wife of George Nairn, pursues for
the third of the Movables belonging to him the time of his Wifes Decease. It
was alleged for the Husband, that before Division, the Heirship moveable
behoved to be drawn. It was answered, that there could be no Heirship of a man
that was living, It was answered, that albeit there was no actual Heirship, yet
the best of every kind was Heirship Moveable, wherein the Wife had no Interest.

Which the Lords sustained; and Ordained the Heirship to be first drawn.

Earl of Argile contra George Stirling. December 9. 1668.
THe Earl of Argile having pursued George Stirling to Remove, he alleged
Absolvitor, because he stood Infeft on an Appryzing. It was Replied, that the
Appryzing and Infeftment could not defend him, because the Person from whom he
Appryzed, being a Vassal of the Earl of Argiles, and his Right not being
Confirmed by the King, the same could not exclude the Pursuer, the Kings
Donator, and the Appryzer could be in no better case then his Author. The
Defender Duplyed, that he was in better case, because he being Infeft by the
King before the Pursuers Gift, when the King had both Superiority and Property,
it is equivalent to him, as if the King had Confirmed his Authors Right. It was
answered, that Infeftments upon Appryzings that pass in Course, and are not
noticed in Exchequer, cannot prejudge the King, and take away the benefit of
the Gift, which must pass by a several Signature.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and Repelled the Defense and Duply, and
Decerned.

Scot contra Aitoun. December 11. 1668.
MR. James Aitoun having Disponed the Lands of Grainge, with the burden of
12000. Merks, to be paid to his Daughters. John Scot having Married one of the
Daughters, in their Contract of Marriage, the Daughter Anna Aitoun Assigns her
part of the 12000. Merks to her future Spouse, and in the same Contract he
acknowledges the Receipt of the Money from Mr. Robert Aitoun the Debtor; and
therefore, with consent of the said Anna, Discharges the said Mr. Robert by a
Contract of the same Date, betwixt John Scot and Mr. Robert, relating the
Contract of Marriage, but acknowledges there was no Sums paid for the
Discharge contained in the said Contract, but that the Security contained in
this Contract was granted therefore; and therefore he gives a new Heretable
Security to John Scot, the Marriage Dissolves within year and day, by the Death
of the said Anna, without Children; she in her Testament names the said John
Scot her Husband, her Executor and universal Legator. George Scot as
Representing his Father, pursues Aitoun of Inchderne, as Representing his
Father, for the Sum contained in the Contract, who alleged Absolvitor,
because the Pursuers, and his Fathers Right flowing from the Marriage, and it
Dissolving within year and day, his Right cease, and farther alleged that
all things were now in the same condition as before the Marriage, so that the
Contract of Marriage was void, and the Discharge granted in the first Security
was void; and the first Security being Heretable, belongs to Anna's Executors,
from whom the Defender has Right by Assignation. The Pursuer answered, that the
Defense is no ways Relevant; because though the Marriage Dissolved within year
and day, and that thereby the Tocher and Jointure became void; yet what was
Acted in Relation to Mr. Robert Aitoun, who was a third Party, viz. the
Discharge and Renunciation of the first Security stands valid as to him: for if
the Lands burdened had been sold to any other, that burden being once
Discharged and Renunced, could never affect them, so that whatever is in a
Contract Matrimonial, Extrinsick and relating to third Parties is valid, and
the acknowledgment of the Money contained in the Contract, is at least
acceptilatio, which extinguisheth the first Security in the same way, as if
real payment had been made: in place of which payment stands the new Security
granted to the Husband, so that now there is neither Debitum nor Creditum
betwixt Anna Aitoun and umquhil Mr. Robert Aitoun, or their Representatives:
but by the Dissolution of the Marriage, the Husband and his Heirs becomes
liable to pay the Tocher, but not to the Wifes Heirs, but to her Executors, for
the Tocher being paid or satisfied, and the old Security taken away, the
Husbands obligement to pay, is clearly moveable, and so belongs to the Pursuer
as Executor, and universal Legator to his Wife, and not to the Wifes Heirs, or
the Defender who has Right from them. The Defender answered, that the Tocher
never having been uplifted, but remaining in the same Debitors hands as before
the Marriage, omnia redeunt in pristinum statum, and the Discharge granted to
the Debtor in Contemplation of the Marriage, is also void; so that if the
Husband had Died and the Wife Survived, if she had pursued Mr. Robert Aitoun
upon the first Security, and if he had Defended upon the Discharge contained in
the Contract of Marriage, he would have been Excluded by this Reply, that that
Discharge being granted in Contemplation of the Marriage, is now void by the
Dissolution thereof within year and day; especially seeing the Debt yet remains
in the Debitors hand. 2dly. The Defender alleged that the Discharge, though
it were valide, was not habilis modus, to extinguish the first Security, being
a real Right. 3dly, That the new Security granted to the Husband being
Heretable, and the Husbands therein ceasing, it accresceth to the Wife, as if
it had been granted to her, and so can only belong to the Defender, as having
Right from her Heirs, and not to the Pursuer, as being her Executor. The
Pursuer answered that the first Security was totally extinct by Acceptilation,
and by the Discharge thereof granted to the Debtor in the Contract of
Marriage; and though the Wife had Survived and pursued the Debtor, and he had
excepted upon the Discharge, her Reply upon the Dissolution of the Marriage
would not have been Sustained to annul the Discharge; because whatever might
have been done, if the Debtor could pretend no Damnage or Interest* Yet where
the Debtor had granted a new Security to the Husband, which could never be
taken away without the Discharge, and Renunciation of the Husbands Heirs, the
Debtor could never be Decerned to pay the Wife, so long as the Security to the
Husband stood: which Security could never accresce to the Wife, at least could
never so accresce, as to make it an Heretable Security to the Wife, but she
could only have Right of Repetition against the Husband: And the question being
here concerning the changing of the condition of a Sum from Heretable to
Moveable, as a Requisition or Charge during the Marriage would have made the
Sum Moveable, multo magis, an Innovation and Acceptilation by a Discharge and
new Security: And whereas it was alleged that the Discharge was not habilis
modus. It was answered that this Sum not being secured by an Infeftment of
Annualrent or Wodset, but only by a Provision, burdening another Infeftment of
Property with the Sum, there needed no Resignation but the Discharge and
Renunciation is sufficient.

The Lords found the first Security to be wholly taken away by the Discharge
contained in the Contract of Marriage, which they found valid as being granted
to a third Party, notwithstanding of the Dissolution of the Marriage; and
therefore found it to belong to the Husband, as having Right to the new
Security, and as Executor to his Wife, and not to the Defender as having Right
from the Heirs.

Mary Winrham contra Mr. James Eleis. December 15. 1668.
JAmes Murray of Deuchar having Married his Daughter to James Eleis of
Stenopmil^, leaves to the seven Sons of the Marriage beside the Heir, 7000.
Merks, and the Portion of the Deceasing to accresce to the Surviving; which Sum
was uplifted by James Eleis who in his Testament nominats his eldest Son and
Heir, his Executor and universal Legator, and ordains him to pay all his Debts
out of the first end of his Movables, and then leaves 9000. Merks to Patrick
his second Son, in satisfaction of all that he might succeed to by the Decease
of the Testator his Father: Margaret Winrham, Relict and Executrix Creditrix to
her Husband, obtained a Decree before the Commissars, against Mr. James Eleis,
who Suspends on this Reason, that Patricks Legacy of 9000. Merks, being in full
satisfaction of all he could demand by his Fathers Death, must be understood in
Satisfaction of the said Legacy, left by James Murray, which being lifted by
James Eleis the Testator, and so becomes his Debt, debtor non praesumitur
donare. 2dly, The Commissars Decree is most unjust, in Decerning Annualrent
where there was none due by Paction, the Sum being but a Legacy which never
bears Annualrent. The Charger answered to the first, that the Brokard debtor
non praesumitur donare, holds not in many cases, especially in Provisions of
Children by their Fathers, who are obliged jure naturae and ex pletate pate^na,
to provide them. And in this Testament, the Executor is appointed to pay all
the Debts without any exception of this or any other, and the Testator had a
plentiful Estate, it can no ways be thought that both the Legacy and this Sum
in question, was too great a Portion to his second Son; as for the Annualrent,
the Father being Tutor, and lawful Administrator to his Son, ought to have
employed it profitably, and no doubt did, being a most provident man. It was
answered, that the Son never having insisted for this Sum, nor having ever
demanded Annualrent during his Fathers Life. It is an evidence he acquiesced to
his Fathers Provision, and cannot seek Annualrent against his Fathers
Executors, his Father having Alimented him, neither is he liable for that rigor
that other Tutors are.

The Lords Repelled the Reasons as to the principal Sum, and found that the
Fathers Legacy was not in satisfaction of the Grandfathers Legacy; but found
no Annualrent due, but Suspended the Letters simpliciter as to Annualrent.

Sir Alexander Frazer contra Alexander Keith. December 16. 1668.
SIr Alexander Frazer Doctor of medecin having purchased the Lands of M^ekelty
from Andrew Frazer, who had Appryzed the same from Alexander Keith, pursues a
Declarator of the expiring of the Appryzing, and of his Right of the Lands
thereby. It was alleged for Alexander Keith, that he had Depending Actions of
Reduction against the Grounds of the Appryzing, and thereupon alleged, that
the said Sums were satisfied before the Appryzing, at least by the Pursuer or
his Authors Intromissions with the Rents of the Appryzed Lands within ten years
after the Deducing thereof: During which time the Legal was unexpired by the
late Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, whereby the Legal of Appryzings, led
since 1652. are prorogat for three years. And as to the first point, he
alleged that the ground of the Appryzing being a minut of Alienation betwixt
the said Alexander Keith and Andrew Frazer, whereby Andrew Dispones the Lands
of Miekeltie and Stranduff to the Defender, the Tenor of which minute is, that
the said Andrew obliges himself to Infeft and Secure the said Alexander in the
said Lands, and to purge all Incumberances thereupon; and that the price shall
not be payable till the said Alexander be put in Possession. There is also a
Commission therein granted to the Defender, to purchase two expired Appryzings,
and to satisfy any other Incumberances, and to Serve the said Andrew Heir to
Thomas Frazer his Father, and to obtain the said Andrew Infeft as Heir to his
Father, and likewise the Defender himself in the Lands; so that the Right the
Disponer had, being only a back Bond granted by Frazer to Staniwood, thereafter
Lord Frazer, by which he obliged himself, to Denude himself of the Lands of
Mickeltie, in favors of the said Andrew Disponer: Which back Bond was Appryzed
by the two expired Appryzings, but could not reach the Lands of Stranduff,
because Staniwood was not Infeft therein, nor did the back Bond bear the same,
and therefore the Defender was necessitat to purchase the Right of a third
Appryzing, led at the Instance of Craigivar against Andrew Frazer the Disponer,
as lawfully Charged to Enter Heir to Thomas Frazer his Father, who died last
Infeft in the Lands of Stranduff, and which would have excluded any Right that
the Defender had from Andrew Frazer, especially seeing the Sum on which
Craigivars Appryzing proceeded, was a Debt due by the said Thomas Frazer to
William Frazer, which William Frazer raised a Pursuit thereupon, against the
said Andrew Frazer, as Representing Thomas his Father, and raised Inhibition
upon a Dependence; which Inhibition is Execute and Registrate against Andrew
Frazer, before he Disponed the Lands: after which Dependence, the matter being
referred to Arbiters, they Decerned Andrew Frazer to pay to the said William
Frazer two thousand merks out of the first and readiest of the price of
Miekeltie, due by the Defender Alexander Keith, or out of any other Goods or
Sums belonging to the said Andrew: so that the Decree Arbitral upon the
Submission being in the same Terms, was equivalent to an Assignation or a
Precept; and the Defender Alexander Keith satisfying that Sum, it is in effect
payment of so much of the price, and Craigivars Appryzing proceeding on that
same Sum, it was most necessar for the Defender to Acquire that Appryzing, as
proceeding upon a Right, whereupon Inhibition was used before the Minute, and
upon a Decree Arbitral, in effect Assigning William Frazer to so much of the
Sum, due by Alexander Keith. The Pursuer answered, that the Defenders
alleadgence ought to be Repelled; because the Acquiring of Craigivars Appryzing
was altogether needless, and no way warranted by the Minute, and so cannot
exhaust the price, because that Appryzing was led 10. years after the Minute,
and the Defender having accepted a Commission to do all things necessar for
Establishing of his own Right, he ought to have Served the Disponer Heir to his
Father, and to have Infeft him in Stranduff* and to have Infeft himself upon
the Disponers Resignation: Or if he had found that the Lands were Disponed to
Frazer of Staniwood upon Trust, he ought to have procured the same, to have
been Established in his Person, as coming in the place of Andrew Frazer, to
whose behove the Trust was, which would for ever have Excluded Craigivars
Appryzing, being long posterior to the Defenders Commission contained in the
Minute; so that it was his own fault, that he suffered another to Appryze:
neither could the Inhibition have prejudged him, though prior to the Minut, in
respect it was upon a Dependence, upon which, no Decree in favors of the
Inhibiter, could ever follow, the Cause being Extinct by Transaction and
Decree Arbitral; neither is there any Process Extant, neither is the Decree
Arbitral equivalent to an Assignation and Precept, because it does not Decern
Andrew Frazer to Assign the Sum due by the Defender, nor does it declare that
that Sum shall belong to him, but only Decerns Andrew Frazer to pay out of
Keiths Sum, or any other; so that thereupon no Action could have been effectual
against Keith, to pay the Sum, but only against Frazer himself. The Defender
answered, that albeit no Sentence of a Judge proceeded upon the Dependence, the
Sentence of the Arbiters being in eadem causa, was equivalent: and whereas it
is alleged, that the Defender had a Commission to perfect his own Security by
the price left in his hand. It was answered, that the Commission being for his
own behove, and for his own Security, he might make use of it, or not make use
of it as he pleased: especially seeing the Disponer was obliged to perfect the
Defenders Security. 2dly, In the Minute there was no Procuratory of
Resignation, neither were the old Evidents Delivered to the Defender; so that
he could neither obtain Frazer to be Infeft, much less himself upon Frazers
Resignation, wanting a Procuratory. The Pursuer answered, that the Commission
being a Mandat accepted by the Defender, did ex natura mandati, bind the
Accepter to do Diligence; neither is it to his own behove, but was also to the
Disponers behove, that his obligements might be fulfilled, and his price not
stopped: and although the Minute want a Procuratory of Resignation, that is no
way Relevant: for if the Defender had required a Procuratory of Resignation
from the Disponer, or had required the Writs to instruct the Service, being in
the Disponers hand, and had been refused of either, he had been in no fault:
but without any Diligence, to suffer another Appryzing to be led ten years
after his Commission, and now having taken Right to the Appryzing himself, he
cannot therewith Exhaust the price, especially against this singular Successor,
having acquired bona fide, after a Decree of Suspension in foro
contradictorio, when the Defender had Right to the said third Appryzing, and
alleged nothing thereupon. The Defender answered, that he cannot be Excluded
from his Defense by the Decree of Suspension, as being competent and omitted
the time of that Decree, because (Competent) is only Relevant against Decreets
in ordinary Actions: but neither in Reason nor Custom is the same Relevant
against Decreets of Suspension, there being this evident difference, that in
Decreets of Suspension the Reasons must be instantly verified: but in ordinary
Actions, there are Terms assigned for proving Defenses, and so it has ever
been practiced by the Lords. The Pursuer answered, albeit it was anciently the
Custom to admit Competent, and omitted only against Decreets upon ordinary
Actions: Yet by an Act of Sederunt in Anno 1648. or 1649. the same was extended
to Decreets of Suspension; and albeit through neglect of the Clerks, the Act
has not been Booked: The Session being interrupted by the War shortly
thereafter ensuing, yet it is notorly known, and was in practice Anno 1653.
when the Decree was obtained against this Defender, whereupon the Appryzing
proceeds, and that practice was both just and necessar; for if Decreets might
be Suspended as often as the Suspender can produce another Writ, the most solemn
Sentences should be made Insignificant; for the ground of Excluding things
Competent, and omitted, is not only that public Sentences upon compearance,
are as valid as Transactions, which upon no pretense can be Rescinded, that
Pleas be not perpetual: but also because they are omitted, dolo and animo
protrahendi litem, which is ever presumed, unless another Cause be assigned,
wherefore they were omitted as, noviter veniens ad notitiam, which is
Sustained, even as to Decreets in ordinar Actions: and if in no case competent
and omitted be allowed in Suspensions, we shall have no more Decreets in
ordinar Actions; but the Defenders will still be absent, and will Suspend as
often as they can find different Grounds, as if of one Sum, one have twenty or
thirty several Receipts, he will raise as many subsequent Suspensions, which
will at least serve for as many Sessions; and though it should be alleged
quod dolo omisit, it would not be Relevant: so that if the Suspender can purge
his Fraud* either as not knowing of the Writ, whereon he has again Suspended,
or as not then having it presently in his power to instruct it, would be
sufficient, which clears the difference betwixt Decreets of Suspension, and
other Decreets, to operat no further than that in Suspensions, the Fraud is
purged, by showing that the Writ was not ad manum, which is not so in ordinar
Actions, where Terms would have been assigned to get the Writ: and albeit the
Lords might by modifying great Expenses bar the multitudes of Suspensions, they
could hardly do it justly, if of the Law it were no fault; and it is known, the
Lords are neither in use of, nor have time for such modifications.

The Lords superceeded to give answer as to this Point, till the Count
proceeded as to the Particulars, but the Lords had no respect to the
alleadgance upon the Inhibition, seeing no Decree followed, nor upon the
Decree Arbitral, which they found not Equivalent to an Assignation or Precept:
but the Lords found the Commission contained in the minute, not to oblige the
Defender, as to any Diligence; and therefore found, that as to that Point, he
might acquire the third Appryzing, which would have excluded him, albeit he
might have prevented it by Diligence.

Mr. Robert Swintoun contra John Brown. December 18. 1668.
MArgaret Adinstoun being Infeft in Liferent, in certain Roods of Land near
Hadingtoun, she and her second Husband grants a Tack to John Brown thereof, for
certain years, and thereafter till he were paid of 400. merks, owing to him by
the Husband, after that Husbands Death, she being Married to a third Husband,
there is a Decree of Removing purchased at her and that Husbands Instance,
against John Brown, but the Husband did not proceed to obtain Possession by
virtue thereof, but brevi manu Ejected Brown; whereupon Brown obtained a
Decree of Re-possession: now the said Margaret Adinstoun having assigned the
Decree of Removing to Mr. Robert Swintown, he Charges John Brown to Remove,
who Suspends on this Reason, that he having obtained Decree of Re-possession,
after the Decree of Removing, upon the Husbands violence, cannot now be
Removed, without a new Warning. The Charger answered, that the Decree of
Re-possession, bearing to be ay and while this Suspender was legally Removed,
and that in respect he had been put out Summarly* and not by the preceding
Decree of Removing; which having now taken effect, he being in Possession, the
Charger may very well Insist, that he may now legally Remove, by virtue of the
Decree of Removing.

The Lords Repelled this Reason, in respect of the answer, and found no need of
a new Warning.

The Suspender further alleged that he cannot Remove, because he bruiks by
virtue of a Tack granted by Margaret Adinstoun and her second Husband. The
Charger answered: First, That the Tack being only for four years specially, and
an obligement not to Remove the Tennent while the four hundred Merks were
paid, which is not a Tack, but a personal obligement, which cannot defend the
Suspender against Mr. Robert Swintoun, the singular Successor. 2dly, The Tack
is null, being Subscribed but by one Nottar. The Suspender answered, that a
Right of Liferent not being Transmissible by Infeftment, but only by
Assignation, the Assigney is in no better case nor the Cedent, except as to the
Probation by the Cedents Oath. 3dly, The Tack is Ratified judicially by the
Wife, in the Court of Northberwick, which is more nor the concourse of any
Nottar. 4ly, If need beis, it is offered to be proven by the Wifes Oath, that
the Subscription was truly done by the Nottar, at her command. The Charger
answered, that the judicial Ratification cannot supply the other Nottar;
because the same Nottar, who is Nottar in the Tack, as also Nottar in the
judicial Ratification, which is but done in a Baron Court: So it is but
assertio ejusdem notarij, no stronger nor it was, neither can it be supplied by
Margaret Ad^^stouns Oath, de veritate facti; because her Oath cannot be
received in prejudice of her Assigney: and though her self were Charger, the
Law requiring two Not^ars, till both Subscribe, the Writ is an unsubscribed
Writ; and in all matters of this nature, parties may resile before Subscription.

The Lords found the Tack valid against the Wife, Subscriber thereof, and her
assigney, ay and while the sum thereof were paid: but found the Tack was null,
as being but by one Nottar, notwithstanding of the judicial Ratification being
by the same Nottar; and found that the Cedents Oath could not be taken in
prejudice of the Assigney, to astruct the verity of the Subscription, unless
the Assignation had been gratuitous, or the matter had been litigious before
the same: In which case they found that there was no place to Resile after the
Subscription of the first Nottar, the verity and warrant of the Subscription
being proven by the said Margarets Oath.

The Suspender further alleged, that he could not Remove, because the
Liferenter being year and day at the Horn, he had a Gift of her Liferent
Escheat, and thereby had right to possess her Liferent-Land. The Charger
answered non relevat, because the Gift was not declared: 2dly, It could not be
declared, because it proceeded upon a Horning, against a Wife cled with a
Husband, who being sub potestate viri, cannot be Contumacious, or Denunced
Rebel thereupon. The Suspender answered, that he needed no Declarator himself,
being in possession of the only Right, to which the Declarator could reach.
3dly, The Horning, albeit against a Wife, was valid unless it had been upon a
Debt contracted during the Marriage; but this Horning proceeding upon a Decree
against a Wife as Executrix and vicious Intromissatrix with her Husbands
Goods, a Horning upon her own Fact or Fault was always effectual.

The Lords would not sustain the Gift without a Declarator, and superceeded any
Extract at the Chargers Instance, till a day, betwixt and which he might insist
in his Declarator, and superceeded till that time to give answer, in relation
to the Horning, because the Kings Officers behoved to be called.

Mr. Alexander Seaton contra Menzies. December 19. 1668.
MR. Alexander Seaton as Executor to his Brother. Pitmedden pursues Seaton of
Menzies as Representing his Father, who was one of the Pursuers Brothers
Tutors, for his Fathers Intromission with the Pupils Means, who alleged
Absolvitor, because the Pupil after his Pupillarity, had granted a Discharge to
one of the Co-tutors, which did extinguish the whole Debt of that Co-tutor, and
consequently of all the rest, they being all correi delendi* ^yable by one
individual Obligation, which cannot be Discharged as to one, and stand as to
all the rest; for albeit pactum de non petendo, may be granted to one, and not
be profitable to the rest, a simple Discharge, which dissolveth the Obligation
of the Bond, must be profitable to all.

The Lords Repelled this Defense, unless the Discharge had born payment, or
satisfaction given, and in tantum, they found it would be Relevant, but not a
simple Discharge, which could only be Relevant in so far as they by this Tutor
would be excluded from the Co-tutors bearing a share with this Tutor, in
omissis and male administratis; there being nothing here but this Tutors own
proper Intromission, now insisted for.

The Lords Repelled the Defense simply.

Margaret Mckenzie contra Robertsons. December 23. 1668.
MArgaret Mckenzie pursues the Executors of her Husband, to pay her share of
the Movables, who alleged Absolvitor, because there was as much Debt as would
exhaust the whole Movables. It was answered, non relevat, unless it were
alleged that the Executors had paid the Debt; for the Debts being yet due,
it is j^s tertij, for them to allege thereupon: neither can this Pursuer
propone alleadgances of payment, Compensation, or any other, or the Defenders
Reply upon the Debts belonging to third Parties, unless they were pursuing
themselves; but the Pursuer is content to find Caution to repeat her share, in
case they were Distressed.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, but prejudice to the Executor, to Suspend upon
double Poinding, calling the Creditors.

It was further alleged for the Defenders, that they must have allowance of
Sums, bearing Annualrent since 1641. It was answered, that no such Sums can
burden the Relict, her part, because by the Act of Parliament, the Relict has
no share of such Sums, if they were due to the Defunct; and therefore a pari,
she cannot be burdened with such Sums, being due by the Defunct. The Defenders
answered, that the Act of Parliament excludes Relicts from such Sums as bear
Annualrent, being due to their Husbands, but does not bear, that they shall be
free of such Sums due by their Husbands: and Statutes being stricti juris, the
Lords cannot extend them beyond their Sense to like cases. The Pursuer
answered, that the Lords always did, and might Explain, and Extend Acts of
Parliament to Cases employed, and consequent, albeit not verbatim expressed: and
as to this Act of Parliament, it bears expressly, that all such Bonds shall
remain in their condition as they were before the Act of Parliament 1641. quoad
fiscum and relictam; before which, the Bonds bearing Annualrent, could not have
burdened the Relict: for the word such Bonds, may not only be extended to Bonds
due to Defuncts, but to Bonds due by Defuncts.

The Lords Repelled also this Defense, and found the Relicts part not to be
burdened with any Bonds due by her Husband, bearing Annualrent, unless they had
become Moveable by a Charge, or that the Term of payment of the Annualrent was
not come at the Defuncts death.

Smith contra Muire. Eodem die.
JEan Smith having pursued Margaret Muire as vicious Intromissatrix with the
Goods of George Smith her Husband, to pay the sum of 110. pounds due by Bond,
by the said George to this Pursuer; his Sister obtained Decree thereupon, and
Appryzed the Liferent of the said Margaret Muire, who Suspended, and raised
Reduction on this Ground, that she could not be liable as vicious
Intromissatrix, because she possessed her Husbands Movables by a Title, in so
far as by her Contract of Marriage she was provided to all the Goods and Gear
acquired during the Marriage, for her Liferent use, and so she could only be
liable for making forthcoming the true value after her Death. The Charger
answered: First, That there could be no Liferent of Movables, quae usu
consumuntur, and all Liferents of usus fructus must be salva rei substantia.
2dly, Though a Liferent could consist in Movables; yet the meaning of such a
Clause, of all Movables acquired during the Marriage, must be understood the
free Movables, deducing Moveable Debt; and cannot be understood to exclude
lawful Creditors.

The Lords found the Clause to be understood only of free Gear, and not to
exclude the Pursuers Debt; but found it a sufficient ground to free the
Suspender from vicious Intromission, and to Retrench the Decree to the true
value.

Sir John Weems contra Forbes of Toch^n. January 2. 1669.
SIr John Weems having Charged Tochon for Maintenance, due in Anno 1648. or
1650. conform to Act of Parliament, and Commission granted to him, and Decree
of the Lords. Tochon Suspends on this Reason, that singular Successors are free
by the Act, and he is a singular Successor by Appryzing. It was answered, that
the exception of the Act was only in favors of singular Successors, who had
bought the Lands, which cannot be extended to Appryzers, who oftimes have the
Lands for far less then the true price*

The Lords found the Act not to extend to Appryzers, unless the sums were a
competent price for the Land Appryzed; and therefore found the Letters orderly
proceeded.

Isobel and Margaret Simes contra Marrion Brown. January 5. 1669.
BY Contract of Marriage betwixt umquhil Thomas Sim and Marion Brown, John
Flowan Marions Master, is obliged to pay 300. Merks of Tocher, and Thomas Sim
is obliged to employ the said 300. Merks, and 200. Merks further for the said
Marion, her Liferent use: the said Thomas having two Daughters, Isobel and
Margaret Sims, he lends a sum of 400. Merks to Thomas Brown, and takes the Bond
on these Terms, to be paid to him and the said Marion Brown, the longest liver
of them two in Liferent, and after their Decease, to Margaret and Isobel Sims:
The said Isobel and Margaret having pursued the said Marion before the
Commissars, for Delivery of this Bond, as belonging to them after their Fathers
Death. The Commissars Assoilzied the said Marion from Delivery of the Bond, and
found it did belong to the said Marion her self, not only as to the Annualrent,
but as to the Stock, because her Husband having no other Means but this Bond,
and not having fulfilled her Contract, she had Confirmed her self Executrix
Creditrix in this sum, and behoved to Exclude her Husbands two Daughters of a
former Marriage, who were provided, and Forisfamiliat before. Of this
absolvitor the Daughters raised Reduction on this Reason, that this Sum could
not be Confirmed, not being in bonis defuncti, the Father being but Liferenter,
and the Daughters Feears, and though they were but as heirs substitute, they
exclude Executors, and need no Confirmation. 2dly, The Husband being but
obliged to Employ this Tocher, and 200. merks more, the Pursuer must instruct
that the Tocher was paid. 3dly, The Wife intrometted with as much of her
Husbands Goods as would satisfy her Provision. It was answered, that the Wife
not being obliged for her Tocher* but another Party who was solvendo, and
neither being obliged, nor in capacity to pursue, therefore could not now after
so long a time, be put to prove that the Tocher was paid; and for her
Intromission she had Confirmed and made Faith, and the Pursuers might take a
dative ad omissa, if they pleased, but could not, hoc ordine, Reduce or stop
her Decree upon compearance.

The Lords found that albeit in Form the Bond should have been Reduced, as
being done in fraudem of the Wife, as being a Creditor, and thereafter*
Confirmed; yet now the matter being before the Lords, and the Parties poor,
they found the Husbands Substitution of two provided Daughters by a former
Marriage null, as to the Wifes provision by the Act of Parliament 1621. without
necessity of Reduction, the matter being but a personal Right, and found the
Wife not obliged to instruct the Tocher paid, and therefore assoilzied from
the Reduction, but prejudice to the Pursuers to Confirm, a dative ad omissa.

William Zeoman contra Mr. Patrick Oliphant and Dam Giels Moncrief. Eodem die.
IN a Count and Reckoning betwixt these Parties, anent the satisfaction of an
Appryzing, the Auditor, in respect that Mr. Patrick Oliphant and Dam Giels,
Moncrief, were Contumacious and compeared not, did Decern conform to William
Zeomans Summonds, finding the Sum satisfied, and ordained them to Remove;
whereupon William Zeoman obtained Possession, and having been several years in
Possession, Mr. Patrick Oliphant obtained himself and the said Dam Giels to be
Reponed against the said Decree for his Contumacy, and a Writer to the Signet
past Letters of Possession in his favors, against William Zeoman, but without
a Warrant from the Lords, which were found null, and this Writer Deposed, but
Mr. Patrick having attained Possession by these Letters, William Zeoman insists
against him as an Intruder to quite the Possession. It was alleged for Mr.
Patrick, that William having obtained Possession unwarrantably by Decree, upon
his pretended Contumacy, and he being now restored there against, he is in
statu quo prius, before that Decree, at which time he was in lawful peaceable
Possession, which only should stand, and neither of the unwarrantable
Possessions be regarded. It was answered that William Zeomans Possession was by
virtue of a Decree then standing, autore pretore, and so was not vicious, but
Mr Patricks was without Warrant of the Lords, and so was most vicious. It was
answered that Mr. Patrick was instantly content to Debate his Right, and
frustra petitur quod mox est restituendum. It was answered that spoliatus ante
omnia est restit^endus, and is not obliged to Dispute any Right, till first he
be Restored.

Which the Lords Sustained, and ordained William Zeoman instantly to be
Restored to the Possession.

My Lord Balmerino Supplicant. January 7. 1669.
MY Lord gave in a Bill to the Lords, Representing that his Uncle was Dead, and
that he is nearest Heir-male to him, in whose favors his Estate is provided;
and therefore desired that Commission might be granted to certain Persons in
the Country, to Inventar, Seal, and Secure his Charter Chist, and to make
patent Doors in his Houses, Coffers, and Cabins, for that effect, and to take
my Lady, his Relicts Oath, where the Evidents were, to the effect foresaid:
Compearance being made for my Lady, desiring a sight of the Bill till the next
day, and alleging that it was notour to the Lords, that my Lady had a
Disposition to the whole Estate* whereupon Resignation had past in Exchequer,
and that the Evidents ought to be left open, to the effect my Lady may instruct
her Charter, conform to the Disposition.

The Lords refused to give up the Bill, it being their ordinar Course to grant
such Commissions, without calling or hearing Parties, and that a short delay
might prevent the effect of the Commission: and therefore granted Commission to
certain Noblemen and Gentlemen, or any one of them to Inventar, Seal, and
Secure the Evidents, and to open Doors, Coffers, and Cabinets for that effect;
but refused to give Warrant to take my Ladies Oath.

Captain Newman contra Tennents of Whitehil, and Mr. John Prestoun. January 8.
1669.
CAptain Newman having Appryzed the Lands of Whitehil from Prestoun of
Craigmiller his Debtor, and being thereupon Infeft, pursues the Tennents for
Mails and Duties. Compearance is made for Mr. John Prestoun, who produces a
Disposition from Craigmiller his Brother, of the Baronies of Craigmiller,
Prestoun and Whitehil: Which Disposition, relates this Debt of Captain Newmans,
and many other Debts, and for satisfaction thereof Dispones these Lands to Mr.
John, Reserving the Disponers and his Ladies Liferent, containing a Reversion
upon ten merks, and containing a provision, that it should be leisom to
Craigmiller, during his Life, and after his Decease to Mr. John to pay any of
the Creditors contained in the Disposition they pleased, without contributing
the price proportionally to the rest of the Creditors: and also produces a
Renunciation by Craigmiller, whereby he Renunces the Reversion and the
Liferents in favors of Mr. John, and also his own power of preference of the
Creditors, and Mr. John his Infeftment upon the Disposition, whereupon he
alleged that he ought to be preferred to the Mails and Duties, because he
stands publicly Infeft, by virtue of the said Disposition, before any
Infeftment in the Person of the Pursuer. It was answered for the Pursuer, that
the Infeftment produced cannot Exclude him, because it is expressly granted for
satisfying of the Sum, whereupon his Infeftment proceeds. It was answered for
Mr. John Prestoun that he having a power to prefer any Creditor he pleased, he
paid other Creditors to the value of the Estate, whereby Newman is excluded.
It was answered for Newman, that this Disposition was fraudulent and fimulat,
in prejudice of lawful Creditors, whereof he has Reduction upon the Act of
Parliament 1621. as being granted by a Brother to another, with a power of
preference of Creditors at the Purchasers option: which Clause is altogether
null; especially as to the preferences done, since lawful Diligence was used by
this Pursuer, by Horning, Inhibition, Arrestment, and Appryzing: and as no
Debtor can so prefer himself, so neither can he give such a power to any
other: and therefore the Pursuer ought to be preferred to all the Creditors,
conform to his Diligence. It was answered for Mr. John Prestoun, that there
being no Diligences done before the Disposition by any Creditor, Craigmiller
might Dispone, being for an onerous Cause, as he pleased, and might prefer one
Creditor to another. 2dly, Albeit this power of preference were not simply to
be allowed after Diligence done by Creditors to prefer others to them: Yet it
ought to be Sustained, in so far as Craigmiller might lawfully have done, viz.
to prefer Mr. John for the Sums due to himself, and for his relief of such Sums
as he was Cautioner in. The Pursuer answered, that such a Disposition was not
made, nor does this Disposition any way relate to Mr. John's Sum, and his
Relief, but generally and equally to all, and there is no difference but the
unwarrantable power of preference, which can have no effect after Diligence
done.

The Lords found the power of preference not to be Sustained as to any other
Debts, then to such as were due to Mr. John himself, and for which he was
Cautioner before the Disposition; and found as to these, that the power of
preference was lawful and valide, and was equivalent to this Clause, with power
to Mr. John to satisfy himself, and those to whom he was Cautioner, primo loco.

Wallace of Galrigs contra Mckernel. January 9. 1669.
UMquhil Wallac^ of Galrigs being alleged to have given a Seasine propriis
manibus, to his second Wife of two Chalders of Victual.

The Lords Sustained the Seasine without any other Adminicle. But that the Wife
had quite her former Liferent by a former Husband, in favors of Galrigs,
whereupon Galrigs offered to improve the Seasine by the Witnesses insert, which
being four, two Deponed positively that they were never Witnesses to a Seasine
given by Galrigs to his Wife: and the third Deponed, that he remembered not that
he was Witness: the fourth Deponed, that he was Witness, but said that this
Seasine was in Summer, whereas it bore to be in Winter: the Nottar abode by the
Seasine, but was not Examined.

The Lords found the Seasine improven, but would not Examine the Nottar, nor
any other Person, mainly in consideration that the Seasine was pr^priis
manibus, without any other Adminicle; otherways the Nottar and one Witness
affirming, the Lords would have Examined the Nottar or any other persons or
Evidences for astructing the verity of the Seasine.

George Hume contra Seaton of Menzies. January 13. 1669.
GEorge Hume as Assigney by the Earl of Wintoun to a Bond granted to the Earls
Factor, for his behove, having Charged thereupon. The Creditor Suspends, in
Discussing whereof, it was alleged for George Hu^^, that he ought to have
Annualrent, because the Suspender by a missive Letter produced written to the
Umquhil Earl of Wintoun, obliged him to pay Annualrent for the time by gone:
and therefore ought to continue the same till payment. The Suspender answered,
it contained nothing as to the Annualrents in time coming.

The Lords found Annualrents due from the beginning, both before and after the
Letter, though they exceeded the Principal Sum, seeing once Annualrent was
promised for some Terms.

Alexander Mckenzie of Pitglasse contra Ross of Auchinleck, January 14. 1669.
ALexander Mckenzie having Right to two Compryzings of the Lands of Auchinleck,
one in Anno 1644. and another in Anno 1647. which being alleged to have been
satisfied within the Legals, and the matter referred to an Auditor who reported
these Points to the Lords. First, Whether the Appryzer should Count for the
Mails and Duties, so as to impute the same to both Appryzings, as to years
after the second Appryzing, or to impute them wholly to the first Appryzing
during its Legal, and then to the second Appryzing during its Legal. It was
alleged for the Appryzer, that he having two Titles in his Person, it was
free for him to impute his Possession to either of them, and yet he was so
favorable, as not to crave his option, but to impute proportionally to both,
albeit in Law, when Receipts are not specially as to one Cause, electio est
Debitoris. 2dly, When any payment is made by a Debtor to his Creditor
indefinitly, it is still imputed to the Annualrents in the first place, before
it can satisfy any Stock, so that any satisfaction gotten by him, must first be
imputed to the Annualrent of both the Sums, and then to the Stock of the first.
It was alleged for Auchinleck, that the Intromission could only be attribute
to the first Appryzing. First, Because by that Right the Appryzer entered in
Possession, and cannot invert his Possession to a third Parties prejudice.
2dly, The first Appryzing est potior jure; for if the two Appryzings were in
different Persons, he that had the second, could never attain Possession
against the first. 3dly, In dubio solutio est imputanda in duriorem sortem, and
therefore to the first Appryzing, for if imputation be made to both, the first
Appryzing will not be satisfied within the Legal, and the Debitors Right will
be taken away, which is most infavourable. 4thly, The Appryzer as he did not
Possess by the second Appryzing, so he could not, because the first Appryzing
carries the Right of Property, and the second carries only the Right of
Reversion.

The Lords found the Possession was only to be attribute to the first
Appryzing, and not to the second, while the first were satisfied.

The next point was, that it was alleged the Appryzer had sold a part of the
Lands within the Legal, and therefore the worth of these Lands ought to be
allowed in satisfaction of the Sums. It was answered, that the Appryzer could
not Dispone the Lands simply, but only his Right of Appryzing, which would
still be Redeemable from his Assigney, as well as from himself.

The Lords found that he was not Comptable for the whole value of the Lands
Disponed, but for what Sums he actually Received for the Lands Disponed, to be
proven scripto vel juramento.

The next point was, as to the prices of the Victual, whether the Feers, or
greatest prices were due.

The Lords allowed the Debtor to prove the greatest Prices, and also to
produce the Feers, reserving to themselves the modification; Next as to the
Rental, the Appryzer desired a joint Probation, especially it being in the
Highlands, where the Witnesses are suspect.

The Lords would not grant a joint Probation, but ordained the Probation to be
by Witnesses above exception.

Hamiltoun contra Bain, January 15. 1669.
UMquhile Agnes Anderson having Disponed all her Goods and Movables, to Bains
Bairns of the first Marriage, and made Delivery thereof, conform to an
Instrument produced; and having thereafter Married John Hamiltoun, he Ratified
the former Deed done by his Wife in favors of her Bairns: she being now Dead,
both Parties give in Supplications, desiring Possession of these Goods Disponed
to the Bairns, they alleged upon the Mothers Disposition, Ratified by her
second Husband. And the Husband alleging that it being but a fictitious
Possession by an Instrument, he as Husband being Dominus bon^rum, is in the
natural Possession, seeing his Wifes Liferent use was reserved, and cannot
summarly be put therefrom, hoc ordine, upon a Supplication without Process.
2dly, If he were in a Process, he would exclude the Bairns, because the
Disposition being made after his Contract of Marriage and Proclamation, no Deed
of his Wifes could then prejudge him; and as for his Ratification, he did it to
satisfy his Wifes importunity, but being granted to a Wife during the
Marriage, he may and does recall it. It was answered, that it was not a Donation
to his Wife, but to his Wifes Children, which no Law makes Revockable.

Which the Lords Sustained, and found the Husband could not recall his
Ratification, not being in Favors of his Wife, but in Favors of her Children,
at her desire.

Earl of Athol contra Robertson of strowan, January 19. 1669.
MAster Walter Stuart as Parson of the Kirk of Blair in At^ol, whereof
Tillibairn was Patron, gave a Tack to Tillibairn's Brother of the whole Teinds
of the Paroch; which Tack he (within a few days) Assigned to Tillibairn, the
Patron himself. Tillibairn's Escheet and Liferent having fallen, the Viscount
of Stormont obtained the Gift thereof, and as Donator, Assigned the Right of
this Tack to the Earl of At^ol, who now pursues Robertson of Strowan for the
Teinds of his Lands, for many more nor 40. years, from the Date of the Tack.
The Defender alleged, First, that the Tack is null, being Set for more nor
three years, without consent of the Patron, contrair to the Act of Parliament,
1594. The Pursuer answered, that the alleadgeance was justertij to the
Defender, and was only competent to the Pursuer, or some deriving Right from
him, for the Defender being liable for his whole Teind, had no Interest to
quarrel the Pursuers Tack. 2dly, Albeit the consent of the Patron be necessar,
yet it is not necessar to be in the very Tack it self, but a subsequent consent
is sufficient, and here the Patron has given a subsequent consent, in so far as
within a few days after the granting of the Tack, he accepted an Assignation
thereof himself, and did obtain a Decree of prorogation of the same. The
Defender answered, that the Patrons consent being a solemnity requisite in Law,
behoved to be in the Tack it self, and not being then adhibit, the Tack of it
self was null ab initi^, and a subsequent consent, not by subscription, but by
acceptance, or homologation, was not sufficient, and the Defender had good
interest to propone the nullity, not being founded super jure tertij, but
simply exclusive juris agentis, as wanting the essential solemnities, and also
because the Defender has paid the Minister the accustomed Teind-duty for all
years bygone, and having his Discharge of the whole Teind-duty due by him
eatenus he is in the Ministers place.

The Lords found the Defender to have sufficient interest to allege the
nullity upon the Discharges, but found the Patrons acceptance of a Right to the
^ack, a sufficient consent to validat the same, and that it required no consent
expressly by subscription of the Tack.

The Defender further alleged Absolvitor, because this Tack never having
attained Possession, nor no action following thereupon, for more then 40. years
it is prescribed and void, and so likewise is the Decree of prorogation, being
more then 40. years since. The Pursuer answered, that the Defender having no
Right to his Teinds, had no interest to quarrel his Right. 2dly, That a Tack
being but a Right to an annual Prestation, it is all one, as if a Right had
been granted to every year a part, in which case 39. years would be entire, and
the Pursuer insists for no further. The Defender answered, that prescription
being a total extinction of the Right, and not a transmission thereof, by
virtue of an other Right; It is not jus tertij to the Defender to allege the
same, and to exclude any from troubling him, upon a null and prescribed Right,
and he is liable only to the Minister, to whom he has made payment, and
obtained his Discharge for bygones, and for time coming; likeas it is better to
be in the hand of an Ecclesiastical Person, th^n in the hand of a powerful
secular Person. To the second, that there is not here granted distinct Tacks,
of several years, but one individual Tack for many years, all which years are
expired; but it subsists only by the prorogation: and albeit it be true, that
if the Tack had been once cled with Possession, and so become a real Right, the
Defender would only have been fred of the Duties before forty years, but the
very Tack it self being never cled with Possession, is singly expired and void.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and competent to the Defender, to
Liberat him of all bygones paid to the Minister, but not to exclude the
Pursuer for time coming, in respect, that by the Decree of Provision, and
prorogation of the Tack, the benefice is no more a Parsonage, but the Minister
is a Stipendiary, and is in Possession by virtue of a Modified Stipend, the
Right of the Teinds remaining by the Tack, and prorogation forsaid in the
Tacksman, and in his Successors.

But because the Pursuer alleged Minority and Lesion, the Defender proponed a
third Defense, viz. That he had made payment bona fide to the Minister, and had
received a Discharge for his whole Teind duty, and could be liable for no
further, for bygones, till his use of payment was interrupted by Citation, or
Inhibition. The Pursuer answered, that any payment the Defender made, was but
an inconsiderable Duty allocat out of his Teinds, by virtue of the samine
Decree of modification, and locality; and albeit the Minister had Discharged
his whole Teind, yet as to the superplus, which is the Tacksmans part, the
Discharge was merely gratuitous, and was not upon payment made, and the Pursuer
was willing to allow what he truly paid; the Defender answered, that in all
Benefices and Tacks, use of payment importing a verbal Tack, is sufficient per
tacitam relocationem, till it be interrupted, so that if the Minister had
granted a Tack in Writ but for one year, and the Defender had continued in
Possession per tacitam relocationem, he was bona fide Possessor, and f^cit
fructus consumptos suos, even albeit the Minister had no Right, so his use of
payment for so long a time must work the same effect, neither can it be made
appear, that the Defender or his Predecessors paid more, then what they now
pay.

The Lords Sustained the Defense, and found the Defender only liable for use of
payment, until Citation or Inhibition.

Mr. George Johnstoun contra Sir Charles Erskin Lord Lion, Eodem die.
UMquhile Richard Irwing having Died Infeft in the ten Merk Land of Knok-hill,
his Son, had a Son, and four Daughters, his Son being his appearand Heir, and
being Addebted a Sum to Mr. James Alexander, he Charged him to enter Heir in
special to Richard his Grandfather, and Apprized the Lands from him, whereunto
Sir Charles Erskin has now Right; the said Son being now Dead, and never
Infeft, Mr. George Iohnstoun takes Right from the four Female Grandchildren,
and Serves them Heirs to their Grandfather, but before they were Infeft, there
was an Infeftment, or Charge upon the Apprizing, at the instance of Mr. James
Alexander, and in a former competition, Sir Charles was preferred upon Mr.
James Alexanders Right, as denuding the Male Grandchild, appearand Heir for
the time, in the same manner as if he had been Infeft; now Mr. George Iohnstoun
upon the Femals Right, raises a Declarator, to hear and see it found and
declared, that Mr. James Alexanders Apprizing was satisfied, and extinct by
Intromission, before the legal was expired. It was alleged that the Pursuers,
as Heirs Served, and entered to Richard their Grandfather, had no interest to
Redeem the Apprizing, led against Robert their Brother, unless they were also
entered Heirs to their Brother, which Robert, if he were alive, might Redeem
the Apprizing against himself, so that the legal Reversion being in his Person,
cannot belong to his Grandfathers Heirs, but to his own Heirs, and as he, or
his Heirs could only Redeem, so can they only declare the Apprizing to be
satisfied by Intromission, neither can the Reversion belong to two, both to the
Heirs of Robert, who was Charged to enter Heir, and to the Heirs of the
Grandfather, who Died last Infeft. It was answered, that Robert never having
in his Person any real Right, as never being Infeft, albeit fictione juris, the
Act of Parliament gives the Creditors like Right upon his disobedience to
enter, being Charged, as if he had entered, yet that is a mere passive Title,
and could give no active Title to Robert, or any representing him, either to
Redeem, or to call the Apprizer to an account, till they were entered Heirs to
the person last Infeft; for albeit the Creditor Apprizer has a real Right, yet
the disobedient appearand Heir has none; and albeit the Lords might suffer the
disobedient appearand Heir, or his Heirs to Redeem the Apprizing, because the
Apprizer had no interest to oppose the same, being satisfied, much less can the
Apprizer now oppose the Pursuers, who being Infeft as Heirs to Richard, have
the real Right of Fee in their Person, and consequently the Right of the
Reversion of the Apprizing led against Richards appearand Heir, which being a
minor Right, is employed, and included in the Property.

Which the Lords Sustained, and found that the Heirs of the person last Infeft,
being Infeft, might Redeem, or declare against an Apprizer, who Apprized from
an appearand Heir, lawfully Charged, albeit they were not of that appearand
Heir.

The Creditors of James Masson contra Lord Tarphichan, Eodem die.
SEveral Englishmen Creditors to James Masson, who lately broke, being Infeft
in several Annualrents, out of Lands of his, pursue Poinding of the Ground;
compearance is made for the Lord Tarphichan Superior, and his Donator, to the
Liferent Escheet of James Masson, who alleged that James Masson being Ribel
year and day before these Infeftments of Annualrent, the Ground could not be
Adjudged, but the profits behoved to belong to the Superior, and his Donator.
It was answered, that the Superior, or Donator had no Interest by the Rebellion
of James Masson, because before the Rebellion, James Masson was Denuded in
favors of his Son, and he Received as Vassal, so that the Vassal for the time,
not having fallen in Rebellion, the Superior can have no Liferent Escheat. The
Superior answered, that the Creditors of Masson having been once Vassal, and as
Vassal constituting their Annualrents, they could not object upon the Right of
his Son, unless they had derived Right from his Son. 2dly, The Superior is also
Creditor, and has Reduced the Sons Right as fraudulent, in prejudice of him, a
lawful Creditor. It was answered, that the Superiors Right, as a Creditor upon
the Reduction, does not simply annul the Sons Fee, neither does it at all
restore the Father again, because it being but a Reduction to a special effect,
viz. that the Creditor may affect the Lands, by Apprizing upon his Debt,
anterior to the Sons Infeftment, notwithstanding of his Infeftment, the Sons
Fee stands, but burdened with that Apprizing, so that upon neither ground, the
Superior can have the Right of a Liferent Escheat, of him who once was his
Vassal, but was Denuded before Rebellion* and which is most competent to the
Pursuers, as well as if the Superior had been Denuded, and another Superior
Infeft, if he or his Donator had been pursuing for a Liferent, any person
Infeft in the Land might well allege, that he had no Interest as Superior,
being Denuded.

The Lords found, that in neither case the Superior, or Donator, could have
interest in the Liferent Escheat.

Mr. John Hay contra the Town of Peebles, January 20. 1669.
MAster John Hay the Clerk having pursued a Reduction, and Improbation, against
the Town of Peebles, of all Right of Ascheils belonging to him in Property,
containing also a Declarator of Property of the said Lands of Ascheils, and
that certain Hills lying toward the Townlands of Peebles, are proper Part, and
Pertinent of Ascheils: He insists in his Reduction and Improbation, for
Certification, or at least, that the Defenders would take Terms to produce. The
Defenders alleged no Certification, because they stand Infeft in these Hills
in question, per expressum, and the Pursuer is not Infeft therein. The Pursuer
answered, that he offered to prove, that they were proper Part, and Pertinent
of the Lands of Ascheils, whereof he produces his Infeftment. The Defenders
answered, that till the samine were proven, they were not obliged to take Terms
to produce, or otherwise, upon this pretense of Part, and Pertinent, before the
samine were instructed, any party might necessitate all his Neighbors, to make
patent to him their Charter Chists. The Pursuer answered, that the Defenders
ought to take a Term to produce, and that before Certification, at that Term he
would prove Part, and Pertinent, and alleged the Practique in the Case of the
Town of Sterling, observed by Dury, the 24. of June 1625.

The Lords Sustained the Defense, and would not put the Defenders to take
Terms, till the Lands in question were first proven to be Part, and Pertinent,
and allowed the Pursuer to insist primo loco in this Declarator for that
effect; and as to the Practique alleged, they found in that Case, the
Defenders alleged upon no Right, whereas the Defenders propone here upon an
express Infeftment.

Lord Kilburny contra the Heirs of Tailzie of Kilburny, and Schaw of Greinock,
Eodem die.
UMquhile Sir John Crawford of Kilburny, having only two Daughters, the eldest
Married to Blackhal, Dispones his Estate to Margaret the younger, and to the
Heirs-male of her Body; which failing, to the eldest Heir Female, without
division, throughout all the Succession; and failling the Issue of this
Daughter, his eldest Daughter, and her Issue; and failling of these, Iordanhil
and Kilburny, their Issue, all which failling his own Heirs, and Assigneys
whatsomever. In which Disposition there is a Clause, that the said Margaret,
and the Heirs of Tailzie, should not alter the Tailzie, nor Dispone, or burden
the Lands' or contract Debts, whereby they might be Apprized, and carried from
the Heirs of Tailzie; otherwise the Contraveeners should lose their Right ipso
facto, and there should be place to the next Heir of Tailzie: but there is a
Clause subjoined, that the said Margaret, and the Heirs of Tailzie might Sell,
Dispone, and Wodset the Lands of Easter Greinock, and Carsburn, and might
burden the same with Sums of Money, for paying, and satisfying of the Defuncts
Debts. The said Margaret Crawford having Married the Earl of Crawfords Son
Patrick; they did Sell the Lands of Easter Crawford, and Carsburn, to Sir John
Schaw of Greinock, at a Rate far above the ordinar Price, having expected a
Bargain with the Town of Glasgow, for a Harbor there; but the Town having made
another Bargain with New-wark: Greinock pursued Kilburny, either to annul the
Minut, or fulfill the same, and to secure him, in relation to the Clause de non
alienando; and to that effect, Kilburny raises a Declarator against the Heirs
of Tailzie, to hear and see it found and Declared, that by the Right granted to
the Lady by her Father, she might lawfully Sell the Lands of Easter Greinock,
and Carsburn. The Heirs of Tailzie compeared not, but Greinock compeared, and
was admitted for his Interest, which was, that the Process being for his
security, he might propone all the Defenses, which he thought competent to the
Heirs of Tailzie, and alleged that the Libel was no ways Relevant, bearing a
power to Sell simply, but that it ought to have been conform to the Clause in
the Disposition, viz. to Sell, Wodset, or Burden, for payment of the Defuncts
Debts, which did necessarly import, that no further could be Sold, then what
was sufficient to pay the Debt, and therefore no Process, till the Libel were
so ordered, and the Debts produced. The Pursuer answered, that he opponed the
Clause, having two Members, one bearing with full power to Dispone the Lands of
Easter Grienock, and Carsburn, and the other bearing to affect the same with
Sums, for paying of the Defuncts Debts; which payment of the Defuncts Debts,
was but the end, motive, and consideration for which the power was granted, but
was no restriction, quality, or limitation of the power. 2dly, It did only
relate to the second Member of the Clause, and not to the first Member, which
bore with full power to Sell, and Wodset, etc. which full power, is directly
opposite to a limited power. 3dly, Albeit the Pursuer were obliged to instruct
the Debt, and apply the price for satisfying thereof, yet the Clause does not
limit him to Sell only so much as will be equivalent to the Debt, but he
satisfying the Debt, more or less, has acted conform to the Clause, which
uses to be so expressed in Clauses of this nature, as that the Heirs of Tailzie
may Dispone so much as will be sufficient for payment of the Debt, which not
being expressed, these restrictive Clauses being against common Law, are
strictissimi juris, and not to be extended beyond what the words expressly
bears. 4thly, Albeit the Pursuer were obliged to instruct that there were Debt,
which might be a price, yet he were not obliged to instruct that they would be
equivalent to this price, but to such a price as were not a third part within
the ordinar Rate, in which latitude, every Seller has power, and the
alienation cannot be quarrelled; and albeit that price would be more then the
Debt, yet these Lands being two entire Tenements, which none would Buy by
Parcels, the Pursuer could only be comptable to the Heirs of Tailzie for the
superplus. The Defender answered, that he opponed the Clause, being one and
copulative; and that these Lands being put per expressum in the Clause, de non
alienando, It could not be thought that the immediate following Clause, would
give the Lady as much power, as to these Lands, as if they had not been in the
former Clause, but the intent to satisfy the Defuncts Debt, being the last
words in the Clause, is relative to the whole Clause, and natively resolves
into an Restriction, or Quality, not bearing that they night be the more able
to pay the Debts, but for payment and satisfaction of the Debts.

The Lords considering that Heirs of Tailzie were absent, and that as to them,
the Interlocutor would be in absence, found it most just, and safe for both
Parties to declare conform to the Clause, that the Alienation was valide for
satisfying the Defuncts Debts, and found not that the Debts behoved to be
equivalent to this price.

The Creditors of John Pollock contra James Pollock his Son, January 21. 1669.
THe Creditors of John Pollock having Adjudged his Tenement for their Debt, and
James Pollock having gotten a Bond of 5000. Merks from his Father, payable
after his Fathers death, which was granted after he was Married, he did also
Apprize thereupon within year and day of the Adjudication. The Adjudgers raise
a Reduction of this Bond, and the Apprizing following thereupon, upon these
Reasons; First, Because the Bond was granted for Love and Favor, and albeit it
bear borrowed Money, yet the said James has acknowledged by his Oath, that it
was for Love and Favor, and so being granted betwixt most conjunct Persons,
after the contracting of their Debts, it is null by the Act of Parliament,
1621. The Defender alleged that the Reason was not Relevant as to such Debts
as were not constitute by Writ, anterior to the Defenders Bond; and as to any
constitute by Probation of Witnesses, for proving Bargains, Merchant Compts,
and Furnishing, wherein the Probation, and Decree are both after the Bond,
they cannot be said to be anterior Debts, because they are not constitute till
Sentence; and albeit the Sentence bear the Debt to have been contracted before
this Bond, yet that cannot make them anterior Debts, because Writ cannot be
taken away by Witnesses, proving an anterior Debt, which would be as effectual
against the Writ, as if the payment thereof had been proven by Witnesses, and
the time of Bargaining, or Furnishing, being a point in the Memory, and not
falling under the Sense, no body would be secure who had Writ, but that
Bargains, and Furniture might be proven anterior thereto. The Pursuer answered,
that his Reason was most Relevant, and the constitution of the Debt is not by
the Decree, or Probation, but by the Bargain, and Receipt of the Goods, or
Furniture, after which no posterior Deed of the Debtor, can prejudge the
Creditors Furnishers; and albeit in many cases Witnesses prove not, and
Witnesses are not admitted to prove, where Writ may, and uses to be interposed,
yet where the Probation is competent, the Debt is as well proven thereby, for
the time of contracting as it is by Writ, neither does that ground, that Writ
cannot be taken away by Witnesses, any way hinder, for the meaning hereof, is
only that the Payment, or Discharge of that Writ, must be proven by Writ, and
it were a far greater inconvenience, if after Bargain, and Furniture, any Writ
granted by the Debtor, though without an Onerous Cause, should prejudge these
Creditors.

The Lords Sustained the Reason, and Repelled the Defense, and found Debts
constitute by Witnesses to be effectual, from the time of contracting, and not
from the time of Probation, or Sentence, to take away any posterior Deed of the
Debtor, done without a Cause Onerous.

The Pursuer insisted in a second Reason of Reduction, that albeit these Debts
were posterior to this Bond, yet the samine ought to be Reduced, as being a
fraudulent conveyance betwixt the Father and the Son, kept up, and latent in
some of their Hands, without any thing following thereupon, to make it known
and public, so that the Creditors having bona fide contracted with the Father,
having a visible Estate, were deceived and defrauded by this latent Bond, if it
were preferred to them. 2dly, This Bond bears only to be payable after the
Fathers Death, and so is but donatio mortis causa, and but a Legacy; or if it
be inter vivos, it is much more fraudulent and latent. 3dly, Bonds of
Provision, for Love and Favor granted to children, are accounted but as their
legitime, still Revockable by the Father, and all Debts contracted by him are
preferable to them. The Defender answered, that there was neither Law, Reason,
nor Custom to evacuat, or exclude Bonds of Provision, granted by Parents ex
pietate paterna, to their Children, upon account of their Fathers posterior
Debt, especially if the Bonds were Delivered, for there is no ground for any
such thing by the Act of Parliament, 1621. which relates only to Deeds done
after the Debt contracted, neither is there any sufficient ground of fraud,
that the Bonds were not made public or known, there being no obligement upon
Parties to publish the same, and Creditors have less means to know the Debts of
other anterior Creditors, then of Children, having a just ground to suspect
that they may be provided, and to enquire after the same, neither does the
delay of the Term of payment import, either fraud, or that the Bonds were
donationes mortis causa.

The Lords would not Sustatin the Reasons of Reduction upon the Act of
Parliament, 1621. or upon the general ground, that posterior Debts were
preferable to all Bonds of Provision, but ordained the Pursuer to condescend
upon the particular ground of fraud in the Case in question.

The Collector-general of the Taxation contra the Director of the Chancellery,
January 22. 1669.
THe Director of the Chancellery being Charged for the present Taxation,
imposed in Anno 1665. by the Convention of Estates, Suspend on this Reason,
that he is a Member of the College of Justice, which by the Act of Convention
are exempted. It was answered, that the Members of the College of Justice were
never further extended then to the Lords, Advocates, Clerks of Session, and the
Writters to the Signet. It was answered, that as the Signet depends immediately,
and chiefly upon the Lords of Session, and Writters thereto, are of the
College of Justice, so the Chancellery depends in the same way upon the Lords,
who issue Orders thereto from time to time, to give out Precepts direct to
Superiors, or to Bailliffs, Sheriffs for Infefting of Supplicants; and
therefore the Director of the Chancellary, being Writer in that Office, must
enjoy that Privilege, as well as the Writers to the Signet; for albeit the
Director gives out Precepts and Brieves of Course, without the Lords Warrant,
so do the Writers to the Signet, give out many Summons of course without
Warrant.

The Lords found the Director of the Chancellary to be a Member of the College
of Justice, and therefore Suspended the Letters.

The Collector general of the Taxations contra The Master and Servants of the
Mint-house. Eodem die.
THe Master of the Mint did also Suspend for him and his Servants on this
Reason, that it was their ancient Privilege to be free of Taxations, for which
they produced certain Gifts, by former Kings of Scotland, and Decreets of the
Lords. It was answered, that the Act of Convention gives only Exemption to the
Members of the College of Justice, and Discharges all former Privileges and
Exemptions. It was answered that Acts of the Convention must be understood
salvo jure, which takes place even in Acts of Parliament. 2dly, They produced a
late Gift, granted by the King in Anno 1668. Exeeming the Master and Servants
of the Mint from all Taxation, Imposed or to be Imposed, which is past the
Exchequer and Privy Seal, so that the King who has Right to the Taxation,
might Discharge the same to whomsoever he pleased.

The Lords in respect of the new Gift, did Exeem the Officers of the Mint, and
Suspended the Letters.

The Daughters of umquhil Chrichtoun of Crawfoordstoun contra Brown of
Inglistoun. Eodem die.
THe Daughters of umquhil Crichtoun of Crawfoordstoun, as Heirs appearand to
him immediately after his Death, gave in a Supplication to the Lords, desiring
his Charter-Chist to be Inventared and Sequestrat.

Which the Lords granted.

But before the Commission came to the House, William Lowry the Ladies Nevoy,
upon notice of the Order, Rode Night and Day, and prevented the same: so that
all the Writs were carried from Crawfoordstoun to Inglisstoun.

Thereafter the appearand Heirs raised Exhibition, ad deliberandum, against the
Lady and others, who produced three Dispositions by Crawfordstoun, in favors
of Brown of Inglistoun, who had Married one of his Daughters, and the Heirs of
that Marriage, whereby he Disponed his Estate of Crawfoordstoun to them, with a
Bond of 20000. pounds, the intent whereof seems to have been, that they might
have Appryzed, to make the Disposition effectual, and she and William Lowrie
having Deponed, acknowledged that the Writs and Charter-Chist were carried out
of Crawfoordstoun to Englistoun, but Deponed that they knew not whether their
Writs were amongst them or not, or whether they were formerly delivered to
Inglistoun himself, who is now dead: There was in the Exhibition Libelled a
Declarator, that the Writs were null, as not delivered, and that being
unwarrantably taken out of the Defuncts Charter-Chist, after the Lords Order to
the contrair, they ought to be put back and Sequestrat, till the Rights of
Parties were Discust. The Pursuers did now insist in this last member, to the
which it was answered, that the Writs being Exhibit to the appearand Heirs ad
deliberandum, and they having seen them, they could have no further interest,
but the Lady Crawfoordstoun Tutor to her Oy Inglistoun, ought to have them up
again, who produced them; neither is it, nor can it be instructed, that these
Writs were unwarrantably taken out of the Charter-Chist, after the Lords
Warrant, seeing their Oaths bore, that they knew not whether these were in the
Charter-chist or not; and therefore, being a Pupils Writs, in his favors
produced by his Tutrix, they cannot be taken from him or Sequestrat, unless the
unwarrantable meddling therewith were proven. 2dly. By a Disposition of the
Movables to the Lady produced, granted by the Defunct, it bears a Delivery of
the Keys of the Charter-Chist to her, to be Delivered to Inglistoun with the
Charter-Chist, which is equivalent as if they had been Delivered to Inglistoun
himself, and she was content to be Enacted to produce them when ever the Lords
found cause. It was answered, that the Lords Warrant being anticipat, and the
bulk of the Writs in the Charter-Chist carried away, it must be presumed, that
these Dispositions, and that Bond was amongst the rest, and so must be returned
in statu quo.

The Lords found this alleadgance Relevant, unless the Defenders would instruct
that these Writs were not in the Charter-chist the time of the Order, but out
thereof in Inglistouns hands: and yet they allowed the Parties presently to
Dispute whether, albeit these Writs were in the Charter-Chist, Inglistoun or
his Tutrix should have them up, or if they should remain Sequestrat.

Mr. James Drummond contra Stirling of Ardoch. January 23. 1669.
MR. James Drummond being Donator to the Escheat of the Lord of Glenegies,
pursues Exhibition and Delivery of a Bond granted by George Mushet to James
Henderson, containing 2000. merks principal, and by him Assigned to umquhil
Glenegies, and thereby falling under his Escheat, and the Bond being produced
by Ardoch, the Donator craves the same to be Delivered to Ardoch. It was
answered by Ardoch, that the Bond ought not to be Delivered to the Donator,
because it cannot belong to him, in respect that Mushet, who by the Assignation
became Debtor to Glenegies, had two Bonds granted by him to Glenegies,
containing 3000. merks, wherein Ardoch is Cautioner, whereby this Bond of 2000.
merks, due to Glenegies, was compensed long before Glenegies Rebellion. It was
answered for the Pursuer. that Compensation is not Relevant, unless it had been
actuallie proponed in Judgment, or Extrajudiciallie stated, by the Parties
offering and accepting the Compensation. 2dly, That the alleadgance is no ways
Relevant against the Donator, who has Right to the Debts due by the Rebel.
3dly, Ardoch had no Interest to allege the Compensation, which could only be
proponed by Mushet the Creditor, and not by Ardoch who is Cautioner to him. The
Defender answered, that Compensation is Competent ipso jure, from the time that
the sums be mutuallie due by the Debtor and Creditor, in the same way as if
they had granted mutual Discharges each to other; and therefore when an
Assigney Pursues or Charge, Compensation is always Sustained against him
upon Debts due by the Cedent before the Assignation, albeit the Compensation
was not actually stated before the same; neither is the Donator here in better
case then an Assigney, so that when he pursues Mushet Debtor to the Rebel,
Mushet may allege Compensation upon the like Debt due to him by the Rebel
before the Rebellion, and the Defender has good Interest to propone the
Compensation, because he is Cautioner to Glenegies for Mushet, and if Mushet be
forced to pay the Donator, without allowing Compensation, Ardoch will be
necessitat to pay Mushet, to whom he is Cautioner, and therefore has good
Interest to propone that by the concourse of the two Debts, they are both
extinct, and he is not obliged to Deliver up to the Donator the Bond
Constituting Mushets Debt.

The Lords found the Alleadgance proponed for Ardoch Relevant and Competent,
and that Compensation was Relevant against the Donator upon Debts due by the
Rebel before Rebellion.

Sir John Weims contra Farquhar of Towley. Eodem die.
SIr John Weims having Charged Farquhar of Towley for the maintenance of his
Lands deu in Anno 1648. He Suspends on this Reason, that by the Act of
Parliament 1661. appointing this maintenance to be uplifted by Sir John Weims,
singular Successors are exeemed ita est, in one part of the Lands he is
singular Successor to Sir Robert Farquhar, of another part, he has a
Disposition from his Father, for Sums of Money particularly expressed in the
Disposition. It was answered to the first, That the Exemption is only in
favors of singular Successors, who had bought Lands the time of the Act, ita
est, Sir Robert Farquhars Disposition is after the Act: neither does it appear
that a competent price was paid therefore, and as for his Fathers Disposition,
though prior to the Act, yet the Narrative thereof, betwixt Father and Son,
will not instruct the Debts, unless it be otherways instructed, nor can it be
made appear to be a just price.

The Lords found that the Exemption could not extend to singular Successessors,
acquiring after the Act, for if at that time the Lands were in the hands of him
who was Heretor in Anno 1640, or his Heirs, nothing ex post facto done by them,
can prejudge the Right Constitute by the Act, which does not bear an exemption
to singular Successors who should acquire, but only to these who had acquired.

They did also Ordain the Defender to instruct the Cause onerous of his Fathers
Disposition, but would not put the Suspender to Disput the Equivalence of the
price, unless it were instructed that the Dispositions were Simulat, there
being a great latitude in prices, according to the pleasure of Parties.

Alexander Chisholme contra Lady Brae. January 26. 1669.
ALexander Chisholme having apprized certain Lands from the Heirs of Sir
Alexander Frazer of Brae, and thereupon insisting for Mails and Duties.
Compearance is made for the Lady Brae, Sir James his Relict, who being provided
by her Contract of Marriage to certain Lands, with an Obligement that they
should be worth 2400. merks yearly, here Husband did thereafter, during the
Marriage, grant her a Tack of the whole remanent Lands he had then, with a
general Assignation and Disposition omnium bonorum, the Tack bears to be for
Love and Favor, and that the Lady may be in the better capacity to aliment his
Children, and bears 20. pound of Tack Duty, in case there be Children, and a
Duty equivalent to the Rent of the Land if there be none, the entry to the Tack
is at the next Term after the granting thereof, and not at the Husbands Death.
Upon this it was alleged for the Lady, that she ought to be preferred to the
Mails and Duties of the Lands in question, by her Tack cled with Possession by
her Husbands Possession before contracting of their Creditors Debt, which must
be understood her Possession stante matrimonio, and by her own Possession,
after her Husbands Death, before Chisholms Apprizing or Infeftment. It was
alleged for Chisholme, that the alleadgance founded upon the Tack, ought to
be Repelled. First, Because it is a Donation betwixt Man and Wife, null of it
self, nisi morte confirmetur, and so is still ambulatory, and in the Husbands
power, during his Life, and is in the same case as Bonds of Provision granted
to Children, and kept by their Father, which being still in his power, any
Debt Contracted after would be preferable thereto: So here this Tack being in
the Husbands power, the Contracting of a Debt thereafter is preferable thereto,
and is an Implicit Revocation thereof. 2dly. This Tack being a most fraudulent,
latent and clandestine Deed betwixt Man and Wife, whereupon nothing followed in
her Husbands Life, the Creditors having no way to know any such thing, and
having Contracted bona fide, are Ensnared and Defrauded thereby; and the Lords
having Declared, that in regard they had Reponed the Lady against a former
Decree: She should now Dispute her Right of the Tack, as in a Reduction,
against which, this would be an unquestionable Reason, that it is a latent,
fraudulent Contrivance, containing a Disposition omnium bonorum. It was
answered for the Lady to the first, That Donations betwixt Man and Wife, are
not by Our Law and Custom null, but are valid, a principio, unless they be
actually Revocked: and albeit Implicit Revocations has been Sustained by
Dispositions, or Infeftments of the same Lands to others, yet never by a
Personal Bond or Contracting of a Debt, posterior. To the second, The Ladies
Right can never be Interpret in fraudem creditorum, there being no Creditors
the time of the granting thereof, and the Husband being free, and Incapacitat
by no Law, an Infeftment of the remainder of his Estate to her, so Cautioned as
this is, is both legal and favorable: and albeit in the same, there be a
Disposition omnium bonorum, which cannot reach to Goods acquired after the
Debts, yet the Tack is valid and utile per inutile non vitiatur. 3dly, Albeit
this Tack bear to be a Donation, and for Love and Favor; yet it is neither
Fraudulent nor Revockable, because it is donatio remuneratoria, granted by the
Husband, who was obliged to make up the Jointure Lands, contained in the
Contract of Marriage, to 2400. merks, of which they came short of four at the
beginning, and other four have been Evicted. It was answered for Chisholme the
Creditor, that this alleadgance was no ways Competent against him, who is a
Creditor, contracting bona fide; but the Lady ought to pursue her Son, as
Representing his Father, for fulfilling her Contract, or at least till that be
declared against the Heir, who is the only competent Party, the Creditor must
Possess conform to his Right. 2dly, Whatever was the Husbands Obligement, the
Husband has not granted this Tack in Remuneration or Satisfaction thereof, but
expressly for Love and Favor, without mention of any other Cause. It was
answered, that the expressing of Love and Favor, which may relate to the
general Disposition, cannot exclude other Causes; and albeit it make the Tack a
Donation, yet it is well consistent to be a Remuneratory Donation, which is not
Revockable.

The Lords found the Alleadgance Relevant, that this was a Remuneratory
Donation, and that there was also much wanting of the Contract of Marriage, and
found it competent against this Apprizer, and superceeded to give answer to the
other Points, that if it were not proven Remuneratory, whether it could be
Reduced as latent and fraudulent, at the Instance of posterior Creditors, or as
being in the Husbands power, was indirectly Revocked, by Contracting of the
posterior Debt, having no more Estate to burden with his Debt.

Boil of Kelburn contra Mr. John Wilkie. Eodem die.
BOil of Kelburn having gotten a Commission from the Presbytery of Irving, to
uplift some vaccand Stipends, he gave Bond to pay to them 850. pounds
therefore, and being thereafter Charged by Mr. John Wilkie, Collector of the
vaccand Stipends, Kelburn paid him 600. merks, whereupon Mr. John gave Kelburn
his Discharge of these vaccand Stipends, and of his Bond to the Presbytery,
with absolute Warrandice of the Discharge, especially bearing to relieve and
free him of the Bond to the Presbytery, thereafter Kelburn was Decerned to
make payment of that Bond, after a long Debate Mr. John Wilkie compeared,
whereupon Kelburn Charged Mr. John to pay him the 850. pounds, with Annualrent
and Expences^ upon the Clause of Warrandice, Mr. John Suspends on these
Reasons. First, That he was Circumveened, never having read the Discharge.
2dly, That Clauses of Warrandice (however conceived) are never extended further
by the Lords, then to the Skaith and Damnage of the Party Warranted, which if
it be Componed for never so little, the Warrandice reaches no further then the
Composition, and it can never be extended ad captandum lucrum ex alterius
damno, so Kelburn having gotten Stipend worth 850. pounds, he cannot seek the
same back again, but only the 400. pound he paid out. It was answered, that
albeit general Clauses of Warrandice be so Interpret, yet this is an express
and special ^action, to relieve Kelburn of this Bond, which, if it had been per
se, would have been valide, although without an onerous Cause, and cannot be
less valide, having so much of an onerous Cause.

The Lords did take no notice of the Reason of Circumvention, Mr. John being
known to be a provident Person, but Restricted the Warrandice to the 400.
pounds received by the Suspender, and Annualrents thereof, and the Expenses of
Plea against the Presbytery, and found it no ways alike, as if it had been a
Paction apart, but being a speciality in a Clause of Warrandice, it was to be
Interpret accordingly, pro damno and interesse only.

Lady Braid contra Earl of Kinghorne. Eodem die.
THere is a Bond 10000. pounds granted to the Earl of Buchan Principal, and the
Earl of Kinghorne Cautioner to umquhil Mo^ison of Darsie, and Dam Nicolas
Bruce, now Lady Braid, then his Spouse, bearing Annualrent, and a Clause
stating the Principal Sum after ilk Term, as a Stock to bear Annualrent, and
Termly Penalties in case of failzie. This being called in praesentia, It was
alleged for Kinghorne, that Annual of Annual was a most Usurary Paction,
rejected by all Law, and our Custom, and cannot subsist in whatever Terms it be
conceived, otherwise by the like Paction, the Annual of that Annual might bear
Annual, and so perpetually multiply; and if this were Sustained, there would
never be a Bond hereafter in other Terms. It was answered, that Bonds of
Corroboration, stating Annualrents into Principals by Accumulation, have ever
been allowed, and though that be done after the Annualrent is become due,
making it then to bear Annualrent, there is no material difference to make it
bear Annualrent by a paction ab ante, but not to take Effect till the
Annualrent be effectually due. It was answered, that Custom had allowed the
stating of Annualrents after they were due, into a Principal, because then
being presently due, they might instantly be Exacted; but Law and Custom has
rejected the other Case. The Pursuer further alleged, that she being a Widow,
and this her Liveliehood, Annualrent at least should be due for the
Annualrents, seeing she is ready to Depone, that she borrowed money to live
upon, and paid Annualrent therefore, or otherwise the Termly Failzies ought to
be Sustained.

The Lords Sustained the Defense, and found no Annualrent due of the Annual,
nor Termly Failzies, seeing there was no Charge at the Pursuers Instance against
this Defender, and that he was a Cautioner, but modified for all 100. pound of
Expenses.

Bell of Belfoord contra L. Rutherfoord. January 27. 1669.
BEll of Belfoord being Infeft in an Annualrent by the Deceast Lord
Rutherfoord, out of certain Lands, pursues a poinding of the ground.
Compearance is made for my Lady Rutherfoord, who alleged she ought to be
preferred, as being Infeft in an Annualrent of 2000. merks yearly, upon her
Contract of Marriage, before this Pursuer. 2dly, That she ought to be
preferred, for an Annualrent of 2000. merks yearly of additional Jointure,
wherein she stands also Infeft publicly; and albeit her Infeftment be
posterior to the Pursuers, yet his Infeftment being base, not cled with
Possession, before her public Infeftment, she is preferable. The Pursuer
answered, that before the Ladies Infeftment on her additional Jointure, he had
used a Citation for poinding of the Ground, and is now Insisting for a Decree
thereupon, which must be drawn back to the Citation, and is sufficient to
validat the base Infeftment, that it be no more from that time forth repute
Clandestine.

Which alleadgance the Lords found Relevant, and preferred the Pursuer to the
Ladies additional Jointure.

It was further alleged for the Lady, that she was Served, and kenned to a
Terce of the Lands in question, and must be preferred, as to a third part of
the profits of the Lands, conform to her Infeftment upon her Terce. The Pursuer
answered, that her Service, Kenning and Infeftment of Terce, are posteriour to
his Infeftment of Annualrent, and posterior to his Citation foresaid thereupon.
It was answered for the Lady, that her Terce being a Right Constitute by Law,
by the Death of her Husband, albeit it be Served and Kenned after, these Acts
are but Declaratory of her Right, by her Husbands Death, and do Constitute her
Right* not from the date of the Service, but from her Husbands Death, which is
before the Pursuers Citation, so that his Infeftment, granted by her Husband,
before his Death, not having been cled with Possession in the Husbands Life, it
remained at his Death as an incomplete Right, which cannot exclude her from her
Terce. It was answered, that a base Infeftment is of it self a valid Right,
although by a special Act of Parliament posterior, public Infeftments are
preferred thereto, unless the base Infeftment has been cled with Possession,
which cannot be extended beyond the Terms of the Act of Parliament, and so
cannot be extended to a Terce, but as the base Infeftment would have been a
sufficient Right, against the Husband and his Heirs, so it must be esteemed as
debitum reale, affecting the Ground, and his Lady can have no more by her Terce
then the third of what was free unaffected before his Death.

The Lords found the base Infeftment sufficient to exclude the Terce pro tanto,
and that as to the Husbands Heir or Relict, it was a sufficient Right.

Stirling contra Heriot. Eodem die.
Stirling Son to Commissar Stirling, pursues for a modification of an Aliment
out of the Liferent of Helen Heriot, his Fathers Wife, as having the Liferent
of the whole Estate.

The Lords Sustained not the Aliment, in respect the Defenders Liferent was
very mean, and the Pursuer was major, and kept a Brewary, and she kept one of
his Children, and that he was not frugi aut bonae famae.

Robert Brown contra Iohnstoun of Clacherie. February 1. 1669.
RObert Brown pursues Iohnstoun of Clacherie, for payment of 1200. pounds
contained in a Bill of Exchange, subscribed before two subscribing Witnesses,
and marked with Clacheries hand, there was several other Bills for greater Sums
produced, marked with the like mark, and none compearing for Clacherie.

The Lords caused Examine the Witnesses insert, who Deponed that Clacherie was
accustomed so to Subscribe, and one of them Deponed, that he saw him put to
this mark to the Bill in question* several others Deponed, that they had
accepted such Bills in regard of his Custom, and had obtained payment from him,
without any Debate thereupon.

The question arose to the Lords, whether a Sum above an hundred pound could be
proven by such a Writ, that had only a mark, and having demured upon it before,
till they should try if any such case had been Sustained formerly, and none
having been found Sustaining any Writ not being Subscribed with the whole Name,
or at least the Initial Letters of the Debitors whole Name. It was offered by
some, that Clacheries Oath might be taken ex officio, or de calumni^, not
simply to refer the Debt to his Oath, but whether that truly he set to this
mark, before these Witnesses, but Robert Brown being a dying, the Lords would
not defer, but decided the Case, and found that this Writ being a Bill of
Exchange among Merchants, and Clacheries custom so to grant Bills of greater
importance then this, being clearly proven, and none appearing for him, they
decerned against him upon the Bill and Testimonies, many of the Lords being of
different Judgment, and that it was of dangerous preparative to encourage
Forgerie, but it was Sustained only in all the particular Circumstances
aforesaid, and not to be a general Rule.

John Boswel contra Town of Kirkaldie. Eodem die.
THe Town of Kirkaldie having given a in Bill to stop the Interlocutor of the
22. of July 1668. of the Process against them, and having objected against that
Article of the Libel, whereby John Bosewel craved Repetition of what he was
stented for, for Charges of Commissions to the Convention of Burrows, upon this
Ground, that the Convention of Burrows was authorized by Acts of Parliament,
and Commissioners is ordained to meet yearly thereat, which being a burden
arising from the Authority of Parliament, these who have Tenements in the Town,
or Lands in the Burghs Lands are liable pro rata, and did again resume the
Debate anent the second Ministers Stipend, and being heard thereupon in
presentia.

The Lords adhered to their former Interlocutor anent the Teinds, and found
nothing could make John Bosewel liable for any part of the second Ministers
Stipend, except what was due by Law out of his Teinds, or what was due by his
own consent, or by custom of 40. years, and found him not liable for Charges of
Commissioners of Burrows, which though authorized by Parliament, yet the intent
thereof was Trading; and though the Convention might equalize the proportion of
Taxations amongst Burghs, which did concern all having Land therein: Yet that
being a case merely contingent, they would not upon consideration thereof, put
any part of the burden upon these who had no Trade.

John Boswel contra Lindsay of Wormistoun. February 3. 1669.
John Bosewel being appointed Commissar of St. Andrews by the King, and before
the Restitution of Bishops, after their Restitution, the Archbishop named
Lindsay of Wormistoun Commissar, and agreed him and John Bosewel, on these
Terms, that John should have the half of the profit of the place, whereupon
Wormistoun grants a Bond to John Bosewel, to Count and Reckon for the Profits
of the half, and to pay the same to John Bosewel termly, and quarterly, and if
any question should arise betwixt them in the Account, that he should submit
himself to the Archbishops determination, and acquiesce therein. John Bosewel
Charges upon his Bond. Wormistoun Suspends. It was alleged for Wormistoun,
that his Bond did contain a Submission to the Archbishop, who is thereby the
only Judge Constitute in these Accounts. It was answered, that this Bond was
only Subscribed by Wormistoun himself, and a Submission must be Subscribed by
both Parties, and that it behoved to be understood to last but for a year, and
not to import a Liferent Submission, neither could it be exclusive of the Lords
to decline their Authority. The Suspender answered, that this Submission being
a provision in the Bond Charged on: Which Bond being accepted by the Charger,
his acceptance makes his consent to the Submission, in the same way as if he
had Subscribed the same: And there is no Law to exclude a Submission for two
years, or a Lifetime, more then for one; and it is not a declining of the Lords
Jurisdiction, it being most ordinarily sustained, no Process, because there is a
Submission standing.

The Lords found that there is here a Submission, not ending by a year, and
accepted by the Charger, and that thereby the Archbishop in the first place,
ought to give his Sentence, which if he refused, or if it was iniquous, the
Lords would cognosce thereupon, as in the case of other Arbiters, and Assigned
therefore to the Archbishop, the first of June to determine thereupon.

Kilburnie contra Heirs of Tailzie of Kilburnie. Eodem die.
THe Lord and Lady Kiburny did insist in the Declarator against the Heirs of
Tailzie, Dispute the 20. of January, and according to the Interlocutor then
given, gave in a condescendence of Kilburnies Debt, amounting to fifty one
thousand pound, and that the Rent of the Land did not exceed thirty six hundred
merks. It was alleged, that the Annualrents were here accumulate for five
years after Kilburnies Death, which ought not to be, the Lady having Possession
of the Lands, and ought to have paid the Annualrent, and the Clause impowering
her to Sell, is only for satisfying Kilburnies Debt, due the time of his Death,
which cannot extend to Annualrents, due after his Death, and that these
Annualrents were truly paid by the Lady, and so could not come in as a Debt
upon the Estate. 2dly. The Moveable Debts ought to be satisfied by the
Executory, which must first be Exhausted, the Lady her self being Executrix,
and so cannot burden the Heirs of Tailzie, or the Estate; for if they, had been
Distressed, they could have craved payment from her, quoad vires inventarij, so
that the principal Sums not extending to 40000. Pounds, and the Lands being
Bought by Greinock, at the Rental of 4000. Merks, and 20000. Merks being gotten
more for the Lands then the Debt, the power of Selling granted to the Lady in
the Disposition, can never extend to so vast a difference, albeit a small
difference of the price would not be noticed: and lastly it was offered to find
a Party, who would take a Wodset of the Lands, in satisfaction of all the
Defuncts Debts, so that the Lady cannot, in prejudice of the Heirs of Tailzie
Sell, where Wodsetting may do the turn, and the Wodset should contain a
Reversion, and no Requisition; and whereas it might be pretended that the
matter was not entire, because the Lands were actually Sold to Greinock, he
offered to Consent, and Renunce his Bargain. It was answered, that this Clause
de non alienando, being against the nature of Property, was odious, and not to
be extended, and the faculty of Selling, or affecting, being suitable to the
nature of Property was favorable, and not to be restricted further then the
Defuncts own Words, and Terms, who having given full power to his Daughter to
Sell, or affect the Lands named, for payment of his Debts, and not having said
(to Sell, or burden so much of the Land as were equivalent to the Debt; neither
having said so much of the Debt, as exceeded his Movables, or his Movables
being first exhausted) it is most rational, and to be presumed to be his
meaning, that as to his Movables he did not burden her at all; and that this
part of his Lands he set apart for his Debt, for he understood his Debt to be
about the value of it, otherwise he could have set apart less Land, or could
have more limited the Faculty (...) Disposing; but the principal Sums of this
Debt being 40000. Pounds, and the Rental not being pretended to have been above
4000. Merks, the principal would amount to the value of the Land at 15. years
Purchase, and there being unquestionably a latitude to the Feear to Sell at
such a Price, as in discretion he thought fit, though he had sold at twelve
years purchase, or not under the lowest Rate of Land; neither could the Buyer
be quarrelled, nor the Seller, as incurring the Clause irritant, and therefore
the Lady having Sold at a far greater Rate then the ordinar, Greinock and the
Town of Glasgow being both dealling for the Land, they to make a Harbor there,
and he not to suffer them, in prejudice of his Town, and Harbor in Greinock,
there is no reason to exclude the Lady from the benefit of her Bargain, or to
necessitat her to quite the same, and give only a Wodset, seeing the Clause
gives her power both to Sell, and Affect, and does not limit her to either of
them.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses, and declared that the Lady had warrantably
Sold these Lands, and that the principal Sums being so considerable, although
the Rental had been more, they were sufficient* and found that the Clause laid
no necessity upon her to exhaust the Movables, and that she might thereby
Wodset, or Sell at her pleasure,

James Deanes contra Alexander Bothwel, February 5. 1669.
ALexander Bothwel of Glencorsse being conveened before the Commissars of
Edinburgh, for Slandering James Deanes Procurator before the Commissars, in
calling him a false knave, publicly in the Parliament House, and at the
Cross; the samine being proven by Witnesses, he was Decerned to stand at the
Kirk Door of Glencorsse where both Parties dwelt, and acknowledge his Fault,
and to pay 100. pound to the Poor, and 100. pound to the Party. Bothwel
Suspends on these Reasons, first, That the Commissars could not ordain him to
stand at an Congregation, which is an Ecclesiastical Censure. 2dly, That they
could not also Fine him to the Poor, nor Decern any thing to the Party, but the
Expenses of Plae, seeing there was no other Damnage Lybelled nor proven. 3dly,
That the Witnesses were not habile, being the Pursuers own Servants. The
Charger opponed the Decree wherein the Suspender was compearing, and objected
nothing against the hability of the Witnesses then, and therefore cannot now
quarrel their Testimonies, and that it was most proper for the Commissars to
cognosce upon Slander or Defamation, neither was his standing in order to
Repentance but in order to restoring the party to his Fame.

The Lords Repelled the Reasons, and Sustained the Decree in all Points.

Cleiland contra Stevinson. Eodem die.
William Cleiland Charges John Stevinson upon a Bond of 400. Merks, bearing
Annualrent, he Suspends on this Reason, that the Charger was owing him more for
Victual, being his Tennent, which was now liquidat before this time, but after
the Date of this Bond, and craved compensation thereupon, not only from the
Date of the liquidation, but from the time the Victualrent was due.

Which the Lords Sustained.

Rule contra Rule, February 6. 1669.
MArgaret Rule having made a Consignation of certain Bonds, and in general of
all other Rights, with a Disposition of all her Goods to Umquhile Robert Rule
her Brother, who having named Mr. David Rule his Executor, and universal
Legator, did upon his Deathbed acknowledge, that his Sisters Disposition was
in trust to her own behove, granted upon that consideration, that she being a
Bastard, unless she Disponed in her liege poustie, her Means would be Confiscat
by her Bastardy, she thereupon pursues the said Mr. David Rule to deliver back
her Assignation, with her own Writs. The Defender alleged the Lybel was no
way Relevant* there being nothing Libelled but the Defuncts acknowledgement of
a Trust upon Deathbed, and that offered to be proven by Witnesses only, but
First, The Trust behoved to be declared by a Declarator, and not thus by an
Exhibition. 2dly, Trust is only probabable scripto vel juramento, being a
matter of so great importance. 3dly, Some of the Rights Assigned, and Disponed,
are Heretable, and nothing done upon Deathbed can prejudge the Defuncts Heir
thereof. 4thly, An extrajudicial Confession without Writ, albeit it were
acknowledged, has no effect, for it cannot be known quo animo, such words
might have been expressed. The Pursuer answered, that the Trust might be very
well Lybelled, with the Exhibition, and albeit the Defuncts Confession would
not alone be sufficient to prejudge his Heir, yet it may very well stand as an
evidence of Trust, which cannot be astricted to probation by Witnesses, but
has ever been found probable by other evidences, especially where the Person
trusted is Dead, and the Pursuer condescends upon these evidences and
adminicles of Trust. First, Communis fama. 2dly, The Assignation and
Disposition bears no Reservation of the Disponers Liferent, and yet she
continued still in Possession, and her Brother (whom she Entrusted) never
meddled, which he would not have done, if the Disposition had been for a Cause
Onerous, or to his own behove. 3dly, He did solemnly, in presence of Witnesses
above exception, acknowledge the Trust on his Deathbed.

The Lords Sustained the Summons, and would not astrict the Pursuer to prove by
Write, or Oath of Party, but ordained Witnesses to be Examined ex officio,
anent the evidences and adminicles condescended on by the Pursuer.

Black contra Dawid French* February 9. 1669.
THe Lands of Miln-burn being holden Waird of the Duchess of Hamiltoun, after
Miln burns Death the Duke and Duchess grants a Gift of the Waird to Mr. ^o^ert
Black, who pursued for Mails and Duties; and likewise David French having
Appryzed from Miln burn, and having Charged the Duchess before Miln-burns
Death to Receive him, he pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties, who Suspend
upon double Poynding. In the Competition it was alleged for the Appryzer,
First, That his Appryzing being a Judicial Sentence, did Denude Miln-burn the
Vassal, in the same way as if Miln-burn had Resigned in the Dukes Hands, in
favors of David French, after which Miln burn was totally Divested, and no
Casualty could befall to the Superior by his Death, Ita est that Law has
stated a Decree of Appryzing in the same Case as an Resignation accepted, for
though the Vassal, against whom the Appryzing was led should Die, the Appryzer
will summarly upon a Charge obtain himself Infeft, so that the former Vassal
was totally Denuded. 2dly, Here not only there is Appryzing, but a Charge
against the Superior, which fictione juris is in all points, as if the Appryzer
were actually Infeft, and therefore the Appryzer, who first Charges, albeit he
in^i^t not to use any further Diligence, is ever preferred to all other
Appryzers Infeft after. It was answered for Black the Donator, that he ought to
be preferred, because the Superior, who gave his Gi^t, could not want a Vassal,
nor loss the Casualty of his Superiority without his own fault, but the
Appryzer did not become Vassal, neither by the Appryzing, nor by the Charge,
nor was it ever found that the Liferent, or Waird of an Appryzer fell, unless
he had been actually Infeft, and it would be of very great disadvantage to
Creditors, if the naked Charge should make their VVaird to fall, which they may
pass from at their pleasure, therefore seeing the Appryzer could not be Vassal,
the former Vassal behoved to remain Vassal; and seeing the Superior could not
have a Waird by the Appryzers Death, he behoved to have it by the former
Vassels Death; and albeit the Charge be ^qulparat to an Infeftment, as to the
Competition of Appryzers, whom the Superior may not prefer, but according to
their Diligences, yet it is not holden as an Infeftment to any other Case, for
thereupon the Appryzer cannot remove the Tennents, neither is the Appryzing
equivalent to an Resignation accepted, albeit it being an incomplete legal
Diligence, it may be completed against the Superior after the Vassals Death,
yet not so as if the Superior had Received a Resignation from the Appryzer,
which is the Superiors voluntar Deed, but there is nothing upon the Appryzing
to force him to give Infeftment to the Appryzer, until conform to the Act of
Parliament, a years Rent of the Appryzed Lands be offered to him, and therewith
a Charter offered to Subscrive, which being done, upon his Delay, Fault, or
Contumacy, he may be excluded from the subsequent Casualties, and cannot
thereby be gainer, in prejudice of the Appryzer, but otherwi^e without his
Fault, he cannot loss the Casualties. It was answered for the Appryzer, that
the Appryzing, and Charge did state the Appryzer as Vassal, and there was no
inconvenience thereupon to Creditors, more then if they had been actually
Infeft. 2dly, Our Statute has provided contrair to the Common Feudal Customs,
that Superiors must Receive Strangers, being Creditors Appryzing, for payment
of a years Rent, so that the Superior can have no more but the years Rent, and
not the subsequent Waird also, and there being mutual Obligations between the
Superior and the Appryzer, introduced by the Statute, viz. that the Superior
should Receive the Appryzer, and that the Appryzer should pay to the Superior a
years Rent, as in all mutual Obligations, so in these, the Delay of the one
Party in performance of his Obligation, does stop the Execution, and Effect of
the other Obligation to him, ay and while he perform, but quando mora purgatur,
by performance of the one Party, both Obligations are effectual as a principio,
and therefore, albeit the Appryzer had been obliged to pay a years Rent when he
were In^eft and did it not the time of the Charge, yet now he offers to do it
at the Bar, unde purgatur mora, and the Superior must Receive him in obedience
to the Charge, which must be drawn back to the Charge, and the Lords cannot
but find the Le^^ers, that is to say the Charge orderly proceeded, neither can
there be any fault in the Appryzer, that he did not then offer a years Duty
when he Charged* because it was not liquid nor constant what the years Duty
was, and therefore he was only obliged to do it after the liquidation, and
modification of the Lords; and lastly he having proceeded as all other Appyzers
have done by perpetual Custom, he was in bona fide to acquiesce. It was
answered for the Donator, that this former ground holds still good, that the
Casualties of his Superiority cannot be lost to him, without his Delay or
Fault; and the Case is no way here as in mutual Obligations, but as in a
Conditional Obligation, for the Statute obliges the Superior to Receive the
Appryzer, he paying a years Rent, which being per ablativum absolute positum,
is ever interpret as Condition, as if it had said, the Superior shall Receive
him if he pay a years Rent; but by the Statue there is no obligation put upon
the Appryzer to pay the years Rent, for the payment is in Condition and not in
Obligation, and the Appryzer may ever forbear to seek the Infeftment, and yet
will obtain Malls and Duties, and so will Possess, and exclude the Superior,
both from the Casualities of his Superiority, and his years Rent, therefore by
the Statute there is only a Conditional Obligation upon the Superior, to
Receive the Appryzer upon payment of a years Rent; now the nature of all
Conditional Obligations is, that pendente condition and ante purificationem
nulla obligatio, so that till that time whatever occurs is freely the
Superiors: And albeit the Lords will now, upon offer of a Charter, and the
years Duty, give a Sentence, the ordinar Style whereof, is finding the Letters
orderly proceeded, without putting the Appryzer to a new Charge, yet they do
not thereby find, that at the beginning the Charge was orderly without the
offer, but that now it becomes orderly by the offer, and therefore has only
effect from the offer* and not from the Charge, and prejudges not the Superior
of the Waird falling before the offer. 2dly* The Superior at the time of the
Charge offered obedience, upon production of a Charter, and a years Duty to the
Messenger who Charged him, conform to an Instrument produced, the Appryzer
himself not having Appeared. The Appryzer answered, that the Superior ought to
have drawn up a Charter, and Suspended, Consigning the Charter in the Clerks
Hands in obedience, to b^ given up to the Appryzer after payment of the years
Rent, conform to the Lords modification; and it was not enough to offer
obedience to a Messenger, or to require a years Rent, which is not liquid but
by the Lords Sentence; and further alleged that it was lately found, that a
Liferent Escheat falling after a Charge, did not exclude the Appryzer, and
there can be no Reason, but the same should be in a Waird. It was answered,
that no such Practique was produced, nor acknowledged, and that in a Liferent
Escheat, the Vassal (against whom the Appryzing was led) might collude, and
might let himself go year and day at the Horn, of purpose to prejudge the
Appryzer, but the Waird falling by his Death, there is no suspicion of
collusion, and the Waird is due by the reddendo of the Charter, but the
Liferent is only due by an extrinsick Law, and Custom.

The Lords found that the Charge did no^ st^^e the Appryzer as Vassal, so that
the Waird would have fallen by his Death; neither did they consider the
inconveniency of the Superior, as wanting the Superiorities by both Parties, if
he were Contumacious, aut in culpa: But they found that the Superior was not in
culpa, or in mora, until the Appryzer presented to him a Charter upon
obedience, and offered some Money for his Entry, and Caution for what further
the Lords should Decern, and did not find the Superior obliged to require the
Vassal so to do, and therefore found the Superior here, not in mora aut: culpa,
and found the Waird to belong to him, and preferred the Donator, and declared
they would follow it as a Rule in all time coming.

Thomas Cowan contra Young and Reid, Eodem die.
ADam Young having Married his Daughter by the first Marriage, to Thomas Cowan*
and given him two thousand Merks of Tocher, in satisfaction of all she could
claim; did by a second Contract of Marriage, provide a thousand Merks to the
Heirs of that Marriage, and all his Conquest during the Marriage, after which
Contract, he gave a Bond of 400. Pound to his Daughter of the first Marriage,
bearing to be paid in parcels as he was able, and after the Bond, he Disponed
his Goods and Gear to his Daughter of the second Marriage: Now the Daughter of
the first Marriage, pursues the Daughter of the second Marriage to pay the
Bond, as she who Intrometted with the Defuncts Goods. The Defender alleged
Absolvitor, because this Bond being granted without an Onerous Cause, after the
Provision of the second Contract of Marriage, Providing all the Goods Conquest
to the Heirs of the second Marriage, who were thereby their Fathers Creditors,
for fulfilling of that Provision, no voluntar D^ed done without a Cause Onerous
by their Father, in Favors of his Daughter, of a former Marriage could
prejudge them, or burden the Movables acquired in that Marriage. It was
answered, First, That the Provision being to the Heirs of the second Marriage,
they being Heirs, could not quarrel, but were obliged to fulfill their Fathers
Obligation, whether for a Cause Onerous or not. 2dly, Such Clauses of Conquest
are ever understood, as the Conquest is at the Acquirers Death, but does not
hinder him any time of his Life to Dispose, or Gift at his pleasure, which if
he might do to any Stranger, there is neither Law or Reason to exclude him to
do it to his Daughter: And albeit it might be interpret Fraud, if nothing were
left to the Daughters of the second Marriage, yet where they have a special
Provision, and something also of the Conquest, with this burden, their Father
could not be found thereby to Defraud them, or to hinder him to use his Liberty.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and Sustained the Bond.

Buohan contra Taits. February. 11. 1669.
IN Anno 1623. George Tait of Pirn gave a seisine propriis m^nibus to George
Tait his eldest Son, and a Bond of that same Date, bearing that he had given
Seisine, and obliging him to Warrant the same, Reserving his own Liferent:
Thereafter in Anno 1640. he Contracts in Marriage with Ianet Buchan, and for
two thousand and five hundredth Merks of Tocher, obliges him to Infeft her in
the same Lands of Pi^n, wh^rein his Son was Infeft, whereupon she now pursues
Reduction of George Tait youngers Infeftment against his Daughters, upon these
Reasons. First, That the Seisine propriis m^nibus, was only the assertion of a
Nottar without a Warrant. 2dly, That the Seisine had not four Witnesses. 3dly,
That this was a clandestine latent Right, most fraudulent betwixt a Father and
his appearand Heir, never having been published, or taken effect by any
Possession, and cannot prejudge this Pursuer, who is a most privileged
Creditor, and brought a competent Tocher with her. 4thly, That this being an
Infeftment by a Father to his appearand Heir, then in his Family, it was but as
the legittime of Children, which is still ambulatory at their Parents Disposal,
and so must be affected with this posterior burden of the Fathers Marriage. It
was answered to the first, that the Bond of the same Date with the Seisine,
acknowledging the same is a sufficient adminicle, and is equivalent, as if the
Father had Subscribed the Seisine. To the second, there is no Law requiring
^our Witnesses to a Seisine, for that Act of Parliament is only where a Party
Subscribes by a Nottar, but relates not to Nottars Instruments Subscribed by
themselves, upon warrands, or adminicles, without which they are not valid with
40. Witnesses, and without which two Witnesses are sufficient. To the third,
this Infeftment is no ways Fraudulent, or Latent, seeing it is Registrat in the
Register of Seisines, and Reserves the Fathers Liferent, whose Possession is
the Sons Possession, and cannot be pejudged by a Deed so long posterior
thereto. To the last, Infeftments taken to Children by Parents being Registrat
by Parents, can never be Recalled.

The Lords Assoilzi^d from all the Reasons of Reduction, and Sustained the
Defenders Seisine.

Pot contra Pollock, February 12. 1669.
UMquhile John Pollock having granted a Bond of 5000. Merks to James Pollock
his second Son of the first Marriage, and he having Adjudged thereupon; Pot as
Assigney by his Wife to her Provision, and the Creditors Debts, having also
Appryzed, raises Reduction of James. Pollocks Bond, and Adjudication on this
Reason, that the said Bond was without a Cause Onerous, given by a Father to a
Son, as is clear by the Sons Oath, taken thereupon, and therefore a posterior
Debt Lent by Creditors, bona fide to the Father, is in Law preferable thereto.
2dly, This Bond to a Son can be but de natura legittimae having no Cause
Onerous, as if it had born for his Portion Natural, and Bairns part: In which
Case it is Revockable by the Father, and the Fathers Creditors (though
posterior) are preferable thereto. 3dly, This Bond is Reduceable, super capite
doli, as being a contrivance betwixt a Father and a Son, to ensnare Creditors
to Lend to the Father, who then drove a great Trade, which must be inferred
from these circumstances. First, The Son was fori^ familiat and sufficiently
provided before. 2dly, The Bond bears no Annualrent, and the Term of payment is
after the Fathers Death, and remained ever latent betwixt the Parties, without
any thing following thereupon, and these Debts were all Contracted within a
very little after this Bond, which was only a year before the Defuncts Death.
The Defender answered, that the Reasons are no ways Relevant, for there is
neither Law nor Reason to hinder any person to give Bonds or Gifts freely,
there being no Impediment the time of the granting, neither has the Law any
regard to posterior Creditors, but in personal Debts, whether for Causes
Onerous or not, the first Diligence was ever preferable; nor was it ever heard
that a posterior Onerous Obligation did Reduce, or was preferred to a prior
gratuitous obligation, upon that ground that the prior was gratuitous. And to
the second, Albeit this Bond were in satisfaction of a Portion Natural, as it
is not yet, being Delivered to the Son, who i^ forisfamili^t, he can be in no
other case then any other person to whom a bond were granted, without an
Onerous Cause. As to the third, Dolus non presum^tur, and all machinations
being only animi, are only probable scripto vel juramento, and can be inferred
by no circumstances. The Pursuer answered, that albeit in dubio dolus aut c^lpa
non pre^umitur, yet it is doubtless probable otherwise then by the Oaths of the
Parties, whereunto Tru^^ is never to be given, in relation to their own shame,
contrivance, or fraud, and therefore mat^ers of fact do neces^arly infer, and
presume fraud in many cases, and in none more then this, where the Deed was
clandestine, and latent betwixt Father and Son, and where the Fathers Estate
was thereby rendered insuffi^ient to pay both his D^bt, and the others
contracted shortly therea^ter* and if it were sustained that such latent Rights
betwixt conjunct persons were valide in prejudice of posterior Creditors,
contracting bona fide, and not knowing the same, all Commerce behoved to cease,
for every man might give such Bonds to his Children, and continue to Trade, and
to borrow Money, and upon the Childrens anterior Bonds be totally excluded. The
Defender answered, that our Law by a special Statute, in Anno 1621. having
determined the cases of presumptive fraud, and extended the same only to
anterior Creditors, without mention of posterior Creditors, the same might be
thought to be of purpose omitted, and cannot be extended by the Lords.

The Lords found the matter of fact, and circumstances, alleged Relevant to
infer a presumptive fraud, and contrivance betwixt the Father and the Son,
which did ensnare the Creditors who continued to Trade, and therefore Reduced
the same as to the Creditors, and preferred them, and the Relict in so far as
she was a Creditor, but not for any posterior or gratuitous Provision to her,
or to her Children, but they did not find the two first grounds Relevant to
prefer a posterior onerous obligation to a prior gratuitous, or that this Bond
was as a ^egit^ime Revockable; and the Lords were chiefly moved because of the
inconvenience to Creditors, acting bona fide with a person Trading, and repute
in a good Condition: And where in eventu his Estate is not sufficient, both to
pay his Creditors, and this Bond, for if it had been sufficient for both, they
would have come in pa^^ passu, having both done Diligence within the year.

John Brown contra Robert Sibbald, Eodem die.
John Brown having taken a Feu of some Aikers of Land, at a great Rent in
Victual and Money, pursue Robert Sibbald (now his Superior) to hear and see it
found and declared, that he might Renunce, and be free of the Feu Duty. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because this Feu was by a mutual Con^ract, by
which the Vassal had bound him and his Heirs to pay the Feu Duty yearly, and
which obligation he could not louse at his pleasure; for albeit Feues which are
proper and gratuirously given without any obligement on the Vassals part, but
given by a Charter, or Disposition, as being presumed to be in favorem of the
Vassal, he might Renunce the same, nam cuivis licet favori pro se introducto
renunciare, but here the Vassal being expressly obliged for the Feu Duty, cannot
take off his own obligation, this case being like unto that of a Tack, which
being by mutual Contract, cannot be Renunced, though by a Tack only granted and
Subscribed by the Setter it may. The Pursuer answered, that he opponed the
common opinion of all Feudists, de feudo refutando, wherein there is no
exception, whether the Feudal Contract be Subscrived by both Parties, for every
Contract must necessarly import the Consent of both Parties, and the acceptance
of a Vassal to a Feu by way of Dispo^ition is all one with his express
obligation in a mutual Contract. 2dly, Though such a Contract could not be
Renunced, yet this Pursuer may Renunce, because by a Backbond by the Superior,
who granted the Feu under his Hand, he has liberty to Renunce when he plea^es.
The Defender answered, that this Backbond not being in corpore juris, nor any
part of the Investiture, it was only personal against that Superior who granted
the same, but not against the Defender, who is a singular Successor. It was
answered, that the mutual Contract not being de natura feudi, but at most
importing an obligement not to Renunce the Feu, any personal Deed before this
Superiors Right, under the Hand of his Author, is Relevant against him, as well
as his Author.

The Lords found the alleadgeances upon the Back-bond Relevant against the
Supe^^or, though singular Successor, it being granted of the same Date with the
Feudal Contract, and relating to a matter extrinsick to the nature of the Feu,
and so suffered the Pursuer to Renunce the same.

Gilbert Mcclellan contra Lady Kirkcudbright, February 13. 1669.
GIlbert Mcclellan being Infeft by the Lord Kirkcudbright in an Annualrent,
effeirand to four thousand Merks, out of the Lands of Auchin^lour, thereafter
my Lady was Infeft in Property, or an Annualrent out of the Lands, at her
pleasure, for her Liferent use; and after my Ladies Infeftment, my Lord gave a
Corroborative Security of the Property of Auchinflour, and stated the four
thousand Merks of principal, and the two thousand and five hundredth Merks of
Annualrent in one principal, and Infeft him thereupon in Property wherein
Gilbert was many years in Possession before my Lords Death: In the Competition
betwixt my Lady and him, he craved preference, because he was seven years in
Possession. 2dlie, Because his first Right of Annualrent still stands, and was
Corroborat; and therefore, as he would undoubtedly have been preferred to my
Lady, for all his Annualrents, for the sum of four thousand merks by his first
Infeftment, which is prior to my Ladies, and as an appryzing by poinding of the
Ground for these annualrents, though posterior to my Ladies Infeftment, would
be drawn back ad suam causam to his Infeftment of annualrent, and be
preferred, so my Lord having voluntarly granted-this Corroborative Security to
prevent an appryzing, it should work the same effect, as if an appryzing had
been then led, and an Infeftment thereupon, which would have accumulat the
annualrents then past, and made them bear annualrent in the same manner as this
Corroborative security does.

The Lords preferred Gilbert for the whole annualrents of his four thousand
Merks, conform to his first Infeftment: but would not Sustain the Corroborative
Security, being posterior to my Ladies Infeftment, as if it had been upon an
appryzing, to give him annualrent for 2500. merks, then accumulate: but found
no moment in his alleadgance of the Possessory Judgment, unless it had been
seven years after my Lords death, when my Lady might have preferred her Right,
and not contra non valentem agere.

The Creditors of Balmerino and Couper contra my Lady Couper. February 16.
1669.
THe Deceased Lord Cowper having Disponed his Estate to his Lady, some of his
Creditors, and some of Balmerino's Creditors, who was his Heir appearand, did
raise Reduction of the said Disposition, as done on Deathbed, and before the
day of Compearance they give in a Supplication, desiring Witnesses to be
Examined, and to remain in retentis, that Cowper had Contracted his Disease,
whereof he died before the Subscribing of this Disposition, and that he never
went out thereafter, but once to the Kirk and Market of Cowper, which times he
was supported and fell down Dead, a Swoon, before he was gotten home. It was
answered for the Lady Cowper: First. That Witnesses ought not to be Examined
until the Relevancy of the Libel were Discust, unless they were old or
Valetudinary, or penury of Witnesses, whereas there are here forty Witnesses
ctaved to be Examined, and the coming to Kirk and Market being public Deeds,
there would be no hazard of wanting Witnesses. 2dly, The Creditors, or
appearand Heir have no interest, unless the Heir were Entered, or they had
appryzed, or had a real Right; neither can the Creditors be prejudged by the
Disposition, as being on Deathbed, because they may Reduce the same, as being
posterior to their Debts, upon the Act of Parliament 1621. and the reason of
Deathbed is only competent to Heirs, and to these having real Rights from the
Heir, and not to their personal Creditors.

The Lords ordained the Witnesses to be Examined, to remain in retentis,
concerning my Lord Cowpers condition, the time of Subscribing the Disposition,
and of his coming abroad; and allowed my Lady also Witnesses if she pleased,
for proving what his condition was at these times, reserving all the Defenses
and Alleadgances of either Party in the Cause, for they found that the
Creditors of Balmerino, as appearand Heir had interest to Declare that their
Debts might by legal Diligences affect the Estate of Cowper, unprejudged by
this Disposition, as being made by Cowper on Deathbed, and that the Reduction
in so far as might contain such a Declarator, would be Sustained, for no Party
can be hindered to Declare any point of Right competent to them, and it was
also thought, that though there were many Witnesses called to find out who
truly knew the Defuncts condition, yet there might be few, who truly knew the
same, and these might be removed out of the way, either by Death, or by
Collusion.

Alexander Hamiltoun contra Harper. Eodem die.
UMquhil John Hamiltoun Apothecarie, having purchased a Tenement in Edinburgh,
to himself in Liferent, and his Son Alexander in Fee, thereafter he borrowed
1000. merks from Thomas Harper, and gave him a Tack of a Shop in the Tenement,
for the Annualrent of the Money. After his Death Alexander his Son used a
Warning by Chalking of the Doors by an Officer in the ordinary Form, and he
being Removed, Alexander pursues now for the Mails and Duties of the Shop from
his Fathers Death, till the Defenders Removal, who alleged Absolviture,
because he bruiked the Tenement by virtue of his Tack, and bona fide possessor
facit fructus perceptos suos. It was answered, that the Tack being but granted
by a Liferenter, could not Defend after the Liferenters Death, and could not be
so much as a colorable Title of his Possession. 2dly, That he could not
pretend bona fides^ because he was Interrupted by the Warning. It was answered
by the Defender, that the Tack was not set to him by John Hamiltoun as
Liferenter, nor did he know but he was Feear, being commonly so repute, neither
could the Warning put him in mala fide^ because there was no Intimation made
thereof to him, either Personally, or at his Dwellinghouse, but only a Chalking
of the Shop-door.

The Lords Sustained the Defense and Duply, and found him free of any Mails or
Duties, till Intimation or Citation upon the Pursuers Right: here the Pursuer
did not allege that the Warning by Chalking of the Shop-door came to the
Defenders knowledge, as done by the Pursue.

Sarah Cockburn and Mr. Patrick Gillespie contra John Stewart and the Tennents
of Lintone. February 18. 1669.
SArah Cockb^rn being Infeft in Liferent in an Annualrent of 1200. merks
yearly, out of the Barony of Lintone, She and Mr. Patrick Gillespie her
Husband, insisting for her Annualrent, in Anno 1657. obtained payment from John
Stewart, and gave him a power to uplift the same from the Tennents, and
delivered to him the Letters of Poinding, to be put in Execution. Thereafter
Mr. Patrick obtained a second Decree against some Wodsetters, whose Rights
were posterior to the Annualrent, for the years 1658, 1659, and 1660. and upon
payment of these three years, did acknowledge payment made of the said three
years Annualrent, and all bygones whereunto he had Right. Mr. Patrick having
granted John Stewart a Bond to warrant him anent the year 1657. and that he had
given no Discharges that might exclude him. The Tennents of Lintoun Suspends
the Charge for the year 1657. upon that Reason, that Mr. Patrick had Discharged
the Annualrent for the years 1658, 1659, 1660. and all preceding whereunto he
had right: Whereupon John Stewart Charged M. Patrick upon his Bond of
Warrandice, who Suspended upon this Reason, that the Discharge could not
exclude John Stewart, albeit it bare all preceedings to which he had Right,
because when he granted the Discharge, he had no right to the year 1657. which
he had received from John Stewart, and given him Warrant, and his Letters to
Poind for Mr. John's Stewarts own use. It was answered, that unless that Order
had been intimat, the Right remained with Mr. Patrick, and so his general
Discharge extended thereto. It was answered, that albeit Intimation was
necessar, as to establish the Right in the Assigneys Person: yet Mr. Patricks
Warrant was sufficient to exclude him, at least, the matter of his Right being
thereby dubious, the general Discharge cannot be effectual against him, if by
the Oaths of the Wodsetters that got the Discharge, it appeared that they paid
him not the year 1657. and some of their Oaths being taken, he who paid the
Money for himself, and the rest D^poned, that the year 1657. was not paid, and
that there was no Decree against the Wodsetters for 1657. but only against the
Moveable Tennents, to whom the Discharge, containing the said general Clause,
was not granted.

The Lords found that in respect of the Oath, the general Discharge extended
not to the year 1657. and therefore Suspended the Letters against the said Mr.
Patrick upon his Bond of Warrandice, and found the Letters orderly proceeded at
John Stewarts Instance, against the moveable Tennents of Lintoun, for the year
1657. The Tennents further alleged, that since the year 1660. they did
produce three Consecutive Discharges from Mr. Patrick, which imports a
Liberation of all years preceding, specially seeing Mr. Patrick was never
denuded of the year 1657. nor no Intimation made. It was answered, that such a
Liberation is but presumptive, presumptione juris, and admits contrary
Probation, and is sufficiently taken away by the Oath of the Party,
acknowledging that year unpaid^ and the Warrant given to John Stewart, to lift
it for his own use, before these Discharges.

The Lords Repelled also this Defense upon the three Discharges, in respect of
the Reply.

Trinch contra Watson. Eodem die.
John Watson being Curator to Margaret Trinch, and having Contracted her in
Marriage with his own Sister Son, there is a Disposition granted by her to the
said John Watson, of all her Means, and in the Contract, he Contracts with her
1000. pounds, whereunto the Heirs of the Marriage are to succeed, and failing
these, to return to the said John himself, she died before the Marriage, and
David Trinch Stationer being Served Heir to her, raises Reduction of the
Disposition, and Substitution in the Contract of Marriage, upon two Reasons.
First, That albeit the Disposition contain Sums of Money, yet being of the same
date with the Contract of Marriage, in which John Watson Contracts 1000. pound
with the said Margaret Trinch, which unquestionably has been all that has been
gotten for the Disposition, the said Disposition is a part of the Agreement, in
relation to the Marriage, and must be understood, as granted in Contemplation
of the Marriage, as if it had been Contracted in the Contract of Marriage; so
that the Marriage not having followed, the Disposition is void, as being causa
data causanon secuta. 2dly, Both the Disposition and Provision in the Contract,
that failing Heirs of the Marriage, the 1000. pound should return to John
Watson, were obtained by Fraud and Circumvention, being granted to a Curator,
ante reddi^as rations, by a Person who lately was his Minor, and who was of a
weak capacity, Stupide and half Deaf, and upon such unequal Terms, her Means
being worth 3000. pounds, as appears by a Decree obtained at her Instance, and
all she got being but 1000. pounds, to return to Watson, in case there were no
Children, and nothing secured on the Husbands part. The Defender answered to
the first, that albeit the Disposition was of the same date with the Contract
of Marriage, it did not conclude, that it was in Contemplation of the Marriage,
and might be, and truly was an absolute Bargain. As to the Reason of
Circumvention, it is not Relevant, although the Terms had been as unequal as
they are alleged, for the said Margaret Trench, might freely Dispose of her
own, at her pleasure, and leave it to John Watson, who was her Mothers
Brother, if she had no Children, especially seeing David Trinch, the nearest on
the Fathers side, is but her Goodsires Brothers Oy, and never took notice of
her, whereas John Watson Alimented her from her Infancy, and obtained Decreets
for her Means, and never received a Groat thereof; neither was there any
inequality betwixt the 1000. pound, and her means, for which, albeit there be a
Decree in absence of a greater sum; yet there are unquestionable Defalcations,
which being Deduced with her Aliment, there will not be 1000. pounds free.

The Lords conceiving the Matter to be very unwarrantable on the Curators part,
in taking this Disposition and Substitution, before his Accounts with his Minor
were given up, did reduce both the Disposition and Substitution, not only as
done in Contemplation of Marriage, but as being presumed fraudulent and
unwarrantable.

Mr. John Hay contra the Town of Peebles. February 19. 1669.
MR. John Hay Insisting in his Declarator, that certain Hills Libeled were
proper Part and Pertinent of his Lands Libelled, wherein he stands Infeft in
Property. It was alleged for the Town of Peebles, that they do not
acknowledge his Right of Property, but they allege that they are Infeft by
King James the second, in their Burgage Lands with the Commonty of
Priest-shiels, and likewise by King James the fourth, and that Queen Mary
having directed a Commission for Perambulation to the Sheriff of Edinburgh, he
Perambulate their Commonty, and has set down Meithes and Marches thereof,
which are expressed in their Decree of Perambulation, within which their Meithes
lie, and that in Anno 1621. they have a Charter from King James the sixth, of
their Burgage and Commonty of Priest-shiels, comprehending expressly their Hills;
by virtue whereof, they have been in peaceable Possession thereof, as their
proper Commonty by Pasturage, Feuel, Fail and Divot, and by debarting all
others therefrom. The Pursuer answered, that their Charters was but periculo
petentis, the King having formerly granted the Right of their Lands to his
Authors, and the Decree of Perambulation by the Sheriff of Edinburgh, was a
non suo judice, the Lands not being within the Shire, and for any Possession
they had, it was not constantly over all the year, but only a while about
Lambas of late, and was still interrupted by him and his Authors, and offered
him to prove that they have been in immemorial Possession, by Teiling, Sowing
and all other Deeds of Property, and that their Hills cannot be part of their
Commonty, there being other Heretors Lands interjected between the same and the
Commonty of Priest-shiels, so that the Pursuer ought to be preferred, being in
libello, and far more Pregnant and specially alleging Acts of Property by
Tillage, and the Defenders having Declarator depending of their Commonty, and
alleged a Practique at the Instance of Sir George Kinnaird, where he
alleging upon Property more pregnantly, was preferred to an other in
Probation, alleging Pasturage.

The Lords preferred neither Party to Probation, but before answer Ordained a
Perambulation to be, and Witnesses adduced, hinc inde, anent the Situation of
the Bounds, and either Parties Possession and Interruption.

Lord Elphingstoun contra Lady Quarrel. Eodem die.
THe Lord Elphingstoun pursuing Quarrel in a Tutor Count anent the Profits of
the Coal of Elphingstoun, this Q^ere came in from the Auditors, how the small
Articles of uncost should be proven. It was alleged for Quarrel, that such
Articles could be proven no other way but by his Oath, seeing it was impossible
either to use Witnesses, or for them to remember such small particulars,
occurring every day, especially seeing it was known to all Coal-masters, that
such particulars were ordinarily incident. It was answered for the Lord
Elphingstoun, though these Particulars were small, yet they amounted in whole
to 2000. merks, and that the Tutors ought to have kept the Coal-Grieves
weekly Books, wherein every particular was set down daily as they were expeded*
which if they were produced, and both the Tutors and Coal-Grieves Oaths were
taken thereupon, that they were truly so paid, as they were recently set down,
they might be allowed: but no such Book being produced, the Tutor could not
give a Count thereof at random, nor could his Oath in Astruction thereof be
received; because it were impossible for him to remember these small
particulars without the Books. It was answered for the Tutor, that during the
Dependence of this Process, the Books were lost^ which were made up by the Coal
Grieves weekly: but that he produced a Book made up of these Books, and was
willing to give his Oath that the first Books were lost, and that their Books,
albeit they be not direct Copies of the former Books, yet that they were made
up of the former, and did agree in the matter with them, and contained no more
then they did.

The Lords refused to Sustain this manner of Probation, but ordained Quarrel to
condescend de casu ommissionis, of the first Books, and adduce such Proofs and
Evidence thereof as he could, and also to condescend who was the Writer of the
latter Books, that he might be Examined how he made up the one from of the
other.

Kings Advocat contra Craw. Eodem die.
THe Kings Advocat pursues a Declarator of the Bastardy of one Craw. It was
Alleged for the Defenders, that the Libel was not Relevant, unless it had
been condescended who was the Bastards Mother, and offered to be proven, that
she was never married to his Father. It was answered, that not being married
was a Negative, and proved it self, unless the Defenders condescended upon the
Father, and offered to prove married. The Defender answered, if that was
Relevant^ the most of all Scotland might be declared Bastards, it being
impossible after a considerable time to instruct the Solemnizing of a Marriage,
but Law and Custom does require, that at least it must be condescended on and
instructed, that the Defunct was holden and reputed Bastard at the time of his
Death.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

And it being further alleged, that there was produced a Legittimation taken
by the Bastard from the King, which did import his acknowledgement of being
Bastard, and was stronger then being holden and repute Bastard. It was
answered, non constat, that the Defunct took this Legittimation, but some other
might have done it in his Name, without his warrant.

The Lords found the Legitimation sufficient to Instruct the Bastardy.

It was then alleged, that the Legitimation Denuded and Excluded, the King
not only giving power to the Bastard to make Testament, but to Dispone of his
Heretable Rights, even on Deathbed. It was answered, that whatever the Style
of such Gifts be, they are never extended to Heretable Rights, but only to a
Faculty, to make Testament, which Bastards want by the Law: but if the Bastard
made no Testament, and did Exhaust his Movables by universal or particular
Legacies, the Executor nominat could only have the third, which follows the
Office, and the King would have the rest of the Inventar, not Exhausted. 2dlie,
All general Declarators being summar, these Debates are only competent in the
special Declarator.

The Lords Repelled the Defense hoc loco, and reserved the same to the special
Declarator.

Relict of Skink contra Earl of Roxburgh. Eodem die.
UMquhil Cornelius Skink pursues the Earl of Roxburgh upon a Bond, and the Earl
having alleged that the Bond was partly paid by Skinks Intromission with the
Earls Pay in Holland, and partly made up of exorbitant Usurary, of 16. per cent
Monthly, as appears by a Count of the same date, with the Bond subscribed by
Skink, and whereunto the Bond relates, there was an Act of Litiscontestation in
Anno 1659. sustaining the alleadgance as to the Intromission and Usury after
the Bond, but repelling the same, as to what preceeded the Bond, and appointed
a Count and Reckoning. Skink being dead, his Relict as Executrix having
Transferred the Act, craves now the Count to proceed conform thereto. The
Defender answered, that he ought to be Reponed against the Act, in so far as it
Repelled the Alleadgance, upon the Usury preceding the Bond, as being unjust.
The Pursuer answered, that the opponed the Act of Parliament, Confirming the
Judicial preceedings in the time of the Usurpation, and specially Ratifying
Acts and Interlocutors of the Judges. The Defender answered, that this Act was
unwarrantably Extracted, there being a posterior Interlocutor, which is now
produced under the hand of the President, at that time, ordaining the Count to
be not only upon the exorbitant Usurary after the Bond, but-also before the
same.

The Lords ordained a new Act of Count and Reckoning to be Extracted, allowing
the Defender to be heard upon the exorbitant Usury before the Bond, also before
the Auditor, in respect of the said posterior Interlocutor.

Andrew Bruce contra Lord and Lady Stenhope. February 20. 1669.
ANdrew Bruce Merchant in Edinburgh, pursues the Lord of Stenhope for payment
of a continued Tract of Merchant Compts, insert at several times in his Count
Book, as being taken off by Margaret Sinclar, in the name and for the behove of
the Lord of Stenhope, upon these Grounds. First, That the Ware was worn and
made use of by the Lord of Stenhope and his Lady, and so was converted to
their use. 2dlie, That Margaret Sinclar was entrusted by the Lord of Stenhope
and his Lady, to take off Ware for them from time to time, as appears by
several Missive Letters of theirs to the said Margaret: so that Margaret having
taken off the Ware, and being entrusted so to do, they must pay the same.
3dlie, Not only was Margaret Sinclar trusted to take off Merchant Ware in
general, but particularly to take off the same from Andrew Bruce, upon these
Grounds: First, Because there is produced an Count in the Pursuers Books,
before the Accounts in question, which is not contraverted; so that Andrew
Bruce was Stenhops Merchant, when Margaret Sinclar began to be Employed. 2dlie,
By one of the Lady Stenhops Letters, it appears that a Satine Petticot and
Lace was taken off from Andrew Bruce, by Margaret upon Trust of Stenhope, and
the Lady desires that Margaret may endeavor to get the Lace taken back, and
their Names put out of the Count Book. 3dlie, The Lord and Ladies Oaths being
taken, ex offi^^o, the Lady acknowledges that she was several times in Andrew
Bruces Shop with Margaret Sinclar, and that she was present with Margaret
Sinclar, when the last part of the Account of 114. pounds was taken off, all
which are sufficient Evidences of a Warrant or Commission to Margaret, to take
off the Ware in question from the Pursuer. The Defender answered, that none of
these Grounds were Relevant to oblige him; for albeit he acknowledge the Goods
to be Converted to his use, there is nothing to make it appear that he had any
meddling with the Pursuer, but by the Letters written by him and his Lady to
Margaret Sinclar, made use of by the Pursuer, it is evident that he only
employed Margaret Sinclar to furnish him upon her Credit, and did prohibit to
put him in any Merchants Account, saying that he would be only her Debtor and
no others, so that it were of most dangerous consequence, if the making use of
Good should infer an obligement to pay the Merchant, whose they were at first,
though payment were made to the Person entrusted, as in this case the Letters
to Margaret Sinclar bears, that she was paid of what was taken off formerlie by
her, and there are severals also subscribed by her Hand for a part of the
Particulars contained in these Accounts; neither can any Trust put upon
Margaret Sinclar, to take off Ware in general, Oblige the Defender, unless it
had born To take off the same upon his Faith and Credit, and not to take off
the same upon Margaret Sinclars own Credit: Neither does the Circumstances
adduced, infer a special Commission, to take off from Andrew Bruce, or prove
that he was ordinary Merchant, or so much as that Stenhope knew that the
Particulars in the Account were taken off upon his Credit, and were put in his
Name in the Book, except that which concerns the Petticoat and the last
articles of the 114. pounds, especially seeing his Letters prohibits her to put
his Name in a Merchants Account: and seeing Andrew Bruce for several years*
never so much as intimate the Account to Stenhope, till Margaret Sinclar was
dead. The Pursuer answered, that in rem versam, is an unquestionable Obligation
in Law, albeit nothing of a Commission were instructed, unless the Defender can
allege that he made payment to Margaret Sinclar, and proved by her Hand Writ,
and not by his own Letters. 2dlie, There is nothing more ordinar, then to take
off Ware from Merchants by Tailors and Servants, who cannot be thought to have
the Ware of their own, but that they must take them off from some Merchant, and
therefore payment should not be made to such Persons, till they produce the
Merchants Account, and his Discharge, or if it be, and if these Persons
interposed pay not the Merchant, as in this case, the loss must not be to the
Merchant, but to these who paid to the interposed Persons, upon their hazard,
and if this were not, all Merchants would be ruined, for no Persons of quality
do immediately take off from the Merchants themselves.

The Lords found that these Articles in the Account, in relation to the
Petticoat and the 114. pounds, which were known by the Defender or his Lady, to
be taken off in their Name, and put in Andrew Bruce, his Book, were due by
them, and that though the same had been paid to Margaret Sinclar, it was upon
the Defenders peril, if she paid not the Merchant: They did also find that the
Goods being acknowledged to be converted to the Defenders use, they were liable
to the Pursuer, in so far as they proved not they paid Margaret Sinclar, and
found the same probable by Margarets Writ, or by Witnesses: but found not that
Ground Relevant, that Margaret Sinclar was entrusted generally to take off
Ware; or that the Grounds alleged did instruct a particular Warrant to take
off from the Pursuer; and therefore did not find the payment made to Margaret
Sinclar, which she failed to pay the Merchant, to be upon the Defenders peril,
except as to the two parcels of Account aforesaid, which the Defenders knew to
be in their Name in the Pursuers Book.

Countess of Dundee contra Strait^un. February 24. 1669.
THe Countess of Dundee as Donatrix to her Husbands Escheat, pursues Straitoun
for a Sum due to her Husband. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because that
same day this Bond was granted by him to the Earl, a Creditor of the Earls
arrested, to whom the Defender had made payment, and obtained his Assignation;
and therefore as Assigney craves compensation and preference as Arrester. It
was answered that this Debt being contracted by the late Earl, after he was
Rebel, it cannot burden his Escheat, in prejudice of the King and his Donator;
for though Creditors, whose Debts were due before Rebellion, arresting after
Rebellion, may be preferred: yet no Debt contracted by the Rebel after
Rebellion, can burden his Escheat, neither by arrestment nor compensation.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and preferred the Donatrix, except as to what
was due to the Defender by herself, or for Drogs to her Husband, which she was
content to allow.

The Earl of Kincardin contra The Lord of Rosyth. Eodem die.
THe Earl of Kincardin pursues the Lord of Rosyth for the Teinds of his Lands,
to which the Pursuer has Right. The Defender alleged, that he had obtained a
Decree of the high Commission for Plantations against the Earl, whereby they
Decerned the Earl to Sell and Dispone these Teinds for a price mentioned in the
Decree, being about nine years Purchase thereof, and therefore the Pursuer
cannot have Right to the Teinds themselves, but only to the Annualrent of that
Sum, which was the price. The Pursuer answered that he opponed the Decree
produced, which did not, de presenti, adjudge the Teinds to the Defender, but
Decerned the Pursuer to sell them to him, upon payment of the said price, which
can give no Right to the Teinds till the price be paid, or at least offered,
which was never done.

The Lords Repelled the Defense in respect of the Reply.

The Earl of Annandail contra Young and other Creditors of Hume^ Eodem die.
THe Earl of Annandail having obtained Assignation from John Ioussie to a Sum
of Money due by the Earl of Hume, whereupon Inhibition was used Anno. 1634. and
shortly thereafter an Appryzing upon which Aunandail was lately infeft.
whereupon he now pursues Reduction of the Infeftment granted by the Earl of
Hume to Young, as being after his Inhibition, which Inhibition being auterior
to the most part of the Debs, Wodsets, and Apprizings of the Estate of Hume,
and being supposed to be the leading Case, that the Decision thereon might rule
all the rest, many of the Creditors did concur with Young, and produced their
Interests, and craved to see the Process. It was answered, that they had no
Interest in Youngs Right, and so could not crave a sight of the Process. It was
replied that albeit the Sentence against Young could not directly operate
against them, yet indirectly it would, as being a Dicision, and Practique in
the like case.

The Lords found this no Interest to stop Process, but allowed any Creditors
that pleased to concur in the Dispute. It was then alleged Absolvitor,
because this Assignation, Inhibition, and Apprizing, albeit standing in the
Person of the Earl of Annandail, yet it was truly on Trust to the behove of
the Earl of Hume, and if to his behove, it did accresce to the Defenders, as
having Right from him, and for evidence of the Trust they condescended upon
these grounds. First, That the Debt was contracted 35. years since, and no
Diligence ever used thereupon till now, except an Apprizing, whereupon no
Infeftment was taken till of late, albeit Infeftments were taken of the Estate
of Hume, upon many posterior Apprizings, which are now expired, and will
exclude this Apprizing. 2dly, The Assignation granted by Iousie to Annandails
Father, was immediately after the Lands of Dunglasse was Sold by the Earl of
Hume, to the Lord of Dunglass, by whom Ioussie was paid, as a part of the
price, by Sir William Gray, who was then Debtor to Dunglasse, likeas Ioussies
Oath being taken ex officio upon his Deathbed, Depones that Sir William Gray
paid him the Money, albeit he knew not by whose Means, or to whose use, yet he
knew nothing of any payment made by the Earl of Annandails Father^ 3dly, This
Inhibition and Apprizing was never in Annandails, or his Fathers Possession,
but still in the Possession of the Earl of Hume, and his Agents, and still in
his Charter Chist. 4dly, The Earl of Annandail took a Security from the Earl of
Hume for all Sums due to him, or for which he was Cautioner, wherein there is
neither mention nor reservation of this Sum, or Apprizing. 5thly, The Earl of
Annandail has consented to many of the Creditors Rights, which he would never
have done, if this Apprizing had been to his own behove, thereby preferring
others to himself, the Creditors therefore craved Witnesses to be Examined ex
officio, upon all these points for clearing of the Trust, which being an
obscure contrivance, can be no otherwise probable, all the Actors being now
Dead, and is most favorable in the behalf of Creditors, who if this pursuit
take effect, will be utterly excluded, for if the Inhibition Reduce their
Rights, the Pursuers Apprizing supervenient upon that same Sum, is now expired,
and irredeemable. The Pursuer answered; he did declare he would make only use
of this Right, for satisfaction of the Debts due to him, and for which he was
Cautioner for the Earl of Hume, and was content that Witnesses should be
Examined anent the Inhibition, and Apprizings being still in the Possession of
the Earl of Hume in his Charter Chist, but not upon any other ground to take
away his Assignation and solemn Right, which cannot be taken away by
Witnesses, but scripto vel juramento, and most of these presumptions are but
weak conjectures, no ways inferring that Ioussie was paid by the Earl of
Humes Means, and the great friendship that was betwixt Annandail and Hume
alleviats the same, it being the cause for which Annandail forbore to take
Infeftment, or do Diligence, thereby to allarum Humes Creditors, that his
Inhibition would always work his preference, and on that same ground did
consent to several Creditors Rights, there being enough remaining for him, and
which was an evidence that this Right was generally known, and that without it
Hume could not give Security.

The Lords ordained Witness sex^ officio to be Examined upon all the points
alleged for ^learing of the Trust.

The Kings Advocat contra the Earl of Mortoun and Viscount of Grandison,
February 29. 1669.
THe Kings Advocat pursues a Reduction of the Rights of the Earldom of Orkney
and Zetland, granted by the Deceast King Charles the first, or by this King
himself to the Earl of Mortoun, or Viscount of Grandison, and produces a
Contract betwixt the King* and the Earl of Mortoun, in Anno 1643. and a Charter
following thereupon, whereby the Lands are granted, and Disponed blench, with
several extraordina^ Priviledg^s, as having right to the Bullion, and other
Customs of Goods Imported there* and also a Charter, in Anno 1646. by the King
to the said Earl, relating to a Dissolution in the Parliament 1644. containing
nova da^tus, and bearing also blench; there is also produced an Infeftment,
granted to the Viscount of Grandison, and after the said Infeftment, a
Ratification by the Parliament 1661. In the which Ratification, there is
contained a Dissolution of the Earldom of Orkney and Zetland, in favors of
Grandison, wherein also the Dissolution, formerly made in favors of Mortoun,
in Anno 1644. is particularly Rescinded upon this consideration, that neither
the King, nor his Commissioner were present in the Parliament 1644. and that
his annexed Property could not be Disponed, nor Dilapidat, without an express
a^t of his own Ratified by Parliament. After this Dissolution in favour^ of
Grandison, the King granted no new Infeftment to Grandison; The Advocat having
holden the production satisfied with the Writs produced* M^^toun and Grandison
compeared not at all, and some others having public Rights from them being
called, did also pass from their compearance, and submitted to the Kings
favor, and compearance being made for some of the Vassals holding of Mortoun,
they were not admitted, because they produced no W^its to instruct there
Interest, so the Lords proceeded to Advise the Reasons of Reduction, which were
upon these points. First, That by the Law, and several particular Acts of
Parl^ament, the Patrimony of the Crown being the Lands, and Customs annexed to
the Crown, might not be Disponed by the King, unless the samine (upon weighty
Motives, and Considerations) had been Dissolved by his Majesty, and the
Parliament, and Dissolutions^ made after Infeftments are not valide, Parliament
1597. cap. 236. and by the 234. Act of that same Parliament, the annexed
Property can not be Se^ otherwise, but in Feu Ferm, so that the Earldom of
Orkney, being annexed to the Crown, by the annexation produced in Process, and
the Contract and Charter, 1643. being before any Dissolution, is absolutely
null; and the Infeftment in Anno 1646. albeit relating to a Dissolution in Anno
1644. yet no such Dissolution is found in the Records; and though it were, it
is Rescinded in the Ratification in favors of Grandison, in the Parliament
1661. upon so weighty a Reason, as the King, or his Commissioner not being
present: And because the Parliament 1644. is Rescinded by the Parliament 1661.
wherein albeit there be a salvo of private Rights, yet that cannot reach to the
Patrimony of the Crown, especially seeing in that same Parliament^ 1661. His
Majesty having Revocked all Deeds done by Him or his Father since 1637. which
by the Laws of the Nation, he might not do to the Derogation of his Honor, or
Crown, the Parliament has Ratified the same Revocation, as to all Rights
granted since. 1637. Contrair to the Laws, and Acts of Parliament preceding
1637. and likewise by an express Act of Parliament, it is provided, that no
Ratification in Parliament shall prejudge the Crown^ or supply a Dissolution,
and that none of the Kings Customs (which are also annexed) can be effectually
Gifted.

The Lords found these Reasons Relevant, and proven, and Reduced all the Rights
produced before the Dissolution in Anno 1661. since which there is no
Infeftment granted.

Pargilleis contra Pargilleis, February 26. 1669.
UMquhile Abraham Pargilleis having no Children but one Bastard Daughter,
Dispones some Lands acquired by him to Abraham Pargilleis, eldest lawful Son of
that Daughter. John Pargilleis his Brother Son, and nearest Heir, pursues a
Reduction of that Disposition, as being done in lecto, and the Defender
alleged that the Defunct went abroad to Kirk and Market thereafter
unsupported, and the Pursuer replying that he was supported, and either Party
contending for Preference, the one that he walked free of himself, and the
other that he was supported.

The Lords considering the advantage to the Party that had the sole Probation,
would prefer neither, but before answer ordained Witnesses to be adduced for
either Party, concerning the Condition the Defunct was in, as to Sickness or
Health when he Subscribed the Disposition, and the manner of his going abroad,
whether free, or supported: and now the Lords having Advised the Testimonies,
by which it was proven that the Defunct was Sick the time of the Subscribing of
the Disposition, and that he continued Sick till his Death. It was also proven
that he went unsupported a quarter of a Mile when the Seisine was taken, six
days after the Disposition, and that after the same he went three times to
Calder, and about three quarters of a Mile off, and that he was helped to his
Horse, and from his Horse, and that he was helped up Stairs, and down Stairs,
but that he walked a foot unsupported in the Market of Calder, and up and down
from my Lords House; being three pair of Buts of rising Ground. It occurred to
the Lords to consider whether the Sickness proven would have been sufficient,
not being ^^orbus sonticus, or in extremis, or whether the presumption of
Health sufficient to liege poustie was enough that he came out to Kirk and
Market, albeit the Sickness remained, and whether the probation of the Sickness
remaining could take away that presumption; and whether his being helped to his
Horse, and from his Horse, or up and down Stairs, and his Man holding his
Bridle as he Rode to, and returned from Calder, did infer that supportation,
which eleids the presumption of Health by going abroad, or whether the going
freely on foot (having only a Staff in his hand the rest of the way) was
sufficient to prove that he went abroad in liege poustie.

The Lords found that the Defuncts going abroad after the Disposition, as is
before expressed, was Relevant to eleid the Reasons of Reduction on Deathbed,
notwithstanding of the Defuncts being helped up and down Stairs, and to, and
from his Horse, and by leading his Bridle, and that notwithstanding that he
continued Sickly to his Death.

William Street contra Hume and Bruntfield, June 9. 1669.
William Street Merchant at London, having sent down a parcel of Skins to
Arthure Lyel his Factor at Edinburgh, Lyel Sells the Skins to Hume and
Bruntfield, and takes the Bond for the price thereof, in his own Name, payable
to himself, without mention of Street, Lyel being Dead Bankrupt, and Street
finding that if he should Confirm the value of the Skins as Executor Creditor
to Lyel, the rest of Lyels Creditors would come in with him, and share in this
Sum which was the price of his Skins, therefore he raised a Declarator against
the nearest of kin of Lyel, that the sum due by Bruntfield and Hume, albeit the
Bond was taken in the Name of Lyel, yet the same was for streets Goods, and to
Streets behove, and none compearing, he obtains Decree of Declarator to that
effect; and now he pursues Bruntfield and Hume for payment of the Sum, who
alleged they cannot be in tuto to pay to any but these who represent Lyel, to
whom they were Debitors, and therefore the Pursuer must first Confirm as
Executor to Lyel; and as for the Declarator obtained, it was in absence, and
they not called, and whenever the Executors Confirms, they cannot exclude them.
The Pursuer answered, that he needed not Confirm as Executor to Lyel, because
this Debt, albeit in the name of Lyel, yet was not in bonis of Lyel in so far,
as it was the price of the Pursuers Skins, which were in the Custody^ and
Management of Lyel, but never in his Property, but specially, by Lyels Missive
produced, he acknowledges the Receipt of the Skins, and that he had Sold them
to these Defenders, that he was to take Bond for them; which is the same Bond,
and in his Compt-book produced, he states himself only Debtor to Street for
ten pound Sterling, that he had reserved of his Bond, and not for the whole
Sum, which therefore must import that the remainder remainded Streets; and yet
for the further assurance of the Defenders, he offered Caution to warrant them.
The Defenders answered, that the Pursuer having entrusted Lyel with the Skins,
he had followed Lyels faith, and could not quarrel what Lyel had done with any
third Party, so that Lyel taking the Bond in his own Name did alter the
Condition of the Affair, and stated himself Debtor to Street, and the
Merchants Debitors to him, and as he might have Received payment from the
Merchants, and applied the Sum to his own use, so he might Discharge them, and
this sum might have been Arrested, and affected for Lyels Debt, and therefore
was in bonis of Lyel, and behoved to be Confirmed, and seeing the Defenders
cannot be secure, they were not obliged to accept of Caution to put themselves
to two Actions. The Pursuer answered, that albeit payment made to Lyel would
have been sufficient, as being made bona fide, yet if Lyel had Discharged
without payment, his Discharge would not have excluded Street the Pursuer,
neither would Arrestments for Lyels Debt have excluded him, especially the same
having been posterior to the Missive produced.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses, and found the same not to be in bonis of
Lyel, nor to be Confirmable as his Goods, but to belong to the Pursuer street;
and seeing Street offered Caution to warrant the Defenders, they ordained him to
grant the same accordingly.

Countess of Dundee contra Mr. James Birsbin, Eodem die.
THe Countess of Dundee being possessed in an Annualrent out of the Maines of
Dudhop, Anno 1650. and having consented to the Infeftments of other Creditors
in the said Mains, in Anno 1659. she is provided to ten Chalder of Victual out
of the said Mains, and to certain other Lands, and the provision bears expressly
in satisfaction of the Contract of Marriage, and any prior Infeftments,
whereupon she pursues a poinding of the Ground. Compearance is made for Mr.
James Birsbin, who produces an Infeftment of an Annualrent, in Anno 1648. and
offers to prove Possession conform, prior to the Ladies Infeftment in Anno
1659, whereupon she how pursues, and which Infeftment she has accepted in
satisfaction of all that can befall to her by her Husbands Death. The Pursuer
answered, that she was infest in an Annualrent out of the Mains in Anno 1650.
which does exclude Birsbin, unless he had attained Possession before that time;
and albeit this Infeftment in Anno 1659. being in satisfaction etc. yet that
Right whereby she accepts the same, is not in favors of Birsbin, but of other
Rights to whom the Lady consented, and not to Birsbins to which she never
consented, and therefore it must be limited to be only in so far as concerns
these Rights related therein. Birsbin answered, that be the Motive or Narrative
what it would, my Lady having simply and absolutely accepted this Infeftment in
satisfaction of her former Infeftments, the former Infeftments were thereby
extinct in the same way, as if she had Renunced them simply to my Lord, whence
there is jus acquisitum to Birsbin, deriving Right from my Lord.

The Lords having considered the last provision, found that albe^t the
Narrative related to Rights consented to by my Lady, yet the Dispositive words
were absolute, and so did extend to Birsbin. It was also alleged, that this
last security in so far as it bears to be in satisfaction of all others, the
acceptance thereof was a Donation betwixt Man and Wife Revockable, and my Lady
did now recall it. It was answered, my Lady had Homologat the same after my
Lords Death, by pursuing now thereupon, in which it occurred to the Lords,
whether my Lady might recall any part of this last provision, and make use of it
in so far as it quadrat with the former Infeftments, or whether she might recall
it after she had made use of it after her Husbands Death, which not being
Debated fully, the Lords did not decide therein.

Evart Loyson contra Lord of Ludquharn and Captain Wilson, June 15. 1669.
CAptain Wilson a Privateer, whereof Ludquharn was Owner, having taken Evart
Loyson and his ship, obtained the same to be adjudged Prize by the Admiral, as
carrying Flax and Hards, which were Counterband; which Decree the Strangers
Suspend, and raised Reduction upon these Reasons, that this Ship and Goods
belonged to one Clepan in Bruges, the King of Spains Subject, and was declared
Prize upon no other ground, but because she carried Tow and Hards, which are
not Counterband, but are necessary in some quantity in every Ship for Calsing;
and by the Treaty betwixt the King, and the King of Spain, there is an express
Article, that though Counterband be deprehended in Spainish Ships, only the
Counterband shall be Prize, and not the Ship and Goods. It was answered, that
this alleadgeance was competent, and Omitted before the Admiral. It was
answered, that these cases with Strangers are to be Ruled by the Law of
Nations, and not by peculiar Statutes and Customs.

The Lords reponed the Strangers to their Defenses, as in the first instance,
and also allowed the Privateer to insist on any grounds for making of the Ship
Prize, which he did not formerly insist on, whereupon the Privateer insisted
upon two grounds. First, Because by the Law of Nations, and the Kings
Proclamation of War, Allies and Neuters must not make use of the Kings Enemies
to sail their Ships, and therefore the Proclamation of War bears expressly, that
all Ships shall be seized, bearing any number of Men of the Kings Enemies, and
this Ship had the major part of her Company of Hollanders, then the Kings
Enemies, as is evident by their own Depositions taken before the Admiral. 2dly,
This Ship was not only sailed by Hollanders, but the Ship, or major part
thereof, and the Loadning belonged to Hollanders, and any pretext that the same
belonged to the King of Spains Subjects is a mere Contrivance, it being most
ordinar the time of the War for the Hollanders to Trade under the name and
covert of the Flemish, the King of Spains Subjects, which appears in this Case
by many evidences. First, Both the Merchant and major part of the sailers, by
their own confession are Hollanders, and they have adduced nothing to be a
sufficient probation that the whole ship and Goods belonged to Clepan in
Bruges; but on the contrair the Skippers first Testimony at Linlithgow bears,
that this Ship and Goods belongs to Clepan and Revier, which Revier being taken
Aboard, acknowledges that he was born in Holland, but says that two or three
years before the seizure he dwelt in Gent, and Brussels, under the King of
Spain; and having a Diligence granted to prove his Domicil the time of the War,
and Capture, all that he proves, is that in March 1667. he hired a House in
Brussels, and began to set up there, and that sometime before he had lived with
his Mother in Gent, but proves not how long, or that it was his constant
Domicil, for that was an ordinar contrivance for Hollanders to hire Houses in
the Spainish Netherlands, and to pretend to be Subjects there, but they being
Hollanders at the beginning of the War, concurring, and contributing to the
War, albeit they had truly removed tempore belli, they continued to be the
Kings Enemies; much less can their taking a House else where, sufficiently
prove that they totally deserted the Hollanders, and concurred not with them in
the War, it being easy to have Domicils in diverse places. 2dly, The
contrivance is yet more evident, in that the Goods were Shipped by Rivier at
Fleck in Holland, and sailing from thence to Copperwil in Norway, and was
taken, having no Pass from the King of Spain for this Voyage, but had a
pretended Pass from the Duke of York, which albeit it bears relation to the
same Ship called Charles the second, yet by the Testimonies of the Witnesses,
it is evident to have been granted two years before this Ship was Built, which
is an evident cheat; and for the Pass from the Governor of the Netherlands, it
bears but to last for a year, and was expired before this Voyage; and as for
the Pass from the Chamber of Commerce, it was granted for a former Voyage, from
Ostend to France, which is clear by the Testimonies, which bear also that there
could be no Pass gotten for this Voyage, because this Ship was lying in Fleck,
and not in the King of Spains Ports, and so the Loading could not be their
lying, and wanted Oath taken thereupon that it belonged not to the Kings
Enemies, as is requisite in such Cases. It was answered for the Strangers, to
the first ground of Adjudication* that it was no way sufficient. First, Because
the King of Spain being an Allie by a perpetual League, his Subjects were not
to be regulat by the Kings Proclamations, but by the solemn Treaties betwixt
both Kings, which setting down the causes of Seizure, must necessarly import
that seizure should be for no other cause then is therein expressed. 2dly, The
Articles bear expressly, that any of the Spainish Subjects having a Pass conform
to the formula set down in the Articles, should be no further troubled, which
formula requires nothing as to what Country the Sailers are of, and therefore
there can be no seizure upon the account of the Sailers; for albeit by the
Swedish Treaty, the Swedes are allowed to have a Dutch skipper ^ (...) becoming
a sworn Burgess of some Town in Sweden, and he residing there, from whence the
Lords have inferred that the Swedes may not sail with Hollanders, and have
declared some of them Prize upon that account, yet this cannot be exended to
the Spanish Subjects, in whose Treaty there is (...) such thing. 3dly, By an
Act of the Council of England produced, it appears that his Majesty gave Order
that all Flandrian Ships that were taken should be dismissed, if there were no
other ground of seizure, but that they were sailed by Hollanders, until his
Majesty review the Flandrian Concessions, and give further Order, and there is
a particular Concession to the Flandrians beside this Treaty, in regard their
Language and the Hollanders is one^ they should not be seized upon the account
of being sailed with Hollanders; and (...) to the other ground, the Passes and
Testimonies prove sufficiently that the Goods belong to Clepan in Bruges, and
there is but one Testimony of the Skipper, that Revier is Owner, which
Testimony was taken at Linlithgow, the Clerk or Interpreter having Interest in
the Caper, and the Skippers Testimony being again taken by the Admiral at
Leith, says nothing of Revier, and albeit it did he is but one Witness, and any
Hollander deserting Holland the time of the War, ceases to be an Enemy,
because the King invited such as would desert his Enemies, to come live in
England^ so that it is both his Majesty's Interest and Intention in any way to
weake^ his Enemies, by causing their Subjects desert them. It was answered for
the Privateer, that the Strangers could not pretend Right to the Spainish
Treaty, seeing they wanted a Pass conform thereto, and that it could not be
inferred negative from the Spainish Treaty, that seisures should only be for
the Causes therein expressed, there being no such Article in the Treaty, and the
Law of Nations, and the Kings Proclamation being the Rule of War the Treaties
with Allies do only explain or restrain the same, and gives exceptions from the
Rules* for instance the Spainish Treaty makes Counterband not to in^er seasure
of the Ship and Goods, which is valide, though a Privilege derogator to the
Law of Nations, but speaks nothing whether the carrying of Enemies Goods shall
make the Ship Prize, so that that Privilege, not being granted by the
Articles, the Law of Nations takes place, and the Ship may be declared Prize;
likeas in the case of Overvails Ship Decided in the last Session, all that is
there alieadged, being here alleged, Overvail not instructing any Flandrian
Concession to sail with Hollanders, his Ship was Declared Prize upon that same
very ground, and the Testimony of the Skipper at Linlithgow is most unsuspect,
it being taken before the Skipper was otherwise prompted to Depone, neither had
the Clerk any interest, but the most that can be pretended is that he had
relation to some of the Owners, which signifies nothing, and the Skipper by his
Office, being the person Commissionat by the Owners, who by his Office, may
Sell or Burden the Ship, without a special Commission, his Oath makes a full
probation against the Owners who Entrusted him, especially here where the
Merchant, and most part of the Company by their own confession are Hollanders,
which proves sufficiently for the Privateer, unless they instruct that the Ship
and Goods belonged to free men, and them only, which they have not done
evidently and surely, by all that they have produced, but the Skipper (who is
the main Man to be trusted) is contrary, therefore it may be, and is presumed
to be a Contrivance, to carry on the Trade of de Rivier a Hollander, under the
name of Clepa^ in Bruges his Brother in Law.

The Lords upon the whole matter declared the Ship and Goods Prize, but^ found
not that the want of a Pass alone was sufficient, neither did they put it to
the Vote by it self, whether the sailing by Hollanders alone would have been
sufficient, notwithstanding of the Treaty, and the Kings Order, Extracted out
of the Council of England, which though it related not to Scotland, some of the
Lords thought it was sufficient, unless it did appear that the King had given
contrair Order, others thought not, unless that Concession could be otherwise
showen. Thereafter the Srangers offered to prove positively that there was a
Concession, which the Lords would not Sustain, in regard that the last Session,
the first of June, was given (before answer) to prove the Concession, and the
Term was now circumduced for not proving thereof.

Scot contra Langtoun, June 19. 1669.
John Graham of Gillesby having Wodset certain Lands to James Langtoun, he did
thereafter (with consent of Earl of Annandail Superior) Eike twelve hundredth
Merks to the Reversion, and the Earl Ratified the former Wodset, and Graham
with his Consent of new Disponed again the Lands for the Sums in the first
Wodset and Eike, and Added some other Clauses, the first Wodset was before the
Act between Debtor and Creditor, and by virtue thereof the Wodsetter was in
Possession; the second Wodset was after the said Act, the Superior Consented
only to the second wodset, and of the same Date gave a Gift of Grahams Liferent
to Robert Scot, whereupon Robert having obtained general Declarator, pursues
now special Declarator for the Mails and Duties of the Wodset Lands, as falling
under the Liferent of Graham, the Granter of the Wodset. It was alleged for
Langtoun the Wodsetter, that he ought to be preferred to the Donator, not only
for the first Wodset, which was constitute before the Rebellion, but for the
second Wodset, comprehending the Bike, because the Superior by his Consent to
the second Wodset, without any Reservation, had Communicate all Right in his
Person; and consequently the Liferent Escheat of Graham; the granter of the
Wodset, in the same manner as if he had given the Wodsetter a Gift thereof, and
so no Gift, no being anterior to the other could prejudge the Wodsetter. It was
answered for Scot the Donator, that the alleadgeance is no way Relevant to
exclude his Gift, unless the Wodsetter could allege a Deed Denuding the
Superior, anterior to the Pursuers Gift; but here the Superiors Consent is not
anterior, but of the same days Date, and may be posterior, and therefore the
Gift which is the habilis modus, must be preferred unto the Superiors Consent
to the Wodset, which is but indirect, and consequential to infer the Right, as
Liferent, at least both must be conjoined, and have equal Right, as done simul
and semel. It was answered for the Wodsetter, that the Superiors Gift must not
be preferred to the Consent, though of the same Date, because he was then in
Possession of the Wodset Lands, and needed no Declarator, and the Gift is but
imperfect, until a general Declarator, which is the Intimation thereof, no
Declarator being requisite to the consent of the Superior to the Wodsetter,
and so is preferable.

The Lords preferred the Wodsetter.

It was further alleged for the Donator, that the Wodsetter must restrict
himself to his Annualrent, and be countable to him for the superplus, seeing now
he makes an offer to find the Wodsetter Caution, and so he must either quite
his Possession, or restrict conform to the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor.
The Wodsetter answered, that his second Wodset bearing, not only a Ratification
of the first Wodset in all points, but a Disposition of the same Lands, falls
not within that Clause of the said Act of Parliament, which Regulates only
Wodsets prior to that Act; and the new Disposition makes the old Wodset as
extinct and innovat. The Donator answered, that there being a jus quaesitum,
conform to the Act, as to the former Wodset, the posterior Ratification cannot
derogat therefrom, or take it away, unless it had been expressed, and in meritis
causa, it was alleged that the Wodsetter had near the double of his
Annualrent.

The Lords preferred the Donator as to the Superplus, more nor the Annualrent
of the first Wodset, and ordained the Wodsetter to Restrict.

The Wodsetter further alleged, that the Gift was Antidated and Simulate to
the Rebels behove, and so accresced to the Wodsetter. Which the Lords
Sustained, and found the Simulation probable by the Oath of the Superior, and
the Witnesses insert in the Gift.

Hamiltoun of Corse contra Hamiltoun and Viscount of Frendraught. June 22. 1669.
WIshart of Cowbardie having Wodset his Lands of Bogheads and others, to George
Hamiltoun, from whom the Viscount of Frendraught has now Right, he did
thereafter sell the same Lands to John Hamiltoun of Corse, who took the Gift of
Wisharts Fischeat, and having thereupon obtained general Declarator, pursues
now in a special Declarator for the Mails and Duties of the Wodset Lands.
Compears George Hamiltoun and the Viscount of Frendraught, and produced the
Wodset Right, and alleged that the Liferent Right cannot reach the VVodset
Lands, because the Gift is Simulate to the behove of Wishart the Rebel and
common Author, and so is jus supervenient author^, accrescens successori, to
defend this VVodset Right, and condescends that it is Simulate, in so far as it
is offered to be proven, that Wishart the common Author did allow to the
Donator in the price of the Lands, not only the sum whereupon the Horning
procceded, but also the Expenses of the Gift; so that it is purchased by the
Rebels Means, whence the Law presumes it to be to his behove. It was answered,
that this Condescendence cannot infer Simulation to the Rebels behove, because
it was lawful to Hamiltoun of Corse, finding that his Right was not secure to
fortify the same by this Gift, and in his account of the price of the Land
upon the Warrandice, he might require Retention, not only of the sum in the
Horning; but of his Expenses in necessarly purchasing the Gift, and might apply
the same for the Security of the Lands bought from the Rebel only, which is to
his own behove: but if he were extending the Gift to other Lands of the Rebels,
that might be presumed to the Rebels behove, because the Donator had no
anterior interest of his own to these Lands. It was answered, that if the Rebel
had given the Money to purchase the Right, before it was purchased, it would
infer unquestionable Simulation; and it is wholly equivalent, that having then
the Rebels Money in his Hand, the Rebel ex post fact, allowed the Expenses of
the Gift. 2dly, Albeit such an allowance ex post facto, would not be
sufficient, where the Donator acquired the Right to the Lands bona fide, and
then ex necessitate, behoved to purchase the Gift to maintain his Right: but
here the Donator was in pessima fide, and most unfavourable, because if need
beis, it is offered to be proven by his Oath or Writ, that he knew of George
Hamiltouns Right, and that the same was complete before he bought from the
common Author, and so is particeps frandi^ with his Author, in granting double
Rights contrary to Law: and therefore the presumption of Simulation and Fraud,
ought to proceed against him upon the more light Evidence.

The Lords found the Ground of Simulation not Relevant, upon taking allowance
from the Rebel of the price, if it was done for the maintaining of a Right bona
fide acquired: but found that it was sufficient to infer Simulation, if the
Right was mala fide acquired; and that the Donator, at, or before he bought the
Land, knew of the other Parties Right.

Pearson of Balmadies contra The Town of Montross. June 23. 1669.
PEarson of Balmadies being Collector of two of ten, and the sixteen penny
imposed by Parliament anno 1633. and the Magistrates of the Town of Montross,
having Written a Letter to him, promising Count and Payment in anno 1637. Some
few days after the Letter, he made Count with Orbistoun, general Collector,
and Charged himself with the whole Taxation of Montross, as received. And in
anno 1654. obtains a Decree against the then Magistrates, holding them as
confessed upon the quantities of Taxation of their Burgh. They now Suspend on
this Reason, that the Decree was in absence, and the Magistrates only holden
as confessed, and they are now content to Depone, that they never had any Stent
Roll of the said Taxation; and by the Chargers Count produced, he acknowledges
the proportion of Montross received. And further alleadges, that there being
neither Warrant from King nor Parliament, there should be no Charge or Pursuit
Sustained for these old Taxations, especially of Money, where the most part of
the Monyed Persons liable then, are now insolvent; and the Town cannot get
their Relief. But as for the Land Taxation, the King has given Warrant to lift
it, and it is still secure, being debitum fundi. The Charger answered, that he
being neighbor to the Town, did upon their desire, delay to distress them, and
held Count for them, as appears by their Letters produced: and therefore it
will not infer that Charges may be used upon the Act of Parliament only, unless
Parties had given Writ therefore, and the Magistrates were obliged by the Act
of Parliament, to have uplifted the Taxation debito tempore, and paid it to
the Collectors; and it must be presumed they did so, or if they did not, it was
their fault, in the Discussing of this Cause. It occurred to the Lords, that
this Taxation not being imposed upon the Towns Common-good, but upon the
Inhabitants severally, for their Money, and that the Magistrates were not
countable to the Town for the Taxation of Money, nor were they liable for their
Magistrates, who had not this power of Collection by their Office, but by the
Commission of Parliament therefore.

The Lords found the Town and present Magistrates not liable, but prejudice to
the Pursuer to insist aganist the then Magistrates, their Heirs and Executors.

Robert Fairie contra James Inglis. Eodem die.
RObert Fairie having Charged James Inglis younger of Mordistoun for 1000.
merks due by Bond, he did Suspend and raised Reduction upon Minority, Lesion
and Circumvention, Litiscontestation was made upon the Reason of Minority, and
the Term was Circumduced; and he Decerned. He Suspends again, and insists upon
the second Reason of Reduction, upon Circumvention, and qualified it thus, That
albeit the Bond bear, borrowed Money, yet he offers to prove by Fairies Oath,
that the true Cause was the Boot between a Horse and a Mare interchanged
betwixt the Parties: and albeit the Suspender gave as good as he got, yet he
was induced to give this Bond of 1000. merks to Boot, so that he is lesed ultra
dimidium justi pretij, which in Law is a sufficient Ground alone to dissolve
the Bargain, and restore either Party, action redibitoria and quanti minoris:
and next in so gross inequality, ex re praesumitur dolus. The Charger answered,
that the Reason is no way Relevant, because our Law and Custom acknowledges not
that Ground of the Civil Law, of annulling Bargains, made without Cheat or
Fraud upon the inequality of the Price; neither can there be any Fraud
inferred, upon the account of the Price of an Horse, which is not quantitas but
corpus, and has not a common Rate, but is regulat secundum praetium
affectionis, and now the Horse and the Mare not being to be shown in the
condition they were in; the Suspender cannot recall the Bargain. 2dly, The
Reason ought to be Repelled, because by a Ticket apart with the same Date of
the Bond, the Suspender declares upon his Soul and Conscience, that he should
never Impugn the Bond; and thereafter by his second Bond produced, he Ratifies
the same, and passes from any Revocation thereof, or quarrel against the same.
The Suspender answered, that he was content to refer to the Chargers own Oath,
whether in the Chargers own esteem of the Rate, the Suspender was not lesed
above the half: and as for the two Tickets, the first was obtained when he was
Minor, and both laborant eodem vitio, the inequality still remaining without
satisfaction.

The Lords in respect of the Tickets, and Ratification after Majority, and that
there was no Fraud or Deceit qualified, they repelled the Reasons and Decerned.

Fairie contra Inglis. June 24. 1669.
AT the Reporting of the former Interlocutor yesterday, Fairie against Inglis.
It was further alleged for Inglis, that he offered him to prove by Fairies
Oath, that he was Circumveened, in granting of the Ratification, because Fairie
upon that same Design drank him drunk.

Which Alleadgance the Lords Repelled in respect of the Bond and first Ticket,
wherein he Declared upon his Soul and Conscience never to come in the contrary.

Steuart of Gairntilly contra Sir William Steuart Eodem die.
SIr William Steuart having granted a Bond upon their Terms, that whereas he had
obtained Disposition of the Lands of Innernytie, partly by his Fathers Means,
and partly by his own, and partly for granting the Bond underwritten; and
therefore he obliges himself to Infeft Iean Steuart his Sister and the Heirs of
her Body, which failzying, ocertain Persons Substitute, his Brethren and
Nephews, and a part of it t^ return to himself, and obliges himself to pay the
Annualrent yearly to the said Iean, and the Heirs of her Body, and other Heirs
of Tailzie foresaid, during the not Redemption of the said Annualrent, then
there is insert a Reversion of the Annualrent, from the said Jean and her
foresaids, by the said Sir William upon the payment of 20000. Merks, and then a
Clause of Requisition, that if Jean after her Marriage desire the Money, she or
her foresaids might require the same to be paid after her Fathers Death, and
then a Clause that the said sum of 20000. should not be payable till five years
after her Fathers Death, and after her own Marriage. The said Jean Assigns this
Bond to her Brother Sir Thomas, and he Charges Sir William, who, and some of
the other Substitutes Suspends on these Reasons: First, That by the Conception
of the Bond, it was clear the principal Sum was not payable till Jeans
Marriage, and she being Dead unmarried, is not now payable at all, whereupon
the Charger insisted for the bygone Annualrents, and for granting an Infeftment
of annualrent to him as Assigney, conform to the Bond: The Suspenders Reasons
against the annualrent, were first, That this being an annualrent accessory to
a principal Sum, ablato principali tollitur accessorium, so that the principal
Sum being now not due to any by Ieans Death, Dying unmarried, the annualrent
also must cease from her Death. 2dly, The annualrent is conceived payable to
Iean and her Heirs* but no mention of Assigneys. 3dly, Albeit ordinarily in such
Obligations or Infeftments following thereon, the first Person is Feear, and
the Substitutes are but Heirs, who cannot come against the Feears Deed by
Assignation, or otherwise; yet where the Obligation is gratuitous, and
proceeds not upon sums of Money belonging to the Creditor: but upon the free
Gift of a Parent bestowing the Sum, there the Substitution implys a
Substitution and Obligation upon the first Person, and the Heirs of their Body,
to do no voluntar Deed to evacuat the Substitution; so that albeit a Creditor
or Successor, for a Cause onerous, might exclude the Substitutes; yet another
Heir appointed by the first person or a Donator, or gratuitous Assigney cannot
evacuat the Tailzie, and exclude the Substitutes, because in such Contracts,
uberrima fidei, the mind of the Party who Gifted, and freely granted the sum,
is chiefly to be considered: so that it cannot be thought to be old
Gairntillies mind, that his Daughter might Change the Substitution, and elude
the Conditions of the Bond, for the Suspending of the Requisition of the
principal Sum, till Iean were married, must import that his meaning was, to
give her the Annualrent only till that time, and the principal Sum to be a
Tocher if she married, which was to no purpose, if the Annualrent remained
perpetual; for then the Heretor would certainly Redeem to purge his Land, as he
had done, and the Sums Consigned would belong to the Assigney, and the Clause
Suspending the payment thereof, if Iean married not, signified nothing, sed
verba sumenda sunt cum effectu; and the meaning of the Parties, and conception
of the Condition Suspensive must be preserved. The Charger answered, that he
opponed the Bond, wherein, without all question Jean was Feear, and the
Substitutes being the Heirs of Tailzie, cannot quarrel her Deed, but are bound
as Representing her to fulfill the same; and albeit Ieans Assigneys be not
expressed, yet they are ever included, where they are not expressly excluded;
neither is this Annualrent stated as a mere accessory, because the Requisition
of the principal Sum may be Discharged, or may become by the Suspensive Clause
ineffectual, as now it does; and yet the Obligement or Infeftment of Annualrent
remains a perpetual Right, though Redeemable at the Debitors option; neither is
there by Law or Custom any difference or exception, whether the Annualrent be
gratuitous, or for a Cause onerous: and for the meaning of the Father, procurer
of the Bond, it must be understood as it is expressed, only to exclude the
lifting of the principal Sum by Iean, upon the Clause of Requisition, if she
were not married: and if his mind had been otherways, it had been easy to have
adjected a restrictive Clause, or in stead of the Substitution, to have set
down a Provision, that if Iean died unmarried, the annualrent should belong to
her Brothers and Sisters nominat: but this being an ordinar single
Substitution, has neither expressly nor implicitly any Condition or Obligation
upon the Feear, not to Dispone.

The Lords Repelled the Reasons of Suspension, and found Iean to be Feear of
the Annualrent, and that she might assign the same, and that the Substitutes
could not quarrel the same.

Kennedy and Muir contra Iaffray. Eodem die.
MR. John Iaffray being presented to the Parsonage and Viccarage, Teinds of
Maybol, and having obtained Decree conform, there is a double Poinding raised
by the Heretors and Possessors of Fishartoun: Mr. John Iaffray craves
preference as Parson, and so having Right to the whole Benefice: the other
party called is Grange Kennedy, and Muire of Mank-wood, who craved preference
on this Ground, that the Teinds of Maybol was of old, a part of the Patrimony
of the Nunry of North-Berwick, and the Prioress for the time, with the consent
of one Nune, who was then only alive, set a Tack thereof, to Thomas Kennedy of
Bargany, and Gilbert Kennedy his Son, and to Gilberts first Heir, and after all
their Deaths for three nineteen years: The Prioress having thereafter, at the
Kings Desire, Resigned the Teinds of Maybol to be a Parsonage, did in her
Resignation, except the Tack set to Barganie, which was always cled with
Possession, and was assigned to David Kennedy of Ballimore, and Transferred to
Mr. John Hutcheson, and by him to Kennedy and Muir, as to the Teinds of
Fishartoun, whereupon they crave preference. It was answered for Iaffray, that
by their Right produced, there is related another Tack granted by Mr. James
Bonar, Parson of Maybol for the time, to the Lord Ochiltrie, which came by
progress in the Person of Ballimore, having then in his Person, Barganies Tack,
so that Ballimores taking that Right, acknowledges the Parsons Right, and
passes from his former Tack, unless in his Right he had expressly reserved his
former Tack; so that neither Ballimore nor these Assigneys can now make use of
Barganies Tack, it being a certain Ground, that the taking of a posterior Tack,
having a greater Tack Duty, or a shorter Term evacuats a prior Tack in that
same Person. It was answered, that the alleadgance is no ways Relevant,
Ballimore not having immediately taken a second Tack, but only finding another
Tack by progress in the Person of the Lord Binnie, to remove that impediment,
and shun his trouble, he purchased Right thereto, but never brooked thereby.

The Lords found that the taking Right to another Tack, did not infer a passing
from the former Tack, unless it were proven, that the posterior Tack had a
greater Duty, or shorter durance, and that Ballimore had paid the said greater
Duty to Bonar, or bruiked expressly by the later Tack.

June 29. 1669.
CAptain having taken at Sea, obtained him to be declared Pryze, upon this
ground, that he carried Clapboard, which is expressly mentioned as Counterband
in the Commission of the Admiral of Scotland, given to the Caper, and was the
same Style with the Commission Recorded in the Books of Admirality, given in
the time of War, in the year 1628. The Strangers raised Reduction of the
Admirals Decree, on this Reason, that Clapboard being a general Name,
comprehending many kinds of Boards, that Clapboard could be only understood
Counterband, which had not a promiscuous use in Peace and War, but was
instrumentum bellicum, carried by the Kings Allies to his Enemies, to be Sold
to them for assisting of the War, which this Loading could not be, because it
consisted all of Knappel, cutted all at three Foot and an half length, the
proper use whereof is for Barrelis, and is no ways instrumentum bellicum.

The Lords having given Commission to some of their number to visit the
Knappel, and to Examine Sea-wrights, whereupon they did Examine a number,
whether this Timber in question was useful for War or Shipping, and most
Deponed, that it was not, and some Deponed, that it might be made use of to be
Pins or Tubs; but that it was not ordinarily made use of for Shipping, but
common Oak, which was far cheaper.

The Lords did also before answer, ordain either Party to adduce such
Testificats and Evidences, as they could from the Admiralties of Neighboring
Nations, what was the Custom of Nations, whether upon such Timber as this, the
Ships of Neuters or Allies were made Prize.

The strangers produced several Testificats* one from the Custom-House of
Amsterdame, bearing, that such Timber was not accounted Counterband in Holland,
and one from the Spanish Admiralty at Ostend, bearing, that they knew not that
by their Custom, and the Custom of other Admiralties such Timber was
Counterband, one from a Deputy, who served in the French Admiralty at Dunkirk,
declaring that in that Admiralty, such Timber was not accounted Counterband;
one from the Kings Auctorney, and another Lawer, who served in the Court of
Admiralty of England, bearing, that during the War, none had been declared
Prize upon that account. The Privateer produced no Testificats, but alleged
that there ought no respect to be had to the Testificats produced, it being
easy to impetrat such, and there should a Commission been direct by the Lords,
to the several Chief Admiralties of the Neighboring Nations, to express what
was their Custom in this Point.

Notwithstanding the Lords found the Ship Prize, as carrying this Clapboard,
being contained in the Admirals Commission, a great part of the most able of
the Lords being of the contrary Judgment.

Earl of Argile contra His Vassals. June 30. 1669.
THe Earl of Argile being Donator to the Forefaulture of the late Marquess of
Argile, his Father, Pursues an Improbation of the Vassals Rights, and craved
Certification. The Vassals alleged no Certification against their Rights,
because any Right the Earl had was qualified by the Kings Gift, that he should
only have Lands paying 15000. pounds, and that the rest should be conveyed to
the Creditors, and the Creditors thereupon claiming the Property of the
Vassals, as falling within the Forefaulture, His Majesty Wrote a Letter,
Declaring that it was not His meaning by the Gift, that the Creditors should
have any more Lands conveyed to them then the remainder of the Property
belonging to the late Marquess, over and above this Earls part, and that the
Superiority should entirely belong to the Earl and his Successors, by which His
Majesty's Mind and Pleasure is evident, that the Earl should only have the
Superiority, and not the Property of the Vassals. 2dly, The Vassals offered to
produce what Rights they had flowing from the House of Argile, but there could
be no Certification, as to what they had not, in respect of the Troubles,
especially no Certification, for want of Confirmation of the Vassals Rights by
the King, because several of the Vassals continued Loyal to His Majesty, during
all the Troubles, and some of them losed their lives in His Service, opposing
the said late Marquess himself: So that it can never be thought to be His
Majesty's purpose or pleasure, so to restore this Earl the Marquess Heir
appearand, as thereby to Forefault the Vassals, who adhered to His Majesty, and
who durst not in time of these Troubles have fought Confirmations, His
Majesty's Exchequer being then in the manadgement of these who were in
opposition to Him. It was answered for the Pursuer to the first, that neither
by the Pursuers Gift from His Majesty, nor by the foresaid Letter, there is
nothing granted to the Vassals in opposition to the Earls Right, but in
opposition to the Creditors, that they should have no hand in the Vassals
Estates. Likeas, His Majesty by His last Ratification and Charter under the
Great Seal produced, has most distinctly and clearly expressed His meaning and
pleasure, that by the foresaid Gift or Letter, His Majesty did only Exclude the
Creditors from the Estates of the Vassals, but thereby Declares, that not only
the Superiority and Casualities thereof should belong to the Earl, but the
Property of all these who had not sufficient Rights from the House of Argile,
and Confirmations from the King, and that the Earl might Intent all Actions
competent of Law, for that effect. It was answered for the Vassals, that if
their true condition and adherence to His Majesty, had been understood His
Majesty would not so have Declared, and that post jus quaesitum to them by the
Kings Gift and Letter, no posterior* Declaration impetrat from His Majesty,
should prejudge them, at the least, they humbly craved that the Lords according
to their former Interlocutor, would Represent the Case to His Majesty, that His
Pleasure might be known, and that His Majesty might interpose with my Lord
Argile, not to insist against the Vassals, who had been Loyal. It was answered
for the Earl, that he had given no just grounds to his Vassals to expect, that
though they were in his power, that he would destroy them, and annul their
Rights: and seeing His Majesty had fully and absolutely entrusted them to him,
they ought to have rested upon His Kindness and Generosity, and not to have
made all this Clamor, where they have no Legal Defense, it being no strange
nor new thing, for the King to give Gifts of Forefaulture without any
Reservation of Vassals, who had no Confirmation from the King, yea many times
without any Reservation of the Forefault Persons Debt, and His Majesty has
lately so done to the Marquess of Huntly, to whom he gave the Estate of Huntly,
without Reservation, either to Vassals or Creditors, and that upon the
Forfaulture of the Marquess of Argile, who had Right to, and was in Possession
of the Estate of Huntly for vast sums of Money, and the Earl of Argile has the
Gift of the remainder of his Fathers Estate, with the burden of more Debt, then
the proper Debt of the House of Argile would have been, over and above the
Debts undertaken for the House of Huntly. 2dly, Whatever the Vassals might
plead in Point of Favor: yet they do not pretend to a Defense in Law. And the
Lords being Judges of the Law, ought not to stop the Course thereof, upon the
Insinuations of any Party; otherwise they may deny the Course of Law to any of
the Leidges, when they please, upon the account that they think the Law hard,
or rigorous, or the Kings grants made conform thereto; and whatsoever the Lords
might do in the dubious Interpretation of a Treaty of Peace, to know the Kings
meaning; yet in claris ^on est locus conjecturis, nothing can be clearer then
the Kings meaning, under His Great Seal, and all the Defenders can pretend, is
Favor, which is no Point of Right, nor legal Defense.

The Lords granted Certification e^n^ra non producta, conditionally, that what
the Vassals should produce betwixt and the tenth of November, should be
received; and left it to the Vassals in the mean time, if they thought fit to
make Address to the King, that he might interpose with the Earl in their
Favors, or to Debate any thing they thought fit, when the Earl insisted for
Reduction of their Rights, for want of Confirmations, or for Mails and Duties.

Agnew contra Tennents of Dronlaw. Eodem die.
AGnem having Appryzed the Lands of Dronlaw from Mr. Robert Hay Advocat, as
Cautioner for the Earl of Buchan, to the behove of the Earl of Kinghorn,
pursues the Tennents for Removing, who alleged Absolviture, because the
Tennents were Tennents by payment of Mail and Duty to the Liferenter, Mr.
Robert Hayes Mother, and she is not warned nor called. The Pursuer answered,
that the Liferenter dyed before the Term, and that he was content, that the
Tennents should be Decerned to Remove but at the next Term of Whitsonday.

Yet the Lords Sustained the Defense, seeing the Liferenter was living the time
of the Warning.

Farquhar contra Magistr^tes of Elgin. July 2. 1669.
FArquhar having caused a Messenger Charge the Magistrates of Elgin to take my
Lord Lovat, and the Baillies being together upon the Street, about eight or
nine a Clock in the Morning, the Messenger, with several other Persons present,
Charged them to go into an House near by, which they designed to them, and to
take Lovat, being then in Bed, and the Messenger offered to go with them, and
enter first, yet the Bailies did not obey, but said they would go at their
convenience, when they had conveened their Neighbors to assist; there is an
Execution, and Instrument upon the back of the Caption, to the effect foresaid
produced; whereupon Farquhar pursues the Magistrates for Payment of the Debt
contained in the Caption. The Defenders alleged Absolviture: First, Because
they were no further obliged but to conveen the Neighbors of the Town, and
send them with the Messenger to assist, which they offered to do. 2dly, Albeit
themselves were obliged to take the Rebel if he were showen to them within
their Jurisdiction, yet they were not obliged to search every House of the Town
for him, or to enter within closle Doors. 3dly, The Lord Lovat being known to
be a fierce young Man, who ordinarily had a Minzie attending him, they were not
obliged to adventure upon him, without calling the assistance of their
Neighbors, which they did within an hour or two thereafter, and he was gone.

The Lords Repelled all these Defenses, in respect of the Execution and
instrument produced, and found the Magistrates, being Charged, obliged to take
the Rebel, and without delay to search any House within the Town that was
particularly shown to them, unless they had been Repulsed by Force, or the
Doors by Violence kept closse against them by the Master of the House, and
ordained the Pursuers to adduce the Witnesses in the Instrument, and others to
prove the particulars foresaid, to have been so done as is therein expressed.

Bow contra Campbel, Eodem die.
BOw Stabler in Edinburgh as Assigney to a Sum of Money due by Glenurchy, and
also as Donotar to the Escheat of his Cedent, being called in a double
Poinding, and competing; the Donator alleged he ought to be preferred to the
Arrefter, because the Debt in question falling in his Cedents Escheat, he had
taken the Gift of the Escheat, bearing expressly all Goods the Rebel had, or
should acquire, and this Debt. being acquired, after the Gift did accresce to
him, the Rebel not being yet Relaxed. It was answered, that though the style of
the Gift bear all Goods to be acquired, yet that is always interpret such as
happen to be acquired within year and day after the Horning. It was answered
for the Donatar, that he oppones the Tenor of his Gift, and if any limitation
could be thereof, it could only be of Sums to be acquired within a year after
the Gift, and not within a year after the Horning, because sometimes Gifts are
not taken within a year of the Horning.

The Lords found the Gift to extend to the Sum in question, being acquired by
the Rebel within a year after the Gift, and that the general Clause of Goods to
be acquired, did extend no further then to Goods acquired within a year after
the Gift.

Lord of Grubbet contra More, Eodem die.
THe Barony of Lintoun belonging to Sir John Ker of Litledean, the Lands of
Morbatle and Otterburn are parts thereof; there is a piece of Land called
Greenlaw, lying in the borders of Morbatle and Otterburn, and there is an
Heretable Right of the Lands of Otterburn granted by Sir John Ker to one Young,
and by that Young a subaltern Right to another Young, bearing the Lands of
Greenlaw per expressum, both these Young's jointly Dispone to Grubbet the Lands
of Otterburn, with the Pertinents, comprehending the Lands of Raschbogs; in the
end of which Disposition there is a Clause, bearing that because the Young's
were kindly Tennents in the Lands of Greenlaw, therefore they Dispone their
Right thereof, and kindlynesse thereto, to Grubbet, More having acquired the
Rights of the Lands of Morbatle from Sir John Ker; and the Earl of Louthian
having Apprized Sir John's Right of the Barony of Lintoun, in Anno 1636. gives
a particular Right of Greenlaw alone, which is now also in the Person of More,
whereupon arises a Competition of Right between Grubbet and More, Grubbet
alleged that he has Right to Greenlaw, as a Part and Pertinent of Otterburn,
which he and the Young's his Authors have Possessed far beyond 40. years, as Part
and Pertinent of Otterburn, and offers to prove that there is standing Marches
between Morbatle and Otterburn, within which Marches, Greenlaw lies on
Otterburn side, and that his Infeftment produced granted by Young to Young,
bears expressly Greenlaw. It was alleged for More, First, that Grubbet cannot
pretend Greenlaw to be Part and Pertinent of Otterburn, because by his own
Infeftments produced, granted by the Young's, and accepted by him, Greenlaw is
not expressed as Part and Pertinent of Otterburn, albeit Raschbog tho less
considerable then it, be expressed, and on the contrair, it is declared that the
Young's were kindly Tennents of Greenlaw, and Disponed their kindness thereof;
and offers to prove that the Young's were in constant custom of Service to Sir
John Ker in Arms and otherways whenever they were required, and that most of
the Lands on the border were Set only for Service, which Service could not be
attribute to Otterburn, because it was holden blench of Sir John, and if need
be's, offered to prove by Witnesses, that when the said Young's came not to the
said Service they were poinded therefore. 2dly, More offered to prove that
Greenlaw is a distinct Tenement, both from Otterburn and Morbatle, and has
past as a distinct Tenement since the year 1636. and has a known March between
it and Otterburn, viz. a Know. 3dly, For Grubbets pretense of bruiking Greenlaw
as Part and Pertinent of Otterburn for 40. years, so that he might claim it by
Prescription, the alleadgeance ought to be Repelled, first because Prescription
cannot proceed without an Infeftmen, and it cannot be ascribed to the Young's
Infeftment, wherein they acknowledge that they were kindly Tennents of
Greenlaw, after which no course of time can ever prescribe a Right to Greenlaw,
as part and Pertinent of Otterburn by that Charter, and therefore any
Possession that is thereof is without Infeftment. 2dly, There is not forty
years Possession, abating Mores Minority. 3dly, There are interruptions, and
therefore if Greenlaw be either a distinct Tenement, or part of Morbatle, it
belongs to More. It was answered for Grubbet, that he and his Authors
Possessing Greenlaw these 40 years past, as part of Otterburn gives him
sufficient Right thereunto, notwithstanding of any acknowledgement in the
Charter, or without the Charter before that time, for Prescription may change
Part and Pertinents, so that which was once not acknowledged to be a part by
Possession, 40 years thereafter may become a part, and that acknowledgement
never being made use of Prescribes and the Charter in which it is, is a
sufficient Title, both for what was parts the time of the Charter, and what
becomes thereafter parts by Prescription. 2dly, The acknowledgement of a Party
having Right is of no effect, when by demonstration of the Right it self the
contrair appears, as here, therebeing an anterior Right of Property of the
Young's produced before that acknowledgement. 3dly, The ackowledgement is not,
that they were only kindly Tennents, otherwise it is very well consistent with
the Property, that they being first kindly Tennents, and that kindliness being
thought more favorable to maintain Possession in these places, then any
Heretable Right, they might very well Dispone Otterburn, whereof Greenlaw is a
part, and might also Dispone their kindness of Greenlaw they had before the
Right of Property; neither does it infer, because Raschbog is expressed as
Pertinent of Otterburn, which has been upon account that Raschbog was then
unclear, that therefore Greenlaw is no Part thereof, or else it could have no
more parts but Raschhog, there being no more expressed; and as for the alleged
Services done by the Young's to Sir John Ker, they cannot infer that the
Young's were then Tennents of Greenlaw, because such Services being only
general, and no particular Services accustomed by Tennents, they might have
been performed to Sir John as Superior, or as out of kindness to a great Man in
the Country, and its offered to be proven (if need be's) that hundreds granted
such Services, who were not Tennents, so that unless there were a Tack,
Inrolments of Court, or Executions of Poinding produced to instruct Services as
a Tack-duty on Greenlaw, it is Irrelevant.

The Lords by a former Interlocutor had found that by the acknowlegement in
Young's Charter, or any thing therein was not sufficient to exclude Greenlaw
from being Part and Pertinent of Otterburn, but they found that is More would
allege a Tack, or Inrolment of Court, to the Young's of Services for
Greenlaw, it were sufficient, or otherwise if he would allege constant
Service of the Young's, by Riding etc. with Sir John, and there being Poinded
by him, when they were absent, they found the same with the acknowledgement in
Grubbets Right to exclude Grubbet from Greenlaw, and if these were not
alleged, they ordained Witnesses to be Examined upon the ground hinc inde
before answer, upon these points, whether Greenlaw was known to be a distinct
Tennement, both from Otterburn and Marbotle, or whether it was known to be Part
and Pertinent of either, and what were the Marches and Meithes thereof, and
what Services were done by the Young's to Sir John Ker, and if such Services
were done by others, not being moveable Tennents.

Barclay contra Barclay, July 6. 1669.
BArclay of Towy having but one Daughter, and his Estate Tailzied to
Heirs-male, his nearest Heir-male being the old Tutor of Towy, above 80. years
of Age, and having also but one Daughter, and neither Father nor Daughter being
Persons of much discretion, Captain Barclay his next Heir-male having also but
Daughters, he Dispones his Estate in favors of his own Daughter; and it being
rumored that Captain Barclay pretended a Bond of an hundredth and three thousand
Pounds, granted by Towy to him, that thereby he might prefer him to the Tutor,
and that the Tutor as Heir-male, had also granted several Dispositions to
Captain Barclay of that Estate: Towies Daughter being an Infant, her friends
did also procure a Disposition from the Tutor to her, and she pursues a
Reduction and Improbation against Captain Barclay of the foresaid Bond, and
Dispositions made to him, he Compears, and produces a late Disposition made by
the Tutor, and alleadges that he had the Bond foresaid, and two Dispositions
from the Tutor, anterior to this produced, but that a Person to whom he had
entrusted them, had carried them away, but there being produced in the Process
attested doubles of the former Dispositions, under the hands of Nottars. The
Pursuer craved, that seeing the Witnesses alleged insert might die, and the
Captain of purpose kept up the Principals, that the Witnesses might be
Examined upon what they know of the Truth, or Forgery of the said Dispositions.

Which the Lords granted, the Fame, and suspicion of the Forgery being so
great, though ordinarily they do not Examine Witnesses upon the Forgery of a
Writ, till the principal be produced, that the Witnesses may see their
Subscriptions, whereupon Steel one of the Witnesses compeared, and Deponed,
acknowledging the Forgery, and the way of contrivance of it, in which the
Captain made use of him, whereupon the Lords proceeded to Examine the Tutor,
who stiffly stood to the verity of the Dispositions, as being truly Subscribed
by him, but differed in the Date, and in the persons who were Witnesses to the
Subscription: The Captains Son in law being also Examined, whether or not the
Captain had employed him to corrupt the Witnesses, and if he had written any
Letter to him, to that purpose produced a Letter, mentioning some things by
word which he should diligently go about, and being asked who the Bearer was,
Deponed that he was Robert Ogilvy the Tutors Servant, who being in the House,
and presently called to the Bar, upon Oath being interrogat, whether he had
brought North any Letter from the Captain to his Good-son, Deponed that he had
brought no Letter from him to his Good-son, or any other, and thereafter the
Letter being showen him, and confronted with the Captains Good-son, he Deponed
that he did bring that Paper, and delivered it to the Captains Wife, but he
thought it was an order, not being Sealed, and being interrogat whether he had
any Message in word from the Captain to his Good-son, Deponed he had none, and
upon reading of the Letter, bearing the contrair, and confronting with the
Captains Good-son, he acknowledged that he had order to cause his Good-son
bring over the Witnesses to Edinburgh; and the Captains Good-son further
acknowledged that Ogilvy had desired him to deall with the Witnesses, to stand
to the Truth of the Writs, he stiffly denied that point.

The Lords having considered his gross Prevarication, and contradictory Oath,
ordained him to be put in the Irons, and the next day to stand in the Pillary
betwixt ten and twelve, and a Paper on his Brow to declare the Cause, and did
declare him infamous, and appointed him to continue in Prison till further
Order.

Mr. William Kintor contra the Heirs and Successors of Logan of Coat-field.
July 9. 1669.
LOgan of Coat-field having become Cautioner for the Tutor of Burncastle, an
Inhibition used upon the act of Caution, Mr. William Kintor having Right by
Progress from Burncastle, obtained Decree against the Representatives of the
Tutor, and of Coat-field the Cautioner, for payment of the Annualrent of 10000,
pounds, due to the Pupil by the Marquess of Hamiltoun, and the like Sum due by
the Earl of Bucclengh, in respect that the Tutor was obliged to have uplifted
these Annualrents, and to have employed them for Annualrent, and thereupon
pursues a Reduction of the Rights granted by the Tutors Cautioner, as being
granted after the Cautioner was Inhibited, these Acquirers raise a Reduction of
Mr. Williams Decree, and repeat the Reasons by way of Defense, alleging that
the Tutor nor his Cautioner were not obliged for the Annualrents due by the
Marquess of Hamiltoun and Earl of Buccleugh, because they were in responsal
Hands, and the Pupil had no Damnage, for it was free for the Tutor to uplift
the Annualrents of Pupils Money, when secure, at any time during the
Pupillarity, but here they offer to prove the Tutor Died durante tutela, and so
was not liable when he Died, to uplift these secure Annualrents, or to have
employed them. The Pursuer answered* that the Lords had already found at the
same Pursuers Instance against John Boyd, that the Tutor was liable for
Annualrent, not only pro intromissis, but pro omissis, and for the Annualrent
of the Pupils Annuals a finita tutela, which is finished, either by ending the
Pupillarity, or the Death or Removal of the Tutor. It was answered, that the
Lords Interlocutor was only in the case that the Tutory had been finished in
the ordinar way by the Age of the Pupil, for that way of ending thereof, could
only been foreknowen by the Tutor, that within the same he might lift the
Pupils Annuals, and give them out on Annualrent, but he could not foresee his
own Death, but might justly think he had time before the expiring of his
Tutory, to lift and employ, and so the Tutor not having failed in his Duty, his
Cautioner is free. It was answered, First, That by the Lords daily Practique
Tutors are liable for the Annualrents of Rents, of and within a year after the
Rents are due, and there being so much parity of Reason in Annualrents, it
cannot be thought just that the Tutor was not obliged to lift them till the end
of his Tutory, for albeit he might have kept them in his Hands unemployed,
and only to leave them employed at the ish of his Tutory, yet he was obliged to
uplift them, and if by any accident, as being preveened by Death, he did not
employ them, that accident should be on his peril, not the innocent Pupils.
2dly, If need beis, the Pursuer offers to prove the Annualrents were uplifted
by the Tutor, and so these that Represent him, and his Cautioners, are liable
for Annualrent therefore, at least from the Death of the Tutor.

The Lords found that the Tutor was neither obliged to lift, nor give out on
Annual the Annualrents of his Pupil, if the Debitors were Responsal, but only
once betwixt and the end of the Pupillarity; and if he Died betwixt and the end
of the Tutory, he was free both of the Annual and Annualrents thereof, but if
he did actually uplift the Annalrents, they found that it was sufficient to
employ them any time before the Tutory ended, and found that his Heir was
liable for Annualrent, not from the Tutors Death, but from the end of the
Pupillarity, and that he could be no further liable then the Tutor, if he had
lived, in respect that subsequent Tutors were obliged to lift these Annualrents
from the former Tutors Heirs, and employ them.

This was stoped to be further heard.

Garner contra Colvin, July 10. 1669.
JAmes Colvin having Apprized the Lands of Lady-kirk, and some Tenements in
Air, and being Infeft therein; Garners Wife and Bairns raise a Reduction, and
allege that the Apprizers Right is null, as to the Tenements in Air, because
John Garner had never Right thereto, but the Right was Originally granted to
young John Garner the Pursuer, by his Mother Brother. The Defender answered.
that the said Right must be affected with his Apprizing, as if it had been in
the Fathers Person, because young Garner was then an Infant in his Fathers
Family; and albeit the Right be granted by his Uncle, yet it is necessarly
inferred to be Acquired by the Fathers Means, because it bears not for Love and
Favor, but for Sums of Money, and the Uncle had Bairns of his own. It was
answered, that albeit the Right had been Acquired by the Fathers Means, yet its
anterior to the Apprizing, and Sums on which it proceeds, whereupon nothing can
be taken away but what is posterior thereto, albeit there were a Declarator and
Reduction intented for that purpose, as there is none.

The Lords Sustained the alleadgeance, and Reduced the Apprizing as to these
Tenements.

2dly, The Pursuer alleadges the Apprizing (as to Lady-kirk) must be Reduced,
because the Pursuers produce a prior Infeftment granted by John Garner to his
Wife in Liferent, and his Bairns in Fee. it was answered, that the said
Infeftment was base, never cled with Possession. The Pursuers Replied, that the
Fathers Liferent not being Reserved, the continuation of Possession was as
lawful Administrator to the Pursuers Bairns, and if need be's its offered to be
proven he had a Factory from them. The Defender answered, that a Fathers
Possession being continued, was never found to validate a base Infeftment
granted to his Children, albeit his Liferent were expressly Reserved, but its
ever accounted a latent fraudulent Deed, and a Factory can be of no more force
then a Reservation, otherwise it were impossible to obviat fraudulent
conveyances betwixt Fathers and Children. The Pursuer answered, that albeit
such Reservations are not valide in Rights freely granted by Fathers, yet it
meets not this case, especially where there was an anterior Onerous Cause, John
Garner being obliged by his Contract of Marriage, that what Lands he should
Acquire, should be to his Wife in Liferent, and to the Bairns of the Marriage.

The Lords found that the Bairns Infeftment granted by their Father, albeit he
had Possessed by a Factory from them, was not cled with Possession, or sufficient
to exclude a posterior public Infeftment, and that the Clause in the Contract
was but to substitute the Children Heirs to their Father in the Conquest.

Here it was not alleged that the Factory was made public by Process founded
at the Fathers Instance, or otherwise in this Process. The Defender to satisfy
the Production of an Assignation, upon which the Apprizing proceeded, which the
Pursuers offered to improve as false in the Date, and the Defender now produced
another Assignation of the same Date, and declared he abade by the same as of
that Date, and that it being a missing, he had caused the Cedent to Subscribe
another of the same Date with the first, which did expressly bear Reservation of
another Assignation formerly Subscribed, which he did also bide be as truly
Subscribed, but not of the Date it bears, but of the Date of the true
Assignation insert therein.

The Lords Sustained the Assignation now last produced, and did not quarrel the
other Assignation, though another Date was insert, then when it was Subscribed,
for the Cause foresaid.

Alexander Glass contra John Haddin; Eodem die.
ALexander Glass and William Reid having a proper Wodset of the Lands of
Alairtnenie, and John Haddin being also Infeft in an Annualrent forth thereof
some days prior, compet for the Maills and Duties; Haddin alleged that both
infeftments being base from the same Author, his Infeftment of Annualrent is
preferable, because prior and first cled with Possession. It was answered, any
Possession he had was by a Factory from Glass. It was replied, that he offered
to prove Possession before that Factory. It was duplyed that by Haddins back
Bond produced, bearing expressly that Glass had had a valide Right to the
Maills and Duties of the Lands, and that he was in Possession thereof, and that
Haddin had accepted a Factory from him, and was obliged to count to him for the
Maills and Duties without any Reservation of his own Right, this was an
unquestionable Homologation, and acknowledgement of the Right, and equivalent
to a Ratification thereof.

The Lords found by the back Bond produced of the Tenor foresaid, that Haddin
had so far acknowledged Reid and Glasses Right, that he could not quarrel it
upon his own Right, but he proponing that there was a Reservation of his own
Right related to in the back Bond, the Lords found the same Relevant he proving
Possession before the other Party, and before the Factory.

The Old College of Aberdeen contra the Town of Aberdeen, July 13. 1669.
THe Principal and the remanent Members of the old College of Aberdeen, having
Set a Tack to Doctor Dun of his Teinds during the Principals Life, and five
years thereafter, and bearing an Obligement to renew the like Tack from time to
time for ever. The Doctor Mortified the same to the Town for plous uses, after
the Death of that Principal many years. The College now pursues the Possessors
of the Lands upon an Inhibition for the full value of the Teinds; and the Town
Defends upon the foresaid Tack. It was answered for the College, that the Tack
is only for the Principals Life, and five years after, which is expired; and as
for the new Obligement to renew such Tacks for ever. It was answered First,
Albeita Tack were conceived in these Terms it would be null, as wanting an ish.
2dly, Obligements of the present Incumbents in Universities are not obligator,
but where there is an equivalent Cause Onerous Received for the good of the
University. It was replied for the Town, that an Obligement to grant a Tack by
them who can grant it, is equiparat to the Tack it self, which requires no
other solemnity, as an obligement to grant an Assignation, is equivalent to an
Assignation, and that there is here a Cause Onerous of the Universities
Obligement, because the Tack bears expressly 300. Merks of grassum, and that the
former Tack-duty was only ten Merks, which by this Tack is made 50. Merks, and
albeit it want a desinit ish, yet it must be valide for a Renovation during
this Principals Life, and five years after, and it is Homologat by the
College, who have received the same Duties several years since the first Tack
expired. It was duplyed for the College, that this Tack is not valide for any
time after the first ish, because by the Act of Parliament 1617. Tacks by
beneficed Persons under Prelates, are prohibit for longer time nor their own
Life, and five years after, and these Teinds are a part of the benefice
Mortified to the College, and they must be accounted as beneficed Persons, and
albeit the Teinds were augmented to 50. Merks, yet they are worth 200. Merks;
and for the Receipt of the Duties after the first Tack, it is per
tacitamrelocati^nem, and no Homologation of the Obligement to renew the Tack.

The Lords found that the College was not comprehended under beneficed
Persons, but found that there was no sufficient. Cause Onerous alleged for
this Obligement of Renewing a perpetual Tack, and would not Sustain the samine
in part, and found it totally null, and that the Receiving of the former Duties
was no Homologation thereof.

Captain Wood contra Boyneilson, Eodem die.
CAptain Wood having taken a Ship of Norway, whereof Boyneilson was Master,
called the Raphael Prize, she was Adjudged by the Admiral, and there is now
Reduction intented of the Decree of Adjudication, in fortification whereof the
Privateer Insists upon two grounds. First, That this Ship belongs to the Kings
Enemies, with a considerable part of the Loadning, viz. 1500. Dails as is
acknowledged by the Skippers Deposition. 2dly, Whereas she pretends to have
been bound for London upon the Kings Proclamation, giving liberty to all his
Subjects to import Timber from Sweden and Denmark, by the Ships and Mariners in
these Countries, though then in Enimity, yet the said Proclamation requires
that all such Ships shall find Caution at the Custom-house to return straight
to England, without going aside into an Enemies Country, and requires the Lord
Admirals Pass; but this Ship at the time of the Adjudication did not pretend to
the Duke of York's Pass, but only to the Duke of Richmond's Pass as Admiral of
Scotland, whereas the Proclamation warrands only the Duke of York to give such
Passes, neither does he produce now any Pass from the Duke, or any extract of a
Pass from him. It was answered for the Strangers, and for John Dyson Citizen of
London, that they having Contracted conform to the Kings Proclamation for
importing Timber, and having found Caution and obtained a Pass conform to the
Proclamation the Ship and Loadning cannot be made Prize, upon the Skippers
Oath, that they had Aboard 1500. Dails belonging to him and the Company. First,
Because the Skipper is testis singularis. 2dly, By the constant Custom Sailers
have Portage Dails allowed. 3dly, The number of the Dails is insert but with
Figures, and might easily have been altered after the Testimony, from 500. by
adding one, and from 150. by adding a Cipher, neither of which would have been
sufficient to infer Confiscation. 4thly, John Dyson Citizen of London, having
bona fide Contracted with the Stranger for importing 6000. Dails, albeit the
Skipper had foisted in some more, it cannot infer a Confiscation of a Loadning
belonging to him the Kings Subject, Contracting bona fide, whatever it may
infer as to the Strangers Ship and his own Dails. As to the second point anent
the wanting the Duke of Yorks Pass, there is produced a Testificat of the Dukes
Secretaries, and the Ship having been Bought from the Privateer by Captain Lie,
who carried her to London, the Duke gives her a Pass to return from London to
Norway, bearing that he had given her a former Pass to come into England; there
is also produced His Majesty's Letter, that he is sufficiently informed that
this Ship is Authorized by a sufficient Pass, and therefore ordering her to be
Restored with Testificats from the Customers, that Caution was found there, and
the Testimony of the Skipper and a Seaman taken at London, bearing that
Captain Lie having Bought the Ship from a Privateer, desired the Skipper (then
in Prison) to show him the Duke of Yorks Pass, which when he showed him, he
pulled it out of his Hand to secure the Ship; against all which it was
objected, that all these were impetrat after the Ship was declared Prize, and
that it is the more suspicious, that at the time of the Adjudication there was
not so much as mention made of the Duke of York's Pass, though the Duk of
Richmonds Pass was rejected, as not sufficient without the Duke of Yorks, and
that as yet there is no Extract, of the Pass out of any Record; and as for his
Majesty's Letter it has been impetrat suppressa veritate, and cannot take away
a Parties private Right, but is salvo jure, as are all Acts of Parliament done
by His Majesty, and three Estates incitata part, much more such a Letter, as
the Lords found in the case of the Castle of Riga, and though there had been a
Pass from the Duke of York, it is likely not to have been of this Date but for
a former Voyage.

The Lords found the alleadgeance for the Privateer, that there was 1500. Dails
Aboard belonging to the Kings Enemies Relevant to Confiscat the Ship and Dails,
but not to Confiscat John Dysons Dails, His Majesty's Subject, who acted bona
fide if he can make out a Pass, and before answer to that point, grants
Commission to Sir Robert Murray to try if there were a Record kept of the
Dukes Passes, and if therein there was a Pass for this Voyage, and to send down
the duplicat thereof compared with the Principal, and Signed by Sir Robert, and
to try at the Records of the Custom-house, if Caution was found there, and if
there was no Records of Passes, to take the Oath of Captain Lie concerning the
Pass alleged taken by him, and ordained the Members of the Court of
Admirality to be Examined upon Oath, whether the Testimonies in Figures for
1500 Dails was given in Figures as it bears, and found the Skippers Testimony
alone to prove not only against himself, but the Owners, because he was
entrusted by them in this Affair.

Duke Hamiltoun contra the Feuars of the Kings Property, July 14. 1669.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun as Collector-general of the Taxations, having Charged
the Feuars of the Kings Property for payment of this current Taxation, several
of them Suspended upon this Reason, that by the Act of Convention there is
abatement given of a third part to such Shires as in the West and South, in
regard their Retours are higher then the rest of the Country, and yet these of
the Kings Property are Charged for the whole. It was answered, that that
abatement cannot extend to the Feuars of the Property, because in all former
Taxations they were distinct both from the Temporality and Spirituality, and
therefore though by the Act of Convention, the Temporality of these Shires be
eased, it will not extend to the Property, especially seeing the Reason of the
Act cannot extend to them, for the Feuars of the Property did bear no Taxation
till the year 1592. and then there was a Commission granted for Retouring them,
and that Complaint of the high Retours of the Shires being then known, these of
the Property would doubtless endeavor to have easy Retours. It was answered,
that the Act of Convention expressly Regulating the Taxation, both as to the
Spirituality and Temporality, it cannot be thought but that these Members did
comprehend the whole, and seeing the Property cannot be of the Spirituality, it
must be of the Temporality, which has the abatement as to these Shires without
exception, and albeit the Property was lately Retoured, yet there being no Rule
to estimate a Merk-land, or Pound-lands Retour by, or how many Pounds of real
Rent makes a Pound of Retour, there could be no other Rule, but to make the
Retour of the Property proportional to the remainant Lands lying in that Shire,
so that where the other Lands are generally highly Retoured, it is evidently
presumed that the Property was so Retoured, and seeing the Property did of old
pay no Taxation, it were strange now to make it bear more then the other
Temporal Lands about it.

The Lords found that the Property of the Shires had the same abatement with
the rest of the temporality in these Shires.

Earl of Marishal contra Leith of Whitehaugh, Eodem die.
IEan Keith having a Right to a Wodset of the Mains and Miln of Troup, and
being Married to John Forbes, she Disponed the Heretable Right to his Brother,
which Right is now by progress in the Person of Leith of Whitehaugh, Isobebs
Brother raised a Reduction in Anno 1628. of the Right granted by her to her
Husbands Brother, and now his Right and an Assignation to the said Process
coming to the Earl of Marishal, and by him to Lesmore, they insist in their
Reduction upon the Reason of Minority and Lesion. It was alleged for the
Defender; First, No Process, because prescription is past since the Right was
granted by Isobel Keith, which cannot be interrupted by the Reduction in Anno
1628. because it is evident by inspection of the Reduction that it is but
filled up of late and that the Executions there of are new, so that it
signifies no more nor blank Paper, or a blank Summonds till the Reasons be
filled up and insisted in before which prescription was complete. 2dly.
Absolvitor, because the Right granted by Isobel Keith to her Husbands Brother,
was to the Husbands behove: Likeas there was a blank Bond granted by the
Brother to the Husband so declaring, and there being no other Contract of
Marriage, this Disposition must be understood as granted to the Husband in
contemplation of the Marriage, and being but the Right of 10000. Merks, which
was but a competent Tocher, it was no Lesion to Dispone the same to the
Husband, or any to his behove, and offered to prove by the Brothers Oath that
there was such a back Bond, and that yet there is a back Bond by him to whom
the Brother Disponed. The Pursuer answered to the first, that interruption is
sufficient by any Act whereby the Party having Right, may follow the same, so
that Summonds (albeit not legally Execute) would yet make an interruption,
though no Sentence could follow thereupon, and a Summonds being blank, must be
presumed as comprehending all the Grounds and Reasons that might have been
filled up therein, but here the Lybelling of the Interest, which is not with
new Ink, bears expressly that the Pursuer as Heir to his Sister has good
interest to Revock and Reduce Deeds done by her to her prejudice, which does
imply the Reason of Minority and Lesion. To the second, albeit the Disposition
by the Wife had been to the Husband, yet it is simply Reduceable upon Minority,
there being no remuneratory Obligation upon the part of the Husband providing
her to a Jointure, in which case if the Provision had been suitable, there
would have been no Lesion, and if not suitable, the Lords might Reduce it in
part, or Rectify it if done in the Wifes Life, but here she having nothing
from the Husband, and being Dead she cannot now receive a Jointure, and so the
Right is Reduceable in totum, especially seeing the said John Forbes did
violently carry away the said Isobel Keith, and Married her without her Friends
Consents, and must be presumed by the same means to have purchased the same
Disposition from her without any remuneratory Provision to her. 2dly, There is
not, nor cannot be known any such back Bond, and it were absurd that the
Husbands Brothers Oath alone should prove the same in favors of his Brother.
The Defender answered, that albeit there was no Jointure provided, yet the Law
provides a Terce, which ofttimes is better nor the Jointure. The Pursuer
likewise answered, that the Law did provide the jus mariti, and the courtesy,
so that either Party ought either to acquiesce in the provision of Law, or the
Provision of Parties must be mutual.

The Lords Repelled the first Defense, especially in respect of the manner of
Libelling the Title, and found not the Executions of the first Summonds to
appear new, and therefore Sustained them, unless the Defender would improve the
same; they found also that alleadgeance, that the Disposition was to the
Husbands behove, was not to be Sustained, especially seeing no back Bonds were
produced, or offered to be proven, and that the manner of Probation offered was
no way sufficient, that there was no Provision for the Wife.

Duke Hamiltoun contra the Lord of Blackwood, Eodem die.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun pursues the Lord of Blackwood, that it may be declared
that he is his Vassal in his Lands of Blackwood, on this ground, that the late
Marquess of Hamiltoun having Disponed to the King the Abbacie of Arbroth, did
in consideration thereof, in Anno 1636. get a Charter from the King of the
Barony of Leshmahago; a part of the Abbacie of Kelso, of which the Lands of
Blackwood were holden Waird; which Lands having been Apprized, and the
Apprizers Infeft holden of the King, the Lord of Blackwood having thereafter
Disponed them to Major Ballantine, by his Contract of Marriage with Blackwoods
Daughter, and the Major having purchased a Right from the Apprizers, both upon
Blackwoods procuratory of Resignation, and the Apprizers, he Resigned the Lands
in the Marquess Hand, and did take his Infeftment holding Waird of him; likeas
this Blackwood who is Heir of Provision to the Major as procreat by Marion Weir
Blackwoods Daughter with William Lowry, has no other Right but as Heir of
Provision to the Major, and yet he has taken Infeftment holding of the King;
likeas the said William Lowry his Father as lawful Administrator, and taking
burden for him, has obliged himself by his Bond, that so soon as the Marquess
should obtain a Right to the Superiority, he should take his Infeftment from
him Waird, and by the Act of Parliament 1661. Ratifying the Act of Annexation
1633. It is expressly provided, that any Right to the Superiority of Kirk Lands
granted by the King, yet notwithstanding the annexation shall be valide, as to
such Vassals who have, or shall consent to the Rights of the Persons obtainers
of the said Superiorities, so that Major Ballantine having consented, by
taking Infeftment in manner foresaid, he and his Successors must continue the
Dukes Vassals. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because any Right the Duke
has, or the Marquess had to the Superiority is absolutely null by the said
Acts of Parliaments, annexing the Superiority of Kirk Lands to the Crown, so
that unless there had been a Dissolution in Parliament, no Right of these
Superiorities is valide, but null, and the exception of the said Act 1661. is
only in the case of the Vassals consenting to a Right of Superiority, Ita est
there can be no Right but legitimo modo by Dissolution. The Pursuer answered;
First, That albeit the King, or his Officers might quarrel his Right as not
proceeding upon Dissolution, or any other having their Right upon Dissolution,
yet the Defender cannot, especially seeing he has Homologat the Pursuers Right,
his Predecessors to whom he is Heir, having taken Infeftment thereupon; likeas
the Pursuer has satisfied the Kings Interest, by giving Bond to the Kings
Advocat to hold the Lands Waird of the King in the same way as the Defender
would, therefore the Advocat has declared he will not concern himself. 2dly,
the Pursuer having obtained a new Right of the King since the Act of Parliament
1661. the same must be valide to him as to these Vassals who have, or shall
consent, because the exception of the Act expressly bears, that such a consent
is equivalent, as if the Vassal had Resigned in the Kings Hands in favor, and
for new Infeftment to the interposed Superior, and had then taken a subaltern
Right of him, against which there can be no pretense, so that (by a Right in
the exception) it cannot be meaned a perfect Right proceeding upon Dissolution,
because that would be valide without the Vassals consent, but that the Vassals
consent being equivalent to a Resignation, makes the Right valide without
Dissolution.

Which the Lords found Relevant, the Duke proving a sufficient consent, but it
was not Decided whether Major Ballantines taking Infeftment would import a
sufficient consent conform to the exception of the Act, so that he might not
thereafter return to the King.

Jack contra Jack, July 15. 1669.
PAtrick Jack having only three Daughters, Margaret his eldest Daughter Married
John Douglas, and there is a Contract betwixt John Douglas and the Tutors of
the other two Daughters, dividing there Fathers Inheritance in three parts, and
mutally Disponing the same with Procuratory and Precept, and there being a
Salmond Fishing holding Waird of the King, which fell to Margarets share, John
Douglas takes Infeftment upon the Tutors Precept, Disponing for the other two
that Fishing after his Death, the said Margaret takes a Gift of Recognition of
the said Salmond Fishing, as falling by the Infeftment taken by John Douglas
without consent of the Superior, and thereupon pursues Declarator, Katharin
Jack and Robertson her Spouse, and the other Sister, pursue a Reduction of the
Contract of Division, as done by their Tutors in their Minority to their
Lesion, and in answer to the Recognition alleged. First, That this
Recognition occurred in the time of the English when Recognitions were
excluded, and such Infeftments by the Law then in use were allowed. 2dly, The
Infeftment here granted proceeded only upon the Disposition of their Tutors,
whose acts except in what is proper to the Administration of their Office is
void. It was answered as to the first, that they opponed the Decision in the
case of Sir George Kinaired against the Vassals of the Master of Gray, by which
it was found that Infeftments taken of Waird-lands without the Superiors
consent, even during the Usurpation, inferred Recognition, and to the second,
that the Division among the Daughters was an act of Administration, that the
Daughters might have been compelled to do. It was answered, that there is no
such Decision produced, and that in the case of the Vassals of Gray, they did
continue in Possession several years after the Kings Restitution, and did not
take Confirmations; but here the said Margaret one of the Sisters who should
have taken Confirmation before she had continued Possession, cannot have
benefit by her own fault, and make use of a Gift of Recognition in her own
Person, proceeding upon her own and her Husbands fault, neither can the
Division be a lawful act of Administration of the Tutors, in so far as they
granted them Precepts of Seizing to be holden of their Pupil, which no Law
could have compelled them to do, but only Procuratories of Resignation, likeas
it was John Douglas fault not to make use of the Procuratory, but of the
Prccept.

The Lords found no Recognition incurred, but because the Parties might have
been troubled if any other had taken the Gift, they ordained the other two
Sisters to pay their part of the expenses of the Gift.

Mr. Archibald Dennistoun contra Semple of Fulwood, July 16 1669.
THe Lairds of Fulwood elder and younger, and Dennistoun being appointed
Overseers by Culgrain to his Daughters, the eldest Daughter being Married to
Mr. Archibald Dennistouns Son, there is a Contract betwixt Mr. Archibald and
the three Overseers, taking burden for the Daughters, by which the Estate of
Culgrain, and Mr. Archibalds Estate are both settled in the Person of his Son,
and the Overseers are obliged to cause the Minors, and their Curators become
obliged to relieve Mr. Archibald of 17000. Merks. Mr. Archibald Charges Fulwood
upon the Contract, who Suspends, alleging that the Clause can only import
that he is liable for his own part, but not in solidum, seeing the Clause bears
not the Overseers to be bound conjunctly and severally. It was answered, that
the obligement is not for payment of a Sum, which is divisible, but for doing a
Fact which is indivisible, viz. the Minors being become bound to relieve, which
is all one as if the Overseers had been obliged to cause the Minors Subscribe a
Bond of releif, which could not divide, but would have obliged every one of
them in solidum, It was answered, that the result of the obligation being
releif of Sums which are divisible, the obligation at least the Damnadge and
Interest succeeding in place thereof ought to be devisible, for the obligation
being factum alienum imprestable to the Overseer, and the third Overseers that
refuses to concur being the Chargers own Brother; there is no reason that the
Overseers who had no Office or obligement, but were only Overseers which is not
nomen juris, should be liable for the Chargers own Brother, his third part
thereof.

The Lords found them only liable pro rata.

Barclay contra Barclay, July 20. 1669.
THe Lord of Towy having only one Daughter Elizabeth Barclay, and his Lands
being provided to Heirs Male, Dispones his Estate to his Daughter, In which
Disposition there being not only a Procuratory of Resignation, but a Prcept of
Seizing, the said Elizabeth was Infeft upon the Precept, and being an Infant,
her Friends thinking it might infer Recognition, took a Gift of the
Recognition, and now pursues Declarator thereon, against the Tutor of Towy Heir
Male, and Captain Barclay as pretending Right by Disposition to the Estate. It
was alleged for the Defenders Absolvitor, because the Disposition granted by
umquhile Towy to the Pursuer his Daughter was granted on Deathbed, at the
least it was retained by the Defunct, and never delivered till he was on
Deathbed, and thereby it is null, and cannot infer Recognition, because the
Law upon just consideration that Parties are presumed to be weak in their
Minds, and easily wrought upon, after contracting of the Disease of which they
Died, has incapacitat them then to Dispone their Heretage, or to take it any
way from their nearest Heirs. 2dlie, Albeit the Disposition had been
Subscribed, and Delivered in liege poustie, yet the Seizing not being taken
till the Defunct was on Deathbed, Recognition cannot be incurred, because it
is not the Disposition, but the Seizing that alienats the Fee, and infers
Recognition. The Pursuer answered; First, That Death bed is only introduced in
favors of Heirs against other Persons getting Right but has no effect against
the Superi or, who is not to consider whether the Vassal was sick or whole, but
whether he has endeavored to withdraw himself, and his Heirs in the
investiture from their Superior. 2dlie, Deathbed is never competent by way of
exception, but by way of Reduction. 3dlie, The Disposition being in favors of
the Disponers only Daughter, reserving his Liferent, albeit it wants a Clause
dispensing with the Delivery, it being Subscribed in liege poustie, it is as
valide as if it had been then Delivered, and if need be's offers to prove that
it was Delivered in liege poustie to the Lord Frazer for the Pursuers use, so
that albeit Seizing had been taken when the Disponer was on Death bed,
Recognition must be incurred, because the Vassal should not have granted a
Precept of Seizing, and Delivered the same without Reservation, and the having
of the Precept of Seizing being always accounted a sufficient* Warrant for
taking of Seizing, and that the Warrant was given at the Delivery of the
Precept, albeit the Seizing was taken when the Disponer was on Deathbed, yet
the Warrant was granted when he was in liege poustie, by the Precept, which
bears in it self to be an irrevockable Power and Warrant to take Seizing, so
that the Vassal had in his liege poustie done quantum in se fuit, to alienat
this Waird Fee.

The Lords found that if the Disposition containing the Precept, was Delivered
to the Vassal without Reservation in the Disponers liege poustie, it would
infer Recognition, though the Seizing were taken after his Sickness, and found
that if the Disposition and Seizing were on Deathbed, it would exclude
Recognition by way of exception, Recognition not being a Possessory, but a
Petitory, or Declaratory Judgment; but seeing it was alleged that the
Disposition was Delivered to the Lord Frazer, the Lords before answer ordained
the Lord Frazer to Depone from whom, and when he Received the said Disposition,
and whether he had any Direction to take Seizing thereupon, or any Direction to
the contrair, and also that the Bailly, Attorney, Notar, and Witnesses in the
Seizing should Depone by what Warrant they did proceed therein.

Earl of Crawfoord contra Rig, Iulie 21. 1669.
THe Earl of Crawfoord pursues Rig for payment of the half of the Expense of
the Building a Park Dike, belonging to the Earl in so far as it is Built, or to
be Built upon the March betwixt him and Rig, and that upon the Act of
Parliament 1661. anent the Parking and Enclosing of Ground, whereby for the
Encouragement of them that Enclose it, it is provided that whatever part of the
Park or enclosure falls upon the March, that part shall be Built upon the equal
Charges of both the Heretors. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the
March betwixt the Earl of Crawfoord and him is not a dry March, but a Burn, and
the Act cannot be understood but of dry Marches, otherwise though there were a
Water intersected, the Heretor Building a Park Dike upon his own side of the
Water, might require his Neighbor on the other side of the Water to pay the
half of his Charges. 2dlie, Some parts of the Marches betwixt the Pursuer and
Defender are Mossy and Bogy Ground, upon which no Dike can stand. The Pursuer
answered, that he opponed the Act of Parliament, and that any Meith betwixt his
Land and the Defenders is an inconsiderable Stripe of Water, which oftimes is
dry, and cannot hinder a Stone Dike to be Built in the very Channel of it, and
for the other if the Pursuer Build not the Dike, the Defender will not be
liable.

The Lords found the Reply Relevant, and ordained the Stripe of Water either to
be wholly without the Dike, or if the Defender pleased that it run a space
within the Dike, and a space without the Dike that either Party might have the
benefit of Watering thereat.

Town of Perth contra the Weavers of the Bridg-end of Perth. Eodem die.
THe Town of Perth pursues the Weavers at the Bridg-end of Perth either to
desist from Weaving in their Suburbs, or otherwise to pay a Duty accustomed to
be paid by the Weavers there to the Town for that Liberty, conform to the
several Tickets produced, and that conform to the 159. Act Parliament 1592.
Entitled the Exercise of Crafts within Suburbs adjacent to Burghs forbidden.
It was alleged for the Defenders, and Sir George Hay their Master Absolvitor,
because the said Act of Parliament has been in continual desuetude, and was
never in use. 2dly Though it were yet effectual, yet it can only be understood
of such Suburbs as have no Privilege, but where the Suburbs are contained in
any Burgh of Regality or Barony, or within any Barony though having no Burgh,
the Privileges of these Erections warrants the exercise of all Crafts-men, so
that these Websters Living within the Barony of Pitcullen; cannot be upon that
pretense hindered from Exercising their Trade. The Pursuer answered, that he
opponed the Act of Parliament being general, and that it was a standing Law
unrepelled, and that the obligations of the Weavers Living there to pay a Duty
for their Liberty of Weaving, did preserve the Act in vigor, at least as to
this Burgh. The Defenders answered, that these Weavers being in no
Incorporation, the Tickets granted by any of them, could prejudge none but
themselves, and being without the consent of the Heretor, cannot infer a
Servitude upon his Barony without his consent, more then his Tennents could
infer a Thirlage without his consent.

The Lords found that the said Act of Parliament did not reach to the
Inhabitants of any Barony, and that the Tickets of the Weavers could not infer
a Servitude upon the Barony, and therefore Decerned only against the granters
of the Tickets personally, for the Duties contained therein.

James Gray contra Margaret Ker, July 23. 1669.
James Gray having Apprized certain Lands, and having Charged the Superior,
pursues for Mails and Duties, Compearance is made for Margaret Ker, who
produces her Infeftment granted by her Husband the common Author, prior to the
Apprizing, and craves to be preferred. The Pursuer answered, that her
Infeftment being granted by her Husband to be holden of the Superior not
Confirmed is null. To the which it was answered, that an Infeftment of a
Liferent granted to a Wife in implement of her Contract of Marriage is valide
though not Confirmed.

The Lords Repelled the alleadgeance, and found the Relicts Infeftment null,
and not sufficient to defend her Possession.

Mr. John Eleis contra Inglishtoun, Eodem die.
CRichtoun of Crawfordstoun having only one Daughter, Disponed his Estate to
John Brown of Inglishstoun, in contemplation of the Marriage betwixt him and
Crawfordstouns Daughter, and to the Heirs-male of the Marriage, which
failzying, to certain other Heirs Substitute, bearing a power to Burden the
Estate with 5000. Merks to whom he pleased, and containing a Clause that the
Disposition should be valide, though not Delivered in his Lifetime; and after
Inglistouns Marriage, Crafordstoun grants a Bond relating to his former promise
of 20000. Pounds to Inglistoun, and the Heirs of the Marriage, (which
failzying:) After which words there follows a blank of a Line and a half, and
the Sum is payable at the first Term after Crawfordstouns Death; the intent of
which Bonds seems to have been, that thereupon Apprizing might proceed to
Denude the Heirs of Line, and to compel the Superior (...) Receive Inglistoun.
Thereafter Crawfordstoun made a second Tailzy, wherein Inglistouns Son, with
his Daughter being then Born, is Feear, and several Members of the Tailzy
altered; and after that he made a third, wherein his Daughter ( Inglistouns
Wife) is Feear, and the Substitutions much like the former. After his Death
these Papers being Exhibit, at the Instance of two of his Daughters, Heirs of
Line, Married to Mr. John Eleis, and Alexander Tran upon a Process ad
deliberandum, and being craved up again from the Clerks, by the Tutor of
Inglistouns Son. It was alleged for the Heirs of Line, that the said Writs
could not be Delivered up, because they not having been Delivered by the
Defunct in his liege po^stie, could not prejudge his Heirs of Line; and albeit
his first Disposition contained a dispensation for not Delivery, which
ordinarily is accounted sufficient, yet where it appears the Defunct altered his
purpose, both by the posterior Dispositions of a different Tenor, and several
Missive Letters showing a resolution after all to alter the same the said
Clause cannot be effectual, and there is no pretense for Delivering the Bond,
and the two other Dispositions, seeing they want that Clause. It was answered,
that the Dispensation with Delivery is in all cases equiparat with the Delivery
it self, and that the remanent Writs ought also to be Delivered, though they
bear not that Clause, because the Heirs of Line being absolutely excluded by
the first Disposition, they have no interest to quarrel the other Dispositions,
and albeit it the posterior Dispositions were to different effects, the want of
Dispensation therein might make them ineffectual* yet where they are but
qualifications of the first Tailzy they are accessory thereto, and must be
Delivered therewith, seeing the Defunct so long as he kept the Writ in his own
Hand, might still alter the same at his pleasure. It was answered, that the
posterior Dispositions wanted the Clause, reserving power to the Defunct to
leave to whom he pleased the 5000. Merks, and it is like he has left it to his
other Daughters, and the Bond may be made use of to overturn his whole intent,
and alter the Tailzy.

The Lords found, that seeing the first Disposition contained a Dispensation
with Delivery, and the rest being accessory thereto, and only altering in
somethings the Tailzy, but still to the first Heir of Tailzy, being the Son of
Inglistouns Marriage; they ordained them all to be Delivered up, and the Bond
also, but with this Declaration, that the Provision anent the 5000. Merks in
the first Disposition, should be holden as repeared in the rest, that the Heirs
of Line might be in no worse Case then by the first, and that the Bond should
only be made use of according to the Substitutions, and Clauses of the Tailzies.

Crawford contra Anderson, July 24. 1669.
John Fleeming having made a Disposition of his Lands to William Anderson
Provost of Glasgow, sometime thereafter William grants Back-bond, Declaring the
Disposition was upon Trust, to the behove of Fleemings Creditors; Young being
one of the Creditors, uses Inhibition and Apprizing against Fleeming, and is
thereupon publicly Infeft; after which William Anderson makes payment to the
other of the Creditors, the said Alexander Young and Crawford his Spouse
Insists for Mails and Duties of the Apprised Lands, Anderson excepts upon his
prior Infeftment from Fleeming, the common Author, upon the said Disposition,
Crawford replys upon the Back-bond, that the said Infeftment is on Trust to the
behove of Fleeming: Anderson duplys that it is a qualified Trust to the behove
of Anderson himself in so far as any Debt was Due to him, and next to the
behove of Fleemings Creditors, and condescends and instructs that he has made
payment to several of these Creditors, so that payment made by him bona fide
must give him Right to the Trust pro tanto, and any Inhibition or Infeftment at
Youngs Instance, was only against Fleeming, and not against Anderson, against
whom there was never any Action. It was answered, that the Trust being for
payment of Fleemings Creditors, cannot be interpret at the option of Anderson,
which would be a most fraudulent conveyance to exclude the more timeous
Diligence of Fleemings other Creditors, but it must be understood to pay the
Creditors legitimo modo, and not to make voluntar payment to these who had done
no Diligence* and prefer them to these who had done Diligence; and albeit the
Inhibition and public Infeftment upon the Apprizing be only against Fleeming,
yet Anderson who was Entrusted for Fleeming, might and ought to have known the
same by searching of the Registers, appointed for publication of Rights, and if
he had neglected the same Sibi imputet, for he being Trusty for Fleeming, could
no more prefer Fleemings Creditors, then Fleeming himself could do.

The Lords Repelled the Defense and Duply, and found that voluntary payment
made by Anderson to Fleemings Creditors, after the Inhibition or public
Infeftment of other Creditors, did not give him any Right by his Infeftment in
Trust, to exclude the more timeous Diligence of the other Creditors.

Street contra Masson and Lord Tarphichen, July 27. 1669.
James Masson being Debtor to the Lord Tarphichen does Infeft his Son an
Infant in his Lands, publicly holden of the Superior, and being a Merchant,
there was a correspondence betwixt him and Mr. Street, and other London
Merchants, whereupon he gave them Bond, mentioning to be for former Accounts,
and Provisions betwixt them, and thereupon followed an Infeftment of
Annualrent. The Lord Tarphichen obtains Decree of Reduction of the Infeftment
granted to the Son, as being posterior to his Debt, and granted by a Father in
defraud thereof: The London Merchants raise also a Declarator, that the
Infeftment granted by Masson to his Son (then an Infant) ought to be affected
with their Debt, in the same condition as it were yet standing in the Fathers
Person, or otherwise ought to be declared void as a fraudulent Deed by the
Father in favors of his Son, the Father being then in tract of Correspondence
and Traffic with these Merchants, who bona fide continued the same, seeing the
Father continued in Possession of the Lands, and built thereupon, and gave an
Infeftment of Annualrent to the Merchants, after the Infeftment granted to his
Son, and likewise raised a Poinding of the Ground upon his Infeftment of
Annualrent, whereupon he now insists. It was alleged for the Son and the Lord
Tarphichen* that the Sons Right being public, and Registrat in the public
Registers, prior to the Pursuers Annualrent for the Bonds whereupon the same
proceeds, it does fully exclude them from Poinding of that Ground. The
Merchants repeat their Declarator by way of reply: To which it was answered,
that whatsoever may be said of Latent and Clandestine Rights betwixt Fathers
and Children, and other confident Persons, yet there is no Law hindering a
Father to give an public Infeftment to his Son, unless it be in prejudice of
the Creditors, to whom he was due Sums at that time, which being a valide
pubick Right, no Deed or pretense of fraud of the Father thereafter can
prejudge the Son in his Right, who being an Infant was not capable to be
partaker of fraud, neither can fraud be presumed as to Creditors, who are but
to Contract thereafter, nor can a public Right Registrat, and a public
Seizing, which all the World may, and all Concerned ought to know, be esteemed
a contrivance or fradulent Right, and as to any Commerce betwixt these
Merchants and the Father, which began before the Sons Right, no respect can be
had thereto, because the Pursuers Bonds are lately for a Sum of Money, and must
import that the former Debts by Traffic were past from or Discharged, and if
need beis offered to prove that they were actually Discharged. 2dly, The making
up a Debt to be prior to take away the Sons Infeftment, can only be probably by
Writ or Oath of Party, and not by Witnesses, who cannot prove above 100.
Pounds. 3dly, Though the cause of the Bond were proven to be a Correspondence
and Traffic begun before the Sons Infeftment, it is no ways relevant against
any Provisions gotten after the Infeftment, for such can have effect but from
their own Date, and the effect is cut off as to what is posterior to this
public Infeftment, seeing the Merchants did either follow Massons Faith upon
their hazards, or else they should have had a Procurator here, and taken advice
how they might have been secured of Massons Estate by the Law of Scotland, who
would have taken notice by the Registers, that Masson was denuded by a public
Infeftment, which nothing he could do thereafter could prejudge, and would have
certified the Merchants thereof, and their failing therein is on their own
peril, and albeit their payment and acting bona fide is sometimes good, though
made to these who had not a valide, but a colorable Right by these who knew
not a better Right, and might have been compelled to pay upon the colorable
Right, yet other Deeds, though bona fide done, are upon the peril of the Actor.
To which it was answered, that by the common Law and Custom of this Nation all
fraudulent Deeds are Reduceable, and there can be no Deed more fraudulent then
this of a Father to his own Infant Son, for whom he is legal Administrator, and
must accept the Right he gives himself, and so colludes with himself to make a
snare to entrap Merchants and Strangers in the midst of a course of Trade with
them, which is a common ground of Law, whether the Debt be prior or posterior
to the Sons Infeftment, and albeit the Merchants Bond be posterior, yet seeing
it bears to be for Ware, Witnesses according to the ordinar custom, are
Receiveable for astructing the Writ, to prove what the Ware was, and when
Received, which will not be prejudged, though there had been a Discharge of the
Ware granted the time of the Bond, unless there had been a real and true
payment of the Money, for there being nothing then paid, this Bond ceases not
to have a true anterior Cause, as if it had been granted on Deathbed upon a
Discharge then given, it would be valide, as being upon an anterior Cause
before the Sickness, neither is there any difference to be made of the Parts
of the Traffic after the Sons Infeftment, but seeing the Correspondence began
before, and is once continued as a constant Correspondence and Traffic, it
must all be drawn back to its beginning, as if the Merchants on both sides had
Contracted when they began their Correspondence, that they should faithfully
pay what either of them Received from other, till the Correspondence was given
up.

The Lords found that this Bond, although posterior to the Sons Infeftment, not
bearing borrowed Money, but Merchant Ware, that the quantity, and times of
furnishing thereof might be proven by Witnesses, and albeit there had been a
Discharge of the Ware, yet so much thereof as was furnished before the Sons
Infeftment would affect the same, but found that the Sons Infeftment being
public and Registrat, no posterior Deed of the Fathers, by continuing Traffic
or Correspondence, nor no pretense of fraud of his, could annul or burden the
said Infeftment, for any Debt contracted posterior thereto.

Executors of Mr. Thomas Ridpeth contra John Hume, Eodem die.
IN a Competition betwixt the Executors Creditors of Mr. Thomas Ridpeth, about
a Sum due to Mr. Thomas by Bond, and by him Assigned to John Hume, who not
having Intimat it in Mr. Thomas his Lifetime, did thereafter get payment of a
part of the same, and a Bond of Corroboration for the rest thereafter, Toredlie
for a Debt due to him by Mr. Thomas Ridpeth, Confirms himself Executor Creditor
to Mr. Thomas, and alleadges that he ought to be preferred, because the
Assignation made to John Hume was an uncompleat Right, wanting Intimation, so
that the Sum remained in bonis of Mr. Thomas Ridpeth, and that he had followed
the only legal way to affect it, by Confirming himself Executor Creditor to Mr.
Thomas, and albeit the Assigney may force any other Executor to pay to him, yet
not an Executor Creditor, who is Executor to his own behove for satisfying his
Debt. It was answered, that the Assignation, though not Intimat, being a
special Assignation, albeit it cannot have Execution by Horning, yet it is the
undoubted ground of an Action, even after the Defuncts Death, against the
Debtor, and no Executor Creditor can have Right thereto.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and preferred the Assigney.

Duke Hamiltoun contra Weir of Balckwood, July 28. 1669.
THe Duke of Hamiltoun insisted in his Declarator against the Lord of
Blackwood, for declaring that he had Right to his Superiority by the Act of
Parliament 1661. bearing, That whosoever should get Right from the King to the
Superiority of the annexed Kirk Lands, the same should be valide as to these
Vassals who had Confirmed, or should Consent. And alleged that Major
Ballantine, to whom Blackwood is Heir, had taken an Infeftment of the Estate of
Blackwood, from the Marquess of Hamiltoun, upon Blackwoods Resignation, and
upon the Resignation of two Apprizers, in Anno 164^. The Marquess then having
a Right to the Superiority, granted by the King in Anno 1636. Which albeit it
was not then valide, because the Lands were then annexed to the Crown, by the
Act of Parliament 1633. and were not Dissolved; yet the Major having taken
Infeftment as to his part, his Heirs could not quarrel the Superiority, though
the King might; and now the King and Parliament by the Act 1661. having
declared such Rights of Superiority valide as to these Vassals who had, or
should Consent, and the Duke having gotten a new Right of the Superiority since
the Act, the former Consent is valide; Likeas William Lowry Blackwoods Father
and Tutor gave a Bond, that so soon as the Duke should obtain the Superiority,
the Son should become Vassal. The Defender alleged that his Fathers Bond was
only effectual against his Father, but not against himself, and his Father
never being Feear of the Estate, his Bond could never be a Consent of the
Vassal, neither can the Consent of any Tutor, or lawful Administrator be
sufficient to give such a Consent, which is not an Act of Office or
Administration; and as to the Infeftment taken by Major Ballantine, First, The
simple taking of Infeftmen from a Lord of Erection by the Vassals of
Kirk-lands, cannot import their passing from the King, and the benefit of the
Act of Annexation, so that they may not return to the King thereafter, neither
can it be such a Consent as it is meant in this Act of Parliament, otherwise
the King and the Leidges should both loss the benefit of the Annexation, seeing
most part of the Vassals have continued to take Infeftment of the Lords of
Erection, through ignorance or inadvertance, finding their Infeftments flowing
from the Lords of Erection, and in respect that the Lords of Erection have
still Right to the Feu-duties till they be Redeemed, which being a common Error
that they may safely so do till the Redemption, and yet may still take
Infeftment from the King when they please, it were a very evil consequence, if
thereupon they should not only lose the benefit to be Vassals to the King, but
by disclamation lose the Property. 2dly, As to this case it cannot be presumed,
but Major Ballantine is in the same case with other Vassals of Kirk-lands, and
also in this much better case, that he is in a manifest and palpable Error, in
so far as the Disposition that he takes from the Apprizers, bears expressly that
the Apprizers are informed that the Marquess of Hamiltoun was Superior, and
their Procuratory bears warrant, either to Resign in the Kings hands, or the
Marquess hands, or in the hands of any other lawful Superior, and Blackwoods
Procuratory in the Contract of Marriage, bears warrant to Resign in the hands
of the King, the Marquess of Hamiltoun, or the Earl of Roxburgh, who had Right
of Erection before the Marquess or any other lawful Superior, so that by
Resigning in the Marquess hand, it is evident that the Resigner and the Major
believed that the Marquess was Superior, whereas he was not, any Right he then
had being absolutely null by the Act of Annexation, 1633. and the King was the
only Superior; yea, by the taking of that Infeftment he incurred disclamation,
unless it were excused by his error, but the Consent requisite here must be
such, as the Party knowing the King was his Superior, did choose to interject
another Superior, and become his perpetual Vassal. It was answered for the
Pursuer, that the acceptance of the Infeftment as it is now stated can be no
Error, because it is evidenced by the Apprizers Rights now produced, that they
hold of the King, and were Infeft by him, and yet the Major took the Infeftment
upon their Resignation in the Dukes hands; likeas the Rights produced relate to
the Right of Annexation, which being a most public Law, and recent at that
time, cannot be thought but to be known to any at that time, and ignorantia
juris neminem excusat. It was answered, that the Error was the greater that the
Apprizers Infeftment was holden of the King, seeing in their Disposition and
Procuratory they mention they were informed the Marquess was Superior, and
therefore the Procuratory is to Resign in the hands of the King, the Marquess
or any other lawful Superior, and the other Procuratory is in the like Terms,
so that the Accepter of the Writs did not intend, nor do any new or free Deed
in favors of the Marquess, but did only that Deed that they supposed was
necessar, and so did not by this Infeftment make the Marquess Superior, as that
his Right should be valide by their Consent, but did take the Right from the
Marquess, as being Superior before they took it, which was an palpable Error,
so prejudicial to them that it might infer disclamation, if it were not
excusable upon Error, and if it had been intended that the Major minded to make
the Marquess his Superior, where he was not, there is no doubt but it would
have been expressed in the Right it self, being so great a deference to the
Marquess, and would not have been past over in common Form; neither can it be
thought that this was procured by the Marquess upon account and favoring the
Major, the Infeftment being granted by the Lady Marquess, as her sons
Commissioner, he being then in England, and having no great influence then
being the time of the Troubles of the Country. It was answered, that the other
Vassals of that Barony did voluntarly Accept the Marquess as their Superior,
and gave Bonds for that purpose, which are produced, and it is most like that
Blackwood has given Bond, which has been lost or given up to him upon taking
this Infeftment, which is an implement thereof.

The Lords did not see that the single taking of the Infeftment from a Lord of
the Erection, did import his Consent to become Vassal thereby for ever, or that
he might not thereafter return to the King, neither did they find such a
Consent as is meant in the Act of Parliament, but considering the whole
Circumstances of this Case, and especially the Fathers clear Bond, who procured
and settled the Controverted Right of this Estate for his Son, then an Infant,
they found there was no Error, but a choice of the Marquess to be Superior in
place of the King, and therefore declared.

Lesly contra Cunningham, Eodem die.
LEsly having Arrested certain Sums for payment of a Tack-duty due to him. It
was alleged for the Party, in whose hands Arrestment was made, that the
Arrestment could not reach any further, then for the Tack-duty Arrested, which
was due the time of the Arrestment, but not for any Term following the
Arrestment, because Arrestment being a Legal Execution, can no more proceed
upon a Debt, before the Term that the Debt be due then Apprizing; and further
alleged, that they had made payment of the subsequent Terms to the Debtor,
which they were in bona fide to do, knowing no Law nor Custom to the contrare.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found the Arrestment to be valide for that
Terms Duty that was then running, and found that the Arrestment was rather like
to an Inhibition then an Apprizing, which gave present payment.

Scot of Hartwood-mires contra November 6. 1669.
SCot of Hartwood-mires gave in a Bill of Suspension of a Decree in foro^
which the Ordinar reported to the Lords; the Reason of Suspension was, that he
being Conveened as Representing his Father, to pay the Debt in question, for
which his Father was Cautioner, he offered to prove payment, denying alwise the
passive Titles, and having proven the most part paid, by Discharges granted to
the Principal Debtor, he was Decerned for the rest, and now offers to Renunce
to be Heir to his Father, conform to his Protestation in the first Act. It was
answered, that the Defense of payment does never suffer the proponer to deny
the passive Titles, or put the Pursuer to a necessity to prove them, by the
constant custom, founded upon good Reason, because the proponing upon any
positive Right of the Defuncts is a behavior as Heir, and in the Act of ^i^is
contestation, a Term is only assigned to the Defender to prove payment* and the
Protestation in effect is rejected, because there is no Term therein assigned
to the Pursuer to prove the passive Titles, in case the Defender failed to
prove payment, neither could there be any by our Custom.

The Lords refused the Suspension, and found that the offer to prove payment,
Liberated the Pursuer from proving the passive Titles.

Lady Towy contra Captain Barclay, November 9. 1669.
THe Lady Towy having pursued Improbation of a Bond of an bundreth thousand
Pounds, alleged granted by the Umquhile Lord of Towy to Captain Barclay, and
of a Disposition of the Estate of Towy, alleged made by the Tutor of Towy,
the day after the Lord of Towy died, at the Barns of Towy, which Tutor fell
Heir-male to the Lord, who had only one Daughter; the foresaid Bond and
Disposition being produced Judicially before by Captain Barclay, though not in
this Process, he refused now to produce the same, but suffered Certification to
be granted against it. The question having arisen whether any further Process
could be in the Improbation, in respect that the principal Writs were not
produced, but Copies bearing the Tenor, Date, and Witnes^es insert.

The Lords the last Session did Examine Captain Barclay, and Steel one of the
Witnesses insert, and certain others, and Steel confessing the Forgery, and
Captain Barclay denying the same after he was Confronted with Steel, and
denying the having of the principal Writs, the Lords sent Captain Barclay and
Steel to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, to be kept there till the Event of the
Plea, or further Order, and did thereafter permit Steel to come out upon
sufficient Caution for a great Sum, and the other Witnesses inserted being
Sumonned, and not Compearing.

The Lords granted Caption against them, and gave Commission to certain Persons
to search for them, and now John Rosse the other VVitness in the Disposition,
and Alexander Ferguson who filled up the Date, and Witnesses, both in the
Disposition and Bond, and Subscribed Witness to the Bond, and insert himself as
VVitness in the Disposition, but Subscribed not as VVitness in the Disposition,
being brought to the Bar.

It was alleged for Captain Barclay, that the said VVitnesses could not be
Examined, First, Because there was now no Process depending, in respect that
the Improbation which was only civilly intented, was determined by the Decree
of Certification, which now is Extracted, and albeit the Lords did before
Examine Captain Barclay and Steel, yet the Process was then depending, and the
Certification not Extracted. 2dly, It was alleged that Rosse and Fergusson
were not habile VVitnesses, having appeared most partial upon the Pursuers
part, having stayed a long time with her in her House, Et prodiderunt
Testimonia, in so far as not only they had declared what they would depone, but
that they had set the samine under their hands, and that by their said
Subscription they acknowledged themselves accessory to the Forgery, and so by
their confession they are socij criminis, and being culpable of so great a
Crime are infamous, and their Testimonies can make no Faith against any but
themselves. It was answered for the Pursuer, that Improbations (even civilly
intented) are not totally determined by the Certification, which is of its own
nature but an Interlocutor Sentence, and if the Pursuer should notwithstanding
thereof find out, and produce the Principal Writ, he might proceed to the
Improving thereof, it being very well consistent, that it might be holden, and
repute false by the Certification, and might also be proven to be false; and
though the Pursuer could not produce the Writ, yet the Process is not wholly
determined by the Certification, but it may be justly desired that all
evidences of the Forgery that were possible, without production of the Writ,
might be taken to remain in retentis, in case the Principal should after be
found, for there might be clandestine Assignations of the Writs made by
Barclay, and Intimat at the Pursuers Dwelling House, or Forged and Antedated
Intimations made up, so that the Certification would not be effectual against
the Assigney's, and though Parties should not insist, the Kings Advocat who is
also Pursuer of the Process might insist, that the VVitnesses might be
Examined, for detecting of the Forgery; and there could be no case more
favorable then this, wherein Captain Barclay had Judicially produced the
Writs, and now wilfully refuses to produce the same, and if Forgers shall
escape, and be in no more hazard, but suffer Certification, though they have
burnt, or wilfully keep up the Writs, it will be an open Door to encourage all
Forgerers, neither have the VVitnesses betrayed their Testimonies, albeit being
Examined by the Lord Fivy, a Nobleman in the Country, one of them did
Subscribe, who had just ground to think that it was no voluntar Deed, but that
the Lord Fivy might have sufficient Authority for that effect; but whatever
objections were against VVitnesses, they are ever Received in Improbations, and
the Lords at Advising of the Cause do consider what their Testimonies may work,
at which time only it will be proper to object.

The Lords notwithstanding these alleadgeances, Examined the VVitnesses.

Rosse acknowledged that he being Servant to Captain Barclay, he called him up
to Subscribe VVitness to a Writ, but told him not about what it was, nor did
not let him hear nor see what was written therein, but rolled it up, and
presented only to him the white paper, near about the end of the Writ, and
desired him to Subscribe VVitness, and he saying that he could not be VVitness,
because he saw no body Subscribe, the Captain answered, that that was nothing
to him, and that he should stand betwixt him and all danger, and that he would
be loath to bid him do any thing would do him harm, whereupon he did Subscribe
as VVitness, and saw not the Tutor Subscribe at all, nor saw not his Name put
to the Writ at that time, and that this was not at the Barns of Towy, the time
of the Lairds Death, as the Date of the Paper bears, but at Achready five weeks
thereafter. Ferguson Deponed that Captain Barclay having been his Tutor, he
induced him to Write over the Bond of 100000. Pounds, whereof he had formerly
gotten a Draught from James Midletoun Notar, wherein Debtor, Creditor, Sums
and Date were blank* and that he filled up Umquh^^^ Towy Debtor, and the
Captain Creditor, and the Sum 100000. Pound, and put in a Date as if it had
been before the Lairds Sickness, albeit it was truly after his Death, and that
the Captain show him Towies Subscription in a Letter, and caused him feinz^e it
to the Bond as near as he could; and likewise Depones that the Captains Brother
was the other VVitness, but that he saw not what the Deponent had done, nor
knew not thereof; He also Deponed that he filled up the Date, and insert the
VVitnesses in the Disposition of the Estate of Towy, at the Captains desire,
and made the Date to be at the Barns of Towy, at the Lairds Death, albeit it
was done at Achready, about a Month or twenty days thereafter, and that there
was no Subscription put thereto at that time, but that the Captain told him
that he would get the Tutor to put his Hand to it thereafter, and that the
Deponent refused to Subscribe VVitness, because the Tutors Name was not thereat.

Upon these Testimonies both these VVitnesses and Steel, who was formerly out
upon Bail, were put in Prison.

Henderson contra Anderson, November 18. 1669.
HEwat having made a general Disposition of his whole Goods and Geir to
Anderson, and thereafter having Disponed to Henderson, his Creditor Henderson
pursues Anderson for Reduction of his Disposition, as being fraudulent in
prejudice of Creditors, without any equivalent Cause Onerous, contrare to the
Act of Parliament, 1621. against fraudulent Dispositions. The Defender,
a^leadged that the Reason was not Relevant upon the said Act, because Hewat and
Anderson were not conjunct persons, and because his Disposition buir an Onerous
Cause, viz. for Sums due to himself, and for 2000. Merks, and other Sums, for
which he was Cautioner for Hewat, and gave in a condescendence of the
particular Sums, and offered not only to Depone thereupon himself, but to
astruct the same by the Oath of Hewats Creditors to whom he paid. The Pursuer
answered, that albeit ordinarily Dispositions amongst persons not conjunct,
bearing Causes Onerous were sufficient, yet this Disposition being manifestly
fraudulent, in that it is omnium bonorum, which the Receiver thereof could not
but know to be in prejudice of the Disponers other Creditors, to whom there was
nothing left, and so is particeps fraudis; and likewise the Sum of 2000. Merks,
which is the only Cause specially expressed, being instructed to be false by
Discharges of the most part of that Sum by the Creditor to Hewat himself, the
remainder of the Cause being general, ought to be instructed not by Andersons
Oath, but by sufficient Probation, at least the verity of the Debt by Hewats
Oath, and the payment thereof by the Oaths of Hewats Creditors, to whom it was
paid, and that it wa. paid by Anderson before the Disposition, at least that
he was bound for payment thereof before the Disposition. The Defender answered,
that Dispositions of Movables are valide without any Writ, especially before
any Diligegence done by the Pursuer, and if these who acquire Movables were
obliged to instruct the Cause otherwise then by their own Oaths, all Commerce
would cease, and the Defender having taken a Disposition in Writ, can be in no
worse case then if he had none.

The Lords having considered the Defenders condescendence, found that what wa^
due to the Defender himself by Hewat before the Disposition, should be
sufficiently instructed by Anderson's own Oath; but as to what was due to him,
or paid by him for H^wat, after the Disposition, and before any Right or
Diligence of Hendersons, that the same should also be allowed, being instructed
by Howats Oath, and these who received the Sums, and that accordingly Anderson
should account for the whole Goods he meddled with, and pay the superplus
thereof to Henderson the Pursuer, over and above the said Articles.

The Creditors of Cowper and Balmerino contra My Lady Cowper. November 25. 1669.
THe Deceast Lord Cowper having made a Disposition of his whole Estate in Fee
to his Lady, and thereby having excluded the Lord Balmerino, his appearand Heir
therein, Balmerino being unwillingly to Enter Heir to Cowper, before he knew
whether the Disposition would stand or not, moves some of Cowpers Creditors,
and some of his own Creditors having Charged him to Enter Heir to Cowper, to
insist in the Reduction of the Disposition, made to the Lady, as being done by
Cowper, in lecto agritudinis. It was alleged for the Lady no Process, at the
Creditors of Cowpers Instance: First, Because they insist only upon Personal
Bonds, granted by the Lord Cowper, and have no real Right to the Land, and so
cannot Reduce a real Right, but upon a real Right: So till they have Apprized
the Lands they have no Interest. 2dly, Albeit Cowpers Creditors might Reduce
the Disposition, as betwixt conjunct Persons, without an onerous Cause, yet not
upon the Reason, ex lecto, because that is a privilege particularly competent
to Heirs, but not to Creditors, as they are Creditors, unless by real
Diligences, they state themselves in place of the Heir, and so make use of his
Right and Privilege. It was answered for the Pursuers, that in that they were
Creditors, they had sufficient interest to crave it to be declared, that the
Estate of Cowper should be Affected with Apprizings upon Cowpers Debts due to
them, notwithstanding this Disposition, which is all the Effect of this
Reduction; and as they may, without any real Right, Reduce, or Declare as
aforesaid upon the Act of Parliament 1621. against fraudulent Dispositions, so
they may declare that any Disposition done on Deathbed, as it could not
prejudge the Heir, so it cannot prejudge the Creditors of the Defunct, or his
appearand Heir, but that they may affect the said Estate, with their Legal
Diligences. It was answered for the Defender, that she repeats the former
Defense. And further alleadges, that she is content to take off the interest of
Cowpers own Creditors, and to Declare that the Disposition shall be burdened
with their Debts: but adhered to her Defense against Balmerino's Creditors,
who, though they produce an Apprizing, yet it is posterior to the Summons, and
their Personal Debts can be no sufficient Title, nor is there any produced. It
was answered for Cowpers Creditors, that the Declarator in their favors was no
way sufficient, nor would not give them a real Right, nor prevent the Diligence
of other Creditors. 2dly, If they had a good interest to Reduce, and thereupon
to Apprize, no offer could take away that interest but payment.

The Lords found the Creditors had sufficient Interest upon their Personal
Bonds to insist upon the Reduction, ex capite lecti; but they found that a real
Security given to Cowpers Creditors, equivalent to an Apprizing, and Infeftment
was sufficient to exclude their Interest.

Monteith of Car^ubber contra Margaret Boyd. December 2. 1669
UMquhil Mr. Robert Boyd of Kips, dying Infeft in the Lands of Kips, and
Gourmyre, and in a Miln, and having left two Daughters Heirs portioners, the
younger having Married Monteith of Carrubber being dead, her Son and Heir
raised a Brief of Division against the eldest Sister, whereupon Division was
made in this manner, viz. The Rent of the Miln being Rated at a 100. pound the
Chalder, being more than the Rent of the Land, the whole Land was set on the
one part, and the Miln on the other, and because the Mansion House belonged to
the eldest Sister, the Land was Adjudged to her, and the Miln Adjudged to the
other, and the superplus of the Rent of the Miln allowed, in satisfaction of
the youngest Sisters Interest in the House. Carrubber raises Reduction of this
Division, upon these Reasons: First, That the Lands ought to have been divided
in two shares, and the House likewise, having convenient Rooms and Lodgings for
both Families, in which they have Dwelt these 20. years, and not to have
Adjudged the Miln only to him, stating the Victual, being only Meal, at a 100.
pound the Chalder, far above the just value; and stating the Miln-Rent
equivalent to the Land-Rent, which is subject to many more Contingencies* and
Expenses in upholding the Miln, and difficulties in recovering the Rent; and in
the common estimation, is not accounted equivalent to Land Rent; so that he is
enormly les'd, and offered a 1000 merks to Margaret the eldest Daughter, to
exchange shares, albeit the Rent of either share be but about three Chalders of
Victual. The Defender answered, that the Reasons of Reduction were no way
Relevant, because all Divisions ought to proceed, as is most convenient for
either Party, and where least is left undivided^* and the Division it self
cannot have a precise Rule, but is in arbitrio of the Inquest, who were knowing
Gentlemen of the Neighbourhead, and upon Oath; so that unless the Lesion were
ultra dimidium justi valoris, it cannot be recalled, seeing an Inquest has the
irrecoverable determination of Life and Death, which is of far greater moment
than this, and this Division proceeded upon Carrubbers own Process, and the
Inquest was called by himself. And albeit it be true, that if the Division
could have been made, by giving both a share of the Lands, and a share of the
Milns, if there had been more Milns, it might have been more equal; but here,
if the Land had been Divided, the Miln behoved to have remained for ever
Common, and so the Division not be complete. Likeas, the Miln lies at a
distance from the Land, and near to Carrubbers own Land, and is not a casual
Rent, arising from free Multures, but has the whole Barrony of Torphichen
astricted by Infeftment; and the Defender is willing to give 2500. merks for
each Chalder of the Miln Rent, which is the ordinary rate of Land Rent; and the
reason why there was no Cavel, or Lot, was because the eldest Sister falling
the Mansion House by Law, she behoved to have the Land therewith.

The Lords Sustained the Reasons, and Ordained a new Commission for a new
Division; here the Lords would not consider the Points severally, whether the
Mansion House ought to have been Adjudged to the eldest Sister, and a
Recompense to the second: Or whether such a House, being no Tower nor
Fortalice, but which would be comprehended as a Pertinent of the Land, gave no
preference; so that Lots ought to have been cast upon the Division: Or whether
the House could be divided, per contignaliones: Or whether the Miln, though it
had been truly Rated, could have been put to answer the whole Land: Or that the
Land behoved to be divided, and the Miln remain common; but only generally, the
Lords gave a new Commission for a new Division.

Weavers of Pearth contra Weavers at the Bridge-end of Pearth December 4. 1669.
THE Weavers of Pearth having pursued the Weavers at the Bridgeend, upon the
154. Act, Par. 1592. prohibiting Trads-men in the Suburbs of Burghs, to
exercise their Trades, whereof mention is made, July 21. 1669. The Defenders
were then assoilzied. Now the Pursuers further allege, whereas it was then
represented, that that Act had never taken effect, but was in desuetude. They
now produce a Decree of the Lords, at the instance of the Weavers of
Edinburgh, against the Weavers of the Suburbs compearing, Decerning them to
desist, and cease from bringing any of their Work within the Liberties of
Edinburgh, and from coming within the same to receive Work; and that upon the
same Act of Parliament which cleares, that the same is not in desuetude, and it
is founded upon a most just, and necessar Ground, viz. That Trads-men within
Burgh pay Stent for their Trade, which were impossible for them to do, if the
same Trads-men were permitted in the Suburbs, who might work cheaper then they,
not being liable to Stent.

The Lords Explained their former Interlocutor, and declared, conform to the
foresaid Decree of the Town of Edinburgh, viz. That Weavers in Suburbs might
serve any in the Landward, but might not come within the Liberties of the
Burgh, for taking up the Work of the Burgesses, in prejudice of the Freemen,
who were Freemen of the Burgh.

John Iaffray contra Alexander Iaffray and Doctor Iaffray his Son. Eodem die.
JOhn Iaffray, late Provost of Aberdeen, pursues a Declarator of the Escheat
and Liferent of Alexander Iaffray his Brother. Compearance is made for Doctor
Iaffray, Son to the Rebel, who produced a prior Gift, with general and special
Declarator, and alleadges no Declarator at the Pursuers instance, upon this
posterior Gift, because the Right is fully Established in his Person, by the
prior Gift and Declarators. The Pursuer answered, First, That the Doctors Gift
is simulat to the Rebels behove, and so accresced to the Pursuer, which appears
from these Evidences; First, That the Doctor is the Rebels own Son. 2dly, That
it is retenta possessione, the Doctor having suffered his Father to possess for
many years. 3dly, It was offered to be proven, per membra curiae of the
Exchequer, that the Gift was purchased by the Rebels Means and Moyen, and
severally it was offered to be proven by the Doctors, and his Fathers Oath
conjunctim, that he had given a Back-bond, declaring the Gift to be to his
Fathers behove. It was answered for the Doctor, to the first, that the Grounds
of Simulation were no way Relevant; for albeit he was the Rebels Son, yet he
had means of his own, and was not in his Family; and albeit he were not eager,
to put his Father out of Possession of his House and Lands: yet his continuance
of Possession is not Relevant, unless it had been to his death, or for a longer
time: but any delay that was, is because it is but of late, that the Doctor
has obtained special Declarator, till which, he was not in capacity to
discontinue his Fathers Possession: Neither can Members of Court be admitted to
prove, that the Father wared out the Expense, and procured the Gift, because
the Doctor, at the passing of the Gift, gave a Back-bond, that he being
satisfied of the Debts due to him, and the Expenses thereof, there should be
place for the Rebels Creditors, and did make Faith at the passing of the Gift,
that it was to his own behove, after which, no Winesses can be admitted against
him, nor any other presumptive Probation, of the simulation of the Gift.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and found also the Pursuers Reply upon the
Back-bond alleged granted by the Doctor to his Father, Relevant to be proven
by the Doctors Oath only.

Sir John Vrquhart Supplicant. December 7. 1669.
SIr John Vrquhart gave in a Supplication to the Lords, bearing, that he being
Cited before the Council, upon several alleged Riots, and fearing that he
might be excluded from appearing in his own defense, by hornings against him;
therefore desired that the Lords would grant Suspension of all Hornings against
him, ad hunc effectum only to give him personam standi in judicio, but
prejudice to the Creditors of all other execution.

Which desire the Lords granted as to all Hornings he should condescend upon.

Pittrichie contra Lord of Geight. December 15. 1669.
MAitland of Pittrichie having obtained the Gift of Recognition from the King,
of certain Waird-lands, held by the Lord of Geight, of His Majesty, pursues
Declarator of Recognition upon Geights Alienation of the Lands, wherein
compearance was made for the Purchasers thereof, who alleged Absolvitor,
because the time of their Alienation by the Law, and custom in force for the
time, Such Alienations without consent of the Superior were valide. The
Pursuer answered, that any Law or Custom that then was, is now Annulled and
Rescinded, as from the beginning* The Defender answered, that no Laws of
whatsoever Tenor, can be drawn back by invalidat Deeds, done by the Law and
Custom for the time, especially as to Matters Penal, such as Recognitions, so
that Parties having acted bona fide, according to any thing they could know for
a Rule, cannot fall in the Penalty and certification of Recognition, which
imports a contempt of the Superior, and cannot be inferred by any Deed legal
for the time. The Pursuer answered, that the contempt is the same, when the
Vassal alie^ nat^ his Fee, without the Superiors consent; and when such
Alienations being by Law become void, and the Superiors Right of Recognition
revived, the Vassal did not after that time crave the Superiors Confirmation
as Heir: so he Lord of Geight having never sought Confirmation from the King
since His Restoration; it is no less contempt, than if since the Kings
Restoration he had Alienat, especially seeing the King refuses Confirmation to
none who demand it. It was answered for the Purchasers, that the Vassal being
Denuded in their favor, according to the Law standing for the time, his fault
cannot lose their Right; for though he should collude against them, yet that
ought not to prejudge them, and there being no obliegment upon the Vassal to
seek a Confirmation, to the behove of the Purchasers, they cannot be prejudged,
for not obtaining the same. The Pursuer answered, that the Purchasers might
have craved the Kings Confirmation of their Right, both for themselves, and in
name of Geight the immediate Vassal, which Geight neither would, nor could
oppose.

The Lords Repelled the Defenses in respect of the Reply, that no Confirmation
was craved, neither by the Vassal nor Purchasers, his Sub-vassals, which they
might have done if they had pleased, and therefore declared the Lands to be
Recognosced.

Innes contra Innes. January 5. 1670.
Innes having granted an Assignation of an Heretable Bond of 6000. merks, 4000.
merks thereof to Robert Innes his eldest Son, and 2000. merks thereof to
William and Ianet Inness his younger Children, and in case of Roberts Decease,
providing his part amongst the rest equally; Ianes having died before Robert,
her Heirs and Roberts Heirs compet for the sum, for Robert died without
Children, and William as Heir to Robert, claimed the whole sum upon this
Ground, that Ianet being substitute by the Father to Robert, without any
mention of Ianets heirs, Ianet having died before Robert, she had never right,
and her Substitution became absolutely void, and her Heirs not being expressed,
this Substitution cannot extend to them, because, though ordinarily Heirs are
comprehended, though not expressed, qui acquirit sibi acquirit suis, yet here is
no Acquisition, but a voluntary Substitution, whereby it may be rationally
conjectured, the mind of the Defunct was, that he would prefer Ianet to Roberts
Heirs of line, not being Heirs of his Body; but not that he would prefer Ianets
Heirs, which were a degree further from his own other Bairns. And the case of
Substitutions in the Roman Law was urged, that if the Substitute died before
the Institute, the Substitutes Heirs have never place. It was answered, that
Institutions and Substitutions with us, do far differ from the Roman
Substitutions, whereby if the Institute succeed, the Substitute has never place
as Heir to the Institute, but the Institutes Heirs whatsomever, which failing,
the Institute is there interpret so, that if the Institute never be Heir, then
the Substitute has place, as Heir of Tailzie, and provision to the Substitute;
so that here Ianets Heirs are Heirs to Robert, who had no Heirs of his Body,
and do exclude William his Brother: and though Ianets Heirs be not mentioned,
yet they are understood and comprehended, because in Tailzies and Provisions,
there uses never to be an Institution or Substitution of a single person,
without the Heirs of their Body. And though there be some singular Cases, in
which Heirs not being expressed, are not comprehended, this is none of them. It
was further alleged for William, that William and Ianet being Substitute
jointly, Ianet deceasing before Robert, her share accresces to him, jure
accrescendi ex conjuncta substitutione. It was answered, that there is here
only substitutio conjuncta verbis, but disjuncta rebus, for the sum is declared
to belong to William and Ianet equally, so that each of them has but Right to a
half.

The Lords preferred the Heirs of Ianet, and found that they had Right as Heirs
of Provision to Robert, and that they ought to be served to him, and not to
Ianet, who had never Right her self, having died before she was, or could be
Heir to Robert.

Elizabeth and Anna Boids. contra James Boid of Temple. January 6. 1670.
JAmes Boid of Temple in his Contract of Marriage, and in a Bond of Provision
relative thereto, became obliged to pay to the Bairns of the Marriage beside
the Heir the sum of 20000. merks at their age of 17. years, reserving his own
Liferent. Elizabeth and Anna Boids, the only Bairnes of the Marriage, now after
their Mothers Death, and age of seventeen, do with concourse of their Husbands,
pursue their Father to employ the said sum of 20000. merks to himself in
Liferent, and them in Fee. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the
Pursuers can have no Interest in this Provision, being expressly conceived in
favors of the Bairns of the Marriage, beside the Heir: Itaest, The Pursuers
are the Heirs appearand of the Marriage, there being no Sons, and will succeed
to the Estate by the Contract, and so cannot demand the Provision made to the
other Bairns, for if there had been a Son of the Marriage only, he could not
have claimed this Clause; and the Pursuers can be in no better Case than he. It
was answered, that in Contracts of Marriage, the meaning of the Parties is
chiefly to be respected, which has been, that in case there were an Heir-male,
or Son of the Marriage, this Sum should belong to the remanent Bairns, and
therefore it is conceived under the name of Heir in the singular number, and
being introduced in favors of the Daughters, it ought not to be interpret
against them, but that they may renunce to be Heirs, and be satisfied with this
Provision only; otherwise they may be absolutely excluded, the Fathers Estate
being apprized by John Boid, whose Legal is near to expire, and who makes use
of the Fathers Name without his Warrant. It was answered, that Law allows not
in any Contract to make up new Clauses, and seeing the Provision is express in
favors of the Bairns beside the Heir, it can never quadrat to their Pursuers,
who are the only Heirs.

The Lords found the Provision not to be extended to the Pursuers, but because
it was suggested, that the Father did not propone it. They desired the Ordinar
to enquire, whether the pursuit was for the Father, and by his Warrant, that
then they might consider, whether John Boid the Appryzer could have interest to
propone that alleadgeance.

Ker of Cavers, and Scot of Golden-berrie Supplicants. Eodem die.
KEr of Cavers, and Scot of Golden-berrie being Arbit^ators nominat by a
Submission, did by Bill crave Warrant from the Lords to authorize them, to
summond Witnesses to compear, and Depone before them in the Cause in which they
were Arbiters.

Which the Lords granted.

Iean Ker contra Downie. January 7. 1670.
JEan Ker having set a House in Edinburgh to Downie for nine Pound ten
Shillings Sterling; She obtains Decree against him therefore: He Suspends on
this Reason, that within 48. hours after he took the House, he did by
Instrument give it over, which is the ordinar custom of Burghs, where there is
no Writ, to quite the Bargain within a short space, unless some offer
interveen, medio tempore, by which the Party is damnified. The Charger
answered, that this House having been taken but fourteen days before the Term,
there is neither Law nor Custom allowing either Party to give over or resile,
there being then no competent time to set again: For albeit Houses sometimes
are given over when they are taken, and quite before Warning time, when the
ordinar occasion of setting to others may occur; yet that cannot be drawn to
this case, and the Instrument of over-giving, was only by Downies Wife, who
show no Warrant. The Suspender answered, that there was no difference, whether
the House was taken before warning time, or after, seeing the Law gives locum
penitentiae, or some small time, which must take place in either case. 2dly,
Albeit the Charger had not been obliged to accept the over-giving, yet de
facto, she has accepted it, because it is offered to be proven, that she set
the House to another, and took Earnest thereupon, which did import that she
quite the first Bargain, seeing at once she could not set it to two. 3dly,
Albeit offer was made of the Keys at the Term, yet it is offered to be proven,
that the House was not void, but that the former Tennents Goods remained
therein.

The Lords Repelled the first Reason of Suspension, upon the over-giving but
found that Member Relevant, that the House being given over, the same was set
to another, and earnest taken thereupon; but found that Point, that the Tennents
Goods, who possessed formerly, were not removed, not Relevant, in respect of
the Custom in Edinburgh, not to remove peremptorly at the Term.

Mr. Laurence Charters contra Parochioners of Curry. January 8. 1670.
MR. Laurence Charters, as Executor Confirmed to Mr. John Charters Minister of
Currie his Father pursues the Parochioners for 1000. Pound for the Melioration
of the Manse of Currie, conform to the Act of Parliament, 1661. which is drawn
back to the Rescinded Act of Parliament, 1649. It was alleged by the
Parochioners, Absolvitor. First, Because the Meliorations of the Manse were
long before any of these Acts, which do only relate to Meliorations to be made
thereafter; and for any thing done before adificium solo cedit, and it must be
presumed to be done by the Minister animo donandi, there being no Law when he
did it, by which he could expect satisfaction. 2dly, Several of the Defenders
are singular Successors, and so are not liable for Reparations done before they
were Heretors. The Pursuer answered, that albeit these Reparations were done
before the year 1649. yet there being subsequent Acts of Parliament, obliging
the Heretors to make the Manses worth 1000. pounds, if these former Reparations
had not been made, the Heretors of this Paroch would have been necessitate to
make up the same, and so in quantum sunt lucrati tenentur. 2dly, The said Acts
of Parliament contained two Points, one is, that whereas the intrant Minister
paid to his Predecessor 500. merks for the Manse, and his Executors were to
receive the same from his Successor; the said Acts ordained the Heretors to
free the Successor, as to which the present Heretors can have no pretense, and
as to the alleadgeance, that they are singular Successors, the Acts oblige
Heretors, without distinction, whether they are singular Successors, or not.

The Lords found the Parochioners only liable for the 500. merks paid by the
Minister at his Entry* and found, that at the time of the Reparation, the
Parochioners not being liable, were not then lucrati, and are not liable by the
subsequent Acts, which extend not ad praeterita, neither did they find the
singular Successors liable, but that the Heretors for the time were only
obliged.

Scot contra Murray. Eodem die.
IN a Process betwixt Scot and Murray; a Husband having granted a Tack of his
Wifes Liferent Lands, and the Wife having promised after his death, never to
quarrel that Tack; yet thereafter insisting against the Tennents, who alleged
upon the said promise, it was answered, that it being but a verbal Promise, not
in Writ, it can be no more effectual, than if it had been a verbal Tack, which
is only effectual for a year, and thereafter, the Setter may resile. It was
answered, that here there is a Tack by the Husband for several years, and the
Wifes promise never to quarrel it, needs no Solemnity in Writ, but is valid, as
pactum de non petendo, or de non repugnando.

The Lords found the Wifes Promise effectual, and that she might not resile
during the years of the Tack.

Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra The Lands of Dunlap and Pitcon, and the Creditors
of Hay of Montcastle. January 15. 1670.
LAdy Lucia Hamiltoun being assigned to a Bond of 4400. merks, grantted by
George Hay of Montcastle, to the Earl of Abercorn, she Inhibits the said
George, and Denunces, and Apprizes his Lands of Birklands and others, and
thereupon pursues Reduction against Dunlap, and Pitcon, and certain other
Creditors, in favors of whom, there is a Disposition granted of the said
Lands by George Hay, and ins^sts on this Reason, that albeit the Disposition
bear, to be for sums of Money, and Causes onerous; yet by a Clause therein, it
is expressly declared, that it is granted to Dunlap and Pitcon, for satisfying
of the Debts due to them: and to the effect they may sell the Lands for
payment, and satisfaction of the said John Hay, his other Creditors
underwritten, for the sums after-specified: after which words, there was left
a large blank, which by ocular inspection, is now filled up with another hand,
than he who Wrote the Body of the Disposition: and which Article so filled up,
is in the same case, as if it had been set upon the Margent and subscribed, or
as if it had been in a several Writ, wanting Witnesses, and cannot be holden to
be of the same date of the Disposition, but must be presumed to have been
filled up after the Pursuers Inhibition, and after she had Denunced and
Apprized the Lands; and therefore as to these Creditors so filled up, their
Rights which are granted by Dunlap and Pit^on, the entrusted Persons, long
after the Pursuers Inhibition and Appryzing, the same ought to be Reduced. It
was alleged for the Creditors Defenders, that the reason, as it is qualified,
is no ways Relevant against them. First, Because the Disposition granted to
Dunlap and Pitcon, being of the whole Lands, and they Infest accordingly, being
long before the Pursuers Inhibition and Appryzing; and the said Disposition and
Infeftment, being to the Creditors behove, albeit their Subaltern Rights from
Dunlap and Pitcon, be posterior, nihil referi: And whereas it is alleged,
that their Names and Sums are filled up in the blank, after the Inhibition and
Appryzing with another hand, and so must be presumed of another date. It is
answered, that the Subscription at the Foot and Body of a Writ, did necessarly
infer, that the whole blanks were then filled up, unless the contrary be
proven, neither uses the Names of fillers up of blanks to be expressed, and it
cannot be presumed, that any man in prudence would subscribe a blank Writ, till
the blanks were first filled up. 2dly, Though it could be proven that the blank
was filled up after the Inhibition, yet the general Terms of the Clause being
insert, a principio, with the same hand, viz. for satisfaction of the said
George his Creditors, it is sufficient, although the particulars were insert
after.

3dly, It is offered to be proven, if need beis by the Oaths of Dunlap. Pitcon,
and the Witnesses insert, that before the subscribing of this Disposition, their
Creditors filled up, were particularly comm^ned on to be filled up, and no
other. The Pursuer answered, that there being here pregnant Evidences of Fraud,
by interposing entrusted persons, and preferring of some Creditors to others by
the Debtor, who was Insolvent, and had no more Estate, in that case the
filling up of the blanks must be presumed fraudulent and posterior, unless the
Creditors prove it was truly^ filled up before the Inhibition, otherwise it
opens a Door to all Insolvent Persons in this manner, to exclude any of their
Creditors from payment, and to have such Clauses ambulatory at their pleasure:
Neither does the general part of the Clause suffice, unless it had been in
favors of the Disponers Creditors generally, or indefinitly, which would have
comprehended the Pursuer; but it being only of the Creditors underwritten, if
these were not underwritten till after the Inhibition they, have no place: And
as for any verbal Communing or Agreement, it cannot be effectual, until it be
redacted into Write, which was not till after the Inhibition.

The Lords found that the blank being filled up with another hand, and so
substantial a Clause, and the Writer not being expressed at the foot, that it was
to be presumed, to be posterior to the Inhibition, unless the Creditors prove
by the Witnesses insert, or others above exception, that it was truly insert
before the Inhibition and Apprizing, wherein they would not admit the Oaths of
the Persons entrusted, and they had no respect to the alleadgeance, that it was
Communed and Agreed upon before the Subscription.

Doctor Balfour and his Spouse contra Mr. William Wood. January 18. 1670.
UMquhil Mr. James Wood having been Tutor to his Wifes Daughter, she being now
Married to Doctor Balfour, they pursue Mr. William Wood, as Representing his
Father for a Tutor account; in which Account, the Auditors reported these
Points. 1. The Pursuer insisted for the whole sums, bearing Annualrent, whereof
no part belongs to the Wife, as Relict, she being excluded by the Act of
Parliament. The Defender answered, that he opponed the Testament, and
Confirmation unreduced, whereby there is a Tripartite Division of the whole
Sums, and the Relict has one Third, which belonged to the Defunct Tutor, her
Husband, jure mariti.

The Lords Repelled this alleadgeance, and found that the Error of the
Confirmation was Corrigible without Reduction.

2. The Defender alleged that he was not comptable for the Annualrent of one
of the Sums acclaimed, because by the Bond, it was provided in Liferent to the
Relict, whereto his Father had right, jure mariti. It was answered, that the
Tutor had given several Discharges of that Annualrent as Tutor, and not as
Husband, and so had Homologat and acknowledged the Pupils right to the
Annualrent. It was answered, that the Discharge was so granted by error and
mistake, and falsa designatio non obest ubi constat dear and offered to prove
by the Bond, that the Wife was Liferenter.

Which the Lords found Relevant.

Andrew Hadden contra Nicol Campbel. January 25. 1670.
ANdrew Hadden having Charged Nicol Campbel upon a Bond Subscribed by him as
Cautioner for Samuel Meikle Goldsmiths. Nicol Campbel Suspends, and raises
Reduction on this Ground, that he being an illiterate man, and could not
subscribe, he was induced to be Cautioner for Samuel Meikle, but on these
express Terms, that he should only be Cautioner for 1200. merks, and
accordingly he gave order to the two Nottars, to subscribe for him as Cautioner
for 1200. merks. The said Andrew Hadden the Creditor, being then present at the
Warrant and Subscription, and yet a far greater Sum is filled up in the Bond,
which he offers to prove by the two Nottars, the Witnesses insert, and the
Communers. The Charger answered, that he oppones his Bond, being a clear liquid
Bond in Writ, which cannot be taken away by Witnesses. The Suspender answered,
that albeit regularly, Writ cannot be taken away by Witnesses, yet Fraud or
Circumvention, or the Terms of Agreement, and Communing in Contracts, are
always probable by the Oaths of the Communers, Writer, and the Witnesses insert.

The Lords would not receive the Reason to be proven in the ordinar way by
Witnesses, but ex officio, ordained the Communers, Nottars, and Witnesses to be
Examined, that they might consider the clearness, and pregnancy of their
Testimonies, whether this Writ was Read to the Suspender, when he gave Warrant
to Subscribe, and what was Read for the Sum, and on what Terms he gave Warrant
to Subscribe.

Mr. John Mcqueen contra Marquess of Douglass, and Mr. Peter Pearson. January
26. 1670.
MR. John Mcqueen having been Minister at Carmichael, and Trainsported to
Edinburgh, he continued to serve the Cure at Carmichael, till March 1669 and
pursues the Marquess for the half years Stipend 1669. Compearance is made for
Mr. Peter Pearson his Successor, who alleged that he is presented in January
to the whole Stipend 1669. and thereby has Right; and Mcqueen was Transported
before January 1669. and though he continued to Preach till February or March,
yet being Transported, he was no more Minister, and did not Preach till the
complete Sowing, or Whitsonday, which is the legal Term for half a years
Stipend of Transported Ministers. It was answered for Mr. Mcqueen, that Pearson
not being Admitted Minister till August 1669. can have no right to a Term
anterior, and the Patrons Presentation can give him no right, because the
Patron has now no power of the vaccand Stipend.

The Lords preferred Mcqueen, seeing nothing was alleged for the Collector of
the Vaccand Stipends, who, it is like, might have excluded both, for at
Whitsonday, neither of them was in officio, or beneficio,

Relict of Mr. Patrick She^ls contra Parochioners of West-Calder. Eodem die.
MR. Patrick Sh^ils having been Minister of West-Calder, he was Suspended by
the Synod and Bishop, for not coming to the Presbyteries and Synods, and the
Act Suspended him; ab officio, and bear, that if he did not come to the next
Synod, they would proceed to Depose him, yet he was not Deposed, but continued
three years in the Possession of the Manse, Gleib, and Stipend, his Wife now
pursues for an Ann, the next Intrant being admitted within three Months after
Mr. Patricks Death, alleadges she could have no Ann, because Mr. Patrick was
Suspended ab officio and benefici^, and produces an Act of the Synod bearing so
much, and the Relict produces that same Act Extracted, and Subscribed by
umquhil Mr. George Hay, who was Clerk at the time, and bears only Suspension,
ab officio, and the Intrants Act is Extracted by the present subsequent Clerk,
and bears ab officio and beneficio. The Relict alleged, that the Act produced
by her, was the only Act intimate to Mr. Patrick, and which is Subscribed by
the Clerk, who was Clerk to the principal Act it self, and accordingly Mr.
Patrick was in bona fide, and did possess three years after.

The Lords adhered to that Act, and found the Ann due, and ordained the other
Act to be kept in retentis, that it might be compared with the Register, that
he might be Cen^ured if he Extracted it wrong.

Lady Towie contra Captain Barclay. Eodem die.
THe Lady Towie insisted in the improbation of a Disposition, alleged granted
by the Tutor of Towie, whose Estate was provided to Heirsmale, but he had
Disponed his Estate to the Pursuer his Daughter, upon which, no Infeftment had
followed in his Life: And also for improving of a Bond of a hundredth and three
thousand pound, alleged granted by the Deceast Lord of Towie, both granted
in favors of Captain William Barclay. In which Improbation, because the Writs
were not produced, a Decree of Certification, holding them as false and
feinzied, and declaring them to make no Faith, was Pronounced and Extracted:
and thereafter the Pursuer having desired, that Alexander Steil, and John Ross,
Witnesses insert in the Disposition, and Alexander Ferguson Writer, and
Witnesses in the Disposition, and Witness in the Bond, should be Examined,
lest by their Death, the means of Improbation should fail, in case the Writs
were hereafter produced.

Whereupon the Lords Examined the Witnesses, Steil and R^ss by their
Depositions, acknowledged, that they being Servants to Captain Barclay, he had
induced them to Subscribe as Witnesses to a Writ, which he had folded up, and
did not Read to them; but they saw that there was no Name, as a Subscription
thereto, at that time, but the Captain told them, that he would get the Tutor
of Towies Subscription thereto, and that he had thereafter dealt with them to
bide by the Writ, as a true Writ; and that albeit it bear date at the Barns of
Towie, the day after the Lord died, yet that it was truly Subscribed at the
Captains House of Achridie, about a Month thereafter, Ferguson did Depone, that
he had Written over the said Disposition, and that it was Subscribed at
Achridie about a Month after Towie died, and that he had insert himself
Witness therein, but had not Subscribed as Witness; and that he was insert, and
Subscribing Witness in the said Bond, to which he Forged, and set to the hand
of the Deceast Lord of Tow^e, at the desire of the Captain, whose Pupil he had
been. The other Witness in the Bond was Richard Barclay, who appeared not: upon
the foresaid Disposition Captain Barclay had made Resignation before the Lords
of Exchequer, and the same had been produced by him, and made use of in
Processes before the Lords, as appeared by the Subscribed Minute, by Mr.
Alexander Birnie his Advocat, acknowledging the getting up of that Disposition
from the Clerk, which he had produced for Captain Barclays interest, and which
he had delivered to the Captain immediately, as he had received the same from
the Clerk. Captain Barclay's Goodson Arnage, was also Examined, who Depo^ed
that he had received a Message from the Captain, to deal with the Witnesses to
come over to Edinburgh, and bide by the Writs. Captain Barclay himself was also
Examined upon Oath, and Confronted with the Witnesses, but he denied all the
foresaid Points in their Testimonies, and Deponed that the said William Steil
being his Servant, had run away from him, and carried away the said Disposition
and Bond, and had gone over to the Lady Towie, and conspired with her for his
destruction. The Tutor also being Examined upon Oath, acknowledged he had
subscribed several Dispositions of the Estate of Towie, in favors of Captain
Barclay, and that some of them were Subscribed, no Witnesses being present, but
that he had bidden the Captain put in what Witnesses he pleased; and that
whereas before he had declared, that he had Subscribed no Disposition, yet he
had done it, being in the power of the Lady Towies Friends, who told him that
Captain Barclay being next Heir-male of Towie, had a mind to take his Life,
which he found afterward not to be true, and was willing to do any Deed for
conveying of the Estate to the Captain, seeing he had no Heirs-male of his own.
The Clerks of Exchequer, Advocats, and several Writers and their Servants, were
also Examined upon Oath, anent the having of the said Disposition and Bond; The
Clerks of Exchequer Deponed that the Disposition was produced in Exchequer, and
Resignation made thereon; and the r^st Deponed, that they had seen the
Disposition and Bond, and were Consulted thereupon by the Captain, but had
given them back to him.

Upon the whole Matter, the Pursuer craved, that now, seeing there was
sufficient Probation of the Forgery of the Writs, and that the Lords had
produced before them a just double of the Disposition, presented to the
Exchequer, that therefore the Lords would proceed to improve the same, and to
declare that the same were false, and Forged by the Captain, and that they
would remit him to the Justice General, according to the ordinary Custom in
Improbations. It was answered for the Defender, that the Lords could not
proceed to improve the Writs, because the Writs were not produced, and never
any Writ in Scotland was improven, but when the principal Writ it self was
produced; neither can it otherwise be, for Improbation before the Lords, being
ad effectum civilem, to take away the Writ, and Right therein, the same behoved
always to proceed upon a particular and individual Writ, which therefore
behoved to be produced before the Lords and Witnesses; for suppose it could be
prove that a Write of such a date, and such a Tenor, was Fabricat, and Forged
at such a time and place, which might in^er a Crime against the Forgers; yet it
could not take away all right by such a Writ, because there might be several
Writs of the same Date; and the making up and improving of a false Writ of such
a Date, could not take away the true Writ of the same Date, unless the
principal Writ it self had been produced, that the Judges and Witnesses might
know that that was the very Writ in question. And therefore our Custom has
settled and fixed upon this Remeid, by allowing a Certification, that if the
Writs called for to be Improven, were not produced, they should be holden and
repute as false and feinzied, and should make no Faith: but did not find them
proven to be Forged and Feinzied: but only to make no Faith, as if they had
been fenzied, which in this Process has been done, and the Lords have neither
Law nor Custom to do any further. 2dly, Albeit the Witnesses have by their own
Testimonies declared themselves to be Forgers of false Writs, their Testimonies
cannot prove that Captain Barclay was either Author, or accessory to their
Forgery* because they are socij criminis, and have by their Testimony made
themselves infamous, as Falsers; and so there is no Faith to be given to their
Testimonies, against any other but themselves: Besides, they have given partial
Counsel to the Pursuer, and have betrayed their Testimonies, by voluntarly
coming to them, and declaring what they would Depone; and therefore the Lords
can neither Improve the Writs, nor Remit Captain Barclay to the Justice, as a
Falser. The Pursuer answered, that albeit the ordinar Course in Improbations,
be only Certification, when the Writs are not produced: yet there is nothing to
hinder the Lords to use extraordinary Remeids, in extraordinary Cases; and
there can be no Case more extraordinar than this, where there is an evident
Tract of Forgery, for taking away a considerable Estate of sixscore Chalders of
Victual Improven by the very Witnesses insert, and that the Writs have not been
produced. It is the Defenders own fault, who knowing them to be false, wilfully
Abstracts the same, and it will be a very great encouragement to Forgery, if
the Forger knew that all his hazard will be, to suffer Certification, if his
Forgery take not; Neither were ever Witnesses in Improbation of Writs, exclude
in the Civil Process, as being socij criminis: But if they acknowledge the
Forgery thereof, they were Improved, though they themselves were accessory to
the Forgery, otherwise if Witnesses can be induced to Subscribe as Witnesses to
a forged Subscription, there were no possibility of Remeid, seeing it cannot be
thought, they would suffer any other to be present, or that the Forger himself
would consess.

The Lords refused to proceed to Improve the Writs, not being produced, or to
Remit the Parties to the Justice: But they did Declare, that by the Processes,
they found Steil, Ross, and Ferguson, the Witnesses to be guilty of Forgery, by
their own Confession; and that they found Captain Barclay had made use of the
Writs, acknowledged to have been Forged, and therefore ordained these of their
number, that were upon the Privy Council, to Represent the Case to the Council,
that they might cognos^e what further Censure they saw just to be Inflicted: and
it was the private opinion of most of the Lords, that at least the Witnesses,
and Barclay himself should be banished: But they found it not proper for them
to express their opinion; or prelimit the Council. But withal, the Lords found
the Probation adduced, sufficient to Declare Captain Barclay and the VVitnesses
infamous, and did Declare them such accordingly.

James Watson contra Agnes Simpson. February 1. 1670.
AGnes Simpson being Infeft by umquhil Alexander Stewart her Husband in
Liferent, in an Annualrent of 40. pound yearly out of the Lands of La^ellethem,
she in Anno 1657. obtained a Decree of Poinding of the Ground, and the
Tennents having Suspended on multiply Poinding calling her, and James Watson
and others, wherein she is preferred in Anno 1666. to her Annualrent, for all
years bygone, and in time coming. In which (...) of multiple Poinding, Watson
was absent. Watson making use of the names of the Tennents, does raise a second
Suspension, Anno 1668. wherein he is called on the one part, and the said Agnes
Simpson on the other part, which now coming to be Discust; it was alleged for
the said James Watson, that the Decree of multiple Poinding against him, being
in absence, he ought now to be heard upon his Right, which is a public
Infeftment, long before the Liferenters base Infeftment, or before it was cled
with Possession. It was answered, that by the express Act of Parliament, anent
double Poindings, It is Declared, that where parties are called, and compear
not, but intent Reduction of the Decree, that they shall never be heard
against the Decree, or what the obtainer thereof has uplifted, unles^ they
show a sufficient Cause of their absence; and that the obtainer of the Decree
shall only be obliged to answer the other Party in the second instance,
according to the Right, which is then competent in his Person, and the obtainer
of the Decree shall have undoubted Right to the Mails and Duties, ay and while
he be warned at the instance of the other Party, and better Right shown, as is
clear by the Act of Parliament, 1584. cap. 3. So that Watson having yet raised
no Reduction of the Decree of multiple Poinding, preferring Simpson, but only
a second Suspension in name of the Tennents, who Suspended before, the said
Agnes Simpson her Decree standing, and her Right standing thereby, cannot be
taken away, till in a Reduction Watson produce a better Right. It was answered,
that Watson does not contend for the years lifted by Simpson, or for any years
prior to his second Suspension, albeit he does produce an unquestionable Right,
that would exclude her from all; yet in regard of the Act of Parliament, he is
sati^fied she be preferred, for all years, till he in his second Suspension,
produce his Rights; but alleadges that he needs not raise Reduction, because
the Act of Parliament does not require the same, but any Complaint or Process
is thereby sufficient; Neither does the ordinar course of Law require a
Reduction of a Decree in absence, but a Suspension alone is sufficient; and if
he be put to a Reduction, his unquestionable Right will be excluded for all
years bygone, and ay and while he raise his Reduction, and produce his Right.
It was answered, that albeit the ordinar course requires not Reduction of
Decreets in absence, yet the Act of Parliament requires the same, because in
the Narrative, it expressly mentions, that the party absent in the double
Poinding, uses to raise Reduction: And in the Statutory part, it mentions, that
the other Parties Complaint shall be heard in the second instance, which is
always understood to be Reduction or Declarator, and in a second Suspension.

The Lords found that Reduction was necessary to take away a Decree of
multiple Poinding in absence, and that a second Suspension was not sufficient,
and therefore preferred Simpson, and found the Letters orderly proceeded, but
prejudice to Watson to raise his Reduction for the Duties in time coming.

Alexander Jack contra Colonel Borthwick. February 2. 1670.
ALexander Jack alleging that he Subscribed a blank to have been filled up in
a Bond of Cautionry, in a Suspension, which was found among the Writs of
umquhil George Jack, as a blank Paper, who lived several years thereafter; and
after his Decease, his Relict finding the same, caused fill up in the blank, a
Bond of ten thousand pound, as being borrowed from Thomas Boid of Pinkill, and
is now in the Person of Colonel B^r^hwick, who having Charged thereupon, the
said Alexander Jack Suspended, and raised Reduction on this Reason, that he had
never any meddling, or borrowing with the said Thomas Boyd; but that the said
Bond was a blank Paper, found among the Writs of the said Deceast George Jack,
and neither he nor the said Alexander were ever worth so great a sum: and now
seeing Colonel Borthwich did not insist in his Charge; Jack was necessitate to
proceed to take away the Bond, and craved that the Lords would Examine
Witnesses, ex officio, upon the truth of this Reason.

The Lords ordained the Writer, and the Witnesses to be first Examined, ex
officio, and thereafter other VVitnesses, as the Lords should see Cause.

Earl of Kinghorn contra The Lord of Pittarro. February 3. 1670.
THe Earl of Kinghorn pursues a Declarator of the nullity of a Bond of 1000.
merks granted by his Father* and now standing in the name of Pi^tarro, as
Creditor on this Ground, that he never borrowed the sum from Pittarro, nor
delivered this Bond to him; but having Trusted umquhil Alexander Keith, as his
ordinar Agent and Writer, with this Bond, blank in the Sum and Date, to have
borrowed Money upon the same, took never effect, but remained so blank in the
hands of Alexander Keith, for many years, till his Death, and thereafter in his
Relicts hands, till her Death, and after her Death the blank was filled up, by
John Bane her Brother, and the Date made in Anno 1647. whereas the Bond
mentions Alber as Cautioner, who Died before the year 1640. whereupon
Pittarro's Oath, and the Oath of Alexander Keith, Friend to the said umquhil,
Alexander being taken, Pittarro acknowledged that the Bond was blank, and
filled up by the said John Bane, as the Reason bears, and that he received the
same by advice of this Alexander Keith, in satisfaction of 1000. merks, and 40.
pound due to Pittarro, by Mr. Roger Mowat, and lifted from him by umquhil
Alexander Keith, by Pittarro's Warrant, for which he obtained Decree against
Alexander Keith his Executrix before the Commissars, now produced in Process,
and proceeding upon a missive Letter of umquhil Alexander Keiths, acknowledging
the Debt. It was answered for Pittarro, that by the Bond produced, it was clear
that his Name was in the Bond, ab initio, as Creditor, and was not filled up,
ex post facto, neither was there any wrong in filling up this Sum, because he
having already proven, that Alexander Keith had uplifted the like Sum of his
from Mr. Roger Mowat, and that my Lord Kinghorn being Debtor to Keith in
considerable Sums of Money, paid to his Creditors, conform to Discharges
produced in Process, Alexander Keith might lawfully have filled up the Sum in
the Bond, for Repayment of Pittarro, whose Money he had uplifted, and any
Friend of his had done my Lord Kinghorn no wrong, seeing thereby he would be
exonered of the like Sum to Keith, and was content yet to Count and Reckon with
Kinghorn, for Alexander Keith, and to Restrict his Sum, to what shall be found
due by the umquhil Earl of Kinghorn to Keith. Likeas, this Alexander Keith by
his Oath in Process Depones that he heard that umquhil Alexander Keith, on his
Deathbed Declared, that Kinghorn was Debtor to him in nine thousand merks:
and therefore he thought it no fault to fill up the blank in this Bond. It was
answered for Kinghorn, that albeit umquhil Alexander Keith was trusted by the
umquhil Earl of Kinghorn with this blank Bond, that Trust being merely personal
to him. It was a most unwarrantable trinkating for any other after his Death,
to fill up the Bond, especially seeing neither by Testament, nor any other Writ
umquhil Alexander Keith, who only was entrusted, and who lived many years
after, and was no ways surprised with Death, did signify that the Money was
borrowed from Pittarro, or taken from any of his Creditors and applied to
Kinghorn's use, and the hearsay of this Alexander Keith is of no moment: and
if any thing be due by Kinghorn to Keith, the Pursuer Represents his Father as
Heir, and shall answer Pittarro, or any Executor or Creditor of Keiths,
whenever he shall be pursued: but cannot be insisted against, upon this Bond,
so unwarrantably filled up.

The Lords found the Declarator Relevant and Proven, and therefore Decerned the
said Bond null, reserving Action against Kinghorn, upon any Debt due by
Kinghorn to Keith as accords.

Tutor of Colzean contra The nearest of Kin of the Pupil. February 5. 1670.
THe Tutor of Colzean having cited the nearest of Kin of his Pupil, to hear and
see it found and declared, that the Pupils Lands were set too high, and could
not be kept at these Rates, and that the Tennents were in Arreir before his
Tutory in great Sums, which if he should exact, would cast the Land waste; and
that it was for the good of the Pupil, to set the Land at lower Rates, which it
might be able to pay, and to quite so much of the Arreirs, as the Tennents
might pay the rest, and be able to continue and Possess.

There being no compearance, the Lords gave Commission to certain Gentlemen in
the Country to Examine the Rate of the Land, and the conditions of the
Tennents, who have reported several of the Rooms to be too high set, and what
ought to be given down, and what behoved to be quite to each Tennent, that was
deep in Arreir, to enable him to pay the rest, and L^bour the Ground.

The Lords approved the Report, with these Qualifications, First, That the
Tutor should Discharge nothing simply, but only till the Pupillarity were past,
that himself and Curators might then proceed as they saw Cause, and that the
Tutor, before any Abatement of the Rooms, should cause make Intimation at the
Market Cross of the Jurisdiction, and at the Paroch Church that such Lands were
to be set, at such a place, such a day, and whoever bade most for them, being
sufficient Tennents, should have them, and that at the said day, if a better
Rate were not gotten, the Tutor might then, or thereafter, set at the Rates
contained in the Commission.

Daniel Cathcart contra Mccorquodail and Mr. James Mirk. February 8. 1670.
Mccorquodail having Married the Daughter of Mr. James Mirk, he, and the Barron
of Mccorquodail his Brother, are obliged to pay yearly 600. merks to the Wife,
after the Husbands Death: and Mr. James Mirk is obliged to pay to Mccorquodail
7000. merks of Tocher: Mccorquodail being Debtor to Daniel Cathcart Writer in
Edinburgh in 600. merks. He arrests the Tocher in Mirks hands, and pursues to
make forthcoming, and for instructing, produces the foresaid Contract of
Marriage. It was alleged for Mirk that he is not obliged to pay, or make
furthcoming the Tocher, unless his Daughter were secured in her Jointer, for
the Tocher and Jointer being the mutual causes of the Contract; neither
Mccorquodail nor any deriving Right from him by Assignation, or Arrestment, can
demand the Tocher till they secure the Jointer, and that exception is Relevant,
both against Mccorquodail and his Assignies. It was answered for the Pursuer,
that if it had been provided by the Contract, that the Tocher should have been
employed for the Wifes security, the Defense had been Relevant, or there might
be some pretense, if there were an obligement upon the Husband to secure the
Wife in Land or Annualrent for 600. Merks. But the Contracters having agreed
for no security for the future, but having agreed upon a Personal security,
viz. of the Husband and his Brother, the Husbands part of the Contract is
performed, and the Husband is no ways Creditor till his Death.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and in respect of the conception of the
Contract as aforesaid, Repelled the Defense, and Decerned.

John Scot contra Alexander Cheisly and David Thomson, February 9. 1670.
John Scot pursues a Declarator of Circumvention against Alexander Cheisly, and
David Thomson, bearing that Alexander Cheisly having a Process against the
Magistrates of Glasgow, for alleged hindering the Executing of a Decree, and
imprisoning him, and being in an evil Condition in his Means, he proposed to
the said John Scot his Good-brother, that he must make use of his Name as
Assigney to that Process, lest his Creditors might affect any thing that might
be obtained thereby, and that John Scot should give a Backbond, declaring that
his Name was put in the Assignation upon Trust. In stead of which Back-bond, he
caused draw up a Bond, bearing that for so much as Alexander Cheisly had Assigned
John Scot to a Process against the Town of Glasgow therefore, and for other
good Causes and Considerations. John Scot obliges him to pay to a blank Person
3850. Merks, in which Bond Alex^nder Cheisly, filled up David Thomsons Name,
and which Bond was obtained by Alexander Cheisly, by gross Circumvention upon
the absolute Trust the said John Scot reposed upon the said Alexander, for
clearing whereof he condescends on these Points, viz. that the said John Scot
was Goodbrother to the said Alexander Cheisly, had been his Prentice, and the
said Alexander was his Curator, and the said John Scot is known to be a simple
Person, and the said Alexander Cheisly to be a subtle Person, ready to take
advantage: Likeas it is evident that he did take advantage of the said John
Scot, about that same time, pretending that he was more able to act John Scots
Affairs then himself, he procured Assignation from John Scot to Bonds of twenty
eight thousand Merks, and put in the Assignation^ Clause of absolute
Warrandice, albeit by a Back-bond of the same Date, it be clear that the
Assignation was only granted for Love and Favor, and for Agenting the Matter,
and that the one half should belong to Cheisly for his pains, and the other to
Scot, but prejudice to Scots obligements in the Assignation, which could be no
other but the Warrandice, whereby albeit Cheisly knew that a part of the Debts
were paid to Scots Father, and a part was insolvent, and that Scot who was
Assigney by his Mother as Executrix, had no more himself but Warrandice from
her Deed, yet by the absolute Warrandice he intended to be sure of the one half
of the Sums, although its known that hardly the half will be recovered, whereby
Cheisly should have all, and Scot who freely granted the Assignation should
have nothing, but less than nothing, by being obliged to make up the half,
though so much were not recovered of the whole. 2dly, All the pretense of the
Plea against Glasgow could never amount to 3850. Merks, yet the Bond is
conceived for absolute payment of that Sum, albeit it was a mere Plea,
depending many years, and Debated without success. 3dly, Cheisly himself did
ever keep the Process and Assignation, and did transact the Plea, or a great
part thereof with the Magistrates of Glasgow, and got payment. In this pursuit
there was no Compearance for Cheisly, but it was alleged for David Thomson,
that whatever had past betwixt Cheisly and Scot, no ground of Circumvention
betwixt them could be Relevant to take away his Right, who seeing the blank
Bond filled up with his Name by Cheisly, before it was brought to him, and
given to him for Debt due to him by Cheisly, and he being nowayes particeps
fraudis, Cheislies Fraud or Circumvention cannot prejudge him, for albeit
Extortion vi majori be vitium reale, that follows the Right to all singular
Successors, yet fraud is not, and reaches none but participes fraudis, both by
the Act of Parliament 1621. and by the civil Law. L.

It was answered for Scot, that albeit it be true that an Assigney for an
O^erous Cause cannot be prejudged by the Oath of his Cedent, and consequently
by no Circumvention probable by his Oath; yet in Personal Rights an Assigney is
in no better case then the Cedent, nisi quoad modum probandi, but what is
relevant against the Cedent, and competent to be proven, either by Writ or
Witnesses is competent against the Assigney, so that the Circumvention against
Cheisly being inferred by pregnant Evidences and Witnesses, and not by his
Oath, it must be effectual against Thomson, whose Name being filled up by
Cheisly, is in effect Cheislies Assigney, for so all blank Bonds are commonly
found by the Lords to have the same effect with an Assignation. 2dly, Assignies
without an Onerous Cause, even as to the Oath of the Cedent, or any other
consideration are in no better case nor the Cedent; but here there is no
Onerous Cause appears, for which Cheisly transmits this Right to Thomson, for
the Bond ^ears not that for Sums of Money due by Cheisly to Thomson, or any
other Cause Onerous on Thomsons part, that Scot should be obliged at Cheislies
desire to pay Thomson, but only that because Cheisly had Assigned a Process to
Scot, therefore Scot becomes obliged to pay to Thomson. 3dly, As there is no
Cause Onerous instructed on Thomsons part, so his own Oath de calumnia being
taken, renders the matter most suspicious, by which he acknowledges he got the
Bond from Cheisly, and that Cheisly was not then his Debtor for so great a Sum
as in the Bond, but that by payments made to him, and for him, thereafter he
became his Debtor in an equivalent Sum, but Depones that he has nothing to
instruct the Debt, nor no Note thereof in his Count Book, though he be an exact
Merchant and Factor, so that there is no Evidence or Adminicle of an Onerous
Cause instructed. And lastly, Albeit Parties getting blank Bonds bearing
borrowed Money from the blank Person, whosoevers Name is filled up, the Bond
then bears the Sums borrowed from him whose Name is filled up, and cannot be
taken away but by his Writ or his Oath, but this Bond bears only a Process
Assigned by Cheisly, and no borrowed Money, or other Cause by Thomson, and
Thomson living in the same Town with Scot whom he knew, and is commonly known
to be a simple Person, and Cheisly a subdolous, he ought before accepting of
the Bond to have acquainted Scot of the filling up of his Name, and if he had
any thing to say, and cannot now pretend that he acted bona fide, but either
must be in dolo or in lata culpa, quae dolo aequiparatur.

The Lords found that having considered the Tenor of the Bond, and Thomsons
Oath, Thomson was in the same condition as to the relevancy and probation of
the Reasons of Circumvention against Cheisly, and therefore found the Libel
Relevant against them both to annul the Bond, the Apprizings, and Infeftment,
and all that had followed thereupon.

Naper contra Gordon of Grange, Feb. 12. 1670.
John Naper, as Representing his Father, did Pursue William Gordon of Grange,
as Representing Hugh his Father, for payment of 2000. Merks, due by the said
Umquhile Hugh his Bond, and upon the said Williams Renuncing to be Heir,
obtaind Adjudication of the Lands of Grange and others, in so far as might
belong to the said Umquhile Hugh his Debtor, his Heirs; and thereupon did
Pursue the Tennents for Mails and Duties. In which Action, it was alleged for
William Gordon, now of Grange, that he stands Infeft by Disposition from the
said Umquhile Hugh Gordon of Grange, his Father, for Onerous Causes, and Sums
of Money undertaken, and paid for his Father, which was found Relevant; and to
evite the same the said John Naper raised Reduction of Grange's Right granted
by his Father, ex capite Inhibitionis, raised against his Father upon the said
Bond, before the Disposition made to this Grange; which Inhibition being
produced this day fourtnight, it was alleged for Grange that the samine was
null, because the Executions buir not a Copy to have been lest at the Market
Cross, at the publication of the Inhibition, which the Lords found Relevant,
and now the Pursuer insisted on this Reason, that the Disposition though it
buir Onerous Causes, yet being after the Contracting of his Debt, by a Father
to a Son, the Narrative bearing the Cause thereof, is not Probative against a
third Party, but the same must yet be instructed.

Which the Lords Sustained, and ordained Grange to produce the Instructions
thereof.

William Lowry contra Sir John Drummond, Feb. 18. 1670.
UMquhile Sir Robert Drummond of Meidup, having Disponed the Lands of Scotstoun
to Sir John Drummond of Burnbank; Mr. John Drummond Writer in Edinburgh, his
Grand Nevoy, intending to Reduce that Disposition as on Deathbed, grants a
Bond to William Lowry of 12000. Merks, who thereupon having Charged the said
Mr. John to enter Heir in special to the Lands of Scotstoun, to the said Sir
Robert his Grand Uncle, Apprizes from him all the Right of the Lands, that
might be competent to him, if he were entered Heir, and thereupon raises
Reduction of Sir John his Right, as being granted by Sir Robert on Deathbed,
in prejudice of his nearest Heirs, in whose place the Pursuer now is by the
Apprizing. It was alleged for the Defender, no Process upon any Charge to
enter Heir against Mr. John Drummond, because he is not the nearest appearand
Heir, but has an elder Brother living. The Pursuer answered, that the said
elder Brother had gone out of the Country 18. years ago, and was commonly
holden and repute Dead; likeas he produced a Missive of one Crei^htoun his
Commerad in the War abroad, bearing the Circumstances of his Sickness, Death
and Burial, Dated July 6. 1667. It was answered, that semel vivus semper
presumitur vivus nis^ contrarium probetur, and what was alleged could be no
probation, but some probabilities of Death. The Pursuer answered, that the
brokard is but presumptio juris, and not presumptio juris and de jure, and
therefore only trans^ert onus probandi, which Probation may be valid without
Witnesses, by such adminicles as the Lords shall find sufficient, which are
here sufficiently alleged, viz. long Absence, common Fame, and a Missive
Letter.

The Lords found that eighteen years Absence, and being holden and repute Dead,
was sufficient Probation to take off the presumption of Life, unless a stronger
Probation for the Parties being on Life were showen, then the naked presumption
thereof.

Lauchlen Lesly contra Guthry. Feb. 19. 1670.
LAuchlen Lesly having Fraughted a Ship belonging to Bailly Guthry in Dundee,
to carry a Loadning of Wheat and Oats from Athol to Leith, the Skipper did put
in by the way at Dundee, and there the Ship received a Crush by another Ship,
whereby the Salt Water entered amongst the Victual, and thereupon the Owners
and Skipper caused Disloaden the Victual, and put it up in Lofts, and Bailly
Guthry the next day after the Crush, gave notice to Robert Lesly in Dundee,
Lauchlens Correspondent, and who made the Bargain for him, to make it known to
Lauchlen what had befallen the Ship and Loadning, who within two days after
came to Dundee and was required to Receive the Victual, which he refused, and
by the Probation adduced in this Cause it was found that it was the Skippers
Fault, that he had put in to Dundee, and so he and the Owners were found liable
for the damnage and interest of the Merchants, and that the Merchants should be
only obliged to take back that Part of the Victual that was unspoiled, and the
Owners should be liable for the Price of the whole as it would have given at
Leith, if the Skipper had kept his Course, deducing the Price of the
sufficient Victual as it now gives, and a Commission being granted to certain
Persons in Dundee to visit the Victual, and to see what condition it was in,
they reported that 36. Bolls of it was sufficient Mercatable Wheat* and that
the Oats was damnisied in 20 Shilling the Boll, and as to the rest, two
reported that it would yet be Brisket for Ships, or Household Servants, and two
reported that it was spoiled, but spoke nothing further. The question arose to
the Lords upon the Commission at the Advising thereof, whether the Owners and
Skipper should be liable for the damnage that was done before the Advertisement
given to the Merchant, or for the damnage that ensued thereafter, because the
Victual being laid together, without separating the wet from the dry, had het
and spoiled thereafter, and if it had been separat at first, the damnage would
have been very little, and so the question was, whether the Owners and Skipper
were obliged to have separat the wet from the dry, and so to have offered it to
the Merchant, or if the offer in general to the Merchant to receive the Victual
was sufficient, though he did not desire them to separat the wet from the dry,
or that they did not offer satisfaction, or security for the damnage of what
was wet.

The Lords found that seeing the damnage had fallen after, and through the
occasion of the Skippers delay, he and the Owners were obliged to separat the
wet from the dry, and to have used diligence to prevent future damnage, wherein
having failzied, they found them liable for the whole damnage, both before and
after the offer; the next question arose was, whether the Skipper and Owners
were obliged to take the spoiled Victual, and pay the Price thereof, as if it
had been sufficient, or if the Merchant was obliged to take it, and the Owners
to make up the damnage.

The Lords found that seeing the Victual remained yet in specie, and was not
wholly Corrupted, but by the report appeared to be useful for Ship Brisket, and
seeing the property thereof still remained in the Merchant,, and the Owners were
only liable for damnage; They ordained the Merchants to Receive the wet
Victual, and gave Commission to the same Persons to report what it was worse
then the Price it would have given at Leith, if the Voyage had held.

The Countess of Cassills contra The Earl of Cassills, February. 22. 1670.
BY Contract of Marriage betwixt the Deceast Earl of Cassills and his Lady, he
is obliged to Infeft her in certain Lands, with absolute Warrandice, and
obliges him that the Lands did pay then, and several years before 6000. Merks
of yearly Rent, beside Kanes and Customs, and over and above Teinds and
Feu-duties, and if it shall please the Lady within six Months after the Earls
Death, rather to choice six thousand Merks of free Rent, then to retain the
Possession of the Land, and to give a Tack to his Heirs and Successors of the
Liferent-lands: Then and in that case he obliges his Heirs and Successors to
pay her 6000. Merks yearly. Therefore the Countess has made it in her option,
and offers to take, and Pursues the Earl her Son to pay yearly the said Sum of
six thousand Merks of free Rent; who alleged, that albeit that Clause be
mentioned to be free Rent, yet he must have allowance of Cess, Maintenance,
and other public Burdens, because by free Rent can only be understood, free of
Teinds and Feu-duties, in respect that this being a Tack-duty for the
Liferent-lands, the Lady thereby can be no further free, then if she enjoyed
the whole Lands, which the Earl is only obliged to make worth 6000. Merks of
yearly Rent, over and above Teind and Feu-duty; but neither does it bear
generally of free Rent, much less of public Burdens, and therefore the
subsequent Clause for the Tack-duty, albeit it bear free Rent, yet it can only
be understood to be free of Teind and Feu-duty, and not to be free of public
Burden, which is further cleared by the Act of Parliament 1646. Ordaining all
Liferenters to hear proportional Burden for any Annualrent, or Tack-duty
belonging to them in Liferent, unless they were expressly freed of
Maintenance. It was answered for the Countess, that she oppones the Clause of
her Contract, bearing free Rent, without ^^nitation, and Contracts of Marriage
are to be extended in favors of Women, and as to the Act 1646. the same is
Repealed, and not Revived again.

The Lords found that by the Contract of Marriage, the Countess was no^ free
of Cesse and Maintenance, which were the only Points at In^^^^cutor; But if
any Debate arose concerning the ordinar^ Taxation, or the Outrikes, or
allowance to Militia Horse, the Lords would hear the Parties thereanent, and
accordingly the next day found the Clause did free my Lady of the ordinar
Taxation, Militia, and so much of the Cesse as the Tennents of the Lands paid
to my Lord.

Murray of Achtertire contra Sir John Drummond, Eodem die.
THe Deceast Earl of Tulli^airn having Wodset the Lands of Logy-Almond, to
William Murray of ^chtertire, by a Contract of Wodset in February 1656. by
which the Earl Assigns. Achtertire to the Mails and Duties of the Lands, due
for the Cropped 1656. at Whitsunday or Martimess, or any other Term, and obliges
him to Deliver to him the Keys of the House, and to enter him in the
Possession at Whitsunday 1656. The Earl having Sold the Lands to Sir John
Drummond, whose entry was to be at Whitsunday 1668. and having used an order of
Redemption in the Earls Name, because the Reversion did not extend to the Earls
Assignies, and having obtained Declarator, Decerning Achtertire to denude
himself of the Lands, who in obedience of the Decree grants a Renunciation,
Reserving to himself the Mails and Duties for the Cropped and year 1667.
Achtertire insists for the Duties of the Cropped 1667. which are payable at
Martimess 1667. The way of payment of the Rent of those Lands, and many others
being, that the Tennent enters at Whitsunday, and pays his Rent at Martimess
thereafter for the whole year; and if he remove at the next Whitsunday, he
pays no Rent at that Term, but leaves his Corns Sown by him upon the Ground,
which he Shears after his removal. Whereupon it was alleged by Sir John
Drummond, that this way of payment being aforehand Duty, whereby the Tennent
pays at Martimess before he Sowes the Cropped, for the Cropped of the year of God
subsequent to the Martimess, that therefore Sir John entering at Whitsunday
1668. and having Right to the Duties due for the Cropped and year 1668. he has
Right to the Duties due at Martimess 1667. because that Duty albeit not payable
in the year 1668. yet is payable for the Cropped 1668. seeing the Tennent if he
were removing at Whitsunday 1668. would for the payment made at Martimess 1667.
carry free with him without any payment, the whole Corns of the Cropped 1668. so
that if Sir John should enter to the void Possession of the Land at Whitsunday
1668. he should have no benefit of the Cropped 1668. but only of the Cropped 1669.
It was answered for Achtertire, that he has the only Right to the Rent payable
at Martimess 1667. and Sir John can have no Right thereto, because his entry
being but at Whitsunday 1668. he can have no Interest in the Cropped then Sown,
and standing on the Ground, unto which no Buyer did ever pretend, but the
Seller if he be in natural Possession, takes always with him his own growing
Cropped, even after the Buyers enters into Possession, and so do all outgoing
Tennents, and so did Achtertire at his entry, which being at Whitsunday 1656.
he lifted the Duties due at Martimess thereafter, but lifted not the Martimess
Duty of the Cropped 1655. payable before his Wodset, and therefore now he must
lift the Rent due at Martimess 1657. or otherwise he wants a years Annualrent;
and if Sir John Drummond should lift a years Rent due at Martimess 1667. and an
other years Rent due at Martimess 1668. he should have two full years Rent of
the Land within half a year of his entry, which was at Whitsunday 1668. and
which can never be understood, except it had been clearly so expressed by the
Parties, neither is there here any further forehand Duty, then what ordinarily
Tennents paying Silver Rent, and not Inlayed or Rentalled Victual entering at
Whitsunday do, for they pay the one half of there Rent at Martimess thereafter,
and the next half at the Whitsunday following that Martimess, and for his years
Rent they must have a years Cropped both of Grass and Corn, and all the
difference here, is that the Rent due for the Possession from Whitsunday 1667.
to Whitsunday 1668. is payable together at Martimess 1667. in the middle of the
year, whereas if it had been according to the ordinar course of Silver Rent,
being payable half at Martimess 1667. and half at Whitsunday 1668. Sir John
Drummond who entered but at the Whitsunday 1668. could have no Right to the
Rent even payable at Whitsunday 1668. so neither can he claim it, when it is
payable jointly at Martimess 1667.

The Lords found that Achtertire had Right to the Rent payable at Martimess
1667. and that Sir John Drummond had Right to no part thereof.

Ierdan of Apilgirth contra Iohnstoun of Lockerby, Feb. 24. 1670.
APilgirth having Apprized Lockerbies Estate, and pursuing on the Apprizing.
Lockerby alleged that the Apprizing was satisfied, at least he offered
presently what was defective in this Account; Lockerby alleged upon a Wodset
Right, whereof an order was used, whereupon the question arose, and was
reported by the Auditor, whether after order used for Redemption of a proper
Wodset, the Sums Consigned, being immediately taken up by the Redeemer, and the
Wodsetter remaining four, or five years in Possession thereafter, and
Declarator of Redemption being obtained upon production of the Sums consigned,
with the Annualrent from the Consignation, whether the Wodsetter had Right to
the Mails and Duties, and might refuse his Annualrent, or if he behoved to
accept of his Annualrent, and count for the Mails and Duties. It was alleged
for the Wodsetter, that the Consignation was but simulat, and the Money
remained not in the Consignators hand, so that he did justly retain the
Possession, and so was not comptable for the Duties.

The Lords found the Wodsetter comptable for the Duties, seeing he had no
objection against the legality or verity of the order, so that it was his fault
that he kept not the day of Consignation, and Received his Money conform to
the premonition; and that the user of the order did no wrong to take up the
Money out of the Consignators hand, seeing Consignations are upon peril of he
Con^igner, he making the same forthcoming at the time of Declarator, with
Annualrent since the Consignation.

George Graham contra The Lord of Stainbires* Feb. 26, 1670.
GEorge Graham Merchant in Edinburgh, Pursues the Lord of Stinbires for a
Merchant Count, taken off partly by his Umquhile Father before his Decease, and
partly by his Factors and Servants thereafter. It was alleged as to the
Defuncts Part of the Account, the samine was not pursued within 3. years of the
off-taking, and therefore it is only probable by Writ, or Oath of Party. The
Pursuer answered, that he was ordinar Merchant to the Defunct for many years,
and that this was a current Account to the Defunct and his Heir, the Defuncts
Funerals having been taken off at his Death, and the other subsequent Furniture
to the Heir always since, so that there is not three years betwixt that part of
the Account that is for the Funerals, and the last of the current Account given
off to the Defunct, and therefore it remains a current Account as to both.
2dly. There is not three^ year betwixt that part of the Account furnished to
the Defunct, and the Summons raised against his Heir, deducing the year and day
in which the ^eir could not be Pursued which is intra annum deliberandi. The
Defender answered, that the currency of an Account was never extended to a
Defunct and his Heir, but only to one Person to exclude the prescription of
probation by Witnesses, neither in this short prescription, is Minority, or any
other incapacity to be deduced, and the Pursuer ought to have raised his
Summonds intra annum deliberandi, though he could not have obtained Decree,

The Lords Sustained the Count, both against the Defunct and Heir, as an
current Account to be proven by Witnesses for the whole.

Doctor Hay contra Marjory Iameson, June 8. 16670.
DOctor Hay as Heir to his Father, who was distressed as Cautioner for Con of
Artrachy, pursues a Reduction and Improbation of all Rights of the Lands of
Artrachy, and others proceeding from Con, in favors of John Stuart Advocat,
William Neilson, Mr. John Alexander, and Marjory Iameson his Relick, or Andrew
Alexander Brother to Mr. John, wherein there was produced an Apprizing against
Con, at the instance of George Stuart^: Likewise a Liferent-seising of Helen
Kinaird, Relick of Con, with a Liferent-tack to her of the Lands contained in
the Seizing, and also of other Lands, and another Tack of two nineteen years of
the same Lands. There is also* produced a Disposition of the Apprized Lands, by
George Stuart to William Neilson, and because William Neilson failzied in
payment of four thousand Merks of the price, George Apprized the Lands again
from William Neilson, and upon all these Rights there is public Infeftments;
there is also a second Apprizing, at the instance of Andrew Alexander, long
after George Stuarts Apprizing from Neilson, but no Infeftment thereon; and
there is produced a Disposition by George Stuart as returning to the Right by
the second Apprizing, made to Mr. John Alexander Advocat, and by him to Marjory
Iameson his Spouse, and public Infeftments on these* and there is a Decree of
Cerification Extracted contra non producta. And now the Doctor insists on this
Reason of Reduction, that George Stuarts first Apprizing against Con the common
Debtor was satis^ied, by Intromission within the Legal, and so is extinct, and
all the subsequent Rights depending thereon fall therewith in consequence. It
was alleged for the Defenders, that George Stuart having in his Person the
Apprizing, and finding Helen Kinaird (Cons Relick) in Possession of a great
part of the Lands by Liferent infeftment, and a Liferent and two ninteen years
Tacks, which would have excluded him; he purchased Right and Assignation
thereto from the Relick, and continued her Possession thereby, and did ascrive
his Possession to the Liferenters Right, and not to the Apprizing, so that his
intromission being by another, and more valide Title, could not be ascrived to
the Apprizing to extinguish it. The Pursuer answered, that the Defense ought to
be Repelled, because he had obtained Certification against the Defenders of all
Rights not produced, and albeit the Liferenters Seizing be produced yet the
Warrant thereof (the Charter or Precept) was not produced, so that it is now
declared as false and feinzied, and the Seizing being only the Assertion of a
Nottar without a Warrant, is no Title to which the Intromission can be
ascrived, and therefore it must be ascrived wholly to the Apprizing. The
Defenders answered, First, That albeit the Charter be now improven for not
production, yet it being a true Evident, and now produced, the effect of the
Certification cannot be drawn back, to make George Stuart countable, who
Possessed bona fide cum titul^, which though now improven, yet the effect of
the improbation can only be a sententia, lite contestata aut ^^ta* before all
which the Liferenter was Dead, and the intromission ended unless the Charter
being produced, had been by Witnesses, or otherwise proven to be false. 2dly,
Albeit Certification be obtained against George Stuart and Marjory Iameson; yet
the Certification is not against Andrew Alexander, from whom Marjory has
purchased Right after the Certification, and produced the Appryzing at Andrews
instance against Neilson, and alleadges, that albeit the Certification could
take away George Stuarts Right, in so far as concerns Marjory Iameson, or her
Authors, yet that being no annulling of their Right, by being Transmitted in
favors of the Pursuer, but only as being void, through want of the necessary
Evidents, it cannot impede Andrew Alexander, against whom no Certification is
obtained, to Defend George Stuart his Authors Right, and to ascribe George his
Possession to the Liferent, Infeftment, whereof he now produces the Charter.
The Pursuer answered, that he was not obliged to take notice of Andrew
Alexander^ Right, because it was incomplete, no Infeftment following thereon:
and because it was null, being deduced against Neilson, after Neilson was
Denuded by the Appryzing led against him by George Stuart, and Infeftment
thereon, so that the Pursuer having prevailed against George Stuarts Right,
which is the only valide Right, and did exclude Andrew Alexander by the Rule
vinco vincentem, etc. and if this were otherwise Sustained, no Improbation
could be effectual, unless all the invalid and imperfect Rights were
particularly improven, which cannot be known, and was never done. 3dly,
Certification being Extracted against George Stuart himself, all Subaltern
Rights flowing from him, fall in consequence, and so Andrew Alexanders Right,
which is but incomplete and latent. The Defender answered, that albeit Andrew
Alexander was not called, or Certification taken against him, as a party
necessar, yet before Conclusion of the Cause, he has a good interest to produce
his Appryzing, and to allege that the Certification against George Stuart his
Author, who neglected to produce the Liferenters Charter, could not prejudge
him, as deriving Right from George Stuart, as a singular Successor; much less
could the neglect or Collusion of Marjorie Iameson prejudge any other but her
self: and therefore craved, that if the Lords would Sustain the Certification
of the Liferent Charter against Marjorie Iameson, that it should be without
prejudice to Andrew Alexander, as to his Right of the said Liferent, or to
George Stuarts Right of the Liferent in so far as the same is Derived to Andrew
Alexander.

The Lords adhered to the Certification in so far as concerned Marjory Iameson,
reserving Andrew Alexanders Right and his Authors, in so far as concerned
Andrew Alexander as accords.

This Cause being again Called the 9. of June, the Defenders ascribed their
Possession to the Liferent, and two nineteen years Tacks, against which there
was no Certification. The Pursuer answered, First, That the Liferenter having
bruiked by a Liferent Infeftment, and having ascribed her Possession to it, it
being improven, she could not ascribe her Possession to the Tacks, quia ex
pluribus titulis ejusdem rei nemo fit Dominus. 2dly, George Stuart the Appryzer
having both the Appryzing and these Liferent Rights in his Person, and not
having declared his mind, by what Title he possessed, his Possession must be
attribute titulo nobilioti, to the Apprizing, and his intromission imputed
thereto, and duriori ^orti, as the Lords use ordinarily to do in ^dium of
Appryzings, if the Appryzer adhere to the expyring of the Legal: but if the
Defender will grant the Lands Redeemable, the Pursuer is content, that the
Intromission be ascribed to the Liferent Right primo loco. The Defender
answered, that though George Stuart Declared not by what Title he Possessed,
yet his intromission must be ascribed potior^ juri, to that Right which was
preferable, and so to the Liferent, which would undoubtedly exclude his
Appryzing: and therefore he acquired Right from the Liferenter, being then in
Possession, and it is unquestionable, that any party who has many Titles,
though they first make use of one, if that be Reduced, they may make use of the
rest, and so the Defender, in respect the Liferent Infeftment is improven,
makes use of the Tacks. The Pursuer further alleged, that the Tacks
comprehended Lands not contained in the Contract of Marriage; and as to there,
it was a voluntar Deed granted by a Husband to his Wife, stante matrimonio, and
Revocked by George Stuarts Appryzing, which is a legal Disposition in the same
way, as if the Husband had Disponed to George: Likeas the Doctors Debt was
anterior to these Tacks, so that George Stuart in so far cannot cloth himself
with these defective Rights, against which his Appryzing would have prevailed.
As to the superplus The Defender answered, that albeit the superplus were
donatio, and that the Husband might recall it indirectly by a subsequent
Disposition, it was never found that an Appryzing was such a Revocation. and
albeit the Doctor might Reduce the Tacks, as to the superplus, being without an
onerous Cause, after his Debt, yet that Reduction cannot take effect ante litem
mot^m, to make the Liferenter, or George Stuart Comptable for the bygone
Fruits, or which is equivalent to impute them in the Appryzing.

The Lords found that the Defenders Intromission might be imputed to the
Liferent Tacks, and not to the Appryzing, but as to the Superplus they were not
clear, even to impute that in the Appryzing, upon the Considerations alleged
by the Defenders, but as to that, the hour prevented the Vote.

Margaret Hunter contra The Creditors of John Peter. June ^1. 1670.
THere being a Competition betwixt Margaret Hunter, the Relict of umquhile John
Peter and his Creditors, Appryzers or Adjudgers of his Lands in Anno 1658. The
said Margaret produced an Infeftment by her Husband, of a yearly Annualrent of
700. merks, bearing to be for Implement of her Contract of Marriage; which
being also produced, by her Registra^^* bear only to four thousand merks of
Tocher, and an obligement, that upon payment of the Tocher, the Husband should
Employ the same, and four thousand merks more for her in Liferent; whereupon
the Creditors alleged that her Infeftment behoved to be restricted to the
Annualrent of eight thousand merks: And she having alleged that her Contract
was Vitiat after the Marriage, and did bear seven thousand merks of Tocher, and
an Annualrent thereof, and of other seven for Jointure, the seven was made
four, but that not being then instructed, the said Margaret was only preferred
as to the Annualrent of eight thousand merks, but prejudice to her to prove any
further, to have been in her Contract, and that the same was Vitiat. She now
pursues a Declarator against the Creditors, that her Contract was altered, and
Vitiat after the Marriage, and that she ought to have a Poinding of the Ground,
for two hundredth and ten merks yearly, the times bygone, wherein her Infeftment
of seven hundredth merks, exceeded the Annualrent of eight thousand merks, and
which she yet wanted, and for the whole seven hundredth merks in time coming,
whereupon Witnesses were adduced, for proving of the Vitiation, which they did
prove. And it was now alleged by the Creditors, that although the Contract
was altered, yet she could have no more in their prejudice, but the annualrent
of eight thousand merks, because the Contract was altered before it was
Registrat; and her Infeftment bears expressly for Implement of her Contract
Registrat, which must import, that it was an Implement of the Contract as it
was altered after the Registration, and not as it was before the Registration,
seeing it does not mention the particular Sum, either of eight, or fourteen
thousand merks; and the seven hundredth merks, is but fifty merks more than the
Annualrent of eight thousand merks, at the time of the Infeftment. 2dly, The
Contract was altered by consent of the Father and the Husband, Contracters, and
if need beis, it is offered to be proven, that it was with the Relicts own
consent, so that it was no Vitiation, but a warrantable alteration, 3dly,
Albeit it had been unwarrantably altered, yet two Creditors having lent their
Money to John Peter, bona fide; and seeing an Infeftment granted by her Husband
in Implement of the Contract of Marriage Registrat; and finding only in the
Register eight thousand merks, and she having produced it, and made use
thereof, and so Homologat the Contract altered, they could be prejudged, but
she might pursue the Heirs of John Peter. 4thly, They having bruiked by their
Infeftment and a Decree, they cannot be liable for the Repetition of bygones,
nor cannot suffer their Ground to be Poynded therefore* But this Declarator can
only take effect a sententia aut lite mota. 5thly, Though the Vitiation were
fully Sustained, John Peter was only obliged to Infeft her in an Annualrent,
e^^e^ring to the Tocher, upon payment thereof, Ita est, the Tocher was never
paid, and so she can only claim the Annualrent of seven thousand merks, which
the Husband should have added to the Tocher. And albeit ordinarily such Clauses
prejudge not the Wife, where the Tocher is not paid through the Husbands
neglect, who is obliged to do Diligence for his Wife. Yet here it is offered to
be proven, that the Relicts Father was insolvent the time of the Contract, and
still thereafter; so that no Diligence could have recovered it. It was answered
for the Relict to the first, that albeit her Infeftment relate to the Contract
which was Registrat, yet not to the Contract as it was Registrat, and the
Husband having so great Trust, the Wife was not obliged to look to the Register
or Extract, which was in her Fathers and Husbands Custody; and by the
Testimonies of the Witnesses it appears, that they have Colluded to abate both
the Tocher and Joyntour, without her Consent. To the second, The Father and
Husband not being sole Contracters, but the Wife, they could not after the
Contract and Marriage, without her consent, alter her Right. To the third, The
Creditors lending their Money, bona fide,, cannot prejudge the Relicts Right;
for bona fides operats only in payment made, and other necessary Deeds, but not
in voluntary Acts, as lending of Money, wherein the Lender must follow the Faith
and Condition of the Borrower, whose Rights, though never so clear in any
Record, yet if thereafter they be improven or Reduced, the Creditors bona
fides, avails nothing, and though the Relict made use of the Contract Vitiat,
yet it was with Reclamation against the Vitiation; and therefore in the
Decree, the same is reserved, which is the Ground of this Declarator. To the
fourth, The Relict craves not the Repetition of the Fruits uplifted by the
Creditors, but only that the Ground may be Poynded for what she wants of
bygones. To the last, By no Practice was ever a Wife prejudged, by not payment
of the Tocher; and albeit the Fathers being Insolvent, might have been a Ground
to the Husband to refuse to Infeft his Wife, in any more than the Annualrent of
7000. merks, till the Tocher were paid: Yet where he has actually Infeft her
in more, and even before Contracting of the Creditors Debt, her Infeftment must
stand valid, seeing it was less than what was her Right.

The Lords found the Vitiation of the Contract to have been after the Marriage,
and Sustained the Declarator, and ordained the Ground to be Poynded for what
she wanted of her Infeftment of 700. merks for bygones, and for the whole in
time coming, unless it were proven by the Wifes Oath, that she consented to the
alteration of her Contract.

Margaret Livingstoun contra Burn^. June 15. 1670.
MArgaret Livingstoun as Donatrix to the Bastardy of a Mason in Falkirk,
pursues a Declarator of the Bastardy, and Restitution of the Goods against
Burns, who alleged no Process, because the Libel, condescending upon the
Bastards Father and Mothers Names, and that the Defunct was Bastard, the same
must be proven by VVitnesses, and so the Summons must be continued, it being a
known Maxim, that all Summons, not instantly verified, either by Presumption,
or Probation by Writ; but which must be proven by VVitnesses, or Oath must be
continued. The Pursuer answered, that albeit ex alundante, she had condescended
on the Bastards Father and Mother, yet whoever were Father and Mother, (that
they were not Married together) is a Negative, and proves it self, and needs no
further Probation, but is presumed, and puts the burden of Probation upon the
Defender, that they were really Married, at least so holden and repute. 2dly,
Albeit Probation were necessar, that the Defunct was either Bastard, or so
commonly repute, the Probation may proceed upon the first Summons, in favorem
Fisci, and is so accustomed in Declarators of Bastardy, and in Declarators of
Non-entry, wherein though the Death of the Vassal be Libelled, yet the Summons
is not continued.

The Lords found that the Summons behoved to be proven, that the Defunct was at
least holden and repute Bastard, and that Bastardy was not presumed, but they
Sustained the Declarator without continuation, and that the Declarator might
proceed upon the first Summons.

Scot of Thirlestoun contra The Lord Drumlanrig. Eodem die.
SCot of Thirlestoun having Adjudged cerrain Lands, Charges Drumlanrig
Superior, to receive him, who Suspends, and alleadges he ought to have a years
Rent, conform to the late Act of Parliament 1669. It was answered that this and
all other Acts have Effect ad futura: But not only this Adjudication was led
before the Act, but Drumlanrig was Charged before the Act, and having no just
reason to Disobey the Charge when he was Charged, he cannot claim the benefit
of a subsequent Law. It was answered, The Tenor of the Act was Declaratory, and
bear a general Clause, that Adjudications should be in all things as Apprizings.

The Lords found, that seeing the Act did not expressly relate to bygones. It
could not extend to any Adjudication, whereupon a Charge was given before the
Act.

Lord Justice Clerk and his Son Sir Alexander. contra Earl of Hume. Eodem die.
THere being a Contract betwixt the Earl of Hume and John Stuart of
Coldinghame, and Francis Stuart, sometime Earl of Bothwel, whereby the Lordship
of Coldinghame was agreed to be possessed by the Earl of Hume, until he were
paid of nineteen thousand Pounds; and also that the Earl should uplift two
hundredth pound Sterling of Annualrent ^orth ^hereof to him, and the Heirs-mail
of his Body; and it was Declared that the Possession for the nineteen thousand
pound, should only be for the Annualrent thereof, fructibus non computandis in
sortent, Sir Alexander Hume as having Right to this Contract by progress, did
pursue a Declarator against the late Earl of Hume, that in regard his
Predecessor, the Earl of Hume Contracter, Died without Heirs-male of his Body,
and he continued to Possess, who had no right to the Annuity of two hundredth
pound Sterling, that his Possession did satisfy the nineteen thousand pound,
and purged the Right, the said umquhil Earl dying, there is now Summons of
Transferrence at Sir Alexanders instance, against this Earl of Hume, as
Representing his Father, and also therein a Declarator against this Earl as
appearand Heir, that the Contract was satisfied and extinct by Intromission,
and the Lands Liberate. Compearance is made for an Appryzer, who produced his
Infeftment, and who had apprized the Lordship of Coldinghame, and all Right
thereof, competent to the late Earl of Hume, who alleged no Process for the
conclusion of Declarator against this Earl of Hume, because all Parties having
Interest, were not called, viz himself who had Denuded the Earl of Hume, and
who is not cited. The Pursuer answered, that this being a Personal Contract
with the Earl of Hume, whereupon no Infeftment had followed, seeing the original
Right was in no Register, he was not obliged to search the Register for the
Infeftments of Appryzers, but it was sufficient for him to call the appearand
Heir of the Contracter: But seeing this Alleadgeance could not be proponed for
the Earl of Hume, being jus ter^tij, neither by the Appryzer, unless he had
produced his Right to verify the same instantly, seeing he now compears for his
Interest, he may be admitted and heard to Defend thereupon in causa, but not to
delay, or exclude the Process till a new Citation, but according to the Lords
ordinar custom, he may see the Process in the Clerks hands, and propone his
Defense as the Lords have done in the same Process against one Park another
Appryzer.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, but allowed this Appryzer, as they had done
the other to see in the Clerks hands, and to be heard upon his Right; and
Ordained all the Advocats compearing for the Defenders, to produce any other
Interest in their hands, and not be delay the Process, by dropping them in
severally.

Langlands contra Spence of Blair. June 17. 1670.
LAnglands pursues Spence of Blair for Reduction of his Rights, of certain
Lands granted by Hamiltoun of Blair his Author, because Hamiltoun was Inhibit
at the Pursuers Instance, before he granted these Rights to the Defender. It
was alleged for the Defender, Absolvitor, because the Inhibition was null,
the question being of Lands lying within the Regality of Culross, and the
Inhibition was not Execute at Culross the head Burgh of the Regality, but at
Pearth the head Burgh of the Shire; and for instructing that Culross was a
Regality, the Lord Colvils Infeftment was produced, which though it bear not
expressly a Regality, yet is bears a Bailirie, with power to Repledge, which
imports a Regality, and accordingly the Bailzie and not the Sheriff, makes
count in Exchequer, and Briefs are direct to the Bailzie; and there is produced
an Inhibition Anno 1657. and another in Anno 1666. Execute at Culross. The
Pursuer answered that Culross was never denominat, holden, or repute a
Regality, but a Bailliry, and though the power of Repledging, be a special
privilege of Regality, yet there are many other privileges thereof, not
consequent upon the Repledging. 2dly, The Pursuer having followed the ordinar
course, used the time of his Inhibition, viz. by Executing at the Market Cross
of the head Burgh of the Shire, he has produced three Inhibitions about that
same time Execute as his is; so that what was then holden repute to be the head
Burgh, is sufficient for him to make his Legal Diligence subsist* And for the
Inhibition Execute at Culross in Anno 1657. It cannot be respected, because it
is known that at that time Regalities were suppressed by the English; and for the
Inhibition in Anno 1666. It might have been done of purpose, pendente processu,
and cannot regulate the custom the time of the Pursuers Inhibition which was in
Anno 1633.

The Lords Sustained the Pursuers Inhibition and Reduced, for they neither
found it clear that Culross was repute a Regality, not that the custom was to
Execute Inhibitions there at that time, but at Pearth the head Burgh of the
Shire.

Mr. James Cheap contra Magistrates of Falkland. June 18. 1670.
MR. James Cheap pursues the Bailzies of Falkland to pay their Debt due to him
by Provest Mains, who being taken by Caption, and delivered to the Bailzies by
the Messengers, they kept him in a private House for the space of ten days,
for which they are alse well liable for the Debt, as if they had brought him
out of the Tolbooth, and kept him in the Town during so much time; and also
they were liable in so far as having put him thereafter in the Tolbooth, they
suffered him to escape forth thereof. It was alleged for the Defenders, they
were not obliged to keep Prisoners, not being a Burgh Royal, but only a Burgh
within a Ste^^rtry, which no Law obliges to receive Prisoners, and the Caption
is only Direct to Sheriffs, Baillies of Regalitie, or Royalty, Steuarts, and
Magistrates of Burghs Royal, but not to Burghs within Steuartries, or within
Regalities, albeit they were the head Burghs of the Steuartry or Regality, not
being Burghs Royal. 2dly, The Defenders cannot be liable for keeping the
Prisoner some days out of the Tolbooth, seeing he did not then escape: And
albeit it be a fault for which they may be censured, to keep a Prisoner in a
private House, yet the doing thereof, if the Rebel escape not, makes them not
liable to the Debt, but especially where the Rebel was never in the Tolbooth,
and when there was Treaty betwixt him and the Pursuer and his Servant, for an
agreement and satisfaction and security for the Sum. 3dly, They offered to
prove, that the Tolbooth was sufficient, and that the Prisoner escaped vi
majori, by breaking the Roof of the Prison without their fault. The pursuer
answered to the first, that he opponed the Act of Parliament, ordaining
sufficient Prison-houses in all Burg^s, Parl. 1597. cap. 273. 2dly, Whateven
this Burgh might have pretended for refusing to accept the Prisoner, yet having
accepted him, and suffered him to escape, they are liable as having
acknowledged themselves to be liable; and if they had refused the Prisoner, the
Pursuer would have Imprisoned him in another uncontroverted Burgh. To the
second Defense it was answered, that Magistrates are liable for the Debt of
Rebels offered to them, if they do not put them in Prison, or if they suffer
them to come out of Prison without Warrant, and the Pursuer needs not Dispute
that the Prisoner went out by the Magistrates fault, and their Contumacy is
sufficient in not obeying the Letters, by putting him in their public Prison,
but keeping him so long in a private House. To the third Defense the Pursuer
offered him to prove, that the Prison was insufficient, and that thereby the
Rebel did escape.

The Lords found, that seeing the Defenders did receive the Rebel upon the
Caption, they could not now Dispute, whether they were liable to receive or
not, as being the head Burgh of the Steuartrie, and therefore the Lords did not
Determine that Point. Likewise, the Lords found that the keeping of the Rebel
ten days before he was Imprisoned, there being Treaty in the time, and they not
urged to put him in the Prison, did not oblige them. As to the last Point
concerning the sufficiency, or insufficiency of the Prison, the alleadgeances
being contrary, the Lords would prefer neither Party in the Probation, but
before answer ordained either Party to adduce Witnesses, concerning the
condition of the Prison, and manner of the Rebels escape.

Collin Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin* Eodem die.
COllin Hay having pursued the Magistrates of Elgin for a Debt of a Rebel,
arrested by him in their Tolbooth, upon Caption, and suffered to escape, and
the Town having failed in all their Defenses, did at last offer to prove, that
the Execution of the Messenger bearing, that he arrested the Prisoner, and made
intimation of the arrestment to the Magistrates, was false, whereupon there
being three Witnesses insert, and one Dead, the Messenger, and one of the
living Witnesses Deponed and acknowledged the arrestment, but differed in the
manner of it, the Execution and the Messengers Oath bear, that he came to the
Rebel being in Prison, and commanded him to remain therein, by virtue of the
Caption, till the Debt were paid; the affirming Witnesses Deponed, that the
Messenger came with the Caption to the Tolbooth Door, but that he went not in,
and does not remember that he knocked at the Door, out that he Chalked the
Door, and commanded the Prisoner to remain, but the Witnesses denied, that they
remembered any thing of the Intimation to the Magistrates, and the other of the
^ing Witnesses denied that he was Witness to the arrestment or intimation,
whence the question arose, whether the intimation was necessar, or though it
were improven, if the arrestment did stand, and were sufficient to oblige the
Magistrates, who were obliged to have a Jailer, and to keep a Book of
arrestments: and next, whether this arrestment was sufficient, not being made
to, or in presence of the Jaylour. It was alleged for the Defenders* that few
Towns in Scotland kept a Record of Incarcerations, and here the Magistrates
and Clerk had sworn, that there was none in that Town at that time, neither did
the Execution bear that the Jaylour was Commanded to (...) the Prisoner; and
albeit one of the Witnesses Depones that he was Jaylour at that time and the
Messenger and other Witnesses depones that he was present at the arrestment,
yet the Execution bears not any command to him to detain the Prisoner, but only
to the Prisoner to remain in Prison, and the Jailer is a Witness in the
Execution, and not a Party, and denis the same even that he was so much as
Witness, by his Oath* neither does the Messenger and the affirming Witnesses
agree in the Substantials of the arrestment; and for the Messenger he is a
Party, whose Execution is quarrelled, and is infamous, and Excommunicate for
great Crimes. It was answered for the Pursuer, that the arrestment stood valid,
and was not improven but approven as to the Substantials requisite thereto, for
the Messenger and one of the two living Witnesses do agree, that the arrestment
was made by the Caption at the Tolbooth Door, in presence of the Jaylour, and
though it was not so formally done, by Commanding the Jaylour, yet it was
sufficient that the Prisoner was Commanded in the Jaylours presence, which is
sufficient, albeit not so formal, in making the Jaylour Witness, neither can
respect be had to the Jaylours Oath, denying that he was Witness, because
confessing he was Jaylour, he is a Party liable for suffering the Rebel to
escape, neither does it import, that after so long a time, the affirming
Witnesses do not remember all the Circumstances, seeing he affirms the
arrestment to be made, and that by his own advice, he being also a Messenger;
nor is the Pursuer obliged to Dispute the Fame of the Messenger, who lived at
so great a distance from him, and was continued in that public Trust
undeposed; so that there being three Witnesses insert in the Execution of the
Arrestment, one of them who is an inhabile Witness, as a Party denying, another
affirming, the third being Dead, does unquestionably stand as a proving
Witness: for where are many Witnesses in a Writ or Execution, if there be one
living that affirms, all that are Dead affirm with him, though other living
Witnesses deny: Much more here, where of three, two being alive, the one
affirms, the other denis, but i^ a Party concerned, and the Messenger also
affirms.

The Lords found that there being here no formal arrestment made to the
Jaylour, astructed by the Testimo^ies of the Witnesses, and that the intimation
thereof was clearly improven, they Assoylzied the Magistrates, but if the
arrestment had been good, they would not have ^ound the Intimation necessar,
whether the Town kept a Book or not, but that the arrestment, made to the
Keeper of the Tolbooth, whom they entrusted, were sufficient.

Douglas of Lumsdean contra Douglas. June 22. 1670.
UMquhil Douglas of Lumsdean Dispones his Estate to Archibald Douglas his Son,
reserving power to himself at any time during his Life, to burden the Estate
with four thousand merks, and did thereafter grant a Bond of four thousand
merks, in favors of Elizabeth Lyel his Wife, in Liferent, and of John Douglas
their Son in Fee, who thereupon pursues the said Archibald for payment. The
Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Reservation in the Disposition,
being in favors of the Defunct, can only be understood of a Legal power, to
burden according to Law. Ita est, This Bond of Provision was granted by the
Defunct, when he was not in legiti^ua potestate, but on Deathbed, especially
seeing the Reservation does not bear a power to Dispone at any time time in his
Life, etiam in articulo mortis, which is the Clause ordinarily adjected, when
the meaning of Parties is, that the power should extend to Deeds on Deathbed;
and thereupon the Pursuer has intented Reduction, which he repeats by way of
Defense. The Pursuer answered, that the Defense is no ways Relevant, because
the privilege excluding Deeds on Deathbed is introduced by Law in favors of
Heirs only, that the Defunct may not prejudge his Heir on Deathbed, but if a
Party Dispone, he may qualify his Disposition as he pleases, and he who has so
accepted the Disposition cannot quarrel the same; and albeit these words etiam
in articulo mortis are sometimes adjected propter majorem ca^telam, yet the
words (at any time during his Life) are sufficient to import either in his
Health or in his Sickness. The Defender answered, that whatsoever might be
alleged, if the Disposition had been to a Stranger, of that interpretation of
the words, yet this Disposition being granted to the Disponers own eldest Son
and appearand Heir, it must be understood only of such Deeds as might be done
against an Heir, and here the Creditors do also concur, who in place of the
Heir might pursue the Reduction, and against whom the Personal objection of
acceptance cannot be alleged. The Pursuer answered, that the Defender was not
appearand Heir, because it is notourly known that his Father begot him in
Adultery, upon the Wife of Sir Alexander Hume, for which Adultery she was
Divorced from her Husband, and albeit he did co-habit with her thereafter as
his Wife, that cannot infer (as in other cases) that she was his Wife, because
Marriage cannot consist betwixt the Adulterer and the Adulteress, and all their
Issue are disabled to Succeed, so that the Pursuer of the Reduction is the
eldest Son, and appearand Heir, in whose favor the Provision is made. 2dly,
Albeit the Defender were, or could be appearand Heir, yet here having accepted
a Disposition of the whole Estate, Burdened with this Provision, his acceptance
excludes him, who is thereby bound, and cannot pretend to any privilege of an
Heir; for albeit re integra he might Renunce the Disposition; and return to
bruik as Heir, now he cannot, having bruiked by the Disposition; and for the
Creditors concourse they are not Pursuers, and they may insist in any Action
competent to them by Law, but cannot oppose this Personal obligement, whereby
the Defender by the acceptance of the Disposition in these terms, is become
obliged to pay the Pursuer the Sum in the Reservation.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and found that the Reservation in the terms as
it stood, did extend to burdening of the Estate at any time the Disponer
pleased, and was in capacity of Sense and Reason* though on Deathbed, and
found no necessity to dive in the questions concerning the Defenders
Procreation, and capacity of Succession, seeing he had accepted, and bruiked by
the Disposition so qualified, and did not admit the Creditors to oppose this
Conclusion, but reserved their Rights as Accords.

Elizabeth Finlaw contra The Earl of Northesk, June 25. 1670.
ELizabeth Finlaw and her Children as Executors to Robert Beat^^e, did Assign
to the Umquhile Earl of ^athie a Bond granted by the Lord of Du^ to the said
Robert (...) of 2200. Pound, and the Lord of Morphie standing infeft under
Trust in Duns Estate, grants a Bond of Corroboration to Eathie, obliging him to
pay all Sums due by Dun to Eathie himself, or to which he was Assigned by Duns
Creditors; thereafter Morphie grants a second Bond of Corroboration to Eathie,
but derogation of the (...) Bond of Corroboration, obliging him to pay what
Sums were due by Dun to Eathie for himself, or as Assigney, and that out of
(...) superplus of Duns Estate, more then paid Morphie himself. The Earl of
Eathie transfers the Bond of 2200. Pounds, and both these Bonds of
Corroboration in favors of the said Elizabeth and her Children, and the
Translation bears for Sums of Money paid by them to Eathie, and bears that the
second Bond of Corroboration was Delivered, but bears not that the first was
Delivered, neither bears it the obligement to Deliver the same; the Translation
also bears Warrandice from Eathies own Deed. The said Elizabeth and her
Children having pursued Morphie upon the said second Bond of Corroboration, he
was Assoilzied, because he had no superplus in his hand. She now pursues the
Earl of Northesk as Heir to his Father, to Deliver the first Bond of
Corroboration transferred by his Father, whereby Morphie was bound to pay the
Debt simply, without preference of his own Debt, or otherways that Northesk
should pay the Damnage and Interest, which is the Debt it self. The Defender
alleged Absolvitor, because by the Transaction his Father was not obliged to
Deliver the first Bond of Corroboration: Likeas the Translation bears the
second Bond of Corroboration Delivered, so that the Pursuer has aequiesced
therein; and albeit the Style of the Translation bears for Sums of Money, yet
it is clear thereby that it is but a retrocession of the Pursuers to their own
Right, which they themselves had Assigned, which does presume that Eathie was
but entrusted, and seeing he has reponed them in better condition than they were
by the second Bond of Corroboration, he cannot be obliged to Deliver the first
Bond which Morphie freely granted as a favor to Eathie, unless it did appear
such a Bond was, and that Eathie had fraudfully put it away, whereanent he is
content to Depone, so that the transferring the first Bond must only import, if
any such Bond was the time of the Translation, which would not oblige Eathie to
Deliver it, unless he had it, much less to pay the Sum pro damno and interesse.
2dly, Eathie having accepted the second Bond of Corroboration, with a
limitation of preferring himself, it qualifies the first Bond of Corroboration,
so that though the Pursuer had it, it could operate nothing more nor the
second, and so he has no Damnage. The Pursuer answered, that Eathie having
transferred the first Bond of Corroboration granted to himself, hoc ipso, he is
obliged to Deliver the same, though the Translation expressly bear not an
obligement to Deliver quod inest, neither can Eathie pretend that there was not
such a Bond of Corroboration, seeing the Translation acknowledges that it was
granted to himself, neither does it appear that the Translation was in Trust,
seeing it bears expressly that it is granted for Sums of Money; and although it
had been in Trust, Eathie having acknowledged that Morphie granted a Bond of
Corroboration to pay the Sum simply; it was contrare to his Trust either to
give back that Bond, or to qualify it. 2dly, The second Bond of Corroboration
cannot restrict the first, because it bears expressly in Corroboration thereof,
and but derogation thereto.

The Lords Sustained the Summons, and Repelled the Desenses, and found that the
Translation in terms as aforesaid did import an obligement to Deliver the first
Bond of Corroboration, or otherwise to pay the Debt, as Damnage and Interest,
seeing Morphie was Assoilzied from the second Bond of Corroboration.

Eleis of South Side contra Carsse, June 28. 1670.
MAster Richard Carsse of Fordel having granted a Bond of 4000. Merks to his
Sister in Liferent, and after her Decease to her Daughter, she Assigns the same
to James Eleis her Brother, who now pursues Charles Carsse as Heir to Doctor
Carsse, who behaved himself as Heir to Mr. Richard Carsse the Debtor, in so
far as he Intrometted with the Charter Chist, and gave a Receipt thereof to
Arnistoun, bearing, that he as Heir to Mr. Richard Carsse had Received his
Charter Chist, and all the Writs and Evidences belonging to the House of
Fordel, which Charter Chist he kept two years, and Died, it being in his
Possession; likeas he raised Breevs to Serve himself Heir, and Subscribed a
Revocation of all Deeds done by Mr. Richard in his Minority, which is
Registrat: The Defender alleged the condescendencies are no ways Relevant,
for as to the Charter Chist, as he might have pursued Arnistoun to produce it
for inspection ad deliberandum, so he might Receive it from Arnistoun
voluntarly for that same effect, which cannot import behavior, unless he had
made use of some of the Writs belonging to him as Heir, and this being an
odious universal passive Title, any probable excuse ought to liberat,
especially this Doctor, who was a Doctor of Divinity, Reciding in England, and
ignorant of the Law of Scotland, and who never enjoyed the least benefit of
Mr. Richards Estate, and the Defender was content to restore the Charter Chist
re integra, and to instruct by the Oaths of the Friends Consenters in his
Discharge, that there was nothing wanting, but it was in the same case he
Received it; as for the taking out of Breevs, albeit it signified the Doctors
purpose to have been Heir, yet behavior must include an Act of immixtion, or
meddling with the Heretage, and animus adeundi, as having no other Title or
intent but as Heir; and as for the Revocation it is a null Act, operative of
nothing, but for Reduction which was not Intented, and is no meddling with the
Heretage. The Pursuer answered, that there could be no more palpable and
unquestionable immixtion, then by the Receipt of the Defuncts whole Writs and
Evidences, and that without so much as making an Inventar thereof, to have been
Subscribed by the Haver of the Charter Chist and him, neither has he qualified
his Receipt so as that he might Deliberat, but bears him as appearand Heir, to
have Received the same simply; likeas he detained the same two years; and as to
his Ignorance, Ignorantia juris n^minem excusat, and the Pursuer is in this
also favorable, that this Bond is a Provision granted to Mr. Richards Sister,
and Heir of Line, and the Doctor, and this Defender were but Heirs of Tailzy of
a further Degree.

The Lords found the condescendence Relevant conform to the Receipt of the
Tenor foresaid, and the retention of the Charter Chist without Inventar so
long; and whereas it was moved amongst the Lords, that they had oftimes refused
vicious Intromission against any Representing the Intrometter, unless Sentence
or Pursuit had been against the Intrometters in their own Life, whether that
should be extended to behavior as Heir, where there was no Pursuit against the
Behaver in his own Life, but the Behavior being so considerable and universal,
with all the Evidents without Inventar, it did not take with the Lords, neither
did the Party plead it, but the Lords did not find that the taking out of
Breevs, or the Revocation Imported Behavior.

Greigs contra James Weems, June 30. 1670.
BY Contract of Marriage betwixt James Weems and umquhile Judith Nairn: It was
agreed that the Means and the Estate of either Party, contained in an Inventar
of the date of the Contract, should return to either Party, failzying Bairns of
the Marriage, and should not be under communion. Thereafter the Wife provides a
Daughter of a former Marriage, to a part of her Means in the Inventar, with her
Husbands consent. By which Contract it is provided, that in case the Marriage
dissolve within year and day, or in case at any time thereafter, there being no
Children, the Tocher should return to the said Judith Nairn: And the said
Judith leaves in Legacy 1200. Dollars due by the Estates of Bremen, which was a
part of her Inventar, to her Husband and her three Children of the first
Marriage, there being no Children of the second Marriage; whereupon John,
Charles and Judith Greigs pursues the Husband for the Legacy, as having
uplifted this Sum from the Estates of Bremen. The Defender alleged, First,
That the Clause in the Contract of Marriage, taking away the communion of
Goods, and making even the moveable Estate of either Party to return, is
against the Law of Scotland, inconsistent and ineffectual; for any Reservation
or Provision in favors of the Wife, does ipso facto return to the Husband jure
mariti, which jus mariti neither is nor can be Discharged* 2dly, Albeit the
first Contract of Marriage were consistent, yet the Sum in question being
provided to one of the Daughters of the first Marriage by her Contract, upon
condition to return to the Wife if the Marriage dissolved, the Marriage
dissolving* it comes back to the Wife tanquam novum jus ex pacto acquisitum,
and so it falls under the Husbands jus mariti, as well as any Sum acquired
would. 3dly, The Husband uplifted this Sum by Commission from his Wife, and so
it must be presumed to have been spent in oneribus matrimonij, at least the
Husband must have Retention of his Expenses in recovery thereof. The Pursuers
answered, that albeit Provisions in Contracts of Marriage, stating Rights in
the Wifes Person, to be enjoyed by her during the Marriage, have not been
Sustained in some cases, yet this being a Provision of a return after the
dissolution of the Marriage, it is most consistent, especially in this case,
where the Estate Contracted was abroad, and the Contract it self made abroad,
where by the civil Law current there, the Means of either Party does return
hinc inde, and the profit thereof is only common^ stante matrimonio, neither is
the case altered by the Daughters Contract, for both by the Law and that
Paction, the Tocher returning to the Mother who gave it, in the same case it
was, it is hers by her first Right, the second Right by the Marriage becoming
void, both by Law and Provision; neither does it import that the Husband lifted
the Sum, for by the Contract he is obliged to repay it, and could only employ
the Profit of it, in oneribus matrimonij.

The Lords Repelled all these Defenses, but allowed Expenses to the Husband
laid out by him in Recovery of the Sum.

Lindsay and Swintoun her Spouse contra Inglish Supplicants, July. 5. 1670.
(...) Pursues his Debtor, and craved him to be holden as Confessed, who not
Compearing, the Clerk was not clear to give out an Decree, because the
Messengers Execution did not bear, that the Defender was Personally
Apprehended, but that the Messeger came to his House and knew he was within,
and was forcibly kept out by his Wife, and thereupon Protested that the
Defender might be holden as Personally Apprehended* upon the Clerks stop, the
Pursuer gives in a Supplication, desiring that he might either have out his
Decree, holding the Defender as Confessed upon this Execution, or that he might
have a Warrant to Cite the Defender at the Market Cross of the Shire or Burgh
where he dwells, as being difficilis conventionis, some were of opinion that he
should be holden as Confessed, the Messenger proving that he was within, or if
the Execution had born that he and the Witnesses also had given a particular
evidence of their Knowledge of his being within; others thought that he should
be holden as Confessed, unless the Defender could instruct he was alibi in
regard of the Contumacy, but the most resolved that holding as Confessed, being a
solemn and important Certification, peculiar to Scotland, that this Assertion
of the Messengers, and his Execution should not be sufficient, nor should put
the Defender to allege alibi, but that he should have a Warrant to Cite at
the Market Cross, with Certification to be holden as Confessed.

Archbishop and Presbitry of St. Andrews contra George Pittillo, July 6. 1670.
GEorge Pittillo being called before the Prisbitry of St. Andrews, for
Scandalous Conversation with Agnes Mitchel, two Ministers of the Presbitry were
appointed to speak with him, to whom he proponed he was Married to the said
Agnes Mitchel, and produced a Testificat of some Persons, bearing that they
were Witnesses to the Marriage, but neither Designing themselves nor the
Minister, which being reported to the Presbitry they rejected the Testimonial,
unless the Minister and Witnesses were Designed, and if they were Designed,
ordained the Party to make satisfaction for private Marrying without Warrant,
and the said George not Compearing before the Presbitry so to do, they for his
Contumacy appoints the Process to be seen by the Archbishop, who ordained the
Party to be Excommunicat, and accordingly he was Excommu^icat, and now the
Archbishop and Presbitry caused present a common Bill for Horning against the
Excommunicat Person, for Charging him to answer, submit and obey the Censure of
the Kirk, this being brought by the Ordinar to the Lords, to know whether they
would pass the Horning in course, or if they would consider whether the
Sentence of Excomunication was orderly proceeded. The Lords ordained two of
their number to consider the Process of Excommunication, and to hear any that
did compear for the Party Excommunicat, to Debate whether Horning should be
direct thereon. Before whom Compearance was made for the said George Pittillo,
who alleged that Horning ought not to be direct, because the Sentence was
disorderly and unjust, and because there was an Appeal to the Council yet
undiscust, and founded upon the late Act of Supremacy, alleging that the King
and his Council were Supreme in all Causes Ecclesiastic, so that Appeals might
be lawfully made (from any Churchman, or Church Judicature) to the King and
his Council: And further alleged, that he being unclear to acknowledge the
Bishop or his Presbitry; and the King having now granted an Indulgence to many
that did not acknowledge Episcopal Authority, it could not be Contumacy in him
not to Appear; but he was content that it should be now cognosced whether he
was in the Fault, and if he were found Guilty, he should Submit and make
satisfaction; which being Reported to the Lords and there being several other
nullities in the Process of Excommunication, which behoved to be cleared by the
Warrands of the Process, and having heard these of their number that are upon
the Council declare that upon the Appeal, the Council Remitted the Matter to
the Archbishop.

The Lords ordained Letters of Horning, unless Pittillo would presently offer
satisfaction, in which case they would give him a time, and superceed the
out-giving of the Letters.

Lady Lucie Hamiltoun contra Boid of Pitcon and others, July 8. 1670.
THe Earl of Abercorn having Sold the Lands of Mountcastle to George Hay; he
gave the Earl a Bond of 4000. Merks, bearing borrowed Money, but being a part
of the Price, and bearing this provision, that it sholud not be payable till
the Earl obtained George Infeft by his Superior. The Earl Assigns the Bond to
Lady Lucy his Sister, who having raised Inhibition upon the Bond against George
Hay, and having thereafter Charged him, he Suspended, alleging that the
Condition was not fulfilled he not being Infeft, and the Lady offering a part
of the Sum to purge that Condition, pro damno and interesse, and to procure his
Infeftment, George accepted of the offer, and thereupon the Letters were found
orderly proceeded for 3000. Merks of the Sum, and Suspended for the rest in
place of the Condition, upon this Decree the Lady Apprizes the Lands of
Mountcastle, and now Insists in a Reduction of a Disposition of the same Lands,
granted to Dunlap and Pitcon for themselves, and to the use and behove of the
Disponers other Creditors underwritten, viz. Where there was a blank of several
Lines, which is now filled up by another Hand; and though this Disposition was
anterior to the Inhibition, and did prefer Dunlap and Titcon for any Sums due
to themselves, or for which they were Cautioners the time of the Disposition;
Yet the Lords found by a former Interlocutor, that as to the other Creditors
filled up in the blank, it should be repute as posterior to the Inhibition, and
filled up after the same, unless the Creditors prove by the Witnesses insert,
or other Witnesses above exception, that they were filled up before the
Executing of the Inhibition. The Cause being called this day, the Creditors
repeated their former alleadgeance, and offered to prove that their Debts were
anterior to the Inhibition, and also that at the Subscribing thereof, it was
communed and agreed that Dunlap and Pitcon should undertake the remainder
Creditors Debts, at least they promised to give Dispositions of parts of the
Estate effeirand to their Debts, and accordingly they had done the same after
the Inhibition, but being upon a promise before the Inhibition they were
valide, having causam anteriorem, and they offered to prove the Communing and
Promise by the Writter and Witnesses insert. 2dly, They offered to purge and
satisfy the Pursuers Interest. 3dly, They alleged that their Disposition
from the common Author of the Property of the Lands in question did comprehend
all Right the Disponer had, and consequently the Condition and Provision in the
Bond, that before payment George Hay should be Infeft, for the Disposition
would no doubt carry any obligement for Infefting the common Author. The
Pursuer opponed the former Interlocutor, and alleged that she was not obliged
to Assign her Right, seeing she had now Apprized, and that her Apprizing was now
expired, and yet of consent she was content to Renunce her Right, but would not
Assign it to exclude other Creditors, or to distress the Cautioners; and as
for the Condition of the Bond, the Defenders Disposition gave them no Right
thereto, because there was no obligement in the Bond to obtain the common
Author Infeft, but only a suspensive Condition, that payment should not be made
till he were procured to be Infeft, for hat the provision to obtain the
Infeftment, being only an Condition, and not an Disposition, after the
Disposition to the Defenders, the Pursuer might have paid the Bond, or
transacted thereanent with George Hay, and was not obliged to know the
Defenders.

The Lords adhered to their former Interlocutor, and found the offer not
sufficient, and that the Pursuer was not obliged to Assign her Right, though
she had offered of her own accord to Renunce it, and found the Persons
Entrusted their undertaking the Creditors Debts before the Inhibition Relevant,
only to be proven by Writ, or by the Ladies Oath of Knowledge, and would not
make up such a material Clause by the Oaths of the Witnesses insert, nor of the
Persons Entrusted, and if they had made any such promise it was their own
fault, that they caused not put it in Writ, knowing that their Oaths, albeit
they might prove against them, yet that they would not prove for them, for the
Lords thought that if such blanks and clandestine Promises were allowed, they
might disappoint the Diligences of all Creditors.

Thomas Kennedy contra Archibald Kennedy of Culzean, Eodem die.
THe Lord of Culzean having three Sons, John Archibald and Alexander, for a
Provision to Archibald the second, Dispones his Lands of Corrowa and others,
with this provision, that if John should die, and Archibald Succeed to be Heir,
Archibald should denude himself of the Lands in favors of Alexander, and if
Archibald wanted Heirs of his Body, Alexander should be his Heir,
notwithstanding of any Law or Custom to the contrare; thereafter a few Months
before the Fathers Death, this fourth Son called Thomas was Born, John the
eldest, and Alexander the third are both dead Infants, Archibald falls to be
Heir, and so the Condition exists, in which he was obliged to Dispone to
Alexander. Thomas enters Heir of Line to Alexander, and pursues Archibald to
Dispone the Lands to him. It was answered for Archibald, that Thomas as Heir of
Line to Alexander can have no Right to this Provision. First, Because the
Provision is only in favors of Alexander, without mention of his Heirs. 2dly,
Though it could be extended to Alexanders Heirs, yet it being no Heretage to
which Alexander could Succeed; it is Conquest, and would not descend to Thomas,
Alexanders Heir of Line, but would ascend to Archibald as Heir of Conquest to
Alexander. It was answered for the Pursuer, that in this case the^meaning and
intention of the Father must be considered by his Provision inter liberos,
which is clear to have been that Archibald should not both have his Estate, and
these Lands of Corrowa, but that the same should descend to Alexander, and if
Thomas had been then Born, he would no doubt have provided that failzying of
Alexander, Archibalds Portion should fall to Thomas* and if he had declared
that the Lands of Corrowa should only belong to the Heirs of Line, it would
undoubtedly have excluded the Heirs of Conquest: He has done the equivalent,
for having provided the Lands to Archibald and his Heirs whatsomever; he does
by a posterior explicatory Clause, declare that if Archibald died without Heirs
of his Body, Alexander should be Archibalds Heir therein, notwithstanding of
any Law or Custom to the contrare, which can have no other meaning then that,
notwithstanding by the Law, John as Heir of Conquest would Succeed to
Archibald, wanting Heirs of his own, yet Alexander the younger, who would be
Heir of Line should Suceeed, which is as much as to say that this Provision
should belong to Archibalds Heirs of Line, and not to his Heirs of Conquest,
and consequently having made no mention of Alexanders Heirs, he did also mean
Alexanders Heirs of Line, who is the Pursuer Thomas, and the case is so much
the more favorable, that if this failed, Thomas has neither Provision nor
Aliment.

The Lords considering that both Parties were Infants, and that if Archibald
should die, Thomas would get all, superceeded to give answer anent the
Heretable Right of Succession until both Parties were Major, and in the mean
time allowed Thomas to Possess the Profits of the Lands, who had no Aliment
nor Provision.

Kennedy contra Cunningham and Wallace, July 12. 1670.
THere being an Apprizing of the Lands of Garleith, belonging to John Kennedy,
at the Instance of Edward Wallace; the said Edward by his Back-bond declared
that the Apprizing was to the behove of William Wallace of Burnbank his
Brother, and obliges him to denude himself thereof in his favors: Thereafter
the said Edward Assigns the Comprizing, and Dispones the Lands to Adam
Cunningham, who stands Infeft, and in a Debate for the Interest of this
Apprizing, It was alleged that Edward Wallace the Apprizer, having by his
Back-bond declared, that the Apprizing was to William his Brothers behove,
conform to his Back-bond produced, the said William was satisfied by Payment or
Intromission, so that the Apprizing is extinct. It was answered for Cunningham,
that the alleadgeance is not Relevant against him, who stands Infeft as a
singular Successor, so that his real Right cannot be taken away by any Personal
Back-bond granted by his Author, whereby he was not denuded, for though his
Author had granted Assignation to the Apprizing, if it had not been Intimat, a
posterior Assignation Intimat much more a Disposition and Infeftment would be
preferred thereto, for albeit satisfaction of an Apprizing, by Intromission
with the Mails and Duties be sufficient to extinguish, even against a singular
Successor, though there was no Resignation made, which the Lords had extended
to any payment made by the Debtor, yet this was never extended to any Personal
Declaration of Trust, or obligement to denude, which cannot be valide against a
singular Successor. It was answered for Kennedy, that Apprizings and
Infeftments thereon, do differ from other Infeftments, in this, that they
require no Resignation or Re-seising to extinguish them, but whatever may take
away a Personal Right, either by Intromission, Payment, or compensation will
take them away even by exception; and what is Relevant against the Author, is
Relevant against the singular Successor, except as to the manner of Probation,
that it cannot be Proven by the Authors Oath, but by Writ or Witnesses; neither
is there any odds as to this, whether there be Infeftment on the Apprizing or
not, so then if Cunningham were but Assigney to the Decree of Apprizing, it
would be Relevant against him, that before his Assignation his Cedent had
declared that the Apprizing was to the behove of another, to whom the Debtor
had made payment; which Declaration being instructed by Writ anterior to the
Assignation, is valide against Cunningham the Assigney, and whether he be
Infeft on his Assignation and Disposition of the Apprizing or not, as to this
Point, Law and Custom makes no difference, neither does the case quadrat with
an Assignation unintimat, compeating with a posterior Assignation intimat,
which might be preferred; but if the Debtor made payment to the Assigney,
though he had not intimat it, it would extinguish the Apprizing, and no
posterior Assignation, though intimat, would make the Debtor pay again, and in
this case there is a real Declaration of Trust, which is most ordinar, when
Parties having small sums* assign them all to one who Compryzeth for all, and
by several Back-bonds, Declares that the Appryzing is to the behove of the
several Creditors according to their sums, who have always rested therein, and
have sought no further, and if this Back-bond were not sufficient against
singular Successors, the Appryzer might at any time thereafter Dispone, and
clearly exclude them.

The Lords found that the Back-bond was Relevant against singular Successors,
and that payment made to him, to whose behove the appryzing was Deduced, was
sufficient against a singular Successor, having right to the appryzing, or
Lands from the Appryzer, after he granted his Back-bond.

The Daughters of Soutray contra The Eldest Daughter. July 13. 1670.
THe Lord of Soutray having granted a Writ in favors of his Eldest Daughter,
beginning in the Style of a Testament, and after a blank, Disponing his Lands
of Soutray, and his whole Movables to the said Eldest Daughter, with the
burden of ten thousand merks to be paid to the remanent Daughters: The said
remanent Daughters pursue a Declarator of the nullity of the Writ. First, In so
far as being a Testament, it contains a Disposition of the Lands. 2dly, In so
far as the Eldest Daughter is nominate Executrix, and universal Legatrix,
because by ocular inspection, that part of the Writ was blank, and is filled up
with another hand, which is offered to be proven to have been done since the
Defuncts Death, so that the Executor and Legator not being filled up by the
Defunct in his own time, and these being the Essentials of the Testament
wanting, the whole Falls, even as to the Disposition of the Movables. The
Defender answered, that the Testament was valide, albeit the Name of the
Legator and universal Executor, were filled up after the Defuncts Death; yet it
is offered to be proven, that the Defunct when he subscribed the Testament, did
nominat his Eldest Daughter, as Executrix and Legatrix, and gave warrant to the
Nottar to fill up the Name, which though he neglected then, and has done it
since, it ought not to prejudge her. It was answered, that our Law allows of no
Nuncupative Testaments, or nominations of Executors of Legators, unless the
Testament be perfected in Writ, and therefore if the Executor or Legator be not
filled up by the Defunct, the Testament is not perfeited in Writ, albeit the
Defunct has Subscribed the same, as he might have done in a blank Paper, and
given warrant to the Nottar to fill up his Testament upon such Terms, which
could not subsist, though the Nottar and Witnesses should astruct the same, as
not being done, habili modo.

The Lords found the Testament null as to the nomination of the Executor and
Legator; and also as to the Lands, but they found it valide as to the
Disposition of the Movables, with the burden of the ten thousand merks; and
found that the want of the nomination of the Executor or universal Legator, did
not hinder, but that the Defunct might in any way Dispone his Movables in
Testament, or on Deathbed, which would stand valide as a Legacy, which by our
Law might consist without nomination of Executors but would extend to that part
of the Movables only, the Defunct might Legate.

Anna Raith and John Wauchop of Edmistoun contra Wolmet and Major Bigger. Eodem
die.
IN Anno 1641. there was a Minute of Contract betwixt umquhil Wolmet, James and
Mr. James Raiths of Edmistoun, and their Spouses, whereby a Marriage was
Contracted betwixt James Edmistoun Wolmets Son, and Mr. James Raiths Eldest
Daughter, and in case of the Decease of either of these two, the next Son and
next Daughter to make a perpetual Friendship: In Contemplation of which
Marriage, the said James Raith and Mr. James Raith his Son, were obliged to pay
10000. pounds of portion to Wolmet himself, and to lend another Sum, for
Redeeming of a Wodset upon the Estate, which being done, Wolmet was obliged to
Infeft his Son, and to provide eight hundredth merks of Jointure to his
Good-daughter, Raiths Eldest Daughter Dies, and the said James Edmistoun,
Wolmets Eldest Son Marries Raiths second Daughter, but there was no Contract or
consent of her Parents, and they having lived seven years together, James Died
without Children, and Raiths third Daughter is Married to John Wauchop,
Niddries Son, and Raiths Estate provided to her, whereupon they to liberate
Raiths Heirs and Estate of the 10000. pounds contained in the Contract, raised
Declarator, that the minute was null and void, in two Grounds: First, Because
there was no Marriage following by consent of the Parents, conform to the
Minute. 2dly, Because Raiths obligement to pay the Tocher, was to Wolmet
himself, and for his mutual obligement, of Infefting his Son, and providing a
Jointure, which neither was, nor can be done, Major Bigger now standing in the
full Right of Wolmets Estate, and no Person to Represent Wolmet. The Defenders
alleged absolvitor from the first Ground, because there was a Marriage
conform to the Minute; and albeit Raith did not consent, yet being obliged, he
had no just Ground to disassent. And to the second Ground, seeing there was no
Clause irritant in the Minute, albeit the obligements therein were mutual
Causes each of other, it might be Declared, that neither Party should be
obliged to fulfill, till the other fulfilled their part, but could not annul the
Minute.

The Lords found that seeing Wolmet was in no capacity to perform his part, that
the Heirs and Estate of Raith were free of their part, providing that the
Pursuer who is Assigney to the Liferent Right of the said James Edmonstoun, his
Wife should Discharge the said Liferent, and declare that it should never
burden Wolmets Heirs or Estate.

Beation of Bandoch contra Ogilbie of Martoun. Eodem die.
BEaiton of Bandoch having a Miln upon a Burn, running by the Lands of
Greendykes and Martoun, the Tennents of these Lands did by Sheuchs and Casts,
divert the Water, and therewith watered their Ground, which thereafter returned
to the Burn, before it came to Bandochs Dam. Bandoch pursues a Declarator, that
he and his Predecessors and Authors, having been in immemorial Possession of
the Miln, and having had the free use of the Burn, until of late the Tennents
of Greendyke and Martoun have diverted the same to water their Ground, whereby
so much thereof is drunk up by the Ground, that there remains not Water
sufficient for his Miln.

In this Process the Lords having before answer allowed Witnesses to be adduced
on either part. It was proven that Bandoch was in Possession of the Miln, with
the free use of the Burn these threescore years, and that it was commonly
known, that he and his Predecessors had been in immemorial Possession thereof
till the diversion. It was also proven, that the Tennents of Greendykes had
been forty years in use to water their Ground, as now they do. It was also
proven that the Tennents of Martoun have been in use to water their Ground this
34, or 35. years, whereupon it occurred to the Lords to consider, whether the
watering of the Ground being the most natural and ordinar effect of Burns and
Waters, the building of a Miln beneath, could hinder that liberty, or at least,
if 34. years Possession were not sufficient to continue the watering.

The Lords did not consider what effect the building of a Miln, with a short
possession of the Water free of diversion would hinder the Heretors from
diverting the Water from watering their Ground; but finding that the ancient
and immemorial Possession of this Miln, and full enjoyment of the Water was as
much proven, as could be known to preceed the 34. years, during which, the
diversions upon the Lands of Martoun was proven, they found that the Miln and
her privilege being once so Constitute, no less then 40. years peaceable
Possession of diverting the Water for watering, was sufficient, that being the
only legal Term, and therefore allowed the Lands of Greendykes to continue the
watering, but discharged the Lands of Martoun to continue the same.

Sir Alexander Hume. contra The Earl of Hume. July 14. 1670.
THe Right of the Erected Barony of Coldinghame being derived from John Stuart
of Coldinghame, and Sir Alexander Hume younger of Rentoun, he pursues a
Declarator against this Earl of Hume; and the Creditors and Appryzers of the
Estate of Hume, to this effect, that there being a Contract betwixt umquhil
James Earl of Hume and Stuart and others, whereby it was Declared, that the
Earl being Infeft in an Annualrent of 200. pounds Sterling out of the said
Barony, there was nineteen thousand pounds of bygons, of the said Annualrent,
at the Date of the Contract, in Anno 1631. Therefore it was agreed, that the
Earl of Hume should be put in Possession of the said Barony, for payment of the
said Annualrent, for Terms subsequent, and for the nineteen thousand Pounds
made up of the bygone Annualrents, fructibus non compurandis in sortem, and
that the Earl of Hume, who last Deceased, having Assignation to the said
Contract from the Heirs of Line, of the said umquhil James Earl of Hume,
recovered a Decree of Possession upon the said Contract, in Anno 1643. and
entered in Possession accordingly, and that the said Annualrent of 200. pounds
Sterling, after the Decease of the said James Earl of Hume did cease, being
only provided to the Heirs-male of his Body, which failzing, etc. that
therefore the 200. pounds Sterling affecting the Barony in the first place, and
being free, did satisfy the nineteen thousand pounds, and freed the Barony
thereof. Compearance being made for the Earl of Hume, and the Creditors who had
Appryzed the Barony of Coldinghame. It was alleged that the Earls
intromission was not to be ascribed to his Decree of Possession in Anno 1648.
because he had another anterior Title in his Person, viz. A former Contract
betwixt the Deceast James Earl of Hume, and the Heretors of Coldinghame, by
which he was allowed to Possess, till he were paid of 4000. pounds Sterling,
payable at four Terms, for which, or any of the Terms, he was to enjoy without
an account fructibus non imputandis in sortem, of which Contract there was a
thousand pound Sterling unpayed* and upon which Contract James Earl of Hume had
obtained Possession, in Anno 1630. So that the late Earl having right to both
these Contracts and Decreets from the Heirs of Line, and having entered to the
Possession, without any Porcess of Removing, or Mails and Duties against the
Tennents, but the former Possessors leaving the Possession, the Earl entered
without opposition, and might ascribe his Possession to either of these Rights
he pleased, and does most rationally ascribe the same to the first, especially
seeing he had both the Rights from the same Party, and was not introduced to the
Possession by them, more upon the one Right than upon the other. It was
answered for the Pursuer, that albeit Parties may make use of any Right they
have to Defend their Possession, without interverting the same, yet that must
always be where the posterior Right does not derogat from the former, either as
to Right or Possession. But here the second Contract and Decree is
inconsistent with, and derogatory to the former; for the Earl having power to
enter by the first, till he were paid of one thousand pound Sterling, resting
of four, fructibus non computandis in sortem, taking a posterior Right, whereby
he was to enter for payment of nineteen thousand pounds, fructibus non
computandis in sort^^, he derogat so far from the first, that he must Possess
primo loco by the last, seeing the first is not reserved. 2dly, The late Earl
could only be understood to enter in Possession by that Right, or the former
Heretors, to relinquish the Possession to him upon that Right, which then had
paratam executionem, and could then instantly have forced them to quite the
Possession; but that was only the last Contract, and last Decree, whereupon
the late Earl had obtained Sentence in his own Person, in Anno 1643. when he
entered in Possession: But as for the first Contract and Decree of Possession,
it had not then paratam executionem, never being Established in the Persons of
the Heirs of Line, much less in the Person of the late Earl, who had Right from
the Heirs of Line by Assignation himself, being only Heir-male.

The Lords found that the Possession was only to be ascribed to the last
Decree, which only had paratam executionem primo loco, without prejudice to
the Earl. if that Right were Exhausted, to defend himself with the first Right
in the next place.

Major Bigger contra David Cuninghame of Dankeith. July 15. 1670.
MAjor Bigger having Right to the Teinds of Wolmet from the Earl of Lauderdail,
pursues David Cunninghame of Dankeith and Iean Douglas, Relict of Wolmet, his
Spouse, for Spuilzie of the Teinds, restricted to wrongous Intromission, and
insists for the fifth of the Rent. The Defenders allege absolvitor, because
they produce a Valuation of the Teinds of Wolmet, obtained at the instance of
umquhil Patrick Edmonstonn of Wolmet, before the Commission for Valuation in
Anno 1636. The Pursuer answered that the Defense ought to be Repelled: First,
Because Swintoun standing then in the Right of these Teinds, had raised
Reduction and Improbation of this Decree of Valuation, against James
Edmonstoun, as Heir to Wolmet, and thereupon had obtained a Decree of
Certification, which is now produced. 2ly, By Articles betwixt Dankeith and
Major Bigger produced Dankeith Compts for a greater Duty than this Valuation,
and so passes therefrom, and Homologats the Majors Right. 3dly, The Decree of
Valuation took never effect, there having never been payment made conform
thereto, but Tacks accepted by the same Defenders, and Duties paid by them of
a greater quantity. The Defender answered, that the Certification could have no
effect against the Defenders, because it was only obtained against Wolmets
appearand Heir, who had only the Right of Reversion, the Wodsetter who was
Proprietar publicly Infeft, and the said James Douglas Liferenter, by a
public Infeftment, never being Called, who do now produce the Decree of
Valuation quarrelled: And as to the Articles. they can import no Homologation,
because the Article anent the Teind bears only such a sum, without relating to
the fifth of the Rent, or to the price of the valued Bolls. The Pursuer
answered, that the Valuation having been obtained at the Instance of Wolmet,
and not of his Wife, he might Reduce the same by Calling only Wolmets Heir, who
had not only the Reversion, but a Back-tack, and he was obliged to Call no
other, especially seeing they had no Right to the Teinds the Defender answered,
that the Heretor has undoubtedly Interest in the Valuation, though they had no
Right to the Teind, because it Liquidats the Teind, and Liberats the Stock of
any further, and so has the Liferenter for the Liferent Right, especially she
being publicly Infeft: so that though the Decree was obtained at umquhil
Wolmets Instance, yet he being Denuded of the Property by a public Infeftment
of Wodset with his Wifes Liferent, reserved therein, they could not be
miskenned, and their Right taken away by a Process against Wolmets appearand
Heir, who was Denuded of the Property, and who did now produce the Decree of
Valuation, and abode by it as a true Deed.

The Lords Sustained the Defense upon the Decree of Valuation, and found the
Certification could not take away the Liferenters Interest in the Valuation,
she not being Called; and found the Articles to infer no Homologation, but
found the third member of the reply Relevant, that Tacks were taken by the
Defenders, and Duty paid of a greater quantity since the Valuation.

Lady Lucie Hamiltoun. contra Bold of Pitcon. Eodem die.
LAdy Lucie Hamiltoun insists in her Reduction, before Debated on the eight of
July instant, against Pitcon on this Ground, that abbeit the Disposition
granted to him by George Hay, the Common Debtor be anterior to the Pursuers
Inhibition; yet it must be Reduced on this Ground, that it is without any
equivalent onerous Cause, and that albeit in bear an onerous Cause, yet that
will not instruct the same, but it must be instucted otherwise than by Pitcons
own Oath, because it is betwixt conjunct Persons, two Good-brothers; and
because it bears not only to be in favors of Pitcon himself, but for the use
and behave of the Creditors, whose Names were then blank, and thereupon are now
excluded, as being filled up after the Pursuers Inhibition, so that the
Disposition being in so far fraudulent, and not totally granted to Pitcon for
himself, the proportion of his Interest cannot be known, but by instructing the
Debts due to him, and for which he was engaged the time of the Disposition. It
was answered for Pitcon, that he was ready to instruct the Debts scripto, and
for some few to whom he had undertaken payment, at the time of the Disposition
he offered to produce their Bonds, and to Depone that he undertook payment of
them, as said is, which is all that is required by the Act of Parliament anent
fraudulent Dispositions, whereby the defect of an onerous Cause, is to be
proven by the Parties Oath, who gets the Disposition.

The Lords Repelled the Allegiance, and found that Pitcon behoved to instruct
the Cause of the Disposition, otherwise than by the said Bonds, and his own
Oath.

It was alleged for Kelburn, another of the Creditors, that he had Right by
an Appryzing, proceeding upon sums anterior to the Inhibition. It was Replied,
that the Appryzing was null. First, Because the Denunciation whereon it
proceeded, was not at the Market Cross of the Shire, but at the Market Cross of
the Regality; in the English time, when Regalities were suppressed. 2dly, That
the Appryzing was led at Glasgow; and neither within the Shire of Air, where
the Lands ly, nor by Dispensation at Edinburgh: And albeit the Letters bear a
Dispensation to Appryz^ at Glasgow, and that the Denunciation was made
accordingly, for the Parties to appear at Glasgow, yet there was neither Law
nor Custom for such a Dispensation, and Parties are not obliged to attend but
at the head Burgh of the Shire, or in communia patria, at Edinburgh. 3dly, The
Pursuer has also an Appryzing, though posterior, yet preferable, because solemn
and orderly according to the Custom then being. It was answered, that albeit
the Custom under the Usurper might excuse the want of Denunciations at the head
Burghs of Regalities, which were then suppressed, where they were used at the
head Burgh of the Shire according to the Custom then, and so validats such
Appryzings; yet this Defender having according to the standing Law of the Land,
Denunced at the head Burgh of the Regality, the contrair unwarrantable Custom
cannot annul his Appryzing, proceeding according to Law. And as to the
Dispensation at Glasgow, which was nearer the Lands then Edinburgh, whatsoever
might have been said to the inconveniency of granting such a Dispensation, yet
being granted, it is valide, and was then frequent to grant such Dispensations.

The Lords found that the Pursuers Apprizing being according to the ordinar
Custom for the time, at the head Burgh of the Shire upon Denunciation, that it
was more solemn and preferable, as to the manner of Denunciation, than that
which was upon Denunciation at the head Burgh of the Regality, at that time.
But the Lords did not determine, whether such an Appryzing would have been
valide, if there had not been a more formal one; Nor whether the Dispensation
being granted at Glasgow, was valide.

Margaret Scrimzeor contra Alexander Wedderburn of Kingennie. July 19. 1670.
UMquhil Major William Scrimzeor having nominat Alexander Wedderburn of
Kingennie, and two others to be Tutors to his Daughter. She now pursues a Tutor
Account, wherein this Question arose, and was reported to the Lords by the
Auditors, viz. The Defunct having Died in September 1650. The Tutor did not
accept the Nomination, or begin to Act till the end of the year 1653. In which
time the Tutor alleged that a part of the Pupils Means perished, and became
Insolvent, and craved to be liberate thereof, on that Ground in his Discharge.
It was alleged for the Pupil, that the Tutor must be liable from the time
that he knew that he was Nominat Tutor, for albeit he might have abstained
absolutely, yet once accepting the Tutory by Nomination of a Testament, wherein
a Legacy was left to himself, he must count as if he had accepted it at the
first, for which there was adduced many Citations of Law. It was answered for
the Tutor, that in the Roman Law, Tutors were obliged to accept so soon as they
knew their Nomination, unless they could free themselves by the excuses allowed
in that Law: But with us it is absolutely free to accept or refuse, without any
excuse; and it is only the acceptance that obliges, and so can have no effect
ad preterita as to that which perished before acceptance, especially in this
case, the Defender being but one of three Tutors Nominate, he ought to have had
a time to endeavor with the rest to accept, and his lying out was in such a
time, in which Judicatures did cease by War and Troubles, the English after the
Battle of Dumbar in September 1650. being possessed of Edinburgh, and the public
Records, there was no Session kept till the year 1652, or 1653.

The Lords found the Tutor was not liable for any thing that perished before
his acceptance.

The Executors of Walter Hamiltoun contra The Executors of Andrew Reid. July
20. 1670.
THe Executors of Walter Hamiltoun pursue the Executors of Andrew Reid, for
payment of a Bond of 122. pounds Sterling, and of a Bond of eighteen pounds
Sterling, due by the said umquhil Andrew Reid, to the said umquhil Walter
Hamiltoun. The Defenders alleged, that they ought to have allowance of fifty
pounds Sterling, paid to Walter by John Fleeming, by Andrew Reids Order, and
of Sterling, paid to Mckneich, upon a Bill drawn by Walter Hamiltoun upon
Andrew Reid, to be paid to Mckneich, and for proving thereof, produced missive
Letters, Written by Walter Hamiltoun to Andrew Reid, the one bearing, that
Fleeming had paid a part of the 50. pound, and he doubted not but that he
would pay the rest: And the other bearing, that Mckneich had got payment. It
was answered for the Pursuers, that the Missive Letters could not instruct a
Discharge, or abate those clear Bonds, because they did relate to Bills and
Orders, upon which payment was made, and except those Bills and Orders can be
produced, the Letters relating thereto, can have no effect, for it must be
presumed, that the Bills and Orders have been retired by Walter Hamiltoun, as
having been allowed in other Bonds, which then have been delivered by Walter
to Andrew Reid, it being the ordinar course amongst Merchants, to interchange
Bills and Bonds, without any other Discharge, neither do they take notice of
their Missives, relating to such Bills or Orders, nor can it be supposed they
can remember the same. The Auditors in this Account, having taken the opinion
of several knowing Merchan's anent their Customs in this point, they did all
report in Writ, and did all agree in this, that missive Letters relating to
Bills, Orders, or Discharges, had no effect, unless the Bills, Orders, or
Discharges were produced, and that Merchants neither did, nor could have notice
of such Missives to retire, or interchange the same; they did also visit Walter
Hamiltouns Count Book, by which there appeared several other Bonds and Accounts
betwixt the Parties, beside these: And in which also, the sums contained in
these Letters, were set down as payment, in part of the other Bonds and Compts,
whereby it appeared, that the Bill and Order mentioned in the Letter, were
interchanged with the former Bonds.

The Lords found that the missive Letters relating to the Bill and Order, had
no Effect, unless the Bill and Order were produced.

Hugh Moncrief of Tippermalloch contra Magistrates of Pearth. July 26. 1670.
HVgh Moncrief of Tippermalloch having Incarcerate Ogilbie of Channaly in the
Tolbooth of Pearth, from whence he having escaped; he pursues the Magistrates
of Pearth for payment of the Debt, who alleged absolvitor: First, Because
their Tolbooth was sufficient, and the Rebel had escaped vi majori, having
broken the Stone, in which the Bolt of the Tolbooth Door entered, and forced
the Lock in the time of Sermon, and that immediately after the Rebel escaped
out of the Town, and was met with Friends that were trysted there at the time
of his escape. 2dly, They had laid out all ways thereafter to search for him,
and had at last found him in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh for the same Debt, where
he yet was in as good condition, as when he first escaped. The Pursuer
answered, that the Rebel had escaped by the fault or neglect of the Jaylour,
for whom the Town was answerable, in so far as they had given him the liberty
of all the Rooms in the Tolbooth, and that when he escaped, he was left in the
outmost Room, and his Brother Son was permitted to abide within with him, and
the Catband on the outside of the Tolbooth Door was not put on and Locked,
which would have so secured the Door, that nothing the Prisoner could have done
within, could have opened the same; and that the Tolbooth Lock had a double and
single Cast, and when it was Locked only with the single Cast, the Bolt might
be thrust back, but when with the double Cast, it had a strong Backsprent, and
could not be thrust back: and that at the time of the escape, the Lock had but
the single Cast, so that the edge of the Stone being broken off, there was
access to press back the Bolt. To the second it was answered, that the Rebel
having escaped through the Town or their Servants neglect, jus erat acquisitum
to the Pursuer, making them liable, which could not be taken off by any
Incarceration thereafter, unless the Magistrates had followed him in the very
Act of escape, and recovered him; but now they have six Months after his
escape put him, not in the Tolbooth of Pearth, but in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh.

The Lords being unwilling to give either Party the choose of Witnesses for
Probation, had before answer, appointed either Party to adduce Witnesses anent
the condition of the Tolbooth, and the manner of the Rebels escape, which being
now advised.

The Lords found that by the most pregnent Probation, it was proven that the
Catband used sometimes to be on in the day time, and sometimes not, and that
Prisoners for Debt had the liberty in the Day time of all the Rooms of the
Tolbooth, the Probation was very contrair, as to the breaking of the Stone
wherein the Bolt entered, but it seemed access could not be had to the Bolt
without some breach of the Stone. It was also proven the Catband was not then
on, and that the Bolt when it got the double Cast, could not be pressed back, and
could when it got the single Cast; and therefore the Lords found that the
Magistrates proved not their first Exception, that the Rebel had escaped vi
majori, without their fault or negligence, and found the second Exception of
putting him again in Prison, not Relevant.

The Lady Halliburtoun contra The Creditors of Halliburtoun, July 27. 1670.
THe Lady Halliburtoun being provided by her Contract of Marriage to the M^ins
of Halliburtoun, with the Miln and Pertinents, and her Precept of Seizing
bearing warrant to Infeft her in the Mains and Miln, by Earth and Stone of the
Land, and by the Clap of the Miln, her Seizing having the said Precept
ingros^ed, bears her by virtue thereof to be Infeft by the Earth and Stone of
the Land, but mentions nothing of any Symbol for the Miln, or of any Reason
that Seizing was not taken of the Miln^ because it was Demolished, the Miln
being thereafter Built or Re-edified, the Creditors having Apprized, did take
Infeftment of the Mains by Earth and Stone, and of the Miln by Clap and Happer,
and now in a competition betwixt the Lady and them anent the Rents of the Miln.
It was alleged for the Creditors, that they ought to be preferred, because
they were Infeft in the Miln, and the Lady was never Infeft therein, albeit her
Precept of Seizing buir an express Warrant to Infeft her therein by Clap and
Happer. It was answered for the Lady, that her infeftment of the Land, with the
Miln and other Pertinents, is anterior to the Creditors, and must extend to the
Miln, albeit she took no special Seizing thereof, because there was no standing
Miln at the time of her Seizing, so that the Miln being Builded by her Husband
thereafter, solo cedit, and belongs to her as a Pertinent, for though, where a
Miln is before Infeftment, it cannot pass as a Pertinent without a special
Seizing, yet where it is only Built thereafter, it accresces to any Party
Infeft in the Land, especially being Infeft in the Land, with the Miln thereof.

The Lords preferred the Lady, she proving the Miln^ the time of her Contract
and Infeftment, was not at all Built, or having been Built was Demolished.

Charles Charters contra Cornelius Neilson, July 29. 1670.
CHarles Charters and Cornelius Neilson, both having Arrested their Debitors
Money in the same hand, Cornelius Arrestment was upon the 24. of June, and
Charles Arrestment upon the 28, But Cornelius Arrestment was upon a Bond,
whereof the Term of payment was not come, and the Term of payment of Charles
his Bond was come, both Parties having their Citation before the Bailzies of
Edinburhg in one day, where Cornelius alleged preference, because his
Arrestment was prior, Charles Charters answered, that albeit his Arrestment was
four days posterior, yet it ought to be preferred, because the Term of payment
of Cornelius Debt was not come whereas Charles his Term being past, he has
paratam executionem, this being ready to be Advised by the Bailzies. Cornelius
raises Advocation, and the Cause being Advocat, the same Debate was repeated
before the Lords, and Cornelius added that now the Term of payment of his Sum
was past, and alleged that albeit his Term were not come, his first
Arrestment is preferable, though the Decree thereupon could only be to pay
after the Term were past, and now his Term being also past before Sentence
there needs no such limitation. It was answered, that it is not the Arrestment
that constitutes the Right, but the Sentence making forthcoming, and though
ordinarily the first Arrestment is preferred, yet oftimes posterior Arrestments
are preferred upon more timous or more orderly Diligence, and the Diligence
done, by Charters is done more orderly, because it was after the Term, for if
it were Sustained, that Arrestments made before the Term of payment, should be
preferred to these made after the Term, Creditors who has ready Execution
should be postponed to others, whose Debts were payable after a Liferent of 20.
years time, but as the second Arrester may Poind his Debitors Goods, though
Arrested formerly by another, so may he crave Sentence to make forthcoming to
take present effect by Poinding, and cannot be excluded by an other Creditor,
upon pretense of a prior Arrestment, which cannot receive present Execution;
and albeit the prior Arresters Term be now come, yet he ought not to be
preferred, because he procured Advocation of the Cause, without any just
Reason, either of Incompetency or Iniquity, only to procure delay till his Term
were past, and therefore the Cause being now Advocat of consent, the Sentence
must now be of the same manner, as it would have been before the Bailzies when
the Cause was Advocat, at which time Cornelius Term of payment was not come.

The Lords found that the unwarrantable delay by the Advocation should not
prejudge Charters, and that the case should be considered as it was the time
that the Advocation was raised, and preferred Charles Charters upon his
posterior Arrestment, in respect the Term of payment of his Debt was come, to
the prior Arrestment laid on upon a Debt the Term of payment whereof was not
come, whereupon Citation was used before the Term came.

The Advocats having withdrawn from the House upon the Oath prescribed by the
Regulation, nothing was Called until the middle of December.

Murray of Achtertire contra Gray, December 16. 1670.
MVrray of Achtertire having pursued a Contravention against Gray upon several
Deeds, whereof one was, that Achtertire having procured liberty from a
Neighbor Heretor to make a Cast upon that Heretors Ground, wherein some little
Burns were gathered to a Head, and thence were conveyed through Achtertires own
Ground to his Miln Lade, and that Gray had broken down that Cast, whereby the
Burns were diverted^ Gray having compeared and proponed nothing, the Libel was
found Relevant, and admitted to Achtertires Probation, who by several Witnesses
proved that the Defender had broken down that Cast, of whom some Deponed
simply, but two of them Deponed thus, that Gray had broken down the new Cast,
but that the Burns gathered therein in the time of Floods did water Gray^s own
Lands; and that by the new Cast they were kept in, and could not water the
same, whence it arose to the Lords consideration, whether that Deed of
Contravention was sufficiently proven, or whether the Testimonies of the
Witnesses, being qualified that the Defender had done the Deed, but in
continuation of his former Possession of the watering of the Burns, whether
respect ought to be had to that qualification, some thought not, because the
Fact, as it was Libelled, was found Relevant, and proven, and the qualification
ought to have been proponed by way of Defense, but it was found that the
Testimonies being so qualified, did not sufficiently prove to infer a
Contravention, for if the Contravention had been proven by Writ or Oath, such a
quality either in the Writ or Oath would hinder the same to prove sufficiently
the Contravention.

But because the Testimonies were not to be considered by the Parties, the
Lords ordained the Sentence to express the foresaid Reason of it, that the
Pursuer before Extract, might allege any thing thereanent he thought fit.

Nicol Langtoun contra Robert Scot, December. 17. 1670.
JOhn Graham of Gillesby, having Set a Track of his Lands of Graystoneflat to
Nicol Langtoun, and being at that time at the Horn, Robert Scot obtains a Gift
of his Escheat and Liferent from Annandale his Superior, and thereupon obtains
general and special Declarator, Decerning Langtoun to pay the Duties to him as
Donator. Langtoun Suspends, and raises Reduction on this Reason, that the Gift
was simulat to the behove of Graham the Rebel procured by his own Means and
Moyen; and it being answered by Scot, that he being a lawful Creditor of the
Rebels, might lawfully accept and make use of this Gift for his own security,
albeit the Rebel had procured the same, and Scot the Donator having Deponed
anent the simulation of the Gift, did acknowledge that the Rebel had procured
the Gift, and that he had it blank in the Donators Name, and that he did fill
up Scots Name, and delivered it to him.

The Lords found the Oath to prove the simulation of the Gift, and that it
having been in the Rebels own hands blank in the Donators Name, it was
equivalent to an Assignation from the Rebel, and that Scot accepting of it so
from him, could not justly or bona fide make use of it, even for security of a
just Debt in prejudice of the Tacks-man, who had before gotten his Tack from
the Rebel.

Alison Kello contra Kinneir, January 5. 1671.
ALison Kello as Heir to her Mother Margaret Nisbet, having pursued a Reduction
of an Apprizing of the Lands of Paxtoun, Led at the Instance of Mr. Samuel
Hume, against the said Margaret in Anno 1622. and Assigned to Mr. Alexander
Kinneir in Anno 1623. upon this Reason, that the said Mr. Alexander was
satisfied by his Intromission within the Legal; this pursuit, being against Mr.
Alexander Kinneirs Son, who is Minor, and being stopped upon his Minority, quid
Minor non tenetur placitare de hereditate paterna. The Lords did upon the
Pursuers Petition, grant Commission to Examine Witnesses upon the Intromssion,
to remain in retentis till the Cause might be Determined, in respect the
Witnesses might die in the mean time, which being reported, the Lords remitted
to an Auditor to state the Count of the Intromission according to the
Probation, that the stated Account might remain in retentis. The Defender being
heard again before the Lords, did allege that the Account could not be stated
upon this Probation, but that there being yet no Litiscontestation in the
Cause, neither can be, through the Defenders Minority, and this Probation being
but before answer to remain in retentis, and taken by Commission, the Defender
not being present at the Examination, and the matter being very ancient, fifty
years ago, the Lords ought to give the Defender the sole or conjunct probation
of this alleadgeance, viz. That he offered him to prove, that during the years
of the Legal, the Lands were Possessed by several Persons, by Dispositions or
Tacks, both under Reversion, for certain Sums of Money, due by the said
Margaret Nisbet, which Rights were granted by her, and were now produced by the
Defender, which with the said Rights produced, is much more pregnant nor the
Pursuers Probation, by some inconsiderable Country People, without any
Adminicle in Writ. It was answered for the Pursuer, that the alleadgeance was
no way Relevant, being contrare to her Libel, and founded super jure tertij,
for this Defender has no interest in the Wodset Rights, nor does any Person
appear for them, or own them, and if this were sustained, it would afford a
current evasion in all kind of Pursuits upon Intromission, by offering still to
prove that the Defender did not, but that a third Party did Intromet, and
therefore the Lords have never Sustained such a Defense upon the Defenders sole
Probation, and in no case have allowed a conjunct probation. It was answered,
that in a matter so old, and where the sole probation of a thing of so great
Moment was to be by Witnesses the Lords ex officio might Examine Witnesses for
either Party, and have often so done, especially the same ought to be done here,
where the probation is by inconsiderable Persons, and so suspect and
exorbitant, proving ^^nneirs Intromssion to be before he had any Right, and the
quantities to be much higher then the written Tack of the Lands produced.

The Lords found that they could not admit a Probation for the Defender, upon
the Possession of any third Party, from whom he derived no Right, but that upon
the consideration alleged, they would Sustain no Probation for the Pursuer,
but that which were clear and pregnant, and allowed the Defender to give in any
Objections against the hability of the Witnesses, yet having considered their
Testimonies, they found that they did not prove Kinneirs Intromission to be
before his Right, but that after his Assignation he had Removed and
Dispossessed Margaret Nisbet, and entered in the natural Possession, and
Laboring himself, which is a Fact more palpable then the lifting of Duties
from Tennents.

January 17. 1671. Stair was Admitted President of the Session. Drummond of
Rickartoun contra The Feuars of Bothkennel, Eodem die.
THomas Drummond of Rickartoun pursues a Poinding of the Ground against the
Tennents of the Lands of Bothkennel wherein the Feuars alleged no Process,
because the Pursuer being Pupil, he is not sufficiently Authorized, the Tutory
produced being to his Mother and Uncle jointly, and his Mother being dead, his
Uncle is no more Tutor, the Tutory being granted to them, and bearing expressly
to them jointly. It was answered, that in Tutories, Curatories, Executories,
the death of one Person does not evacuate the Office, but it accresces to the
rest.

The Lords found that in respect of the Tenor of the Tutory, bearing to two
conjunctim, the death of one evacuats the Office; Nevertheless they declared
that they would give a Curator ad hanc litem, to Authorize the Pupil, but that
none could uplift or discharge, till there were a new Gift of Tutory.

Mr. Robert Dickson contra James Graham, January 19. 1671
MAster Robert Dickson Advocat having granted Bond to James Graham, for a Sum
of Money furnished to his Brother upon an Account, he raises Reduction of the
Bond, as to a part thereof, upon fraud and circumvention, alleging that the
true cause of the Bond was the causing answer his Brother Money, and that he
had made an agreement before the hand, for so much the French Floren; but his
Brother having some Moneys answered in Vinnice, without any agreement before
the hand; when the Parties came to Account, James Graham being wholly Trusted
by the Pursuer did give an Account, and did Affirm to the Pursuer that the Rate
of answering Money in Vinnice was at that time so much dearer then the same
truly was, if it had been only answered in France, wherein he now understands
he was deceived, because it was equal or less value to furnish it in Vinnice
then France, and offered to prove the value of the Money by Witnesses, and the
rest by Oath. The Defender answered, that it was lawful for him, being a
Merchant, to take what value for the Floren he could agree, and that it would
be of evil consequence, if Bonds upon Merchants Accounts were Reduceable, and
they held as Circumveeners, if they had taken a greater Rate then the ordinar
Rate at that time, especially here the agreement of the Rate being with a
prudent Party, and a Lawyer. 2dly, The Pursuer had Homologat the Bond by paying
a part of it, and could not quarrel the rest.

The Lords found the Reason of Circumvention Relevant, in these terms, that
there being no agreement before the hand, wherein the Merchant might take any
Rate he could get, but after the Money was furnished, the Defender had
fraudulently affirmed to the Pursuer, that the furnishing of the Floren to
Vinnice, was more then the furnishing of it to France, although he knew the
contrare at that time, but would not find the main error in that Article of the
Rate to be Relevant, and they Repelled the Homologation, because the Pursuer
might be deceived in one Article, and not in the rest.

Captain Ramsay contra William Henderson, January 20. 1671.
CAptain Ramsay as Assigney Constitute by Eupham Scot, to a Sum of two thousand
Merks, Addebted by umquhile Mr. Charles Henderson pursues his Heir for payment,
who alleged Absolvitor, because this Debt being due originally by Mr. Charles
Henderson, and by the said Eupham Scot, who being vicious Intromissatrix with
his Goods and Geir, and having been Assigned to this Sum her self, she became
Creditrix, as Assigney and Debitrix as vicious Intrometter, and confusione
tollitur obligatio, and this Pursuer having Right from her, can be in no better
case then she. It was answered, that vicious Intromission was not competent by
way of Defense.

The Lords found that whatever might be said, if the vicious Intrometter had
been pursuing whether the Defense might have been competent, yet found it not
competent against the Assigney, seeing the Cedent was not in campo, and
Probation behoved to be used against her.

Sandilands contra Sandilands, January 25. 1671.
THe Children of Alexander Sandilands pursue Agnes Sandilands their Mother, for
Count and payment of their Fathers Means, the Tutory being now finished by her
Marriage; In which Account the Mother gave up in defalcation the third of all
moveable Sums, as Ships, Merchant Goods, Household Plinishing, etc. It was
answered for the Children, that she can have no part of the moveable Sums, or
moveable Goods, because by the contract of Marriage produced, she is provided
to the Annualrent of 5000. Merks which was her own Tocher, and ten thousand
Pounds more of her Husbands, which is her Husbands, and was the whole Fortune
he then had; and as to the Conquest, it is provided that all Sums of Money,
Lands, Annualrents, Tacks and others whatsomever Conquest during the Marriage,
shall be taken to the Husband in Liferent, and to the Bairns in Fee; and
because the Wife is provided to be a Bairn in her Fathers House, what shall
come that way is provided to be taken to the Husband and Wife, the longest
Liver of them two, and the Bairns of the Marriage, so that all the Sums, and
Movables in question, being Conquest during the Marriage, they are by the
Contract destinate to the Husband in Liferent, and the Bairns in Fee, and which
Provision is a Debt upon the Husband, his Heirs and Executors, so that the Wife
can have no third thereof. The Defender answered, First, That her Right of the
third of the Movables being Constitute by the Law, cannot be taken away, but
by an express clear Deed Renuncing the same, or accepting such Provisions in
satisfaction thereof, which being a Clause now ordinarily adjected in Contracts,
and not put in this Contract, albeit in the same the Wifes Tocher bears in full
satisfaction, the Clause can never be so interpret as to exclude her third,
especially a Contract of Marriage being so favorable, that words are always
understood^ therein according to the meaning of Parties, and here the meaning
of the Parties may be cleared, by this, that the Defunct who was a very
intelligent Man, did declare that he would leave to his Wife so much of his
Movables in full satisfaction of her third, so that he thought she was not
excluded, and if need beis the Parties alive, Writters and Witnesses in the
Contract may be yet Examined to clear the meaning of the Clause. 2dly, Albeit
the Clause could not exclude her from a third of Money, which is express
therein, yet not from a third of Moveable Goods and Geir, which is not expressed,
and albeit the Clause bears, (and others) it can only be understood of Rights
due by a stated Security, and the intent of the Clause has only been to
substitute the Bairns of this Marriage, Heirs of the Conquest, and to exclude
the Bairns of any other Marriage, but did neither exclude the Father, but that
he might dispone on his Movables, albeit the Clause expresses him but
Liferenter thereof; neither does it exclude the Mother from the third thereof:
And there was adduced a Decision in the Case of the Lady Oxenfoord, wherein,
albeit by her Contract of Marriage she accepted certain Lands in full
satisfaction of her Terce, and third of all Lands, Annualrents and others, yet
that was not found to exclude her from a third of Movables, but only from a
Terce, or third of Heretable Rights. It was answered for the Children, that
their Mother having consented by the Contract of Marriage, that all Conquest
during the Marriage should be provided to their Father in Liferent, and to them
in Fee, she had excluded her self as clearly, and effectually, as if she had
Renunced her third thereof, or accepted of her Jointer in full satisfaction;
neither is there a necessity that these words must always be used, nor is this
alleged as a consequential Renunciation, but as an express Obligation, or
Destination of the Husband consented to by the Wife, which must have its native
effect, and so the Children must be Feears of the whole Conquest, and therefore
the Wife cannot be Feear of a third of it, and albeit moveable Geir be not
expressed, the generality (others) must necessarily comprehend them, being of the
same nature with Sums which are expressed, and may be Moveable, and of less
importance then they, and the case wholly differs from that of the Lady
Oxenfoord, wherein nothing but Heretable Rights are expressed, and it is an
unaccustomed Clause amongst Persons of that quality to exclude Ladies from a
third of Movables; but here Sums are expressed, and it is most ordinar for
Merchants to exclude their Wives from their Merchant Goods, which is the
greatest part of their Estate, as to the meaning of the Parties, clear Clauses
cannot be enervat upon that ground, and as for any thing expressed by the
Husband, It was on Deathbed in a great Fever whereof he Died, and no Testament
followed.

The Lords found that the foresaid Clause in the Contract did exclude the
Relict from a Terce of Moveable Sums, or Moveable Goods during the Marriage,
which could be understood, to be meaned to be put upon Security at any time,
but that it did not exclude her from a third of the Household Plenishing.

Charles Casse contra Sir Robert Cunningham, January 26. 1671.
CHarles Casse having Sold to Sir Robert Cunningham his Right to the Lands of
Achinhervy in his Minority, pursues a Reduction of the same Disposition upon
Lesion, and condescends upon his Lesion, thus, that being Infeft for security
of forty thousand Merks, and in an Annualrent effeirrand thereto, whereof
there were many bygone years Annualrent resting, and yet he got only forty
thousand Merks for all. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Pursuer
was satisfied of all his bygone Annualrents, in so far as he having Apprized
for five years Annualrents preceding the Apprizing, which was in Anno 1655. he
had entered in Possession by virtue of the said Apprizing of the whole Lands of
Achinhervie, and so is Comptable therefore according to the Rental, until he
cease to Possess the same, which will fully satisfy all his bygones, so that
he will have no Lesion 2dly, He had not only in his Person the said Apprizing,
but the Infeftment of Annualrent, upon which he being preferred in a double
Poinding, and excluding other Parties having also real Rights, he is thereby
obliged to do Diligence, and be Comptable not only for what he intrometted
with, but for what he ought to have intrometted with. The Pursuer answered,
that he was content to Count for what he had Intrometted with, but upon neither
ground was he obliged to Count for any further, especially as to his Apprizing,
albeit Law and Custom had oblidged him to Count for the whole Rental, till the
Apprizing were satisfied, yet he could not be Comptable but for his
Intromission after he was satisfied^ for then he had no title in his Person,
and it is clear that any Intrometter without a title is only liable for his
Intromission, and all Parties having Interest might have hindered him to have
Intrometted after he was satisfied; and albeit a Tennent or Factor, after the
expiring of the Tack, or Factory may be Comptable for a full Rental, yet that
is because they have a title per tacitam relocationem, or tacitam commissionem;
but after the extinction of the Apprizing then no title remains, and neither is
he liable as an Annualrenter, even though he did exclude others to do any
Diligence, because all the effect of an Annualrent can only be to distress the
Ground, or Poind the Tennents for as much of their Rent as is equivalent to the
current Annualrents, after which any other Party having Right may li^t the
superplus, and in this case the Annualrenter has not been preferred as to any
bygone Rents, but only in timecoming, and for his current Annualrents, and the
bygones are appointed to be brought in Account, which was never determined. The
Defender answered, that it were against all Reason that an Apprizer after he is
satisfied, should be in better condition then before he is satisfied, and so as
long as he meddles, he must Count by the Rental, and it is his proper part, who
knows when he is satisfied, to relinquish the Possession, which other Parties
cannot know, till by a long Process of Count and Reckoning it be determined,
and it were most absurd that in the mean time he should continue in Possession,
and though the Rents did in a great part perish, he should not be Comptable
therefore, but only for what he actually lifted.

The Lords found the Pursuer as Apprizer Comptable according to the Rental, not
only for Intromission, but Omission, both till the Apprizing be satisfied, and
thereafter for all years of which he lifted any part, but found not the
Annualrenter liable for Diligence, albeit he did exclude others, but the Case
came not to be Determined if the Annualrenter had by a Personal Action insisted
for more years Annualrent past, to be preferred to the whole Rents, till these
bygones were satisfied, that not being the case here in question.

In this Cause it had been formerly alleged that the Pursuer after his
Majority, had Received a part of the price of the Lands, in so far as having in
his Minority granted a Commission to Mr. John Smith, one of his Curators, to
uplift all Sums due to him, and he having uplifted a part of the price of the
Land from the Defender, and bonds for the rest; the Pursuer after his Majority,
had by his Discharge produced, Received from his Curator and Factor the said
Money and Bonds, and Discharged him thereof, and acknowledged that he and the
remainent Curators had acted faithfully in all their Intromissions, whereby the
Pursuer has approven, and Homologat the Disposition of the Land, made by him
and his Curators, which he now quarrels. The Pursuer answered, First, That the
Defense is not Relevant, for Homologation being a presumed or conjectured
Consent, not by Word or Writ, but by Deeds done, which import the adhering to
the Disposition quarrelled, it cannot be inferred by any Deeds, but such as can
have no other intent or purpose consistent with the Rejecting, or disapproving
the Disposition, but here the Receiving of the Money and Bonds from the Factor
has a consistency and congruity with this Reduction, for the Pursuer knowing
that he could not be restored against his Disposition, unless he did restore
what was Received by his Warrant, might justly take up the same from his
Factor, that he might be in capacity to Consign the same at the Bar, as if a
Minor having Bought Lands to his Lesion, and having Wodset a part of the same,
he might after his Majority Redeem the Lands Wodset by himself, which although
it behoved to proceed upon the Disposition as his Title, yet it being a Deed
necessar to purge the Wodset, and repone the Disponer to his own Land free
thereof, it would never importan Homologation, or if he had in his Minority
excambed Lands, and Wodset a part of the Lands he acquired thereby, the
Redeeming or purging of the Wodset after his Majority would import no
Homologation, so neither can any Deed import Homologation, which upon any
account can be consistent with the annulling of the Right quarrelled upon
Minority. 2dly, This Dicharge does bear expressly relation to Mr. John Smiths
Account of Intromission Subscribed at the same time, and bears that the
Discharge should be alse sufficient as if the Account were insert, Ita est in
the Charge of the Account, wherein only mention is made of the Sums paid by
the Defender, there is an express Reservation, that the Account shall be but
prejudice to the Pursuer to insist in his Reduction of the Disposition, And as
to that Clause in the Discharge, that the Curators and Factor had done
faithfully* It relates only to their Intromission, and not to their Omission,
and albeit it had born simply, that they had acted faithfully, that can only
import that they had not acted Fraudulently, and that they had done for the
Minor what they conceived best: but does not import that they had acted
providently and skilfully, so that the Minor may still Reduce their Deed. The
Defender answered, that his Defense was most Relevant, being founded upon the
Pursuers consent, after his Majority: for consent may be Adhibite, not only by
Word or Writ, but by any Deed importing the consent, as if a Minor giving a
Bond in his Minority, should pay a Terms Annualrent thereof after his Majority:
Or if a Minor intrometting with his Fathers moveable Heirship, or Rents of his
Lands in his Minority, should continue to intromet for one Term, or one Point
further after his Majority, in neither case would he be restored* and yet such
Deeds might be consistent, and might be done to other intents, as if his
payment of the Annualrent did bear, le^t before his Reduction he might be
Distressed, or that he continued his Possession, lest the Rents or Goods might
perish to the damage of his party: Yea, though these were expressly mentioned
in his Discharge; and his Reduction were reserved, it would be protestatio
contraria facto, and would not free him: so neither can the Reservation in this
account, though it were repeated in the Discharge, be sufficient; especially
seeing he might have caused the Factor Consign the Money in the Clerks hands,
that it might be restored at the Discussing of the Reduction: So that
inconsistent Reservations or Protestations, operate nothing. 3dly, The charge
of this Account, wherein only the Reservation is mentioned, is a louse sheet of
Paper, subscribed with another Hand than the Discharge, and has neither Date
nor Witnesses, and so cannot instruct that this is the very Account mentioned
in the Discharge.

The Lords did not determine the Point of Homologation, but before answer
ordained the Curators and Witnesses in the Account to be Examined upon Oath,
whether the Charge produced be the same that was subscribed, abinitio, bearing
the said Reservation, But they inclined that the Reservation would take off the
Homologation, and would not be void, as contraria facto.

Keir contra Nicolson. January 28. 1671.
JOhn Keir as Assigney by the Earl of Mar to some Feu-duties, pursues a
Poinding of the Ground against Nicolson of Tillicutrie, who alleged no
Process, because the Earl of Mar his Cedent, had no right to their Feuduties,
which were due in his Fathers Lifetime, whose Liferent was reserved ^whereupon
compearance was made for Scotscraig's Heir, who was Donator to the old Earl of
Mar's Escheat and Liferent, and concurred. The Defender answered, that the
concourse could not be effectual, because their bygone Feu-duties being
moveable, belonged to Scotscraigs Executor, and not to his Heir: and though the
Concurrer was both Heir and Executor, yet their bygones belonging to Scotscraig
as Donator, being for years wherein Scotscraig lived, they are moveable, and
ought to have been contained in the Inventar of his Testament, as they are not.
It was answered, that a Liferent-Escheat having tractum futuri temporis,
belongs not to the Executor, even as to the bygones, before the Donators Death,
unless they had been liquide and established in his Life; but the Gift and all
following thereon belongs to his Heir.

The Lords found that the bygones of the Liferent preceding the Donators
Death, did belong to his Executor, albeit in his Life he had obtained no
sentence therefore.

Douglas of Kelhead contra The Vassals of the Barony of Kelhead and others.
January 30. 1671.
THe Earl of Queensberry being Superior to certain Vassals of the Barony of
Kelhead, who did Dispone the Feu Duties and whole Casualities of the
Superiority to Kelhead his Brother, to the effect that Kelhead might be his
immediate Vassal, and that the Feuars might hold of Kelhead, whereupon Kelhead
was Infeft, holding of Queensberry, and thereupon pursues a Declarator of
Non-entry, both generally and specially in the said Summons. It was alleged
for the Defenders absolvitor, because they were not the Pursuers Vassals, for
albeit he was Infeft holding of Queensberry, to the effect he might become
their Superior, yet that Infeftment was null, because no Superior could
interpose any Person betwixt him and his immediate Vassals: Likeas the
Non-entry could only infer the Feu Duty till Decree or Declarator were
pronunced, which used to be per se, but here both special and general
Declarator being joint, could only conclude the Feu Duties for bygones till
Litiscontestation.

The Lords found that albeit the Pursuers Title upon his Infeftment, by which
he was interposed, was invalide; yet seeing it contained a Disposition and
Assignation to the Feu Duties, and Casualities of the Superiority, that the
Pursuer had sufficient Title thereby, as Donator by Queensberry the Superior,
and found that the Non-entry carried only the Feu Duty before the Citation, but
after the Citation, the whole Profits, seeing the Vassals did not upon the
Citation, obtain themselves Infeft by Queensberry.

Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun. January 31. 1671.
JOhn Maxwel younger of Calderwood having Married the Lady Miltoun Sir John
Whitefoord of Milntoun her Stepson Acquired from him his Right to her Jointure
of Milntoun, as her H^sband jure mariti, thereafter John Maxwel having gone out
of the Country, the Lady pursues a Divorce against him, upon Adultery
committed with Margaret Davidson, in which Process* Milntoun as having interest
in the Jointure, which would return to the Lady from him upon the Divorce,
craves to be admitted in the Process, but was not admitted, so the Process
proceeded, and the Decree of Divorce pronunced: whereupon Milntoun raises
Reduction of the Commissars Decree upon iniquity, because he was unjustly
excluded from Defending, and if he had been admitted, he would have proponed
pertinent Interrogators to the Witnesses which were omitted, and would have
proponed Objections against their Hability, which would have excluded them from
being Witnesses.

In this Process the Lords Ordained the Witnesses to be Re-examined upon all
such pertinent Interrogators as Miltoun should propose, and they being
Re-examined, did acknowledge that the Lady prompted them how to Depone, as to
their knowledge of Margaret Davidson, and gave them Tokens of her by her
Clothes and Stature, and that she promised them a good Deed to Depone.

In which Process the Lords found that the Witnesses upon Re-examination, after
Sentence, could not by their posterior Deposition, Derogat from the first
Deposition, and therefore Assoilzied from the Reduction, reserving and allowing
to Milntoun his Action of Reprobator, wherein he now insists on these Grounds,
First, That the Witnesses, Paterson and Clerk who only proved, were viles
personae, having no means worth the Kings Unlaw. 2dly, That they were Persons
infamous, and of very evil Repute, and in their Examination before, they had
prevaricat and contradicted themselves. 3dly, That the Lady had Suborned and
Corrupted the Witnesses, by Prompting and Instructing them how to Depone.
4thly, That she had Corrupted the Witnesses before their Testimonies before the
Commissars, by giving some of them twenty Dollers to bear Witness, which is far
above their ordinar allowance of Witnesses for their Charges. It was answered
for the Defender, First, no Objection was now competent against the Hability or
Sufficiency of the Witnesses, because Objections were given in against them by
the Pursuer, and they have Deponed thereanent, so that albeit Reprobators be
competent, where the Pursuer cannot instantly verify his Objections against
the Witnesses, and protests for Reprobator; yet if either he forbear to
protest, or refer his Objections to the Witnesses Oaths, he can never be heard
by way of Reprobator against them: And here this Pursuer neither Protested for
Reprobators at the first, nor at the Re-examination, but upon his own desire,
they were purged, and did Depone anent these Objections. 2dly, Having made use
of the Witnesses upon the said Interrogators, he has approven them, and cannot
quarrel their Testimonies. And as to the particular Objection of their poverty,
they have already Deponed that they are worth the Kings Unlaw, and it being a
Negative, which is not presumed that persons are so poor, it cannot be proven
by Witnesses, and though it could, and were a sufficient Objection ordinarily,
yet in a Crime of this Nature, which is so Clandestine, Objections of Poverty
would not be sufficient, and as to that Member of the Reprobator, that they are
persons of evil Fame, it is not Relevant, unless they were infamous, infamia
juris, either by such Deeds, as the Law Declares to infer Infamy, or by a
Sentence of a Judge, declaring them infamous. As to that Member of the
Reprobator upon Subornation, it is not Relevant, unless it were Libelled, that
the Witnesses undertook so to Depone, or that they had Deponed accordingly, for
the Witnesses might be far above exception, as no offer of Subornation could
Canvel the Faith of their Testimony, and so infer a blemish upon them. And it
was answered to all the Members of the Reprobator that they are not proven by
Witnesses, but by Oath of Party, otherwise such Processes could never end, for
if Witnesses were Receiveable to prove the Inhability or Corruption of the
first Witnesses in the principal Cause, then the Testimonies of the Witnesses
in the Reprobator might be Canvelled by Witnesses in a second Reprobator,
against the Witnesses in the first Reprobator, and so Reprobator upon
Reprobator without end. It was answered for the Pursuer to the first, that he
cannot be excluded from Reprobators against the Commissars Decree, though he
protested not therefore, in respect it is evident by the Decree, that he was
not admitted to compear, but he did Protest in the Reduction before the Lords,
who have expressly allowed him his Reprobators, neither does the taking of the
Oaths of the Witnesses de initialibus testimoniorum, exclude Reprobators,
albeit the Party desire them to be Re-examined upon Oath thereupon, for that
Oath is not an Oath upon the Parties Reference, as stating the sole Probation
thereupon, but it is a judicial Oath, and partis judicis, for the Judge may,
and ought so to Examine the Witnesses, whether the Party require or not, so
that the Party refers not these Points to the Witnesses, but requires it of the
Judges as a part of his Office. And as to these Points, every Witness is testis
singularis, for he Depones only his own Hability, and so there is no Probation
thereby, except in so far as may militate against the Witness himself, so that
contrary Probation may well be admitted against such an Oath, as well as
against Executors upon Superintromission, Tutors or Curators upon negligence or
Malversation: and if it were otherwise, Reprobators could be Sustained in no
case against Decreets of the Lords, because of Course, they take the Parties
Oath to purge themselves of partial Counsel, and of Corruption by promise, or
receiving of good Deed, etc. Neither does the Pursuers making use of the
Testimonies of their Witnesses in their Re-examination, import his Approbation
of their Hability and Integrity, for Parties may give Interrogators to
Witnesses not adduced by themselves. To the second, this Process being of so
great importance, all lawful Objections against the Witnesses are competent,
and there is none more ordinar than that they are pauperes, not worth the Kings
Unlaw, and so liable to great Temptation of Corruption. And as to the attempt
of Suborning, or Brybing the Witnesses, it is most Relevant and express in Law
l. 33. ff. de re judicata, bearing testibus pecunia corruptis conspiratione
adversariorum, etc. which being pessimi exempli in odium corrumpentis, not only
are the Witnesses punishable, but the Sentence annullable, which is confirmed
toto titulo Codicis si ex falsis instrumentis, and that without regard whether
they undertake or Depone falsely or not, as is observed by Bartol l. in princ.
ff. de falsis and adict l. divans 33. de re judicata Number. 7. and Covaruvias in
repet. C. quamvis fol. 57. Col. 3. which he attests to be the common opinion;
and which is likewise attested by Boss. in tit. de falsis number. 1608. and by
Will. 66. com. opin. fol. 2991. and especially by Hartman tit. 15. de testibus
observe. 16. where he does expressly maintain, that it is not so much a lawful to
instruct a Witness, excitandae memoriae causa non si subito deprehendatur
haesitet and titubet, in respect any such instruction is subornationis
velamentum: and which Opinion has been likewise Confirmed by the Decisions of
the most eminent and famous Courts of Justice, as may appear per Capell.
tholos. deces. 2804. and others. And which is likewise the Opinion of Clarus,
viz. That the foresaid Acts of Corruption are disjunctive and separatim
Relevant, as may appear by Fassum. Number. 12, and 13. and qu^st. 53. de
exceptionibus quae contra testes opponi possunt. And to the last alleadgeance
against the Probation by Witnesses, that it would infer an endless course of
Reprobators: It was answered, that by the same Reason, Reductions might be
taken away; because the Decree Reductive might be Reduced, and that Decree by
another Reduction without end: But Reprobators have every where been Sustained,
and no such inconvenience ever found; neither can it be imagined, that every
Pursuer of a Reprobator will prevail, which this infinite progress must
suppose, only it may infer, that Witnesses in Reprobators ought to be more
unquestionable, than the Witnesses called in question thereby.

The Lords found that Reprobators were competent, albeit the Witnesses upon
Oath Deponed upon their own Hability, at the desire of the Party: and albeit
the Party Protested not for Reprobators, seeing he was not admitted to compear,
and found that Member of the Reprobators upon the poverty not Relevant in this
Clandestine Crime: neither that Member upon their alleged Infamy, unless it
were alleged that they were infamous, infamia juris, by any Deed which the
Law expressly declares to infer Infamy, or were declared infamous sententia
judicis: and found that Member of the Reprobators upon instructing or prompting
the Witnesses Relevant, without necessity to allege the Witnesses undertaking
or Deponing conform, and that in odium corrumpenti^, without inferring any
blemish upon the Witnesses so prompted, who consented not, or swore falsely: and
found that Member Relevant of Corrupting the Witnesses, by giving or promising
of good Deed, more than might be suitable to the Witnesses for their Charges:
but as to the manner of Probation by Oath or Witnesses, The Lords superceeded
to give answer, till a Practique alleged upon were produced.

Pringle contra Pringle. February 1* 1971.
PRingle of Soutray having only three Daughters, does in his Testament done
upon Deathbed, Dispone his whole Lands to his eldest Daughter, and Constitute
her universal Legator* with this provision, that she pay 10000. merks to the
other two Daughters, the Disposition as to the Lands being Reduced, as being in
Testament, and on Deathbed, the universal Legacy was Sustained, to give the
eldest Daughter the Right of the Deads part, whereupon it was alleged for the
other two Daughters, that if the eldest insisted for the universal Legacy, she
behoved to have it with the burden of the ten thousand merks, which was a
burden both upon the Land and Movables, and does no more relate to the one
than the other, so that albeit the Right of the Land be Evicted, the Movables
remains burdened, as if a Father should Dispone certain Lands to a Son, with
the burden of Portions to the other Children, albeit a part of the Lands were
Evicted, the Portions would be wholly due without abatement. It was answered
for the eldest Daughter, that in latter Wills, the mind of the Defunct is
chiefly regarded, not only as to what is expressed, but to what is employed or
presumed, and here it is evident, that the mind of the Defunct was, that his
two younger Daughters should only have ten thousand merks in satisfaction to
all Rights of Lands or Movables: Now seeing they have gotten two third parts of
the Land, which is much better than ten thousand merks. It cannot be thought to
be his meaning to give them any share of his Movables also, but that the half
thereof, which was at his disposal, should belong to the eldest Daughter
without burden.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and declared the same to belong to the eldest
Daughter, without burden of the Provisions.

Alexander Ferguson contra Parochioners of Kingarth. Eodem die.
ALexander Ferguson being one of the Prebands of the Chapel-Royal, by His
Majesty's Presentation and Collation, pursues the Heretors of the Paroch of
Kingarth for the Teinds, as being annexed to the Chappel-Royal, as appears by
the Books of Assumption, and three Presentations from the King produced.
Compearance is made for the Minister of Rothsay, who alleged that he had
Presentation to the Kirk of Kingarth from the King, and Collation thereupon,
and so had best right to the Teinds of his Paroch, because de jure communi
decima debentur p^rocho, and as for the Pursuer, he shows no Right by any
Mortification of these Teinds to the Chappel-Royal; Neither can he make it
appear, that ever he, or any other Prebander were in Possession civil or
natural thereof. 2dly, Albeit the Prebanders had had a Right, the same is now
taken off by Prescription, because it is offered to be proven, that the
Minister has been 40. years in peaceable Possession, before the Pursuers
Citation, which not only takes away the bygones, but the whole Right, and
establishes the same in the Ministers person.

The Lords found the Books of Assumption, and the three Presentations from the
King, sufficient to instruct the Pursuers Title, and found the Defense of
Prescription Relevant, as to the bygones before the Citation, but not to
Establish the Right in the Minister, or to take it from the Chappel-Royal, as
to years after the Citation, and in time coming, in respect of the Act of
Parliament, providing that the Kings Interest shall not be prejudged by the
neglect of His Officers.

Blair of Bagillo contra Blair of Denhead. February 3. 1671.
BLair of Bagillo having granted Bond to Blair of Denhead, he did Assign the
same to Guthrie of Collistoun. Bagilio raised Suspension against Collistoun as
Assigney, in Anno 1632. and now Collistoun insists in a Transferring of the old
Suspension and Decree Suspended against Bagillo's Heirs, to the effect the
Cautioner in the Suspension may be reached. It was alleged no Transferrence,
because Bagillo^s Father obtained a general Discharge from Denhead, before any
Intimation upon Collistouns Assignation; and albeit the Discharge be posterior
to the Assignation produced, it must liberat the Debtor, who was not obliged
to know the Assigney before Intimation. It was answered, that the Debtor might
pay to the Cedent bona fide, before Intimation: yet a Discharge obtained from
the Cedent after Assignation, would not liberate against the Assigney, though
it were before Intimation: and this general Discharge bears no onerous Cause.
2dly, This general Discharge being only of all Processes and Debts betwixt
Bagillo and Denhead, at that time, it cannot extend to this sum assigned by
Denhead long before, and who could not know whether the Assigney had intimate
or not, and cannot be thought contrair the Warrandice of his own Assignation,
to have Discharged the sum Assigned, especially seeing there was an Assignation
long before, which was lost, and the Intimation thereof yet remains* and this
second Assignation bears to have been made in respect of the loss of the
former, and yet it is also before this general Discharge.

The Lords found the general Discharge of the Cedent could not take away this
sum, formerly assigned to him, though not Intimat, unless it were proven that
payment or satisfaction was truly made for this Sum.

Alexander Wishart contra Elizabeth Arthure. February 4. 1671.
UMquhil Mr. William Arthure being Infeft in an Annualrent out of some
Tenements in Edinburgh, and having entered in Possession, by lifting of Mails
and Duties, some of his Discharges being produced. Alexander Wishart as now
having right to the Tenements, pursues a Declarator against Elizabeth Arthure,
only Daughter to Mr. William, for declaring that the sum whereupon the
Annualrent was Constitute, was satisfied by Intromission with the Mails and
Duties of the Tenements. The Defender alleged that this was only probable
scripto vel juramento, and not by Witnesses, for an Annualrenter having no
Title to Possess, out-put and in-put Tennents, cannot be presumed to uplift
more than his annualrent, especially seeing his Discharges produced for many
years, are far within his annualrent, and it were of dangerous consequence, if
Witnesses, who cannot prove an hundredth pounds, were admitted, not only to
prove Intromission with the Rents, so far as might extend to the Annualrent,
but so much more as might satisfy the Principal, and thereby take away an
Infeftment: for albeit that Probation has been Sustained to extinguish
Appryzings, which are rigorous Rights, yet not to take away Infeftments of
Annualrent. It was answered, that albeit Witnesses are not admitted where Writ
may, and uses to be adhibite, in odium negligentis, who neglected to take Writ:
Yet this is no such case; and therefore in all such, Witnesses are admitted:
for if the Pursuer had insisted against the Defender, for intrometting with his
Mails and Duties, of whatever quantity and time within Prescription, Witnesses
would have been admitted: The Defender could only have excepted upon his
Annualrent, which would have been Sustained, pro tanto; but the Pursuer would
have been admitted to prove further intromission, which being by virtue of his
Security for a Sum, and in his hand would Compense and Extinguish that Sum,
which is all that is here craved, and whereupon the Witnesses are already
Adduced.

The Lords Sustained the Probation by Witnesses, for the whole intromission, to
be imputed in satisfaction of the Principal Sum and Annualrents.

Lowrie contra Gibson. Eodem die.
LOwrie being Superior to Gibson in a Feu, pursued him before the Sheriff, for
annulling his Feu, for not payment of the Feu-duty, and obtained Decree
against him, and thereafter Pursued him before the Lords for Mails and Duties,
wherein Compearance being made, Gibson made an offer, that if Lowrie would free
him of bygones, and pay him 1600. merks, he and his Author would Dispone their
whole Right, which being accepted by the Superior, Decree was pronunced
against Gibson, to denude himself upon payment: Shortly thereafter, Gibson drew
up a Disposition, and Subscribed it in the Terms of the Decree, and offered it
to Lowrie, who refused it, because his Author had not Subscribed. Thereafter
Gibson Suspended upon Obedience, and Consigned the Disposition which was never
Discussed; but Gibson continued in Possession still from the Decree, which was
in Anno 1650. Now Gibson raises a Reduction of the Sheriffs Decree of
Declarator, annulling his Feu, because the Sheriff was not a competent Judge to
such Processes, and because Gibson had offered the Feu-duty, which was refused,
so that the not payment was not through his fault: and also insisted for
Reduction of the Lords Decree, as built upon the Sheriffs Decree, and falling
in consequence therewith. And as for any offer or consent, the assertion of a
Clerk could not instruct the same, unless it had been warranted by the Parties
Subscription. It was answered, that Gibson having Homologate the Decree, by an
offer of the Disposition, conform thereto, which was only refused, because it
wanted the Authors Subscription; and having Suspended upon Obedience, he cannot
now object, either against the Decreets or Consent. It was answered, that so
long as the Decreets of the Sheriff and the Lords were standing, Gibson might
be compelled thereby to Consign the said Disposition; but that is only on these
Terms, to be given up if the Lords saw Cause; and hinders not Gibson to
allege, why it should not be given up. And as to the offer to deliver the
Disposition, the Instrument of the Nottar could not instruct the same, but only
Gibson's own Oath.

The Lords found that albeit the Consignation for the Suspension would not have
prejudged Gibson, yet the simple offer to deliver the Disposition, did so
Homologate the Decreets and Consent, that he could not quarrel the same; but
they found it not proven by the Instrument, without the Oaths of the Witnesses
insert in the Instrument: And in regard that Lowrie had letten the matterly
over for more than twenty years, they Declared that the Agreement should only
take effect from this time, and that Gibson should not be comptable for the
bygone Duties.

Ninian Home contra Francis Scot. February 7. 1671.
NInian Hume having Charged Francis Scot upon a Bond of 550. merks; He Suspends
on this Reason, that both Parties having referred the matter verbally to an
Arbiter, he had determined 200. merks to be paid for all, whereupon Hume had
pursued. It was answered, that verbal Submissions and Decreets Arbitral are not
binding, but either Party may resile before Writ be adhibite.

The Lords found the Reason was Relevant to be proven thus, by the Chargers
Oath that he did submit; and by the Arbiters Oaths, that they did accordingly
determine.

Lowrie of Blackwood contra Sir John Drummond. Eodem die.
SIr Robert Drummond of Meidhope having Disponed his Lands of Scotstoun to Sir
John Drummond, for love and favor, and for better encouraging Sir John to pay
his Debt, as the Disposition bears, and under Reversion of a Rosenoble to Sir
Robert in his own Life. Mr. John Drummond Sir Roberts appearand Heir, grants a
Bond to Lowrie of Blackwood, whereupon he Adjudges the Land from the appearand
Heir, and pursues a Reduction of the Disposition, as done on Deathbed. In
which Pursuit Witnesses were appointed to be Examined, hinc inde, concerning
Sir Roberts condition, when he made the Disposition, and thereafter till his
Death; the sum of the Probation was, that before the Disposition Sir Robert had
contracted an Apoplexy, whereby he remained senseless for a time, but by Cure
there remained a Palsy in his Tongue, and a Vertigo in his Head, which
continued till his Death, and about a year after that the sickness affected his
Brain, so that he lost the remembrance of Names of things, and most of the
Witnesses Depones, that he was not found thereafter in his Judgment, but that
he kept on his Clothes, and was not affixed to his Bed, and went frequently
and walked in his Garden, and to the Court-hill, half a pair of Butts off; and
one of the Witnesses Deponed, that he came to his House alone, a quarter of a
mile off: but that he went never to the Kirk nor Market, nor any public place:
Whereupon it was alleged for the Defender, that the Defunct continued in
health at and after the Disposition, and that his going so frequently abroad,
was equivalent to his going to Kirk and Market, which was sufficient to eleid
the Reason of Deathbed, and that the Palsy being but in his Tongue, albeit he
misnamed things, it did not import his being on Deathbed, especially seeing he
Disponed for payment of his Debt, equivalent to the worth of the Land, his
Disposition being to a Friend of his Name, who Relieved him of his Debt, his
Heir not being his Son, nor Descendent, and incapable to Relieve him of his
Debt. It was answered, that the contracting of his sickness being sufficiently
proven to be before this Disposition, and the continuance thereof to affect his
Brain, in that case nothing could purge the same, but his going to Kirk and
Market, which were the acts required in Law, and could not be supplied by his
going privately abroad, and not to any popular public meeting; and as to his
Debts they could not validat the Disposition by exception, though the Defender
might by way of action affect therewith the Estate, or Burden the Heir, on
whose Bond it was adjudged, especially seeing the Disposition buir for Love and
Favor, and Redeemable for a Rose-noble.

The Lords found the Reason of Deathbed sufficiently proven, and that his
private going abroad (though unsupported) was not equivalent to going abroad to
Kirk and Market, or public meeting, where the Disease continued to affect the
Brain; But they found the paying of Debts equivalent to the worth of the Land
Relevant by way of exception, in regard the Disposition buir to be for payment
of his Debt.

Mr. John Wat contra Campbel of Kilpont, Feb. 8. 1671.
SIr Archibald Campbel being Debtor to Adam Wat in a Sum of Money, he did
thereafter Contract his Son Mr. Archibald in Marriage with Thomas Moodies
Daughter, and by the Contract Thomas Moodie acknowledges the Receipt of forty
thousand Pound from Sir Archibald, and is obliged for twenty thousand Merks of
Tocher, all to be employed for Mr. Archibald in Fee; but Thomas Moodies
Daughter Dying, and leaving no Children behind her, Thomas Moodie did restore
the Sums, and there is a Discharge granted by Sir Archibald and his Spouse, and
Mr. Archibald bearing them to have Received the Sums, and to have Discharged
the same; Whereupon Mr. John Wat as Heir to Adam, pursues Mr. Archibald to pay
him the Sum due to his Father, upon this ground, that he having Received forty
thousand Pounds of his Fathers Means, after Contracting of the Debt, ought to
make so much of it forthcoming as will pay the Pursuer; which Action was
founded upon the Act of Parliament, 1621. whereby all Deeds done by Debitors in
prejudice of their Creditors, without a Cause Onerous are declared null, and
all Parties that by virtue thereof Intromets, are declared liable to restore to
the Creditors. It was answered for the Defender; First, That the Libel was not
Relevant, there being no part of the Act of Parliament 1621. that Incapacitats
Debitors to Gift or Dispone Sums of Money, or Movables, especially if the
Disponer at that time be not insolvent, but have a sufficient Estate for
satisfying his Debt; and it is offered to be proven, that Sir Archibald had at
the time of this Contract a sufficient Estate for all his Debt, in the hands of
the Earl of Argile and Glenorchie; and albeit by the superveening Forefaulture,
Argiles Debt be insufficient, it was a good Debt the time of the Contract, so
that there can be no ground to make a Child liable to Restore a Portion given
by a Father who was solvent. 2dly, Albeit the Defender could be liable, if it
were clear that he had the Sum foresaid by his Father yet remaining to the
fore, yet if it had been lost or spent before the Intenting of this Cause, he
or any subsequent Estate acquired aliunde is not liable, ita est anything he
has is a Wodset of forty thousand Merks on Kilpont, and the two Tochers he had
viz. twenty thousand Merks from Thomas Moodie, and ten thousand Merks of
Legacy, and twelve thousand Merk of Tocher with Sir William Gray's Daughter,
was sufficient to acquire the Right of Kilpont, without any thing from his
Father. 3dly, The Discharge produced cannot instruct that Mr. Archibald
Received the Money, because it bears indefinitly that payment was made to Sir
Archibald and his Spouse, and to Mr. Archibald, and all of them do Discharge.
The Pursuer answered, that the Libel was very Relevant, for whatsoever might be
alleged of Bairns Portions by a solvent Father, yet this being so
considerable a Fortune provided to the only Son, and appearand Heir, if it did
not make him liable to satisfy the Fathers Debt pro tanto, it were a patent
way to defraud all Creditors and elude the Act of Parliament, for the Father
might Sell his Estate, and provide the Moneys in this manner; and as to the
Discharge, albeit it be indefinite, yet it must be presumed that Mr. Archibald
Received the Sums, because they belong to him in Fee by the Contract of
Marriage.

The Lords found the Libel Relevant, and that the Discharge produced did
presume that Mr. Archibald the Feear did Receive the Money, but seeing the
Probation was not express, but presumptive, they allowed Mr. Archibald to
condescend upon what Evidences he could give, that the Money or Surety thereof
was Delivered to his Father.

John Will contra The Town of Kirkaldy, Feb. 11. 1671.
JOhn Will pursues the Magistrates of Kirkaldy for paying the Debt of a Person
Incarcerat in their Tolbooth, who was letten escape by them. It was alleged
for the Town, that the Person Incarcerat had escaped vi majore, and that they
had not failed in their duty, having had a sufficient Tolbooth, having four
Doors, and the inmost an Iron Door, and that all being Locked; the Person
Incarcerat having gotten secretly conveyed in some Mason or Wrights Tools, had
in the night broken all the Locks, and escaped. It was answered, that the
Defense was not Relevant, neither had the Magistrates done their duty and
diligence, for they ought to have had Chains, and Cat-bands upon the
utter-sides of the Doors, with Locks thereon, unto which the Incarcerat Person
could not reach; and it was alike how many Doors they had upon the Tolbooth,
with their Locks inward, for the same means that would break up one, would
break up twenty, and if such a pretense should liberat the Magistrates, it were
an easy way to elide all Captions, and let all Persons for Debt free. It was
answered for the Town, that the having of Cat-bands without, Closed and Locked,
was not the custom of their Tolbooth, who past all memory did never Lock the
outward Chains but upon Malefactors, and such is the custom of Edinburgh, and
other Burghs of Scotland.

The Lords having before answer, ordained Witnesses to be Examined on both
parts, anent the condition of the Tolbooth, and finding thereby that there was
no Cat-bands or outward Chains Locked when this Prisoner escaped, they found
the Magistrates had not done their duty, and so Decerned against them.

Alexander Naper contra The Earl of Eglintoun, Feb. 14. 1671.
THere was a Bond granted by the Lord of Minto as principal, Lugtoun James
Creichtoun, and the Earl of Eglintoun Cautioners, in Anno 1641. to Adam Naper
and his Spouse in Conjunct Fee; Alexander Naper as Heir to his Father, pursues
this Earl of Eglintoun as Heir to his Father for payment, who alleged
Absolvitor, because Minto having Disponed his Estate to his Son, under express
Provision to pay the Debt, the same was satisfied by Minto younger, and was
retired lying by him a long time, or by Robert Vrie, who had the Trust of
Minto's Affairs and Writs, and Minto younger being lapsus bonis, and Robert
Vrie being dead, the Pursuer had either practiced with Minto upon his
necessity, or upon Robert Vries Friends to give him back the Bond, and for
evidence that the Bond has been satisfied and retired. First, It had lain
dormant above this thirty years, without either payment of Annualrent, or any
Diligence. 2dly, The late Earl of Eglintoun being Forefault by the Usurpers,
his Creditors were appointed to give in their Claims, or else to be excluded,
and yet no Claim was given in for this Debt, and therefore craved that
Witnesses might be Examined ex ^fficio for proving of the points foresaid. The
Pursuer answered, that it was an uncontroverted principle in our Law, that
Witnesses could not prove payment of any Debt due by writ, nor take the same
away; and as to the pretenses adduced by the Defender, they import nothing, for
the delay of seeking payment or Claiming the Sum, was because the said Adam
Naper was with Montrose in the War, and his Heir remained a Minor, and his Wife
was Married to another Husband. The Defender answered, that the Wife was
Liferenter of the Sum, and she and her second Husband would certainly have
sought her Annualrent, or Claimed the Sum, which takes off the excuse of the
Pursuers Minority; and albeit Writ be not taken away by Witnesses ordinarily,
yet where the matter is so ancient, and the Evidences so pregnant, the Lords
uses not to refuse to Examine Witnesses ex officio.

The Lords ex officio ordained Witnesses to be Examined anent the being of the
Bond in the Custody of Minto, or his Doers, being a matter of Fact, but would
not Examine them anent the payment made thereof.

George Bain contra The Bailzies of Culrosse, Eodem die.
GEorge Bain pursues the Bailzies of Culrosse for payment of the Debt of a
Rebel, whom they had suffered to go free up and down their Streets, whereupon
he had taken Instruments against them, and protested that they should be liable
for the Debt; seeing squalor carceris is justly introduced against Debitors that
will not pay their Debt, and the Magistrates of Burghs may not take it off in
whole or in part, and produced a Practique observed by Durie upon the 27. of
March 1623. Smith against the Bailzies of Elgine, where the Prisoner being
suffered to walk freely upon the Streets, till he obtained a Charge to set to
Liberty, the Magistrates were found liable. The Defender alleged Absolvitor,
because he offers to prove that this Prisoner's going out was necessary, viz.
He being a Person altogether Indigent, was permitted sometimes to go and
mendicat his Bread, and once to go to the Burial of a Child of his own, and
immediately thereafter; the Pursuers having taken Instruments, the Rebel was put
in Waird, and continued there till he Died.

Which the Lords found Relevant to Liberat the Burgh.

Apilgirth contra Locarbie. Eodem die.
IN a Count and Reckoning at the instance of Apilgirth, for declaring two
Apprizings Led by Lockerbie satisfied, this Query was moved by the Auditor,
whether a Sum Consigned by umquhile Apilgirth, for Redeeming a part of the
Lands Wodset to Lockerbie, conform to the Reversion in the Wodset, might be
proven to be uplifted by Apilgirth from the Consignator, by the Oath of the
Consignator, and of the Clerk of the Process who Received the Money, or only by
Writ, Apilgirth the Consignator being Dead.

The Lords considering that it was ordinar to take up Sums Consigned for
Redemption of Wodsets, being upon the peril of the Consigner, did appoint the
Oath of the Consignator and Clerk to be taken, for proving that the Money was
taken up by Apilgirth from the Consignator, and that Apilgirth and not the
Consignator put it in the Clerks hands, and that the Clerk gave it up again to
Apilgirth.

The Earl of Argile contra The Lord of Mcnaughtan. Feb. 15. 1671.
THe Earl of Argile pursues the Lord of Mcnaughtan to Remove from the Lands of
Benbowie, as being a part of the Earls Barony of Lo^how. The Defender alleged
Absolvitor, because he pr^duces a Seizing, dated in Anno 1527. proceeding upon
a Precept of clare constat from the Earl of Argile, in favors of Alexander
Mcnaughtan as Heir to Giller Mcnaughtan, of the four Merk Land of Benbowie, by
virtue whereof, the said Alexander and his Successors to this day have
Possessed, and so have a sufficient Defense upon prescription by the Act of
Parliament 1617. anent prescription. The Pursuer answered, that the Defense is
not Relevant, as it is founded upon the naked Seizing only, because by the said
Act of Parliament there is required to all prescriptions of Land a Title in
Writ, preceding the 40. years Possession, which Title is d^stinguished in two
cases; First, In relation to Rights acquired titulo singlari, whereunto is
required not only a Seizing, but a Charter, which although they may be excluded
by an anterior or better Right, yet if Possession has been had thereafter, for
the space of forty years uninterrupted, it becomes an unquestionable Right,
and all other Rights are excluded. But, Secondly, A greater favor is showen as
to the Title of prescription of Lands belonging to any Party titulo universali
as Heirs to their Predecessors, in which their is no Charter required, but
Seisings one or more continued, and standing together for the space of forty
years, either proceeding upon Retours, or upon Precepts of clare constat, so
that the Seizing in question proceeding upon a Precept of clare constat cannot
be a sufficient Title for prescription, unless the Precept of clare constat
^which is the Warrant thereof were produced. 2dly, The said provision of the
Act requires that the Seizing one or more must stand, and be continued for the
space of forty years, which cannot be alleged in this case, because by the
Defenders production it is clear that the said Alexander Mcnaughtan, to whom
the Seizing was granted, Lived not for forty years after the Seizing, so that
unless his Heir had been entered, and had Possessed by virtue of the Heirs
Seizing to perfyt the forty years, the Defense of prescription is not
Relevantly alleged. The Defender answered, that his Defense of prescription
stands Relevant upon this one Seizing only; and he oppones the foresaid Clause
in the Act of Parliament where an Heirs Title of prescription, is a Seizing
proceeding upon a Retour or Precept of clare constat, and does not mention that
the Seizing and Precept shall be a sufficient Title, as it does in the case of
Lands acquired, where it expressly requires both a Charter and Seizing, and it
had been as easy in this Clause to have required a Seizing, and Retour or
Precept, whereas it does only require a Seizing on a Retour or Precept, so that
the Seizing relating the Retour or Precept is sufficient, and by long course of
time sufficiently instructs the being of the Retour or Precept. As to the
second answer, the meaning of the Act of Parliament by a Seizing one or more
standing together, is that the said Seizing be not Reduced, for our Law does
ordinarily oppose standing and falling by Reduction, so that albeit the Party
Seized Died within forty years after the Seizing, his appearand Heir continued
his Possession, and being one Person in Law with him, did Possess by his
Seizing, and if it were otherewise understood, many absurdities would follow;
for if a Person were Infeft as Heir, and did Possess thirty nine years,
thereafter Dying, then if his Heir were not Infeft within the year, he should
have no Title of prescription, though within the forty year six Heirs
consequently were Infeft, all their six Seisings with thirty nine years
Possession, though their appearand Heir should continue an hundredth years
thereafter in Possession, would not induce pre^cription, yea, taking the Act
Literally, it can never have effect, unless the Heir Infeft Live and Possess
after his Infeftment forty years, which is very rare, for if there be more
Heirs that Succeed, there must be still an intervale betwixt the Death of the
one, and the Seizing of the other, and so the Seisings could not be said to be
continued, but discontinued or interrupted, for Possession is not continued, if
the Possessor cease to Possess one year, so that prescription being of common
Interest and Advantage to the Leiges, the same ought to be ampliate in the
interpretation thereof, and not straightened. The Pursuer answered, that he
opponed the clear words of the Act of Parliament, which does not only require
forty years continual Possession, but also that it be by Seisings standing,
continuing together forty years, and that upon very solid Reason, for if both
Charter and Seizing be required for a Title to prescription in Rights acquired:
It cannot be imagined that an single Seizing should be sufficient in Rights
devolved by Succession, without requiring any thing in place of the Charter, so
that if neither the Precept nor Retour be required, nor yet the continuance of
the Seizing, either standing in the Person of the first Heir, or renewed in the
Persons of the subsequent Heirs, which certainly is of purpose put to astruct
the Right in place of a Charter, or other Adminicle of the Seizing, and
therefore the standing of the Seisings is not here opposed to their being
Reduced, but their falling by the Death of the Person Infeft, whereby according
to the ordinar Terms of Law, the Fee falls in Waird or Nonentry in the hands
of the Superior; neither can a subsequent Heir Possess by the Seizing of a
prior Heir, because Seisings are not given to Heirs, but to the individual
Person Seized; but Charters and other Rights given to Parties and their Heirs
may be a Title to their Heirs to Possess, but not a naked Seizing; and as to
the inconvenience, it would be far greater if one single Seizing were
sufficient, and would open the Door to all Forgery, after Parties and Witnesses
are Dead, but if more Seisings be required, if the first Person Die, it is much
more difficult to Forge diverse Seisings, by diverse Nottars, and diverse
Witnesses, which may be redargued by the Hand-writ of some of the Nottars, or
survivance of some of the Witnesses; and what is alleged upon a Seizing
continuing thirty nine years, or of six subsequent Seisings within that time is
easily retorted by consideration of one Seizing, whereby the Party Infeft Lived
and Bruiked but a year, whethet that would be a sufficient Title for
prescription, or if six consequent Seisings proceeding upon Charters and thirty
nine years Possession, yea, or a hundred years Possession, all which would make
no Title of prescription, unless a Charter were also produced, as is clear by
the Act, so we are not to consider equivalencies, but in a Statute must take it
as it is made, and not make it; and as for the inconvenience alleged that
there must necessarly be intervales, it imports not, for the continuance of
Seisings is not required to be so exact as the continuance of Possession, but
subsequent Heirs being Infeft, albeit there be an intervale, their Seizing as
in many other cases will be drawn back to the Death of their Predecessor, if
there be no medium impedimentum by any Process intented in the interim; so that
at least there must be a Seizing standing when the Possession begane, and a
Seizing standing when the first forty years is complete, but here there was no
Seizing renewed, though there be a hundred years after the first forty years,
and a full progress as to all other Lands.

The Lords found that there was no necessity to produce, or instruct that there
was a Precept or Retour, otherewise then by the relation of the Seizing, but
found that a Seizing not having forty years Possession, by the Life and
Bruiking of the Person Seized, and never being renewed in his Successors, is
not a suffient Title of prescription, and therefore Repelled the Defense: in
this Process the Defender was permitted to allege the Lands in question to be
Part and Pertinent of his other Lands, whereof he show a full Progress, and
alleged a continual Possession, by doing all Deeds of Property that the
Subject was capable of, and the Pursuer alleging that these Lands were
severally kend and known from all the Defenders Lands contained in the said
Progress, and that he and his Predecessors had exercised all acts of Property
that could be done in the case of a Forrestry, such as the Lands in question
were, and that after the Defenders alleging on a several Infeftment, by the
foresaid Seizing, and so acknowledging these Lands to be separ^^^m ten^mentum,
he could not return to allege Part and Pertinent so considerable a tract of
Ground, six or seven Miles long, yet the Lords would prefer neither Party to
the probation, but before answer ordained either Party to adduce Witnesses
anent their Possession, and the several specialities by them alleged, that by
the probation the Lords might see the just Interest of either Party, which
might resolve into a promiscuous Commonty, or into a Property to the one, and a
Pasturage or other Servitude to the other.

Marion Dods contra Lawrence Scot. Feb. 16. 1671.
BY Contract of Marriage betwixt James Scot and Marion Dods, Marion is obliged
to pay in Tocher a thousand pound to the said James at the next Candlemass, and
the said James is obliged to employ the same to him and her in Conjunct Fee,
and to the Heirs of the Marriage, which failzing to her Heirs, and James having
Died without Children; the said Marion pursues Lawrence Scot as his Heir, to
employ the Sum conform to the said obligement, who alleged Absolvitor,
because the Pursuer has yet the Tocher in her own hand, unless she can show a
Discharge. It was answered, First, That the Parties having lived together 22.
years, it must be presumed that the Husband was paid, and had the Custody of
the Discharge. 2dly. The Husband by his Testament acknowledges that the Sum was
paid. It was answered, that this written Obligation cannot be taken away by
such a presumption, and the Assertion of the Defunct in the Testament, has been
procured by the Wifes importunity in her Husbands weakness, and however cannot
prejudge the Heir, and can import no more then as legatum liberationis, which
can only affect the Deads-part of the free Geir.

The Lords found the presumption with the acknowledgement in the Testament a
sufficient payment of the Tocher, against all Parties having interest.

William Gordon contra Sir Alexander Mcculloch of Ardual. February, 17. 1671.
WIlliam Gordon as Donator to the Recognition of the Barony of Cardines, by
allienation of the Major part thereof, pursues a Declarator of the Recognition
against Sir Alexander Mcculloch, who stands now Infeft therein, who alleged
no Process, because the Pursuer produces no Charter to show the Lands to hold
Waird, neither does he produce the Infeftments Libelled, by which the
Recognition is alleged to be procured, and if he shall get a Term to prove,
and so Litiscontestation be made, the Defender will either be excluded from his
Defenses, which he cannot propone or know before he see the Infeftments, or
otherwise two Litiscontestations may be in the same Cause, by admitting of
exceptions after the Term, and albeit these Infeftments be not the Pursuers own
Writs, yet he ought to have used an incident upon his Summons, to have
compelled the Havers to produce the same, and so before Litiscontestation, the
Defender might have proponed his Defense. It was answered, that the Pursuer is
obliged to produce no more in initio litis then his Gift of Recognition from
the King, for the Law presumes that the King is Superior, and that the Lands
are Waird, unless the Defender offer to prove the contrare. As for the
Infeftments, whereby Recognition is incurred, they are not the Pursuers Title,
but media concludendi* which he may produce ad modum probationis.

The Lords Sustained the Process, and assigned a Term to prove the Infeftments
Libelled for inferring the Recognition, and reserved all the Defenders Defenses
after the production thereof, in the same manner as if they were now produced.

Mrs. Katharin Mcgil contra The Viscount of Oxenfoord. Eodem die.
THe Deceased Viscount of Oxenfoord having named his Son Executor and universal
Legator, he gives a Bond of Provision to umquhile Mistrisse Mary, one of his
Daughters, in satisfaction of her Portion natural and Bairns part, there are
yet three Children beside the Heir, and the said Mrs. Mary did survive her
Father, and in the Count and Reckoning of his Executory, the three surviving
Children claimed half of the Movables as the Bairns part. It was alleged for
the Viscount the universal Legator, that a fourth part of the Bairns part
behoved to belong to him, which would have belonged to Mrs. Mary, because the
Bond granted by the Defunct being in satisfaction of M^ries Bairns part, her
Bairns part must come in place of it, and not accresce to the rest of the
Bairns, but must belong to him as Executor and universal Legator, especially
this Bond being granted on Deathbed, is only effectual as a Legacy, whereby
the Defunct did burden his own Deeds part, which can be no otherways understood
then thus, that he would make up Mary's Portion to ten thousand Pounds, her
Bairns part being in the first end thereof, and it cannot be thought his
meaning to exhaust his Deads part further or to gift any thing to the rest of
the Bairns by the accrescence of Mary's part. It was answered, that such Bonds
of Provision are most ordinar, bearing it to be in satisfaction of their Bairns
part, which has ever been so interpret, that the Portion of the Bairn so
satisfied accresceth to the rest of the Bairns, and it was never heard that the
Heir or Executor burdened with such Bonds of Provision, did thereupon recur to
seek that share of the Bairns part, which was satisfied by the Bond of
Provision, neither is there any odds whether the Provision were by Legacy or
Bond, for the Reason of recourse being, because the Heir or Executor is
burdened to satisfy that Bairn, and so in either case does claim the share of
that Bairn, neither was it ever so understood, that Fathers granting such Bonds
of Provision, did not thereby leave entire the Bairns part to the remanent
Bairns.

The Lords found that Mrs. Mary's share of her Bairns part did accresce to the
rest of the Bairns, and did not belong to the Executor either as a part, or in
place of any part of the ten thousand pound, but the samine did solely burden
the Deads part.

Agnes Dundasse contra The Lord of Ardrosse, and the Lord of Touch. February
18. 1671.
THe Lord of Ardrosse having granted Bond to umquhile Mr. Henry Mauld and his
Spouse, and their Heirs, of 8000. Merks, and after his Decease he granted a
Bond to the Relict, bearing to have borrowed two thousand Merks from her, and
obliging him to pay the same to her in Liferent, for her Liferent use only, and
after her Decease to William Mauld her Son, and his Heirs; and another Bond,
bearing him to have Received from the Relict a thousand Merks in name of Henry
Mauld her Son, and obliging him to pay to the said Henry and his Heirs; and
after all he granted a Bond of ten thousand Merks to the Relict, her Heirs and
Assigneys, which was made up of what remained due of all the three, this Bond
the Relict Assigned to the Lord of Touch, who having Charged Ardrosse, and he
having Suspended, there arose a Competition betwixt Touch as Assigney, and
Agnes Dundasse as Heir and Executrix to Mr. Henry, William, and Henry Maulds,
and thereupon a division of the Sums betwixt the Parties; thereafter Agnes
Dundasse pursues Ardrosse to make payment to her as Heir and Executrix to
William and Henry Maulds, of two thousand Merks, which he was Addebted to the
said William, and of one thousand he was Addebted to the said Henry; Whereupon
he has Deponed that he was Debtor by all the said Bonds before related, and
no otherways, and that in the former Decree by mistake it was expressed, that
the ten thousand Merks Bond was made up of the eight thousand Merks Bond, and
of two thousand Merks of Annualrent thereof, whereas the truth was, it was made
up by what was resting of the two Bonds due to William and Henry, which he
produced cancelled of the Tenor foresaid. It was alleged for Agnes Dundasse,
that the Sums of these Bonds behoved only to belong to her as Heir and
Executrix to William and Henry Maulds, and not to Touch as Assigney by the
Relict. It was answered, First. That the said Agnes had Homologat the prior
Decree, and division therein made, by giving Discharges accordingly, could not
claim any more. 2dly, Another having taken a Bond in the Name of her two Sons,
being Bairns in her Family, might lawfully alter the same at her pleasure,
there being nothing more ordinar then that Fathers gives Bonds of Provision to
their Children, or takes Bonds from their Creditors in their Names, yet these
being never Delivered, the Parents may Dispose of them at their pleasure. It
was answered for the Executrix, that the alleadgeance of Homologation is not
Relevant, because it is Emergent by Ardrosse his Oath, that the ten thousand
merks Bond, was not made up by the Annualrent, but by the said two Bonds, so
that there could be no Homologation of that, whereof the Executrix was
excusably ignorant. To the second, That albeit Fathers granting Bonds of
Provision in Name of their Children, may alter the same at any time before
Delivery: Yet where they lend out the Sum to a Creditor, and take him obliged
to a Child in Fee that cannot be ^ltered, especially where the Parent is naked
Liferenter, and has not reserved a power to lift and Dispone; but whatsoever
be in the case of a Father providing his Children, who can by no presumption be
thought to have any Means; yet after the Fathers Death, a Mother taking a Bond
in the Name of a Bairn, it must be presumed to be the Bairn^ Money, coming by
the Father or otherwise, and the Mother having stated her self naked
Liferentrix in the one Bond, and having no interest in the other Bond, she
could not recall or alter the same in prejudice of the Children, especially
seeing they were Infants, and had not Tutors to care for them. It was answered,
that the Mother had held count for the whole Means of the Father, and so had
cleared any presumption that their Bo^^s could be of his Means, but she
Liferented the whole Estate, and made up their Bonds out of the Rents and
Annualrents, and denied to be Tutrix, or Pro-tutrix, so that the Money being
freely her own, and her Children having died before her,, she might warrantably
alter the Bond.

The Lords found that the Mother could not alter the Bonds taken in favors of
her Children from a Debtor, being of the Tenors above-written, wherein she was
naked Liferenter of the one, and had not so much as a Liferent of the other,
and that the Sums were rather presumed to be of the Bairns Means then her own,
seeing they had no Tutor, and any meddling with their Means was by her self, and
that their Executrix could not now be put to instruct what Means they had, or
be countable thereupon.

John Armor contra James Lands. February 21. 1671.
John Armor pursues his Tennents of some Tenements in Edinburgh, for Meals and
Duties. Compearance is made for James Lands, who produces a Bond granted by
umquhil George Armor, bearing that George Armor as Tutor Testamentar to John
Armor, had borrowed 500. merks from James Lands, and obliges him, his Heirs,
Executors and Assigneys, to repay the same, and thereby sets some of the said
Tenements to James Lands, ay and while he be satisfied of the 500. merks, and
thereupon alleadges he must be preferred to the Mails and Duties till he be
paid. It was answered, this Bond and Tack were not sufficient, in respect he
does not bind himself as Tutor, nor the Pupil, but his own Executor and
Assigneys, and so it must be the Tutors own Debt. 2dly, This Debt cannot burden
the Pupil simply upon the Assertion of the Tutor; but the Creditor ought to
have seen the Sum applied to the Pupils use: and therefore must yet allege in
rem versam. Otherways, if the naked Assertion of Tutors may burden the Pupils,
when they borrow their Name, it is a patent way to destroy all Pupils, Tutors
being oftimes insolvent. 3dly, The Tutor could not set a Tack of the Pupils
Lands, Longer than he had Interest as Tutor, Ita est, the Tutory is ceased by
the Tutors Death.

The Lords found that this Creditor behoved to instruct the Sum applied to the
Pupils behove, which being proven, they Sustained the Tack.

Alexander Pit^^irn contra February 22. 1671.
ALexander Pitcairn having Right by progress to a Wodset granted by James
Kininmouth to Mr. James Gordoun, and by him Disponed to Sir Archibald Sydserf,
and by him to the Pursuer, pursues the Tennents for Mails and Duties, who
alleged that Gordoun or Sydserf were satisfied by intromission with the
Rents, for which they were comptable. It was Replied, that Sir Archibald
Sydserf had obtained Declarator of the expyring of the Reversion, and was
neither Countable nor Redeemable, and for proving thereof, produced the Decree
of Declarator, in Anno 1637. against which it was objected, that it was null,
because albeit the Libel was upon a Clause irritant, whereby it is provided, if
the Money were required, and not paid within such a time, the Reversion should
expire; yet at the Compearance and Production, there is no mention thereof,
albeit at the Conclusion, the Decree bears, because the Libel was sufficiently
proven by Production of the Writs aforesaid, which can be only understood of
the Writs in the Production, and it is not enough only that they were libelled
upon; for in all Decreets, the whole production is specially insert. It was
answered, that the Requisition was truly produced, and that the omission of the
Clerk to repeat it in the Production cannot annul the Decree after so long a
time without a Reduction thereof. It was answered, that albeit in
favorabilibus, the Lords may supply Defects upon Production, ex post facto: yet
in odiosis, such as Clauses irritant of Reversions, the Lords ought not to
admit the same.

The Lords found the Decree of Declarator null.

Sir David Dumbar of Baldoun contra David Dick and others. February 22. 1671.
BAldoun pursues ^he Tennents of Bombie for Mails and Duties. Compearance is
made for David Dick, who produced an Apprizing of the said Lands, against the
Lord Kirkcudbright, within year and day of the Pursuers Appryzing, and craves
to come in pari passu with the Pursuer, conform to the Act 1661. anent Creditor
and Debtor. It was answered that by the same Act it is provided, that where
Comprizings are acquired by the appearand Heir, or to his behove, that the same
should be satisfiable for such Sums as the appearand Heir paid, and offers to
satisfy the same. It was answered, that albeit the Act does so provide, as to
the Estate that might belong to the appearand Heir, it can extend no further.
But this Appryzing is not only of the Estate of Orchartoun, but of the Estate
of Kirkcudbright, wherein Sir Robert Maxwel, appearand Heir of Orchartoun has
no interest, the Appryzing must be valide as to that. It was answered, that
Kirkcudbright was but Cautioner for Orchartoun, and that the Act bears, that
such Appryzings shall be satisfied by what the appearand Heir paid: and such
Appryzings being satisfied, it is simply extinct and can have no effect.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and seeing David Dicks Appryzing is Assigned to
Sir Roberts own Brother, the Lords allowed Witnesses, ex officio; to be
adduced, for proving that it was for Sir Roberts behove.

William Gordoun contra Sir Alexander Mcculloch. Eodem die.
WIlliam Gordoun pursues Sir Alexander Mcculloch for Spuilzying of certain
Corns: Who alleged Absolvitor, because the Defender having right by Appryzing
to the Lands whereon the Corns grew, did warn the Pursuer, and obtained Decree
of Removing against him; and thereupon dispossessed him, and finding the Cropped
upon the Ground, he might lawfully intromet therewith, nam sata cedunt solo,
especially where the Sower is in mala fide; but here he was in Violence after a
Warning, and did continue to Sow after Decree of Removing: yea a part was Sown
after he was Dispossessed by Letters of Ejection. The Pursuer answered, that by
the Law and Custom of Scotland, the Cropped of Corns, or industrial Fruits are
never accounted as pars soli, or any accessory, but are still moveable, even
when they are growing, so that they belong not to the Heir, but to the
Executor; and in case of a Disposition, without mention of the Cropped, albeit
the Acquirer were Infeft after they were Sown, and upon the Ground, he would
not have Right thereto, neither does mala fides, or violent Possession alter
the case, for which the Law has provided a special Remeid, viz. the violent
Profits: but it can be no ground to meddle with the Parties Cropped, brevi manu,
as accessory to the Ground, for then the Parties should both lose the Cropped, as
pars soli, and be liable to the violent profits, neither is there any Ground
from the Warning, nor yet from the Decree of Removing, which was Suspended
before it attained full effect, and the Defender continued in Possession of a
House upon the Ground, albeit he was put out of the principal House. It was
answered that the Decree had attained full effect before the Suspension, all
the Pursuers Goods being off the Ground, and he out of the Mansion House,
wherein the Defender entered; and brought all his Goods upon the Ground: and
though the Pursuers Mother being a valitudinary impotent Woman, was suffered to
remain in a Coat-house, and the Pursuer with her, upon that account, that
imports no continuance of Possession of the Land.

The Lords Repelled the Defense as to that part of the Cropped that was Sown
before the Appryzer entered by the Letters of Possession, reserving to him the
violent Profits for that time: But found the Defense Relevant, as to what the
Pursuer did after the Defenders Dispossession; and found the Defender only
liable for the Expenses of the Laboring and the Seed, as being eatenus
Locupletior factus.

Lord Justice Clerk contra Mr. John Fairholm. February 23. 1671.
THe Earl of Levin being Debtor to Lambertoun in forty thousand merks, and
having Infeft him in an Annualrent out of his Lands in security thereof, Mr.
John Fairholm did upon a Debt due by Lambertoun Appryze the foresaid Heretable
Bond and Annualrent, which was holden of the Earl of Levin himself, who was
Charged upon the Appryzing* but unwarrantably to Infeft Fairholm in the Lands,
whereas the Annual rent only was Appryzed, and the Charge should have been to
Infeft Fairholm in the Annualrent: thereafter Fairholm did Arrest the bygone
Annualrents in the Earl of Levins hands, and after all, did upon a Decree
against Lambertoun, arrest the bygone Rents in Levins hand, and Lambertouns
Liferent of the Annualrent having fallen by his being year and day at the Horn,
the Justice Clerk as Donator to the Liferent, and as Arrester competing with
Fairholm, did allege that Fairholms Appryzing being an incomplete Diligence,
and no Infeftment nor valide Charge thereon, and having lain over so many
years, the Arrester must be preferred, for which he adduced a Practique
observed by Dury the 14. of February 1623. Salicots contra Brown, where it was
so found: and albeit Fairholm be the prior Arrester, yet he has done no
Diligence upon his Arrestment; whereas the Justice Clerk has obtained Decree,
and as Donator to the Liferent Escheat, he is preferable for years after the
Rebellion, because the Liferent Escheat falling before any Infeftment, or
Charge on the Appryzing, which was not used within year and day, the Liferent
excludes the Appryzer.

The Lords found the Appryzing preferable to the posterior Arrestment, though
no legal Diligence was done thereon for the space of nine years thereafter, in
respect the Appryzing being a Judicial Assignation, required no Intimation, and
being prior, it is preferable: and they did not respect that single Practique,
the constant Custom since being contrary: But found the Liferent Escheat
preferable to the anterior Appryzing, being without Infeftment or Charge, as to
the years after the Rebellion, and preferred the Appryzer as to years
preceding.

Arnold of Barncaple contra Gordoun of Holm. Eodem die.
THere being four Cautioners in a Bond, and the principal Debtor having
Suspended, and found a Cautioner in the Suspension, who having been Distressed
and paid the Debt, and having gotten Assignation from the Creditor, Charges
one of the Cautioners in the first Bond, Gordoun of Holm, who Suspends on this
Reason, that payment being made by the Cautioner in the Suspension, he can only
have recourse against him for whom he was Cautioner, but not against his
Cautioners in the principal Bond, for us to them it is all one as if the
principal Debtor had paid. 2dly, Though the Cautioner in the Suspension could
have access against the Cautioners in the principal Bond; yet all of them being
Cautioners for the same Principal, they must bear equal burden, and so he must
allow his own fifth part in the same manner, as Cautioners in a Bond of
Corroboration, bear equal burden with the Cautioners in the principal Bond.

The Lords found that the Cautioner in the Suspension had access against the
Cautioners in the principal Bond, he always deducing his own fifth part.

Earl of Northesk contra Viscount of Stormond. February 28. 1671.
THe Earl of Northesk pursues the Viscount of Stormond on this Ground, that he
having sent 100. pound Sterling to London, to the umquhil Viscount of Stormond,
to be employed for Household Furniture, the most part thereof was not employed,
and for instructing his Libel, produces several missive Letters of the
Viscounts, one Holograph, another having an Holograph Postscript, and a third
Written with another hand, which did state the Account, and acknowledged the
Debt. It was alleged for the Defender, that the only Letter which had any
special Probation in it, was the last, which is not Holograph. It was answered,
that the Subject Matter being a Sum sent for Furniture, which uses not to be
redacted in Writ, the Viscounts Letter Subscribed by him, though not Holograph,
is sufficient to prove, for Bills of Exchange so Subscribed, or Letters among
M^^chants are sufficient: and this Letter being amongst Noble Persons in such a
small particular, which requires not ordinarily Writ, must be of the same force,
especially seeing there is also produced two other missives not controverted,
which comparatione literarum, are clearly the same with this Letter in question.

The Lords found that this Letter, though not Holograph, was a sufficient
Instruction, having compared the same with the other not controverted
Subscriptions; The Pursuer making Faith, that this is the same Letter which he
received from the Deceast Viscount, his Servant, or Messenger.

Steil contra Hay of Rattray. June 6. 1671.
UMquhil Steil having a Feu of some Aikers of the Barony of Rattray,
Chancellor Hay as Superior, and Baron of the Barony, pursued Reduction and
Improbation against Steil and other Vassals, and in July 1624. obtained
Certification, the Chancellours Right being Transmitted to Doctor Patrick Hay,
he accepts of the Feu-duty and gives a Discharge of the year 1624. and
thereafter in Anno 1628. having obtained Decree of Removing against Steils
Relict; he by a Transaction with her passes from it, and gives her other Lands
in lieu thereof, but without any mention of the Improbation. Steils Heir
attains Possession of the said Aikers of Land; and Hay of Rattray, as now
having Right to the Barony, pursues a Removing against Steils Tennent, and
obtains Decree of Removing, without Calling Steil; whereupon Steil pursues
Ejection and Intrusion against Hay of Rattray, wherein in respect that Rattrays
interest was by a Sentence, though unwarrantably given, without Calling the
Tenuents Master.

The Lords restricted the Letters to Re-possession and ordinar profits wherein
it was alleged for Rattry Absolvitor, because the Defenders Author having
obtained Certification in the Improbation, at Chancellor Hays Instance,
produces the same, which did evacuate the Pursuers Fathers and Predecessors
Right.

The Pursuer Replied, First, That the Decree of Certification produced, was
not Relevant, because it was not a Certification in an Improbation, which was
not concluded by the Summons, as they are expressed in the Decree, which bear,
That the Writs called for, should be cancelled, and declared null, but bears
not that the same should make no Faith, or should be declared as False, Forged
or Feinzied. 2dly, Doctor Hay the Defenders Author, by accepting of the
Feu-duty for a Term after the Decree, did pass therefrom, and did acknowledge
and Homologate the Pursuers Right, and did acknowledge the Liferenters Right,
by Excambion therewith. The Defender answered, that he opponed his Decree of
Certification, the Decernator whereof, is expressly in the Terms of an
Improbation: And likewise the beginning of the Libel* being both at the
Chancellor and Kings Advocats Instance; and at the Compearance, the Pursuer
insisted for improving the Writs called for, so that the Repetition of the
Conclusion of the Libel, has been only through Inadvertence, not fully set
down. And as to the Discharge of the Feu-duty, First, It is Vitiat in the Date.
2dly, It wants Writer and Witnesses, and albeit it were Holograph, it cannot
instruct the true Date, and it can never import a passing from the Improbation
further, then for the Term Discharged, especially seeing it was granted by
Doctor Hay, who was singular Successor to the Chancellor, and perhaps knew not
of the Improbation. The Pursuer answered, that the Certification being granted
in absence, the Obtainer thereof might frame it as he pleased; but it cannot be
supposed to be truly better then as it stands: and though Improbations being in
absence, are very much adhered to, yet they are odious Rights and very
Reduceable upon any Defect or Informality, seeing it is formality that gives
them all their strength. And as to the Discharge, the Date of it has been
altered at the Subscription by the Subscribers hand, as appears by comparing
the Date and Subscription. 2dly, In the very Body of the Discharge, no ways
altered, it bears to Discharge the year 1624. after the Certification, and the
Discharge as it stands, is in the ordinar way as Discharges uses to be given to
Tennents and Vassals, for small Feu-duties, and therefore must be sufficient in
a case so favorable for the Pursuer who has a clear Right, and should not be
eleided by this dubious Certification, which must be restricted to a
Certification in a Reduction, which is only Reducing the Rights till they be
produced, and so falls, they being now produced.

The Lords Repelled the Defense upon the Certification, in respect of the
Reply, and Discharge produced, and Decerned the Defender to Re-possesse the
Pursuer; but Assoylzied him from the bygone Profits, seeing he Possessed by a
Title, and had just Reason to Defend in a matter so dubious.

Sir William Stuart of Kirkhil contra Sir George Mckenzie and Kettlestoun. June
8. 1671.
SIr William Stuart as Heir by progress to Sir Lewis Stuart, his Goodsire
pursues Improbation of a Bond, bearing to be granted to Mr. John Stuart of
Kettlestoun, his Son granting an Annuity of 3000. merks yearly during his life,
and some other Provisions: Which Bond is Assigned by Keitlestoun to Sir George
Mckenzie, and being produced, Kettlestoun has abidden by the same, and has
declared upon Oath, that he was not present when it was Subscribed, but that he
received it from his Father, as now it is, one of the Witnesses insert being
then Kettlestouns Servant depon'd, that the Subscription to this Bond as
Witness is his Subscription, but that he did not see Sir Lewis Subscribe, nor
any of the other Witnesses; and remembers nothing of the matter, and that he
knows not John Carnagie, Serviture to the Earl of Southesk, another Witness
insert. The Pursuer thereupon craved that the Defender would more particularly
design the other Witness John Carnagie* Serviture to the Earl of Southesk,
because there were several persons Servants, or Attendents upon the Earl at
that time of the same name, and condescends upon two of them having several
Designations, beside this common one. The Defender alleged that he was
obliged to condescend no further, seeing the Act of Parliament required no more
than the Name, Surname and Designation. It was answered, that the intent of
Designations being to find out the Person of the Witness, that he might be
adduced in the Improbation, a general Designation would not suffice, but
behoved to be made special, or otherways if the Pursuer should Cite any Person
of that Designation, and that Person should deny the Subscription, his
Testimony would improve, or at the best, the Defender behoved then to Design
specially another of the same common Designation, otherwise it were a
compendious way to all Forgery, as if Witnesses should be insert of such a
Name, Indwellers in Edinburgh, or any other Town: In that case, if the
Testimony of none of them should Improve, there were no remeed for the
Falsehood.

The Lords found that all the persons that were the Earl of Southesks Servants
or Attendantsat that time, and were called John Carnagie that were alive should
be Cited, and the Hand-writs of any that wereso Designed, that were dead,
should be produced by either Party to be compared with this Subscription, that
thereby it might appear if the Subscription could be astructed by the Testimony
or hand writ of any other.

Sir, Francis Scot of Thirlstoun contra Lord Drumlanrig. June 10. 1671.
SIr Francis Scot having obtained Decree of Adjudication of the Lands of
Brankinside and others, and having Charged the Lord Drumlanrig to receive and
Infeft him. He Suspends on this Reason, that he was willing to satisfy the
Sums contained in the Adjudication, upon Assignation made to him thereto, and
so was not obliged to receive the Charger. It was answered, that albeit King
James the third, his Act of Parliament anent Appryzings, does provide, that for
a years Rent, Superiors shall receive Appryzers, or otherways shall take the
Land to themselves and pay the Sums; yet that gives not the Superior an
option, but bears failzying of paying a years Rent, the Superior may satisfy
the Sums, and take the Land in his own hands, but where that was offered, it
was never by Custom or Practique allowed, that the Superior should exclude an
Appryzer, but whatever were in the case of Appryzings, that power was never
granted to Superiors in Adjudications, whereupon they were still obliged to
receive Adjudgers without a years Rent, until the late Act of Parliament, and
the said old Statute giving an option to the Superior, is not to be extended
to Adjudications; nor was it ever by any subsequent Law, or Consuetude extended
thereto. It was answered that by the ancient Feudal Law, a Superior could not
have been compelled to receive a stranger Vassal, albeit a Creditor, yet the
Statute of King James the 3d. did remeid this in favors of Creditors, and
obliged Superiors either to receive Appryzers for payment of a years Rent, or
else to pay the Sum Apprysed for; but long after that time, there was no
mention of Adjudications, which were a Supplement of the Lords, that where the
appearand Heir being Charged, did renunce, the Creditor should not be
frustrate, but might obtain Adjudication of the Lands, contra haereditatem
jacentem, which except as to that point of Form, is the same with an Appryzing,
under another Title: and albeit as to the years Entry, the Lords would not
extend the same to an Adjudication: It was upon this special Reason, that in
the Act of Parliament 1621. anent Appryzings, the same is declared Redeemable
upon the Sums Appryzed for, and a years Rent for the Entry; yet in the very
next Act in the same Parliament anent Adjudications, the years Entry is left
out, which was thought by the Lords to be done by the Parliament of purpose,
and so not to be extended by the Lords: But otherways the same Reason was for
the Entry in Adjudications as in Appryzings, which the Parliament has now found
by their late Act; and therefore the matter of the Entry is not to be drawn in
consequence to the Superiors option.

The Lords found that the Superior had his option, and might refuse to receive
the Adjudger, offering to satisfy the Sums in his Adjudication, upon
Assignation made to him thereof, and declared that the same should be
Redeemable from the Superior upon the like Sums without any thing for a years
Entry; and that in all things else, the Superior and Vassal should be in the
same case as if the Adjudger had been Entered to that Effect.

Town of Breichen contra Town of Dundee. June 14. 1671.
LAurence Dundass having been Debtor to the Earl of Seaforth in 200. pound
Sterling, was incarcerat in the Tolbooth of Breichen, and being suffered to go
out of Prison, Mr. Rory Mckenzie as Assigney to the Earl, obtained Decree
against the Town for payment of the Sum, and took Assignation to the Caption,
and therewith Incarcerat Laurence in the Tolbooth of Dundee, and now pursues
the Town of Dundee for suffering Laurence to go out of Prison. and condescends
that they suffered him to go ordinarily to the Kirk on the Sabbath, and that
once they suffered him to go to the River by Boat, and over to Fife another
Shire; and ordinarily to go to the Street, and to Taverns without necessar
Affairs. The Defenders answered, that the Prisoner returned still to the Prison
every night, and went always abroad with a Guard, and his going to the Water
was because of his Indisposition, and for his Health, that if he touched upon
the other side in Fife, he did return that same night to Prison: and that his
going to the Kirk with a Keeper, can be no Relevant Ground; and even the going
out upon other occasions with a Keeper, though not absolutely necessar, cannot
make the Magistrates liable, it being the constant Custom of all Burghs so to
do, and that a Prisoner being under a Guard, is in Prison, albeit not in the
Tolbooth. The Pursuers answered, that Magistrates of Burghs were but public
Servants in Keeping of Prisoners, and were obliged to give punctual Obedience
to the Letters of Caption, bearing to keep the Rebel in sure Firmance within
their Tolbooth, which is founded on very good Reason, that the Prisoner may be
necessitate, squalore carceris, to do all Deeds in his power to satisfy his
Debt, which would be eluded, if the Magistrates at their pleasure might let
them go out with a Guard, and would but turn to a Confynement, or intertainment
and gratification to an Officer for a Guard: and even though there were
necessar Causes of the Prisoners coming out, the Magistrate is not Judge
thereof, nor has any power of it, but the Party ought to apply themselves to
the Council or Session, and obtain their Warrant, which will not be granted
even by them, but upon instruction of a necessar Cause, upon Oath of Physicians
or others. The Defenders answered, that Incarceration was a civil effect of
Law, and no punishment, and that it were against all humanity, to put Prisoners
for civil Debt in that condition, that the Magistrates could not let them out
for a little, even for the safety of their Life, in extremity of sickness,
which oftimes would not admit of delay, till application were made to the
Council or Session. 2dly, Whatsoever may be found just by the Lords in time
coming, yet the constant and universal Custom of this and all other Burghs, to
let Prisoners go out with a Guard when they saw convenient cause, did introduce
a privilege to Burghs, or put the Defenders in bona fide, to Act as all their
Predecessors had been accustomed to do, without any question or Decision in the
contrair, and alleged a late Practique in the case of the Town of Culross,
who suffering a Prisoner that was a poor man, to go out to an Hospital, where
he got Bread, and thence he immediately returned to Prison, and to go and see
his nearest Relation that was a dying in the Town, or to their Burial, was not
found liable for the Debt.

The Lords considering the ordinary Custom of Burghs, found that as to the time
past they would not find them liable for suffering Prisoners to go out with a
Guard for any necessar cause, and found the Defense Relevant, that this
Prisoner was let go out with a Guard for his health, or to the Kirk on the
Sabbath, but found that Member of the Condescendence Relevant, that he went out
to the Street and Taverns without a necessar Cause, though with a Guard,
Relevant to infer the Debt: But found that in time coming they would have no
regard to that unwarrantable Custom; but that Magistrates of Burghs should
only have power to let Prisoners come out of the Tolbooth under a Guard in the
extreme hazard of their Life by sickness, and not without Testificats by
Physicians or skilled persons upon Oath, bearing the Parties condition to
require the same, and that without great hazard, they could not suffer delay to
make Supplication to the Council or Session.

The Lady Wolmet and Dankeith her Spouse contra Major Bigger. Eodem die.
JEan Douglas Lady Wolmet being by her Contract of Marriage Infeft in the half
of the Lands of Wolmet, did with her Husband consent to a Wodset of the whole
Lands for 28000. merks, wherein there is a Back-tack setting the Lands and Coal
to her Husband and her, the longest liver of them two for payment of the
Annualrent of the Money: which Wodset the said Iean in her Viduity as Tutrix,
renewed to the first Wodsetters Assigney, and became personally obliged, both
for the principal sum, and Back-tack-duty, and took the Back-tack, half to her
self and half to her Son the Heir; but after the first Wodset, her Husband set
a Tack of the whole Coal to his seven Children, for twelve years, they paying
twelve hundredth merks yearly to the Wodsetter, and two merks yearly to his
Heir: which Tack expired in Anno 1663. after which the said Iean Douglas and
David Cunninghame of Dankeith her Husband, pursues Major Bigger as intrometter
with the Coal for the half of the profit thereof, conform to the Back-tack,
who alleged Absolvitor, because the Back-tack, in so far as it exceeded the
Ladies Jointure, was a Donation between Man and Wife, and was Revocked by the
Childrens Tack, and being once Revocked, remained for ever Revocked, because
the ground of Law prohibiting Donations between Man and Wife, and annulling the
same, nisi morte confirmentur is introduced ne mutuo amore se spolient; and
therefore nothing can make them effectual but the Husbands continuing in the
same mind to his Death, but any signification of alteration of his mind,
directly or indirectly, though it were in his Testament or Codicil, or by any
Deed whereby he owns the thing Disponed, as still at his Disposal, is
sufficient to annul the Wifes Right, as if he should grant a Wodset of the same
Lands, though without mention of his Wifes prior Liferent, given gratis stante
matrimonio, It would Revock the same: so that though the Husband Redeemed the
Wodset, the Wifes Right would not Revive. So here the Bairns Tack being of the
whole Coal for twelve years, does wholly Revock the Back-tack, as to the Wife,
not only during these years, but for ever. 2dly, There is a minute of Contract
betwixt the Husband, his Wife and Raith of Edmonstoun, clearly showing the
change of his mind, and restricting the Lady to her first Liferent. It was
answered, that albeit in jure donationis, or where there was a clear and liquid
excess of the Right received, exceeding the Right quite, any Deed evidencing
the Change of the Husbands Will, might be sufficient to Recall it* Yet that
holds not here, where the Lady quite a certainty for a Casuality, viz. The
profit of a Coal, which might many ways have been ruined and unprofitable, in
which case she would have nothing for her Jointure, and so it was permutatio
spei, aut jactus retis, and at the time of the Wodset, was not of more value in
buying and selling then the Jointure of the Lands, being certain. 2dly, This
not being a pure Donation, the Husband could not Recall it till he had Restored
his Wife to her first Liferent, and releaved her of all Burden and Distress she
had sustained by the Wodset: neither had he shown his mind to Change, but only
in part. And as to the Contract with Raith, it was in Contemplation of a
Marriage, and was all founded on advancing Sums to Redeem the Wodset, whereby
the Back-tack ceased. 3dly, The Defender connot exclude the Pursuer, unless he
pay her all bygone years of her Jointure she wants from 1654, to 1667. by
Arrestments and Processes upon the Back-tack, and free her of the principal Sum
and Annualrent, and satisfy her of the damnage she has Sustained by lying out
of her Liferent, for all these years, and sustaining a long pursuit, wherein
she is willing to acquiesce.

The Lords in respect of this offer, and that the Defender did also offer to
free and relieve her, rested therein, and did not proceed to advise the former
Points, in jure.

Bowers contra Lady Cowper. June 16. 1671.
BOwers pursues the Lady Cowper as vicious in^^^^^er with the Lord Cowpers
Goods and Gear, for payment of a Debt of his, who alleged Absolvitor, because
she had a Disposition from her Husband of his Movables. It was Replied that
the Disposition being between most conjunct persons, without a Cause onerous,
was null by Exception by the Act of Parliament 1621. against fradulent
Dispositions. It was answered, that the Disposition behoved at least to purge
the vicious Intromission, and did stand ay and while it was Redeemed: For
notwithstanding of the Tenor of the said Act, the Lords do not Sustain that
Nullity by way of Exception or Reply.

The Lords found the Nullity competent by way of Exception, it being no
Heretable Right, requiring the production of Authors Rights, but in respect of
this colorable Title, restricted the vicious Intromission to the single value.

Lord Lovet contra Lord Mcdonald. Eodem die.
THe Lord Lovet pursues the Lord Mcdonald to count for the Superplus of a
Wodset, from the Date of his Instrument of Requisition, in Anno 1663. whereupon
he had raised Summons in Anno 1667. It was alleged that the Instrument was at
the Defenders Dwelling House, when he was out of the Country, and bear no
production of the Procutry, and only an offer of a Bond, with a Clause of
Infeftment in all Lovets Land: and did not bear an offer of Caution. It was
answered, that the Act did not require Requisition by Instrument, but quaevis
insinuatio sufficit, and the Instrument bear Delivery of a Copy to the
Defenders Lady in his House, there being no Procutry, for the Pursuer offered
now to produce the same, and a surety by Infeftment was sufficient, the Act of
Parliament mentioning no Caution.

The Lords found that the Requisition behoved to be by Letters of Supplement,
at the Cross of Edinburgh, and Pear of Leith, seeing the Defender was out of the
Country, but Sustained the same, as to the Procutry, it being now produced,
and sustained the offer of Surety, and Ordained it to be produced, Reserving
the Objections and Answers of either Party thereanent.

John Boyd contra Hugh Sinclar: June 17. 1671.
JOhn Boyd having a Right to some Teinds in Orknay, pursues Hugh Sinclar as
Intrometter therewith, who alleged Absolvitor, because he had Right to a
Tack, set to umquhil Sinclar during his Life, and to his first Heir after him,
during his Life, and nineteen years thereafter, which is not yet expyred; for
though the Defuncts eldect Son survived him, yet he was never entered Heir to
him, neither did he possess their Teinds, and Died shortly after his Father, but
it is not nineteen years since the second Son Died, whose Retour is produced,
as Heir to his Father.

The Lords found that the eldest Son Surviving his Father, although he never
Possessed, was the first Heir as to the Tack, and that he needed not be served
Heir.

Alexander Alexander contra The Lord Saltoun. June 20. 1671.
THe Earl of Hadingtoun having obtained a Gift of Bastardy, and ultimus hares,
of umquhil William Gray, Provost of Aberdere, did assign the same to Alexander
Alexander, with a Process thereupon, against the Lord Saltoun, for payment of
5000. merks due by him by Bond, to the said umquhil William Gray. The Defender
alleged that this Bond being granted for the price of Land bought by him from
the Bastard, and of the same Date with the Contract of Alienation thereof;
there was a Back-bond also of the same Date, by which the said William Gray was
not only obliged in Warrandice, but also to procure himself Infeft, holden of
the Earl of Mar, to purge an Inhibition at the instance of Ramsay, and to
procure a Right of an Appryzing, at the Instance of the Lord Newbeath. The
Pursuer answered, that the King or his Donator was not obliged to fulfill these
Obligements of the Bastard, which were not liquide nor special. It was
answered, that the Gift of Bastardy, or ultimus haeres, not falling to the King
by Forefaulture, or any Delinquence, but by Deficience of the Bastards Heir,
the Donator was in no better case, as to the fulfilling of these Obligements,
then the Bastard or his Heir would be, if they were pursuing upon the Bond, who
could not seek payment till the Obligements in the Alienation, or Back-bond,
which were the Causes of this Bond were fulfilled.

Which the Lords found Relevant, as to the special Obligements of obtaining
Infeftment, and purging the Inhibition and Appryzing, but not as to the general
obligement of Warrandice, wherein no Distress was alleged.

Thomas Crawford contra James Halliburtoun. Eodem die.
THomas Crawford having Charged James Halliburtoun upon a Decree Arbitral for
payment of a sum. He Suspends, and alleged that he was Interdicted at that
time, and that the Interdicters did not consent to the Submission, or Decree
Arbitral. The Pursuer answered, First, That the Alleadgeance was not competent
by Exception, but by Reduction. 2dly, That Interdictions had only the same
Effect as Inhibitions, and did operate nothing as to Movables, or personal
Execution, even by way of Reduction.

Both which Defenses the Lords found Relevant.

John Neilson contra Menzies of Enoch. June 21. 1671.
JOhn Neilson as Assigney Constitute by John Creightoun, pursues Menzies of
Enoch for the Rents of certain Lands in Enoch upon this Ground, that there was
a Tack set by James Menzies of Enoch of the said Lands, to the said John
Creightoun for nineteen years, for payment of fourscore pounds Scots yearly of
Tack-duty, thereafter by a Decree Arbitral, betwixt Enoch and his eldest Son
Robert, he is Decerned to Denude himself of the said Lands, in favors of
Robert, reserving his own Liferent: After which Decree, Robert grants a second
Tack to Creightoun, relating and Confirming the first nineteen years Tack, and
setting the Land of new again for five merk of Tack Duty, in stead of the
fourscorepounds: After which Tack Robert Dispones the Land irredeemably to
Birthwood, but at that time Robert was not Infeft, but upon the very same day
that the Disposition was granted to Birthwood, Robert Menzies is Infeft, and
Birthwood is also Infeft: Birthwoods Right by progress comes in the Person of
James Menzies, the Defender Roberts Brother. The Pursuer insisted for the
Duties of the Land, over and above the fourscore pounds, during the Life of old
James Menzies, and over and above the Tack-duty of five merks after his Death:
For which the Defender alleged Absolvitor, because he produces a Decree at
his instance against Creightoun the Tacks-man, Decerning him to Remove, because
he was then resting several Terms Rent, and failed to pay the same, and to find
Caution to pay the same in time coming. The Pursuer answered, that the said
Decree was in absence, and was null, because the Defender Libelled upon his
own Infeftment, and upon a Tack set to Creightoun the Tacks-man by himself, and
there was no such Tack produced by him, or could be produced, because the Tack,
albeit it bear to be set by James Menzies, yet it was only set by James Menzies
his Father, and not by himself.

The Lords found the Decree null by Exception.

Whereupon the Defender alleged that the Decree at least, was a colorable
Title, and he possessed by it bona fide till it was found null, and bonae fidei
possessor facit fructus consumptos suos. It was answered, that a Title that
needs Reduction, may be the Ground for Possession bona fide: but this is
absoltely null by Exception. 2dly, The obtainer of the Decree was in pessima
fide, because imediatly after the obtaining it, it was Suspended, and the
Tacks-man was able to instruct that there was no Duties resting at that time,
and though Protestations were obtained, yet the Suspension was never Discust
against the Tacks-man.

The Lords Repelled this Defense also.

The Defender further alleged, that albeit he would make no opposition
against the first Tack, yet the second Tack could have no effect against him,
because, before it was cled with Possession, Robert Menzies setter thereof, was
denuded in favors of Birthwood, from whom the Defender has Right, and it is
unquestionable, that a Tack not attaining Possession, is no real Right, and
that a singular Successor, Infeft before Possession on it, will exclude it.
2dly, As the Tack was not cled with Possession, so Robert who set it had no
real Right in his Person when he set it, but only the Decree Arbitral. The
Pursuer answered to the first, that he opponed his new Tack, which contained
not only a Ratification of the old Tack, but a new Tack de presenti, for five
merk, and so was like a Charter by a Superior with a novo damus, whereby the
Tacks-man might ascribe his Possession to any of the Tacks he pleased; and if
this Tack had born expressly, a Reservation of the Fathers Liferent for eighty
pounds yearly, it would have been unquestionably a valide Tack from the Date,
and Payment to the Father by the Reservation, would be by virtue of the new
Tack, as well as of the old: So likewise the Tacks-man might Renunce the old
Tack, and retain the new; or if the new Tack had been taken without mention of
the Old, the same would have been cled with Possession, albeit it could not
effectually exclude the payment of fourscore pounds to the Father, during his
life, as having a better Right by the Reservation. As to the second
Alleadgeance, albeit Robert who set the Tack, was not Infeft when he set it;
yet Robert being thereafter Infeft, his Right accresced to the Tacks-man in the
same manner, as if he had been Infeft before, fictione juris. It was answered
to the first, that the new Tack did not bear a Reservation of the old, but the
Tacks-man having two Tacks in his Person at once, although he might quite
either of them, or declare to which of them he ascribed his Possession, before
the interest of any other Party: yet not having so done, he must be holden to
Possess by the first, because he continued to pay the Tack-duty of the first,
and never paid the Tack-duty of the second till the Setter was Denuded. To
this it was answered, that the payment to the Liferenter, who had a better
Right, did not import the Possessing by the first Tack, and the Tacks-man
needed not declare his option till he was put to it, but Law presumes that he
Possessed by that Right, which was most convenient for him.

As to this Point the Lords found that the Tacks-man might ascribe his
Possession to either of the Tacks he pleased, both of them being set for a
distinct Tack-duty, and that agibatur by the second Tack, that the Fathers
Liferent should be Reserved.

As to the other Point, The Defender alleged that the Infeftment of Robert
who set the Tack, could not accresce to the Tacks-man; because the same day
Robert was Infeft, he was Denuded in favors of Birthwood, and he Infeft; so
that it must be presumed, that he was only Infeft to that effect, that
Birthwoods Right might be valide. 2dly, It was offered to be proven, that
Birthwood procured Roberts Infeftment by his own Means, and so it cannot
accresce to any other in his prejudice. It was answered, that whoever procured
the Infeftment of the Common Author, the fiction of Law did draw it back to all
the Deeds done by that Author, that might arise from that Infeftment, which
cannot be divided or altered, by the Acting or Declaration of either, or both
Parties.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and found the Infeftment did accresce to the
Tacks-man in the first place, whose Tack was prior with absolute Warrandice.

Lord Balmerino contra Hamiltoun of Little Prestoun. June 22. 1671.
Wishart in Leith did grant Infeftment of an Annualrent of forty pounds
yearly, out of two Tenements in Leith, in any part of them: Which Annualrent by
progress belonged to Mr. John Adamson, and after the Constitution of the
Annualrent, the two Tenements were Transmitted to different Proprietars, and
now the one belongs to the Lord Balmerino, and the other to Hamiltoun of Little
Prestoun, the Annualrenter did only insist against Balmerino's Tenement, and
upon an old Decree of Poinding of the Ground of that Tenement, has continued
in Possession, and Distressed Balmerino: Who having Suspended on this Ground,
that the Annualrent being out of two Tenements, whereof he had but the one, he
could be only liable but for the one half.

The Lords found that the Annualrenter might Distress any of the Tenements for
the whole, but reserved to Balmerino his Relief as accords.

Whereupon Balmerino now pursues Little Prestoun to Repay him the half of the
Annualrent, for which he was Distressed, because he having paid, did liberate
Little Prestoun of the Annualrent, which affected both Tenements, they being
now in different Heretors hands, behoved to infer a proportional Relief, as is
ordinar in all Annualrents, Constitute upon any Barony or Tenement, which
thereafter comes to be divided. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because he
had bruiked his Tenement much more then forty years before this Pursuit, free
of any such Annualrent; and therefore had prescribed the freedom thereof. The
Pursuer answered, that Prescription was hindered by the Annualrenters
Possession, in getting his Annualrent, which though it had been but by a
Personal Obligement, it would have preserved his Right entire to all effects in
the same manner, as payment by a principal Debtor hinders the Cautioners Bond
to Prescribe, though he were free thereof for forty years. It was answered,
that albeit there might be ground for the Reply, where the Annualrent is
Constitute out of one Barony or Tenement, whereon Infeftment may reach the
whole, yet it cannot hold in this case, where the Annualrent is Constitute upon
two distinct Tenements; and where there behoved Seasing to be taken upon both
of them, and if omitted upon one, that would be free.

The Lords found that payment of the Annualrent out of any of the Tenements,
saved Prescription as to both.

Leslies contra Alexander Iaffray. Eodem die.
LEslies pursues Alexander Iaffray and others, for producing of Writs, and
counting anent a Wodset Right, as being satisfied by intromission, and that as
appearand Heirs, ad deliber^^ dum.

Wherein the Lords refused to Sustain the Summons for Count and Reckoning, but
only for Exhibition, albeit there was a Practique produced, observed by Dury
upon the 1^. of March 1637. betwixt Hume and Hume of Blackadder, wherein Count
and Reckoning was Sustained at an appearand Heirs instance, the Custom having
been ever since contrair upon this Ground, that no Party should be troubled to
Count at the Instance of those, who when the Count was closed, cannot exoner
them, and yet may put them to make Litiscontestation and Probation in the Cause.

Duke of Buccleugh contra Parochioners of Eodem die.
THe Minister of Hasendein having obtained the Designation of a Gleib out of
the Duke Land, who alleged that the Minister having a Gleib before, extending
at least to two Aikers, the Earl upon this Designation had gotten Possession
thereof, and could only seek Relief for the Superplus. It was answered, that
these two Aikers had never been designed as a Gleib; but the Pursuers
Predecessors were infeft therein, and in Possession thereof before the
Ministers, and any Possession they had, was but by their sufference and
con^^vance. It was answered; that decennalis and triennalis possessor non
tenesur docere de t^^u^o and the Minister was not only in Possession thirteen
years; but thirty years. It was answered, that albeit Possession may be a
Title, yet it may be elided by the Pursuers Right, which cannot be taken away
but by Prescription; whereupon the question arose, how the Tollerance or
Sufference of the Ministers Possession was probable, whether by Witnesses or
not, seeing Tollerances are not ordinarily so proven.

The Lords found that if the Ministers Possession were alleged to have been
40. year, as belonging to the Kirk, that the Dukes Tollerance could only be
proven by Writ, to elide the same, but if for fewer years, they found the
Tollerance or Sufference probable by Witnesses.

Mr. Arthur Gordoun contra Lord of Drum. Eodem die.
MR. Arthur Gordoun as Assigney to a Decree recovered against the Lord of
Drum, Charges him thereupon. He Suspends on this Reason, that the Debt being
originally due to a Defunct, his two Executors nominate, recovered the Decree,
and the one only assigned the whole to Mr. Arthur, whereby he can only have
Right to the half. It was answered, that the other Executor being Dead before
the Assignation, the Office accresced to the Surviver, who might uplift all
that was in bonis defuncti, not uplifted. It was answered, that this Debt was
no more in bonis defuncti, but being established in the Executors Person by
Sentence, testamentum suit oxecatum, and the Deceased Executor's half behoved
to belong to their Executors, and not to accresce.

Which the Lords Sustained.

Lady Ballagan contra Lord Drumlanrig. June 23. 1671.
THe Lady Ballagan being by her Contract of Marriage provided to certain Lands,
and amongst others, to the Lands of Birks, the Contract bears, that she accepts
of the said Lands in full satisfaction of all further Conjunct-Fee, Liferent,
or Terce: she was Infeft in the Lands of Birks by her Husband, but was not
Confirmed by the Lord Drumlanrig Superior, of whom the Lands held Ward. The
Lady pursues the Tennents of Birks for Mails and Duties. Compearance is made
for the Lord Drumlanrig Superior, who craved preference, because the Lands are
now by Ward in his hands by the Death of the Husband, and minority of the Heir.
And as for the Ladies Infeftment, it can have no effect against the Ward,
because it is not Confirmed. It was answered, that the Lands being Ward, and
less then the third part of the Ward Lands, holden of the Lord Drumlanrig, the
Lady has Right by Law thereto, as her Terce. It was answered, That by her
Contract of Marriage, she had accepted the Lands provided therein, in
satisfaction of her Tero^, which is the ordinar conception of a Renunciation,
as when a Sum is accepted in satisfaction of any prior Debt, it imports a
Renunciation and Discharge of the prior Debt, and an Inhibition prior to the
last Bond, will Reduce any Right thereupon: Neither can it be maintained, as
having an anterior Cause by the former Bonds; yea, any Appryzing upon them
would be void, because they are Renunced. It was answered for the Lady, First,
That there was here no formal Renunciation, or Discharge of the Terce, and the
acceptance of Lands for it, does very well allow, that the Land accepted, may
be bruiked as Terce, at least a Terce of that Land must be due, though no Terce
of other Lands can be claimed: and albeit the Clause in satisfaction, in
personal Rights, is commonly understood to Renunce and extinguish the prior
Rights, unless they be Reserved: Yet it is not so in real Rights, for if any
person have many Rights to Lands, and does thereafter accept a Disposition of a
part of the Lands in satisfaction of all his interest, that does not Renunce
his former Rights to that Land, but he may defend himself with them all. So
here accepting of Lands in satisfaction of a Terce, does not Renunce the Terce,
as to the Lands accepted. 2dly, Albeit this Clause could import the Renuncing
of all Terce, that can never be extended to the benefit of the Superior, nor
can it be understood the Contracters mind, to exclude the Wife from the Terce,
to make it accresce to the Superior, in both their prejudices, because the
Husband by the Warrandice, must make out the Jointure. 3dly, Albeit the
Renunciation could be profitable to the Superior, yet it being by this Clause
in the Contract, the Superior cannot question the Ladies Infeftment, which is
the cause of the Renunciation, but must adhere to the whole Clause, nam qui
approbat non reprobat. It was answered, that the common Sense of this Clause of
acceptance does still import a full Renunciation, neither can the intention, or
meaning of the Parties import any thing, unless they had acted accordingly;
for it had been easy for them to have said, but prejudice of the Terce, as to
their Lands; so that the Terce being Renunced, the Renunciation is profitable to
all Parties having Interest, because the Right thereby Renunced is simply
extinct: Neither needs the Superior approve the Infeftment Un-confirmed, by
making use of the Renunciation, for as there could be no pretense for that upon
the naked Clause, without any Infeftment, so the meaning can only be, that if
the Clause had been perfected by a valide Infeftment, he could not have
quarrelled it.

The Lords preferred the Superior, and found the acceptance a full
Renunciation of the Terce, both as to the Lands accepted, and others.

Helen Hume contra Lord Justice Clerk. June 28. 1671.
UMquhile Hume of Rentoun having made several Provisions to his Children, and
amongst the rest to Helen Hume, and having recommended the same to his Son, now
Justice Clerk; he gave a Bond to the said Helen of two thousand Merks, payable
upon Requisition of forty days; the said Helen pursued Registration of the
Bond, wherein it being alleged that any Requisition made was past from, by
acceptance of Annualrent for Terms after.

The Lords Assoilzied from that Charge, until Requisition were made, and new
Requisition being made since, before the Extracting the Absolvitor, The Lords
Sustained the same. It was further alleged Absolvitor, because the Bonds
granted by the Father was done on Deathbed, and the Bond granted by the
Defender his Son was in his Minority, and he had Reduction depending upon the
said two Reasons. The Pursuer replied, that the Defender had Homologat the
Bond in question by a posterior Contract, whereby he had appointed a yearly
payment to his Mother, in satisfaction of this and the other Portions. The
Defender duplyed, that that Contract was no Homologation, being Subscribed by
him when he was Minor, having Curators, without their Consent, and so is null
by exception. The Pursuer triplyed, that the Defender had Homologat the said
Contract and Bond in question by these Deeds. First, That after Majority he had
paid Annualrent. 2dly, That he had pursued Exhibition and Registration of the
said Contract, and thereupon had obtained the same Registrat, and the Decree
Decerns Letters to be Direct at his Instance thereupon. It was answered, that
the payment of the Annualrent, albeit voluntar, though it may exclude
repetition of it self, it cannot infer Homologation of the whole Bond,
especially the payment being made by a Brother to an Indigent Sister. 3dly,
Payment of Annualrent cannot Homologat a Contract, which is null by exception.
4thly, Any payment that was made, was after the Decree of Registration, and so
necessar; and as to the Exhibition, the pursuing for a Delivery of a Writ does
not import the approbation of the contents of it, but only a calling for it,
because the Writ belongs to the Subscriber thereof, though he may quarrel the
obligement therein contained, and albeit the Writ was ordained to be Registrat,
yet there was neither Charge nor Execution used thereupon.

The Lords found the payment of the Annualrent in manner foresaid not to import
Homologation, but they found that a Writ Subscribed by a Minor without Consent
of his Curators, as it might be Ratified, so it might be Homologat, and that it
was de facto Homologat by this Decree of Registration, containing neither
Reservation nor Protestation for quarrelling the Writ Registrat. It was further
alleged, that the new Requisition was null, bearing to proceed on a Procutry,
and not bearing the Procutry produced. It was answered, the Procutry was not
called for, and that the having of the Writs, which the Requisition mentioned,
did import a Power to Require. 2dly, This is a Dilator after a Peremptor.

The Lords found the alleadgeance upon the nullity of the Requisition
Receivable after the Peremptor, and Sustained the Requisition, the Pursuer
producing the Procutry, which was the Warrant thereof before Extract.

Forbes of Watertoun contra Shein. Eodem die.
FOrbes of Watertoun pursues Reduction of an Apprizing ex capite inhibitionis.
The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because the Bond which was the ground of the
Inhibition is satisfied, in so far as there followed thereupon an Apprizing,
which came in the Person of the Debitors appearand Heir, and so is Redeemable
from him, for the Sums he truly paid, by the Act 1661* betwixt Debtor and
Creditor; and it is offered to be proven, that the Sums he paid are satisfied
by Intromission with the Rents of the Apprized Lands, or what is wanting the
Defender will instantly satisfy or purge. It was answered, that albeit the Act
of Parliament had declared that Apprizings might be satisfied by payment of the
true Sums paid for them by the appearand Heir, that cannot extend to this
Bond, or Inhibition, or Reduction thereupon, for the Pursuer may pass from his
Apprizing, and yet make use of the Bond, and this alleadgeance will only be
Relevant when he insists upon his Apprizing.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, that the satisfaction of the Apprizing
on the Bond did to all effects satisfy, and extinguish the Bond it self.

The Creditors of Balmerino contra The Lady Couper. Eodem die.
THe Deceast Lord C^^per having made an Heretable and irredeemable Right of his
whole Estate and Dignity to his Lady and her Heirs: The Lord Balmerino his
nearest Heir in the Estate, making use of the Names of certain of his
Creditors, that he might not be necessitate to enter Heir, before the event of
this Plea, pursues a Reduction of the said Disposition, as being on Deathbed.
The Defender alleged, First, That the Reason of Reduction, as it is Libelled,
is not Relevant, that the Defunct contracted a deadly Disease before the making
of the Disposition, and that he Died of the said Disease, which is not
Relevant, unless the particular Disease were condescended upon, otherwise it
will remain conjectural and unsure, and Witnesses cannot distinctly Depone
whether he was sick or not, specially he being an oldMan, so that they could
not distinguish betwixt sickness and weakness through old age. 2dly, The
Reason is not Relevant, unless the Disease were alleged to be morbus
sonticus, that might affect the Mind, and infer a weakness, which is different
from Fatuity or Insensibility. 3dly, The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because
he offered him to prove that the Defunct was in Health the time of the
Disposition, at least in as good Health as he had been for several years or
months before, when he did go ordinarily abroad to Kirk and Market, about all
his Affairs, at least if he had any indisposition, it was not impedimentum
rebus agendis, because it is offered to be proven that he constantly put on his
Clothes, and walked up and down his House, convoyed Strangers to their Chambers
freely without being helped or supported, and in the same manner went down with
others to their Horse to the Green, made several Accounts and Bargains, and
frequently Played at Cards, all which must necessarly infer his Health, unless
a circumstantial Disease were condescended upon and proven* 2dly, The Defender
offered to prove that after the Disposition, the Defunct went to Kirk and
Market, at least to one or other of them, which the Law has allowed as
unquestionable evidences of Recovery of Health, and which therefore is
Relevant, though Sickness was specially proven to have been Contracted before,
and condescends that the Disposition being Dated the eight of December 1668.
upon the Thursday immediately after, the Defunct went to the Market of Couper,
it being the Market day, and upon the Sabbath thereafter heard Sermon in the
Kirk of Couper. The Pursuer answered, that this Reason of Reduction is most
Relevant, and in the same Terms, that the Reason of Deathbed has always been
Libelled; neither was it ever found necessar to condescend upon morbus
sonticus, but as Craig expresses it sufficit si morbus precedat and mors
sequatur, before the Defunct go abroad, yet probatis extremis presumuntur
media, it is still presumed that so long as the Defunct after the Disease
remained within Doors, that the Disease continued, and that presumptione juris
and de jure, neither does it admit a contrare probation, by alleging that the
Party convalesced medio tempore, otherwise then by his going out to public
Meetings at Kirk and Market, nor is there any necessity to condescend on the
kinds of Diseases, which even Physicians themselves, and the most skilful can
hardly determine. And as to the first Defense, offering to prove that the
Defunct was in Health, it is contrare to the Libel, and no ways competent, for
in the case of contrare alleadgeances, the Pursuer offering to prove Sickness,
and the Defender offering to prove Health at the same time, the Pursuer as
being in the Libel must be preferred, especially considering that where such
Deeds are procured through importunity from Sick and Weak Persons, who would do
any thing to get leave to Die in peace, the Contrivers by the same facility may
debar the access of any, but such as they have confidence in, and who have
cuncurred with them in the Contrivance, so that the Disponers Sickness is
difficillimae probationis, yet quaelibet probatio sufficit, as in this case
within a day or two of the Disposition, my Lord was put to violent nature to
attempt to go to the Market, and three days after to the Kirk, in both which
attempts he failed, which does sufficiently presume that he was Sick before,
and was not able to cover his Sickness for a little time to attain the
Evidences that Law requires to infer Health, but if a contrare probation should
be Sustained, or preferred as more pregnant, and which would be by familiar
Persons in the House, and concurrers in the Contrivance, this ancient and
excellent Law would easily be elided, and as to the evidences of Health they
are no way Relevant, neither are any private acts, but the Law has justly
determined that the Disponer must appear publicly in the solemnest Meetings,
that thereby it may be known that he is able to abide the Air, and that matters
of this importance be not probable by two picked out prepared Witnesses, but
that the samine be cleared by the whole Witnesses of a Kirk or Market, which
cannot all be Brybed, and no few Witnesses dare adventure to Depone against
that common knowledge, so that no private or domestic acts in or about the
House can be equivalent to coming to Kirk and Market. And as to the second
Defense, that the Defunct came out to Kirk and Market, it ought to be Repelled,
because the pursuer offers to prove that he was supported. The Pursuer
answered, that the Reply was not Relevant, unless it were condescended quomodo
supported, and that it was by upholding the Defunct under the Oxter, or by the
Elbow, but it is not Relevant to allege that the Defunct took any of the
Company by the hand, or that they took him by the hand, especially if it was in
rugged or uneven places, in respect of the Defuncts age, and that it is offered
to be proven that he was ordinarily accustomed to take these who walked with him
by the hand in such places, and for this there was alleged a Practique lately
done by the Lords betwixt Pargilleis and Pargilleis, whereby a Disposition by
Pargilleis was Sustained, because he came to the Market of Calder, albeit he
was helped to and from his Horse, and up and down the Stairs, and that he was
not able to tell Money, and was never at the Kirk thereafter: and likewise a
Practique in Anno 1647. was alleged, whereby Graham Merchant in Edinburgh
having made a Disposition to his Wifes Daughter, the same was Sustained,
because he Lived a long time and did his Affairs in the House, and wrote the
Disposition, being two or three sheet of Paper, all with his own hand, which is
found sufficient though he did not go out to Kirk or Market. The Pursuer
answered, that the Reply was most Relevant, even though the supporting were
only by the hand, for albeit where there were reiterat acts of going abroad
without design, such circumstances would not be noticed, yet where the going
abroad was so near to the Disposition, and evidently done to validate the same,
it has been ultimus conatus naturae, and has not been of custom, but of
necessity, so that when such an attempt is made of design, if the Disponer have
not so much strength as to walk without the help of any hand, it infers clearly
the weakness and continuance of the Disease. The Defender repeated his
alleadgeance, and offered to prove that not only the Defunct went out to Kirk
or Market, but that he went freely by his own strength, no Body touching him.

The Lords being desirous that neither Party should have the sole probation by
picking out such Witnesses as made most for them, but that all the Witnesses
might be adduced, did before answer appoint either Party to adduce Witnesses to
instruct the Defuncts condition the time of the Disposition, and thereafter,
and anent the manner of his going abroad, and there being a great multitude of
Witnesses adduced by either Party, the Lords considered the Relevancy and
Probation both together, by which the Lords found that the Reason of Reduction
was relevantly Lybelled, and that it was sufficiently proven, that the Defunct
had contracted the Disease whereof the Died before the Disposition; and as to
the Defense and Reply the Witnesses proved all clearly, that he was supported
to the Kirk, and from it, and that he fell a swoond in his return, but the
Lords found it not necessare that the Defunct should both go to Kirk and Market
unsupported, but that either was sufficient, but that where both was attempted
shortly after, and upon design, the manifest failing in the attempt in going to
the Kirk, did much weaken the prior attempt in going to the Market: As to which
the Lords did consider that the going free to the Market behoved to include the
free going to the Market place, and returning back from the same, not being
supported in any place of the way, so that albeit many Witnesses Deponed the
Defunct walked freely, none being by him in some parts of the way coming and
going, there was no number of Witnesses that proved his walking freely all the
way coming and going, even while he was within the Town, but that many
Witnesses proved that he was supported, some in the whole way, and some as to
several places, some by the Oxter, some by the Elbow, and most by the hand.

Therefore the Lords found the Reply Relevant of supporting even by the hand,
in any place of the way within the Town, whether Even or Rugged, and found the
same sufficiently proven, and therefore Reduced the Disposition, albeit the
Defuncts custom to take those who walked with him by the hand was also proven,
whereunto they had no regard, this going to Market being so soon after the
Disposition, and so evidently of design to validat it, and the Defunct never
having gone out after, except to the Kirk when he was supported, and fell a
swoond; and as to the Practique, that in Anno 1647. was not produced, but it
was in consideration of a Sum left to the Church by that Disposition, and was
generally cried out against by all Persons, yet una hirundo, etc. And as for
Pargilleis Case, the Lords perused the whole Debate and Testimonies, and found
that Pergilleis Lived near a Mile from Calder, and that being an old Guttish
Man he was accustomed to be helped to and from his Horse, and that he Rode to
the Town, but that he Lighted then and walked freely through the Market, and up
a Brae to my Lord Tarphichans House, and returned again to his Horse without
any help, either by the hand or otherwise, and regarded not that he was helped
up and down Stairs, or to and from his Horse, which the Law does not require,
but only the going freely from the Entry of the Town to the Market place, and
back again unsupported.

The Lords did also find none of the private acts alleged upon Relevant to
prove Health, or equivalent to going to Kirk or Market, and that there was no
necessity to condescend on particular Diseases.

Ioachim Burnmaster contra Captain Dishingtoun. June 29. 1671
CAptain Dishingtoun having obtained a Decree before the Admiral, Adjudging a
Ship taken by him at Sea the time of the late War with Holland, whereof Ioachim
Burnmaster was Master, the said Ioachim raised Reduction of the said Admirals
Decree, on these Reasons, that his Ship and whole Goods did belong to the
Subjects of Sweden, his Majesty's Allies, and who had a particular Treaty with
the King, bearing expressly, that no Person should be Seized who had a Swedish
Pass, in the Terms particularly expressed in the Treaty; Which Pass the Pursuer
had, and produced when he was taken, and yet he was declared Prize, upon
pretense that three of his Company were Hollanders, albeit the Treaty bears
expressly that where such a Pass is found ulterius nihil exigatur, and in bona
aut homines nullo modo inquiratur, and upon pretense that the Oaths of the
Master and Company were contrare to the Pass, and proved that there were other
owners then these in the Pass, and other Goods, viz. 15. Hogs-heads of Wine,
and a quantity of Wine and Brandy wine, and Paper* and that the Ship in
question was not then Bought by the Swedes, nor did not go to, or from the
parts mentioned in the Pass, albeit none of these said points be Material* nor
did infer that the Ship, or Loading, or any part thereof did belong to the
Kings Enemies, but did belong to the Swedes his Allies and Confederats, so that
albeit they had had no Pass, or an unformal Pass, their Goods could not be
taken from them, there being no Article in the Treaty declaring, that the not
having a full and formal Pass should make such Ships Prize, but only that the
having thereof should keep them from all question or inquiry. The Defender
alleged Absolvitor, because the Decree of Adjudication was justly and
Warrantably given, for Contrivances the time of the War being most ordinar* the
Dutch did frequently palliat their Trading under the pretense of the Kings
Allies; and in this Case it is evident, that the time of the Pass this Ship was
in Holland, of a Dutch Build belonging to an Hollander Residing there, and no
pretense of Buying the same by a Swede for a long time after, as appears by the
vendition produced, which does not bear that the Ship was sold to any Swede, or
for their use, but to a Swedish Factor in Holland, without mentioning to whose
use, and so is justly suspect to have been for an other Dutchmans use,
especially being found Navigable with three Dutchmen in the Company, and no
Swede has ever yet declared upon Oath that this Ship and Goods belonged to
them, for by a Certificat of the Swedish Chamber of Commerce produced, that two
Swedes did declare that they intended to Buy a Ship in Holland, called the blew
Lilly, and yet the Pass of the same date bears, that they swore that the blew
Lilly belongs to themselves and no other, and by the vendition the Name of the
Ship was not the blew Lilly, so that all has been but a Contrivance, and that
there is nothing produced that necessarly evinces that the Ship and Goods
belonged to the Swedes only, and seeing the Pass is so palpably false in all the
substantial points required by the Treaty, and by the Oath of the Pursuer
himself, he cannot cloth himself with the Treaty, which he has so grossly
transgressed, nor has he adduced sufficient proof that the Ship and Goods
belonged to the Swedes. And whereas it is alleged, that the being Sailed with
Hollanders is no ground of Seizure by the Treaty, the same is opponed, which in
the next Article to that alleged upon for not enquiring in the Men and Goods,
bears that Seizure shall not be made where such a Pass is nisi gravis suspitio
subsit, and there could be no better ground of suspicion, then that the Master
when he was taken acknowledged the Contents of the Pass not to be true, or
conform to the Treaty, and that a considerable part of the Company were
Duchess, and as for any Letters produced, they are impetrate since the War upon
misinformation.

The Lords adhered to the Decree of Adjudication, and Assoilzied from the
Reduction, and found the verity of the Pass canvelled by the Testimonies of the
Skipper and Company, and the Certificat, and that most of the material
requisits in the Pass were wanting, and no sufficient Evidence that the whole
Ship and Loadning did truly belong to the Swedes.

Beidmen of the Magdalen Chapel contra Gavin Drisdail. June 30. 1671.
IAnet Rud having mortified an yearly Annualrent of a Merk Scots, out of a
Tenement of hers to the poor Beidmen of the Magdalen Chapel; they pursue Gavin
Drisdail, now Heretor of the Tenement, for Poinding of the Ground* Who
alleged Absolvitor, because he has bruiked the Tenement free of that
Annualrent for more then forty years, so that the Right thereof is prescribed.
It was answered, that prescription runs not against the Poor, and things
mortified for pious uses. 2dly, They are in the same condition with Minors,
having Overseers chosen yearly. 3dly, The years of prescription must be
accounted, abating the times of Pestilence and War, when there was no Session.
It was answered, that prescription was the great security of the Leiges, and
has no exception by the Act of of Parliament, but only Minority, and neither
by the Civil Law or our Custom, is the time of prescription compted per tempus
utile, but per tempus continuum, in regard of the length of the longest
prescription.

The Lords Sustained the Defense of prescription, and Repelled the Replies.

Brody of Lethim and the Lord of Riccartoun contra The Lord Kenmure. July 1.
1671.
BRody of Lethim as having Right from Riccartoun, having several years ago
obtained Decree against the Tennents of the Mains of Kenmure, thereafter upon
a motion for the Viscount of Kenmure the Decree was stopped, and now the
Pursuers desire out their Decree. It was alleged that the Cause having lain
over several years, must be wakened. It was answered that there being a Decree
pronunced, there was no more Process depending, and so needed not be wakend. It
was answered, that a Decree though pronunced, not being conditional to a day,
but being absolute, and thereafter stopped, in respect the stop takes off the
Decree, the Process is in statu quo prius. It was answered, that the stop does
not recall the Decree, but only hinders the Extract thereof till the Supplicant
be further heard, and it is his part to insist in the Bill, and that it would
be of very evil consequence if stopped Decreets were recalled, for then not
only wakening would be necessar, but in case the Parties should Die,
Transferance should be raised, and seeing wakenings are not requisite in
concluded Causes, much less after Sentence is pronunced.

The Lords found no necessity of wakening, but allowed the Defender to propone
what further he had to allege.

Lord of Balfour contra Mr. William Dowglasse. July 4. 1671.
THe Earl of Airlies Estate being Apprized by Mr. William Dowglasse since 1652.
after the Legal was expired Mr. William was Infeft, and after his Infeftment,
the Lord of Balfour Apprized the same Land, and thereupon pursues the Tennents
for Mails and Duties. It was alleged for the first Apprizer that he must be
preferred; First, Because he has the only Right, having an Apprizing expired,
and Infeftment thereon, before the Pursuers Apprizing was Led, so that eo
momento that he was Infeft upon his expired Apprizing, the common Debtor was
fully Denuded, and there was no Right of Reversion, or any other in his Person
that could be Apprized thereafter. It was answered, that by the Act of
Parliament 1661. between Debtor and Creditor: It is provided that all
Apprizings Led within year and day of the first effectual Apprizing shall come
in therewith pari passu, and therefore the Pursuer having Apprized within year
and day after the first Apprizers Apprizing became effectual by Infeftment, he
must come in with him pari passu by the said Act, which makes no difference of
expired, or unexpired Apprizings, and by that same Act the Debtor is not so
Denuded by the expiring of the Legal and Infeftment, but that year and day is
still allowed to subsequent Apprizers, which in effect is a prorogation of the
Legal as to Concreditors. It was answered, that the Act of Parliament is
opponed, bearing that Apprizings before, or within year and day after the first
effective Apprizing shall come in pari passu, as if one Apprizing had been Led
for all, which necessarly imports the calculation of the year to be from the
date of the first effective Comprizing and not from the date of the Infeftment
or Diligence, for the coming in as if one Apprizing had been for all, must
relate to the Decree of Apprizing, which as it is clear by the Letter of the
Statute, so also by the Narrative and Motive thereof, bearing that Creditors
did not know the condition of their Debitors Estate, which might be Apprized
before they could do Diligence, whereas before they had only the benefit of
Reversion, for remeed whereof the Parliament brings in all Apprizings that are
before, or within a year, after the first effectual Apprizing, which before
would have carried the sole Propert^, and factione juris, states all these
Apprizings as Led in one day, so that the remeed is sufficient, by having a
full year after the date of the Apprizing, and Correctory Statutes are to be
strictly Interpret, and if the date of the Diligence be the Rule, an Apprizing
after twenty year might be brought to admit a new one deduced after all that
time, and not only so, but the Mails and Duties would belong proportionally to
the last Apprizer for twenty years before it was Led. It was answered, that the
year indulged by this Act of Parliament to Concreditors, must be from the time
the Apprizing is effectual, for the words of the Statute bears, all Apprizings
before, or within a year after the first effectual Comprizing etc. so that the
year must not run from its being an Apprizing, but from its being an effectual
Comprizing, and so from the Infeftment or Diligence, neither is the
inconvenience shunned otherwise, for the only way then known for publication of
real Rights was the Register of Seisings, and not the Register of the Allowance
of Apprizings, which is only made necessar by an Act since, and it is very
easy to make simulate executions of Apprizings, by taking away the Copies of
Denunciation of the Ground, and Citation at the dwelling House of the Debtor,
but if once a Seizing be in the Register, all provident men take notice
thereof, and albeit a Charge be sufficient in stead of a Seizing which is not
Registrat, yet the ordinar way of completing Apprizings, which the Law notices
is Infeftment, and seeing Apprizings are now rigorous Rights, carrying any
Estate without consideration of the value, Acts Correctory of them ought to be
extended ex aequo, and the more ways Concreditors have for getting notice of
the Apprizing of their Debitors Estate the better, neither are the evil
consequences upon the other hand of any moment, it being the first Apprizers
fault (if not his fraud) that he obtains not Infeftment, or does Diligence
therefore, for he may of purpose lie dormant, not only till year and day run,
but until the Legal expire, and thereby cut off the Diligences of all other
Creditors, as in this very case the irredeemable Right of an Earldom shall be
carried for 1500. pounds, and all the other Creditors excluded, so that the
Apprizing is so far from making the case better, that it makes it much worse,
as latent and fraudulent, for it cannot be imagined that if the second Apprizer
had known that the first Apprizing was Led, but that he would have used
Diligence within the year, at least within the Legal, for so soon as he saw a
Seizing in the Register, he did immediately Apprize.

The Lords preferred the first Apprizer, and excluded the second, and found
that the year is to be reckoned from the date of the first effectual Apprizing,
and not from the Diligence, whereby it becomes effectual. In this Process the
Lords Sustained this Reply, that the first Apprizing was to the behove of the
common Debtor, or his eldest Son, and that they would purge the same by
payment of what Sums were truly paid for it to the Apprizer, according to the
said Act of Parliament 1661. without any Reduction or Declarator.

Helen Hume contra The Lord Justice Clerk. Eodem die.
THere being a Bond granted by the Lord of Rentoun to Helen Hume his Daughter,
obliging him and his Heirs to pay the Sum to her at her Age of ten years
complete with Annualrent, so long as she should suffer the same unpayed, and
then subjoining this Clause, that in case she should die unmarried the Bond
should be void: Whereupon the said Helen pursues the Lord Justice Clerk her
Brother, who alleged upon the foresaid Clause, that the effect thereof must
necessarly be, that the said Helen should make no voluntare gratuitous Right in
prejudice of her Father or his Heirs, that the Sum should return if she were
not Married. It was answered, that this Clause not being the ordinar Clause of
Substitution. Provision, or Return, cannot be understood a Suspensive Clause,
hindering the lifting of the Money, neither yet a resolutive Clause in case the
Pursuer Marry not, but it can only have the effect of a Clause of Substitution,
that if the Pursuer died Un-married, and the Sum un-uplifted, or Disponed; her
Fathers Heir is preferred to her own Heir, or nearest of Kin, for the Term of
payment being her age of ten years, she might then lift the Sum, and there is
no provision to reimploy it of this Tenor, or to find Caution to Restore, if
she were not Married. It was answered, that this Clause cannot be interpreted
as a naked Substitution, but as a condition of the Bond, equivalent to that
which is frequent in Provisions of Children, and Contracts of Marriage, that in
case the Party had no Children, the sum should return, which was always
interpret more than a single Substitution, and to import a Condition or
Obligation against any voluntar Deed, or Disposition: And though the Party be
thereby Feear of the Sum; yet it imports a limited Fee, with a Provision to do
no Deed in the contrair, without a Cause onerous: and albeit Re-imployment of
the sum be not expressed in this Bond, it is employed in the nature of it.

The Lords found, that seeing the Bond had a particular Term, and no Condition
to Re-imploy: and the question now was only of voluntar Dispositions, without
Causes onerous, whereof there was none at present existent. The Lords Decerned
the Sum to be paid to the Pursuer, reserving to the Defender his Reason of
preference against any Disposition, or Assignation, without a Cause onerous, if
the same should happen to be made.

John Mccrae contra Lord Mcdonald. July 6. 1671.
JOhn Mccrae as Heir to John Mccrae his Goodsire, pursues the Lord Mcdonald, as
Heir to his Goodsire, for payment of a Bond of 400. merks in Anno 1629. granted
by the Defenders Goodsire to the Pursuers Goodsire. The Defender alleged
absolvitor, because the Bond is prescribed. The Pursuer replied, that the
Prescription was impeded, partly by Minority, and was interrupted by a Citation
at his Instance, against the Lord Mcdonald. It was answered, that the first
Citation made, was null, being at the Market Cross of the Shire, by
Dispensation, upon an unwarrantable suggestion, that there was not safe access
to him, which has been past of Course by the Servants of the Bill-Chamber,
whereas they ought specially to have represented the same, and the
consideration thereof to the Lords* and so being surreptitiously obtained,
periculo petentis, it can import no interruption. 2dly, The Execution at the
Market Cross, bears no leaving, or affixing of a Copy. And as for the second
Citation, it is but one day before the forty years be complete, which being so
small a time, is not to be regarded in Prescription, nam Lex non spectat
minima, and it is also null, though it be done personally, as falling with the
first Execution.

The Lords found that the first Citation was sufficient to interrupt
Prescription, although it had not been formal, through want of a Copy, and
declared they would sustain the Process thereupon, if the leaving of a Copy
were added to the Execution subscribed by the Messenger, and abidden by as
true. They found also, that the second Citation was sufficient interruption,
though within a day of completing the prescription, which was to be reckoned
punctually de momento in momentum.

Strachan contra Gordouns. July 7. 1671.
STrachan pursues Gordouns for a Spuilzie of four Oxen taken away from them by
violence, being then in their Plough by George and William Gordouns and others.
The Defenders alleged absolvitor, because they offered them to prove, that
the Oxon were their proper Goods, and were stolen from them, and that
thereafter they were found straying upon the Pursuers Ground, and that they
were proclaimed as Waith-goods by the Sheriff, and that by the Sheriffs Order
direct to his Majors, the Defenders intrometted with them, and so did no wrong.
The Pursuer Replied, that no way granting the verity of the Defense, the same
ought to be Repelled, because they having the Oxen in question, in their
peaceable Possession four Months, they ought not to have been disturbed in
their Peaceable Possession, in this Order, without the Citation or Sentence of
a Judge: So that the Defenders having unwarrantably and violently Dispossessed
them, spoliatus ante omnia restituendus, and they may pursue for Restitution as
accords; but the Pursuers are not now obliged to Dispute the Point of Right.
2dly, If need beis, they offer to prove that they acquired the Goods from the
Lord of Glenkindy their Master, so that being Possessors bona fide cum titulo,
they could not be summarly Spuilzied, or Dispossessed: For albeit stolen or
strayed Goods may be summarly Recovered, de recenti, or from the Thieves; yet
cannot so be taken from a lawful Possessor, acquiring bona fide.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and admitted the same to the Defenders
Probation: and found also that part of the Reply Relevant, that the Pursuers
did Possess bona fide, by an onerous Title, Relevant to elide the Defense
though it were proven, as to the Restitution of the Oxen to the Pursuer, and
the ordinar profits thereof, but not the violent profits, for they found the
Sheriffs Warrant being instructed, would excuse from the violent profits: but
they found that the Defenders naked Possession, though for four months, by
having the Goods in the Plough, would not infer Restitution or Spuilzie, but
that the Goods being stolen or strayed, might be recovered Summarly.

Lord of Polmais contra The Tradsmen of Striveling. Eodem die.
THe Tradsmen of Striveling having Charged and troubled the Lord of Polmais
Tennents, about St. Ninians Kirk, upon the Act of Parliament, prohibiting
Workmen to exercise their Trades in the Suburbs of Royal Burrows, Polmais
raised a Declarator for freeing of himself and his Tennents of the said
Charges, and that they might freely exercise all their Trades, especially about
the Kirk of St. Ninians, which is about a Mile from Striveling, which being
Dispute, and it condescended upon, that St. Ninians being a mile from
Striveling, could no ways fall under the Act of Parliament, and could not be
interpret a Suburb, being no ways adjacent to the Town.

The Lords found the Declarator and Condescendence Relevant, and Decerned.

Andrew and Adam Stevins contra Cornelius Neilson. July 11. 1671.
ANdrew Stevin having made a Disposition of his Lands to Cornelius Neilson his
Good-brother, and thereafter another Disposition to his Brother Adam Stevin.
They pursue a Reduction of Cornelius Disposition. First, As being upon Trust,
and only for the security of a thousand merks, whereanent, it being Debated
anent the manner of Probation and Witnesses, ex officio, being craved for
clearing the Trust by the Writer, Witnesses and Communers.

The Lords refused to Sustain the same, till first they considered the other
Reason of Circumvention, which was Libelled thus, That the Disponer was a
lavish, weak person, that the Disposition was elicite by his own Good-brother,
for a thousand merks only, and that he kept him privately from the access of
all other Friends, and drank him drunk, in which condition he was when the
Disposition was Subscribed, and that it was not Read unto him, and it being
excepted upon a Ratification, some Weeks after at another place, and the Reason
of Circumvention repeated on the same Terms against that Ratification.

The Lords ordained Witnesses to be Examined ex officio, upon the Reason of
Circumvention as to both, and specially, whether these Writs were Read at the
Subscribing, and whether the Subscriber was Drunk, and whether he was thereby
insensible or disordered in his Reason, or what were the Motives induced him to
Subscribe.

Sir George Maxwel contra Maxwel of Kirkonnel. Eodem die.
SIr George Maxwel of Nether Pollock, pursues Maxwel of Kirkonnel, for payment
of a Debt of his Fathers, as behaving himself as Heir by intromission with the
Mails and Duties of his Fathers Lands of Kirkonnel. The Defender alleged
Absolvitor, because his Father was Denuded, and an Appryzer Infeft, and so
could have no Heir in these Lands. It was Replied, that notwithstanding of the
Appryzing, the same remained Redeemable, and the Defunct remained in
Possession, and the Defender his appearand heir, did continue his Possession,
and so has behaved as Heir; and though he had had a Right or Warrant from the
Appryzer, yet during the Legal, it is immistio, having no other Cause nor
Title. It must be presumed to be granted to him as appearand Heir, much more
where he has no Warrant from the Appryzers. 2dly, It is offered to be proven
the Appryzers were satisfied by intromission, and what is wanting, the Pursuer
offers to satisfy the same at the Bar; for by the Act of Parliament 1661.
betwixt Debtor and Creditor, Appryzings acquired by appearand Heirs, may be
satisfied by the Defuncts Creditors, for the sums they truly paid out by the
space of ten years: So that the Defender ought to condescend, and Depone what
he gave out, and to count for his Intromission, and what is wanting, the
Pursuer will pay. The Defender answered, that behaving as Heir, being an
odious, universal, passive Title, any colorable Ground is sufficient to
restrict it to the value intrometted with. And as to the offer to satisfy the
Defender of the Appryzing, to which he has Right. It is not competent, hoc
ordine; for by the Act it is only introduced in favors of other Appryzers, and
the Pursuer is a mere personal Creditor, without any Appryzing. It was
answered, that the Narrative of that part of the Act, bears it expressly to be
in favors of Creditors, and though the subsumption is only applied to
Appryzers, yet it is not exclusive, and by the common Custom, satisfaction of
Appryzings by intromission, or present payment, is ever received by Exception
or Reply.

The Lords found that behaving as Heir is sufficiently elided by any Right or
Warrant from the Appryzers, as to intromission thereafter; or that if the
Defunct died not in Possession, But that the Appryzers had then, or thereafter
attained Possession, before the intromission. But found that the appearand
Heirs continuing in the Defuncts Possession without a Warrant, did infer
behavior, and that the offer to purge the Appryzing at the Bar, was competent,
hoc ordine* without burdening the Creditors with the Expenses of Appryzing, to
make the appearand Heir liable for what he intrometted with; and that the
appearand Heir should assign the Appryzing, whereupon the Creditor might
continue Possession till he were satisfied of the sums now paid out.

Robert Lermont contra The Earl of Lauderdail. July 12. 1671.
SIr Alexander Swintoun having Disponed his Estate of Swintoun, to John
Swintoun his Son, in his Contract of Marriage, there is a Clause therein, on
their Terms, that it shall be leisom to the said Sir Alexander, to affect and
burden the Estate with Infeftments of Wodset or Annualrent, for the sum of
fifty four thousand merks, for his Creditors and Bairns; thereafter Sir
Alexander grants a Bond of 1400. merks to the Lord of Smeatoun, and declares
it to be a part of the fifty four thousand merks, whereof 2000. merks being now
in the Person of Robert Lermont. He pursues the Earl of Lauderdail, as now come
in the place of John Swintoun by his Foresaulture, to pay the sums, or at
least, that the Lands is, or may be burdened therewith, because the Forefault
Persons Infeftment being qualified with the said Reservation, it is a real
Burden affecting the Estate, and Swintouns Infeftment being public, and thus
qualified and burdened, was as to this point, the Creditors Infeftment, and his
being Forefault, could not prejudge the Creditors, as to this real Burden, in a
public Infeftment, granted by the King. The Defender alleged, that the Libel
was not Relevant, for the Reservation being a mere Power of Burdening by
Infeftment, it cannot be pretended that the Forefault Persons Infeftment is
sufficient therefore. But seeing Swintoun made no use of that power, albeit it
might have been sufficient against Swintoun the Contracter, or his Heirs: It
cannot militate against the King or his Donator, to whom the Fee returns by
Forefaulture without any Burden, but what the King has consented to by public
Infeftments or Confirmations: And though old Swintoun had given the Pursuer a
base Infeftment, it would have fallen by the Forefaulture, not having been
Confirmed, much more when there is no Infeftment.

The Lords found the Libel not Relevant, and Assoilzied.

The Heirs of Mr. Thomas Lundy contra Earl of Southesk and others. Eodem die.
THe Estate of Sir James Keith of Powburn being Appryzed by several of his
Creditors, they now compet for preference. Mr. Thomas Lundie who led the first
Appryzing, was more then year and day before the rest, and thereupon his Heir
craved preference. It was alleged the Apprizing was null: First, Because it
proceeded upon a Bond, carrying a Clause of Requisition, and the Claim of the
Appryzing, did not Libel thereupon, so that albeit it be now produced and done
debito tempore: Yet the Claim was not sufficiently instructed without it. 2dly,
The Messenger did unwarrantably continue the Court of Appryzing till another
Diet, without any necessar Cause, which was never accustomed before, and is of
very evil consequence, for thereby Messengers at their pleasure may continue,
and weary out the Persons concerned, who might propone Defenses, or produce
Suspensions, and are not obliged to attend the pleasure of the Messenger. 3dly,
The Appryzing was at the Beitch-hill of Cowper, which is not within the Shire
where the Lands ly: And albeit there be a Dispensation in the Letters, that
ought not to have been granted, because Appryzings should only be in the head
Burgh of the Shire, or in communi patria at Edinburgh, but especially seeing the
Warrant was obtained from the Lords of course, among the common Bills, without
being Read or considered, and so is periculo petentis, and cannot prejudge the
more formal Diligence of other Comprizers, especially seeing Lundy Appryzed of
new for the same sums, which will come in pari passu with the rest, being
within year and day. It was answered, that it is inherent in all Jurisdictions
to continue Processes to new Dyets, having kept the first Diet, and that the
Messenger by the Letters is Constitute Sheriff, and there is no question but
Sheriffs might, and did prorogate Dyets in Appryzings, and the Letters bears
Warrant to fix Courts, one or more, and for the continuation, it was but to the
next day, in regard of a great Speat, the Appryzing being upon the hill in the
open field, the time of Rain, and it being m^dica mora, to the next day, which
will give no Warrant to an Arbitrary continuation by Messengers, to what
Interval they please. And as for the place, The Lords by Dispensation may
appoint what place they see convenient; and albeit the Dispensation had been of
course, and that therein the Clerks had failed, yet the Parties obtainers of
such Dispensations are secure thereby, and ought not to be prejudged.

The Lords Sustained the Appryzing, and found the Requisition now produced
sufficient, and found that the continuing of the Diet for so short a time, to
be no ground of nullity, unless the Competitors could allege a special cause,
that they did or might alleged, whereby they were prejudged by leading the
Appryzing the second day, rather than the first. The Lords did also Sustain the
Dispensation of the place; and having perused the Practique produced, at the
Instance of the Lady Lucia Hamiltoun, anent an Appryzing, led at Glasgow by
Dispensation: They found that the Lords did not annul the Appryzing on that
Ground. But the Lords ordained, that no Bill bearing Dispensation, should pass
of Course in time coming, but upon special Reasons, to be con^idered by the
Lords, or the Ordinary upon the Bills; and that Messengers should not continue
the Dyets in Appryzings, but upon necessar Causes; and ordained an Act to be
insert in the Books of Sederunt for that effect.

Adam Gairns contra Isobel Sandilands. Eodem die.
ADam Gairns pursues Isobel Sandilands, as Representing her Father, to pay a
Debt of his, and specially as behaving as Heir, by uplifting the Mails and
Duties of a Tenement, wherein the Father Died Infeft, as of Fee, in so far as
by Contract of Marriage betwixt Thomas Sandilands her Father, and John Burn,
and Isobel Burn his Daughter, The said John Burn provided the said Tenement in
their Terms, viz. after the Obligements upon the Husbands part, it follows thus
(For the which Cause the said John Burn binds and obliges him to Inseft Thomas
Sandilands, and the said Isobel Burn, the longest liver of them two in
Conjunctfee or Liferent, and the Heirs between them, Which failzying, the said
Isobel her Heirs and Assigneys whatsomever) By which Provision her Father being
Feear and Infeft, the Defender is liable. The Defender alleged absolvitor,
because by this Provision of the Conjunctfee of this Tenement, Isobel Burn the
Defenders Mother was Feear, and her Father was but Liferenter, in respect the
Termination of the Succession is to the Mothers Heirs, yea, and to her
Assigneys, which necessarly imports, that she had power to Dispone. And it is a
general Rule in Succession of Conjunct-Feears, that that Person is Feear upon
whose Heirs the last Termination of the Tailzie or Provision ended, especially
in this Case, where the Right of the Tenement flows from the Woman's Father. So
that if there were any doubtfulness, it must be presumed, that the Fathers
meaning was to give the Fee to his Daughter, having no other Children: Neither
is this Land Disponed nomine dotis: And the Defender stands Infeft by Precept
of Favor, as Heir to her Mother, and thereby bruiks bona fide, and her
Infeftment must Defend her till it be Reduced. The Pursuer answered, that by
the provision, the Husband was Feear, and the Wife was only Liferenter, because
though the last Termination does ordinarily rule the Fee: yet this is as
favorable a Rule, that in Conjunct Provisions, potior est conditio masculi,
and though the Termination be upon the Wifes Heirs whatsomever, yet they are
but Heirs of Provision to the Husband, and he might have Disponed, and his
Creditors may affect the Land, which holds in all Cases, except the Lands had
been Disponed by the Wife her self, without a Cause onerous. But here the
Husband is first named, and it is but a small parcel of Land, beside which,
there is no other Tocher; So that though it be not Disponed, nomine dotis, Yet
being Disponed (for the which Causes) it is equivalent, and in the same
Contract, the Husband is obliged to provide all Lands that he shall Acquire, or
succeed to, to himself and his Wife, the longest liver of them two in
Conjunct-fee or Liferent, and to the Heirs between them, Which failzying, the
one half to the Husbands Heirs, and the other half to the Wifes Heirs and their
Assigneys, and it cannot be imagined, that the meaning of these Clauses was,
that the Fee of the Man's Conquest and Succession, should not be all Constitute
in himself, but that the Wife should be Feear of the half. And in like manner,
the Fathers meaning is clear, because the Clause bears not only in
Contemplation of the Marriage, but for sums of Money received by the Father,
which albeit left blank in the Contract, yet it cannot be thought, that in such
a Narrative, he intended to make his Daughter Feear. And as for the adjection
of her Assigneys, it is only ex stilo, for Assigneys is ever added after the
last Termination of Heirs, and does always relate to all the Feears, and would
extend to the Heirs of the Marriage, their Assigneys as well, as to the Wifes
Heirs failing them. Likeas, Assigneys isin the same way adjected to the Clause
of Conquest, wherein there is no ground to imagine that the Wife is Feear: and
both bears the Husband and Wife to be Infeft in Conjunct-fee, or Liferent.

The Lords found that by this Provision, and Infeftment thereon, the Husband
was Feear, and the Wife only Liferenter, and found no necessity to Reduce the
Defenders Infeftment, as Heir to her Mother, not proceeding upon a Retour, but
a Precept of Favor, But they found that the dubiousness of the case was
sufficient to free her from the passive Title of Behavior, but only for making
forthcoming her intromission, quoad valorem: But it was not Debated nor
Considered, whether as bonae fidei Possessor, by a colorable Title, being
Infeft as Heir to her Mother, she would be free of the bygones, before this
Pursuit.

Marjory Murray contra Isobel Murray. Eodem die.
UMquhil Murray having Infeft Isobel Murray his Wife in two Tenements, did
thereafter by his Testament, leave a Legacy of a thousand pounds to their
Daughter Marjory Murray, and gave other Provisions to the said Isobel his Wife,
and provided his Daughter to the two Tenements: Which Testament his Wife
Subscribes, and after his Death Confirms the same, but under Protestation, that
her Confirmation should not prejudge her own Right. The Daughter pursues for
the Legacy of 1000. pounds, and for the Rents of the Tenements, and alleadges
that the 1000. pounds must be free to her, without being abated by Implement of
the Mothers Contract; And likewise the two Tenements by her Mothers consent and
subscription. It was answered, that the Mothers subscription was a Donation
betwixt Man and Wife, for being to the Man's Daughter, whom by the Law of Nature
he is obliged to provide, it was all one as if it had been to himself. 2dly,
her Subscription was obtained in luctu, her Husband being near his Death, and
at his desire, ex reverentia maritali, and the Confirmation can be no
Homologation, because of the Protestation foresaid. It was answered, that it
was protestatio contraria facto: and the Wife had no necessity to do it, for
she might have Confirmed her self Executrix Creditrix.

The Lords found that there was here no Donation between Man and Wife, but in
respect the Parties had not Debated the effect of reverentia maritalis,
ordained them to be heard thereupon, and found the Protestation sufficient to
take off the Ratification, or Homologation by the Confirmation, and found the
Legacy of 1000. pounds to be left only according to the nature of a Legacy, out
of the Defuncts free Goods, and would not exclude the Relict, or any Creditor.

Sir David Dumbar of Baldune contra Sir Robert Maxwel. July 14. 1671.
SIr David Dumbar of Baldune being Infeft upon several Appryzings in the Estate
of Kirkcudbright, pursues Reduction and Improbation against Sir Robert Maxwel
of Orchartoun, of all Rights of the said Estate, granted by Baldune himself, or
by umquhil John Lord Kirkcudbright, or Thomas Lord Kirkcudbright, or any of
their Predecessors, to whom they may Succeed jure sanguin^s, to the Defender.
It was alleged no Certification of any Writs made by the Predecessors of
John or Thomas, Lords Kirkcudbright, to whom they might succeed, jure
sanguinis, because that can be no active Title to the Pursuer; for if John Lord
Kirkcudbright himself were pursuing a Reduction, he would not have a sufficient
active Title, to Reduce the Writs made by any Person to whom he was appearand
Heir, unless he had been actually Heir: So neither can the Pursuer his
Appryzer, have further interest then Lord John himself: for albeit the Clause
is Relevant passive against the Defenders, to produce all Writs made to them,
or to their Predecessors, to whom they may succeed, jure sanguinis, because
Reductions and Declarators are Competent against appearand Heirs, without any
Charge to Enter Heir: Yet they are not competent to appearand Heirs, till they
be actually Entered. It was answered, that the Pursuer being publicly Infeft,
has good interest to call for all Writs that may burden the Land, to the effect
he may improve the same, as an impediment hindering his Infeftment: But
specially an Appryzer who has not his Authors Rights, and that this has been
always the style of the general Clause in Improbations.

The Lords found the Defense Relevant, and would grant Certification against no
Writs, but such as were granted by person, whose Infeftments and Retours should
be produced before Extract.

The Defender further alleged, no Certification against any Rights made by
Thomas or John Lords Kirkcudbright, to the Defender, because no person was
called to Represent them: Whereas it is known that George, Lord John's Nevoy,
is both appearand Heir-male and of Line, and that this has been the common
Defense always Sustained. The Pursuer answered, that the only ground of this
Defense, is when Defenders have Warrandice from their Authors; and therefore
the Pursuer ought to call their Authors, that their Rights in^erring Warrandice
upon them, may not be Reduced, they not being heard: But here the Defender
produces no Right from Lord John, or Lord Thomas, and so the alleadgeance is
not Relevant against the Production, but only in case such Rights be produced,
it will be Relevant, when the Pursuer insists to Reduce the Writs produced.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and reserved the same, if any Right should be
produced by the Defender, bearing Warrandice.

Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun. Eodem die.
THe Lord of Milntoun having insisted in an Improbature against the Lady
Milntoun, for annulling a Decree of Divorce, obtained at her instance against
John Maxwel her Husband, the Relevancy whereof was Discust upon the 31. day of
January 1671. and only the manner of Probation of the Corruption of Witnesses,
by prompting them how to Depone, or by promising, or giving them Bribes, or any
good Deed to Depone, more than their ordinar Charges, remained undiscust. It
was alleged, that such Reprobators were only probable by Writ, or Oath of the
Party adducer of the Witnesses, post sententiam latam, for Reprobators upon
Corruption, albeit they might be proven before Sentence, by Witnesses above
exception as to giving of Bribes, which was a palpable Fact, yet not then, by
prompting, or promising, or any words emitted, which are only probable by the
Witnesses adduced, or by the Oath of the Adducer: Neither in that case, if the
Witnesses adduced be above all exception, can Witnesses be adduced against
them, but only their own Oath, or Oath of the Party: So that any Party that
quarrels VVitnesses by Reprobators, ought to do the same after they are
adduced* and before Sentence; but if Sentence be once pronunced, and Extracted,
it is res judicata, quaepro veritate habetur: And if Reprobators upon
corruption, be used after the Sentence, upon Corruption; the same can only be
probable by the Oath of the Adducer: And neither by the Oath of the VVitnesses
adduced, who cannot annull their own Testimony, post jus quaesitum parti, nor
by other VVitnesses: and if it were otherwise, the greatest inconveniences
would follow: for then the Sentence and Securities of the people, founded
thereon, might for forty years space be quarrelled upon pretense of
corruption, and singular Successors acquiring bona fide, might be outed of
their Rights: As also, there shall be no Termination of Process; for as the
first Sentence may be Canvelled by Reprobators against the Testimonies,
whereupon it proceeded: so may the second be Canvelled in the same manner by a
second Reprobator, and so without end. And seeing the Law of this Kingdom has
been so jealous of Probation by Witnesses, that it has not allowed sums above
100. pounds to be proven thereby: So Witnesses should not be admitted in
Reprobators, especially after Sentence. It was answered, that Reprobators being
a necessar remeed against the Partiality and Corruption of Witnesses: and the
question being only, the manner of Probation, by the Law of God and all
Nations, Witnesses are the general mean of Probation, and so ought to take
place in all Cases, where Law or Custom has not restricted the same, and it
cannot be pretended, that ever there was one Decision of the Lords finding
Reprobators only probable scripto vel juramento: And it being acknowledged,
that Witnesses are competent, ante sententiam, there is neither Law nor Reason
to refuse the same, post sententiam, especially with us, where the Names of the
Witnesses are never known till they be produced, neither is their Testimonies
published, or ever known before Sentence: So that the other Party can have no
interest to quarrel their Testimonies, or know them before Sentence, and so
Reprobators shall never be effectual, unless proven by the Oath of the Party,
that has Corrupted them, which is as good as absolutely to refuse Reprobators;
for it cannot be imagined that a Party will Corrupt Witnesses, and not resolve
to deny it upon Oath. And as ^o the inconvenience to singular Successors, the
Oath of the Author may be as hazardous to them as Witnesses: and if the
acquirer of the Sentence be denuded, if in that Case, even their Oath be not
receivable, it is easy to Evacuat all Reprobators. And as for the
inconvenience of perpetuating Processes, that holds, whether Witnesses be
receivable in Reprobators before Sentence or after, and if admitting of
Witnesses be so qualified, that it be only when the Witnesses in the first
Sentence, are not above Exception, and the Witnesses in the Reprobators above
all exception, and that it be in a palpable Fact of receiving Bribes, and
recently only after Sentence, and with a liberty to the Obtainer of the
Sentence, to astruct the same by other Witnesses, or Evidences, as in
Improbations; for Reprobator is a kind of Improbation, there can be no hazard
of multiplying Reprobators, but this inconvenience, if it were Relevant, would
not only take away all Reprobators, but all Reductions, for the Decree
Reductive may be quarrelled by a second Reduction, and that by a third, and so
without end. But the inconvenience on the other hand is far greater, that all
Parties will be sure to Corrupt VVitnesses, if they do but resolve not to
confess it, and VVitnesses will be easy to be Corrupted, being secured against
all Redargution: And whereas it is pretended, that Witnesses with us prove not
above 100. pounds, that is only where Writ may, and uses to be adhibite, in
paenam negligentium: But otherwise VVitnesses are adhibite in the greatest
matters, as Improbation of Writs, Probation of Tenors, Extortion,
Circumvention, Spuilzies, Ejections, and Intromissions of whatsomever kind or
quantity.

The Lords found Reprobators upon Corruption, and prompting of VVitnesses, only
probable scripto vel juramento, after Sentence, this was contrair the opinion
of many of the Lords, and was stoped till a further hearing at the Bar.

Earl of Hume contra The Lord of Rislaw. July 18. 1671.
THe Kirk of Fogo having been a Kirk of the Abbacy of Kelso, when the same was
Erected; this Kirk was reserved in favors of the Earl of Hume, and Disponed to
his Predecessors, whereupon he pursues the Lord of Rislaw for the Teinds of
his Lands, as a part of the Teinds of Fogo, who alleged absolvitor, because
his Predecessors obtained Tack of their Teinds from the Minister of Fogo, as
Parson thereof, which Tack, though it be now expyred, yet he bruiks, per
tacitam reloca^ionem. The Pursuer Replied, that his tacit Relocation was
interrupted by Inhibitions produced. The Defender answered, that the
Inhibitions were only at the instance of the Earl of Hume, who was never in
Possession of his Teinds, whose Right he neither knew, nor was obliged to know,
and the Earl ought to have used Declarator against the Defender, and the Parson
of Fogo his Author* which was the only habile way, and not the Inhition.

The Lords Sustained the Process upon the Inhibition, and restricted the
Spuilzie to wrongous Intromission, unless the Defender could propone upon a
Right in the Person of himself, or his Author, that could either simply exclude
the Earls Right, or at least give the Defender* or his Author the benefit of a
possessory Judgment, and put the Earl to Reduction or Declarator.

VVhereupon the Defender alleged, that the Parson of Fogo was presented by
the King, as Parson of Fogo, and did so bruik by the space of thirteen years,
which was sufficient to Defend him, in judicio possessorio. It was Replied,
First, That the Minister cannot pretend the benefit of a possessory Judgment,
because his Possession was not peaceable, in so far as it was within the
thirteen years, it was interrupted by the Pursuers Inhibitions. The Defender
answered, that he offered to prove thirteen years Possession, at least seven
years peaceable Possession, before any Inhibition, which is sufficient; for as
thirteen years Possession makes a presumptive Title, decennalis and triennalis
possessor non tenetur docere de titulo: yet where the Defender produces a
Title, viz. a Presentation as Parson, he is in the common Case of a possessory
Judgment upon seven years Possession. The Pursuer further Replied, that albeit
the seven years were peaceable, and sufficient for a possessory Judgment; yet
the Defender cannot maintain his Possession by tacit Relocation, for he having
no positive Right in his Person, his Tack being Expired, he can only maintain
his Possession upon his Authors Right, as Parson, and so can be in no better
Case than his Author, who if he were compearing, not pleading the benefit of a
possessory Judgment, he would be excluded by this Reply, that he had
acknowledged the Earls Right, and taken Assignation from him to the Tack-duty,
due by the Defender, which, though it would not be sufficient after the
Defenders Tack, to exclude the same, if it were not expired, yet it is
sufficient against his tacit Relocation, which can only subsist, while his
Author has Right and Possession, and being but a presumptive continuation of
the Right, it is easily taken away by any Deed of the Author. It was answered,
that tacit Relocation being introduced by Law, was as strong as a Prorogation,
and continuation of the Tack, which could not be prejudged by any posterior
Deed of the Parson.

The Lords found the Defense upon the Parsons Right cled with seven years
peaceable Possession Relevant in judicio possessorio, to defend the Defenders
tacit Relocation, but found the Reply Relevant, that the Parson had accepted
Assignation from the Pursuer, to make the Defender liable for the ordinary
profits, after the Assignation, and after the first Inhibition, but only for
the Tack-duty till the first Inhibition, and found that the tacit Relocation
was not in a like case, as if the Defender had a Tack, or Prorogation.

Andrew Harlaw contra Agnes Hume. July 18. 1671.
ANdrew Harlaw having obtained Decree against Agnes Hume, as Executrix to her
Husband: She Suspends and raises Reduction on this Reason, that the inferior
Judge did wrong in Decerning her, being only Executrix Creditrix, as being
liable for the whole Inventar, because by the Law and Custom of this Kingdom,
Executors Creditors, who Confirm only for obtaining payment of their Debt* are
liable for no more but what they intromet with above the Debt due to them, and
are not liable for further Diligence as other Executors: Yea it was found upon
the 11. of June 1629. observed by Dury, that an Executor having no interest,
was not liable for Diligence, but only to Assign in the Case betwixt Nivin and
Hodge. It was answered, that Executors Creditors are liable for intromission
and omission as other Executors, because they accept an Office, and exclude
others who would be liable for Diligence, and they have no more advantage, but
that they are preferred to others as being Creditors, and may pay themselves in
the first place, and it would be of pernicious consequence, if their negligence
should cause the interest of Children, though Orphants, as well as Creditors to
perish; and therefore the Lords did justly in Anno 1667. in the Case betwixt
Biscuit and Greig, find an Executor Creditor liable for the whole Inventar, both
for Intromission and Omission. It was answered, that it has always been
heretofore holden, that Executors Creditors were not in the case of other
Executors as to Diligence, and that the ordinar Remeed was, that Creditors
might pursue the Executor Creditor, and thereupon would obtain Assignations to
any Debts in the Inventar they pleased, except such as had been uplifted by the
Executor, for their own payment; upon which Assignations they did always pursue
for themselves, so that there was neither Exclusion nor obstacle to the
Creditors, but on the contrair, they got Assignations, without being at the
trouble to Confirm: So that this Confirmation being many years ago, it were
against all Reason to make the Executors Creditors further liable than they
were then esteemed to be, which might also be drawn back against all Executors
Creditors, which are very many.

The Lords having considered the Decision betwixt Biscuit and Greig, that it was
upon a recent Confirmation, and in favors of a Wife for her Provision, out of
whose hands the Executor had recovered the Goods, though she was a privileged
Creditor: They found that this Executor Creditor being long before Confirmed,
was not liable for Diligence, but only for Intromission, and resolved to take
it into consideration, whether Executors Confirming in time coming, should be
liable for Diligence, and to consider the inconvenience on both parts, and to
make an Act of Sederunt thereanent.

Countess of Cassils contra Earl of Roxburgh. Eodem die.
THe Countess of Cassils in her Contract of Marriage with the Lord Ker, being
provided to 5000. pounds, he did stante matrimonio, provide her to an
Annualrent of 10000. merks further during her Lifetime, and upon his Deathbed,
he made two Testaments of one date, by the one he nominate his Father Tutor to
his Children, and left to him the Provisions of his Wife and Children, by the
other he provided his Lady to 5000. pound more than her Contract, and named
Provisions for his Children, but subjoyned a Clause, that if his Father, who
was then in England, returned and made use of the other Testament, that this
Testament should be null* The Earl of Rox^urgh his Father did return, and was
Infeft as Heir to his Son, and did Ratify his Sons Bond of Provision of 10000.
merks, and by his Testament, did expressly mention his Sons former Testament,
and by virtue thereof named Tutors to his Oyes, and by a Bond a^part, gave
different Provisions to them, from these appointed by their Fathers Testament,
and this Earl of Roxburgh being Heir of Tailzie to him, did in his Contract of
Marriage reserve the Pursuers Infeftment of this Annualrent, and did many years
satisfy and take Discharges of the same; and now she pursues the Earl, as
contraverting the payment for some years bygone, and in time coming during her
Life. The Defender alleged absolvitor, because the Pursuer being competently
provided by her Contract of Marriage, this additional Provision was a Donation
betwixt Man and Wife, and so by the Law is Revockable at any time during the
Husbands Life, even upon Deathbed, or by his Testament, not only by a direct
Revocation, but by any thing that might import a change of his mind, and
accordingly he has Revocked the same by his Testament produced, adding only
5000. pounds to his Ladies Provision by her Contract, and albeit thereafter the
late Earl did Ratify and acknowledge this additional Provision, yet therein
they were errore lapsi, not having known of this Testament of the Lord Ker, at
least not having understood that it imported a Revocation of this Provision,
and therefore may justly now Reclaim against it. The Pursuer answered, that
this Testament imported no Revocation, which it did not mention, neither is the
addition of 5000. pounds therein an indirect Revocation, which must ever be by
an inconsistent Deed, but both these conditions are consistent, albeit that by
the Testament it be modo inhabili, and it is very like that the Testator, being
taken with a great Fever, did not remember of this Provision, or added the
other 5000. pounds on this consideration, that the former Provision was only to
take effect, after the Earl of Roxburghs Death; so that the Lord Kers meaning
might probably be to add 5000. pounds during his Fathers Lifetime. 2dly, Though
the Testament could import a Revocation, yet the Testament it self being
Conditional, only to stand in case his Father returned not to Scotland, and
made use of the other Testament of the same date, all the Tenor of it, and this
restricting Clause, is affected with the same Condition, so that if the
Testator had said that he had restricted his Ladies additional Provision to
5000. pounds in case his Father returned not, but in that case left her to his
Fathers provisions, it would be truly a conditional Revocation, which Condition
is purified by the Fathers Return, and providing the Lady by his Ratification
of this Bond of Provision, nor can it be justly alleged, that both this and
that Earl were errore lapsi, seeing the Testament is produced by the Earl
himself, and was never in the Ladies hands, and doubtless it has been advised
by the late Earl ere he Ratified, who was a most provident man, and his
Ratification is dated at the Canongate, ubi fuit copia peritorum, and if
Ratifications should become ineffectual, or if errore lapsus, should be
Relevant upon the ignorance, or mistake of the import of a Writ; Ratifications
should be of no effect, but any ground that might defend the Ratifier before
the Ratification, might annul the same upon pretense that he knew it not: and
therefore errore lapsus is only understood de invincibili errore facti, but
never de ignorantia juris quae neminem excusat.

The Lords found that any Revocation by the Testament was only Conditional, and
became void by the Earls Returning, and making use of the other Testament; and
therefore Repelled the Defense in respect of the Reply, and had no necessity to
determine anent the Confirmation, and Error alleged.

Lindsay of Mount contra Maxwel of Kirkonnel. July 20. 1671.
LIndsay of Mount being Donator to the Waird of the Estate of Kirkonnel, by the
Death of the late Lord, and Minority of this Lord, pursues the Tennents for
Mails and Duties. Compearance is made for the appearand Heir, as having Right
by Disposition from his Grandmother to an Appryzing, led at her Instance
against her Son, and alleged that there could be no Waird, because Kirkonnel
the Kings Vassal was Denuded before his Death, and his Mother as Appryzer was
Infeft. It was answered first, That this Apprizing was upon a Bond granted by
the Defunct to his own Mother, for the behove of his Son, and appearand Heir,
without any onerous Cause, and so was null and simulat, and a fraudful
Contrivance, in prejudice of the King as Superior, of his Casuality of Waird,
and that it was found in the Case of the Lord Colvil, that a Vassal having
married his appearand Heir in lecto, It was found a Fraudulent precipitation in
defraud of the Waird. It was answered, that the alleadgeance was not Relevant,
because there was nothing to hinder the Defunct to have Resigned in favors of
his appearand Heir, without any Cause onerous, or to grant him a Bond that he
might be Infeft upon Appryzing, or to grant such a Bond to any Person to the
Heirs behove, he being in liege poustie, and there can be no presumption of
Fraud, seeing he might have obtained his Son Infeft directly, which the King
refuses in no case, when the Granter is in liege poustie.

The Lords Repelled the Alleadgeance for the Donator, and Sustained the
Appryzing.

The Donator further alleged, that by the Act of Parliament 1661. betwixt
Debtor and Creditor, It is provided, that the Debtor may cause the Appryzer
Restrict himself to as much as will pay his Annualrent, and the Debtor may
bruik the rest during the Legal; and now the Donator is in place of the
Debtor, so that what superplus there is more than will pay the Appryzers
Annualrent* must belong to the Donator. It was answered, that this Clause is
peculiar, and personal to Debitors, and cannot be extended to Donators, who are
not mentioned therein; because Debitors when they crave Restriction, they are
presumed as provident men, to uplift the rest for satisfying the Appryzing, or
their other Debts, or for their Subsistence, and so being introduced wholly in
their favors, it cannot be extended in favors of the Donator to their
prejudice: For if the Appryzer Possess all, the superplus will satisfy the
Appryzing; whereas, if the Donator uplift the Superplus, the Debtor will be
hudgely prejudged, neither the Appryzing, nor any other Debt of his being
satisfied thereby, nor his Heir entertained therewith.

The Lords found that this Clause could not be extended to a Donator, and that
there could not be a Waird, both by the Decease of the Appryzer and Debtor.

The Donator further alleged, that the Appryzing was satisfied by
Intromission within the Legal, which did extinguish the Appryzing, as to all
Effects and Purposes, as if it had never been, and all Parties return to their
Rights, as they were before the Appryzing; and so consequently the Superior,
and his Donator has the Ward Duties, during the appearand Heirs minority, after
the Appryzing is extinct; for the Appryzing being but a Collateral Security,
like an Infeftment for Relief, it is jus resolubile, and does not fully Divest
the Debtor, who needs not be Re-seased, as he would be in the case of a Wodset
holden public, but the Debitors own Infeftment Revives and stands valide, and
the appearand Heir must be Infeft as Heir to the Defunct, which cannot be till
he be legitimae aetatis, after the Ward. It was answered, that the Alleadgeance
is not Relevant, unless the Appryzing had been satisfied in the Defuncts Life,
for then his Infeftment would have Revived: But if any thing remained due, the
appearand Heir has the Right of Reversion as appearand Heir, and Intromission
thereafter cannot Revive the Defuncts Infeftment.

The Lords found that so soon as the Appryzing was extinct, whether before the
Defuncts Death or after, the Ward took effect, and the Donator had Right.

Lord of Birkinbog contra John Grahame of Craigie. Eodem die.
IN a Competition amongst the Creditors of umquhile Sir Robert Dowglass of
Tilliquhilly, a Disposition granted by Sir Robert to Grahame of Craigie, was
called for to be Reduced upon this Reason, that it was granted by Sir Robert
when he was a notorious and known Bankrupt, and fled and was latent, so that by
the Act of Parliament 1621. he could not prefer one Creditor to another, being
in that Condition, for that Act annuls all Dispositions made by Bankrupts,
without a just and necessary cause, and there was no nec^ssity nor Justice for
the Bankrupt to prefer one Creditor to another. It was answered, that unless
there had been legal Diligence at the Pursuers instance, or that the Defenders
Disposition had been without a cause onerous, there is no ground for that Act
to hinder any Debtor, though Bankrupt, to prefer one Creditor to another, for
if he had had the Money, he might have paid any he pleased, and the Cause is
both just and necessary, because he might have been compelled by Law to have
done the same, and there was nothing to hinder the Creditor, but that as he
might have first Appryzed, so he might have taken the first Disposition from
his Debtor. 2dly, The Pursuers Debt was for a Bargain of Victual Sold and
Delivered to the common Debtor, but a Month before the Disposition in
question, when he was alleged to be Bankrupt.

The Lords found the last Alleadgeance Relevant, and Assoilzied from the
Reduction, but did not decide upon the former alleadgeance.

Guthrie contra Mackarstoun. Eodem die.
IN a Competition betwixt an Heir and an Executor, anent the Rent of a Miln,
where the Tacks-mans Entry was at Whitsunday, where the first Terms of payment
of the Rent was at Candlemas, and the second at Whitesunday, the Liferenter
having survived Candlemas, and died before Whitesunday: The question arose, how
far the Executor of the Liferenter had Right, it being alleged, that the
Executor of the Liferenter could only have Right to the one half, the
Liferenter having only survived the first Term as in House Mails.

The Lords found that the legal Terms of a Miln Rent being Whitesunday and
Mertinmas, the Liferenter having survived both the legal Terms, had Right to
the whole years Rent in the same way as in Land Rents, and not to the one Term
as in House Mails.

Sir George Maxwel of Nether Pollock contra Maxwel of Kirkonnel. July 21. 1671.
IN this pursuit related the 11th, of July instant: It was further alleged
for the Defender, that the Pursuer cannot purge his Appryzing, as now being in
the Person of the appearand Heir, by the Act of Parliament 1661 betwixt Debtor
and Creditor, by payment of what truly the appearand Heir paid, because the
express Provision in that Act is, that where ever the appearand Heir of the
Debtor shall acquire Right to expired Apprizings hereafter, which cannot
extend to this case, because the Right to this Apprizing was acquired before
that Act, and because it was not an expired Appryzing, but the Legal then
running. It was answered, that albeit the Disposition of the Appryzing granted
to the appearand Heir, was prior to the Act, yet the Right was purchased
posterior to the Act, for the Disposition could not give Right, but only the
Infeftment following thereupon; for if after that Disposition, any other had
been Infeft upon Appryzing or Disposition by the Defenders Author, that
posterior Infeftment would carry the Right, so that the Author cannot be said
to be divested, or the appearand Heir invested, or stated in the Right, till
his Infeftment, which is after the Act of Parliament. To the second, The
Pursuer answered, that the Defenders Appryzing, albeit it was Redeemable, when
he acquired Right thereto; yet it becoming now irredeemable in his Person; it
cannot be denied but he has acquired Right to an irredeemable Appryzing, albeit
it was not irredeemable when he acquired the Right, yet he has acquired Right
to that Appryzing, that now is irredeemable; for the Extinction of the legal
Reversion, cursu temporis, is a Right accrescing to him, and acquired by him,
and no Heretage to him: and seeing the Words of the Act are capable of this
interpretation, there can be no doubt of the Legislators mind, or that it
should be thus interpret; because otherwise that excellent Provision would be
evacuate, for the appearand Heir would always acquire Right to an Appryzing
before the Legal were expyred, though he should pay the Appryzer the full sum,
and would make no use of it till the Legal were Expyred, and thereby carry the
Right of the whole Estate, though it were of twenty times more value: But the
only Motive of that Act of Parliament being, that albeit the Law gives
Appryzers the Right of all that they Appryze at random, if they be not Redeemed
within the Legal* yet the Appryzer is ashamed to take so great Legal advantage;
and therefore ordinarily compones with the appearand Heir, who being favorable,
makes no Bonds to bruik the whole Estate of his Predecessor, excluding all his
other Creditors: and therefore this Remeed is introduced, which will be
evacuate, if the Act of Parliament be not thus interpret, and that
interpretation should be ever followed, which is according to Equity, and
whereby the Statute may stand, and not be eluded. The Defender answered, that
this Statute being Correctory of the Common Law, is strictly to be interpret,
and not to be extended: and the Acquisition of Rights being ever interpret from
the Disposition, and not from the Infeftment thereon, multo magis, should it be
so interpret in this case, And as to that part thereof anent the Expyring of
the Appryzing, the Pursuers Interpretation is not only constrained, but
inconsistent with Justice, for ubi subest Remedium ordinarium non est
recurrendum ad medium extraordinarium, for if the appearand Heir acquire Right
to an Appryzing unexpyred, the Reason and Motive of the Statute ceases, for
both the Debtor and Con-creditors may Redeem from the appearand Heir, and can
pretend no necessity of extraordinary Remeed, especially if the appearand Heirs
Right be not latent, but public by Infeftment.

The Lords found that the appearand Heirs Right being only become Real by
Infeftment after the Act of Parliament, that it was then to be understood to be
acquired, when the Author was Denuded and the appearand Heir Invested, so that
no posterior Right from his Author could Exclude him: And found also, that
albeit the appearand Heirs Right were during the Legal, yet if it stood in his
Person till the Legal were expyred, that the same fell within the Act of
Parliament, and found it Redeemable by what the appearand Heir truly paid
within ten years, to be counted from the Date of the acquiring of the Right,
conform to the words of the Act, and not from the time the Appryzing became
expyred thereafter.

Scot of Hassendene contra The Duchess of Buccleugh. Eodem die.
UMquhil Scot of Hassendene having no Children, Disponed his Estate to
Buccleugh his Chief, who granted a Back-bond of the same Date, bearing the
Disposition to have been granted upon the ground foresaid, and obliges himself
and his Heirs, that in case Hassendene should have Heirs of his Body to succeed
him, that he should denude in favors of these Heirs: and now his Son and Heir
born thereafter, pursues the Duchess to Denude, who alleged Absolvitor,
because the Back-bond being now fourscore years since, is long ago Expyred. It
was answered, that albeit the Date be so long since, yet the Prescription runs
not from the date, but from the Death of the Pursuers Father, which is within
forty years, for the Pursuer could not be his Heir before he was Dead; and the
Back-bond bears, if Hassendene had Heirs to succeed to him. It was answered,
that Heirs oftimes were interpret, Bairns that might be Heirs; and if this
Pursuer had pursued in his Fathers Life, he could not have been justly
excluded, because his Father was not Dead, and he actually Heir, and so valebat
agere, in his Fathers Life. It was answered, that although in some favorable
Cases, Heirs be interpret to be Bairns that might be Heirs; yet in odiosis, it
is never so to be interpret, and there is nothing more odious, than to take
away the Pursuers Inheritance, freely Disponed to Buccleugh by his Father, in
case he had no Children upon Prescription, by such an extensive interpretation
of the Clause. 2dly, If he had pursued in his Fathers Life, he might have been
justly Excluded, because if he had happened to die without issue, before his
Father Buccleugh had unquestionable Right, and so during his Fathers Life, he
could not be compelled to Denude.

The Lords found that the Prescription did only run from the Death of the
Father, and that this Pursuer could not have effectually pursued in his Fathers
Lifetime.

Blair of Bethaick contra Blair of Denhead. July 22. 1671.
PAtrick Blair of Bethaick as principal, and Patrick Blair of Ardblair as
Cautioner, granted Bond to Iean Blair, and failing of her by Decease, to her
Children equally amongst them, for the sum of 2550. m^rks, upon 5th of May
1624. there were five years Annualrent resting at the Death of the said Iean
Blair, and now Captain Guthry her Executor pursues the Representatives of the
Cautioner for payment thereof, who allege Absolvitor, because the last of
these Annualrents being due in Anno 1630. There is forty years run before this
pursuit, or any other Diligence, and so the Bond it self is Prescribed, and
specially these years Annualrents. The Pursuer Rep^yed, that the Prescription
was interrupted, in so far as a part of the Principal Sum was paid within the
years of Prescription. It was answered for the Defender, that the payment being
mode to the Daughters of the principal Sum, it could have no effect as to the
Annualrents preceding Iean Blairs Death, which belonged not to her Daughters,
as persons Substitute in the Bond, but to her Executors, so that the Bond might
well be preserved, as to the principal Sum, and yet prescribe as to the
Annualrents, these being two several Right, and stated in several Persons. It
was answered, That the Interruption by payment was sufficient for preserving
both Principal and Annual, for Prescription being odious, any Deed by which the
Debtor and Creditor acknowledge the Right within the forty years, is
sufficient, not only as to the interest of the particular Actors, but as to all
others who have interest in the same Right, as payment of any part of the
Annualrent by one Person, preserves the whole Right against all the Cautioners
and Co-principals, though they neither paid, nor were pursued within forty
years, so payment of any part of the Principal, must in the same manner
preserve the Right of the Bond, as to all Annualrents, to whomsoever they
belong, if they be not forty years before that Interruption, by payment of a
part of the principal.

Which the Lords found Relevant. This was stopped on the Lords own
consideration, without a B^ll from the Parties, because by common Custom,
though Annual had been constantly paid for forty years, yet all preceding
prescribed, whereupon it was contrarily Decerned thereafter, February 7. 1672.

Alice Miller contra Bothwel of Glencorse. Eodem die.
ALice Miller pursues Improbation of a Minute of a Tack betwixt her and
Glencorse who compeared and abode by the verity of the Tack, and the Writer and
Witnesses of the Tack being Examined upon Oath, did Depone that they did not
see Alice Miller Subscribe, and one of them Deponing that he had Subscribed at
Glencorses instigation, who told him that he had caused set to Alice Millers
Name, only one Witness who was Writer, and was Glencorse his Brother Deponed
that he saw the said Alice Miller Subscribe with her own hand.

The Lords having this Day Advised the Cause, found that the Witnesses did not
abide by the verity of the Subscription of the said Alice Miller, and did
therefore improve the Minute, but found it not proven who was the Forger of the
said Alice Millers Subscription.

Captain Guthrie contra The Lord of Mccairstoun. July 25. 1671.
CAptain Guthrie having Married Dame Margaret Scot, and she dying in Possession
of the Lands of Mannehill, Labored by her Husband and her in the Month of
April, Mccairstoun as Heretor of the Land, craves the Rent of the Land for that
year, in respect the Liferenter neither lived till the first Legal Term, which
is Whitesunday, nor till Martinmasse. It was answered, that by immemorial
Custom, Liferenters have Right to the Cropped of Lands Sowed by themselves,
whether they attain to the Term of Whi^esunday or not, neither were they ever
found liable for any Duty therefore.

Which the Lords Sustained.

Robert Baillie contra Mr. William Baillie. July 27. 1671.
THe Lord of Lamingtoun having made a Tailzie of his Estate wherein William
Baillie eldest Son to his Deceased eldest Son, is in the first place, and to
him is Substitute Robert Baillie, Lamingtouns second Son, and the Heirs of his
Body, reserving to the said Robert his Liferent, from the Fee of his Heirs, in
case they succeed, and failzying of Roberts Heirs, to Master William Baillie,
Lamingtouns Brother Son, after Lamingtouns Death there is a Contract betwixt
this Lamingtoun and Mr. William Baillie on the one part, and Robert on the
other, by which Lamingtoun obliges himself to pay to Robert, the sum of six
hundredth merks during his Life, and Robert Renunces and Dispones to Lamingtoun
his portion natural, and Bairns part of Gear, and all Bonds and Provisions made
to him by his Father, and all Right he has to the Estate of Lamingtoun, or any
part thereof, and that in favors of this Lamingtoun, and his Goodsires Heirs
males, contained in his Procutry of Resignation. Robert Baillie raises a
Declarator against Lamingtoun and Mr. William Baillie, for Declaring that this
Contract could not be extended to exclude him or his Heirs from the Right of
Tailzie in the Estate of Lamingtoun, failzying of this Lord and his Heirs, and
that it could only be extended to any present Right Robert had to the Estate of
Lamingtoun, but to no future Right, or hope of Succession, seeing there is no
mention either of Tailzie or Succession in the Contract. It was alleged
Absolvitor, because Robert getting 600. Merks yearly, he can instruct no Cause
for it but this Renunciation, which must necessarly be so interpret, as to have
effect, and so if it extend not to exclude him from the Tailzie, it had neither
a Cause for granting the six hundredth merks, nor any effect thereon. It was
answered, that Robert being a Son of the Family, and Renuncing his Portion
natural, it was a sufficient Cause, and though there were no Cause, such
general Renunciations could never be extended to future Rights, or hopes of
Succession, unless the sum had been expressed.

Which the Lords found Relevant, and Declared accordingly.

Sir John Keith contra Sir George Iohnstoun. July 28. 1671.
THe Estate of Caskiben being Appryzed by Doctor Guil, Sir George Iohnstoun the
appearand Heir, acquired Right to the Appryzing, in the Person of Phillorth,
who by a Missive Letter, acknowledged the Trust, upon which Letter, Sir George
raised Action against Phillorth, to count for his intromission, and Denude
himself, and upon the Dependence, raised Inhibition, yet Phillorth sold the
Estate to Sir John Keith, who to clear himself of the Inhibition, raised a
Declarator that the Inhibition was null, and that his Estate was free of any
burden thereof, because it wanted this essential Solemnity, that the Execution
against Phillorth did not bear a Copy to be delivered, and that the Executions
being so Registrat, he being a Purchaser for a just price; and seeing no valid
Inhibition upon Record, he ought not to be Burdened therewith. The Defender
alleged Absolvitor: Because, First, The delivering of a Copy was no Essential
Solemnity, neither does any Law or Statute ordain the same: much less any Law
declaring Executions void for want thereof: and albeit it be the common Style,
yet every thing in the Style is not necessary; for if the Messenger should have
read the Letters, and showen them to the Party, he could not say, but that he
was both Certiorat and Charged not to Dispone. 2dly, The Executions bear, that
Phillorth was Inhibit, personally apprehended. 3dly, The Inhibition comprehends
both a Prohibition to the Party Inhibit, and to all the Leidges at the Market
Cross, at which, the Execution bears a Copy was affixed, so that whatever
defect might be pretended as to Phillorth, this Pursuer and all the Leidges
were Inhibite to block or buy from him, so that the Pursuer has acted against
the Prohibition of the Letters, and cannot pretend that he purchased bona fide,
being so publicly Inhibit, and the Inhibition put in Record, he neither should
nor did adventure to purchase, without special warrandice, to which he may
recur. 4thly, Such Solemnities when omitted may be supplied; for there is
nothing more ordinar than in Summons to add any thing defective in the
Executions, and abide by the truth thereof, and many times these Solemnities
are presumed done, though not expressed, as a Seasing of a Miln was Sustained,
though it bear not Delivery of Clap and Happer; yet bearing a general with all
Solemnities requisite, it was Sustained: and a Seasine of Land, though it bear
not Delivery of Earth and Stone, seeing it bear Actual, Real and Corporal
Possession, and the Clause ^acta erant hac super solo etc. ut moris est: Yea,
in other Solemnities which the Law expressly requires as three ^las^s in the
Executions of Horning, and six knocks, and the affixing of a Stamp, have all
been admitted by the Lords to be supplied, by proving that they were truly
done, though not expressed in the Execution: Though Horning be odious and penal,
inferring the loss of Movables and Liferent; therefore it ought much more to
be supplied in the case of an Inhibition, which is much more favorable to
preserve the Croditors Debt, and here the Messenger has added to the
Execution, that a Copy was Delivered, and Subscribed the same on the Margent,
and it is offered to be proven by the Witnesses in the Execution, that it was
truly so done. The Pursuer answered, that there was nothing more essential in
an Execution, than delivering of a Copy, for showing or Reading of Letters was
no Charge, but the delivering of the Copy was in effect the Charge; and albeit
Executions which require no Registration, and may be perfited by the Executor,
at any time may be amended as to what was truly done; Yet where Executions must
necessarlie be Registrate within such a time, else they are null, after the
Registration the Messenger is functus officio, and his assertion has no Faith:
and seeing the giving of a Copy is essential, and if it be omitted, would annul
the Execution; so after Registration it cannot be supplied, because in so far
the Execution is null, not being Registrate, debito tempore, for as the whole
Execution would be null for want of Registration, so is any essential part: and
whatever the Lords has supplied in Hornings, yet they did always bear, that
the same was lawfully done according to the Custom in such cases; and this
Execution does not so much as bear that Phillorth was lawfully Inhibite, but
only according to the Command of the Letters which do not express any
Solemnity: and it has been found by the Lords, that a Horning being
Registrate, and not bearing a Copy Delivered, it was found null; because that
part was not in the Register, nor was it admitted to be supplied any way, but
that it were proven by the Oath of the Keeper of the Register, that that Clause
was upon the Margent of the Execution, when it was presented to the
Registister, and was only neglected to be insert by him, which shows how
necessar^ a Solemnity the Lords have accounted the giving of a Copy, and
Registrating thereof: And if Solemnities of this kind, be by Sentence passed
over, it will not only encourage Messengers to neglect all accustomed
Solemnities, but course of time may incroach on all other Solemnities; whereas,
if this be found necessar, none will ever hereafter omit it, or any other
necessar Solemnity.

The Lords found the Inhibition null, and that the Delivering of a Copy was a
necessar Solemnity, which not being contained in the Register, they would not
admit the same to be supplied by Probation, in prejudice of a singular
Successor, Acquiring for a just price.

Hadden contra The Lord of Glenegies. Eodem die.
HAdden being Donator to the Marriage of the Lord of Glenegies, pursues
Declarator for the avail thereof. The Defender alleged Absolvitor, because by
an Act of Parliament 1640. It was Declared, That whosoever was killed in the
present Service, their Waird and Marriage should not fall, Ita est, Glenegies
was killed during the Troubles, at the Battle of Dumbar. It was Replied, that
the present Troubles could not extend further than to the Pacification, Anno
1641. After which there was peace till the end of the year, 1643. 2dly, The
Parliament 1640. and all the Acts thereof are Rescinded. It was Duplyed, That
the Troubles were the same, being still for the same Cause, and that the
Rescissory Act contained a salvo of all private Rights Acquired by these
Rescinded Acts. It was answered, that this was a public Law, and the salvo was
only of particular concessions by Parliament to private Parties.

The Lords found that the Act 1640. reached no further than the Pacification,
by which the Troubles then present were Terminate. The Lords Demured in this
case upon remembrance of a Process before them, at the instance of the Heirs of
Sir Thomas Nicolson, against the Heirs of the Lord of Streichen, upon the Gift
of Streichens Waird, to Sir Thomas, who Died the time of the War, being
Prisoner by occasion of the War, and after Pacification, that they might have
seen what they had done in that Case, but did not get the Practicque, and the
Parties being agreed, they Decided in manner foresaid, wherein this was not
proponed nor considered, that the foresaid Act was always esteemed, an
Exemption after the Pacification, during the whole Troubles, and no Waird for
Marriage was found due that time, though many fell during the War, and if it
had not been so esteemed, the same Motives that caused the first Act to be made
in Anno 1640. would have moved the renewing thereof after the Pacification: and
no doubt the King and Parliament Anno 1650. before Dumbar would have renewed
the same for encouragement, in so dangerous a War, if it had not been commonly
thought that the first Act stood unexpired.

Murray contra The Earl of Southesk, and other Appryzers of the Estate of
Powburn. Eodem die.
JAmes Murray having Right to an Appryzing of the Estate of Sir James Keith of
Powburn, led at the instance of Mr. Thomas Lundie, pursues thereupon for Mails
and Duties. Compearance was made for the Earl of Southesk, and posterior
Apprizers after Year and Day, who alleged that by the Act of Parliament 1661.
betwixt Debtor and Creditor. It is provided that the Lords of Session, at the
desire of the Debitors, may ordain Appryzers to restrict their Possession to as
much as will pay the Annualrent, the Debtor Ratifying their Possession, and
now the Posterior Appryzers having Appryzed omne jus, that was in the Debtor,
craved that the first Appryzer might Restrict himself to his Annualrent, and
they preferred to the rest of the Duties. It was answered that this was a
personal and peculiar privilege in favors of the Debtor, that he might not
unnecessarly be put from his Possession, and which he might make use of against
all the Appryzers, if there were a superplus above the Annualrents, and it is
upon condition that the Debtor Ratify the Appryzers Possession, which is not
competent to a posterior Appryzer, in whose favor this Clause was never
meaned: But there is a special Clause for posterior Appryzers, being within
year and day, to come in pari passu: neither can the posterior Appryzers have
any interest, because the superplus will satisfy the first Appryzing pro tanto.

The Lords found the foresaid privilege peculiar to the Debtor; but found
that the first Appryzer, seeing he excluded the rest, behoved to count from this
time as if he had Possessed the whole.

The End of the first Part of the Decisions of the Lords of Session:
AN INDEX Of the Pursuers and Defenders Names, for the usual and easier Citing
of the Lords Decisions.
ABercrombie contra Andersons, 15 November. 1666 Lord Abercrombie con. Lord
Newark, 17 December. 1667 Achinleck con. Mccleud, 7 Feb. 1662 Achinleck con. L.
Wedderburn, 16 January, 1663 Achinleck con. Williamson and Gillespie, 18
December. 1667 K. Advocat con. Craw, 19 Feb. 1669 K. Advocat con. E. of Mortoun,
25 Feb. 1669 Agnew con. Tennents of Dronlaw. 30 June, 1669 Aikenhead con.
Aikenhead, 25 Feb. 1663 Aikman con. 14 June, 1665 E. Airlie con. Mcintosh, 8
July, 1664 Aitcheson con. La. Mccleud, 7 Feb. 1662 Aitoun con. Watt, 26 July,
1662 L. Aitoun con. James Fairie, 29 January, 1668 Allan con. Paterson, 17
June, 1663 Allan con. Colliar, 25 June, 1664 Allan con. Fairie, 2 July, 1667
Capt. Allan con. Parkman, 9 July, 1668 Alexander con. L. Clackmannan. 9 July,
1668 Alexander con. Lo. Saltoun, 20 June, 1671 Lo. Almond con. Dalmahoy, 25
Feb. 1668 Anderson and Elphingstoun con. Wachop, 22 July, 1662 Anderson and
Provon con. the Town of Edinburgh, 31 January, 1665 Anderson con. Cunninghame,
7 December. 1665 Anderson con. Cunninghame, 9 June, 1666 Andrew con. Carss. 25
November. 1668 E. Annandale con. Young and others, 24 Feb. 1669 Antrobus con.
Anderson, 13 June, 1667 L. Aplegirth con. Lockerby, 14 Feb. 1671 Arbuthnet con.
Fiddes, 25 Feb. 1662 Arbuthnet con. Keith, 23 June, 1666 Archbishop and
Presbytery of St. Andrews contra George Pittillo, 6 July, 1670 E. Argile con.
Mcdowgals, 14 July, 1665 E. Argile con. Campbel, 24 January, 1666 E. Argile
con. Campbels, 25 January, 1666 E. Argile con. Campbel, 15 January, 1668 E.
Argile con. Stirling, 9 December. 1668 E. Argile con. Mcnaughtouns* 15 Feb. 1671
E. Argile con. Vassals, 30 June, 1669 Armor con. Lands, 21. Feb. 1671 Arnold
of Barncaple, con. Gordon of Holme, 23 Feb. 1671 Arnot con. Arnot, 11 January,
1665 E. Athole con. Scot* 20 December. 1664 E. Athole con. Robertson of Strowan,
19 January, 1669
BAilie con. Town of Inuerness, 11 December. 1661 B^ilie con. Henderson, 1 July,
1662 Bailie of Regallty of Killimuir con. Burgh of Killimuir, 14 January, 1668
Bailie con. Mr. William Bailie. 27 July, 1671 Bain con. Bailies of Culross, 14
Feb. 1671 Bain con. L. Striechen, 24 January, 1663 Baird con. Magistrates of
Elgin, 25 January, 1665 Baird con. Baird, 9 January. 1662 D. Balfour and his
Spouse con. Wood, 8 January, 1670 L. Balfour con. Mr. William Douglas, 4 July,
1671 Lady Ballagan con. Lo. Drumlanrig, 23 June, 1671 Balmano's Daughter con.
(...) the Helr, 12 November, 1664 Lo. Balmerino con. the Town of Edinburgh, 25
November, 1662 Lo. Balmerino con. Creditors of Sir William Dick, 14 July, 1664
Lo. Balmerino Supplicant, 7 January, 1669 Creditors of Balmerino, and Cowper
Supplicant, 16 Feb. 1669 Lo. Balmerino con. Hamiltoun of Little-Prestoun, 22
June, 1671 Creditors of Balmerino con. Lady Cowper, 28 June, 1671 L. Balnagoun
con. Dingwall, 30 July, 1662 L. Balnagoun con. Mckenzie, 28 January, 1663 Lo.
Balvaird con. the Creditors of Annandale, 21 January, 1662 Barclay con. L.
Craigivar, 10 January, 1662 Barclay con. Barclay, 6 July, 1669 Barclay con.
Barclay, 20 July, 1669 Barns con. L. Aplegirth, 1 January, 1662 Barns con.
Young, 12 December. 1665 Baxters of Edinburgh con. the Heretors of East-Lothian,
20 Feb. 1663 Baxters in Cannongate, 21 November. 1665 Bead-men of the Magdalen
Chapel, con. Drysdale, 30 June, 1671 Beatoun of Bandoch, con. Ogilvie of
Mantoun, 13 July. 1670 E. Bedford con. Lo. Balmerino, 18 Feb. 1662 E. Bedford
con. L. Balmerino, 29 November. 1661 Beg con. Nicolson, 14 January, 1663 Beg con.
Beg, 4 Feb. 1665 Beg con. Be^, 5 December. 1665 Beg con. Nicol, 22 June, 1666
Bells con. Wilkie, 12 Feb, 1662 Bell of Belford con. the Lady Rutherford, 27
January, 1669 Lairds of Beerfoord and Beanstoun, con. Lo. Kingstou^, 27
January, 1665 Mayor of Berwick con. L. of Haining, 1 July, 1661 Major Bigger
con. Cunninghame of D^nkeith, 15 July, 1670 Binning con. Binning, 28 January,
1668 Birkinbeg con. John Graham of Craigit, 20 July, 1671 Birnie con.
Henderson, 18 January, 1668 Birsbane con. Monteith, 24 July, 1662 Birsh con.
Douglas, 18 Feb. 1663 Bishop of Isles con. Hamiltoun, 13 December. 1664 Bishop of
Dumblaine con. E. Cassils, 15 February, 1665 Bishop of Isles con. the Fishers
of Greenock, 24 November. 1665 Archbishop of Glasgow con. Mr. James Logan, 6.
Feb. 1666 Arch^-Bishop of Glasgow, con. Commissar of Glasgow, 14 Feb. 1666
Bishop of Glasgow con. Commissar of Glasgow, 22 Feb. 1666 Black con. Scot, 25
June, 1668 Black con. French, 9 Feb. 1669 Blaikwood con. Purves, 20 November.
1666 Blair con. Anderson, 18 Feb. 1663 Blair of Balgillo con. Bl^ir of Denhead,
3 February, 1671 Blair of Balhead con. Blair of Denhead, 22 July, 1671 Lo.
Blan^yre con. Walkinsh^w, 2 July, 1667 Blomart con. E. Roxburgh, 17 December.
1664 Bones con. Barclay of Iohnstoun, 9 July 1662 Bonnar con. Foulis, 7 Feb.
1662 Capt. Bood con. Strachan, 28 November. 1667 Boog con. Davidson, 9 July, 1668
Lo. Borthwick con. Mr. Mark Ker, 31 January, 1665 Borthwick con. Skeen, 14
July, 1665 Borthwick con. Sk^en, 16 Feb. 1666 Lo* Bor^hwick con. 21 Feb. 1666
Borthwick con. Lo. Borthwick, 14 Feb. 1668 Boswel con. Boswel, 22 November. 1661
Boswel con. the Town of Kirkaldy, 22 July, 1668 Boswel con. the Town of
Kirkaldy, 1 Feb. 1669 Boswel con. Lindsey; 3 Feb. 1669 Bow con. Campbel, 2
July, 1669 Bowers con. Lady Cowper, 16 June, 1671 Boyd con. L. Nithrie, and L.
of Edmondstoun. 13 December. 1661 Boyd of Pinkill con: Tennents of Carsluth, 15
Feb. 1666 Boyd con. Kintore, 4 July 1665 Boyd con. Lauder and Telziefer, 30
Novem. 1665 Boyds con. Boyd of Temple, 6 January, 1670 John Boyd con. He^gh
Sinclar, 17 June 1671 Boil of Ke^h^rn con. Wilkie, 26 January, 1669 Lady Braid
con. E. Kinghorn, 26 January, 1669 Bradie con. L. of Fairnie, June 21. 1665
Bradie con. L. Fairnie, 20 January, 1666 Bredy con. Bredy, 1 July, 1662 Broady
of Lethem, and L. of Rickartoun con. Lo. Kenmure, 1. July, 1671 Brotherstons
con. Ogil ^^d Orrocks, 26 July, 1665 Broun con. L^ferenters of Rossie, 13 Feb.
1662 Broun con. Iohnstoun, 26 Feb. 1662 Broun con. La^sons, 25 June, 1664 Broun
con. Scot, 9 January, 1666 Broun and D^ff con. ^issat, 18 July, 1666 Broun con.
Happiland, 29 January, 1668 Broun con. Iohnstoun, 1. Feb. 1669 Broun con.
Sibbald, 12 Feb. 1669 Bruces con. E. Morto^n, 16 June, 1665 Bruce con. E.
Mortoun, 28 N^vemb. 1665 Bruce con. L. and Lady Stenhops* 20 Feb. 1669 Countess
of Buccleugh con. E. Ta^ras 7. Fe^. 16^2 Duke of Duccleugh con. Parochiners of
22 June, 1671 Children of the E. of Buchan con. the Lady B^^han, 23 Feb. 1666
Buchan con. Taits. 11 Feb. 1669 Buchannan con. Osou^n, 24 July 1661 Lady Burgie
con. Tennents 18 July, 1667 Lord Burly con. Sime 30 January, 1662 Lord Burly
con. Sime, 25. Novem. 1662 Dame Rachel Burnet con. Leapers, 23 December 1665
Bu^net con. Iohnstoun 17 July, 1666 Burnet con. Nasmith, 19 June, 1668 Burnet
con. Swain, 30 June, 166^ Ioachim Burn-master con. Captain Dishingto^n, 29
June, 1671 Lady Bute and her husband con. Sheriff of But^. 5 January, 16^^
Butter con. Gray, 17 Feb. 16^5 con. Brand, 3 January, 1667 con. Edmistoun 6
January, 1665 con. Wilson, 2 January, 16^^ con. John and Hary Rollocks, 1 Fe^.
1666 con. E. Kinghorn, 23 January, 1666 con. He^gh Mcculloch, 29 Feb. 1666 con.
the Sheriff of Inverness 21 Feb. 1666
CAlderwood con. Schaw, 14 Novem. 1668 ^. Callender con. Monro, 20 Feb. 1662
Campbel con. Bryson, 10 January, 1664 Campbel con. Campbel, 22 Feb. 1665
Campbel con. Doctor Beatoun, 23 Novem. 1665 Campbel con. Dowgal, 14 December. 1667
Campbel con. L. Glenorchie, 25 July, 1668 Canham con. Adamsone, 25 June, 1664
Canham con. Adamsone, 7 Novem. 1666 Canna con. 10 July, 1666 Mr. Walter Cant
con. Loch, 27 June, 1665 L. Carberry con. Creditors, 30. January, 1663 Lady
Carnagy con. Lo. Cranburn, 11 January, 1662 La. Carnagy con. Lo. Cranburn, 19
Feb. 1662 La. Carnagy con. Lo. Cranburn, 30 January, 1663 La. Carnagy con. Lo.
Cranburn, 5 Feb. 1663 Countess of Carnwath con. the Earl, 27 Feb. 1667 Cass
con. Mr. John Wat. 18 December. 1666 Cass con. Sir Robert Cunninghame, 26 January,
1671 E. Cassils con. Agnew, 6 January, 1666 E. Cassils con. the Tennents of
Dalmortoun, 11 December. 1666 E. Cassils con. the Sheriff of Galloway, 10 December.
1669 Countess of Cassils con. E. Cassils 22 Feb. 1670 Countess of Cassils con.
the E. Roxburgh, 18 July, 1671 Cathcart con. Mccorquodel and Mirk* 8 Feb. 1670
L. Cesnock con. Lo. Bargainy, 23 December. 1665 Chalmer con. Dalgarno, 27 Feb.
1662 Chalmer con. Lady Tinnel, 24 Novem. 1665 Chalmer con. Bassillie, 30 June,
1666 Chalmer and Gairns con. Colvils, 16 Novem. 1667 Chalmer con. Wood, 27 Feb.
1668 Chapman con. White, 18 January, 1667 Charters con. a Skipper, 13 January
1665 Char^rs con. Parochiners of Currie, 8 Ian. 1670 Charters con. Neilson, 29
July, 1670 Cheap. con. Philip. 19 December. 1666 Cheap con. Philip, 5 January,
1667 Cheap con. the Magistrates of Falkland, 18 June, 1670 Chein con. Chri^^^ 4
July, 1667 Chei^ ^on. Christy 30 June 1668 Chei^ con. (...) 5 December. 16^5
Children of Mo^swal con. Laurie of Maxwel^^^n, 14 Feb. 1662 Children of VVolmet
con. Mr. Mark^^^* 19 Feb. 1662 Children of ^olmet con. Dowg^^s and Danke^^^, 20
Nevem. 1662 Chi^^^me con. Rennies, 6 Feb. 16^8 Chisolme con. Lady Brae, 26
January, 1669 Clappertoun con. L. of Ednem, 11 December. 1662 Clappertoun con. L.
Torsonce, 20 January 1666 Cleland con. Stevinson, 5 Feb. 1669 Clerk con. Clerk
2 December. 1662 Lo. Justice Clerk, con. Rentoun of Lambertoun, 13 Feb. 16^7 Lo.
Ju^^^ce Clerk con. the L. of Lambertoun, 23 November, 1667 L. Justice Clerk
con. Home of Linthil, 28 Feb. 1668 L. Clarkintoun con. L. Corsbie. 3 December.
1664 L. Clerkingtoun con. Stewart, 20. July, 1664 La. Clerkingtoun con. the L.
and the young Lady, 9 January, 1668 Cochran con. 22 Feb. 1668 Cockburn and
Gilles^ie con. Stewart 18 Feb. 1669 M^n^ster of Cockburns-path con.
Parochiners, 7 Feb. 1668 College of St. Andrews Supplicant, 16 July, 1661 Old
College of Aberdeen con. the Town, 13 July, 1669 Colquhoun con. Creditors, 18
January, 1662 Colquhoun con. Watson, 15 Feb. 1668 Colquhoun and Mcnaire con.
Stewart of Ba^scob, 1 July, 1668 Colvil con. Executors of Colvil, 15 July, 1664
Lady Colvil con. Lo. Colvil, 14 December, 1664 Colvil con. Lo. Balmerino, 6 July,
1665 Lo. Colvil con. Town of Culross 27 Feb. 1666 Lo. Colvil con. the Feuars of
Culross, 15 December, 1666 Commissars of St. Andrews con. the L. of Bussie, 4
July, 1665 Captain Conningsbi^ con. Captain Mastertoun, 7 Feb. 1668
Corstorphine con. Martines, 21 December. 1666 Couan con. Young and Reid, 9 Feb.
1669 Lo. Couper con. L. Pitsligo, 3 July, 1662 Town of Couper con. Kinocher, 24
June, 1664 Lady Craig con. L. Lour, 7 December. 1664 La. Craigcasse con. Neilson,
12 Novem. 1664 Cranstoun con. Pringle, 13. December. 1665 Cranstoun con.
Wilkieson, 10 July, 1666 Cranstoun con. Wilkieson, 20 Feb. 1667 Crawfoord con.
E. Murray, 8 Feb. 1662 Crawfoord con. Prestoun Grange, 15 July, 1664 Crawfoord
con. Auchinleck, 17 January 1666 Crawfoord con. Duncan, 7 June, 1666 Crawfoord
con. the Town of Edinburgh, 31 July, 1666 E. Crawfoord con. Rigg, 21 July, 1669
Crawfoord con. Anderson, 24 July, 1669 Crawfoord con. Halliburton 20 June, 1671
Cred^tors of Kinglassi^, 26 and 27 Feb. 1662 Creditors of James Masson, 30
Novem. 1665 Creditors of Andrew Bryson, 14 Novem. 1662 Creditors of the Lady
Couper and Balme^ino con. Lady Couper, 25 Novem. 1669 Crichton and her spouse
con. Maxwel of Kirk-house, 27 January 1666 Daughters of Crichton of
Crawfoordstoun con. Broun of Eglistoun, 22 January 1669 Cruckshank con.
Cruckshank, 16 June, 1665 L. Culteraus con: Chanman, 16 Novem. 1667 Cumming
con: Lumsden, 4 July, 1667 Cunninghame con: Dalmahoy, 1 Feb* 1662 Cunninghame
con. the Duke of Hamiltoun, 5 December. 1665 Cunninghame con: Lyel, 1 Feb, 166^
Cunninghame con: L. Robertland, 4 July, 166^
DAes con. K^le 19 July, 1667 Dallas con. Frazer of ^nnerallochie, 31 January,
1665 Dalmahoy con: Hamiltoun, 6 December. 16^^ Min^ster of Dal^ymple con. E.
Cassills, 27 June, 166^ Deanes con. Bothwel, 5 Feb. 16^^ Dennistoun con: S^mple
of Falwood, 16 July. 1669 Mr. David Dewer con: Paterson, 26 (...). 1667 Dick
con: Sir Andr^w Dick, 13 January 16^^ Dick con. Ker, 26 ^une 1668 Dukie con:
Mon^gamery, 14 January, 1662 Mr. Robert Dick^on con: Mr. Ma^k K^r, 21 July,
1665 Dickson con: ^^me, 16 Novem: 1665 Mr. Robert Dickson con. James Graham, 19
January, 1671 Executors of the E. of Di^ltoun con: the Duke of Hamiltoun and
others, 18 July 1667 Dobie con: Lady Stoniehill, 18 December. 1667 Dobie con: Lady
Stoniehill, 28 January, 1668 Dodds con: Scot 16 Feb. 1671 Donaldson con:
Harower, 3 July 1668 Dove con. Campbel, 4 January, 1668 Do^glas con: 22 Novem.
166^ Douglas con: Lindsey, 2 December. 1662 Douglas con: L. Wadderburn. 19 July,
16^4 Dame Elizabeth Dowgla^ and Lockermacus, her ^u^band con: L. Wedderburn, 24
Feb. 166^ Douglas con: Cowan, 29 July, 1665 Mr. James Douglas con: (...) 28
Jun^, 166^ Douglas Lady Wam^rey con. the L. Wam^^^y 22 J^^^ary, 1668 Douglas of
Lumsden con: Douglas. 22 June, 1670 Douglas of K^^head con: his Vessals and
others, 30 January, 1671 Do^ni^ con: Young, 17 Novem: 1666 Lo. Drums^ies con:
Smart, 18 July, 1668 L^dy Drum con. L* Drum. 13 Feb: 1666 Drummond con. Skeen,
19 June, 1662 D^ummo^d con. Campbel, 5 July, 1662 Drummond con. Starling of
Airdoch, 23 Ian, 1669 D^ummond of Rickartoun con. Feuars of Botkennel, 17
January, 1671 Dun con. Duns, 25 Feb. 1666 Dumbar of Hemprig con. Lo. Frazer, 18
Feb, 1663 Dumb^r of Hemprig con. Lo: Frazer, 11 July, 1664 Dumbar con. E:
Dundee, 5 July, 1665 Dumbar con. Lo: Dussus, 14 June, 1666 Sir David Dumbar o^
Baldoon con. Dick and others, 22 Feb. 1671 Sir David Dumbar of Baldoon con. Sir
Robert Maxwel, 14 July, 1671 Duncan con. Town of Arbroth, 17 November, 1668
Dundas con. the Lairds of Ardrosse and Touch, 18 Feb. 1671 Merchants in Dundee
con. Sp^uce an Englishman, 3 November. 1666 Countess of Dundee con. Straitoun, 24
Feb. 1669 L. of Durit con. R^lict and Daughters of umquhil D^rie his Brother, 6
Feb. 1666 Durie con. Gibson, 28 Feb: 1667
ECcles con. Eccles, 7 December. 1664 Edgar con. Edgar, 17 January, 1665 Edgar
con. Colvils 2 December. 1665 Town of Edinburgh con. L. Le^s and Veitch, 8 July,
1664 Town of Edinburgh con. Sir William Thomson, 6 June, 1665 Edmistoun con.
Edmistoun, 4 June, 1662 E. Eglintoun con. L. Cunningham-head, 27 January, 1676
E. Eglintoun con. L: Cunningham-head, 23 June, 1666 Elies con. Ke^th, 15
December. 1665 Eleis con. Cass^e, 24 January 1666 Eleis con. Wishart and Keith,
27 Feb. 1667 Eleis con. Keith, 16 July, 1667 Mr. John Eleis con. Inglistoun, 23
July, 1669 Eleis of South Side con. Carss, 28 June 1670 M^nister of Elgin con.
Parochiners. 30 June, 1670 Elphingstoun con. Murray, 4 Feb. 1662 Elphingstoun
of Selmes con. Lo. Rollo and Niddrie, 1 Feb. 1665 Lo. Elphingstoun con. L. of
Quarrel, 19 Feb. 1669 E. Errol con. the Parochiners of Urie, 16 January, 1663
E. Errol con. Hay of Crimonmagat, 23 Feb. 1667 Executors of Fairlie con.
Parochiners of Leswaid, 5. July, 1662
FAirfowls con. Binning, 4 January, 1666 Fairholme con. Bisset, 18 January,
1662 Fai^ie con. Inglis, June 23, and 24* 1669 Executor of Fairlie con.
Parochiners of 1662 Fairl^e con. Creditors of Sir William Dick, 14 December,
1666 Falconer con. Dowgall, 24 June, 1664 Falconer con. E. Kinghorn, 3 Feb.
1665 Mr. David Falconer con. Sir James Keith, 14 July, 1668 Farquhar con. Lion,
3 December. 1661 Farquhar con. Magistrates of Elgin, 2 July, 1669 Ferguson con.
Ferguson, 23 June, 1663 Ferguson con. Gairdner, 25 June, 1664 Ferguson con.
Stewart of Ashcock, 1665 Ferguson con. Parochiners of Kingarth, 1 Feb. 1671
Fiddes con. Jack* 19 July, 1662 Findlason con. Lo. Cowper, 22 January, 1666
Findlay con. E. Northesk, 25 June, 1670 Procurator-Fiscal of the Commissariot
of Edinburgh con. Thomas Fairholme, 23 June, 1665 Fleming con. Forrester, 17
July, 1661 Fleming con. her Children, 26 July, and 19, 20. of November, 1661
Fleming con. Fleming, 13 Feb. 1663 Fleming con. Gilles, 18 June, 1663 Fleming
con. Fleming, 16 November. 1664 Fleming con. Fleming* 3 July, 1666 Sir John
Fletcher Suppl^cant, 3 Feb. 1665 Forbes con. Innes, 8 January, 1668 Forbes con.
Innes 20 Feb. 1668 Forbes of Watertoun con. Ch^in, 28 June, 1671 Forsyth con.
Patoun, 17 Feb. 1663 Mr. Alexander Foulis and the Lo. of Collingtoun, con.
Tennents and the Lady Collingtoun, 9 Feb. 1667 Fountain and Brown con. Maxwell,
14 July, 1666 Lo. Frazer con. the La^rd of Philorth, 18 and 23 July, 1662
Frazer con. Frazer, 11 Feb. 1663 Frazer con. Frazer, 3 July, 1668 Sir Alexander
Frazer con. Keith, 16 December. 1668 Fullertoun con. Viscount of Kingstoun, 8
January, 1663
GAirdner con. Colvill, 10 July, 1669 Gairns con. Arthur, 19 December. 1667
Gairns con. Sandilands, 12 July, 1671 Galbraith con. Colq^houn, 12 November. 1664
R^^^ct of Galriggs con. Wallac^ of Galriggs, 19 June, 1668 Sir John Gibson con.
Oswald, 13 June, 1668 L. Gight con. Birkinbeg, 12 December. 1661 Town of Glasgow
con. Town of Dambarton, 6 Feb. 1666 Glass con. Hadden, 10 July, 1669 Glen con.
Home, 19 Feb. 1667 L. Glencorss younger con. his Brother and Sisters, 10
Ian^^ry, 1668 Glendinning con. E. Nithsdale, 22 January, 1662 Goldsmiths of
Edinburgh, con. Haliburtoun, 10 December, 1664 Goodla^ con. Nairn, 8 December.
1668 Gordon of Lesmore con. Leith, 10 June, 1663 Gordon con. Frazer, 3 July,
1663 Sir Lodovick Gordon con. Sir John Keith, 31 July, 1666 Gordon con. Sir
Alexander Mc^^lloch, 17 Feb. 1671 Gordon con. Sir Alexander Mc^ulloch, 22 Feb.
1671 Gordon con. L. of Drumm, 22 June, 1671 Grahame con. Ross, 24 January, 1663
Grahame con. Ross, 5 Feb. 1663 Grahame of Hiltoun con. the Heretors of
Clackmannan, 13 July, 1664 Grahame con. Browns, 7 January, 1665 Grahame con.
Bruce and Martine, 7 Feb. 1665 Grahame and Jack con. Brian, 3 January, 1666
Grahame con. Towris, 26 Feb. 1668 Grahame con. L. Stainbyres, 26 Feb. 1670
Grant con. Grant, 15 January, 1662 Grant con. Grant, 24 Feb. 1666 Grant con.
Grant, 11 January, 1668 Gray con. Dalgarno, 7 Feb. 1662 Gray con. Oswald, 28
June, 1662 Creditors of the Lo. Gray con. the Lo. Gray, 27 Feb. 1666 Gray con.
Forbes, 15 June, 1667 Gray con. Howison and Gray, 24 June, 1668 Gray con. Ke^,
23 July, 1669 La. Greenhead con. Lo. Lour, 10 Feb. 1665 Greenlaw con. ^5
January, 1663 Greggs con. Weems, 30 June, 1670 Greirson con. Mcilroy, 13 Feb.
1668 L. Grubbet con. More, 2 July, 1669 Guin con. Mcke^^, 19 July, 1665 Guthrie
con. L. Sornbeg, 18 November. 1664 Guthrie con. L. Mckers^oun, 25 July, 1671
HAdden and Lawder con. Sherswood, 13 June, 1668 Hadden con. Campbel, 25
January, 1670 Hadden con. L. Glenegies, 28 July, 1671 Halliburton con. E.
Roxburgh, 25 June, 1663 Halliburton con. Porteous, 23 November. 1664 Lady
Halliburton con. Creditors of Halliburton, 27 July, 1670 Merchants of Hamburgh
con. Capt. Dishingtoun, 24 Feb. 1668 Duke Hamilton con. Scots, 24 June, 1664
Duke Hamilton con. L. Clackmannan, 14 December. 1665 Duke Hamilton con. Duke
Bucleugh, 24 June, 1666 Duke Hamilton con. L. of Allardyce, 6 December. 166^ Duke
Hamilton con. Maxwel of Mureith, 29 Feb. 1668 Duke Hamilton con. Fewars of the
Kings Property, 14 July, 1669 Duke Hamilton con. Blackwood, 14 and 28 July,
1669 Hamilton con. Rowan, 13 December. 1661 Hamilton con. Mcferling, 28 Feb. 1662
Hamilton con. Hamilton, 21 Feb. 1663 Hamilton con. Mitchel and Keith, 18 June,
1663 Hamilton con. Esdale, 9 July, 1663 Hamilton con. Tennents, 27 July, 1665
Hamilton con. Duke Hamilton and Bishop of Edinburgh, 21 July, 1666 Hamilton
con. 2 January, 1667 Hamilton con. Symontoun, 16 July, 1667 Hamilton con. Lo.
Belhaven, 14 December. 1667 Hamilton con. Hamilton, 7 July, 1668 Hamilton con.
Bain, 15 January, 1669 Hamilton con. Harper, 16 Feb. 1669 Hamilton con.
Hamilton and the Viscount of Frendraught, 22 June, 1669 Lady Lucia Hamilton
con. Lairds of Dunlop, Pitcon, and Creditors of Hay of Mountcastle, 15 Jan.
1670 Lady Lucia Hamilton con. L. of Pitcon and others, 8 July, 1670 Lady Lucia
Hamilton con. Boyd of Pitcon, 15 July; 1670 Executors of Walter Hamilton con.
Executors of Andrew Reid, 20 July, 1670 L. Haining con. the Town of Selkirk.^
15 Feb. 1668 Harlay con. Hume, 18 July, 1671 Harper con. Hume, 14 January, 1662
Harper con. Hamilton, 29 July, 1662 Harper con. Vassals, 25 July 1666 Harrowar
con. Haitly, 13 June, 1667 Hay con. Hume 24 June, 1662 Hay con. Seaton, 28
June, 1662 Hay con. M^rison, 17 Feb. 1663 Hay con. Corstorphin, 19 June, 1663
Hay con. Nicolson, 16 July, 1663 Hay con. Collector of the vacand Stipends, 17
June, 1664 Hay con. Mag^strats of Elgin, 23 November. 1664 Hay con Little^ John,
16 Feb. 1666 Hay con. Mag^strats of Elgin, 12 June, 1666 Hay con. Magistrates of
Elgin, 5 July, 1666 Hay con. Douglas, 10 July, 1666 Hay con. Little-Iohn, 14
December. 1666 Hay of Strouie con. Fe^ars, 22 June, 1667 Hay con. Drummond and
Hepburn, 26 November. 1667 Hay con. Town of Peebles, 20 January, 1669 Hay con.
Town of Peebles, 19 Feb. 1669 Doctor Hay con. Iameson, 8 June, 1670 Hay con.
Magistrates of Elgin, 18 June, 1670 Henrison con. L. Ludwharne, 22 December. 1666
Henryson con. L. Ludwharne, 4 January, 1667 Henryson con. Henryson, 31 January,
1667 Henryson con. Henryson, 14 November. 1667 Henryson con. Birn^e, 27 Feb. 1663
Henryson con. Anderson, 18 November. 1669 Hepburn con. Hamiltoun 12 December. 1661
Hepburn con. Hepburn, 22 January, 1662 Hepburn con. Hepburn, 25 Feb. 1663
Hepburn con. Nisoet, 16 Feb. 1665 Heretors of Don con. Town of Aberdeen, 26
January 1665 Heretors of the Milne of Keithick con. Fewars, 29 June, 1665
Heretors of Don con. Town of Aberdeen, 29 July, 1665 Heretors of Johns-milne
con. Fewars, 9 Feb. 1666 Heriots con. Fleming Messenger, and his Cautioners, 19
January, 1666 Heriot con.^ Town of Edinburgh, 25 June, 1668 Hill con. Maxwel, 5
Feb. 1663 Hill con. Maxwells, 5 December. 1665 Hogg con. Hogg, 2 January, 1667
Hogg and others con. Countess of Hume, 3 July, 1667 Hogg con. Countess of Hume,
10 December. 1667 Hogg con. Countess of Hume, 10 December. 1667 Humes con. Bonnar,
14 December. 1661 Hume con. Pringle, 3 January, 1662 Hume con. 10 June, 1665 Hume
con. the Tennents of Kello and Home, 13 June, 1666 1666 E. of Hume con.
Wodsetters 5 July, 1666 Dame Margaret Hume con. Crawsoord of Kerse, 10 July,
1666 Hume con. Creditors of K^llo, and Hume, 12 December. 1666 Hume con. Tennents
of Kello and Hume, 24 January. 1667 Countess of Hume con. Tennents of Alcambus
and Hogg, 5 Feb. 1667 Hume con. Creditors of Kello, 28 June, 1667 Hume and
others con. Hume, 6 July, 1667 Hume con. Tennents of Kello, 23 July, 1667 Hume
con. Seaton of Meinzles, 13 January, 1669 Hume con. E. Hume, 14 July, 1670 Hume
con. Sco^, 7 Feb. 1671 Hume con. Lo. Just^ce Clerk, 28 June, 1671 Hume con. Lo.
Justice Clerk, 4 July, 1671 ^ Hume con. L. Ryslaw, 18 July, 1671 Hospital of
Glasgow con. Campbel, 19 July, 1664 Howison con. Cockburn, 17 November. 166^
H^nter con. Wilsons, 13 December. 1667 H^nter con. Creditors of John Peter, 11
June, 1670 Marquess of Hun^ly con. Gordon of Lesmore, 22 (...) 1665 Hutcheson
con. E. Cassals, 3 December. 1664 Hutcheson con. Dickson, 6 January, 1665
JAck con. Fiddes, 24 July, 1661 Jack con. Pollock and Rutherfoord, 23 Feb.
1665 Jack con. Movat, 13 June, 1666 Jack con. Jack, 15 July, 1669 Jack con.
Borthwick, 2 Feb. 1670 Jaffray con. Iaffray, 4 December. 1669 Jameson con.
Mcclied, 3 December. 1661 Ierdin of Applegirth, con. Iohnstoun of Lokerbie, 24
Feb. 1670 Inglis con. Hogg, 22 December. 1664 Inglis con. L. Bal^our, 25 June
1668 Innes con. Wilson, 4 July, 1665 Innes con. Innes, 5 January, 16^0
Johnstoun con. Applegirth, 7 Feb. 1662 Johnstoun of Sheenes, con. Broun, 14
July, 1665 Iohnstoun con. Mcgreegers, 19 July, 1665 Iohnstoun con. Tennents of
Achincorse, 22 July, 1665 Iohnstoun con. Iohnstoun 21 Feb. 1667 Johnstoun con.
Cunningham, 19 June, 1667 Johnstoun con. Sir Charles Erskine, 6 Feb. 1668
Johnstoun con. Paro^hioners of Hodonie, 18 July, 1668 Iohnstoun of Sheenes con.
Ar^old, 22 July, 1668 Johnstoun con. Sir Charles Erskine Lord Lion, 19 January,
1669 Irwing con. Mccartney, 30 January, 1662 Irwing con. Strachan, 24 June,
1665 Iurgan con. Capt. Logan, 23 July, 1667 Justice con. Stirling, 23 January,
1668 Lo. Justice Clerk, and Sir Alexander his Son con. E. Hume, 15 June, 1670
Lo. Justice Clerk con. Fairholme, 23 Feb. 1671
K Sir John K^^th con. Sir George Johnstoun, 28 July, 1671 Kello con. P^xtoun,
3 July, 1662 Kello con. Pringle, 31 January, 1665 Kello con. Kennier, 5
January, 1671 Kennedy con. Hutcheson, 8 July, 1664 Kennedy con. Weir, 23 Feb.
166^ Kennedy con. Agnew of Lochnaw, 27 July 166^ Kennedy and Mu^e con. Jaffray,
24 June, 1669 Kennedy con. Kennedy, of Cullen, 8 July, 1670 Kennedy con.
Cunninghame and Wallace, 12 July, 1670 Ker con. Paroch^oners of Carriden, 26
July, 1661 Ker con. Ker of Fairni^lie, and others, 9 July, 1662 Ker con. Hunter
and Tennents of Cambo, 8 F^b. 1666 Ker con. Children of Wolmet, 25 Feb. 1667
Ker con. Ker, 18 July, 1667 Ker con. Ker, 5 Feb. 1668 Ker of Cavers and Scot of
Golden-berrit Supplicants 6 January, 1670 Ker con. Downie, 7 January, 1670 Ker
con. Nicolson, 28 January, 1671 Kidd con. Dickson, 29 June, 1666 L. Kilbirnie
con. Hei^s of Tailzle of Kilbirnie, and Schaw of Greenock, 20 January, 1669
Lady Kilbocho con. the L. of Kilbocho 20 December. 166^ Kilchattans Cred^tors
con. Lady 16 January, 1663 Kincaid con. L. Fenzies, 26 Feb. 1662 E. Kincairn
con. L Rossyth, 24 Feb. 1669 E. Kincairn con. L. Pittar^, 3 Feb. 1670 King's
Advocat con. E Mortoun, 25 Feb. 1669 E. Kinghorn con. L. Udney, 3 July, 1666 E.
Kinghorn con. L. Udney, 15 January, 1668 Viscount of Kingstoun con. Colonel
Fullertoun, 22 Feb. 166^ Kinross con. L. Hunthil, 10 December. 1661 Kinross con.
L. Hunthil, 25 July, 1662 Kintore con. Boyd, 27 January, 1665 Kintore con. the
Heir of Logan of Coa^field 9 July, 1669 Kirkaldy con. Balkanquell 9 July, 1663
Kirktouns con. L. Hunthill, 12 Feb. 1662 Kirktouns con. L. Hunthill, 31
January, 1665 L. Knaperin con. Sir Robert Farquhar, 9 November. 1665 Kyle con.
Seaton, 28 June, 1665
L. Lambertoun con. E. Levin, 24 July, 1661 L. Lambertoun con. E. Levin, 3 and
11 days of July, 1662 L. Lambertoun con. Hume of Kaimes, 9 July, 1662 L.
Lamingtoun con. Chie^ly, 29 January, 1662 L^nglands con. Spence of Blair, 17
June, 1670 Langtoun con. Scot, 17 December. 1670 E. Lauderda^e con. the Tennents
of Swintoun, 7 January, 1662 E. Lauderdale con. Wolmet, 13 July, 1664 E.
Lauderdale con. the Viscount of Oxenfoord, 11* Feb. 1665 E: Lauderdale con.
Viscount of Oxenfoord, last Feb. 1666 E. Lauderdale and Wachop, con. Major
Biggar, 7 December. 1667 Laurie con. Sir John Drummond, 18 Feb. 1670 Laurie con.
Gibson, 4 Feb. 1671 Laurie con. Sir John Drummond, 7 Feb, 1671 Leckie con. 20
Feb. 1663 L^ith con. L. Lismore, and others, 14 July, 1666 Lennox of Wood^head
con. Nairn, 24 June, 1662 Lennox con. Linton, 5 Feb. 1663 Lermont con. Russel,
9* December. 1664 Lermont con. E. of Lauderdale, 12 July, 1671 Leslie con. Gray,
10 January, 1665 Sir. John Leslie con. Sinclar of Dun, 22 December. 1665 Leslie
con. Cuningname, 28 July, 1669 Leslie con. Guthri^, 19 Feb. 1670 Leslies con.
Iaffray, 22 June, 1671 Letter from the King, 14 June, 1665 Lo. Leye con.
Porteous, 15 Feb. 1666 Lindsey and Swinton con. Ingles, 5 July, 1670 Lindsey of
Mount con. Maxwel of Kirkonnel, 20 July, 1671 Town of Linlithgow con. Town of
Borrowsto^nness, 30 January, 1663 Town of Linlithgow con. Town of
Borrowstounness, 13 Feb. 1663 Little con. E. of Neidsdaile, 20 January, 1665
Litle-Iohn con. Duchess of Monmouth, 20 Feb. 1667 Litster con. Aitoun, 2 July,
1667 Livingstoun con. the Heir of Forrester, 22 July, 1664 Livingstoun con.
Sornbeg, 23 November. 1664 Livingstoun con. Beg, 6 Feb. 1666 Livingstoun con.
Lady Glenegies, 13 July, 1666 Livingstoun con. Burns, 15 June, 1670 Lochs con.
Hamiltoun, 18 November. 1664 Lockhart con. Kennedie, 13 Feb. 1662 Lockhart con.
Lo: Bargenie, 22 Feb. 1666 Logans con. Galbreath, 26 January, 1665 Logi^ con.
Logie 11 December. 1662 Lo: Lour con. E. Dundee, 6 Feb. 1663 Lo: Lour con. La.
Craig, 22 July, 1664 Lo. Lour con. 20 January, 1665 Lo. Lovat con. Lo.
Mcdonald, 16 June, 1671 Loyson con. the L. Ludwharn, 15 June, 1669 L. Ludwharn
con. L. Gight, 21 July, 1665 Heirs of Lundie con. E. Southesk, 12 July, 1671
Lion of Murresk con. L. of Ersk, 17 June, 1664 Lion of Murresk con. Farquhar,
10 December. 1664 Lion of Murresk con. Heretors of the Shire, 7 Feb. 1665 Lion of
Murresk con. Gordons, and others, 15 Feb. 1666
Magistrates of con. the E. Finlatour, 24 January, 1666 Mair con. Stewart, 22
January, 1667 Maitland con. Leslie, 27 Feb. 1668 Maitland of Pitrichie con. L.
of Gight, 15 December. 1669 E. Marischal con. Bra^, 18 June, 1662 E. Marischal
con. Leith of ^hit^haugh, 14 July, 1669 Masson con. 27 June, 1666 Creditors of
Masson con. Lo. Torphichan, 19 January, 1669 Mastertoun con. strangers of
Ostend, 24 Feb. 1668 Mathieson con. Gib, 14 July, 1665 Maxwel con. Maxwel, 13
Feb. 1662 Lady Diana Maxvel con. Lo. Burly and others, 15 Feb. 1667 Maxvel
con. Maxvel, 15 November. 166^ Maxvel con. Maxvel, 11 July, 167^ Maxvel con.
Maxvel 21 July, 1671 L. May con. Ross, 23 Feb. 1667 M^alexander con. Dalrymple,
9 June, 1668 Mcbrair con. Sir Robert Crei^hton 20 Feb. 1666 Mcclaud con. Young
and Girvan, 20 December. 1665 Mcclellan con. the Lady Kircudburgh, 13 Feb. 1669
Mccrae con. Lo. Mcdonald, 6 July, 1671 Mculloch con. Craig, 2 Dec^mb. 1665
Mcdougal con. L: Glenorchie, 24 June, 1663 Mcgill con: Ruthven, 22 November. 1664
Mcgill con: V^scount of Oxenfoord, 17 Feb: 1671 Mcgreeger con: Menzies, 24 Feb:
1665 Mcintosh con: Robertson, 26 July, 1662 Mckenzie con: Ross, 18 Feb: 1663
S^r George Mckenzie con: Fairholme, 7 December: 1666 Sir George Mckenzie con: Mr,
John Fairholme, 25 July, 1667 S^r George Mckenzie con: L. of Newhal, 30 July,
1668 Sir George Mck^nzie con. Mr: John Fairho^me, 14 Feb. 1668 Mackenzie con.
Rober^son, 23 December, 1668 Mckenzie con. Ross, 14 January, 1669 Mckie con.
Stewart, 5 July, 1665 Mcmorland con. Melvil, 28 June, 1666 Mcpherson con.
M^cleud, 29 June, 1666 Mcpherson con: Wedderburn, 14 January, 1668 Mcqueen con:
Marquess of Douglas, and Peirson, 26 January, 1670 Lo: Melvil con. the Lord of
Fairnie, 4 Feb, 1662 Menzies con. L. Drum, 25 January, 1665 Menzies con: L.
Glenorchie, 24 June, 1663 Mercer of Aldie con* Rouan, 24 Feb: 1665 Merstoun
con. Hunter, 9 January, 1663 Mille^ con. Howison, 5 June, 1666 Mille^ con.
Watson, 21 July, 1666 Miller con. Bothwel, 22 July, 1671 Milne con: Hume, 7
July, 1664 Milne con. Clerkson, 21 Feb: 1667 Lady Mil^toun con. L. Milntoun, 26
July, 1662 L. Milntoun con: Lady Milntoun, 4 January, 1666 L. Milntoun con.
Lady Milntoun, 27 Feb. 1663 L. Milnto^n con. Lady Milntoun, 25 Feb. 1667 L.
Milntoun co^. Lady Milntoun, 26 Feb: 1668 L. Milntoun con. Lady Milntoun, 30
July, 1668 L. Milntoun con. Lady Milntoun, 31 January, 1671 L. Milntoun con.
Lady Milntoun, 14 July, 1671 Minister of north Leith con. Merchants of
Edinburgh 10 Feb: 1666 M^nister of con. the L. Elphinstoun 16 June, 1666
Mitchel con. Hutcheson, 24 July, 1661 Dame G^ils Moncrief con. Tennents of
Newtoun and Yeoman, 9 Feb: 1667 Moncrief of Tippermalloch con. Magistrates of
Pearth, 26 July, 1670 Children of Mouswal con. Laurie of Maxwaltoun, 14 Feb.
1662 Lady Mo^swal con. 15 Feb. 1662 Montei^h con. Anderson, 28 June, 1665
Monteith con. Anderson, 15 December. 1665 Monteith con. L. Glorat, 7 Dec^mb. 1666
Monteith of Carrubber con: Boyd, 2 December. 1669 Montgomerie con. Lo.
Kirkudbright, 20 December, 1661 Montgomerie con. Peter, 19 July, 1662 Montgomerie
con. Montgomerie, 22 July, 1662 Montgomerie con. Brown, 28 January, 1663
Montgomerie con. Hume, 22 July, 1664 Colonel Montgomerie con: Wallace and
Bowie, ^4 I^ne, 1665 Colonel Montgomerie and his Spouse, con. Stewart* 24 and
27 January, 1666 Coll. Montgomerie con: the Heirs of H^lliburton, 17 Feb. 1663
Montgomerie con. Rankine, 23 November. 1667 Moffat con. Bl^^k, 24 June, 1664
Morison's Rel^ct con. the Heir, 12 Feb. 1663 Daugh^ers of Mr. James Mortoun
Supplic^nt, 26 November. 1668 Parson of Morum con. the L^s. of Be^rfoord and
Beinstoun, 6 July, 1666 Sir George Mouat con. D^mbar of Hemprig, 22 Feb. 1665
Mow con. Dutche^s o^ Buccleugh, 7 July, 1663 L. Muchrum con. L. Mercoun, and
others 20 December. 1662 Muir con. Frazer, 27 July, 1665 Muir con. Sterling, 19
Feb. 1663 Muirhead con. 27 July, 1664 E. Murray con. L. G^ant, 9 January, 1662
Sir Robert Murray, con. 8 Feb. 1662 Murray con. 17 June, 1665 Murray con.
Executors of Doctor Guild, 16 June, 166^ E. Murray con. Hume, 2 January, 1667
Creditors of Sir James Murray con. Murray, 1 Feb. 1667 Murray of O^htertyre
con. Sir John Drummond* 22 Feb, 1670 Murray of Ochtertyre con. Gray, 16 December,
1670 Murray con. Murray, 12 July, 1671 Murray con. E. Southesk and others, 28
July, 1671 Mushet con. Duke and Duchess of Buccleugh, 28 January, 1668
NAper con. Gordon of Grainge, 12 Feb* 1670 Naper con. E. Eglintoun, 14 Feb.
1671 Nasmyth con. Iaffray, con: 25 July, 1662 Nasmyth con. Bowar, 1 July, 1665
Neilson con. Meinzies of Enoch, 21 June, 1671 Lo. Newbyth con. Magist^ats of
Elgin* 17 Feb: 1665 Lo. Newbyth con. Dumbar of Burgie, 18 December, 1666 Newman
con. Tennents of Hill and Mr. John Preston, 8 January, 1669 Nicol con. Hope, 8
January, 1663 Nicolson con. rewar^ of Tillicutrie, 14 January, 1662 Nicolson
con. L. Bughtie and Babirnie 14 November. 1662 Sir Thomas Nic^lson con. L:
Philorth, 18 December, 1667 Nisbet con. Lest^* 8 July, 1664 Nisbet con. Murray,
23 November. 1664 Nisbet con. 5 June 1666 E. N^rthesk con. Viscount of Stormond,
28 Feb. 1671 Norvel con. Sunter, 20 December. 1664 Norvel con. Sunter, 29 June,
1665
OGilvie con. Stewart, 11 December* 1662 Ogilvie con. Grant, 7 July, 1664 Ogilvi^
con. 21 Feb. 1666 Ogilvie con. Lo. Gray, 17 July, 1666 Oliphant con. Douglas; 3
Feb: 1663 Sir Lauerance Oliphant con. Sir John Drummond. 6 and 9 January, 1666
Oliphant con. Hamilton, 2 January, 1667 Lady Otter con. L. Otter, 8 January,
1663 Lady Otter con. the Lord, 16 Feb* 1666
PAllat con. Fairholme, 7 F^b. 1665 E. Panmuire con. Parochioners, 7 Feb. 1666
Papla con. Magistrates of Edinburgh, 31 January, 1668 Pargillies con.
Pargillies, 26 Feb. 1669 Park con. Somervail, 12 November. 1668 Parkman con.
Allan, 14 Feb. 1668 Parkman con. Allan, 21 Feb, 1668 Parochioners of Port
Supplicants, 4 December. 1665 Paterson con. Watson, 17 December. 1664 Paterson con.
Pringle, 4 Feb: 1665 Paterson con. Humes, 17 December. 1667 Patoun and Mercers
con Patoun, 23 June, 1666 Relict of Patoun con. the Relict of Archbald Patou^ 7
July, 1668 Patoun con. Patoun, 21 July, 1668 ^e^cock con. Baillie, 3 July, 1662
Peirson con. Martine, 12 December. 1665 Peirson of Balmadies con. the Town of
Montross, 29 June, 1669 Town of Peart^ con. Weavers at the B^idg-end of Pearth,
21 July, 1669 The Weavers of Pearth, con. the Weavers at the B^idge-end of
Pearth, 4 December. 1669 Paterson con. Anderson, 30 June, 1668 Petrie con. Paul,
20 July, 1664 Petrie con. Mi^chelson, 25 November, 1665 Philip con: Cheap, 26
July, 1667 L. Philor^h con. Lo. Frazer, 4 Feb. 1663 L. Philor^h con. Fo^bes and
Lo. Frazer, 16 December. 1664 L. Philorth con. Lo. Frazer, 28 June, 1666
Ex^cutors of the Lady P^^toun con. Hay of Bal^ousie, 2 Feb. 1667 Pitcairn con.
Edgar, 28 June, 1665 Pitcairn con. Tennen^s, 22 Feb. 1671 L. Pitfoddel con: L.
Glenkindie, ^5 Feb, 1662 Creditors of Pollock con: Pollock, 21 ^anuary, 1669 L.
Pol^^aes con. Tradesmen of Sti^ling, 7 July, 1671 L. Polwart con: Humes, 21
January, 1662 L. Palma^s con. L: Halliburton, 16 January, 1667 Pot con.
Pollock, 12 Feb. 1669 Po^tie con. Dycks, 2 Feb: 1667 L. Prestoun con. Allurid,
24 June, 1664 Sir George Prestoun con. Scot 27 July, 1667 Primross con. Din* 22
November. 1662 Pringle con. Ker* 17 Feb. 1665 Pringle and her Spou^e con.
Pringle, 29 November. 1667 Pringle con. Pringle, 1 Feb* 1671
RA^ con. Tennents of Clackmannan. 27 July, 1665 Ra^ con. Tennents of
Clackmannan, 28 July 1665* Raith of Edmonstoun con* L. Niddrie, 4 July, 1661
Raith and Wachop con. L: Wolme^ and Major Biggar, 13 July, 1670 Ramsey con. E:
Wintoun, 24 January, 1662 Ramsey con. M^clelland, 24 January, 1662 Ramsey con.
M^clelland, 11 Feb: 1662 Ramsey con. Hogg and Seaton, 22 December. 1664 Ramsey
con. Wilson and others, 12 December. 1665 Ramsey con: Ker, 9 Feb. 1667 Ramsey
con. Henderson, 20 Iannuary, 1671 Rei^ con. Harper, 19 June, 1663 Reid con.
Melvil, 20 December. 1664 Reid con. Reid. 10 January, 1665 Reid con* So^mond, 16
January, 1667 Reid con. 19 Jan^ary, 1667 Renton con. Mr. Mark Ker, 10 and 24
January* 1662 Lo. Renton con. Fewars of Coldinghame, 20 January* 1666 L^.
Renton con. L: Lambertoun, 23 Feb, 1667 Lo. Renton con. L. Lambertoun, 21 July,
1668 Reoch con: Cowan, 26 Feb. 1668 Ri^kart con. 30 January, 1663 Riddel con.
13 F^b. 1663 Ex^cu^ors of Ridpath con. Hu^^, 27 J^ly, 1669 Owners of the Sh^p
called the Castle of Riga, con. Cap^ain Seaton, 27 July, 1667 Owner^ of the
Ship c^lled the Castle of Riga, con. Capta^n Seaton. 25 Feb. 1668 Robertson
con. Buchannan, 1 Feb. 1663 Lo. Rollo con. his Chamberlain. 13 Dec^mb: 1664
Ross con. Campbel of Calder, 3 Ianua^y, 1662 E: Rothes con: the Tutors of
Buccleugh, 20 December. 1661
SLo. Saltoun con. Lairds of Park and Rothomay, 20 Feb. 1666 Sandilands con.
Sandilands, 25 January, 1671 Sauer con. Ruther^oord, 25 November. 1662 Schaw con.
Lewis, 19 January, 1665 Schaw con. Tennents, 4 July* 1667 Schaw con.
Calderwood* 21 January, 1668 Scot con. Montgomery, 14 January, 1663 Scot con.
E. Home, 19 Feb. 1663 Scot con. Lady Fewaltoun, 19 July* 1664 Scot of
Bread-Meadows con. Sco^ of T^irlston, 20 July, 1664 Scot* con. L. Beerfoord, 23
November. 1664 Scot con. Henderson and Wilson, 8 December. 1664 Scot con. ^letcher,
27 January, 1665 Scot of Thirlstone con. Scot of Broad-meadows, 11 Feb. 1665
Scot con. Silvertoun-hill, 14 July, 1665 Scot con. Somervail, 28 July, 1665
Scot con. Boswel of Achinleck, 22 November, 1665 Scot con. Heirs of Line of
Achinleck, 5 July, 1666 Scot con. Sir Robert Montgomerie, 12 July, 1666 Scot
con. Gib. 29 January, 1667 Scot con. Scot, 14 July, 1667 Scot of Clerkingtoun
con. the Lady, 21 Feb. 1668 Scot con. A^ton, 11 December. 1668 Scot con.
L^ngtoun, 19 June, 1669 Scot of Hartwoodmyres con. 6 November. 1669 Scot con.
Murray, 8 January, 1670 Scot con. Chei^ly and Thomson, 9 Feb. 1670 Scot of
Thirlston con. Lo. Drumlen^ig, 15 June 1670 Scot con. L. Drumlen^ig, 10 June,
1671 Scot of Hassenden, con. Duchess of Buccleugh, 21 July, 1671 Scrimz^our
con. Murrays, 24* June, 1663 Scrymzeour con. Murrays, 19 July, 1664 Scrymzeour
con. Wedderburn, of Kingenie, 19 July, 1671 Seaton con. Roswel, 4 January, 1662
Seaton and L. Touch con. Dundas, 11 January, 1666 Seaton con. L. Bawhillie, 22
November. 1667 Seaton con. Seaton 19, December. 1668 Seaton con. Seaton, 22 December.
1668 Sharp of Houstoun con. Glen, 16 Feb. 1666 Sharp con. Gl^n, 14 July, 1666
Shed con. G^rdon and Kyle, 24 July, 1662 Shed con. Chartres, 13 January, 1665
Relict of Mr. Pat. Shiel con. Paroch^oners of West-Calder, 26 January, 1670
Shein con. Chrystie, 15 November. 1666 Simes con: Brown, 5 January, 166^ Sir
Robert Sinclar con. the La^rd of Wedderburn, 21 Feb, 1666 Sinclar of Brym
Supp^lcant, 12 June 1666 Sir Robert Sin^lar con. the L, of Houstoun, 15 June,
1666 Sir Robert Sinclar con. Couper, 2 July, 1667 Skene con. Lumsden, 4 Feb.
1662 Skene con. Lumsden, 19 July, 1662 Skene con. Lumsden, 9 January, 1663
Skene and Thoires con. Sir Andrew Ramsey, 14 November. 1665 Relict of Skin^ con.
the E. Roxburgh, 19 Feb. 1669 Slivanan con. Wood of Grange, 13 Feb. 1662 Smeton
con. Crawfoord 3 January, 1667 Smeton con. Talbert, 7 Feb. 1667 Smith and
Duncan con. Robertson, 7 December. 1665 Smith con. Muire, 23 December. 1668 E.
Southesk con. Broomhal, 12 Feb. 1663 E. Southesk con. Marquess of Huntly, 23
July, 1666 E. Southesk con. Marquess of Huntly, 31 July, 1666 E, Suthesk con.
L. of Earles^al, 27 Feb. 1667 D^ughters of Sautray con. the eldest Daughter, 13
July, 1670 Spruel con. Miller, 21 July, 1665 Steel con. Hay of R^tra, 6 June,
1671 Stewart con. Fewars of Aberl^dnoch, 8 January, 1662 Stewart con. Nasm^th,
6 December. 1662 Stewart con. Spruel 21 January, 1663 Stewart con. Bogle, 30
January, 1663 Stewart con. Stewart, 25 June, 1663 St^wart con. Stewarts, 18
January, 1665 Stewart con. Aitcheson, 17 January, 1668 Stewart con. L. Rossyth,
21 January, 1668 Stewart con. Fewars of E^nock, 24 June, 1668 Sir William
Stewart con. Murrayes, 17 July, 1668 Stewart of Gairntillie con. Stewart, 24
June, 1669 Sir William Stewart con. Sir George M^ckenzie, and Kettlestoun, 8
July, 1671 St^vin con. Boyd, 30 June, 1666 Stevin con. Boyd, 9 July, 1667
Stevins con. Neilson, 11 July, 1671 Stevinson con. Ker, 28 January, 1663
Stevinson con. Crawfoord, 30 June, 1665 Executors of Stevinson con. Crawfoord,
12 J^^uary, 1666 Stevinson con. the L. of Hermiesheels, 15 June, 1666 Stevinson
con. Dobbie, 30 June, 1666 Sterling con. Campbel, 21 Feb. 1663 Sterling con.
Hariot, 27 January, 1669 Vi^count of Stormount con. the Cred^tors of Annandale,
26 Feb. 1662 Strachan con. Morison, 17 January, 1668 Strachan con. Morison, 22
Feb. 1668 Strachan con. Gordons, 7 July, 1671 Straitoun con. the Countess of
Hume 10 December. 1667 Street con. Home and Bruntsfield, 9 June, 1669 Street con.
Masson, 27 July, 1669 Swintoun con. 18 July, 1662 L^dy Swintoun con. the Town
of Edinburgh, 19 Feb 1663 Swintoun con: Notman, 10 June, 1665 Swintoun con.
Brown, 18 December. 1668 Sword con. Sword, 16 January, 1663 E. Sutherland con.
M^intosh, 22 July* 1664 E. Sutherland con. Gordon, 1 December. 1664 E. Sutherland
con. the Earls of Er^ol and Marischal 3. January, 1667
TLa. Tarsapie con. L, Tarsapi^, 20 December. 1662 Collector General of the
Taxation con. D^rector of the Chancellarle, etc. 22 January, 1669 Collector
General of the Taxa^ion con. Mr. and Servants of the Mint^house, 22 January,
1669 Tailor con. Kintie, 15 June, 1666 Telzi^fer con. Maxtoun and Cunninghame,
29 June, 1661 Telziefer con. Maxtoun and Cunningham, 4 July, 1661 Tailziefer
con. L. So^nbeg, 6 December. 1661 Tailziefer con. Geddes, 11 November. 1665 Lo.
Thesaurer and Advocat, con. Lo. Colvil, 20 ^^b. 1667 Thomson con. Mckittrick, 3
July, 1662 Thomson con. Reid, 15 June* 1664 Thomson con. Town of Edinburgh, 14
Feb. 1665 Thomson con. Henderson, 4 December: 1665 Thomson con. Binning, 10 July,
1666 Thomson con. Mckittrick, 21 July, 1666 Thomson con. Stevenson, 19 and 13
December. 1666 Thomson con. E. Glencairn, 21 July, 1668 T^orntoun con. Milne, 29
June* 1665 Tipertie con. his Cred^tors, 3 January, 1662 Lo. Torphichan con 8
Feb, 1662 Tosh con. Cruckshank, 16 July, 1666 La. Towi^ con. Barclay, 9 November.
1669 La. Towie con. Barclay, 26 January, 1670 Trench con. Watson, 18 Feb. 1669
Exe^utors of Trott^r con. Trotter, 20 November. 1667 Lairds of Tullialland and
Condie, con. Crawfoord, 16 and 17 June, 1664 E. Tullibardin con. Murray of
Ochtertyre, 12 Feb. 1667 Tweedies con. Tweedies, 22 Dec^mb. 1666
URqu^art con. Blair, 14 July, 1665 Urquhart con. (...) 4 December. 1666 Sir.
John urquhart Supplicant 7 December. 1669
V Collector of the Vacand Stipends con. Parochi^ners of Maybol, 10 Feb. 1666
Veitch con. Lyell, 18 January, 1662 Veitch con: Paterson, 2 December. 1664 Veitch
of Daick con. Williamson, 9 December. 1664 Veitch con. D^ncan, 7 December. 1665
Vernor con: Allan. 24 June, 1662
WAchop con. L. Niddrie, 15 July, 1662 Wallace con. Fork, 19 June, 1662 Wall^^e
con. Edgar, 22 January, 1663 Wallace con. Mckerrel, 9 January, 1669 Wardlaw
con. Gray, 20 November. 1662 Wardlaw con. Frazer, 21 Feb. 1663 Wat con. Russel,
16 November. 1665 Wat con. Halliburton, 14 June, 1667 Wat con. Campbel, 8 Feb.
1671 Watson con. Elies, 27 June 1662 Watson con. Fleiming, 6 Feb. 1666 Watson
con. Fewres of Duckennan, 21 June, 1667 Watson con. Law, 12 July, 1667 Watson
con. Sympson, 1 Feb. 1670 L. Wedderburn con. VVardlaw, 13 Feb. 1666 Wedderlies
Children, 24 January, 1663 Weems con. Cunninghame, 24 July, 1662 Weems con. Lo.
Torphichan, 25 July, 1661 Sir John Weems con. the Lord of Tolquhon, 8 Feb.
1668 Sir John Weems con. Will. Campbel of Ednample, 21 July* 1668 Sir John Weems
con. Forbes, of Tolquhon, 2 January 1669 Sir John Weems con. Farquhar of
Tauley, 23 January, 1669 White con. Crocket, 4 December. 1661 White con. Hume, 25
November. 1665 White con. Brown, 30 November. 16^5 Whytehead con. Straitoun, 16
November. 1667 Wilkit con. Ker, 24 June, 1662 Will con. Town of Kirkaldie, 11
Feb. 1671 Wilson con. Thomson, 26 June, 1662 Wilson con. Murray, 27 June, 1662
Wilson con. Hume of Linthil, 2 December. 1664 Wilson and Callender, con. 12
January, 1665 Wilson con. Magistrates of Queens^errie, 2 Ianua^y 1668 Winraham
con. La. Idingtoun, 19 July, 1665 Winrham con. Elies, 15 December. 1668 E*
Wintoun con. the Countess of Wintoun, 16 Feb. 1666 E. Wintoun con. Gordon of
Letter-^errie, 15 July, 1668 Wishart con. Arthur, 4 Feb. 1671 La. Wolmet and
Dankeith, con. Major Bigg^r, 24 January, 1668 La. Wolmet and Dankeith con.
Major Bigga^, 14 June, 1671 Wood con. Neilson, 13 July, 1669 Wright con. Sheil,
16 June, 1665
YEoma^ con. Oliphant, 29 July, 1662 Yeoman con. Oliphant, 22 January, 1663
Yeoman con. Oliphant, 21 December. 166^ Yeoman con. Oliphant, 5 January, 166^
Young^r con. Johnstoun, 30 June, 1665 Younger con. Iohnstoun, 28 November. 1665
FINIS.
ERRATA.
SEveral Errors has escaped the Press in the Authors absence, and the rest
being but Literal Faults, the Judicious and Candid Reader* will easily correct
them.

PAge 53. l. 9. Osburn r. Osburns nam. p. 57. l. 12. acratus r. lucratus. p.
43. earister r. thereafter, p. 64. l. 20. on by, there r. Town, p. 71. l. 21.
instructions of offense, r. instrument of offer, p. 72. l. 31. Defender, r.
Pursuer, l. 34, grant. r. granter, p. 81. l. 6. if* r. yet, p. 91. l. ult,
Suspender r. Charger, p. 92. or. by. r. to p. 98 l. 23. to r. by, p. 100. l.
14. and r. he. p. 101. l. 15. the second Annualrent dele, p. 105. l. 11.
initiable r. ^mitable, p. 107. l. 21. defender r. pursuer, p. 108. l. 21. Laws
r. Lands, p. 110. l. 36. pursuer r. suspender, p. 112. l. ^. in r. no, p. 114.
l. 23. actorialis, r. actio r^alis, l. 24.^ valued r. val^d, p. 116. l. 18.
differred r. decerned, p. 118. l. 27. and 28. And dispone the Tenement, de^e,
l. 40. debtor. r. debate, p. 120. l. 41. lands r. bonds, p. 122. l. 4.
deposition r. depositation, p. 152. being r. and therefore writs being, p. 126.
l. 33. ^nstruct, r. in^ert, p. 128. l. 11. therefore, r. the pursuer p. 140* l.
1. though r. the, p. 141. l. 20. would r. could no^, l. ult. was r. was not, p.
142. l. 19. have been vincus, r. not have been unicus, l. 20. b^ r. exchanging,
p. 146. l. 20. observed, r. reserved, p. 150. l. 23. first, r. fifth, p. 160.
l. 16. the r. by* l. pen i^ he, r. who, p. 162. l. 17. needful r. wilful, p.
166. l* 2. bl r. ^ight searz, p. 180. l. 22. defuncti maritis, r. defunctae
matris, p. 181. l. 31. no dele, p. 188. l. 40. inmoveable dele, 191. l. 25. a
sufficient, r. this, p. 194. l. 19. bl. r. incumbent, l. 28. heretor r.
heretable, p. 195. l. 19. transaction, r. translation, l. 21. heir r. her son,
l. 36. confi^mation, r. confinio, p. 196. l. 37. their r. her, p. 200. l. ^4*
bl: r. knew, p. 202. l. 25. past, r. past f^ra, was, l. 42. which r. 4th* p.
219. l. 17. could, r. would not* 220. l. 15. He^r r. He^r of line, p. 231. l.
9. power r. so near, p. 236. l. 18. answered dele, p. 251. l. 42. Pursuer r.
Children, p. 252. l. 7. Children r. Pursuer, l. 42. to dele, p. 253. l. 39.
were r. neither, l. 40. seem r. some, p. 269. l. 35. likeas in his office, r.
in his office likeas, p. 281. l. 14. minister r. master, p. 292. l. 42. reduced
r. deduced, l. 43. others r. and, p. 309. l. 3. with r. which. 480. l. 10.
emmitted r. ommitted, p. 483. l. 29. without consent r. with consent, p. 490.
l. 10. he did not sell r. he did sell, p. 493. l* 8. peculium r. periculum, p.
497. l. 47* yet whether. r. yet where the* p. 498. l. 30. 29. ad r. 30. act, p.
518. l. 42^ so Richard r. to Richard, p. 533. l. 28. loadned r. abandoned, p.
546* uses to be preferred, Add the Strangers Infeftment. p, 567. l* 30. and
jus, r. as jus, p. 569. l. 22. Heretable r. Moveable: p. 570. l. 4. the Husband
therein, r. the Husbands interest therein, p. 590. l. 32. Ardoch, r. him, p.
593. l. 38. granted to r. granted by, p. 610. l, 7. no Testament, r. a
Testament, ibid. did exhau^t, r. did not exhaust, p. 627. l. 26: nothing r. any
thing. p. 659. l. 30. by invalidat, r. to invalidate, p. 657. l. 36. are not
comprehended r* are comprehended, p. 665. l. 27. exclude r. excluded, p. 666.
l. 41. and in r. and not, p. 679. l. 21, they could be, r. they could not be,
p. 725. l. 2. another r. a Mother* last Index, p. 2. l. 49. fragrant r.
fragrant*

A LIST Of the Heads of the following Index, or Alphabetical Compend.
ACT of Indemn^ty. Act of Parliament, Act Salvo Jure, Adjudger, Adjudication,
Adm^ral, Advocat, Adulter^e, Alibi, Aliment, Ann, Annexation, Annuiti^, Annus
deliberandi, Annuelrent, Appryzing, Arb^ter, Arrestment, Assignat^o^, Attester.
BAillie, Ba^rn, Band, Barron, Base Infeftment, Bastardie, Behaving as Heir,
Bills of Exchange, Blank, Bloodwi^e, Bona fides, Burgh, Burgh Royal.
CApt^on, Casus ^ortuitus, Cause onerous, Cau^^oner, Cedent, Certification,
Charge, Chyrog^aphum, etc. Circumvention, Citation, Clause, Clause of Conquest,
Clause Irritant, Cl^^se of Substitution, Clause de non alienando, Coal,
Cogn^tion, College, Command, Commissar, Commssion, Commodatum, Common
Pasturage, Comm^nt^e, Compensation, Competent and ommitted, Count, Count Book,
Conclusion of the Cause, Confession, Confirmation, Con^usion, Conjunct^ee,
Conque^^, Con^ent, Consignat^o^, Continuation, Contract, Contrary Alleadgances,
Contravention, Creditor, Cropped, Cruves, Curators, Custody.
DAmnage, Date, Death, Deathbed, Debtor no^ presumitur donar^, Debitum fundi,
Declarator, Declarator of Esc^ea^, Declarator of Non-entr^e, Declarator of
Nullity, Declarator of Property, De^reet, Decree Arbitral, Decreets of
^nferior Courts, De^reets of Session, Decreets of Parl^ament, Delivery,
Depositation, Designa^ion, Devastation, Dil^gence, Discharge, Disposition,
Division, Donat^on, Donat^on betwixt Man and Wife, Donator, Double poynding, In
Dubiis, etc*
EJection, Erection, Escheat, Ex^cutors, Executor Creditor, Execution,
Exception, Exhibition, Exhibition ad deliberandu^, Extract.
FAther, Feu, Feu-dut^e, Forfaulture, Fraud, Fraught, Fru^ts.
G^neral Let^e^^, G^ft,
HEirs, Heir Male, Heir subst^tute, He^r apparent, He^rs ^n Tacks, Heirship
moveable, Her^table, Holden as confessed, Holograph, Homologation, Horning,
Husband, Hypotheca^ion*
IGnorantia ju^is, etc. Improbation, Incident, Pro ^ndiviso, Infeftment,
Inhibition, Interdiction, Interruption, Intimation, Introm^ssion,
Jus Mariti, Jus superveniens, etc. Jus tertii.
K The Kings Palace, Knowledge.
LAw, Legacy, License to pursue, Litiscontestation, Locus penitentiae, Lords,
Lucrative Successor, Life, Lyferenter, Lyferent E^chea^, Lion Herald.
Magistrates, Manda^, Mails and Duties, Maintinance, Marriage, Mel^oration,
Merchant, Metus Causa, Miln, Minister, Minor non tenetur placitare, etc. M^nor,
Minor^tie and Le^^on, Minute, Missive Letter, Mother, Moveable*
NEarest of Kin, Non-entrie, Noviter veniens ad notitiam.
OAth, Oath of Calumn^e, Oath ^x officio, Oath in (...), Oath qualified,
Obligation, Offer, Office, Overseer.
PArt and pertinent, Parties having Interest, Paricide, Passing from, etc.
Payment, Pension, Perr^l, Personal, Possession, Possessor bonae fid^^,
Possessorie Judgment, Poynding, Precept, Premunition, Prescription,
Presumption, Privilege, Probation, Process, Promise, Protutor, Prize Ships,
Pupil.
RAt^habition, Recogn^tion, Redempt^on, Reduction, Regal^t^e, Relief, Rel^ct,
Remov^ng, Renunciation, Reparation, Rep^obat^re, Requ^sition, Retour,
Reversion, Right Real.
SAlmond-fishing, Sat^s^action, Seasine, Service, Servitude, Simulation,
Singular Successor, Slander, Special Declarator, Spui^zie, Stipend, Stolen
goods, Submission, Substitution, Successor Lucrative* Summonds, Superior,
Superiority, Suspensions.
TAcit Relocat^on, Tack, Taxation, Teinds, Tenor, Terce, Term of payment,
Testament, Thir^age, Tocher, Trads-men, Tran^action, Transferrence, Trust,
Tutor, Tutor nominat, Tutor dative.
ULtimus Haeres. Use of Payment, Userie.
VIcarage, Violent profits, V^t^ation, V^tious Introm^ssion.
WArd, Wak^^ng, Warn^ng, Warrand^ce, Wi^e, W^tnesses, W^tnes ex officio,
W^tnesses insert, Wodsetter, Wodset, Writ.
INDEX: OR, An Alphabetical Compend of the first Part of the Decisions of the
Lords of Session, beginning in June 1661. and ending in July 1671.
ACT OF INDEMNITY, found to liberate a Soldier, ^cting with a party of
Soldiers in Arms, under any Authority, lawful or pretended, and that his
Warrant or Command was thence presumed, unless it were proven by his Oath that
he had no Warrant, and converted the Goods to his own private use, June 25.
1664. Ferquharson contra Gardner. The same found, February 15. 1666. Lion of
Mur^ask contra Gordouns and others: But here the application was ^ound probable
by Witnesses. Act of Indemnity ^ound to secure a Person intrometting by order
of the Comittee of Estates for the time, in so far as he compted to them,
without necessity to show his Commission, or the Warrant of the Auditors that
compted with him, but not found sufficient to free him from what he had
omitted, though the said Account bear, That he had made Faith, that he had
omitted nothing, Which was only accounted an Oath of Credulity, like that of
Executors, February 13. 1667. Lord Justice Clerk contra Lord of Lambertoun.
Act of Indemnity, ^ound to make Intromettors with public Money, liable only
for their Intromissions, and not for omission, though by their Commission they
were bound to do Diligence, February 23. 1667. inter ^osdem. Act of Indemnity,
found not to make Collectors liable for what they intrometted with, and compted
not for, not being applied to their own use, but carried away by Soldiers, for
the use of the Army, without necessity to instruct the Soldiers or Collectors
Warrant, which was presumed, I^ly 28. 1668. inter ^osdem. ACT OF PARLIAMENT,
Relating a former Act, and not conform thereto, ^ound not thereby to alter the
former Act, but to be Regulat thereby, January 20. 1665. The Heretors upon Don
Water contra the Town of Ab^rdene. An Act of Parliament anent leaving the
mid-stream free in Cr^ives, found to be taken away by De^uetude past memory,
July 29* 1665. Inter eosdem. The like of the Act 1555. cap. 29. July 5. 1666.
The Earl of Hume contra his Creditors. Act of Parliament in favors of private
parties, not Printed, assigning them to some bygone Maintenance, found not
effectual against singular Successors, though not excepted in the Act, they not
being called thereto, June 25. 1668. Inglis contra Lord of ^alfour. Act of
Parliament betwixt Debtor and Creditor, found not to extend to Bonds for Rents
of Lands, though exceeding 1000. pounds, but that personal Execution might be
thereon, December 6. 1661. Dalmahoy contra Ham^^toun of ^innie. The said Act
found to Restrict a Wodset, though the Usurpers Act, and all such Acts made, or
to be made, were Res^inded, January 29. 1661. Lord of Lamingtoun contra Sir
John Ch^isty. The Security required by the said Act for Principal and
Annualrent accumulat, found either to be by Cautioners, or Infe^tment of Land,
July 7. 1664. Miln contra Hume of Eccles. THE ACT SALVO IVRE being excluded in
a Ratification to a particular Party, and that Exclusion not being repeated in
the Act Salvo, The Lords were unwilling to decide, whether such Exclusion
should be sufficient, but ordained the Parties in the first place, to Dispute
their Rights, without consideration of that Clause, Feb^uary 11. 1665. Earl of
Lauderda^l contra Viscount of Oxenfoord.
AN ADJUDGER ordained to be Received, without instructing his Debitors Right,
who Renunced to be Heir, Salvo jure superioris and cujus^bet, February 9. 1667.
Ramsay contra K^r. AD^UDICATION being on a Disposition, and obligement to
Infe^t, and not upon a liquid sum, the Superior was not found obliged to
receive the Adjudger, unless he instructed the Disponers Right, June 24. 1663.
Medowgal contra Lord of (...). Adjudication being pursued by a Creditor on a
personal Debt, was not excluded by a Back-bond of the Defuncts Debitors,
bearing his Infeftment to be on Trust, to the behove of a third Party, whose
Creditors compeared against the Adjudger, yet was not put to Dispute his
Debitors Right till after the Adjudication, he might use Exhibition of his
Evidents: but the Adjudication was granted with the burden of the Back-bond.
November 23. 1663. Livingstoun and Sornbeg contra Lord Forrester and Creditors
of Grange. Adjudication was Excluded as to the Property, in favors of a Party,
showing the De^unct to be Denuded, and himself Infeft, but was Sustained to
Adjudge any Right of Reversion, Clause irritant, or Provision in favors of the
Defunct Debtor, Iu^y 22. 1664. Inter ^osdem. Adjudication was Sustained
against a second appearand Heir upon a Decree cognitionis causa, upon the
Renunciation of a former Heir, without a new Charge against the Heir, or his
Renunciation: The Defender declaring that the Lands should be Redeemable within
ten years, if the Pursuer Entered within these years, January 17. 1666.
Crawford contra Auchinleck. Adjudication was found not to be stopped upon a
better Right than the De^uncts, alleged upon by a Party compearing, but the
Pursuer was suffered to Adjudge upon his peri^, November 15. 1666. Chein contra
Christie. ADMIRAL, or the Judge of the high Court of Admirality, does Reduce
the Decreets of inferior Admirals. or their Deputs, February 24. 1668. Captain
Mastertoun contra Strangers of Ostend. The Lord Admiral being out of the
Country, found not necessary to be called in the Reduction of a Decree of
Admirality, where the Judge pronuncer of the Decree was Called, Inter ^osdem.
ADVOCAT was found obliged to Depone concerning the having of his Clients Writs,
February 1. 1666. contra Rallo. An Advocat being in his Duty, hindering a
Suspension to pass, being threatened by a Party, who said he would make him
repent what he had said if he were in another place, and calling him Liar and
Knave, the Lords imprisoned the Party, and Fined him in 500. merks, July 14.
1668. Mr. David F^lco^er contra Sir James Keith. ADVLTERY was found not to
infer Escheat, unless the Adulterer were Convict Criminally, or Denunced as
Fugitive, though he had confessed, and stood in Sackcloath a year, Ian^ary 9.
1662. Baird contra Baird. ALIBI was found not receivable for proving a false
dat^ to annul the whole Write, where the Witnesses insert proved the (...) of
the Subscription, though of a^ Erroneous date, February 23. 1667. Lord of May
contra Ross. ALIMENT was found due by the Heir to his Brothers and Sisters,
their Mother being dead, and they left without any Provision, January 24. 1663.
Children of Wedderly contra Lord of Wedderly, R^o absente. Aliment was found
due by an Heir-male, to Heirs of Line, to whom he was obliged to pay such a sum
when they were M^rriageable without mention of Annualrent or Aliment, here the
Heir-male s^cceeded to a considerable Estate, November 8. 1663. Lady Otter
contra Lord of Otter. Aliment was found due by an Heir-male to an Heir-^emale
of a second Marriage, till her age of fourteen, from which time, her Portion
bear Annualrent, and bea^ no mention of Aliment till then, her Mother being
dead, and having no way to subsist, without consuming the Stock of her Portion,
February 11. 1663. Frazer contra Frazer. Aliment was found due by an Heir-male,
to Heirs of Line, till their Marriage, and not till the Term of payment of
their Portions only, seeing the same bear no Annualrent, r^o abs^^te, November
12. 1664. Daughters of Balmerino contra Lord Balmerino. Aliment of a Child was
found not due where the Child was freely entertained by the Mothers Father, who
demanded nothing during the time of the Intertainment, and was holden as freely
g^f^ed for all years before the pursuit, July 21. 1665. Lord of Ludquhairn
contra Lord of Geight* Vide Mother. Aliment was found due upon a Bond of
Provision, granted by a Father to his Daughter, obliging him to Intertain her
till the Term of payment of her Portion, which bear no Annualrent, and that not
only till the Term of payment, but thereafter till her Marriage, and even for
years in which her Mothers Brother Alimented her Gratis, after her Fathers
Death, but for no time of his Life, seeing she le^t her Fathers House, upon
pretense of her Step-mothers severity, January 21. 16^8. Steuart contra Lord
of Rossesyth. Al^ment of a Daughter by her Mother, Married, was ^ound due, the
Daughter being appearand Heir to her Father, whose whole Lands the Mother
Liferented, though the Daughter Renunced to be Heir, July 16. 1667. Ha^iltoun
contra Symontoun. Aliment was not found due to an appearand Heir, who was
Major, and kept a Brewary, by a Liferenter, whose Liferent was very mean, and
entertained one of his Children, January 27. 1669. Stirling contra Heriot. ANN
was found to be the whole year wherein the Defunct dyed, if he dyed before
Michalmas, and if he dyed after Michalmas, and before January, to be the whole
year in which he dyed, and the half of the next year; but if he reached
January, dying in February, he has that whole year, July 5. 1662. Executors of
Fairly contra his Parochioners. An^ of a Minister having a Wife and no Bairns,
was found to divide equally betwixt his Wife and nearest of Kin, June 24. 1663.
and July 19. 1664. Scrymzour contra^ Executors of Murray. Ann of a Minister
dying after Michalmas, and before Mar^^nmas, was ^ound to extend to that years
Stipend, and the hal^ of the next, July 19. 1664. Inter ^osdem. ANNEXED
PROPERTY of the Crown was found not validly dissolved, unless the dissolution
had preceeded the Gift and Infeftment, and had proceeded upon weighty Reasons,
by a special Act, and not by a Clause i^ a Ratification of the Gift, February
25. 1669. Kings Advocat contra Earl of Mortoun and Viscount Grandi^ound absent.
ANNVITY of Teinds included being in question, it was recommended to the Parties
to settle, but the Lords inclined to Liberat the Teinds, January 10. 1662.
Lord of Rentoun contra Ker. ANNVS DELIBERAND I, was found to exclude
Reductions and Declarators against appearand Heirs, not requiring a Charge to
Enter Heir, in respect the appearand Heir must therein except upon the Defuncts
Rights, and so behave as Heir, June 27* 1667. Dewar contra Paterson* Annus
deliberandi, Excludes Citations, given within that year, here the day of
compearance was within the year* Ibidem. ANNVALRENT was not found due for sums
of Money without paction, albeit the Money was lent with this provision, that
failing Heirs of the Creditors body, who was very old, the Debtor should
succeed, December 11. 1662. Logi^ contra Logi^. Annualrent was found due after
Horning, albeit the Decree being Sus^ended, a part of it was taken away, yet
Annual was found due for the rest, January 30. 1663. Rigg of Carberry contra
his Creditors. Annualrent was allowed without paction for a Port^on, left by
Legacy to the Defuncts natural Daughter, the time of payment of which Legacy
was her Marriage, which being in her power, The Lords would give no occasion to
hasten the same, but allowed Annualrent in the mean time, June 25. 1664. Inglis
contra Inglis. Annualrent was not found due by a Father to his Son for a Legacy
left to his Son by his Mothers Father, and uplifted by the Father, during the
time he alimented his Son in his Family, December 15. 1668. Windrham contra
Eleis. Annualrent promised for a time by a Letter* was found due in all time
thereafter, January 13. 1669. Hume contra Seaton of Menzies. Annual of Annual
was not found due, though expressly obliged to be paid by a Bond, bea^ing, That
after each Term the Annualrent, if it were not paid, should bear Annualrent
with the principal, which clause was found null, and not in the same case with
a Bond of Corroboration* granted after Annualrents were due, accumulating the
same, January 26. 1669. Lady Braid contra E^rl of King^orn. APPRYZINGS were
found not to be affected by a Bond or a Contract amongst the Appyzers, to
concur and communicate their Rights, as to singular Successors, seeing the
Contracters were then Infeft, July 1661. Ta^lzi^er contra Maxtoun. An Apprizing
led before the year 165^. but no Infeftment thereon till after that year, was
found not to come in pari passu with posterior Apprizings Infeft, or Charging
after the Charge or Infeftment on the Appryzing before 1652. but it did exclude
them wholly, December 12. 1666. Sir Henry Hume contra Creditors of Kello. An
Apprizer was found Comptable ^or his Intromission with such as he Entered in
Possession of, according to the Rental the Lands gave at his Entry, with power
to him to give up all defalcations in his Discharge, and instruct the same,
January 4. 1662. Seaton contra Rosewall. An Apprizer was excluded by a prior
Infeftment, though granted to the Creditors appearand Heir, whereby he became
Lucrative Successor, after this Debt contracted, but prejudice to pur^ue him
personally, or to Reduce on that Title, January 6. 1662. Mansoun contra
Bannerman of Elsick. An Apprizer pursuing for Removing, and Mails and Duties,
his pursuit was Sustained only as ^o so much of the Apprized Lands, as he
should choose, worth 8. per cent, and to count for the superplus more than his
Annualrent and publict burdens excepting the Defenders House and Mains, by the
late Act of Parliament, betwixt Debtor and Creditor, June 27. 1662. Wilson
contra Murray. Apprizers Competing upon the late Act of Parliament, bringing in
Apprizings since 1652. pari passu, was found not to exclude Apprizings before,
having obtained Infeftment since; but that none could come in with him, who was
first Infeft, and paid the Composition till they refounded their shares
thereof, January 24. 1663. Graham contra Ross. But also by the Tenor of the
late Act, the first Apprizers being Infeft in an Annualrent, were found to have
access to his Annualrent, though there was no poinding of the ground February 5.
1663. Inter ^osdem. An Apprizer was found comptable for the Rents of the
apprized Lands, during the Debi^ors Minority, contrary the Act of Parliament
1621. Which was ^mended in the late Act, 1641. But in the late Act Resc^ssory,
that was not Revived, seeing all private Rights by these Rescinded Acts. m^dio
tempore, were Reserved, and this had been the Custom for twenty years, February
18. 1663. Rosse contra Mckenzie. Apprizers Competing, the first Apprizer having
given the first Charge on the Letters of ^our Forms, and before the days
thereof were expired, the Superior Infefting a second Apprizer, the Infeftment
was found Collusive, and the first Apprizer, giving the first Charge, and
Infeft within a little time after the second, was preferred, and the first
Infeftment Reduced, was still in Possession till now, that the Legal was
expired, not only the bygone Fruits were his own, but that he might Redeem
within a year after this Sentence, seeing by the Taci^urnity of the Pursuer, he
was in bona fide to continue his Possession, and not to doubt his own Right, or
Redeem a second Apprizer, December 3. 1664. Lord of Cl^rkingtoun contra Lord
of Corsbie. An Apprizing within a year was excluded from coming in pari passu,
with a prior Apprizing, in respect the prior Apprizer, had before the Act
betwixt Debtor and Creditor, taken Right to a prior Apprizing, without
necessity to allege, that he took the Right to shun the expiring of the Legal
of that prior Apprizing, or any other necessary Caus^, December 9. 1664. John
Veatch younger of Dawick contra Alexander Williamson. Apprizers Competing,
where the first Apprizer being Infeft would possess but a part, the Debate
being as to the rest, betwixt the second Apprizer, not Infe^t, and the third
Infeft; the Lords preferred the second as needing no Infeftment, December 22.
1664. Doctor Ramsay and Hay contra Seatoun. Apprizers come in pari passu, not
before the date of the late Act, but from that time both Parties Sums should be
accumulate, and the Mails li^ted proport^onally, but pr^ceeding Mails should be
imputed in payment of the Expense of the Apprizing, Composition to the
Superior, and then in payment of the principal Sums, January 7. 1665. Grahame
of Blackwood contra Brow^s. An Appri^ing being to be led, the present H^ritor
and Possessors obtained assessors to be joined to the Messenger, that he might
stop the Apprizing by production of his In^e^tment, ^ebruary 3. 1665. Sir John
Fletcher Supplicant. An Apprizing ordained to be allowed, and Registrat after
the Debitors death, and long after the sixty days were past from the Date of
the Apprizing, and that upon Supplication, without Citation* in respect it was
found* that the Apprizing Registrate Quandocu^que, would be preferred to
others, not sooner, or more orderly Registrate, June ^. 1665. An Apprizer
pursuing for Mails and Duties, was excluded till he ^atisfied the Superior for
a years Rent, he being now ready to Rec^ive him, albeit he ^as Charged before,
and did not obey, July 22. 1665. Iohnstoun contra Tennents of Auchincorse. An
Apprizing being lost, and a new Extract thereof being Sub^cribed by the Clerk
of the Apprizing, but not by the Messenger, being produced as a Title in a
Process, the same was not Sustained without the Messengers Subscription, or his
Executions; but the Party was remitted to prove the Tenor thereof, December
1665. M^culloch contra Craig. An Apprizing was found to be satisfied by
Introm^ssion, not only within the years, but also within the three years added
by the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, though the Apprizing was led long
before that Act January 20. 16^6. Clappertoun contra Lord of Torsonce. Here it
was also found that a part of the Lands Apprized being sold irrede^mably by the
Apprizer, were Redeemable within thr^e years; and that the singular Successor
was only comptable for the Rents thereof, and not the Apprizer who had sold the
same before the Act. An Apprizing led upon several Sums, of one whereof the
Term of payment was not come, the Apprizing was ^ound null, as to that Sum; but
whether it would be null in totum, or whether it would be valide to carry the
whole Right of the Lands, as that Sum had never been in: or if a proportional
part of the Land, effeiring to that Sum, would be free of the Appr^izing, the
Lords decided not, but were of different Judgments, February 16. 1666. Sharp
of Houstoun contra Glen. An Apprizing was found extinct, as being satisfied by
the Debtor, and retired by him with a blank Assignation thereto, lying by him
at his death, though his Son thereafter filled up his Name therein, which was
instructed, partly by the Sons Oath, which was found not sufficient to prove
alone, and partly by Witnesses, ex officio, one of which, who proved most
clearly, was his Brother, February 27. 1666. Creditors of the Lord Gr^y contra
the Lord Gray. An Apprizing on a Bond bearing a Sum to be payable without
Requisition, was found valide without either Requisition, or Charge of Horning,
July 21. 1666. Thomson contra M^kitrick. An Apprizing was found extinct, as to
a Party in whose favors the Apprizer granted a Back-bond, bearing (that the
Apprizing should not be prejudicial to that Parties Right) which was found
Relevant against a singular Successor, viz. The Kings Donator having right to
the Apprizing by Fore^aulture, July 31. 1666. Earl of Southesk contra Marquess
of Huntly. An Apprizing was found satisfied within the Legal by Intromission,
and no part of the Martinmas Rent was ascribed to a Tercers Right, not being
served, though she gave Tack to the Apprizer, he having Entered on the Debitors
Possession, December 21. 1666. Zeaman contra O^^phant. An Apprizing led against
an appearand Heir, as specially Charged to Enter Heir, was preferred to the
Infeftment ^f the next apparent Heir, after the Heir Charged his death, or the
Infe^tment of their singular Successor granted after the matter became
Litigious, albeit the Apprizer from the apparent Heir Charged, was never
Infeft, nor Charged the Superior upon the App^izing, neither was the apparent
Heir himself Infeft, but that the Superior might be Changed at any time after
the apparent Heirs death; and albeit the next apparent Heirs* could not Enter
Heirs to the former apparent Heir Charged, but to his Predecessor, to the
effect they might Reduce or Redeem the Apprizing, led against the former
apparent Heir, February 6. 1668. Iohnstoun contra Erskin. An Apprizing was
found Redeemable from the eldest Son, and apparent Heir of the Debtor, within
ten years, for the sums he truly paid out, by the Act of Parliament 1661.
albeit his Father was living the time of this Process, June 19. 1668. ^urnet
contra N^smith. An Apprizer since 1652. pursuing the rest for his part of the
Duties, as coming in with them pari passu, by the Act 1661. betwixt Debtor and
Creditor, his Apprizing was ^ound not to be effectual, till the allowance
thereof were Registrate, conform to the late Act of the same Parliament, anent
Registration of allowances, but that it required no determinate time to
Registrate, but whenever Registrate it would be effectual as to all Rights,
not completed before Registration, July 17. 1668. Steuart contra Murra^^. An
Apprizing on an Assignation to a Cautioner, or for his behove, Apprizing for
the whole sum, without deduction of that Cautioners part, was not found null,
in totum, but Restricted to the Sum truly due, being within the Legal, July 22.
1668. Iohnstoun of Sheins contra Arnold. An Apprizing and Infeftment thereon,
granted by the Excheque^ of course without notice, when the King by
Forefaulture, was im^ediate Superior, was found not to supply a Confirmation,
or to exclude the Donator of the Forefaulture, pursuing a Removing on a
posterior Gift, December 9. 1668. Earl of Argile contra Stirling. Apprizing
with a Charge against the Superior, does not exclude the Liferent Escheat of
the Vassal, against whom the Apprizing was led, without consideration whether
the Superior was in culpa, by not obeying the Charge, June 28. 1667. Dowglat
contra Lisk. An Apprizer having at several times Apprized on several Sums, and
Entered in possession by the first Apprizing, before the second was led, was
found to impute his whole Intromission to the first Apprizing, that thereby it
might be satisfied within the Legal: The Apprizer was also found comptable for
what sums he received, for a part of the Lands sold by him within the Legal,
but for no greater price: and a joint probation was refused, though it was in
the Highlands, the Apprizer offering to prove by Witnesses above exception, and
the Lords ordained both the Feears to be produced, and the greatest prices to
be proven, that they might choose what Rate to ^ollow, January 14. 1669.
Mckenzie of Puglas^ contra Ross of Auchnacloich. An Apprizing led against one
Charged to Enter Heir, who dying un-infeft, his Sisters as Heirs to his
Grandfather, to whom he was Charged to Enter Heir, were ^ound to have the
Right of Reversion of the Appri^ing, albeit they were not Heirs to their
Brother, who was Charged to Enter Heir, but dyed un-infeft, January 1^. 1669.
Iohnstoun contra Erskin Lord Lion. An Apprizer having Charged the Superior, was
found not thereby to become Vassal, so as by his death the Lands would ^all
Waird, but by the Death of the Party, against whom the Apprizing was led,
unless the Apprizer when he Charged the Superior, had presented a Chatter, with
an offer of Money, and a Bond for what ^urther the Lords should modifie for the
years Rent, and had put the Superior in culpa aut mora, in not Infefting the
Apprizer, and that whether the Superior required the same or not, February 9.
1669. Black Donator by the Duke of Hamil^oun contra French. Vide Liferent,
Douglas contra L^^k. An Apprizing was found extinct, by the Intromission of him
to whom the Apprizer granted Back-bond, declaring the Apprizing to be to his
behove, and that against a singular Successor, who thereafter obtained
Disposition and In^e^tment upon the Apprizers Resignation, Iu^y 12. 1670.
Kennedy contra Cuninghame and Wallace. An Apprizing posterior was preferred to
a prior Appri^ing, being less formal and solemn, according to the custom then
in u^e, the posterior being upon Denunciation at the Market Cro^s of the
Sheriffdom, and the other at the Market Cross of the Regality, when Regalities
were suppressed by the Usurpers, and was led at Glasgow, July 15. 1670. Lady
Lucia Hamiltoun contra Boy^ of Pitcon. An Apprizer was ^ound comptable for the
whole Rents of the Lands he possessed by his Apprizing, both for his Ommission
and Intromission, and that not only till his Apprizing was satisfied, but for
all years subsequent, that he continued to intromet with any part, January 26.
1671. Cass contra Cunninghame. An Apprizing coming in the person of the
apparent Heir of the principal Debtor, was ^ound extinct by satisfaction of
the ^ums paid by the apparent Heir therefore, summarly without Reduction, not
only as to the Estate of the apparent Heir, but as to the Estate of a Cautioner
^or that Debt, which was also Apprized, February 22. 1671. Dumbar of Baldoon
contra Dick. An Apprizer of an Annualrent was preferred to an Arrester,
although there was no Diligence upon the Apprizing, for nine years before the
Arrestment, and that there was no Infeftment, or lawful Charge on the
Appr^zing, in respect it was a prior judicial Assignation, requiring no
Intimation, February 23. 1671. Lord Justice Clerk contra Fairholme. Apprizings
deduced since January 1652. within year and day of the first effectual
Apprizing, were found not to be compted by a year from the Infeftment or
Charge, by which the Apprizing becomes effectual, but from the date of the
first effectual Decree of Apprizing, by the Act 1661. betwixt Debtor and
Creditor, Which bears, That all such Apprizings shall be, as if one Apprizing
had been led for the whole, July 4. 1671. Lord of Balfoure contra Douglas. An
Apprizing was found satisfiable by Exception or Reply, as being to the behove
of the Debtor, or his eldest Son, for the sums that were truly paid out by
the Act of Parliament 1671. Albeit the Apprizing was Expy^ed, Ibidem. An
Apprizing was Sustained, though it proceeded on a Bond, payable upon
Requ^sition, and that the Claim of the Apprizing did make mention of the
Requ^sition, seeing the Requisition was done, and is now produced* and though
the Messenger having met at the diet appointed for the Apprizing, did adjourn
the Court of Apprizing till the next day, in respect of a great Rain, and that
the place designed for the Apprizing was upon the open Field: and though the
place of the Apprizing was by di^pensation, neither at Edinburgh, nor at the
Head Burgh of the Shire, and past as a common Bill of course, July 12. 1671.
Heirs of Lundy contra the Earl of Southesk and others. In Apprizings Messengers
are prohibit by Act of Sederunt, to continue the dyer of Apprizings, except
upon absolute necessity, that Parties interressed be not put to uncertain
attendance: and likewise, di^pen^ations for the place of Apprizings is
prohibit to be past of course amongst other common Bills, without being Read,
Ibidem. An Apprizing acquired by the appearand Heir of the Debtor, was found
satisfiable by any other of the Defuncts Creditors, by paying what the
appearand Heir truly paid therefore, albeit the appearand Heirs Disposition
was before the Act of Parliament 1661. seeing his Infeftment, by which the Right
real is Established in his Person, and his Author was Denuded, was after the
said Act; and albeit the Apprizing was not expired, when the appearand Heir
acquired Right, but that it became to expire, continuing in his Person, and
that it was Redeemable within ten years from the date of the acquiring, but not
from the expiring of the Legal, I^ne 21. 1671. Maxwel of Nether-pollock contra
Maxwel of Kirkconnel, An Apprizer was found not obliged to restrict his
Possession to his Annualrent, in favors of posterior Apprizers, by the Clause
for Restriction in the Act of Parliament 1661. which is personal and peculiar
to the Debtor; but seeing the first Apprizer would not admit the posterior
Apprizers to possess, he should be comptable for the whole Rental, from the
time of the Exclusion, July 28. 1671. Murray contra Earl of Southesk and
others. ARBITERS got Warrant on a Supplication to Cite Witnesses before them,
January 6. 1670. Ker of Cavers and Scot of Goldenberry Supplicants. ARRESTMENT
was not elided, because the sum arrested was discharged before the arrestment,
seeing it appears the Discharge was not delivered to the Party. in whose hands
the arrestment was made, nor none to his use, before the arrestment, December
13. 1661. Boyd contra Lairds of Niddrie and Edmonstoun. An Arrester and an
Assigney competing, the Assigney was preferred, because the Arrestment was
loosed, albeit the sum Arrested remained still in the same hands, because the
Arrestment was on a dependence, and no Decree thereupon, against the principal
Debtor, July 4. 1661. Raith of Edmonstoun contra Lord of Niddrie and Lady
VVolmet. Arrestment cannot be loosed without Caution, super cautione juratoria,
July 16. 1661. College of St* Andrews Supplicant. Arrestment was found not to
affect the Sallaries of the Lords, and the Kings Pensions, conform to a Letter
and Act of Sederunt, February 18. 1662. Sir Robert Murray contra Arrestment
Execute on the Sabbath Day, was found null by Exception, February 3. 1663.
Oliphant contra Douglas of Dor^och. Arresters Competing, the second being on
Letters of Supplement, against a Party ou^ of the Country, was preferred to
the first, being at his Dwelling Place, without Supplement, January 20. 1665.
Lord Lowre contra Givon. Arrestment on a Bond not Registrate, was found
looseable, as not being on a D^^reet of Registration, or any other, and after
the loosing, the Arrester was found preferable to a posterior Assigney, seeing
the Money was yet in his Hand, in whose it was Arrested, February 7. 1665.
Grahame contra Brown and Doctor Martine. Arrestment being laid on in the hands
of a Party who Entered in a Minute, or Bargain of Land, though he passed
therefrom* yet the price was ordained to be made forthcoming, November 23.
1665. Campbel contra Doctor Beatoun. Arresters having both obtained Decree in
one day, were found not to come in equally, but the first Arrester was
preferred, have done equal diligence, February 1. 1666. Colonel Cunninghame
contra Lyel. An Arrester and Comprizer Competing for a S^m, whereupon Apprizing
was led at the Instance of the common debtor, whereupon no Infeftment
followed, yet the Arrestment upon the said first Apprizers debt, was not ^ound
habilis modus, to make forthcoming the Sum Appryzed for, but the second
Appryzer was preferred to the Arrester, February 22. 1666. Lockhart contra Lord
Bargenzie. An Arrestment was found to give Action after the death of the
debtor, whose Goods were Arrested, without a new Decree against any
Repre^enting him, seeing he died at the Horn, and so could have none to
Represent him in mobilibus, February 19. 1667. Givon contra Hume: here the
Defuncts Donator to his Escheat concurred, An Arrestment of Annualrents laid on
curr^nte termi^^, was preferred to an Appryzing of the Lands, led before that
Term, seeing Infeftment followed not thereon, before the Term, July 2. 1667.
Luster contra Aitone and Sleigh. Arresters Competing, the first Arrestment, and
first Citation before the Lords and compearance sine mora, was preferred to a
posterior Arrestment, and Citation before the Sheriff, though obtaining the
first Decree in absence, the Arrester not being in that Shire, November 23.
1667. Montgomery contra Rankine. Arrestments were found not to reach the Fie of
a Servant, in so far as was necessary for the Servants Aliment, conform to the
condition of his Service, but only as to the Superplus, July 9. 1668. ^oog
contra Davidson. Arrestment was found to Reach the next Terms Rent after it was
laid on* though it was not due when it was laid on, July 20. 1669. L^ssy contra
Cunninghame. Arresters Compe^ing, the posterior Arrestment by four days, was
preferred to the prior, in respect the Term of the Sum, for satisfying of
which, the Arrestment was laid on, was not come the time of the Citation, or
Competition before the Baillies, though by an Advocation, raised by the prior
Arrester, without a just Reason of Advocation, the Term was past before the
Competition before the Lords, July 29. 1670. Charters contra Neilson. AN
ASSIGNEY was not excluded by payment made to the Cedent after Intimation,
albeit the Assignation was to the behove of the Cedents Son, without a Cause
onerous, January 3. 1662. Ross of Earles-milns contra Campbel of Caddel. An
Assigney constitute by a Tutor, who took Assignation to his Pupils Bond, was
found to have no Process against the Pupil, till the T^tor Compts were made,
unless the Assigney fo^nd Caution for the Tutor, January 24. 1662. Ramsay
contra Earl of Wintoun. An Assignation omnium bonorum, by a Father to his Son,
was Sustained to give Process against the Debitors, albeit not Intimate in the
Fathers Life, and so in bonis defuncti, June 25. 1663. Hallyburtoun contra Earl
of Raxburgh. An Assigney may be prejudged by the Cedents Oath, before
Intimation; or if the Debtor pursue the Assigney, ad hunc e^^ectum, to take
away the Bond before Intimation by the Cedents Oath, and his being so called,
and producing the Assignation, will not exclude the Cedents Oath, February 15.
1662. Lord of Pitfoddels contra Lord of Glenkindy. An Assigney was found to
have interest to pursue, albeit his Assignation was not Intimate before the
Cedents death, without necessity of Confirmation, July 27. 1664. Muirhead
contra (...) Intimation, November 18. 1664. Guthrie contra Sornbeg. An
Assignation being gratuito^s, the Cedents Oath was found sufficient against the
Assigney, June 16. 1665. Wright contra Sheils. The like, June 13. 1666. Jack
contra Mowat. An Assignation to a Reversion, being Registrate in the Register
of Reversions, and a Liferent Infeftme^^ of the Wodset Land, Registrate in the
Register of Seasines, was found sufficient to give the Wife interest, even in
her Husbands time to Redeem, that she might Redeem the Wodset Land, for her
Liferent use, and to be preferred to an Appryzer of the Reversion, after the
Wifes Right, Registrate as said is, without necessity of any other Intimation,
December 5. 1665. Beg contra Beg. An Assignation to a Gift, when it is
incomplete, and before it pass the Exchequer, does not exclude the Donators
Back-bond, at passing thereof, even as to the Assigney, January 13. 1666.
Dollace contra Frazer of Streichen. An Assignation to such a sum yearly, out of
the first and readiest of the Teinds of such Lands, found not preferable to a
posterior Appryzing of these Lands and Teinds, as an Assig^ation to the Tack,
or whole Tack-duty of the Teinds, would have been preferred as habilis modus,
February 6. 1666. Watson contra Fleming. Assignation Vide Compensatione,
Cockburn contra Lord of Craigivar. An Assigney to a Tack, which is Transmitted
by Assignation, was not found as a singular Successor to Lands, passing by
Infe^tment, so that what is competent against the Cedent in Tacks, is competent
against the Assigney, except as to the manner of Probation by the Cedents Oath,
December 18. 1668. Swintoun contra Brown. Assigneys were found to have Right to
an Annualrent, granted by a Father to his Daughter and her Heirs, without
mention of Assigneys, though her Brothers and Sisters were substitute, failing
the Heirs of her Body; and though the Assignation was granted without a cause
onerous to another Brother, I^^e 24. 1669. Steuart contra St^uart. An
Assignation without Intimation, was preferred to an Executor Creditor of the
Cedent, even as to the Executors own debt, July 27. 1669. Executors of Redpeth
contra Iohnstoun. AN ATTESTER of a Cautioner in a Suspension, declaring that
the Cautioner was sufficient, being conveened Subsidiarie, was found to be no
further liable, than that the Cautioner then was holden as sufficient for the
Sum Charged for* December 17. 1667. Paterson contra Hume. A BAILLIE of Regality
amerciating Parties for a wrong committed, in the thrusting out of others out
of a Seat in the Church, in time of Divine Service, and beating of them, his
Decree was Sustained: though it extended to two hundred pounds, half to the
Party, and half to the Fiscal, January 30. 1663. Steuart contra Boggl^ and
Matthie. A Baillie of a Barony of Kirkland, being Infeft by the Abbots, with
full Jurisdiction, Civil and Criminal, with power to Repledge, and with power
to apply the whole amerciaments and Casualities to his own behove, his Right
was found not to be derogate from, or prejudged by the Kings Erecting a part of
that Barony in a Burgh Royal, and giving them power of Heading and Hanging, and
all Jurisdiction, unless they extinguished the Baillies Right by Prescription;
albeit it did not appear, that these Kirklands were Erected in a Regality, no
mention being made thereof in the Infeftment of Bailliarie, nor was it commonly
known under that Title, February 27. 1667. Lord Colvil contra Town of Culross.
A Baillie of Regality was found to have power to amerciat the Inhabitants of a
Burgh of Regality, though having Baillies of their own in the Burgh, in respect
the Burgh being Vassals to the Baron, their power is cumulative, and not
exclusive of his Jurisdiction; but there is place for prevention, to the first
Attatcher doing diligence, January 14. 1668. The Baillie of Regality of
Killimuire contra Burgh of Killimuire. BAIRNS Provisions being upon Bond
subscribed by their Father, but not delivered till he had disponed his whole
Estate to his eldest Son, with Warrandice from his own deeds done, or to be
done, and reserving his Liferent of a part, which was found sufficient to
Reduce the Bonds of Provision, and Appryzing thereupon, as not obligator till
delivery, or the death of the Father, and Revocked indirectly by the Sons
Disposition, January 10. 1668. Lord of Glencorse contra his Brothers and
Sisters. A Bairns provision posterior in date and delivery to a Creditors debt,
the Creditors Appryzing, though posterior, was preferred in a Reduction to the
Appryzing on the Bairns Portion though prior, July 22. 1668. Iohnstoun of Shems
contra Arnot, Vide Children, January 16. 1676. Erskines contra R^ynolds. A BOND
bearing borrowed Money, was found not Reduceable upon the Act against
Bankrupts, but that the Bond it self did sufficiently instruct the borrowing of
the Money, as the cause onerous, June 28. 1665. Mo^teith contra A^derson. A
Bond was found Heretable as bearing annualrent, though it was but 5. per cent,
in a Bairns Portion, June 28. 1665. P^tcairn contra Edgar. Bonds bearing
Annualrent are moveable till the first Term of payment of Annualrent, and fall
within single Escheat, June 26. 1668. Dick contra Keir. A Bond by a Father to a
Son, though bearing borrowed Money, yet was presumed to be for love and favor,
and the same with an Appryzing thereupon, was Reduced at the instance of
anterior Creditors, who obtained Decreets after the Bond for Bargains, which
were proven by Witnesses to have been contracted before the Bond, January 21.
1669. Creditors of Pollock contra Pollock his Son. A Bond by a Father to his
Son, after he was Married and out of his Family, payable after the Fathers
death, was found not Reduceable at the instance of posterior Creditors of the
Father, by the Act of Parliament 1621. against fraudful Alienations, though it
were Reduceable upon evidence of Fraud, ex jure communi, which were appointed
to be condescended upon: Ibidem. A Bond taken by a Father from a Son, after
Contract of Marriage* Vide Contract. BARONS Decreets are valide in Vaccance
time by their privilege, without dispensation, and they are competent to Judge
the Multures due by their Vassals, February 14. 1662. Nicolson contra Forbes of
Tillicutri^. A BARONY was found to include a Burgh of Barony as P^rt and
Pertinent, though not expressed in a donators Infef^ment, albeit it was expressed
in former Infeftments, and particulars of less moment were expressed in this
Infeftment, as comprehended in the Barony, January 15. 1668. Earl of Argile
contra Campbel. A BASE INFEFTMENT of Annualrent was sound valide against a
posterior public Infeftment, because thereupon there was a Decree of poinding
the Ground, though it could take no effect for a long time, till the entry to
the Annualrent, which was not, till after the Constituents death, 26, and 27.
of February, 1662. Creditors of Kinglass competing. A base Infeftment by a
Husband to his Wife on her Contract, was validate by, and preferred upon the
Husbands Possession, though the Wi^es Infeftment was of annualrent, and the
Husbands of property, November 23. 1664. Lady Grang^ contra Murray, where it
was found, that from the very date it was validate and preferred to any other,
though prior and base, but apprehending Possession upon a Citation before
Candlemas, it being Ferm Land, and a Decree thereon in March thereafter. Two
base Infestments of annualrent competing, one to a Wi^e, the other to a
Creditor, the Wife was preferred, being cled with Possession by the Husbands
possession, which was not found competent to the Creditor, though his
Infeftment was prior, and though he used Inhibition before the next Term, after
the Wifes Infeftment, and alleged the Husband could have no Possession after
the Wifes Infeftment, before his diligence, which the Lords Repelled, because
the Husband was in a present current Possession, and nor in acquirenda
possessione, but the Wifes Infeftment was only sustained in prejudice of this
Creditor, in so far as it had an anterior Cause to his debt: The Husbands
Possession was also found sufficient to validate the Wifes Infeftment of
annualrent, though he possessed the property which includes eminenter, all
other Rights, November 23. 1664. inter cosdem. An Infeftment of Warrandice
Lands being in the same Infeftment with the principal Lands, and both holden
base, was preferred to a posterior public Infeftment of the same warrandice
Lands, though cled with long Possession, and that upon an action of Mails and
Duties upon the Distress, without Reduction, January 9. 1666. Brown contra
Scot. A base Infeftment by a Father to a Son, reserving the Fathers Liferent,
was found not validate by the Fathers continuing his Possession, but the
Fathers Creditors appryzing were preferred to the Donator of the Sons
Forefaulture, founding upon the Sons Infeftment, June 14. 1666. Hume contra
Hume. A base Infeftment of annualrent was preferred to a posterior appryzing
and charge before the Term, at which the annualrent begane to be payable, in
respect the annualrenter was in Possession of the Land, out of which the
annualrent was payable and intus habuit, viz. his annualrent proportionally
from the date of his Right, June 30. 1666. Stevinson contra Dobbie. A base
Infeftment by a Father to a Son, Reserving the Fathers Liferent, was found not
validate by the Fathers possession, albeit the Father disponed the Lands
reserved to a third Party, who did possess; but the Disposition was of the Fee,
and no mention of the Liferent reserved, December 18. 1666. Lord Newbeath
contra Dumbar of Burgy. A base Infeftment was excluded by the Liferent Escheat
of the granter, albeit the base Infeftment was before the Rebellion, seeing it
was not cled with Possession in cursu rebellionis, within year and day.
February 21. 1667. Miln contra Clerkinson. A base Infeftment by a man to his
Wife, was preferred to a posterior public Infeftment, albeit the base
Infeftment was not cled with Possession of the Husband himself, but by others
deriving Right of Wodset, or other Temporary Right from the Husband, or his
authors, which was compted as the Husbands Possession, to validate the Wifes
base Infeftment, July 18. 1667. Lady Burgy contra Strachen. A base Infeftment
of annualrent was found to be validate by receipt of a part, though far within
a Terms annualrent, and not relative to the Infeftment, but to the Bond
whereupon it followed, and though there was no ann^alrent due before the
Infeftment, yet seeing the Receipt bear in part of payment of bygone
annualrents, the Annualrenter was allowed to ascribe it to the annualrents due
after the Infeftment, to exclude an Infeftment on an Appryzing, which appryzing
was led before the Receipt, but the Infeftment thereupon was after* and the
Receipt was proven by an Apocha under the Debitors hand, July 23. 1667. Hume
contra Hume and the Tennents of Kello. A base Infeftment of annualrent on a
Bond bearing 3000. merks of borrowed Money; and 3000. merks of Portion, the one
half of the whole Sum and annual^ents thereof, was Suspended till the Fathers
death, Yet payment of the annualrent of the other half not suspended, was found
sufficient to validate the whole Infeftment, and to prefer it to a posterior
public Infeftment, February 5. 1668. Keir contra Keir. A base Infeftment in
warrandice granted by a Husband to his Wife, holden of himself and ex
intervallo, after the principal Infeftment, was found valide against a
posterior public Infe^tment of the ^ame warrandice Lands, as being cled with
the Husbands Possession in the principal Lands, and that these needed no
declarator of Distress, or Eviction, but a pursuit of Removing, or Mails and
Duties upon Eviction is sufficient, which cannot be excluded by a possessory
judgment upon 7. years Possession, by the public Infeftment, unless it were
7. years after the Eviction, February 20. 1668. Forbes contra Innes. Base
Infeftments granted by a Father to his two Sons of the same date, one of
Property of Lands, and another of annualrent forth thereof, was found both
valide, as being cled with the Fathers possession, reserved in both, there
being no suspicion of defraud of Creditors, or competition with them, and that
a singular Successor appryzing and Infeft from the one, was not preferable to a
posterior Adjudger from the other, June 30. 1668. Chem contra Chrisly. A base
Infeftment of annualrent was found validate by Possession, upon another
Infeftment of annualrent, in corroboration of the former, out of distinct
Lands, whereby both Infeftments as to both Lands, were found valide, though no
payment was made by the Debtor, or by the Tennents in the first Infeftment,
July 9. 1668. Alexander contra the Lord of Clackmannan. A base Infeftment to a
Creditor, was preferred to a posterior public Infeftment, granted to a Wife by
an additional Ioynture, in respect there was a Citation on the base Infeftment,
anterior to the Wifes public Infeftment, which was found to validate the same,
and sentence of preference of poynding of the Ground, was now granted therein,
January 27. 1669. Bell of Belfoord contra Lady Ruther^oord, A base Infeftment
never cled with Possession, was found valide to exclude the Terce of the
granters Relict. Ib^dem A base Infeftment by a Father to his Children, was
found not validate by the Fathers Possession, wherein he continued, albeit he
had a Factory from the Children: here it was not alleged that the Father had
granted Discharges, or used Citation expressly, relative to the Factory, July
10. 1669. Gairdiner contra Colvil. BASTARDY being gifted by the Usurpers,
defends the Bastards Debitors no further than what they bona fide paid to the
Donator, but not for what was yet in their hands, which belongs to the Kings
Donator. July 19. 166^. Windrham contra Megregors. Bastardy was found not to be
relevantly Libelled, that the Defuncts Father and Mother were not Married, but
that it behoved to be alleged, that the Defunct was commonly holden and
repute Bastard: But that it was also sufficient, that the Defuncts taking a
Legitimation, had acknowledged his Bastardy, February 19. 1669. Kings Advocate
contra Craw. Bastardy was found not to be inferred by the negative presumption,
that the Father and the Mother were not Married, but that it behoved to be
proven positive, that the Defunct was holden and repute Bastard, June 15. 1670.
Livingstoun contra Burn. Bastardy puts the Donator to no better case, as to
Backbonds, or mutual Obligements, than the Bastard his Heir would have been in,
June 20. 1671. Alexander contra Lord Sa^toun. BEHAVING AS HEIR by intrometting
with the Mails and Duties of the Defuncts Lands, was elided, because the
Defender intrometted singulari titulo, by an Appryzing, though the Legal was
not expired, unless it had been clearly satisfied by intromission, or
otherwise, January 10. 1662. Barclay contra Lord of Craigivar. Behaving as
Heir was found in no time coming to be ^lided by taking Right to any Appryzing
or Adjudication, led against the Intrometters for their own Debt, real or
simulate, though such Rights were expired, February 28. 1662. Act of Sederunt
Vide, January 22. 1662. Glendoning contra Earl of Nithisdail. Behaving as Heir
was not inferred by In^romission with the Rents of the Lands, which were
disponed by the Defunct, and Infeftment thereon; but to the behove of the
Defender the appearand Heir, January 14. 1662. Harper contra Hume of
Plandergaist. Behaving as Heir was inferred by the appearand Heir, his
in^rometting with the Rents of Lands belonging to his Father the Debtor, in so
far as being disponed to the Defender, they were Redeemed by him, though no
Declarator or new Infeftment followed; and also found by intrometting with the
Fathers whole Silver-work, without alleging a formal drawing of the Heirship,
or taking any of them as such; and though the Lands were Appryzed from the
Defunct, seeing the Legal was un-expired, and the Defender had no Right from the
Appryzer, February 21. 1663. Hamiltoun contra Hamiltoun. Behaving as Heir, by
intrometting with Heirship was not ^lided, because the Defuncts Lands were
apprized, seeing the Legal was not expired before his death, February 26. 1663.
Cuthbert of Drakies contra M^nro of Foulis.
Behaving as Heir was not ^nferred by intromission with the Rents of the
Defuncts Lands, which were appryzed, and whereunto the appearand Heir acquired
Right, before he fell to be apparent Heir, though he continued to possess after
the appryzing was satisfied by intromission, February 26. 1663. Inter cosdem.
Behaving as Heir was elided as to Heirship, because the Defunct dyed Rebel, and
his Escheat was gifted and declared Ibidem. Behaving as Heir, by meddling with
heirship, was not elided, because the Defunct dyed at the Horn, and thereby
nihil habuit in bonis; nor yet that the Escheat was gifted before intenting of
this cause; but that it was gifted and declared before, June 10. 1663. Gordoun
of L^smore contra Keith. Behaving as Heir was elided, because the Defunct was
Rebel, his Escheat gifted and the appearand Heir intrometted by the Donators
Rights or Tollerance, and that before intenting of the Cause, albeit no
declarator thereon, July 4. 1665. Innes contra Wilson. Behaving as Heir was not
Sustained upon Intromission, had by a Tutor, November 30. 1665. Boyd contra
T^lzi^er. Behaving as Heir was not Sustained by Heirs of Line, their Renuncing
to be Heirs; in favors of the Heir-male, to whom the Father had disponed,
seeing they gave no Right thereby, hurtful to Creditors, but gave a Renunciation
voluntarly, which Law would have compelled them to give, though for their
kindness they got a sum of Money, July 5. 1666. Scot contra Heirs of
Auchinleck. Behaving as Heir by Intromission with the Rents of the Defuncts
Lands, was elided by Tollerance from a Donator of Recognition, albeit not
declared till after the Intromission, the Defender paying the single value,
July 17. 1666. Ogilby contra Lord Gray. Behaving as Heir by intromission with
the Duties of the Defuncts Lands, was elided by a Disposition from the Defunct
to the Intrometters Son, the Defuncts oye, though without Infeftment, or by a
Tack by the apparent Heirs Husband, though expired before the Defuncts death,
as continuing per tacitam relocationem, January 16. 1667. Re^d contra Salmond.
Behaving as Heir was Sustained by Exception, January 8. 1668. Forbes contra
Innes. Behaving as Heir was found to be instructed by a Discharge granted by
the Party as appearand Heir, bearing receipt of the Defuncts Charter Chist,
without any Inventary or Protestation, and keeping of it two years, without
necessity to allege that any use was made of the Writs, but was not inferred
by raising of Breives to serve Heir, wherein no Service followed; or by
Revocking deeds done by the Defunct in his Minority, June 28. 1670. Eleis of
Southside contra Casse. Behaving as Heir was not inferred by the appearand
Heirs having right or tollerance from App^yzers, and intrometting thereby, even
within the Legal; but was inferred by continuing the Defuncts Possession,
before obtaining such Warrant, and that any Creditor, though not Appryzer,
pursuing the appearand Heir, behaving as Heir, and he Defending upon the Right
of an Appryzing, that the Creditor might Summarly by Reply, prove satisfaction
of what he truly paid out, by intromission or present payment, and thereupon
he was obliged to Assign, or Dispone to the Creditor, July 11. 1671. Maxwel
contra Maxwel. Behaving as Heir was not inferred simply where the Defender was
Infeft, as Heir to her Mother, her Father and Mother being Infeft in Conjunct
see upon their Contract of Marriage, by which there was probable ground to
think that her Mother was Feear and not her Father, July 12. 1671. Gairns
contra Sandilands. BILLS OF EXCHANGE being accepted, and before the Term of
payment the Accepter dying, no Exchange or Re-exchange was found due, but the
obtainer of the Bill might either return upon the drawer, for single value, or
proceed against the Successors of the Accepter; This Bill was protested for not
payment, at the dwelling House of the Defunct, July 3. 1664. Kennedy contra
Hutcheson. A BLANK Bond, as to the Creditors Name, was found to constitute the
Receiver thereof to his own behove Creditor, and that it would be affected with
his Deb^s and Deeds, and fall under his E^cheat, as if his Name had been filled
up before, and before any other Name was filled up, shown or intimat, an
Arrester being Creditor to the person who got the Bond, is preferable to him
whose Name is filled up therein, November 11. 1665. Telzifer contra Geddies,
debated again, and so decided, December 1. 1665. A blank Bond being filled up
by him who r^^eived it in Name of another, and delivered to that other, and by
him shown to the Debtor, these particulars being proven by Witnesses ex
officio, the ^^^ty whose Name was filled up, was preferred to a Creditor of him
to whom the Bond was first delivered blank, arresting all Sums due to him in
the Debitors hands, but after filling up, and showing of the Bond to the
Debtor, without necessity of an intimation by Instrument, January 18. 166^.
Birnie contra He^drieson and George Vide Compensation inter ^osdem. A blank in
a Disposition, whereby Lands are Disponed to two for themselves, and the
Creditors of the Disponer afterspecified; after which several ^ines were
written with another hand, inserting the particular Creditors and Sums, without
mention of the Writer of that part of the Writ, whereupon it was presumed, that
that blank was filled up after the date of the Writ, and after another
Creditors Inhibition, unless the contrary were proven, not by the Trusties
oath, but by the Witnesses insert, or other Witnesses above Exception, January
16. 1670. Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra the Creditors of Monkcastle. BLOODWITS
were found due to a Superior Infeft cum Bloodwitis, albeit not a Baron holding
immediately of the King, December 12. 1665. Cranstoun contra Pringle. BONAE
FIDEI POSSESOR ^acit fructus consumptos suos, though he have not possessed so
long as to obtain a possessory judgment, November 18. 1664. Guthrie contra
Lord of Sornbeg, and though the other Parties Infeftment was Registrate. Bonae
^idei possesior, etc. was found Relevant to defend a Party possessing by a
Contract with a minor, though Reduced upon minority, as to the years uplifted
before the Reduction, February 16. 1666. Earl of Wintoun contra the Countes of
Wintoun. Bonae ^idei possessor, was found Liberat from the Mails of a Booth,
whereof he had Tack till a Sum were paid, albeit the Setter was but
Li^erenter, and had purchased the Tenement to himself in Liferent and to his
Son in Fee, but the Father was commonly repute Feear, and did not set the Tack
as Liferenter, yet the same was excluded from the duties before Citation, and
was not found to have Right from a Warning he had made after his Fathers death,
by chalking of the door, without any other intimation, February 16. 1669.
Hamiltoun contra Harper. Bona^ fides of Creditors lending their Money, and
seeing a Wifes Contract Registrate, bearing such a sum to be employed, was found
not to defend them against the Wife, who obtained a Declarator of Vitiation of
the principal Contract by her Husband and Fathers diminishing the ^ocher and
Ioynture, to be extended and amended as it was at first, June 11. 1670. Hunter
contra the Creditors of Peter. Bona^ fidei possessor, etc. was found of no
effect to one who obtained Decree of Removing, for not payment of the Duties
in absence, and produced not his Infeftment, but an Infeftment of another
person of the same Name, which being a ^raudulent deed, he could not thereby
have a Title bonae fidei, July 21. 1671. Neilson contra M^nzies of Enoch.
BVRGHS were found to have no power to stent any part of the Charges of their
Commissioners, sent to the Convention of Burrows, upon these who had no Trade
in their Town, but only Tenements, or for any part of a second Ministers
Stipend, unless it had been due by Law, Sentence, consent of party, or
prescription, February 1. 1669. Boswel contra the Town of Kirkaldie. The
privilege of Burghs by the Act of Parliament, that no Trads-men should
exercise their Trade in Suburbs, was found only to extend to such Suburbs as
had no privilege, but if the Suburbs were erected in a Burgh of Regality, or
Barony, or were within a Barony, the Inhabitants might freely use these Trades
albeit some of them had given Bond to pay such a Duty for the Liberty thereof;
The same could only bind themselves and not their neighbors, or the Heritors
Ground with a Servitude, without his consent, July 21. 1669. Town of Pearth
contra the Weave^s in the Bridge^ end of Pearth. A BVRGH ROYAL having obtained
Decree against certain persons in a Burgh of Borony, to desist from Merchant
Trade, and impowering the Burgh to sease on the Merchandise* and the persons of
the contraveeners, was found not to militate against others than those
individual persons, and not against the Lord or Baillies of the Barony, and
that there was no wa^rand in Law to in^arcerate persons hoc ordine, February
13. 1663. Town of Linlithgow contra unfree-men of Borrowstounn^s^. A Burgh
Royal pursuing a Burgh of Barony for desisting from Merchant Trade; The Lords
^ound the Letters orderly proceeded, till the Burgh of B^rony should find
Caution to desist from Merchant Trade in general, but would not suffer to
condescend upon particulars, as to the retailing of Wine, etc. which had been
forborne by the Lords these 30, or 40. years, June 24. 1664. Town of Cowper
contra Town of K^oucher. A Burgh-Royal having immemor^al possession, and free
Trading on the River on which it stood, was found not to be burdened with
Anchorage, Measurage, Tunnage and Weyage, granted by the King thereafter to
another Burgh, in Stations on that same River, though cled with 40. years
possession, but neither universal nor peaceable, but interrupted, February 6.
1666. Town of Glasgow contra Town of Dumbartoun.
A Burgh Royal being pursued by one who had Lands within their Burrow-Lands,
and Houses within their Town, were found not liable for any Stent out of his
personal Estate, or Trading, or for the Towns debts, or second Ministers
Stipend, unless he had consented, or had been in immemorial custom of payment,
July 22. 1668. Bosewel contra the Town of Kirkaldy. A Burgh Royal and their
Trads-men, were found not to have Right to hinder the exercise of Trads-men, no
ways adjacent to the Town to exercise their Trade, upon pretense of the Act of
Parliament, Prohibiting Workmen to exercise their Trades in the Suburbs of
Royal Burrows, Ia^uary 7. 1671. Lord of Polmais contra Trads-men of Stirling.
CAPTION was granted summarly upon supplication against a Bankrupt, who had
unexpectedly and fraudulently broken, and fled, though he was not Rebel, but
the Kings free Leidge, November 30. 1665. Creditors of Mason Supplicants. CASVS
FORTVITVS, was found not to Liberate the Grasser of a Horse that broke his
Neck, where the Owner of the Horse appointed him to be kept in at hard meat,
January 29. 1666. Scot contra Gib. A CAUSE ONEROVS of a Disposition, by one
Brother to another, was found not to be instructed by the Narrative thereof,
but behoved to be instructed aliunde, November 19. 1669. Whitehead contra
Lidderdail. A cause onerous of a Disposition, was found not instructed by its
own Narrative, or the Acquirers Oath, though he was not a conjunct person with
the Disponer, seeing the Disposition bear to be to two persons for themselves,
and to the behove of others, whose interest was evacuate, as being filled up
after an Inhibition, and the Disposition did not express what the Acquirers own
Interest was, July 15. 1670. Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra Boyd of Pi^con. A
CAVTIONER for Executors was found not conveenable till the Executor be discust,
and that Decree is not a sufficient discussing, without Registrate Horning,
though the Executor have no Lands, and though it was alleged he was Bankrupt,
July 24. 1664. Brisb^^e contra Monteith. A Cautioner in a Testament was found
conveenable and comptable with the Executor, before they were discust, but
superceeded all Execution against the Cautioner, till the Executor be first
Discust, December 2. 1662. Douglas contra the Lady Edmonstoun. A Cautioner for
an Apprentice was not liberate from causing the Apprentice serve his time, and
pay damnage for his absence, because the Merchand suffered him to go over Sea,
and intimate not to the Cautioner to restrain him, yet the penalty was modified
to 50. pounds, June 17. 1663. Allan contra Paterson. Cautioners conjunct,
getting Assignation from the Debtor, were found to have access to the rest,
allowing their own part, but are not obliged to accept their part of what they
truly paid by Composition, July 18. 1664. Ni^bit contra Lesly. A Cautioner
was not found liable to pay, unless the Debtor Assign him to the debt, and all
security he had from the principal thereof, January 10. 1665. Lesly contra
Gray: The contrary was found, July 10. 1665. Hume contra Crawford of Kerse. So
this is arbitrary, and according to the favor of the case. A Cautioner as Law
will, being obliged to present a party at all the dyets of Process, and pay
what should be decerned against him, if he did not produce him within Term of
Law; having produced the Party, and taken Instruments protesting to be free, he
was found liberate, albeit at that same time the party produced an Advocation,
and was not Incarcerate, seeing the Baillies might have Incarcerate him,
notwithstanding of the Advocation, February 20. 1666. contra Mcculloch. A
Cautioner as Law will, not being both judicio si^ti and judicatum solvi, was
liberate by putting the party in prison, though not judicially, when the cause
was called, July 10. 1666. Thomson contra Binnie. A Cautioner in a Suspension
of a Bond, wherein there were five Cautioners, being distressed, having paid
and obtained Assignation from the Creditor, was found to have access against
the first four Cautioners, as if he had been Cautioner with them, allowing his
own fifth part, February 3. 1671. Arnold of Barnkaple contra Gordoun of Cholme.
A CEDENTS Oath was found to prove against an Assigney, being the Cedents Son in
the same Family, having no ^eans of his own to acquire, and the Assignation
being gratuitous, November 30. 1665. White contra Brown. CERTIFICATION was not
sustained against the Writs granted to the Defenders Authors, but such as were
called for, though the Writ were alleged to be in his own hand, and these
Authors fully Denuded, January 3. 1662. Hume of St. Bathin^ contra Orre and
Pringle. Certification was not admitted against the Letters and Executions of
an Appryzing, there being no Reduction intented till 30. years thereafter,
November 20. 1666. Blackwood contra Purves. Certification was not admitted
against a Writ Registrate in the Register of Session, where the Extract was
produced, albeit the principal was not produced, and there were pregnant
evidences of Falsehood ibidem. Certification contra non producta, was stopped
upon producing, and offering to dispute that the Writs produced, excluded the
Reducer, without necessity to the Defender to declare that he would make use of
no more, and the Ordinary appointed to hear him thereupon, but if they sufficed
not, he behoved with the next to produce all, or declare he would make use of
no further, else Certification to be granted. December 7. 1667. Earl of
Lauderdale and Wachop contra Major Bigger. Certification was refused against a
Defender, producing an express Infeftment of the Lands in question, and the
pursuer alleging that they were part and pertinent of the Lands expressed in
his Title, he was ordained first to instruct them part and pertinent, before
the Defender was obliged to take a Term to produce, January 20. 1669. Hay Clerk
contra Town of Peebles. Certification extracted was found not to terminate the
Process of Improbation, but that in the same Process, the Pursuer obtained
Witnesses examined as to the Forgery, in so far as it depended not on the
inspection of the Subscriptions, and that upon production of Copies, the
Principals having once been judicially produced before, by the Defender
compearing, who now wilfully keeps them up. November 9. 1669. Lady Towie
contra Captain Barclay. Certification against a Decree of Valuation, was found
to have no effect against a Liferenter, publicly Infeft, not called, though
she had no right to the T^ind, but only to the Benefit of the Valuation, to
liberate the Stock of any further burden, July 15. 1670. Major Bigger contra
Cunninghame of Dankeith. Certification was found null by Reply, being in
absence, and where the conclusion of the Summons, as it is related in the
certification, was not in the Terms of an Improbation, and at the Kings
Advocats Instance, there being likewise a Discharge of a Terms Feu-duty granted
by the party having Right to the certification, which Term and Discharge were
posterior to the certification, and did import a passing from it, and did
Homologai^ the Vassals Right, June 6. 1671. Steil contra Hay of Ra^ray.
Certification contra non producta, was not Sustained at the instance of an
Appryzer, against all Writs granted by him and his Authors Named, and their
Predecessors, to whom they may succeed ^ure sanguinis, as to the Rights granted
by these Predecessors, unless it be instructed that the said Authors were
Infeft as Heirs to their said Predecessors; and that though Defenders be
obliged passive, to produce all Rights made to them and their Predecessors, to
whom they may succeed jure sanguinis, and so to produce before they be entered;
yet active they cannot insist for certification of Rights made by their
Predecessors, as appearand Heirs to them, but as being actually Heirs and
Infeft, and that an Appryzer was in no better case as to this, than if his
Authors had been pursuing, and so he behoved to instruct that they were Infeft
as Heirs to their Predecessors, July 14. 1671. Dumbar of Baldoon contra Maxwel.
Certification was not stopped, because there was none called to represent the
Defenders Authors, upon whom they did condescend, unless they first produce
their Rights from these Authors, thereby to instruct that they are Authors, and
unless that these Authors be obliged to them in warrandice, the warrandice
being the only ground of calling the Authors, that they might defend their
Rights to shun the warrandice Ibidem. A CHARGE to enter Heir was not found
necessary to a poynding of the Ground against the appearand Heir of the granter
of the Annualrent, January 2. 1667. Oliphant contra Hamiltoun. CHIROGRAPHVM
apud debitorem repertum, was found not only to extend to a Bond found by the
debtor, but to an Assignation made by the Cedent, found by him, and Witness
were not admitted to prove delivery, and instructing the Cedent to have the
Assignation as Agent, December 13. 1666. Thomson contra Stevinson.
CIRCVMVENTION was not Sustained upon a parties making bargain anent the boot of
an ^ Horse, though it was offered to be proven by the Defenders own Oath, that
according to his own estimation, the Pursuer was lesed above the half, and that
he was Minor, in respect of his Bond, bearing upon his oath and conscience,
never to come in the contrary, given at that same time in his minority, and
ratified after his Majority, June 23. 1669. Fairie contra Inglis.
Circumvention was found instructed upon several pregnant evidences of fraud,
and that not only against the circumveener, who obtained a Bond blank in the
Creditors Name, but against a third Party, whose Name was filled up in the
blank, he having acknowledged by his Oath of Calumny, that there were not
equivalent sums due to him by the circumveener, the time that he delivered to
him the blank Bond and filled up his Name; but that he became Debtor to him
thereafter in equivalent sums, whereof he could give no evidence even by his
own count Book, though he was an exact Merchant, and lived in the same place
with the granter of the Blank-bond, who is commonly known to be a simple
person, and the obtainer thereof a subdolus person, without asking the granter
of the Bond, if he had any thing to object, whereof he should not accept of it,
February 9. 1670. Scot contra Che^sly and Thomson. Circumvention was sustained
to Reduce or aba^e a Bond made up of the Rate of the Exchange of Money, not
agreed upon before the Money was advanced by the Merchant, but thereafter, the
Merchant being entrusted, and gave up the rate of Exchange, much higher than he
then^ knew it was, but not upon the agreement before hand, although it had been
far above the ordinary Rate, January 19. 1671. Dickson contra Grahame. CITATION
on a Bill without the Signet, was sustained against a person dwelling in
Edinburgh, though no member or dependent on the College of Justice, February
12. 1663. Earl of Southe^k contra Lord of Broo^^hal. Citation at the Market
Cross of the Shire, with certification to be holden as confessed, granted against
a Defender absent, where the Messengers Executions bear, that he Charged the
Defender at his dwelling House, and that he knew that he was within, but was
forcibly holden out by his Wife, July 1670. Lindsay and Swintoun her Spouse
contra Inglis. A CLAVSE in a Bond whereby a Sum was payable to the Man and
Wife, the longest liver of them two and their Heirs, which failing, the Man's
Heirs, was found to constitute the Wife a Lif^erenter only, and that she could
not uplift the sum, because the Heir was not concurring, and was Infeft, and
behoved to concur, December. 10. 1661. Kinross contra Lord of Hunthil. A
Clause in a Tack, that if two years duty run together unpayed, the Tack should
expire, and renuncing the same in that case, with a Bond bearing much Duty
resting, and if it were not paid by such a day, that the Master of the Ground
might enter in Possession of the Land and Cropped br^vi ma^^, was found to
exclude ejection and spuilzie by so entering without declarator. December 19.
1661. Dewar contra Countes of Murray. A Clause in a Missive whereby the Writer
says (I have sent you such a sum, and you shall have as much as long as you
live, if you carry your self as you do now) being questioned as a Postscript
unsubscribed, written with the Parties own hand, at his Subscription, was not
found null on that ground, but it being alleged to import but a resolution,
and not a promise, and that the Parties behavior should only depend on the
Writers opinion, without necessitating him to prove it aliunde; The Lords
assoilzied, July 15. 1662. Wauchop contra Lord of Niddrie. A Clause obliging a
party and his Heir-male, and all others succeeding to him, on this Narrative,
that his Heir male had the benefit of his Estate, and the Heirs female
excluded, were found to burden the Heir-male primo loco, and therefore behoved
to be discussed first, or the Executors could be liable, July 22. 1662.
Anderson contra Wauchop. A Clause destinating a Sum to be employed for the
Pursuer and his Heirs on Infeftment, was found Heretable quo ad creditorem, and
to exclude the Wife and Bairns, but Moveable quo ad d^bitorem, and payable out
of his Movables, July 22. 1662. Nasmith contra Iaffray. A Clause that an
Heir-male should pay a Sum to an Heir female out of ^enements, was found
personally to oblige him to pay, but only quo ad valorem, of the Tenements, and
therefore time was granted to dispose thereupon for that purpose, December 2.
1662. C^^^k contra Clerk of Pit^ncre^^f. A Clause bearing such a quantity to be
the just value of certain Aikers, was found not to be drawn in consequence to
necessitate the same party to accept the like quantity of other Aikers lying
run-rig therewith, December 18. 1662. Lord Balmerino contra Town of Edinburgh.
The Clause of Command, hunding out, and Ratihabition in a Spuilzie, was found
not to be inferred by giving the Messenger the precept of Poinding simply, but
by sending him and other^ Servants to a particular place extra territorium,
which made the poynding Spuilzie, January 9. 1663. Mason contra Hunter. A
Clause in a Bond providing a Sum to a Man and his Wife, the longest liver of
them two in Conjun^^see, and the Bairns procreate betwixt them, which
failzying, to two Bairns of his by a former Marriage, contaning also a precept
for Infefting the Spouses, and the Bairns of the Marriage, which failzying, the
two Bairns, etc. was found to constitute the Husband Feear, the whole Bairns of
that Marriage Heirs of provision, jointly male or female, the two Bairns of the
former Marriage Heirs Substitute, and that they behoved to be served Heirs and
Infeft, there being an Infeftment before, and that the Seasine in quantum, to
the two Bairns nominatim, though Bairns of this Marriage should ^ail, was not
valide, January 14. 1663. Beg contra Nicolson. A Clause in a Disposition of
Lands, bearing that it shall not be leisum to the Purchaser to alienate the
Lands during such a Man's Life, and if he did in the contrary, to pay 10000.
pounds for damnage and interest, ex pacto convento, was found not to be as a
liquidate penalty, for the expenses of the Failzi^ to be pe^formed by and
a^^our the principal obligement, but to be a liquidation of the principal
obligement it self, and to resolve into an alternative Obligation, February 4.
1663. Lord of Philorth contra Lord Frazier. A Clause in a Bond bearing to pay
the sum to the Lender or his Brother, was found not to give ground to use
compensation against that Brother, to exclude the Lender himself, February 14.
1663. Robertson contra Buchannan. A Clause in a Bond whereby the sum was
payable to the Man and Wife in Conjunctsee, and to the Bairns of the Marriage,
whereupon Infeftment followed to the Man and Wife, was found not payable to the
Wife till all the Bairns equally male or female were served as Heirs of
provision in the annualren^, and Infeft and Renunced, February 14. 1663. Hay
contra Morison. A Clause bearing to accept such a sum in case there were Bairns
of the Marriage, was found to take place if there was a Bairn surviving the
Mother never so shortly, February 17. 1663. Forsyth contra Patoun. A Clause in
a Bond bearing a sum payable to Man and Wife and their Heirs, but not
mentioning, which failzying, etc. was found to give the Wife the Liferent of
the sum, but not both the Liferent and half of the Stock, though it bear no
annualren^, and she was the longest liver, June 24. 1663. Scrymzour contra
Murrays. A Clause in a Tack wherein the Tacks-man was to retain his annualrent,
or to pay the Bolls at 20. shillings less nor the Feirs at his option, was
sustained not as usury, or contrary the Act, Debtor and Creditor, November 23.
1664. Scot contra Lord of Barefoord. A Clause in a Contract of Marriage,
providing a Wife to the annualrent of all Goods and Gear, Moveable and
Immovable, was found to exclude her from her third of Movables, and that she
could not both have the Liferent of the whole and a part of the Stock, December
20. 1664. Young contra Buchannan. A Clause in a Contract of Marriage, providing
a Ioynture to a Wi^e, with condition that she should restrict her self to so
much less in favors of the Bairns, and that the superplus should pertain to
the Bairns for their Aliment; This restriction was found not to be from the
Father, but from gratuity of the Mother, the whole Ioynture being no more than
proportionable to the condition of the parties, and so not to be in defraud of
the Fathers Creditors, November 16. 1^^5. Wat contra Russel. A Clause obliging
a Father and his Heirs of the first Marriage, which failzying his other Heirs
to pay to the Bairns of a second Marriage, at such an age, such s^ms, was found
to give no Right to the Assigney of them who attained not to that age, so soon
as they would have been of that age, if they had lived, but that it was dies
^ncertus qui pro conditions habet^r, and accresced to the rest, and the H^^^ of
the first Marriage failzying, never being entered Heir, the Heir of the second
Marriage had no share as Heir of that Marriage, but was excluded as Debtor in
the Clause, February 17. 1665. Edgar contra Edgar. In Clauses conceived
passive, the contracters are understood obliged, though they do not nominatim
oblige themselves February 22. 1665. Mowat contra Dumbar of Hemprigs. A Clause
in a Bond obliging many parties conjunctly and severally, without a Clause of
Relief, was found to import mutual Relief, ex natura rei, June 28. 1665.
Monteith contra Anderson. A Clause in a Contract of Marriage, obliging the
Husband and his Cautioner, that so soon as he should receive the Tocher from
the Wifes Father, the same with so much more should be employed for the Wi^es
Liferent use, was found valide against the Cautioner, 40. years after the date
of the Contract, without necessity to instruct that the Tocher was paid, seeing
it was the Husband and Cautioners ^ault that it was not demanded, and now it
cannot, because Prescription was run, July 5. 1665. Mackie contra Steuart. A
Clause in a Bond obliging a Cautioner as Sure^y and full debtor, was found to
make the Cautioner liable for the whole Sum, and not for the half only, though
it bear not conjunctly and severally, July 5. 1665. Dumbar contra Earl of
Dundi^. A Clause in a Bond obliging to pay the price of Wine according to the
conditions agreed on, was found to burden the Debtor to prove the conditions,
or to pay the common Rate of Wine, but it was found probable by Witnesses, July
29. 1665. Douglas contra Cowan and Russel. A Clause providing a Tocher to the
Husband and Wife, the longest Liver of them two in conjunctsee and Liferent,
and to their Bairns in Fee, was found not to constitute the Man and Wife Naked
Liferenters, but to have power to alter the Substitution, seeing there were no
Bairns existent at that t^me, D^^^mber 12. 1665. Pearson contra Mar^^e and his
Son. A Clause in a Letter whereby three parties obliged them to pay such Bills
as the bea^er would draw for Cows that he should buy for their use, he having
drawn a Bill upon them or any of them, each of them was found liable
accordingly in solidum, December 20. 1665. Mcl^^d contra Young and Giffan. A
Clause in a Bond bearing a sum payable to two brethren, or failing the one, to
the other, being a mutual Substitution, was found not jure accrescendi to
belong to the Surviver, but (...) Heir Substitute to the Deceassing, without
Children, yet so as not to be liable as Heir in solidum, but quo ad valorem,
July 3. 1666. Fleming contra Fleming. A Clause in a Writ bearing a Narrative as
a Testament, and leaving such a (...) Heir and Donator to such Tenenements, and
Assigning him to the Evidents, with power to him after return to Recall, was
found effectual though not formal to enforce his Heir to perfect the same,
January 31. 1667. Henrison contra Henrison. The same was renewed upon full
debate, November 4. 1667. and the being of the Writs in the granters hands
after his Retu^n, was found a sufficient Evidence of Recalling it, but its
coming back in the hands of the other party, was found not sufficient to Revive
it, but they were ordained to instruct how they came by it, whether as
delivered back again by the Granter, or found amongst his Papers, November 14.
1667. inter cosdem. A Clause obliging a party to pay such a sum, as being the
Annualrent of such a sum, without any obligation for paying the principal
expressed, was found not to imply an obligement to pay the principal, as
acknowledged due, but was found to constitute the Annualrent perpetual, and not
for the Woman's life, though it expressed not Heirs and Assign^ys, February 2.
1667. Power contra Dykes. A Clause in a Bond bearing a sum to be lent by a
Father for himself, and as Administrator for his Son, and payable to the
Father, and after his decease to the Son, but bearing that it was the Sons own
Money, not expressing how or from whom it came, was ^ound to constitute the Son
Feear, and the Father Naked Liferenter, February 14. 1667. Campbel contra
Constantine. A Clause disponing Lands, was found to carry the Miln, if the
Lands were a Barony, or if the Miln was not expressed in the Authors own Right,
otherways that it could not pass as part and per^inent, February 15. 1667.
Countess of Hume contra Tenants of Oldcambus and Mr. Rodger Hog. A Clause in a
Contract of Marriage, whereby the Husband is obliged to take the conquest to
the future Spouse in Conjunct^ee, and the Heirs betwixt them* Which failing,
the Heirs of the Man's Body, which failing, the Wifes Heirs whatsoever, was
found not to constitute the Wife Feear, upon the ^ailing of Heirs of the Man's
Body, but the Husband, February 20. 1667. Cranstoun contra Wilkison. A Clause
in the dispositive part of a Charter Cum privilegio piscaudi in aqua, etc. was
found not to be a sufficient Right of Salmond-fishing, unless Salmond-fishing
had been thereby posses^ forty years without interruption, and so it is only a
Title for Prescription, February 27. 1667. Earl of Southesk contra Lord of
Earlshall. A Clause in a Bond bearing sums to be paid to a Man and his Wife,
and their Heirs, bea^ing Annualrent, though no Infeftment followed, was found
to give the Wifes Heirs no share, seeing the Money appeared not to have been
hers, and was presumed to be the Man's, and he surviving did Revock the
Substitution, as a Donation betwixt Man and Wife, June 19. 1667. Iohnstoun
contra Cuninghame. A Clause in an Assignation by a Father to his Daughter,
bearing a power to alter during his Life, was found not to take effect by an
Assignation to a third party, who instantly granted a Back-bond bearing his
Name was but in trust to do diligence, and obliging himself to denude in
favors of the Father his Hei^s and Assigneys, but was not found to operate for
the Fathers Heir, but for the Daughter his Assigney, July 17. 1667. Scot contra
Scot. A Clause in a Tack setting 14. A^kers of Lands presently possessed by the
Tacks-man, was found not to limite him to 14* Aikers of any present Measure,
seeing he had possessed still since the Tack these 30. years, albeit it was
alleged that besides 14. Aikers, there were six Aikers severally ^enned and
possessed by different persons before that Tack, July 19. 1667. Dae^ contra Kyle.
A Clause in a Bond bearing a sum borrowed from Husband and Wi^^, and payable to
the longest liver of them two in Conjunctfee, and to the Heirs betwixt them, or
their Assigneys, which failing to the Heirs or Assigneys of the last liver, was
found to constitute the Husband Fe^ar and the Wife Liferenter, albeit she was
last liver, and the Heirs by the last Clause, were but Heirs of provision to
the Husband, in case the Heirs of the Marriage failed, January 26. 1668.
Justice contra Barclay his Mother. A Clause in a Bond whereby a Woman obliged
her self to enter heir of Line to her Father, and to resign certain Lands in
favors of her self and the heirs of her body, which failing to the heirs of
her Father, and obliged her self to do nothing contrary to that Succession^
whereupon Inhibition was used before her Marriage, was found effectual against
her and her Husband whom she Married thereafter, and disponed the Lands to him
and his heirs, as being a voluntar deed, without an equivalent cause onerous,
albeit by the said Bond of ^ailzie, the heir of provision beh^ved to be the
heir to the Woman her self, without discussing whether deeds done for causes
onerous, without collusion, would be effectual against the said heir of
provision, January 28. 1668. Binn^^ contra Binnie. A Clause in a second
Contract of Marriage, that the heirs of the Marriage should have right to Tacks
acquired during the Marriage, was found to extend to a new Tack obtained of
Lands, then possessed by the Father, unless he had a Tack thereof before in
Writ, which if not expyred, the new* Tack would not be esteemed conquest, if
the new Tack were given for the old, July 3. 1668. Frazer contra Frazer. A
Clause in a Testament, leaving a Legacy to a second Son in satisfaction of all
he could befall by his Fathers deceass, was found not to be in satisfaction of a
debt due by his Father to that Son, as having uplifted a Legacy left to him by
his Mothers Father, both not being above a competent provision by a Father in
his condition to his Son, December 15. 1668. Win^^^am contra Eleis. A Clause in
a Contract of of Marriage, providing all the Husbands Goods and Gear acquired
during the Marriage, to the Wife for her Liferent use, was found to be with the
burden of the Husbands debt, and only to be meaned of free Gear, and not to
exclude the Husbands Creditors at any time contracting, December 23. 1668.
Smith contra Muire A CLAVSE OF CONQVEST in a Wifes Contract of Marriage, who
was competently otherwise provided, was ^ound to carry the Lands conquest,
with the burden of a sum, which the Husband declared under his hand to be a
part of the price, though the same would not hold in the burdening of heirs of
conquest, December 20. 1665. Lady Kilbocho contra Lord of Kilbocho. This sum
was due to the Seller of the Lands and expressed. A Clause of Conquest providing
the Goods to be conquest and acquired during the marriage to the Children of a
second Marriage, was found to be understood of the Goods as they were at the
Defuncts death, and that he might dispone of, or burden them during his life at
his pleasure; and therefore a Bond granted to the Children of the first
Marriage, was found valide against the Children of the second Marriage, to
affect the Goods acquired during that Marriage, February 9. 1669. Cowan contra
Young and Reid. A CLAVSE IRRITANT in a Reversion being committed, was found not
to be null but to be restricted to the damnage of the Granter, so that if the
Wodsetter would give as much, or had offered the same before the Reverser had
closed bargain with another, the clause irritant would be sustained, the
Wodsetter paying in the superplus, February 12. 1667. Earl of Tillibardin
contra Murray of A^chter^yre. A Clause irritant in a Back bond after a
Reversion discharged, bearing that in payment of such sums, the Acquirer should
denude himself, it being done within such a time, and if not then done, to be
null ipso facto, without declarator, was found not to exclude Redemption after
that Term before declarator, which was found necessary in this case, February
^. 1667. Inter ^osdem. A Clause irritant on not payment of the Back-tack-duty,
was found not to be comprehended in that clause of the Act Debtor and
Creditor, November 26. 1662. Sawer contra Rutherfoord. A Clause irritant on not
payment of the Back-tack-duty, was found valide, unless purged by payment at
the Bar, Ibidem. A CLAVSE OF SVBSTITVTION in an universal Legacy, providing the
Fathers free Goods to two daughters, and falling of either of them to the
other, the one dying, the portion was found to accresce to the other, without
necessity of her confirming her deceassed Sisters Testament, ^ure accrescendi,
December 5. 1665. Helen H^^ contra Maxwell. A Clause of Substitution upon the
Margent of a Bond contrary the Substitution in the Body, to wit by the Gran^er
of the Bond himself, who expressed that he had filled up the date and Witnesses,
and mentioned not that he had filled up the marginal Note, And the Witnesses
insert deponing that they remembered not that they did see that marginal Note,
though holograph, was not found to be of the date of the Bond, nor of any date
before the Granter thereof was on deathbed, therefore on all these Grounds
jointly it was found null as to the heir, here the parties had accorded,
February ^8. 1667. Lord of Dury contra* Gibson. A Clause of Substitution in an
Assignation to a Bond of 6000. merks, whereof 4000. merks to the Cedents eldest
Son, and 2000. merks to Wiliam and Ianet his youngest Children, and in case of
the eldests deceass, providing the other two to his part, Ianet dying before
Robert, and he also dying after without Issue, Ianets heir was found to succeed
as heir of provision to Robert, in her half of his part, though she dyed before
Robert, and the clause did not substitute her and her heirs, but only mentioned
her self, January 5. 1670. Innes contra A Clause in a Bond to be comptable for
the profit of an Office, and stating such a party Judge in case of difference,
was found to be an effectual submission, not only as to the subscriber, but as
to the accepter, and not to terminate with a year* and to this effect, if that
person determined not being required, or determined wrong, the Lords would hear
and rectify the accounts themselves, February 3. 1669. B^s^wel contra Lindsay
of Wormistoun. A CLAVSE DE NON ALINANDO, otherways the contraveeners right
should be void, and the next heir have place, being insert in the original
Charter and Seasine, ad longum: and also i^ the heirs Re^our and Seasine, was
sound to annul the Contravceners Infe^tment, in favors of the next heir, and
in consequence to annul the Rights of appryzings from that heir, February 26.
1662. Viscount of S^^rmount contra the Credi^ors of A^nandal^. A Clause in a
Disposition of Tailzie de non alienando, in common form, with this addition,
that it should be leisom to the Feear and heirs of Tailzie, to sell, di^pone,
or Wodset such of the Lands ^ominatim, to affect and burden the same for
payment and satisfaction of the Disponers debt^ This addition was not found to
restrict the Feear, or heirs of Tailzie, to dispone only so much of these Lands
as were sufficient to pay the Defuncts debts, the Clause not running in these
Terms, but that they might dispone the whole; so that the Disponers debt were
paid therewith, and needed not allege that the debt was as great as the price
they got, lanuary 20. 1669. Lady Kilbirnie contra the heirs of Tailzie of
Kilbirnie and Schaw of Gr^^nock renewed, F^bruary 3. 1669. Inter cosdem. A
Clause in a Bond obliging many parties con^unctly and severally, without a
clause of Relief, was found to import mutual Relief ex natura re^, June 28.
1665. Mon^^th contra Anderson. COAL was found to be carried by the common
clause of pertinents, against a party expressly in^e^t in the Coalheughs of the
Lands, January 30. 1662. Lord Burly contra Sym. COGNITION of Marches betwixt
Vassals by Witnesses adduced before the Sheriff, or by Arbiters, was found
valide, albeit the Superior was not called, nor consenting, but so that the
Superior should not be prejudged in case the Fee fell in his hand by Ward or
Nonentry, February 8. 1662. Lord Torphichen contra A COLLEGE was found not
excluded from setting long Tacks, as being comprehended under beneficed
Persons, but their obligement to renew a Tack perpetually, was found not
obligatory, unless there were an equivalent Cause onerous, for which the
obligement was granted, July 13. 1669. College of Ab^rdene contra the Town of
Aberdene. COMMAND or Warrant of a Servant, taking off Furniture in his Masters
Name, was presumed to have been known to the Merchant, and not to oblige the
Servant, though he gave Ticket acknowledging the Receipt in his Masters Name,
but not obliging himself to pay, being pursued thereon after 19. years, and
after his Masters death, unless it were proven by his oath that he had no
Warrant, or applied not the Goods for his Masters use, November 17. 1665.
Howison contra Cockburn. Command or direction was found probable by Witnesses,
being a part of a Bargain for Grassing an Horse, January 29. 1667. Scot contra
Gib. Command or Warrant was in^e^^ed by the presence of him who had Commission
to do an Act, and did not hinder or contradict the doing thereof by others, who
therefore were presumed to have Warrant from him, February 23. 1667. Lord
Ren^oun Justice Clerk contra Lord of Lambertoun. THE COMMISSARS OF EDINBVRGH
were not found to have right to confirm the Testament of a Defunct dying out of
the Country on a Voyage, not being away animo remanendi, this was stopped till
further hearing on the Petition of the Commissars of Edinburgh, November 23.
1661. Douglas contra Iohnstoun. A Commissar was found obliged by the
Injunctions to reside at the place of the Commissariot, albeit he had power of
deputes, that he might direct them, being answerable for them, and that under
the pain of deprivation, February 14. 1666. Arch^bishop of Glasgow contra the
Commissar of Gl^sgow. A Commissar was foun^ deposable if he be not found
sufficient for discharge of the Office in his own person, albeit he have the
power of Deputes, Ibidem Inter ^osdem. A Commissar having power to constitute
Deputes by the Kings Gift, and the former Archbishops, was found ^^ereby not
to have power to make use of any Deputes, but such as were authorized by the
Bishop, conform to the injunctions; but whether Deputes might be authorized pro
re na^a, only in the cases of Sickness, or dec^arator mentioned in the
injunctions, or in other cases also, so that there might be a constant
deputation for things in ordinary course in Process, and to advise with the
principal Commissa^ in matte^s of importance or not: The Lords recommended to
the Bishops in common, who made the injunctions, to clear the parties
thereanent* But found that the Commissars none-residence, or acting by his own
deputes, albeit he was required in the contrary did not annul his Office, i^
respect of his Gift, with power of deputation, and of the common custom of
Bishops to grant deputations that way; but as to the future, seeing the King had
approven their Instructions, The Lords ordained them to be insert in the Books
of Sederunt, and to be observed in all time coming, February 22. 1666. Inter
eosdem. The Commissars of Edinburgh were found to have right to Confirm the
Testaments of Scots-men dying abroad ani^^ r^manendi, as to their Movables in
Scotland, and that they might be confirmed, and pay Quot here, July 18. 1666.
Brown and Du^^ contra Biss^t. A Commissars Decree was not found null, as being
of matters exceeding the injunctions, the Defender not compearing, and the
probation being lost by the Suspenders silence ten years, yet the Lords allowed
the Defender a contrary probation, June 25. 1668. Black contra (...). The
Commissars of Edinburgh upon a pursuit for Slander and Defa^ation, having
dece^ned the Defender to make an acknowledgement before the congregation, and
to pay 100. pounds Scots to the party, and another to the poor, The Lords
Sustained the Decree, February 5. 1669. Deans contra Bothwel. A COMMISSION or
Factory was found Revockable, though it had an express Term of endurance, the
Factor being satisfied of what he profitably debursed in contemplation of the
Factory, June 30. 1660. Chalmers con^^^ Baffilli^. A Commission in a Minute
impowering the buyer of Land to retain the price till he were secured, and to
Infeft the seller and himself, and do all things necessary for his secu^^^y to
be satisfied by a part of the price, was found to oblige him to do no
diligence, December 16. 1668. Frazer contra Keith. COMMODATVM, or the lending
of Canons for defense of a Town in these Terms (to restore them without hurt,
skaith, or damnage, and in case of damnage to pay ^00. merks for them as the
price agreed on) was found not to oblige the borrower to pay the price, where
the Cannon were taken by the Enemy, all diligence being done to preserve them,
and that the peril was the Lenders, and that this was not commodatum estimatum,
giving the borrower his option to restore or pay the price, but only a
liquidation in case of damnage, November 17. 166^. Duncan contra Town of
Ar^roth. Comm^datum, or one lending a Watch to one who put forth his hand for
it without words, was found sufficient to oblige him to restore it, though just
then lending it to another, not to liberate him, though in the presence and
silence of the first Lender, seeing it was so sudden an Act, as his silence
could not be thought nor esteemed a consent, July 3. 1662. Lord Cowper contra
Lord Pitsligo. COMMON PASTVRAGE was found relevant by a clause cum comm^ni
pastura in general, and 40. years possession, to come in with another having a
clause of common pasturage in the Muire in question per expressum, November 14.
1662. Nicolson contra Lord of Balbirnie. Common pasturage in a Commonty of a
Barony of the Kings property, was found constitute by a Fe^ cum pertinent: and
^um pas^^^s and pasturis, though not special in this Muire, being then a
Common^y of the Barony, February 15. 1668. Lord of Haming contra Town of
Selkirk. Commonty was found inferred upon mutual declarators of property of two
parts of a piece of Ground upon their Ma^ch, wherein either party proved 40.
years possession, and mutual interruptions, and though the one proved more
pregnantly then the other, yet it was not sufficient to exclude him, neither
party having a bounding Charter, June 13. 1668. Giabs^n contra Oswald.
COMPENSATION was found not competent to the Debtor of a Defunct, taking
Assignation from the Creditor of the Defunct, after the Defuncts death to
exclude an Executor Creditor, albeit the Assignation was anterior to the
Confirmation, at least any diligence of the Executor Creditor, February 8.
1662. Crawfoord contra the Earl of Murray. February 14. 1662. Children of
Mouswal contra Lowrie of Maxw^lstoun. Compensation against an Assignay was
sustained on debts due by the cedent to the debtor himself, or whereunto he
had Assignation intimat before the Assignays intimation, but not for debts
whereunto he had taken Assignation, but had made no Intimation before this
other Assignay did intrtimat, January 22. 1663. Wallace contra Edgar.
Compensation of an illiquid Number of coals, was found not receivable to take
away a liquid Decree, here they bear a price far above the ordinary rate,
which behoved to be modified, January 17. 1664. Lord of Tulliallan and Condie
contra Crawfoord. Compensation was sustained upon Rents liquidat against the
principal debtor, before the Assignation, which was found sufficient against
the cautioner, whose Right was accessory, albeit not called in the Decree of
Liquidation, June 24. 1665. Irving contra Strachan. Compensation against one of
four Executors was sustained upon a debt of the Defuncts, not only as to that
Executors fourth part, but in solidum, being equivalent to a discharge, Iun^
15. 1666. Stevinson contra Hermasheills. Compensation was found not competent
against a Bond delivered, being blank in the Creditors Name, and by the
Receiver, for an equivalent cause, delivered to a third party, who was found
not to be compensed by any debt of him who first received the Bond, though
prior to the filling up of the Name, February 27. 1668. Hendrison contra
Birnie. Compensation was sustained against the bygones of an Ann^alrent by
Infeftment against a singular Successor, upon his Authors liquid debt, January
2. 1669. Oliphant contra Hamiltoun. Compensation was Sustained against a
Donator of Escheat upon a debt due by the Rebel before the Rebellion, January
2^. 1669. Drummond contra Stirling of Airdoch. Compensation of a Bond by Rents,
was sustained to take Effect, not only from the date of the Decree,
Liquidating the Rents, but from the time the Rents were thereby proven to ^e
due, February 5. 1669. Cleiland contra Iohnstoun. COMPETENT AND OMITTED, was
^ound Relevant as to Decreets of Suspension, since the Act of Sederunt 1649.
and that a reason then past from in a Suspension pro loco and tempore, could
not in eodem statu be repeated against that Decree, or Appryzing thereon,
especially seeing the Appryzing was not expyred, and might be Redeemed, July 17.
1664. Lord of Tulliall^^^ and Co^die contra Crawf^ord. Competent and omitted,
was not Sustained against Strangers in Decreets against them before the
Admiral, July 23. 1667. I^rgan contra captain Logan. A COMP^ sitted, and
bearing at the foot such a Sum resting, not mentioning the Instructions of the
Account, or delivery thereof, was found not to make the Debtor liable to
produce the Instructions, or count again, unless it were proven by Writ, or his
Oath, that the Instructions were in his hand, albeit a considerable Article of
the Account was general, bearing paid for the Pursuer to his Creditors 20000.
pounds, and though the foot of the Account was ^xhausted by debts paid upon
Precepts from the Creditor, after that Account, December 17. 1667. Lord
Abercrombic contra Lord Newwaak. A COUNT BOOK of a Factor in Campheir, being
proven ^o be unvitiate, or Written by the Factor, or a known Book-keeper, and
Sequestrat before any question, was found to prove against the Factors Brother
and Assignay, even quo ad datam, being instructed by the oaths of the Debitors,
who paid conform to the Articles in the Book, July 19. 1662. Skeen contra
Lumbsdean. Renewed January 9. 1663. Inter eosdem. A Count Book Written by the
hand of a person of discretion, was found sufficient to prove payment of his
Rent against his Executor Creditor, but the Tennent being on Life was ordained
to depone on the Truth of the payment, November 20. 1662. Wardlaw contra Gray.
AFTER CONCLUSION of the Cause, a Reply instantly verified, and not putting the
Defender to prove, was admitted, but a duply do^ose omitted before
L^tiscontestation, and not being instantly verified, the same was repelled,
albeit there was a Reservation contra producenda; this alleadgeance was upon
part and pertinent of the Lands contained in the Infeftment produced, December
10. 1664. Lion of Mur^a^k contra Farquhar. After conclusion of the cause in a
Reduction, the same was found not to be advised till some representing some of
the Authors, who died pendente li^e, were called, July 14. 1666. Le^th contra
Lord of Lessemore, Troup and others. CONFESSION to the Church, and standing a
year was found not to prove Adultery, to (...) infer the parties Escheat,
January 9. 1662. Baird contra Baird. Here the Defender had taken Remission.
CONFIRMATION of Exchequer to a particular effect in so far as concerned the
obtainers base Infeftment, granted by him who was Infeft, but not confirmed,
was found valide only ad istum effectum, and not to accresce to any other,
January 16. 1663. Tennents of Kilhattan contra Lord of Kelhattan, Major
Campbel and Baillie Hamiltoun. Confirmation and paying of the Quote was found
necessary, though there was a Disposition omnium bonorum, without a cause
onerous, or any delivery, June 23. 1665. Procurator Fiscal of of Edinburgh
contra Fairholm. Confirmation and Quote was not excluded by a Disposition
omnium bonorum, with a Reservation to the Disponer, that he might dispose
thereupon otherwise during his life, July 4. 1665. Commissar of Saint Andrews
contra Hay of Bousie. Confirmation of a Scots-mans Testament, who lived animo
remanendi in Polland, was found necessary in Scotland, by the Commissars of
Edinburgh, July 18. 1666. Brown contra Duff and Bisset. Confirmation of a
Testament wherein the division of the whole Inventar was tripartite, and yet
much of it was Sums bearing annualrent, wherefrom the Relict is excluded, was
found to need no Reduction, as to that division, but that notwithstanding
thereof, the Relict was excluded by Reply, January 18. 1670. Doctor Bal^oure
and his Spouse contra Wood. Confirmation Vide Homologation. Confirmation of an
Annualrent granted by a Vassal to be holden of the Superior, was found not to
take away any casuality belonging to the Superior, but that the same might be
made use of against that Annualrent, as communicating only a part of the
Vassals Fee, but no interest of the Superiority, January 14. 1670. (...) of
Kirkaldy contra Duncan. CONFVSION was found not sufficient to take away an
Adjudication against an appearand Heir on his own Bond assigned to himself, and
so simulate, which was found a Ground to Reduce by, but not to annul the Bond,
or Adjudication, or make the Defender liable as Heir, January 22. 1662. Earl of
Nithisdail contra Glendoning. CONIVNCTFEEARS Vide clause in a Contract of
Marriage, July 12. 1671. Gairns contra Sandilands. CONQVEST VIDE CLAVSE.
CONSENT of parties to a Decree judicially, was found not sufficiently
instructed by the Decree, in respect there was a Minute of Process, by which
it appe^red that the said consent was not Minuted de recenti, but half a year
thereafter, upon remembrance of the Judges, July 24. 1661. Lord of Buchannan
contra Osburn. Consent of a Minister to quite so much of his Stipend to an
Helper, was found not proven by an Act of Presbytery without a Warrant
subscribed by him, July 26. 1661. Ker contra Minister and ^arochioners of
Carrin. Consent to a March and building a Park-dyke thereon was found not
sufficiently proven by the building of the dyke, and silence of the other
Heretors, January 8. 1663. Nicol contra Hope. Consent was inferred by
subscribing as Witness to a Writ on deathbed, to take away the Reduction on
deathbed, which the Witnesses could not but know, seeing the sick man subscribe
without Importing his consenting to the contents, as in other cases, June 25.
1663. Steuart of Ashcog contra Steuart of Amholme. The like, July 24. 1666.
Halyburtoun contra Halyburtoun. Consent of a dumb Man, was not inferred by his
Subscription of a Discharge given to his Sister, whereunto he put the initial
Letters of his Name, seeing nothing was adduced to instruct that he knew what he
did, July 9. 1663. Hamiltoun contra Ethdale. Consent of a Wodsetter in a
Disposition with the Reverser, was found not to carry his Right, seeing he
assigned no part of the Sums* and that it only imported the Restricting of his
Wodset to the remanent Land, and Renuncing the rest, July 4. 1665. Boyd contra
Kintor. Consent was not inferred by knowledge and silence, in that a future
Husband knew his future Spouse had disponed a part of her Ioynture, and yet
went on in the Marriage, January 5. 1666. Heretors of Iohns-miln contra the
Fewers. Consent to a Diiposition of a Wodset Right, which Dis-Position disponed
the Lands, but neither expressed under Reversion, or Irredeemable, which consent
was found not to take away the Reversion from the consenter, who then had no
present Right, the Reversion being conceived to another person, and the Heirs
of his Body, which failing to that consenter, and that person being then alive,
so that the consenter falling thereafter to be Heir of Tailzie in the
Reversion, was not excluded by his consent from Redemption, February 23. 1667.
Earl of Errol contra Hay of Crimmonmogate. Here the consenter was not obliged
for Warrandice. Consent without Warrandice to a Disposition, imports only such
Right as the consenter then had, but for no other supervenient, January 8.
1668. Forbes contra Inne^. Consent of a Superior to a Wodse^ and Eke, was
found to carry the Liferent Escheat of the Vassal then in the Superiors hand,
and to exclude a gift by the Superior of the same date with his consent, seeing
the gift required declarator to make it effectual, and the consent (...) not,
June 19. 1669. Scot contra Langtoun. Consent of parties to a Decree of the
Lords, bearing the particular Terms of an agreement, and a Decree thereupon
Extracted, the same was Sustained in respect of the offer of a Disposition by
the Accepter, who now quarrelled, the Decree as having a Warrant for his
consent, under his hand the offer being simple, provided the same were
instructed by the Oaths of the Witnesses insert in the Instrument of offer,
February 4. 1671. Lawrie contra Gibson. CONSIGNED SVMS cannot be aff^cted by
arrestment or Escheat for the consigners debt, but belong only to the
Wodsetter, June 29. 1661. Telz^^er contra Maxtoun and Cunninghame. Consigned
sums in the hands of the Clerk to the Bills, for obtaining Suspension, was
found not to be upon the peril of the consigner, unless he were in the fault;
and therefore the consigner having first o^^ered by Instrument the principal
sum and Annualrent, and so much of the penalty as the charger would depone upon
Oath that he truly debursed, and the instrument being instructed by the Oaths
of the Witnesses insert, the consigner was declared free* though the then Clerk
of the Bills was become insolvent, July 28. 1665. Scot contra Somervel.
Consigned Sums being lifted by the consigner, he was found liable to produce
the same with Annualrent, since he lifted the same, though he offered to depone
he had kept them by him and had made no profi^e, and that the consignation
was not by his fault; January 14. 166^. Mcpherson contra Wedderburn of Kingeme.
Consignation being truly and formally made, and the Wodsetter truly in the
fault, that received not his Money, he was only found to have right to his
Annualrent after the consignation, and not to the Rents of the Lands, though he
continued five years in possession before declarator, and that the Sum was
taken up by the Redeemer, upon whose peril the consignation was, being now
produced by him at the Bar, with Annualrent since the consignation, February
24. 1670. Ierd^^n of Applegirth contra Iohnstoun of Lockerbie. Consigned Sums
for Redemption being taken up, and Annualrent craved therefore since the
consignation, the taking up thereof was found probable by the consignator and
clerks oaths, the consigner being dead, February 14. 1671. Inter eosdem.
CONTINVATION was not found necessary in a declarator of Redemption, though not
instantly verified, February 19. 1662. children of Wolm^t contra Ker. Vide
Improbation, Lord of Auchinbreck contra Continuation was found necessary in
Summonds, for making Arrested Goods forthcoming, albeit accessory to a Decree,
seeing they were not privileged by deliverance, as they would have been upon
that ground, if it had been demanded in the Bill, November 28. 1665. Bruce
contra Earl of Mortoun. Continuation was not found necessary to a declarator of
Bastardy, but that in favorem fisci, upon a single Summonds it might be proven,
that the defunct was repute Bastard, as in declarators of Nonentry, the death
of the Vassal may be proven without continuation, June 15. 1670. Livingstoun
contra Barns. A CONTRACT was found effectual to a third party not contracting,
in whose favors an article to pay the debt due to him, was found sufficient,
and not to be discharged by the contracter, seeing the bargain followed, July 7.
1664. Ogilbie contra Grant and Ker. A contract of Marriage, by which the Wife
declared her self to have a Sum, and contracted the Sum to the Husband, was
found to give her no interest to the implement of the Husbands part, till she
instructed her part to be fulfilled, which was not presumed to have been
performed, though after a long time without some Adminicles, July 26. 1665.
Brotherstones contra Ogle and Orrock. A contract of marriage bea^ing a general
clause whereby the Husband renunceth his jus mariti, in the means of the Wife,
and all other Right he could have thereto by the subsequent Marriage, was found
not to take away a Right granted before the contract, whereby in contemplation
of the Marriage, the Wife disponed her Liferent in Trust, and took a back-bond,
that the benefit of it should be for intertaining the Wife and her future
Husbands Family jointly, both being esteemed as parts of the same Treaty of
Marriage, and the general clause in the contract of Marriage, not to be
derogatory thereto, February 9. 1667. Ratho and Colingtoun contra Tennents of
Inn^rtil^ and Lady Collingtoun. A contract of Marriage providing the Movables
of either party to return after the Marriage, in case there were no children,
was found effectual to the Wifes Assignays, and that the same did not return to
the Husband by his jur marit^, or was not inconsistent therewith, June 30.
1670. Greig^ contra Weims. A contract of Marriage by minute, being craved to be
declared void, as to the payment of the Tocher, because the mutual obligements
therein could not be fulfilled. The Lords liberate the Pursuer, he Renuncing
the obligements on the other side, July 13. 1670. Raith and Wauchop of
Edmonstoun contra Wolmet and Major Biggar. A contra^t of Marriage whereby a
Father disponed his whole Estate in Fee to his Son, and got the Tocher, was
^ound not to annul a Bond of provision, granted by the Son to the Father for
his Bairns provisio^s, after the Contract and before the Marriage, as contra
pacta dotalia, but upon Examination of the Witnesses, it being found communed,
that the Tocher should suffice for the Bairns Provisions, and that by the new
Bond, there would little have ^emained to the Married persons: The Lords
Reduced the Bond, January 21. 1668. Patoun contra Patoun. Contract of Marriage
vid. Clause. IN CONTRARY alleadgances of Minority and Majority, neither party
was preferred to Probation, but Witnesses and Adminicles were admitted hinc
^nde, that the Lords might follow the strongest, and clearest Probation,
February 20. 1668. Farquhare of Tonley contra Gordoun. CONTRAVENTION was
Sustained upon several times Herding, for a considerable space together, by the
Defenders Herds at his command, on the Pursuers Ground uncontroverted,
reserving to the Lords whether to make every special Pasturing, a several
contravention, or one made up of all at the conclusion of the cause, July ^.
1664. Earl of Airly contra Mcintosh. A CREDITOR personal, was found to have no
interest to compeat to exclude another Creditor, alleging his debt paid,
July 24. 1662. Shed contra Gordoun and ^yle. A CROPPED of Corn was ^ound not to
be as a part of, or accessory to the Ground, or as sata solo cedunt solo, so
that after Possession attained by Removing, against a violent Possessor warned,
the cropped on the Ground was found not thereby to belong to the Heretor
entering, even as to that part thereof, which was sown after the Warning, but
as to what was sown after the Possessor was dispossed by the Removing, and his
Goods off the Ground, the corn was found to accresce to the Heretor, by paying
the expense of the Seed and Labourage, as Eatenus locupletior factus, February
22. 1671. Gordoun contra Mcculloch. IN CRVIVES no necessity was found for the
stream to be continually free besides the Saturdays slop, but that the same is
commonly in desuetude, and particularly in the Cruive in question,
notwithstanding that it be special in the Act of Parliament, July 29. 1665.
Heretors of Don contra Town of Aberdene. A CVRATORS Decree obtained against
him by a Minor, for Liberation of the Curator from his Office, upon consent of
the Minor, and his alleged irregularity, was ^ound not to Liberate that
Curator from his Office, even for Omissions after the Decree, July 21. 1664.
Scot of ^road-meadows contra Scot of Thirlestoun: But with consideration of the
irregular forcible Acts, that he should not be liable therefore, but liberat
pro tanto vide Minor. Ibid. Curators being chosen three in number, or any two
of them, the Mother being sine qua non, and she being dead, the Pupil was found
sufficiently authorized by the other two, he appearing judicially, and
acknowledging the same, January 4. 1666. David and Andrew Fairfouls contra
Binn^^. Curators, or a Father as lawful Administrator, authorizing Minors, or
Children to their own behove, being Ca^tioners for, or with them, was found
null, December 7. 1666. Sir George Mckenzie contra Fairholme. CVSTODY of Money
was found to liberate the Keeper, where his whole means were sent for safety to
a Garrison, and there lost, and he being required to deliver the Money in
custody, declared that it was there, and the owner might have it for sending
for it, without special probation as to the Money in question, he giving his
Oath in Supplement that it was there, and was lost, July 19. 1662. Fiddes
contra Jack, vid. November. 16. 1667. Whitehead contra Stra^to^n. DAMNAGE of a
Tenement by the fall of a Neighbor Tenement, was found competent against an
Appryzer of a Liserent of the fallen Tenement, possessing thereby, February 16.
1666. Hay of Knockc^ndie contra Litlejohn. Renewed, January 13. 1666. the
ruinousness of the fallen House being Proven, though no Requisition to Repair
it. Damnage done to Victual Embarked for the use of Merchants, by the fault
and negligence of the Skipper, was found not to oblige the Skipper and Owners
to take the Victual, and pay the price, but only to pay the damnage, seeing the
Victual was not wholly corrupt, but remained in Specie, February 19. 1670.
Leslie contra Guthrie.
DATE of a Bond, wanting as to day, month, and year, was found not to annul
it, seeing it bear in the Body, Annualrent from such a Term, in such a year,
last bypast, which supplied the date as to the year, June 15. 1662. Grant
contra Grant of Kirkdail. Date of a Discharge in a Merchants count Book, being
^nstructed by Witnesses and Adminicles, was found to prove against the
Merchants Assigney, January 9. 1663. Skeen contra Lumsdean. Date being wanting
in a Writ, was sustained to be astructed by a Witness insert, that it was
anterior to an Assignation, whereupon it was admitted as a compensation against
the Assigney, June 29. 1665. Thorntoun contra Milne. Date of a Writ being
wanting, was found not to annul it, the party referring the verity of the
Subscription to the Subscribers oath, which was allowed, with power to qualify
if it was undelivered, or in minority, July 7. 1666. contra Duncan. Date of a
Writ being false was found not to infer Falsehood of the whole, or nullity
thereof, where the Witnesses insert proved the verity of the Subscription,
February 23. 1667. Lord of May contra Ross. The date of a Writ was not
quarrelled by the Lords as false, albeit it was not Subscribed the day that it
bear, in respect there was a Writ of the same Tenor truly subscribed that day,
but being a missing, the Granter a long time after, Subscribed another of the
same Tenor and date, and the first being found, and both produced in Process,
the user abode by the first simply, and by the last as to the verity of the
Subscription, but not of the date, which was so insert for the reason foresaid.
July 10. 1669. Gardner contra Colvi^. DEATH of a party was found instructed by
18. years absence out of the Country, and repute dead, and a Letter produced,
w^itten by a Comrad in the War, bearing that he was dead* to Sustain an
Adjudication upon a Bond granted by the next Heir, which was to his own behove.
February 18. 1670. Lowrie contra Drummond. DEATHBED was not Sustained to
Reduce a disposition by a Father to his Son of a Sum, as prejudicial to his
Heir, seeing by Contract with his eldest Son, he reserved that power to burden
the Estate to any he pleased, though it bear not on deathbed, yet that was not
excluded, nothing being there done but the designation of the Person, June 28.
1662. Seatoun of Barns contra his Brother. Deathbed was found relevant to
reduce a Disposition and Infeftment of Lands to an Heir female and of line, in
prejudice of a Brother and Heir-male, who was provided to the Lands by the
Disponer, with a clause (with power to him to alter during his Life) which was
found not to extend to deathbed, though he should have been proven in
soundness of mind, as contrary to the presumptio juris and de jure, that
persons on deathbed are weak, February 25. 1663. Hepburn of Humbie contra
Hepburn^, this clause not being in the Writ etiam in articulo mortis, or on
deathbed. Deathbed and a Testament was found equivalent, albeit the Testament
was made in liege poustie, and so no provision therein, prejudgeth the Heir,
December 14. 1664. Lady Colvil contra Lord Colvil. Deathbed was found not
Relevant to hinder a Husband to provide a Wife with a Ioynture, she having no
Contract of Marriage, nor competent provision, nor any Terce, he having only
Tenements in Burgh, of which no Terce is due; but the Lords modified the
Provision near to a Terce, February 22. 1661. Rutherfoord and Pollock contra
Jack. Deathbed was found not competent by way of exception or duply, January
12, 1666. Seatoun and the Lord of Touch contra Dundas. Deathbed was found
Relevant to Reduce a Liferent Provision by a Husband to a Wife, being
unprovided, and having no Contract, except only in so far as it extended to her
Terce, due by Law, January 21. 1668. Schaw contra Calderwood. Deathbed was
found Relevant to Reduce a Bond granted by a Father to his Daughter, who had a
former Bond of another small Sum, and that seeing he went not out to Kirk and
Market after Subscribing of the Bond, and no equivalent, or probation of his
being in health, or doing all his Affairs, or that it was a small portion to a
Daughter, were Sustained, February 25. 1668. Dun contra Duns. Deathbed was
Sustained by Exception against a Bond wanting Witnesses, and alleged
holograph, seeing the Bond was defective, and the alleadgeance of deathbed was
instantly verified, and the presumption of Law, that the holograph Writ proved
not its own date to be before the Defuncts sickness, November 14. 1668.
Calderwood contra Schaw. Deathbed being insisted in as a Reason of Reduction,
and going to Kirk and Market being proponed in Defense, and being supported,
and that the disease continued notwithstanding of the Defuncts going out being
proponed, The Lords ordained Witnesses to be Examined hinc inde, anent the
Defuncts condition and manner of going abroad, whereby it being proven, that
the Defunct went freely unsupported, a considerable difficult way, having only
a Staff in his hand: The disposition made by him was Sustained, albeit it was
proven that he was helped up Stairs and down Stairs, to and from his Horse,
being an old man, and that his Bridle was led, and that he was not free of the
disease of which he dyed, and though he came abroad, February 26. 1669.
Pargillies contra Pargillies. Deathbed was found Receivable by Exception. to
exclude a Recognition, as not being a possessory, but a petitory Judgment,
July 20. 1669. Barclay contra Barclay. Deathbed was found a sufficient ground
to Reduce a disposition, at the instance of the Defuncts Creditors, or the
Creditors of the appearand Heir; neither did an offer to declare the Estate
Iyable to the Defuncts own debts, exclude their interest, without security
equivalent to the Appryzing, November 25. 1669. Creditors of Cowper and
Basmerino contra the Lady Cowper. Deathbed was not found Relevant to Reduce a
Bond granted on deathbed by a party who had disponed his Estate, reserving a
power to himself to burden at any time during his Life, though it did not bear
etiam m articulo mortis, June 22. 1670. Douglas of Lumsdean contra Douglas.
Deathbed was found proven, Witnesses being adduced before answer on either
part, concerning the Defuncts condition the time of the disposition quarrelled,
and thereafter till his death, it being by them instructed that he contracted a
palsy affecting his Brain before the Disposition, whereby he remained senseless
for a ti^e, but thereafter continued to have a Palsy in his Tongue, and
Vertigo in his Head till his death; but that he lost the remembrance of things,
and Names, and was not sound thereafter in his Judgment, thoug^ he went
frequently to his Garden, and half a pair of (...) from his House unsupported,
never having gone to Kirk or Mercate after the disposition, or to any public
Place, but the disposition bearing for the better payment of the Disponers
debt, was sustained, in so far as the Acquirer paid of his debt, February 7.
1671. Lowrie of Blackwood contra Drummond. Deathbed being insisted in to
Reduce a disposition, Witnesses were appointed to be adduced for either party
ex officio, for clearing the condition the Defunct was in, as to health and
sickness the time of the Disposition, and thereafter til his death, and the
manner of his going abroad, whereupon the Relevancy and Probation were advised
together, and it was found that there was no necessity to libel the particular
disease, or that it was Morbus sonticus, but ^ound it sufficiently proven that
the Defunct had contracted a disease, before Subscribing of the disposition,
and that he nev^r went abroad thereafter, as the Law requires for the Evidences
of Convalescence, It was also found, that the going to Kirk and Market was a
Relevant defense, but that it was elided by the Reply of Supportation, and that
the Defunct from his Entry to the Town of Cowper, to the Mercate place, and
from the Mercate place till he went out of the Town, did not walk freely
unsupported, and that even supporting by the hand was found Relevant, without
consideration of the unevenness of the Ground, and that the Defunct was an old
man, and accustomed sometimes to take the hand of these that were with him in
rouged places, in respect that the attempt to go to Kirk and Market, was the
next day after the disposition, and so was of design to validate the same, and
yet the Defunct was not able to forbear help for so short a way, and attempting
to go to the Kirk the next Sabbath, was supported to it, and from it, and fell
in a swoon in his return, and dyed shortly after, which though it was not
necessary, if he had gone freely to Market, yet was an evidence of the
continuance of the disease; neither were private Evidences of putting on his
Clothes, making of Bargains, Compts, and conveying of Strangers to the gate,
going to the Garden unsupported, ^ound Acts sufficient to prove health and
convalescence, or equivalent to going to Kirk and Market unsupported, seeing in
these public meetings, the party behoved not only to suffer the alteration of
the free Air, but that there was the Testimony of many unsuspect Witnesses,
whereas a few picked out Witnesses might be sufficient for these domestic
Acts, if these were Sustained, June 28. 1671. Creditors of Balmerino contra
Lady Cowper. Deathbed was found Relevantly libelled, that the Defunct was
enclosed on suspicion of the Plague, without proving infection, seeing he died
and came never abroad, February 28. 1665. Rutherfoord contra DEBTOR non
presumitur donare, was elided by a stronger contrary presumption, viz. that an
Assignation made to a creditor who was his nearest of Kin, done mortis causa,
and in it another provision of a Sum to another person expressly, in
satisfaction of another debt, which not being repeated in this, must be thought
^o ammo, not to be in Satisfaction of the other prior debt, June 16. 1665.
Crockshank contra Crookshank. Vide donation, Fleming contra his children,
December 20. 1661. Debtor non presumit^r donare, was found not to make a
posterior Bond in favors of a Brothers Son, to be in satisfaction of a former
Bond to that Brother, seeing the posterior Bond bear for Love and Favor, and no
other cause, neither did it mention the prior Bond, December 5. 1671. Dickson
contra Dickson. DEBIT A FVNDI cannot be effectual by voluntar Dispositions of
the Lands affected thereby, but only by poinding of the Ground; and therefore
an Appryzing, and an Infeftment thereon, was preferred to a posterior
Disposition for Feu-duties, But prejudice to make use of the Feu-duties, by
poinding the Ground, whereby they would be preferred to the Appryzing, July 8.
1671. Margaret Scrymzour contra Earl of Northesk. By this Decision the
Accumulation of Annualrents by the voluntar Disposition was Evacuate.
DECLARATOR of the expyring of a Reversion upon a clause irritant, was found
null summarly without Reduction, in respect the Decree bear not the Production
of the Instrument of Requisition whereupon the irritancy fell, although the
Instrument was now produced, and the party long in Possession by virtue of the
Decree, and albeit the Requisition was expressly libelled upon, and that it
seemed to be the Clerks omission in not mentioning of it in the production,
February 22. 1671. Pi^cairn contra Tennents DECLARATOR OF ESCHEAT was sustained
without calling all parties having interest at the Market Cross, though it was
a part of the Style of the Summons in desuetude, June 23. 1666. Masson contra
DECLARATOR OF WARD AND NONEENTRIE should only be pursued before the Lords of
Session not before the Exchequer, June 14. 1665. His Majesty's Letter Recorded
in the Books of Sederunt. DECLARATOR OF THE NVLLITIE of Bonds and Rights to
Creditors; by a Feear in a Tailzie, with a clause de non ali^nando, was
Sustained without the form of a Reduction, or Production of the particular
Rights, January 21. 1662. Viscount of Stormount contra creditors of Annandale.
In a Declarator of Property, the Defender was not admitted to propone a Nullity
in the Pursuers Right, or that certification was granted against his Authors
Seasine, even at the Defenders instance, unless the Defender allege a better
Right, July 10. 1662. Lord Frazer contra Lord of Phillorth. A DECREE of
Removing, for not finding caution in absence, was found null by Exception, in
respect the Title Libelled on, was not produced, but the Infeftment of another
Person of the same name fraudfully mentioned in the production, so that it was
not Sustained as titulus bonafides, to give the Possessor the Fruits, June 21.
1671. Neilson contra Menzeis of Enoch. A Decree being stopped on a Bill, was
found not to be recalled, but only the Extracting thereof to be forborne till
the Party were heard on the Grounds of the Bill, and that though it lay over
several years, it needed not wakening, July 1. 1671. Broadie of Lethem and the
Lord of Riccartoun contra Lord Kenmure. A DECREE ARBITRAL was found null, as
not being within a year of the Submission, though it had no time, but a power
to the Arbiters to meet at their convenience and prorogat, but did not prorogat
the same, February 24. 1665. Mcgregor contra Menzeis. A Decree Arbitral was
sustained without Submission in Writ, it being proven by the Parties Oath, that
he so submitted, and by the Arbiters Oath, that they so decerned, though both
the Submission and Decree were only verbal, the matter being but of 200.
merks, February 7. 1671. Hume contra Scot. Here the matter was a Bond of 550.
merks, Suspended and determined to 200. merks. DECREETS OF INFERIOVR COURTS
were found not to be taken away upon Iniquity, though it be instantly verified
by the Decree, by way of Suspension without Reduction, January 24. 1662. Ker
contra Lord Rentoun. A Decree of an Inferior Court was not Reduced simply,
because Advocation was produced before Extracting, being after Sentence, but
was Reduced because the Advocation was produced before eleven hours, which was
the ordinary hour of beginning to sit, but the Sheriff sat that day an hour
before ordinary, which the Lords found sufficient presumption that it was of
purpose to prevent the Advocation, July 10. 1662. Lord of Lambertoun contra
Hume of Kaimes. A Decre^et of an inferior Court was not Sustained as in ^oro,
where a Term was taken by a Procurator, to prove a Defense without a Mandat or
Writ produced that might in^er the same, November 24. 1665. Chalmers contra
Lady Tinnel. A Decree of an inferior Court was found null for want of
Probation, bearing only that the Defender compeared, and con^essed the debt,
without proponing any other alleadgeance or de^ense, and not Subscribing his
acknowledgement, July 19. 1665. Guine contra Mcken. A Decree of an inferior
Court upon compearance, was not found null by Suspension, without Reduction,
though it had visible Nullities, and was a small matter, Inter pauperes.
November 21. 1665. Baxters in the Cannongate contra A DECREE OF SESSION was
Reduced as null, being ultra petita, July 21. 1666. Waison contra Miller. A
Decree of Session in foro, whereby in a Suspension a sum being alleged paid
and not instantly verified, the Letters were found orderly proceeded
conditionally, if any thing were produced by such a time, it should be
received, and was not produced after, which the Lords would not admit, it being
now produced in a Reduction of an Appryzing of the said Decree, now in the
hands of a singular Successor, June 16. 1664. Lord of Tillieallan and Condie
contra Crawfoord. A DECREE OF PARLIAMENT was taken away by double poynding
without a Reduction, the same being referred to the Lords by the Parliament
upon Supplication on this Reason, that it was pronunced against a Forefault
person alter his death, without calling the Kings Officers, July 14. 1665. Earl
of Argile contra Mcd^wgal of Dinolich and Raca. A Decree of Parliament
Rescinding a dishabilitation of the Children of Forefault Persons without
Citation, was Sustained, there being no Citation of the Children to the
Dishabilitation, nor Restitution by way of Grace, but in Justice, the Children
being Infants, incapable of the Crime, February 24. 1665. Sir Robert Sinclar
contra the Lord of Wedderb^rn. DELIVERY Vide Chyrographum, December 13. 1666.
^^net Thomson contra Stevinson. Delivery of an Assignation was not found
necessary to validate the same, being granted by a Defunct to his near
Relation, though not in his Family, though it bear not a Clause to be valide
without delivery, seeing it bear a Reservation of his Liferent, and a power to
dispose, evidencing his purpuse, not to deliver the same, and so importing the
Writ to be valide without delivery. Delivery of three Dispositions in Tailzie
to a Daughters Son, was found to be employed by a Clause in the first dispensing
with delivery, and seeing the Substantials of the rest were the same with the
first, and only qualified the same conform to the reserved power in the first,
they were all Sustained, though the other two had no dispensatory Clause, but
so that what was in the first, for the benefit of the Heir, should be holden
as repeated in the rest, that by the rest, the Heir might not be in a worse
case, July 23. 1669. Elle^s contra Ingles^^^n. Delivery of Bonds of provision
to Children is not presumed to have been at; or near the date, but must be
proven to prefer them to posterior Creditors, July 22. 1668. Iohnstoun of
Sh^ins contra Arnot. DEPOSITATION of a Writ was found probable by the Notar and
Witnesses insert, where the Writ was not produced by the Party, in whose
favors it was principally, but by a third party, July 5. 1662. Drummond contra
Campbel. A DESIGNATION of a Gleib by way of Instrument of a Nottar, was not
Sustained without Production of the Testificate of the Ministers Designers,
December 17. 1664. Paterson contra Watson. Designations of Gleibs must first be
of Parsons before Bishops Lands, though they were Feued before the Act anent
Manses and Gleibs, and built with Houses, so that the Feuar must purchase as
much ere the other Kirk Lands be affected, January 25. 1665. Parson of Dysart
contra Watson. Designation of one to be Tutor Testamentar by his own
acknowledgement, was found not to prove against him, where by the Testament,
the contrary appeared, June 10. 1665. Swin^^^n contra Notman. Designation of a
Manse was Sustained by Intimation out of the Pulpit, or at the Kirk door,
warning the Heretors thereto, as being the constant custom, though some of the
most considerable were ou^ of the Country, January 28. 1668. Minister of
Hassendene contra Duke of Buccl^^gh. Designation of a Gleib was Sustained,
though done but by two Ministers, the Bishops Warrant being to three without
(...) Qu^run^, unless weighty reasons upon the prejudice of parties were shown,
February 7. 1668. Minister of Cockburnspe^h contra his Parochioners.
DEVASTATION total was found to Liberate from public Maintenance, February 20.
1663. Baxters of Edinburgh contra Heretors of Eastlouthian. DILIGENCE was not
required of a Person whose Name was not entrusted in the Infeftment of
Annualrent, to make him Comptable for ommis^ion, but only for intromission,
December 18. 1666. Cass contra Wat. A DISCHARGE to one of more Contutors, was
^ound not to Liberate the rest, except in so far as satisfaction was given by
the Party discharged, or in so far as the other Contutors would be excluded
from Recourse against the Party Discharged, December 19. 1668. Seatoun contra
Seatoun.
A Discharge of Rent not designing the Writer thereof, was found null, unless
the user thereof designed the Writer, because it was of 80. pounds of
Annualrent yearly, and that thereby an Infeftment of Annualrent would be cled
with Possession, and preferred to another Annualrent, July 14. 1665. Scot
contra Silvertoun^il. A Discharge being general, was found not to extend to a
Sum Assigned by the Discharger before the Discharge, albeit it was not intimate
before, unless it were proven that payment was truly made for this sum,
February 3. 1671. Blair of Bagillo contra Blair of Denhead. A DISPOSITION of
Movables was preferred to an Arrestment on an horning anterior to the
Delivery, seeing the Disposition was before the Horning, and the delivery before
the Arrestment, July ^. 1662. Bouse contra Baillie Iohnsto^^. A Disposition was
Reduced on the Act of Parliament 1621. as in fraudem creditorum, though the
Disponer was not Bankrupt, and that he had reserved the power of a considerable
sum to sell Land to pay his debt, which the Creditors might affect, seeing the
Creditors ought to have Preference according to their Legal diligence on the
whole Estate till payment, February 6. 1663. Lord Lour contra Earl of Dundee.
Dispositions of Heretable Rights are only Reducable upon the Act of Parliament
against Bankrupts, and not by exception or reply, though betwixt Father and Son
and in re parvi momenti, viz. 100. pounds, June 19. 1663. Reid contra Harper. A
Disposition by a Husband to his Wife of an additional Ioynture, she being
sufficiently provided before, was found Reduceable at the instance of anterior
Creditors, albeit the Husband was no Bankrupt, but because he had no Estate
unliferented or affected, albeit the Reversion was much more worth nor the
Creditors Sums, but the Relick offering to purge the prejudice by admitting the
Creditor, who had appryzed, to possess Lands equivalent to his Annualrent, he
Assigning to the Relick what he was satisfied by the Ioynture Lands, and with
this provision, that if the Legal expired she should not be absolutely
excluded. The Lords found the offer sufficient, February 10. 1665. Lady Craig
and Greenhead contra Lord Loure. A Disposition omnium bonorum, without any
cause onerous, and without delivery, was found not sufficient to exclude the
necessity of Confirmation and paying of the Quote; June 23. 1665.
Procurator-fiscal of the Commissariot of Edinburgh contra Fairholm. A
Disposition omnium bonorum, though with possession was ^ound not to exclude the
Quote and Confirmation, seeing it bear a ^eversion to the Disponer, during his
Life to dispone of the Goods notwithstanding, July 4. 1665. Commissar of Saint
Andrews contra Lord of Bousie. A Disposition of Land was found to carry all
Right that was in the Disponers Person, and to import an Assignation to a
Reversion, which needed not intimation, seeing the Seasine was Registrat in the
Register of Seasines, December 5. 1665. Beg contra Beg. A Disposition of Lands
was found imported by an Assignation to the Mails and Duties in all time
coming, against the Heir of him that granted that Right, and that the Heir was
obliged to renew a complete legal Disposition, with a Procuratory of
Resignation, and Precept of Seasine, July 2. 1667. Sinclar of Hirdmanstoun
contra Cowper. A Disposition by one Brother to another of his whole Estate,
bearing for satisfying of his debts enumerat, and containing a power to the
Purchaser, to satisfy what debts he pleased, and to prefer them, was found
valide and not fraudulent, in so far as extended to the Purchasers own Sums due
to him, and for which he was Cautioner for his Brother, as if it had born these
to be paid primo loco, and thereupon one of the Creditors whose debt was
enumerat in the Disposition, was postponed to the Acquirers own debt and
cautionry, till they were first satisfied, January 8. 1669. Captain Newman
contra Tennents of White-hill and Mr. John Prestoun. A Disposition was Reduced,
because given by a weak person to him, who was lately her Tutor ante redditas
rations, and done of the same date with a Contract of Marriage, whereby she
was married to his Nephew, who got the Disposition, and died ere he was
Married, albeit he who got the Disposition was her Mothers Brother, who Educat
and Alime^^ed her, and the Pursuer of the Reduction was her Grandfathers
Brothers Son, who had not noticed her, but she was an ignorant person, half
deaf, February 18. 1669. French contra Watson. A Disposition of Movables in
Writ, bearing onerous causes, expressing a Sum, and others generally, was fou^^
not to prove the cause onerous by the Narrative, being (...) dulent, leaving
nothing to other Creditors, nor (...) by the Acquirers Oath, but also by the
Oaths of the (...) whom payment was made, November 18. 1669. Henderson contra
Anderson. A Disposition of Lands bearing the Buyers Entry to be at Whitsonday,
and to the Cropped of that year, was found not to extend to the Cropped of Corn
that was Sown, and standing on the Ground that year the time of the Buyers
Entry, or to any part of the Rent, payable for the Land, from the Whitsunday
before to the Whits^nday at which the Buyer was to Enter, February 22. 1670.
Murray of Auchtertyre contra Drummond. A Disposition of Lands and universal
Legacy, both contained in one Infeftment, in which there is a Sum provided to
Children, not being particularly annexed either to the Disposition of Legacy,
the Disposition of Lands being found null, as being in a Testament, the
universal Legacy was found burdened with no part of the Provision, seeing by the
Nullity of the Disposition, the Children had Right to their Portion of the
Lands, which exceeded the Sum they were provided to, February 1. 1671. Pringle
contra Pringles. A Disposition granted by a Person who was insolvent, and
thereafter notoriously Bankrupt, was not reduced as not proceeding upon a
necessary cause, or as being a preference of one Creditor to another, none
having done diligence, in respect the Disposition was granted for a Bargain of
Victual sold and delivered a Month before the Disposition in question, whereby
the Disponer was alleged to become Bankrupt; but it was not decided, whether
a notorious Bankrupt could after he was so known, prefer one Creditor to
another, when none of them had done diligence, July 20. 1671. Lord of
Birken^^g contra Grahame of Craig. A Disposition of Lands was found to imply an
Assignation to the Reversion of a former Wodset, and that it needed no
intimation, the Infeftment on the Disposition being Registrate, though a
posterior Assigney had first redeemed, November 18. 1664. Gu^hrie contra Idem
December 5. 1665. Beg contra Beg. DIVISION of Lands and a Muire betwixt
Coheirs, was reduced upon a considerable inequality, though not near the half
value, and though the division proceeded upon the Reducers o^n Brief of
division, December 2. 1669. Monteith of Corruber contra Boid. A DONATION was
not presumed by a Mother to her Child, by giving out Money in her Name, with
power to uplift and re-imploy, in so far as she was debtor to the Child, but
pro reliquo, December 20. 1661. Fleming contra her Children. Donation of
Aliment by a Mother to her Son, who had no other means, was presumed to
Liberate him from Repetition, but was not found so against his Step-Father, for
the years after his Marriage, June 25. 1664. Melvil contra Ferguson. Donati^
inter Virum and uxorem, was found Revockable, albeit it was not a pure
donation, but in lieu of another quo ad excessum, seeing it was notabilis
excessus, November 20. 1662. Children of Wolmet contra Lady Wolmet and Dankeith
her Husband. Do^atio inter virum and uxorem, was sustained to recall the
acceptance of an Infeftment in satisfaction of the Wifes Contract. February 12.
1663. Relict of Morison contra his Heir. Donation betwixt Man and Wife
Revockable, was found not to extend to a Contract of Marriage, though made up
during the Marriage, there being none before, November 22. 1664. M^gil contra
Ruthven of Gairn. Donatio inter virum and uxorem, was found not revockable, if
it were granted upon consideration of what fell in by the Wife after her former
Provisions, though that would also have belonged to the Husband jure mariti,
yet might be the ground in gratitude of a Donation Remuneratory, November 23.
1664. Halyburtoun contra Porteous. Donatio inter virum and uxorem, being in
question, where there was no Contract of Marriage, but an Infeftment of all
that the man then had, and after a second Infeftment, but stante matrimonio;
The Lords found that the first was valide, there being no Contract before, but
they reduced the second, finding no remuneratory provision of the Wife to
answer both November 23. 1664. Inter eosdem. Donatio inter virum and uxorem,
was found not to reach an Infeftment of Lands, to warrant and make up the
principal Lands in the Contract such a Rent, albeit there was but a personal
Obligement in the Contract, and that the Obligement to Infeft in Warrandice,
was therein satisfied and extinct, November 24. 1664. Nisbit contra Mur^ay. A
Donation was presumed of Aliment by a Goodfire to his Daughters Child, who was
long in his House, and after the Mothers death continued still without any
agreement with the Father, July 21. 1665. Ludquharn contra Geight. Donatio
inter virum and uxorem, was found relevant to recall a Bond granted by a H^^band
to his Wife bearing (that he thought it convenient that they should leave a
part, and therefore obliged him to pay a Sum yearly for her aliment) albeit it
bear also that he should never quarrel or recall the same, as importing a
Renunciation of that privilege, February 6. 1666. Living stoun contra Beg.
Donation betwixt Man and Wife was found to extend to a Charter bearing Lands
and a Miln, where the Contract of Marriage bear not the Miln, and that it was
not as an Explication of the parties meaning, and so was revocked by a
posterior disposition of the Husband to another, February 5. 1667. Countess of
Hume contra the Tenants of Old^a^^us and Hog. Donation betwixt Man and Wife was
found not to extend to a donation by a Husband to his Wifes Children of a
former Marriage, of her Goods belonging to him jure mariti, and so was not
revockable as done to the Wife, though to her Bairns at her desire, January 15.
1669, Hamiltoun contra Baynes. A Donation by a Husband to his Wife by a Tack of
his whole Lands, not Liferented by her, and bearing for Love and Favor, and
for enabling her to Aliment her Children, and bearing a small duty in case
there were Children, and the full Rent if there were none, was found valide, as
being remuneratory to make up the defect of the value, which by Contract, her
Liferent Lands were obliged to be so much worth; Superceeding to give answer,
wheither the Tack would be null at the instance of Creditors, lending Sums
after the Tack, as latent and fraudulent, if it were not proven remuneratory;
or wheither a donation betwixt Man and Wife is null, and pendent as a Bairns
Portion till the Husbands death, and if the borrowing thereafter would prejudge
the same, there being no Lands left un-liferented thereby, January 26. 1669.
Chis^holm contra Lady Bra^. Donation betwixt Man and Wife revockable, was found
not to extend to Wife Subscribing her Husbands Testament, by which her Liferent
Lands were pro^ided to their Daughter, which was not ^ound alike, as if it had
been in favors of the Man himself, who is naturally obliged to provide his
Daughter, July 12. 1671. Murray contra Murray. Donation by a Man to his Wife,
by a great additional Iointure, where she was competently provided before, was
found not to be taken away by a posterior Testament made in lecto, providing a
less additional Iointure, without mention of the former, and being conditional,
that the said last addition should be at the Testators Fathers disposal, if he
returned to Scotland, and he having returned, and having Ratified the first
additional Ioynture, the same was Sustained, July 18. 1671. Countess of Cassils
contra Earl of Roxburgh. DONATAR of Forefaulture obtaining Decree of
Parliament, upon fewer days citation then are required by Law, Reducing an
Infeftment on this Ground, that it is holden of the Forefault person base
un-confirmed, and so excluded by the Forefaulture, and not upon the five years
possession of the Forefault person, as heretable Possessor; The Lords Sustained
the Decree, February 22. 1665. Marquess of Huntly contra Gordoun of Lesmore. A
Donatar of single Escheat, though excluded by the diligence of the Creditors of
the Rebel before declarator, upon debts before Rebellion, was found not to
extend to prefer an appryzing of a Wifes Liferent, led against her Husband as
having right thereto jure mariti, in prejudice of the Donatar of the Husbands
single Escheat, though the Appryzing was before Declarator, for a debt before
Rebellion, seeing the Liferent had tractum futuri temporis, and is not as
Moveable Sums, July 18. 1668. Earl of Dumfreis contra Smart. DOUBLE POINDING
being raised in Name of Tennents by one of the Parties competing, the same was
sustained, though the Tennents did disclaim the same, and that the other party
was their present Master, his possession being but of late and controverted, it
was also sustained, though there was no particular duties libelled, but in
general to be answered of the Mails and Duties, as is ordinary in Decreets
conform, July 14. 1665. Earl of Argile contra Dinloch and Rara. A Double
poynding, calling two Ministers, and preferring one, the other being absent,
was found not irreduceabl^ by the Act of Parliament anent double poindings,
seeing the Decree was only general, without expressing the Teinds in question,
and so was only found valide as to what was uplifted, but not in time coming,
without having a Right, June 15. 1667. Gray contra IN DVBIIS^ interpretatio
facienda contra proferentem qui po^uit sibi lege^^ dixisse clarius, July 29.
1665. Douglas contra Cowan. EIECTION vide Clause in a Tack, December 19. 1661.
Dewar contra Countess of Murray. Ejection was not sustained at the Instance of
an Heretor by the Tennents ceding the Possession to a Stranger, seeing the
Tennent pursued not, and that Tennent was not in natural possession, but both
were to compet for the duties, that party having given an obligement to cede
his Right, December 21. 1661. Montgomry contra Lady Kirkcudbright. Ejection at
the instance of Heirs infants, who had an old Infeftment, but were not Infeft
themselves, was Sustained for re-possessing, albeit the Defender obtained
Decree of removing, against their Mother, and entered thereby, though the
Decree bear to remove her self, ^airns, Servants, etc. The Pursuer being then
in her Family, February 19. 1665. Scots contra Earl of Hume. Ejection was
sustained upon putting the Pursuer out of his House and Land, Naturally
possessed by him, though the Ejecter obtained Improbation against the Pursuer,
and thereupon Removing, seeing he entered not legally by Letters of Possession.
But this was not extended to the Lands possessed by Tennents, who were induced to
take Right from the Ejecter, to give violent profits of these Lands, July 25.
1668. Campbel contra Lord of Glenure^y. ERECTION granted by the King, erecting
Kirk lands into a Temporal Lordship, was found not to be habilis modus, while
the same was not vacant, but in the hands of a Commendator, albeit he was
dishabilitat to brook any Estate by his Fathers Forefa^ture at the time of the
erection, seeing his dishabilitation was thereafter rescinded in Parliament,
because he was no ways accessory to his Fathers crime, whereupon his Temporal
Provision was validate, and the erection medio t^mpore, was postponed to a
posterior erection to the Commendator himself, upon his own dimission, February
24, 1666. Sinclar contra Lord of Wedderburn. ESCHEAT single was found to reach
a sum due as the Liquidation of an obligement not to alienate Lands, which was
found moveable quo ad fiscum, albeit it came in the place of the Right
Heretable, which would have belonged to the Heir, February 4. 1663. Lord of
Philorth contra Lord Frazer. An Escheat gifted by the King, was excluded by a
Creditor, who arrested during the Rebels life, and pursued to make forthcoming
after his death, he having none to represent him in mobilibus, dying at the
Horn, and so needed no Decree establishing the debt in one representing the
Defunct, and calling the Representatives in the action for making forthcoming,
albeit the Arrestment was laid on after the Rebellion, but before declarator,
and for a debt contracted before the Rebellion, February 19. 1667. Glen contra
Hume. Escheat was found to carry a Bond bearing annualrent, the Rebellion
^alling before the first Term of payment of the annualrent. June 26. 1666. Dick
contra Ker. Vide Donator of Escheat. Escheat was not burdened with debts
contracted after Rebellion, February 24. 1669. Countes of Dund^e contra
Stra^town* Vide Gift of Escheat. AN EXECVTOR pursuing a debtor of the
Defuncts, was not excluded by Compensation, because that debtor had taken
Assignation from the Defuncts Creditor, after the Defuncts death, seeing thereby
the Defuncts debtor might prefer one of the Defuncts Creditors to another,
which neither a Debtor nor Executor can do, but according to their diligence,
February 14. 1662. Children of Mouswal contra Lowry of Maxwelstoun. In a
Competition of Executry of Defuncts amongst their Creditors, all who do
diligence within six Months of the defuncts death, by Confirming themselves
Executors Creditors, or intenting any Action against the Executor or
Intromettor, should come in pari passu, by Act of Sederunt, February 28. 1662.
An Executor was found liable to pay a Creditor of the defuncts, albeit it was
the price of Land sold to the defunct by a Minute, without restricting the
debtor to the Heir, who would only get the disposition, or causing the
Creditor dispone the Land to the Executor in lieu of the Movables, but
reserving to the Executor to seek relief of the Heir as accords, July 1. 1662.
Baillie contra Hendrison. Executors were found liable for an Annual payment,
for years after the defuncts death, February 5. 1663. Hill contra Maxwel. In
the Executry a Child dying before Confirmation of the Mothers third, the Father
being alive, was found not to transmit to the Father as nearest Ag^at, but to
the Mothers brother, and that it was not in the case of the Legitim from a
Father, which is Transmissible without any Confirmation, or adition to the
Succession, February 17. 1663. Forsyth contra Pa^oun. Executry was found
bipartite, where there was but one Child, which was Forisfamiliat and provided,
without alleging in satisfaction of the Bairns part, seeing here the Child
offered not to confer, February 18. 1663. Dumbar of Hemprigs contra Frazer. An
Executors proper Creditor competing with a Creditor of the Defuncts, both on
Arrestments of a part of the Defuncts Inventary, the Defuncts Creditor was
preferred to the Executors doing more diligence, especially before this Sum was
established in the Executors person by Decree, July 8. 1664. Ve^ch contra Lord
Ley. An Executor was not liberat by a decree of exoneration, as to the
Creditors not called, who needed not reduce the same, neither yet by
exhausting, by payment of lawful debts, instructed by Writ, before intenting of
the Pursuers Cause, unless sentence had been first obtained against the
Executor, who cannot prefer one Creditor to another, but according to their
diligence, November 11. 1664. Iohustoun contra Lady Kincaid.
An Executor ad non executa, was found to have no place where the former
Executor had obtained Sentence, albeit no payment, and albeit he was Executo^
dative, and a mee^ Stranger, November 7. 1666. Down contra Young. An Executor
was found obliged to depone upon the kinds, quantities and prices of the Goods
in the Inventary, at the instance of an Executor ad omissa. Notwithstanding of
the Oath given by the Executor at the Confirmation, July 18. 1667. Ker contra
Ker. The Executor of a donator of Liferent was found to have right to the
bygones of that Liferent before the donatars death, and that the donatars Heir
had only right to the Liferent after the donatars death, albeit there was no
declarator establishing the Liferent in the donatars person before his death,
January 28. 1671. Kiry contra Nicolson. Executors having obtained decree for
the defuncts debt, the Testament is thereby execute, although they have not
obtained payment, and after the death of one of them, the decree does not
accresce with the Office to the other, but the one half belongs to the
executors of the deceast Executor, June 22. 1671. Gordoun contra Lord of Drum.
CO-EXECVTORS being Confirmed, one dying, the Office accresceth to the rest, and
all benefit that follows thereon, but the defunct executor being nearest of
kin, his part as nearest of kin, is Transmitted to that Executors nearest of
kin, and does not belong to the surviving Executors, February 12. 1662. ^ells
contra Wilk^e. Co Executors after obtaining Sentence, may pursue for their
shares severally, without concourse or calling the rest, January 25. 1665.
Menzeis contra Lord of Drum. EXECVTORS CREDITORS were not excluded by the
defunct debitors alleging compensation upon an Assignation to a debt due by
the defunct, albeit anterior to the Confirmation or diligence, yet posterior to
the defuncts deceass, whereby one Creditor is preferred to another, which
cannot be done, either by the Executor or by the Debtor, but according to
their diligence, February 8. 1662. Crawfoord contra Earl of Murray. An Executor
Creditor was not found liable for diligence, where the confirmation was
questionable, whether it was by a competent Commissar or not, December 10.
1664. Goldsmiths of Edinburgh contra Haliburtoun. An Executor creditor long
since confirmed, was found liable for no diligence to other creditors, but to
assign them next to their own payment: And as to the future, The Lords resolved
to consider the Motives on both hands, and make an Act of Sederunt thereanent,
July 18. 1671. Harlaw contra Hume. EXECVTIONS of arrestment or the like on the
Sabbath day, are null by Exception, as was found, February 1^. 1663. Oliphant
contra Douglas of Dornoch. In Executions, giving of a co^y was found an
essential requisite, and in Executions requiring Registration, that the same
must be expressed in the Execution Registrate, else the same is null, although it
be added ex post facto by the Messenger, and offered to be proven to be true,
July 28. 1671. Keith contra Iohnstoun. EXCEPTIONS which do not acknowledge the
Libel, do not free the Pursuer from proving of the Libel, but both parties must
prove hinc ind^, July 24. 1661. Mitchel contra Hutcheson. The Exception of the
Pursuers lossing the Plea by beating the defender in the Session-House, was
Sustained without necessity to allege effusion of Blood, but the Lords
determined not whether they would admit the probation of the Fact before
themselves, or assign a long Term, that the defender might insist criminally
before the Justices, that it being there cogno^ced, it might be here repeated
in termino, July 29. 1692. Harper contra Hamiltoun. An Exception being proponed
without denying the Libel, or quantities therein, the Defender succumbing in
probation, the Libel was holden as acknowledged and proven, albeit the
Exception of its own Nature did not acknowledge the same, but it was
recommended to the parties to accord, December 13. 1664. Lord Rollo contra his
Chamberlane. EXHIBITION of defuncts Writs by his Heir was sustained, not only
for such as belonged to the defunct, but for such also as were in his
Possession at his death, January 10. 1665. Reid contra Reid. Exhibition of
Writs which the Defender before intenting of the cause had, and fra^d^ully put
away, was sustained by Witnesses to prove the having, in respect of the
defenders fraud, in endeavoring to transvert the Right, yet not thereupon
simply to decern to Exhibit, but only unless the defender refu^e to tell quo
modo des^^t possidere, July 14. 1666. Fountain and Brown contra Maxwel of
Nethergate. Exhibition of an Assignation out of the granters hands, was found
not probable by Witnesses, albeit the granter was alleged to have received it
as Agent for the Pursuer, December 14. 1666. Fairly contra Creditors of Dick.
Exhibition of count Books being craved in a count betwixt the Successors of two
brethren, not to instruct but to make up the charge, in respect of their near
interest and commerce, and that they were copartners, the Books were ordained
to be put in the Auditors hands, and if thereby copartnery appeared, or trust
as Factor for others, they should be exhibit to the other party, to frame his
accounts by, otherwise to be given back, and not to be seen by the pursuer*
July 7. 1668. Kelict of Patoun contra Relict of Patoun. EXHIBITION AD
DELIBERANDVM was sustained for all Writs wherein there was any clause in
favors of the Pursuers Predecessors, and for Writs made by him, to persons in
his Family, Wife, Children and Servants, on which no Infeftment followed,
December 6. 1661. Telzifer contra Forrester and Sc^aw of Sornbeg. The like
November 12. 1664. Galbraith contra* EXTRACT of a Bond Registrate, was found
not to Instruct the debt against the Heir of a party, whom the extract bear to
have subscribed it, but only against the consenters to the Registration: The
like unless it were instructed that the Defenders Predecessor truly subscribed
the Writ, February 7. 1662. A^cheson contra Earl of Errol: Here Witnesses ex
officio, were admitted to instruct by way of Reply. Extract of a Bond
Registrate against a party living, consenting by the Procuratory, was found not
to instruct, or prove against those who consented not, unless other Adminicles
to astruct the ^^uth thereof, were adduced, June 24. 1664. Hay Tailzeor contra
Hume of Blackburn. A FATHER as Tutor of Law, was found liable to pursue for the
Annualrent of his Child's Mothers third of movables, February 4. 1665. Beg
contra Beg. A Father was ^ound liable to receive his Son in his Family, and to
entertain him as the rest of his children, or else to pay a Modification for
his aliment, albeit the Father was indigent, seeing the Son had no Means or
Calling to aliment himself, January 13. 1666. Dick contra Dick. A Father was
sound to be lawful Administrator to his Son in his Family, not only in his
Pupillarity, but Minority, as curator^ honorarius, not liable to o^^mission, or
exclusive to other Curators, but deeds done without his consent were found
null, albeit his Son resided not in his Family, but followed the Law, living
still on his Fathers charges, and having no Calling or Patrimony to maintain
himself, neither was his Fathers Subscribing with him, found a sufficient
authorizing of him, seeing he subscribed with him as Cautioner for him, December
7. 1666. Menzeis contra Fairholme. A Father taking a Bond blank in the
Creditors Name, and filling up his Brothers Name therein, and obtaining an
Assignation from him to his daughter, was not found as a Bond of Provision,
Revockable by the Father, in respect the Bond was Registrate in the Brothers
Name, November 20. 1667. Executors of Trotter contra Trotter. A Father was not
found obliged for Annualrent of a Legacy, uplifted by him, belonging to his
Son, as being his Tutor of Law, the Son being Alimented by the Father, and in
his Family, December 15. 1668. Windrham contra Ele^s. A Father granting Bond to
a Bairn in satisfaction of her Portion Natural, was found thereby to increass
the Bairns part of the rest of the Bairns, and not to apply that Bairns part to
the Heir, Executor, or universal Legator, as they who were obliged for the Bond
of Provision, comprehending the Bairns part, February 17. 1671. Megil contra
Viscount of Oxenfoord. A FEW containing a clause irritant expresly^ to be null
upon the Failzle, was found not to be purged at the Bar where offer of payment
was made, in which it differs from a Feu, not having that clause, February 13.
1666. Lord of Wedderburn contra Wardlaw. Feus of Ward-lands granted before the
Act of Parliament 1666. against Feus, was found valide, albeit granted by these
who held Ward of Subjects, without consent of their Superior, June 24. 1668.
Steuart of Torrence contra Fevers of Ernoch. A Feu was found to be Renunceable
by a Fever, to free him of the Feu-duty, albeit it was constitute by a mu^ual
contract, obliging the Fever and his Heirs, to pay the Feu-duty yearly, seeing
by a Back-bond of the same date, he was allowed to Renunce when he pleased,
which was found effectual, to take away that personal obligement, being
extrinsick to the Feu, though in the Feudal Contract against a singular
Successor in the Feu, February 1. 1669. Brown contra Sibbald. A FEW-D^VTY was
found personally to affect a Liferenter for these years only, whereof she
lifted the Rent, July 19. 1665. Windrham contra the Lady Idingtoun.
FOREFAVLTVRE of a Paricide, as having killed his own Mother, being gifted by
the King, and Infeftment thereon, was found to have no effect, unless there had
been a doom of Forefaulture pronunced by the Justices, but not upon the
ordinary course against absents, declaring parties Fugitives for not underlying
the Law, which can only reach their Movables, July 30. 1662. Zeaman contra
Oliphant.
Forefaulture having with it dishabilitation of the Forefault persons Children,
declaring them incapable of Lands or Estate in Scotland, whereby the Sons
Estate fell in the Kings hand, and was disponed to a donatar, who set Tacks,
and the Son being restored by Sentence of Parliament, as an Infant not
accessory to the Crime; The Infeftment and Tack thereon were found to fall
without calling the Persons interressed before the Parliament, notwithstanding
of the Act 1584. Prohibiting Restitutions by way of Reduction, and declaring
Rights granted medio tempore, by the King to be valide, which was not found to
extend to dishabilitation of the Children, but to the principal Forefalture,
February 24. 1665. Douglas and Sinclar her Husband contra the Lord of
Wedderburn: Here both the dishabilitation and remission thereof proceeded
without citation. Forefalture and five years possession of the Forefalt person,
before the Forefalture, makes a valide Right, notwithstanding of the posterior
Act of Parliament for registration of Seasines and Reversions, etc. Yet
interruption within the five years, was found to elide the same by Inhibition,
and granting a new Corroborative Right, especially where citation was used
immediately before the five years, albeit the corroborative Right was post
commissum crimen, July 23. 1666. Earl of Southesk contra Marquess of Huntly.
Forefalture and five years possession was found not Relevant by exception or
reply, without a re^our by an Inquest, June 13. 1666. Hume contra Hume.
Forefalture gives the King or his Donator five years Rent of any Land the
Forefalt person was in possession off the time of the Sentence, whether by Tack
or not, January 24. 1667. Inter eosdem. In Forefalture a donatar was found
excluded by Appryzing, at the instance of the Creditors of the Forefalt person,
who had comprised before the committing of the Crime, and had charged the
Superior after the crime, but before the Process of Forefalture, July 6. 1667.
Creditors of Hume of K^llo contra Hume. The Donatar of Forefalture pursuing
Removing, was found not to be excluded by an In^e^tment on an Appryzing granted
by the King, being then immediate Superior before the Gift, which was not
found equivalent to a Confirmation, but past in Exchequer of course without
notice, December 9. 1668. Earl of Argile contra Stirling. Forefalture was found
to exclude a Creditor, founding upon a clause in the disposition made to the
Forefalt Person by his Father, reserving a power to himself to affect and
burden the Lands disponed by Wodset or Annualrent for such a sum, though the
Father had granted a Bond to the Pursuer, declaring the sum to be a part of the
Reservation, seeing there followed no Infeftment by Resignation, or Confirmation
by the King, July 12. 1671. Learmo^th contra Earl of Lauderdail. Forefalture
Vide Gift, Hague contra Moscrop and Rutherfoord. FRAVD of Creditors being
insisted on to Reduce an additional Ioynture after the debt appryzed on, the
Liferenter offering access to the Appryzer for his Annualrent, and to be
totally excluded if it were not Redeemed within the Legal, it was Sustained
Relevant; here the Husband was neither bankrupt nor insolvent, but there was no
ready execution, because of the additional Ioynture, February 10. 1669. Lady
Greenhead contra Lord Lour. Fraud of Creditors upon the Act of Parliament 1621.
was not found Relevant by Reply without Reduction, though of a disposition by a
Father to a Son in a small matter, June 19. 1663. Red contra Harper. Fraud of
Creditors was not inferred by a clause in a Contract, providing a Ioynture to a
Wife, with condition of restricking her self to a part, that the superplus
might belong to the Bairns for their Aliment, the whole Ioynture being only
proportionable to the condition of the parties, November 16. 1665. Wat contra
Russel. Fraud in a debitors granting a Bond to his Brother, and taking a
discharge of the same da^e and Witnesses, and thereby proponing a defense
against an Assigney, was found Relevant, and receivable by way of Exception,
unless the Debtor could condescend upon a reasonable cause, for which the Bond
and Discharge were so granted* that it might not in^e^ their design to deceive
any that should contract with the Receiver of the Bond, December 4. 1665.
Thomson contra Hendriso^. Fraudulent dispositions may be either Reduced by the
Act of Parliament 1621. or declared to be affected with all Execution, as if
they were in the disponers person, December 15. 1665. Ele^s contra Keith. Vide
January 8. 1669. Captain Newman contra Fraud was inferred by a Fathers granting
a Bond to his Son who was Forisfamiliat without a cause oner^us* albeit the
Bond bear borrowed Money; yet formerly it was found to be gratuitous, and it
bearing no Annualrent, and only payable after the Fathers death, the Father
after the date of the Bond continuing in a considerable Trade, and his Estate
being insufficient to pay his debt, the foresaid Bond and Adjudication thereon,
was Reduced at the instance of posterior Creditors, as being a fraudulent
conveyance betwixt the Father and Son to ensnare Creditors, and very hurtful to
commerce, February 12. 1669. Pot contra Pollock. The same, February 16. 1669.
French contra Watson. Fraud of Creditors was found valide to Reduce a
Disposition of Movables, being omnium ^^norum; and that the Narrative bearing
special onerous causes was not sufficient, though the parties were not
conjunct, but that it behoved to be astructed otherwise then by the acquirers
Oath November 18. 1669. Hendrison contra Anderson. Fraud of Creditors was
inferred by the Act of Parliament 1691. against an only Son and appearand Heir,
provided to a great sum of Money by his Contract of Marriage, so far as to make
a part thereof forthcoming, for satisfaction of an anterior creditor, albeit
the Father was not Insolvent, or made Insolvent by the Contract; and albeit the
Contract bear no Assignment to an Heretable sum, but actual payment of Money,
February 8. 1671. Wat contra Campbel of Kilpont. Fraud was not inferred by the
latency of a Translation to a Tack by a Husband to his Wife, granted for
quiting of her Liferent of Lands to his Creditors, and therefore was preferred
to an Acquirer thereafter upon an onerous cause, February 7. 1670. Dam
Elizabeth Burnet contra Sir Alexander Frazer. A FRAVGHT was found only
proportionably due to a Skipper, where the Ship was not fully laden, unless he
proved by Witness^s that he intimate his going to Sea, and required more
loading, and abode his ^y days, without necessity to allege an Instrument
and Protest taken thereon mentioning he was not fully fraughted, and craving
more Fraught, January 13. 1665. contra Charters. FRVITS Vide Cropped, Gordoun
contr M^^^lloch. GENERAL LETTERS upon Presentation or Collation of Ministers,
whether having benefices, or modified Stipends, are prohibit by Act of
Sederunt, and the same intimate to the Writers and Keepers of the Signet, and
Clerk to the Bills, but that every Incumbent must have a Decree conform,
although he produce his Predecessors Decrect conform, June 3. 1665. A GIFT
granted by the King, Erecting Kirk-lands in a Temporal Lordship, was found not
to be habil^^ modus, while the same was not vacant, but in the hands of the
Commendator, albeit he was dishabilitat from brooking any Estate by his Fathers
forefa^ture, at the time of the Erection, seeing his dishabilitation was
thereafter Rescinded in Parliament, because he was no ways accessory to his
Fathers Crime, whereupon his Temporal Provision was validate, and the Erection
medio tempore was postponed to a posterior Erection to the Commendatar himself,
upon his own dimission, February 24. 1666. Sinclar contra Lord of W^dderburn.
Gifts of E^cheat competing, the Gift last past in Exchequer, but first past the
Seals, was preferred to the other, though the other took Instruments against
the Keeper of the Seal, for delaying him, seeing the Instrument was after the
other Gift was past, December 6. 1662. Steuart contra Nasmith. A Gift of a Ward
being to the behove of the Superiors Heir, and made (...) of against the
Vassals, who had the Rights with absolute Warrandice, the Gift was ^ound to
accre^ce to the Vassals, they paying a proportional part of the Composition,
February 15. 1665. Boyd of P^nk^ll contra Tennents of Cars^l^ugh. A Gift was
found to be affected with a Back-bond granted by the Donator, when the Gift
past the Exchequer, and was Registrate in the Books of Exchequer, albeit the
Back-bond was not conceived in favors of the The^aurer, but of a private
person, and albeit the Gift was assigned when it was incomplete before it past
in Exchequer, and the Assignation, was intimat, January 31. 1666. Dallace
contra Frazer of Strei^ha^. Gifts of Escheat bearing all Goods to be acquired,
was ^ound to extend to Goods acquired within a year after the Gift only, and
not within a year after the Horning, July 2. 1669. Barclay contra Barclay.
HEIRS ^ound to have the benefit of an obligement to re-dispone Lands, albeit
Heirs were not expressed, but appeared to be omitted by negligence, seeing the
clause bear not that they should be^redeemable any time in the Disponers Life,
January 9. 1662. Earl of Murray contra Lord of Gairn. Heirs were ^ound to have
right to an Annualrent, though Heirs were not expressed, and though it bear only
to be paid yearly to the Annualrenter, and not Heretably or perpetually,
February 2. 1667. Pourie contra Dykes. An Heir, viz. a Son being in^e^t as Heir
to his Mother, dying without Issue, his Brother V^erine by that Mother not
found Heir to him therein, but his Father, February 5. 1663. Lennox contra
Lintoun. An Heir found conveenable for the avail of her Marriage, without
calling the other^Heir portioner who was dead, June 26. 1666. Arbuthne^ contra
Keith. HEIRS OF LINE and not of Conquest, ^ound to have right to a Tack, albeit
Conquest, June 23. 1663. Ferguson contra Ferguson. An Heir of Line of a
youngest Brother by a several Marriage, found to be the immediate elder Brother
of the former Marriage, and not the eldest Brother, June 20. 1664. Lady
Clerkingtoun contra Steuart.
AN HEIR MALE was found to be presently liable without discussing the Heir of
Line, where he was obliged to relieve the same, November 22. 1665. Scot contra
Bothwel of A^^hinleck. AN HEIR SVBSTITVTE in a Bond, was found not to make the
Substitute Heir liable in solidum, but quo (...) valorem of the sum, this was a
mutual Substitution of a sum payable to two Brothers, or the surviver, July 3.
1666. Fleming contra Fleming. Heirs have right in a Substitution, though only a
person by Name was Substitute, without mention of Heirs, and though that person
died before the Institute, January 5. 1670. Innes contra Innes. AN HEIR
APPARENT was allowed to have Aliment from the Liferenter, seeing the whole
Estate was either affected with the Liferent, or the remainder thereof was
appryzed from the appeared Heir for the Defuncts debts, exceeding the value
thereof, February 13. 1662. Brown contra Liferenters of Rossie. An Heir
apparent was allowed to have Aliment of his Grandfather, though he had
voluntarly infe^t his Son the Pursuers Father, and though the Pursuer had a
stock of Money, Liferented by his Mother, here the Grandfather was Iately
fallen to a plenteous Estate, June 17. 1662. Ruthven Fe^ar of Gairn contra
Lord of Gairn. An Heir apparent taking Right to Land from his Grandfather,
was found not to enjoy the privilege of a singular Successor, and to be in no
better case as to that Right than his Grandfather, albeit his Grandfather was
living, and the Oye then not immediate Successor, July 23. 1662* Lord Frazer
contra Lord of Phillorth. An Heir Apparent was found to have Right to the
Rents of ^is predecessors Lands* although he dyed before he was Infeft, and
that the next Heir intrometting with the Re^^s of the years that the former
appearand Heir lived, was liable to pay the said appearand Heirs Aliment, in so
far as he Intrometted, December 20. 1662. Lady Tarsappie contra Lord of
Tarsappie. An Heir apparent pursuing for Inspection ad deliberandum, was found
not to have interest, to cause a party count and run Probation, that he might
know the condition of the Her^tage, though there was a contrary Decision
observed by Dury, March 16. 1637. Hume contra Hume of Blacketer, seeing the
ordinary course since has been contrary, June 22. 1671. L^s^ies contra
Ia^^ray. HEIRS IN A TACK found not to require service, but that such as might
be served Heirs, might enjoy the benefit thereof, June 17. 1671. Boyd contra
Sinclar. HEIRSHIP MOVABLES was found competent to one who was infeft in Lands,
and though the same was appryzed, and the Appryzer infeft, yet the legal was
unexpyred, and the appryzing stood but as a collateral Security, not as a full
Right, February 26. 1663. Cuthbert of Draikies contra Monro^ of Foul^s.
Heirship moveable was found to belong to an Heir of person who dyed only infeft
in an Annualrent, July 19. 1664. Scrymzeour contra Executors of Murray.
Heirship moveable was not found competent to a person who was only Heir
apparent of Tailzie, and dyed never Infe^t. January 27. 1666. Colonel
Montgomerie contra Steuart. Heirship moveable being renunced from the Heir of
Line, in favors of his Father, was found not to return to him after his
Fathers death, but to belong to his Fathers Executors, (...) 18. 1666. Pollock
contra Rutherfoord. Heirs (...) clause. AN HERETABLE Obligement quoad
creditorem may be moveable quoad debitorem, July 25. 1662. Nasmith contra
Ia^^ray. An Heretable Sum was found so to remain notwithstanding of a
Requisition not being made conform to the clause of Requisition, and so null as
being provided to be required by the Husband with consent of the Wife, whose
consent was not adhibite, nor was the showing the Creditors intention to
require his Money enough, not being made debiro modo, January 18. 166^. Steuart
contra Steuarts. An Heretable Bond was found moveable by a charge, though but
against one of the Ca^tioners, January 24. 1666. Montgomery and his Spouse
contra Steuart. An Heretable Bond bearing a clause of Annualrent, was found not
to be moveable, though the principal sum was not payable till the debitors
death, seeing the first Term of payment of the Annualrent was past, July 31.
1666. Gordoun contra Keith. Vide Bond, June 28. 1665. and Iun^ 26. 1668. ONE
HOLDEN AS CONFESSED was reponed against a Decree of an inferior Judge, albeit a
Procurator compeared, and took a day to produce him, but without a Procuratory,
or proponing any Defense that might show any Information of the cause, and so
no warrant to compear, November 24. 1665. Chalmers contra Lady Tinnel. Holden
as confessed was not admitted against a Defender absent, where the Messengers
Execution did not bear personally apprehended, but that the Messenger knew that
the Defender was in his House, but was forcibly kept from access by his Wife,
July 5. 1670. Lindsay and Swintoun contra Inglis. AN HOLOGRAPH Discharge was
found not to prove its date against an Assigney, unless it were astructed by
Adminicles or Witnesses, that knew it subscribed of that date, January 4. 1662.
Dickie contra Montgomery. A Holograph Writ proves not quo ad datam, yet the
date may be astructed by Witnesses above exception; but persons of ordinary
credit, one of two being a Towns Officer, were not found such Witnesses,
albeit no exception was competent against them for being ordinary Witnesses,
June 21. 1665. Bradie contra the Lord of Fairny. Holograph was found proven by
production of a Transumpt done judicially, and the Oaths of the Witnesses, and
Friends of the Defunct who made the Wri^ Transumed amongst his Children,
altering their portions; and though a part of it was written by another when
the Defunct was so weak that he could not write, yet the writ was found
holograph as to the rest, but not as to this Article, albeit the principal writ
was lost and not produced, but only the judicial Transumpt taken off when it
was produced, July 30. 1668. Mckenzie contra Balla^dine of Newhall. Vide
Deathbed, November 14. 1668. Calderwood contra Schaw. HOMOLOGATION to
communicate Appryzings, was found not to be inferred by the singular Successors
concurring de facto against third parties, unless it were proven by the
singular Successors Oath, that he knew of such a Bond, July 6. 1661. Tailzifer
contra Maxtoun and Cunningham^. Homologation of a Decree was not inferred by
payment thereof, without a Charge, seeing the Givers thereof were Officers
having no Commission, or any civil Authority, July 24. 1661. Jack contra
Feddes. Homologation of a Decree Arbitral quoad, one of many Articles of
different matters, was found not sufficient for the whole, November 22. 1662.
Pringle contra Din. Homologation of a Fathers Legacy to his Children, was
inferred by his Wife, Confirming the Testament without Protestation, not to
prove that Legacy, here the Wife by her Contract was provided to the Liferent
of all her Husbands Movables, February 19. 1663. More contra Stirling.
Homologation of an Infeftment granted to a Wife in satisfaction of her Contract
of Marriage, was inferred by her continuing six or seven years to possess, and
setting several Tacks as Liferentrix, where the clause in the Contract was only
in general to employ Money on Land, or Annualrent, and no Infeftment followed
thereon, nor was the Husband in possession in his Life, but the Wise began the
Possession, albeit the acceptance of the Infeftment was to her prejudice, and
was not in her hand, nor did the Seasine repeat that provision particularly,
But only according to the conditions contained in the Bond, the Seasine being
Registrate, and the Bond still in the Nottars hand Who took the Seasine, in
which case the Wife was presumed to know and not to be ignorant of the Terms of
her Infeftment, November 14. 1665. Skeen and her Spouse contra Ramsay.
Homologation of an Infeftment, bearing in satisfaction, etc. was sound not to
be inferred by possessing the Lands, seeing the Possessor had another Title, as
Heir apparent to persons who dyed Infeft therein, unless it were instructed
that the possession was attained by Process upon the Infeftment in
satisfaction, December 12. 1665. Barns contra Young and her Spouse.
Homologation of a Feuars Right, and passing from a Declarator against the same,
upon a clause irritant, was found not to be inferred by acceptance of two years
Feu-duties after the Declarator, except as to these two years that more duty
could not be demanded therefore, June 6. 1666, Earl of Cassils contra Agnew.
Homologation of a Bond granted by a Minor, without consent of his Father as
lawful Administrator, was found not inferred by payment of Annualrent by him
after his Majority, especially not being of his own Money, nor by taking a
Discharge of the Annualrent to the Principal, and himself as Cautioner,
February 14. 1668. Mckenzie contra Fairholm, Here the Discharge related the
Bond both as to Principal and Cautioner. Homologation of a Minors Bond, was not
inferred by pursuing for his relief after his Majority, but that in case he
were not liberate by that mean, he might return to his Reduction upon Minority,
February 20. 1668. Farquhar of To^ley contra Gordoun. Homologation of a Tack of
Teinds which was null, as wanting the consent of the Patron, was not found
inferred by the Ministers receiving the duty conform to the Tack before
Reduction thereof, February 27. 1668. Chalmers contra Wood of Balbegno.
Homologation of a Decree was not inferred by giving Bond of borrowed Money for
the like sum, and taking a Discharge of the Decree, seeing it was no voluntary
deed, but the Debtor was then under Caption in the Messengers hands upon the
Decree, neither a Transaction, if the Bond contained all the sum in the
Decree, unless abatement had been gotten, July 3. 1668. Row contra Ho^stoun.
Homologation was not inferred by a Husbands Discharge of Annualrent, as Tutor
to his Wifes Child, to infer the Child had right to the Annualrent, whereas by
the Bond it self the Wife was Liferenter, January 18. 1670. Doctor Balfour and
his Spouse contra Wood. Homologation of a Decree of consent, containing a
Transaction of parties at the Bar, without any Subscription, was inferred by a
simple offer of a Disposition conform to the said Transaction be that party who
quarrelled the Decree as without Warrant, but was not inferred by consignation
of the Disposition, for obtaining a Suspension upon obedience to be delivered
up, if the Lords saw cause, February 4. 1671. Lowrie contra Gibson.
Homologation of a Contract of a Minor having Curators; without their consent,
was not inferred by payment of a years Annualrent of the sum contained in the
Contract, being made ^o an indigent Sister, who had no other provision, but
homologation was inferred by a Decree of Registration of the Contract, at the
instance of the Party, none quarrelling the same after his Majority, though
there was neither Charge nor Execution used thereon, and in the Decree of
Registration, there was neither Protestation nor Reservation, that the same
might be quarrelled in any point, June 2^, 1671* Hume contra Lord Justice
Clerk. Homologation of a Testament subscribed by a Wife at the desire of her
Husband near his death, was not in^erred by her Confirming the Testament under
Protestation, not to prejudge her own Right, though she might have attained her
interest in the Movables, by Confirming her self Executrix Creditrix, July 12.
1671. Murray contra Murray. HORNING granted Summarly upon the late Judges Act,
at the instance of heirs or Executors confirmed, was found to be ^ull, upon the
late Act of Parliament, declaring their ludi^^^^ proceedings to be
quarrellable, seeing there^ was no ^^justice in the matter, but the Lords gave
the Suspenders such time for their Defenses as in an ordinary Action, January
1. 1662. Barnes contra Lord of Applegirth. Horning does not affect the Rebels
Movables by the Act 1592* but that the Rebel may effectually deliver them to
one who had Disposition of them before the horning, July 9. 1662. Bower contra
Barclay and Iohnstoun. Horning was not found null by payment before
denunciation, to be proven by the Creditors Oath* or holograph Discharges, but
by the Denuncers Oath of Verity, February 10. 1663. Montgomery contra
Montgomery and Lawder. Horning granted against the Magis^rates of a Town upon
the Act of their Council, obliging to pay a Debt upon a Bill without Signet,
though there was no Process whereon the Act proceeded, or Clause of
Registration therein, February 19. 1663. Lady Swintoun contra Magistrates o^
Edinburgh. Horning was sustained though on a Charge of six days beyond Dee,
contrary to the Act of Parliament 1580. ^n respec^ it proceeded on consent of
parties upon a clause of Registration, and since that Act, such hornings had
never been quarrelled, December 16. 1664. Lord of Phillorth contra Forb^s of
As^oun and the Lord Frazer. A HUSBAND was found liable to his Wifes debt,
though not established against him during the Marriage, in so far as might be
extended to the benefit of her Lif^rent Duty resting after the Marriage
dissolved, which could not belong to the Husband, but with the burden of her
debt, February 1. 1662. Cunninghame contra Dalmahoy. A Husband was found liable
for his interest in Movables intrometted with by his Wife of her first
Husbands, albeit there was an interveening Husband who was not found to be
first discust, but reserving to the Defender to pursue his heirs as accords,
February 18. 1663. Dumbar or Hemprigs contra Lord Frazer, Vide interdiction,
February 27. 1663. Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun. A Husband was
assoilzied from his Wifes debt, albeit Litiscontestation was past, seeing she
was dead, and albeit there was an Interlocutor ordaining him to give Bond to
pay what his Lady should be found due, July 11. 1664. Inter eosdem. A Husband
being pursued to remove from a Tenement, which he possessed jure mar^ti, no
Process was sustained till the Wife was cited, July 14. 1665. Iohnstoun of
Shee^s contra Brown. A Husband Confirming his Wifes Testament, by giving up his
own Movables and Debt, though he made Faith upon the Inventary, yet was not
excluded from debarring the Wifes Legatars upon another debt then forgotten,
though not old, December 7. 1665. Anderson contra Cunninghame. But he being
lately charged on a debt before the confirmation, it was not allowed as
forgotten, June 5. 1666. Inter eosdem, A Husbane was not found liable for his
Wifes debt jure Mariti after her death, though in her life there was Decree
against her and him as Husband, seeing there was no Execution thereon in her
life, December 23. 1665. Dam Rachel Burnet contra Lepers. A Husband and Wife
were not found liable as lucrative Successors for a competent Tocher su^eable
to their condition, but for the superplus, and if the provision was exorbitant,
not only the Wife but even the Husband is liable in quantum lucratus est,
December 23. 1665. Inter eosdem. A Husband receiving a sum provided to his Wife
for her use, Ornaments, or Abuilziaments, or any other use she pleased,
excluding the Husband and his jus mariti, was found to exclude the Wifes
Executors, seeing the husband sufficiently furnished his Wife, and the Granter
of the Provision freely made payment to the husband, February 12. 1667.
Executors of the Lady Piltoun contra Hay of Balhousie. A Husbands Escheat
falling by being denunced as husband for his in^erest upon his Wifes Bond, not
subscribed by him, and only at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, he residing out
of the Country, was found not to be Liberate by the dissolution of the
Marriage, February 25. 1668. Lord Almond contra Dalmahoy. A Husband was
decerned for his Wifes debt, as being holden as confessed, upon refusing to give
his oath of Calumny whether he had just reason to deny what his Wife had
declared upon Oath, the Decree for that reason was Reduced, February 26. 1668.
Grahame contra Touris and her Husband. A Husband having Married a Taverner, who
after Proclamation of the Marriage had bought twelve Hogsheads of Wine, and the
Pursuer having intented Action against her and him as Husband, she dyed within
four months after the Marriage, the Husband delivered the Keys of the Sellar
to the Magistrates, and Inventared the Wines, and abstained from intromett^ng;
the Husband was not found liable for what was vended before the Marriage, nor
for what remained unfold after his Wifes death, but the burden of probation was
put on the Husband, to prove what was vended before, and what remained after
the Wifes death, otherwise to pay the whole, November 25. 1668. Andrew contra
Corse. A Husband Ratifying his Wifes Disposition to her Children, by the first
Marriage, though after Proclamation, it was ^ound valide, and not Revockable,
as Donatio inter virum and uxorem, February 15. 1669. Hamiltoun contra Banes.
HYPOTHECATION of the profits for the Rents, was found to prefer a Town setting
their Customs, as to the duty due by a Sub^acksman therefore, though not to the
Town, but to the principal Tacksman, and though a Creditor of the Tacksmans had
arrested the Sub-Tack-duty for the Tacksmans debt^ the Town using no diligence
till they were called in a double Poynding, yet were preferred, January 31.
1665. Anderson, etc. contra the Town of Edinburgh. Hypothecation of the Fruits
of the Ground, for the Rent of the same year, was found valide to the Setter of
a Fishing against the Do^atar of the Tenants Escheat, who had intrometted
therewith, and was found liable to restore, July 4. 1667. Cumming of Alter
contra Lun^d^an. IGNORANTIA^IVRIS non excusat etiam in mulieribus, as that a
Bond moveable in the Wifes Name belonged to the Husband* June 16. 1664. Murray
contra IN AN IMPROBATION a party user of a Writ challenged, but not produced by
himself, was admitted to abide thereby qualificate, viz. That he used it as a
Writ produced by another, which was in his favors, and knew nothing of the
Forgery thereof, July 24. 1661. Lord of Lambertoun contra Earl of Levin and
Kennedy. Improbation of a Writ by Exception being proponed, and an Act
extracted, the Defender was not admitted to allege nullities, quia excepti^
falsi est omnium ultima, July 3. 1661. Peacock contra Baillie. In an
Improbation, testimonies were published to both Parties, and the Defender was
made closs Prisoner, July 26. 1661. Lambertoun contra Kennedy. Improbation was
found necessary to be continued, though it bear an express privilege without
continuation, which was thought to pass of course, contrary to form, February
7. 1662. Lord of Auchinbreck contra Mcleree. In an Improbation after Articles
indirect for improving, and Articles approving, and a Dispute in Writ thereon,
and Witnesses hinc ind^ examined on all before discussing the Relevancy, and
the Testimonies closed, and new Articles hinc inde, and a Dispute in Writ
thereon, the Parties were heard viva voc^, and then all advised, July 11. 1662.
Lord of Lambertoun contra Earl of Levin and Kennedy. In an Improbation a Writ
was improven, though two Witnesses in it were alive, and examined thereon, and
deponed it was his Subscription, the other deponed it was like his when he was
young, seeing the Writ was null for want of the Designation of the Writer, and
other presumptions against it, and seeing none of the Witnesses remembered that
they subscribed, or that they saw the Party subscribe, so tha^ their
Testimonies were held no more but as de credulitate* that this was their
subscription, seeing no ^^n could possibly swear, but that this might be ^en^ied
by some other, not remembering of his subscription, neither was holograph Writs
found sufficient to astruct, and many Witnesses Deponing these were the hand
Writ of the Parties; yet seeing they Deponed not that they saw these written by
the Party, it was but like the other, that these were so like his ^and, as that
they believed it to be the same, which therefore would have proven, if there
had not been contrary presumptions and evidences proven; here some of the Lords
were unclear that this Improbation could absolutely ^mprove as false, but that
the Writs never having been in the Creditors hands, and long kept up by the
producer suspecta fama, and many presumptions contrary proven, it might
conclude the Writs suspect, and not authentic and probative, but not to be
forged or false. which infe^s p^nam sa^guinis, and ought to be on clearer
probation then such presumptions, July 14. 1662. Inter eosdem.
Improbation of Rights of Lands was found not to be sustained upon the
Advocates concourse, without the Kings special Warrant, albeit it was of
Kirklands erected wherein the Pursuer stood infeft as Superior till he were
Redeemed by the King, by the Act 1637. and 1661* anent Erections, June 24.
1664. Lord of Prestoun contra Alred. Here some of the Lords remembered the like
done in the case of Hopes Goodson when he was Advocate. Improbation being
Sustained by exception against an assigney, it was found sufficient that the
Assigney abode by the Writ delivered to him as a true Writ, and that he knew
nothing to the contrary, and producing his Cedent to bide by it, who though
alleged to be Bankrupt, yet was not obliged to find caution, nor go to
Prison, but only to enact himself to appear judicially whenever any thing
that might infer the falsehood of the Writ was referred to his Oath* and his
being holden as confessed, should be effectual to prove both against Cedent and
Assigney, January 3. 1666. Grahame and Jack contra Bryen. Improbation being
sustained by exception, and Terms assigned to the Defender to improve, and to
the Pursuer to abide by the Write, after the Term was come, the Defender was
admitted to propone payment by Bill, the Act not being Extracted on the
improbation, though it be omnium exceptionum ultima; January 23. 1666. contra
Earl of Kinghorn. In Improbations the Lords declared they would grant three
Terms for production of Rights of Lands, and appointed the Ordinary to intimate
the same, November 26. 1667. Hay of Haystoun contra Drummond and Hepburn.
Improbation upon certification was found null, because the Defender was then
Prisoner of War in Ireland, and his Right was after acknowledged by an
agreeement, though not perfected, July 25. 16^8. Campbe^ c^ntra Lord of
Glen^rchy. In an Improbation the Witnesses insert were examined ex officio what
they knew of the Truth, or Forgery of the Writs in question, though the Writs
were not produced, there being pregnant presumptions, and fragrant fame of
Forgery, July 6. 1669. Barclay contra Barclay. In an Improbation after
certification was Extracted, The Lords Examined Witnesses as to the Forgery, in
so far as it might be known* without production of the Writs in question, and
though the Witnesses were accessory to the Forgery, November 9. 1669. Inter
eosdem. In an Improbation where the Writs were once judicially produced in
Exchequer, and wilfully kept up, certification being Extracted, The Lords
upon Copies Examined the Witnesses insert and Writer, who confessed the Forgery
and were moved thereto by the Defender, whereupon the Writs were not improven
as not being produced, but the Writers and Witnesses were found Forgers, and
the Defender as user and accessory, and all were declared infamous and remitted
to the Council, to use an extraordinary Remedy by Banishment against the
Defender. January 26. 1670* Inter eosdem. In an Improbation where one of the
Witnesses insert had a Designation alleged competent to more persons, all
that were alleged to be so designed that were alive were ordained to be
Summoned, and the hand writs of those that were dead to be produced, June 8.
1671. Steuart contra Mckenzie and Kettlestoun. In an Improbation of the Minute
of a Tack, wherein one Deponed, that he had subscribed at the Defenders
Instigation, who told him that he caused the Pursuers Name to be set to the
Writ, and another that he did not see the Pursuer subscribe, and the third who
was Writer of the Minute, and also Brother to the Defender Deponed, that he saw
the Pursuer subscribe with her own hand; The Writ was found improven and false,
but there was not two Witnesses instructing who was the Forge^, July 22. 1671.
Miller contra Bothwel of Gl^^corse. INCIDENT was not Sustained upon an Act
before answer, ordaining all Writs to be produced, the parties would make use
of which was found only to extend to such Writs as they then had, July 3. 1662.
Kello contra Pa^toun. In an Incident four Terms were allowed for proving the
having of the Writs by Witnesses, but the Terms were to be short. December 15.
1665. Mo^teith contra Anderson. An Incident was Rejected, because the Pursuer
of the principal Cause was not called thereby, and the Executions suspect*
December 23. 1665. Lord of C^^neck contra Lord Bargeni^. Incident was not
Sustained at the instance of any but these whose Names as Purshers were filled
up in the Bill* though it contained a blank, but it was Sustained against the
Defenders, havers of the Writs, for whom a blank was left, though nor at first
filled up, in respect of the custom for the last and not for the first, July 3.
1667. Creditors of Wa^chtoun contra Counte^s of Hume. PRO INDIVISO was not
sustained to hinder Removing of a Relick from an House, as being a Tenement
Indivisible, though she had a Terce of it, but the Heretor was found to have
Right to possess, yet so that if he dwelt not so himself, she should be
preferred to all others, she giving like Mail as others would pay, January 26.
1665. Logan contra Galbraith. INFEFTMENT of Annualrent holden base, was found
valide against a posterior Public Infeftment, because thereon there was a
Decree of poinding the Ground, though it could take no effect for a long time,
seeing the Entry to the Annualrent was not till after the Constituents death,
February 26, and 27. 1662. Creditors of Kinglassie competing. Infeftment past
in Exchequer on an appryzing against one who was Infeft by his Author not
Confirmed, was found not to supply or comprehend a Confirmation in prejudice of
another Creditor, who regularly had obtained Confirmation of that null Seasine,
in so far as might concern his base Right depending thereon. January 16. 1663.
Tennents of Kilchattan contra Lord of Kilchattan, Major Campbel and Baillie
Hamiltoun. Infeftments gra^uitous to a Wife after she was provided by her
Contract of Marriage, was found not to be taken away at the instance of
Creditors upon the Act 1621. by Exception or Reply, July 22. 1664. Lord Loure
contra Lady Craig. An Infeftment to a Wife in Liferent, was Sustained by her
Seasine adminiculat by her Contract, albeit the Seasine was not immediately upon
the Contract, but related a Bond granted for the same Cause, which was not
produced, January 29. 1665. Norvil contra Sunter. Infeftment of warrandice
Lands being in the same Investiture with the principal Lands, and both holden
base, was preferred to a posterior public Infeftment of the same Warrandice
Lands, though cled with long possession, and that upon an Action of Mails and
Duties upon the Distress without Reduction, January 9. 1666. Brown contra
Scot. An Infeftment of Kirklands was Sustained* though it bear to be upon
Resignation, and had not the r^ddendo^per expressum, but relative to the former
Infeftment, without necessity to produce any original Right, seeing the Charter
was subscribed by the Abbot with consent of the Convent, January 17. 1666. Lord
Rentoun contra Feuars of Coldinghame. An Infeftment to a person on her own
Resignation, bearing expressly her to be Heir to her Father, who was last
Infeft, The Charter was found equivalent to a precept of clare constat,
Ianu^ry. 20. 1666. Inter eosdem. Infeftment of the Office Forrestrie, with a
Duty out of the whole Lands of an Abbacy, was found valide being granted by the
Abbot and Convent, without Confirmation by the King or Pope, Ibidem. Infeftment
in warrandice granted by a Husband to his Wife though base holden of himself,
and ex intervallo, after the principal Infeftment, was found valide against a
posterior public Infeftment of the same warrandice Lands, as being cled with
the Husbands Possession in the principal Lands, and that there needed no
Declarator of Distress or Eviction, but a pursuit of Removing, or Mails and
duties upon the Eviction is sufficient, which cannot be excluded by a
possessory Judgment upon seven years Possession by the public Infeftment,
unless it were seven years after the Eviction, February 20. 1668. Forbes contra
Innes. An Infeftment of Annualrent being before a Liferenters Infeftment, after
which there followed a corroborative Security* accumulating the bygone
Annualrents, and giving Infeftment for both, which posterior Security was not
Sustained against the Liferenter, nor was it held as if it has been a poinding
of the Ground, February 13. 1669. Mclellan contra Lady Kilcu^bright. An
Infeftment to be holden of the Superior not Confirmed* wa^ found null* albeit
it was only granted for Security of ^ Wi^es ^iferent, conform to her Contract
of Marriage, July 2^. 1669. Gray contra Ker. An Infeftment of Annualrent was
found extinct by the Annualrenters intrometting with the Annualrents of the
Lands equivalent to the principal sum, February 4. 1671. Wishart contra Arthur.
An Infeftment was found null by reply without Reduction, whereby a Woman was
served Heir to her Mother in a Tene^ent^ in which her Mother and Father were
infeft in Conjunct ^ee, albeit she had probable* Ground to think her Mother was
Feear, seeing her Father was found to be Feear, and that she was not (...) by
Retour, but by precept of favor; here seven years possession was not alleged
to give the benefit of a possessory judgment, July 1^. 1671. Gairns contra
Sa^^ilands. ^ Infeftment Vide base Infeftment. INHIBITION was found not to
Reach Lands acquired after it, lying in another jurisdiction, then where it was
published and Registrate, July 18. 1662. Smeateun contra An Inhibition was
found to be valide to reduce or declare against the Person Inhibite, not only
for the Lands he had the time of the Inhibition, but these acquired thereafter,
December 15. 1665. Ele^s contra Keith. An Inhibition of Teinds was found
sufficiently execute by a Sheriff in that part, and not by a Messenger, being
direct to Messengers, Sheriffs in that part, which was sufficient to interrupt
tacit Relocation, January 27. 1666. Earl of Eglintoun contra Lord of
Cunninghamehead. Inhibition being used on a Sum, was found sufficient to
reduce, and that the Inhibition and Reduction thereon could not be purged by
payment of the sum whereon it proceeded with Annualrent and Expenses, seeing
there was a supervenient appryzing upon the Sum which was now expyred, February
24. 1666. Grant contra Grant. Inhibition was found to extend to Rights acquired
after the Inhibition, but not to a Wodset acquired after, and Renunced upon
payment, without abiding an Order, albeit Renunciations be by the style of the
Inhibitions prohibit, yet they are but as Discharges of ^eretable debts or
annualrents, against which Inhibitions operate not, to cause them pay again,
July 16. 1667. Eleis contra Keith and Steuart. Inhibition was found to extend
to Lands acquired after the publication thereof lying in the Shire where it was
published, February 27. 1667. inter eosdem. Inhibition on a Dependence was
found to take no effect wh^re no judicial Sentence followed, but a Transaction
on arbitriment, December 16. 1668. Frazar contra Keith. An Inhibition was found
to reduce a disposition, though its date was anterior to the Inhibition as to
some Creditors, whose Names and sums were filled up in it by another hand,
which was presumed to have been blank, and filled up after ter Inhibition,
unless the contrary were proven by Witnesses above exception. January 15. 1670.
Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra Creditors of Montcastle. An Inhibition was found
null, because the Executions thereof bear not a Copy to have been left at the
Market Cross where it was published, February 12. 1670. Naper contra Gordoun of
Grange. Inhibition of Teinds was found not to give Right to draw the Teind
without Sentence, where the Here^or had any colorable Title, January 27. 1665.
Barefoord and Bennistoun contra Lord Kingstoun. Inhibition was found Relevant
to Reduce the Rights of Creditors, albeit there was a Disposition to two
Parties for themselves and for the behove of other Creditors underwritten,
after which there was a large blank filled up with an other hand, in which the
Creditors in question were insert, which blank so filled up, was holden as
after the Inhibition, and a prior communing to take in these Creditors, and
undertaking their debts by the persons to whom the Disposition was made, was
not Sustained to be proven by their oaths, or by the oaths of Witnesses, but
only by Writ or oath of knowledge of the Pursuer, July 8. 1670. Lady Lucia
Hamiltoun contra Boyd of Pitcon and others. Inhibition being pursued upon to
Reduce, and the Pursuer offering to accept the Sums in the Inhibition cum omni
causa, albeit there was an expyred Compryzing led upon the Sums, the Defender
craving that the Pursuer would assign the Sums; The Lords found that the
Pursuer could not be compelled to assign the same, in respect the offer was
only to take satisfaction and Renunce, whereby the Cautioner might not be
distressed Inter eosdem. Inhibition was found null by Declarator, because the
Executions as they were Registrate, did not bear a Copy given to the party
inhibite, albeit the publication at the Market Cross bear a Copy affixed, and
that the Messenger had added upon the Margent the delivery of a Copy, which was
found an essential requisite in the Execution, and that not being Registrate
with the Execution, the same was null and could not be supplied, by proving by
the Witnesses insert, tha^ a Copy was truly given, against a singular
Successor who had bought the Lands for a just price, July 28. 1671. Keith
contra Iohnstoun. ^INTERDICTION against a Defunct was found only to extend to
the Lands lying within the lurisdiction where it was published and Registrate,
but not to the other Lands, nor to Heirship moveable or other movables, so
that the Heir succeeding therein is liable notwithstanding, February 11. 1662.
Ramsay of Torbane contra Mcclella^. Interdiction albeit it be not Sustainable
by way of Defense to delay a pursuit, yet it was sustained by way of Reply,
seeing the pursuer might delay himself, ^^d that otherwise he behoved to quite
the Possession, and then Reduce to recover it again, February 13. 1663.
Lockhart contra Kennedy. In^erdiction of a Man by ^ond, bearing he should not
sell nor dispone without consent of his Wife on the Narrative of his facility
whereupon Inhibition was used, was found not to stand as an Interdiction, being
inconsistent to bind a man to the direction of his Wife, but that it stood in
so far as might be interpret an obligement in the Wifes own favors, for her
proper interest to secure her an Aliment according to her quality. February 27.
1665. Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun. Interdiction was found to give
interest to Appryzers or Adjudgers from the Heir of the Person interdicted, to
reduce any voluntary Disposition thereupon, albeit they had no special Title to
the Interdiction, but had only appryzed the Lands of the person Interdicted cum
omni jure, and albeit there was an anterior Appryzer* the benefit of the
Interdiction was found appropriat to neither, but common to both, February 20.
1666. Lord Saltoun contra Lord of Park and Rothemay. Interdiction was found
not to have any effect as to Movables, or personal Execution by may of
Exception without Reduction, June 20. 1671. Crawfoord contra Hallyburtoun.
INTERRVPTION of the Prescription of a common Pasturage was found sufficient by
turning off the Parties Cattle, without necessity to allege an instrument of
Interruption, or keeping them off for a long time together* November 14. 1662.
Nicolson contra Lord of Balbirnie. Interruption of a possessory judgment,
hinders the beginning of a new possessory judgment by seven years Possession
after interruption until prescription, July 22. 1664. Montgomery contra Hume.
The like of Decennalis and Tri^nnalis Possession, June 28. 1666. Lord of
Phillorth contra Lord Frazer. Interruption by a Summonds of Reduction and
Citation thereupon was Sustained, albeit the Reasons of Reduction were not
filled up within the 40. years, seeing the Reduction was upon Minority and
Lesion, which was insinuate by the interest libelled ab initio. viz. That the
Pursuer as Heir to his Sister had good Interest to reduce all deeds done to her
enorm lesion, July 14. 1669. Earl of Marischal contra Leith of White^augh.
Interruption was Sustained by a Citation only at the Market Cross, proceeding
upon a Warr^nd to cite at the Market Cross, quia non fuit ^utus accessus, which
was neither true not instructed, but pas^ by Bill of course amongst the common
Bills, and the Executions did not bear a Copy le^t at the Cross, the Pursuer
adding that to the Execution, July 6. 1671. Mcbrae contra Lord M^d^nald.
Interruption was Sustained by a second Summonds* though the first Summonds
should be found nul^, and though the Citation was only a day before the forty
years complete, Ibidem. INTIMATION of a Right of Reversion was found not
necessary, where he that had the Right was Infe^t therein, albeit he used no
Diligence, and which preferred him to a posterior Assigney, although Redeeming
first and possessing, November 1^. 1664. Guthri^ contra Lord of Sornbeg*
INTROMISSION being by many persons promiscuous, was found not to oblige them in
solidum* but equally prorata, unless a greater part were proven against them,
though the Intromission was vicious and had been a Spuilzie* but not pursued
within three years, January 17^ 1667. Captain Strachan contra Morison.
Intromission being proven by clear and pregnant Testimonies of Witnesses,
though not in Litiscon^esta^ion, but to remain in (...), no contrary probation
was admitted even ex officio, to prove that others did Intromet, although Tacks
and Wodsets granted to them were produced, and the Possession and Intromission
conform* was offered to be proven, and though the Intromission was more then
40. years since, in respect the alleadgeance was founded super jure ter^ij* the
Alleadger showing no Right to the Wodsets, or how the same were satisfied* and
the intromission being proven by removing the common Author, and entering to
the Natural Possession by (...)* January ^^. 1671. Kello contra Kin^^^. ^VS
MARITI was found to carry the Right of a sum assigned to a Wife while she was
cled with ^ Husband* without necessity to instruct that it was also intimate
before his death, January 20. 1663. Scot contra Dickson. Ius mariti was found
not to carry the Right to a Provision granted by the Father to the Daughter*
bearing and Annualrent, though but five per c^nt, the Term of payment of the
Annualrent being past before the Marriage, June 28. 1665. (...) contra Edgar.
Ius mariti being Renunced* was found not to take away the Husbands power of
ordering his Family* and disposing of duties appointed by the Wife of her
former Ioynture for the use of their Families jointly, which was not found to
give the Wife a distinct ^^^are of it, or a power to manage it, but to enjoy
her share under the Husbands mannadgement, February. 1667. Ratho and Co^^ng^oun
contra Tennents of In^ertile and Lady C^llingtoun. Ius mariti was found to be a
Legal Assignation, and being complete with the Marriage, a voluntar Right by
the Wife of the same da^e, with a Tack relating to the Agreement of Marriage
granted by the Wife to her second Son^ leaving nothing to her Husband, was
found excluded thereby, as not being intimate before the Marriage, and being
fraudulent in the Wife, and null even against her Son, though not partaker of
the fraud, not being an Acquirer for an onerous Cause, in so far as might
prejudge the Husband, December 18. 1667. Auchin^eck contra Williamson and
Gillespie.
IVS SVPERVENIENS etc. was e^tended to any Right real accrescing to the Here^or
by one who had Right from the Usurpers, though that Right be fallen, seeing it
was consequent on the true Here^ors Right, as obtaining Improbation of other
Rights, July 13. 1664. Earl of Lawderda^^ contra Wolmet. Ius superven^ens
authori accrescit successori, was found not to hold where there does not appear
a full equivalent Cause onerous of the Successors Right, or absolute
Warrandice, here the first Right was Reduced, and the new Right* but personal
to the Mails and Duties till such a sum were satisfied, July 19. 1664. Douglas
and Longformacus her Spouse contra Lord of Wedderburn. Ius superveniens
authori accrescens successori, was found to make a gi^t of Ward to the behove
of the Superior accresce to the Vassal, to whom he was bound in absolute
Warrandice, they paying a part of the expense, February 15. 1665. Boyd of
Pinkill contra Tennents of Cars^leu^^. Ius superveniens authori accrescens
successori* was found to have their effects that a Tack for a small duty granted
for sums of Money with absolute warrandice, was not prejudged, because the
^etter was not then Infeft, nor excluded by a posterior Heretable Disposition
of the Lands, albeit the Authors supervenient Right was procured by the
Acquirer of the said Disposition, who infeft his author and himself, both of
the same date, and who alleged that his Authors Right being procured by him,
could not accresce to the Tack^^man in his prejudice, June 21. 1671. Nei^son
contra Menzeis of Enoch. IVS TERTII was found to exclude an exception upon on
Assignation intimate to the Debtor, and a Decree thereon, seeing there was no
payment, but gran^ing Suspension without* Caution or Consignation, that the
parties might dispute their Rights, June 16. 1665. Bruce contra Earl of
Mor^oun. ^us tertii was found not to hinder an Appryzer to quarrel another
Appryzers Right as wanting an Assignation to the debt on which the Appryzing
proceeded, albeit he had no Right from that Cedent, nor any other interest but
to exclude the Appryzing as informal* albeit that Cedents Heir had renewed the
Assignation, and de^lared that there was a prior Assignation by his Father, and
that his Right was in Trust, July 22. 1668. Iohnstoun of Shee^s contra Arnold.
THE KINGS PALACE of H^ly-rude-house was found to be ex^mpted from the Regality
of Brughtoun, and in the Royalty, and Citations against Parties residing there
at the Cross of Edinburgh, were Sustained, January 11. 1662. Lady Carnagie
contra Lord Cranburn. KNOWLEDGE though private hinders bonae fidei possessor
lucrari fructus, November 20. 166^. Children of Wolmet contra Lady Wolmet and
Dankeith her Husband. LAW of Scotland only Regulates Succession of Scotsmen, as
to their Lands and Goods in Scotland, though they reside and (...) abroad, and
no nuncupative Testament there can exclude the nearest of kin h^re, January 19.
1665. Schaw contra (...). The Law of England was found to reach the manner of
probation of a Bond made there by an Englishman to a Scots-man residing (...),
after the st^le of England, and that payment to the Cedent was probable by the
Cedents Oath, and payment also probable by Witnesses, June 28. 1666. Mom^rlane
contra Lord Melvil. Yet a Bond by a Scots-man to an Englishman in England,
after the style of Scotland, Registrable there, was found Regulate by the Law
of Scotland, and no^ taken away by Witnesses Ibidem. A LEGACY of an Heretable
Right was found null, though in le^ge po^stie, February 21. 1663. Wardlaw
contra Frazer of Kilmundie. A Legacy le^t of 600. merk^, and in part thereof
the Executors ordained to Discharge or give Back-bond of 200. merks due to the
Testa^rix, which Bond was found to belong ^o the Husband jure mariti, and that
being Moveable, the Wife had but her half of it, yet the Lords found that the
Executors ought to make it up^ to the Legata^ as l^g^tum rei aliena scienter
legat^, for that being a palpable principle in Law, they could not excuse the
Wifes ignorance therein, June 16* 1664. Murray contra Executors of Rutherfoord.
A Legacy being special, was found not to be abated proportionally with ordinary
Legacies in case they exceed the Deeds part, July 21. 1665. Spr^^l contra
Murray. A Legacy of a Bond in special was sustained* though the Executor had an
Assignation thereto from the Defunct* seeing the same Legacy might be made up of
the (...) Gear, as being l^gatum rei alien^, seeing it was presumed that the
Defunct remembered his own Assignation, June 24, 1664. Fal^^n^r contra Mcd^wgal.
LICENSE to pursue was s^stained without Confirmation, though granted after the
principal Testament was Confirmed, being to a Creditor, June ^0, 1665.
Stevinson contra Crawfoord. License to pursue was sustained after Confirmation
of the principal Testament and before Confirmation of Datives ad ommissa,
February 21. 166^. Scot of Cl^rkingto^n contra Lady Cl^rkingtoun. AFTER
LI^ISCONTESTATION Alleadgeances instantly verified are receivable, June 24.
1663. Bruce contr^ Lord of Str^^chan. Litiscont^^^ation being made before the
Commissars at a parties instance as Factor, it was found relevant against that
party pursuing as Executor Creditor, being instantly verified, February 10.
1663. Crawfoord contra Creditors of Inglis. LOCVS PENITENTIAE was found to have
no place in an agreement to take a les^ sum, it being as pact^^ lib^ratori^m,
though writ was not interposed, others of the parties Transactors having paid
conform, December 12. 1661. H^pburn contra Hamilt^^n of Orbi^^^um. The like in
restricting an annualrent to a part of the Lands ^ffected, February ^. 1666.
(...) contr^ Hunter and Tennents of Camb^. Locus (...) was found competent to
one who had bought Lands, though he had written that he thought he could not be
able to keep the Bargain and furnish the Money, yet sub^oyned that he would not
pass from the communing, and albeit he had received the Key^ of the House,
seeing there was neither Minute nor other W^^t drawn up ^h^reupon, January 28.
1663. M^ntgomry of Sk^lmorly contra Brown. THE LORDS Sallatles, or the Pensions
of the King are not arrestable, conform to a Letter of the Kings and Act of
Sederunt, February 8. 1662. contra Murray. The Lords found themselves competent
to Judge the Nullities of the Decreets of the Commission for Plantation of
Kirk^, which were visible and instantly v^rified, and needed no Reduction, as
that a Decr^et against an Heretor not called was null, January 16. 1663. Earl
of Roxburgh contra Kinn^^r. The Lords found themselves competent to Judge upon
the Justice Generals Decree for Assythment, which has but a civil effect for
damnage, December 16. 1664. Innes contra Forb^s of Tolq^^^n^. The Lords gave
warrant Summarly upon Supplication to take the person of a Bankrupt, who was
unexpectedly and fraudfully fled, Nov^mb^r 30. 1665. Creditors of Masson
Supplicants. The Lords albeit they are not Judges in Causes Criminal, yet they
found themselves co^petent to Advoca^e a Criminal Cause of Theft, but upon the
old Act of Parliament of King Iam^s the second, from ^ Sheriff to the Justice
General, February 21. 1^66 contra Sheri^^ of Inv^rn^ss^. The Lords deposed a
Writer to (...) ^igne^ for inserting an Article for possessing a party in
Letters of Horning, having no warrant for the said Article, January ^. 1669.
Zeaman contra Monreiff. The Lords upon a Bill for Horning upon Excommunication
allowed the party Excommunicate (...) object against the Gro^nds of
Excommunication, who having founded upon an appeal to the King and Council, The
Lord having had an account from the Council, that they had Remitted that
matter to the ^ishop, did pass the Ho^^ing, July 6. 1670. Archbishop and
Presbytery of St. Andr^w^ contra Pittill^. LVCRATIVE SVCCESSOR was not inferred
by a Disposition and Infeftment to the behove of the appearand He^r* but only
in so far as was Lucrative (...) valor^m, January 14. 1662, Harper contra Hume
of ^landergast. Lucrative Successor was not inferred by a Disposition by an
Uncle to his Nephew the Brother being alive, who was not found alioqui
successurus, as in the case of an Oye, November 22. 166^. Sc^^ co^tra B^ss^wel
of Auchinleck. Lucrative Successor was inferred by an Assignation of an
Heretable Bond by ^ Father to his eldest Son, who would have succeeded him as
Heir therein, and that the same was not alike with Bonds of Provision, wherein
in Father (...) only De^itor to the Son, D^c^mb^r ^. 1665. Edgar contra Colvil.
Lucrative Successor was not inferred by accepting of a Tocher, yet so as if the
Tocher were exorbitant, both Husband and Wife were found liable to the Fathers
Creditors for what was above a competent Tocher, December 23. 1665. Burnet
contra Lepers. LIFE being presumed, was taken off by the Parties being ^^.
years out of the Coun^rey, and commonly ^olden an^ (...) There wa^ also a
Letter produced by a (...) in the Wa^* bearing that the party was dead,
February. 18. 1670. Lowry contra Drummond. LIFERENTERS of an annuaIrent wa^
found Iyable for public burden with the (...), albeit the Act 164^* thereanent
was Rescinded as being due in jure, June 18. 166^ Fleming contra Gillies.
A Li^erenter being Infeft in a Liferent of Lands cum m^ll^ndini^, was found to
have right to a Miln builded thereafter upon the Land by her Husband, but not
to the abstracted Multures of his Lands, except the Liferent Lands, February
16. 1666. Lady Otter contra Lord of Otter. A Liferenter being by her Contract
^nfeft in Lands, obliged to be worth such a Rent besides Teinds and Fe^-duties,
or at her option, the heir was obliged to accept a Tack of the Lands for the
like sum of free Rent (by free Rent) was not only understood free of Feu and
Teind Duty, as is expressed in the first part of the Clause, but free of the
ordinary public burdens, viz. Taxation, but not of extraordinary public
burdens, such as Cess, but in so far as the Tennents relieved the Heretors,
February, 22. 1670. Countess of Cassils contra Earl of Cas^ils. A Liferenter of
a Miln surviving Martinmas, her Executors were found to have Right to the whole
years ^ent of the Mil^^, in the same way as if it had been Ferm of Lands, and
that the Legal Terms thereof were Whi^sunday and Martinmass, albeit the Milns
Rent was payable in Money, and that the first conventional Terms payment
thereof was at Candlesmass after the separation of each Cropped, and the second,
Whitsonday thereafter, and that the Miln Rent was not to be accounted as
House-mails, July 20, 1671. Guthri^ contra Lord of Mck^rstoun. A Liferenter
was found to have Right to the Cro^t of Lands Labored by her, without payment
of any Rent therefore, albe^t she dyed in April, and neither survived
Whitsonday nor Mart^mass^ July 25. 1671. Inter cosdem. LIFRENT ESCHEAT of a
Wodsetter affects the sum of the Wodset, which being consigned and the Lands
Redeemed was ordained to be given up to be Employed de novo to the Redeemer in
Fee, and to the Donatar in Liferent, June 29. 1661. Tailzifer contr^ Maxiou^
and Cunning^ame. Liferent Escheat is complete by Rebellion year and day
unrelaxed, and no Appryzing led thereafter will pre^udge the same, albeit it be
before Declarator Ibid^m. Liferent Escheat was found preferable to a base
Infeftment, anterior to the Rebellion, not having attained possession in cursu
R^b^llionis February 21. 1667. Mil^^ contra Clerkson. Liferent Escheat was
excluded by the Superiou^^ consent to a Wodset of the Rebels Land of the same
date with the Donatars Gift, seeing the Wodsetter was in Possession, and needed
no Declarator, June 19. 1669. Scot contra Langtoun. The Liferent Eschea^ of a
Vassal was found (...) fall and affect the Ground against the Appryzer thereof,
and that the Charge against the Superior did not so denude the Vassal as to
evacuat his Liferent, without disputing whether the Superior was in the fault
in not obeying the Charge, June 2^. 1669. D^wglas contra Li^k. Liferent ^scheat
of an annualrenter was found to Exclude an Appryzer of the Annualrent,
whereupon there was neither Infeftment or lawful Charge* as to the years post
cursum R^b^llionis, February 23. 1671. Lord Justice Clerk contra Fair^olm. THE
LION was found competent Judge to the deprivation of Messengers, and to the
Penalties contained in their Bonds of Caution, both against themselves and
their Cau^ioners, but not as to the dam^^ge of Parti^s, either as to the
Messenger or Cautioner, February 13. 166^. G^^^son contra M^^lrey Messenger.
The same June 27. 167^. H^ri^^^ contra C^rb^^. MAGISTRATES were found liable
for the debts of a Rebel Incarcerate by Act of Warding escaping, without
necessity of calling that person against whom there was De^reet standing,
February 7. 1662. B^nnar contra Fouli^. Magistrates were found liable for the
debt of a Rebel escaping, though in the time of Richard the Usurper, being
before any other Authority was set up, and was not e^^ded because he escaped
out at the Roo^ of the Tolbooth and brok^ it, that being in day light, November
^3. 1664. Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin. A Magistrate, viz. a Sheriff pursued
for the debt of a Rebel escaping, was assoilzied because the Rebel escaped Vi
(...), having wounded these who assisted the Sherist, D^cember 2. 1664. Wilson
contra Hum^ of Linthil. Magistrates were not found liable for the debt of a
Rebel escaping Vi ma^or^, though it was in the Night, and that the Prison Door
was opened to let in the Rebels Supper at the ordinary time, January 25. 1665.
Baird contra Magistrates of Elgin. Magistrates were found liable for the debt
of a Rebel escaping though he had taken the benefit of the Act of Debtor and
Creditor, seeing at his Incarceration he show not his attest of taking thereof
and paying his annualrent conform, February 17. 1665. (...) contra Magistrates
of Elgin. Magistra^es were ^ound Lib^ra^e ^^m the deb^^ of a Rebel whom they
were charged to take, being charged in the Night, and while they were ordering
the quarters of the Army, and offering the Towns Officers to concur, and now
offering to put the Rebel in Prison in as good case as he was then, which was
sustained jointly, albeit the Rebel was in the same House, and did Deforce the
Messenger, wherein some of the Town Officers were assistant, but without
Warrant, June ^3. 1661. Antrobus contra Anderson Provost of Glasgow. A
Magistrate Elected Bailli^ of a Burgh, Charged on General Letters to accept and
exerce the Office, was liberate in respect of the Act of Burrows, that none
shall continue in Office above two years, which time he had been Baillie, The
Reason was found Relevant; January 2. 1668. Wilson contra Magistrates of
Queensferry. Magistrates suffering a Rebel to escape, and being decerned for
the debt thereupon and paying, and taking Assignation to the debt, were found
to have no reco^^se against the Rebels Ca^tioners, who if they had been
distressed by the Creditors, would have had Recourse against the Magistrates,
who were liable not only of the Creditor, but to all others having interest ex
damno and delicto, and they as Cautioners were interessed that the principal
should not escape, seeing his continuing might obtain their Liberation by his
payment, but the ca^e was not debated whether the Magistra^e might not pursue
the principal Debtor who ^^caped and was chiefly in delicto, and they but
acces^ory, January 24. 1668. Magistrates of contra the Earl of Find^atour.
Magistrates of a Burgh were decerned for the debt of a Rebel escaping, though
they were not Magistrates the time of his escape, and without necessity to
discuss these who were then Magistrates as being in the fault, but prejudice to
the Town and p^esent Magistrates, to pursue them ^s accords, January 31. 1668.
Paplaw contra Town of Edinburgh. Magistrates of a Burgh of Regality were found
liable for a sum where they refused to receive a party taken by Caption, albeit
they had no Provost nor common Good, no^ were not in use to ^ncarcerate, in
respect of the Act 1597. cap. 273. Here the Burgh had a convenient Prison, and
the Rebel dwelt in their Burgh, July 7. 1668. Hamiltoun contra Callender.
Magistrates were found liable for the debt of a Rebel whom they were required
to take, and did not, being within their Jurisdiction and the House designed,
and they charged by the Messenger, who offered to go in before them, which they
were found obliged instantly to do, without waiting to conveen the Neighbors,
unless they had been kept out, or repusled v^ major^, July 2. 1669. Farquhar
contra Magistrates of Elg^^. Magistrates of the head Burgh of a Steuartrie were
found liable for the debt of a Rebel escaping out of the Prison, without
disputing whether Burghs within Steuartries, not being Royal Burrows, were
obliged to receive Prisoners* seeing they had actually received this Prisoner,
but their keeping him in a private house ten days, while a Treaty was
continued with the Creditor, was found not to infer disobedience of the charge,
or payment of the debt, June 8. 1670. Cheap contra Magistrates of Faulkland.
Magistrates were not found liable for the debt of a Rebel escaping, who was
arrested in their Tolbooth, but the arrestment was not formal, and whereas it
bear that upon Caption, the Messenger came to the Tolbooth and comm^nded the
Prisoner to continue in Prison, as being arrested for that debt, and that in
presence of the Iaylour, and that intimation was made to the Magistrates, seeing
the intimation to the Magistrates was altogether improven, and the arrestment
in presence of the Iaylour contained three Witnesses whereof one affirmed, and
the other denied, and a third was dead, and the Messenger was then
Excommunicate for Crimes, June 18. 1670. Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin.
Magistrates were found liable for the debt of a Rebel escaping out of their
Tolbooth, albeit the Tolbooth had ^our locked Doors without one another, and
that the Rebel had gotten in some Masons Tools, and broken up all the Doors in
the Night, seeing they had not Chains, and Bonds locked upon the ou^er sides of
the Doors, to which the Rebel could not reac^, albeit their custom was very
ancient to put on Cat-bonds only upon Prisoners imprisoned for Crimes, February
11. 1671. Will contra Town of Kirkald^^. Magistrates were not found liable for
the debt of a Person Incarcerate in their Tolbooth, whom they had suffered to
go free up and down their Streets several times, whereupon the Creditor took
Instruments and Protestation, seeing the suffering the Prisoner to go out was
necessary to mendicat his Bread, being altogether indigent, and that he went
once to the burial of a Child of his own, and that he continued in Prison and
died there, February 14. 1671. Bain contra Baillies of Culross. Magistrates
were not found liable for the debt of a Rebel whom they suffered to come out of
Prison with a Guard to go to the Kirk or to the Fields for health, or any other
necessary cause, as to time past, in regard of their common custom so to do,
but that in time coming they should let none go out except upon great hazard by
sickness, and upon Testificates upon Oath, and when other application could not
sa^ely and timeously be made to the Council or Session, June 14. 1671. Town of
Breichen contra Town of Dundee.
MANDAT or Warrant of a Servant taking off Furniture from a Marchand for his
Master, and giving his Recept, and bearing that he had received* such Furniture
in Name of his Master and for his use, was found not to oblige the Se^vant to
pay, nor yet to instruct that he had warrant, but the warrant was presumed as
known to the Merchant, unless it were proven that the Servant did otherwise
employ the Furnishing than to his Masters use, and specially in the case where
the Master was dead long ago, November 17. 1665. How^eson contra Cockburn. Vide
Command. Vide Wi^e, February 4. 1665. Paterson contra Pringle. IN MAILS AND
DVTIES the not calling of the De^enders Master was not ^ound Relevant as in a
Removing, nor may the Tennents allege peremptorly on their Masters Right,
which is jus terti^, but they should have intimate to him to compear for
himself, and they may yet Suspend on double poynding, and call the Party and
their Master, June 10. 1665. Hume contra In the Mails and Duties of a House,
the damnage sustained by the Tennent, by the fall of a Neighboring house was
found to be allowed, January 2. 1667. Hamiltoun contra MAINTENANCE of August
and September 1650. being destinate for the provision of the Army, and assigned
to these who advanced the provisions, they were not found to be excluded by any
subsequent quarterings, July 27. 1665. Rae contra Heretors of Clackmannan. Vide
Devastation, here singular Successors were not liberate, July 28. 1665. Inter
eosdem. The Maintenance appointed to be uplifted by Bogie by the Act of
Parliament 1661. which excepts singular Successors who bought the Lands, was
found not to extend to an appearand Heir who brooks by an appryzing, which as
to him is Redeemable within ten years for what he paid for it, here it was not
alleged that the paid sums equivalent to the worth February 8. 1668. Weyms
contra Lord of T^lquhon. Renewed January 20. 1669. Inter eosdem. The
Maintenance 1648. to be up^^fted by Bogie, was found not to extend to these
who had exemption upon consideration of burning by the King and Parliament,
1651* though that Parliament was Rescinded; and though all exemptions were
excluded by Bogies Commission, seeing by the Act Rescissory private Rights done
by that Authority were excepted, July 21. 1668. Weyms contra Campbel of
Edenample. Maintenance for the year 1648. was found to burden Lands though
they were now in the ^ands of singular Successo^s, who had acquired the time of
the Act, Ia^uary 23. 1669. Weyms contra Frazer of To^lie. MARRIAGE pursued by a
Donatar was not excluded because the Pursuer instructed not that the Lands held
of that Superior, nor held Ward, seeing he disclaimed not, nor by the
Superiors Subsc^ibing Witness in the Vassals Contract of Marriage after the
Donatars Gift; it was also found that the Marriage might be pursued both
Realiter and personaliter against the Vassal to pay, February 25. 1662.
Arbuthnet of Fiddes contra Keith. Marriage being dec^rned by the Commissar to
be solemnized upon a Bond granted by a Man to a Woman, bearing a Child to be
gotten under promise of Marriage, and it being alleged that the Woman had
been unchaste since, which as it would annul, so much more hinde^ the
Solemnization of the Marriage, and it being alleged that the Child born after
was presumed to be the same man's who got the first, and so obliged to
solemnize the Marriage, The Lords found the presumption held not where there
was no formal Marriage, and so the Woman behoved to prove the second Child to
be this man's, January 31. 1665. Barclay contra Baptie. Marriage of an Heir was
^ound due as to the single avail, albeit the Heir was Married before his
Predecessors death by a fraudulent precipitation to exclude the Superior from
the Marriage, he being Married when his Predecessor was moribundus without
previous Treaty or Proclamation, the Predecessor dying within some ^ew ^ays,
and showing no other sufficient cause of the said precipitation but to exclude
the Superior; here were adduced the Testimonies of Skeins explications upon
Quonia^ atachiamenta de maritagio, bearing that this was praxis for^ in his
time, and expressing three Decisions thereof, February 20. 1667. Lord Thesau^er
and Lord Advocat contra Lord Colv^^. Marriage, vide Contract. Vide Clause,
December 20. 1664. Young contra Buchannan. MELIORATION of a Liferenters House
by her was ^ound to oblige the Feear after her death in quantum Itucr^s est by
a better Rent, February 23. 1665. Jack contra Pollock and Rutherfoord. IN
MERCHANTS ACCOUNTS taken off by persons entrusted, and converted to the persons
use, was ^ound to make them liable to the Merchand, unless the party prove that
they p^yed the price to the Party entrusted, but if they knew the person
entrusted took off the Ware, not on their own Credit and Name but the
Constituents and from what Merchant, then they should have called for the
Merchants Discharge, else though they paid the person instrusted if they paid
not the Merchant, it is on their peril who knew the Merchants interest, but not
so when they paid and knew not who was Merchant, or in whose Name and Credit
the Ware was taken off, February 20. 1669. Bruce Merchant contra Lord and Lady
Stanhope. METVS CAVSA was found Relevant thus, That a Wife show her
unwillingness at the subscribing by the Witnesses insert and other Witnesses,
and that the Husband was a fierce man accustomed to bent her, and that he did
particularly threaten her to consent to quite a part of her Liferent, June 24.
1664. Woodhead contra Nairn. Metus was sustained to take away a Bond given for
fear of Caption, the Party being sick when he was taken Prisoner, June 22.
1667. Maire contra Steuart of Shambelly. A MILN being built by a Husband upon
his Wifes Liferent Lands, wherein she was Infeft cum ^olendinis in the
ten^^dar, was found to belong to the Wife for her Liferent u^e, but not any
Thirle Mul^ures of others of the Defuncts Lands, February 16. 1666. Lord of
Otter contra A Miln once going 28. hou^es may not be De^olished as novum opus,
via fact^ being a Common-good; but by civil in^erruption and via jur^s, though
it was but a walk-miln, June 24. 1667. Hay of Struie contra Fe^ers. A Miln was
found to be in the same condition as Land in relation to Heirs and Executors,
Liferenter and Fe^ar, so that the He^eto^ surviving Whitsonday, his Executor
has the half, and surviving Marti^mas the whole Rent, though the conventional
Terms were Candlesmas for the first, and Whitsonday for the second Term, the
Entry being at Whitsonday, July 20. 1671* Guthrie contra Mckerstoun. A
MINISTERS Stipend by Decree of Locality was found not to be understood the
measure of Linli^hgow, but the mea^ure of the Shire, where the measure was
indefinite, and the Stipend not e^ght full Chalders of Victual, and was usually
paid by the measu^e of the Shire 15. years before, June 27. 1669, Minister of
Dalrymple contra Earl of Cas^il^. A MINOR was not restored, who gav^ a Bond
bearing expressly he was Major, unless it were proven the Minor knew he was
Minor, or did induce him to insert that Clause, or that by inspection he might
have known him Minor, not being near Majority, February 23. 1665. Kennedie of
Auch^iford^^ contra Weir. A Minor during his Minority having obtai^ed Decree
against his Curator to renunce his Office, the Curator was not ^ound liberate
thereby, even of omissions after the Decree, but it being alleged that the
Minor was irregular, and had forcibly intrometted with his Rents; The same was
sustained pro tanto, July 21. 1664. Scot of Broad-meadows contra Scot of
Thirlestoun. A Minors Bond was found null by Exception, because it was not with
his Fathers consent as lawful Administr^tor to him, unless it did appear he had
an Estate of his own and managed it apart, December 22. 1665. Leslie contra
Sinclar of Dun. A Minors Disposition of Land was found v^lide, unless Lesion
appeared, though it wanted the authority of a Judge, which is only requisite to
the Dispositions of Pupils* and though the Minor had no Curators, December 13.
1668. Thomson contra Stevinson. A Minor was restored though he wai^ed on the
Tolbooth as a student at Law, but was entertained by his Father, and though the
Father Subscribed the same Writ, seeing the Son subscribed as Cautioner for him,
and so his Authorizing was to his own behove, Dec^mber 5. 1666. Mckenzei contra
Fairholm. A Minors Bond having Curators not authorized by them, was found null
and extended to a Son, and a Father as lawful Administrator, as Curator to him,
and that his Sons Subscribing with him as Cautioner for him or with him for any
other principal Conjunctly and severally, was not thereby sufficiently
auth^rized, neither as Cautioner for his Father, nor the other ^orr^i debendi,
his obligation as to both being to the Fathers behove, as giving his Father
thereby Relief, and so the Son could not be authorized by the Father to the
Fathers own behove, July 25. 1667. Inter eosdem. A mi^or having* Transacted
with consent of his Curators for a Right and after his majority, having
received the Bonds delivered to the Creditors upon the Transaction, and having
discharged the Curators as having Faithfully acted, and having in the Curators
Accounts reserved Reduction of that Transaction upon Minority and Lesion which
then was raised, was not found thereby excluded from the Reduction, but (...)
being doubtful whether that Reservation was in the account when it was first
Subscribed, the Writer and Witnesses were appointed to be examined ex officio
there^nent, January 26. 1671. Car^^ contra Cunninghame.
MINOR NON TENETVR PLACITARE* was found not Relevant in a Recognition, February
19. 166^. Lady Carnagy con^ra Lord Cranburn. Minor non tenetur placitare super
heredita^^ pa^erna was found to have no place where the Father had only a
Disposition and was not Infeft, but if his Infef^ment were instructed, the
Minor was found not obliged to produce ^a^der, or to Dispute the Reason of
Reduction, albeit it was not upon priority or Solemnities of the Rights, but
super dolo aut me^^, yet the Pursuer was admitted to produce Witnesses for any
point of Fact to remain in re^entis, least they might dye medio temp^re,
January 31. 1665. Kello contra Pringle and the Lord of W^dderburn. Minor non
tenetur placitare was found not to defend a Liferenter, whom the Minor Feear
was obliged to warrant, and that her Right being Reduced, did not accresce to
the minor Feear, nor did his ^ollerance defend her Possession, July 5. 1665.
Borthwick contra Skein. Minor non tenetur placitare was found valide, though
the Reduction was against the Fathers Authors Right as not being infeft,
January 18. 1667. Chapman contra W^ite. Minor non tenetur placitare super
har^d^ta^^ paterna, was found not Relevant to stop a Process of Recognition of
Ward Bands upon the Vassals alienation of the major part thereof, although the
Sub^vassal who was also cited was minor, seeing the Vassal who was major* his
Right was principally in question, and the Sub-vassal minor, his Right fell in
consequence, February 22. 1668. Cochran contra MINORITY AND LESION was found
Relevant to Reduce a Woman's Contract of marriage in so far as it came short of
the ordinary conditions in ^avours of such persons in their Con^racts of
marriage, which was not ^ound to annul the provisions of the Lands and Sums to
the Heirs of the marriage, which failing the man's Heirs, nor yet to make any
portion thereof to return to the Wife in that case, as not being ordinary, but
only to rectify the same as to the Wifes loynture, November 22. 1664. M^gil
contra Ruthven of Gairn. Minority and Lesion was found only competent by
Reduction, and not by Ex^eption or Suspens^on, June 28. 1665. Ky^e contra
sea^oun. Minority and Lesion was not ^lided, because the money was delivered to
pretended Curators, who were liable to the minor without di^cussing the
Curators first, seeing they were not in this Process, and the minor has his
option to Reduce against the Creditor, or pursue his Curators and Intrometters,
July 2. 1667. Lord Blantire contra Walkinshaw. Minority and Les^on being
insisted in by reduction and majority being alleged in defense, neither party
was preferred in probation, but Witnesses allowed hinc inde, February 20* 1668.
^arqu^ar of Towli^ contra Gordou^. Minority and Lesion was sustained to Reduce
a Disposition by a Wife to her Husbands Brother, though it had been to her
Husbands behove in contemplation of the marriage, seeing there was no
remuneratory provision on the Husbands part, and that the legal Terce was not
enough, but that the Husband ought to have acquiesced in his jus mariti, as
well as the Wife in ^er Terce, or both had mutual provisions, here the Wife was
carried away and married without her Friends consent, July 14. 1669. Earl of
Marischal contra Keith of Whitehaugh. A MINVTE disponing Lands with part and
pertinent, was found to be extended ^o, as to express common pasturage in a
Muire possessed therewith the time of the Bargain, February 14. 1668. Borthwick
contra Lord Borthwick. A Minute was ex^ended by the Witnesses insert, as to the
manner of payment, which was not so expressed therein, January 15. 1666. Ch^ap
contra Philip. A MISSIVE LETTER by a Merchant to a Factor to send home Wine on
such another Factors credit, with whom the Writer not being acquaint, but upon
the Factors account, was found to oblige the Writer and not that third party,
unless he had accepted, neither then did it liberate the Writer, but the third
party was expromissor, in this the Lords would not take Examination of
Merchants what such Letters did import, February 7. 1665. Pallat Factor at
Burdeux contra Fairholm. A Missive Letter was found to instruct an account of
100. pound sterling received and Furniture sent, albeit it was not holograph
nor amongst Merchants, but betwixt noble persons, being for ^urniture sent from
London to the Writer of the Letter, by the other noble person, being then at
London, to whom it was written, the said receiver of the Letter making Faith
that this was the true Letter that he received from the other, February 28.
1671. Earl of Northesk ^ntra Viscount of Stormont. Missive vide Clause, July
15. 1662. Wauchop contra Lord of Niddrie, etc. A MOTHER was found obliged by
the Law to aliment her Children according to her means, they having no means of
their own, or any person representing their Father able to aliment them in
their Family, but that the Mother was only ^bliged to aliment them in her
Family, d^d not to pay modification for their Education out of her Family*
albeit they were ^oble persons and the Mother had miscarried, February 23.
1666. Children of the Earl of Buchan* contra Countess of Buchan. A Mother
taking a Bond to her self in Liferent, and to her Children in Fee* was ^ound
not to have power to alter or assign that Bond to another, as being presumed to
be made by her own means, but the same was presumed to be the Childrens means^
by their Father, though their Mother was not Tu^rix or Curatrix to them, seeing
the Bond did not express it to be the Mothers own means, no^ reserved a power
to the Mo^^er to Dispone, February 18. 1671. Dundas contra the Lairds of
Ardros^ and ^ouch. MOVEA^^ES being craved to be restored as being the Pursuers,
the Libel was not found Relevant, unless he condescended quomodo des^t
^osildire, and instruct the same, and he having condescended that it was by
Loan, it was found probable by Witnesses, (...) 21. 1665. Scot contra Fletcher.
In Movables possession presumes a Title, without necess^ty to instruct the
possessors authors Right^ without distinction of ordinary movables or lewels,
unless the presump^ion be elided by ^^onger probation, that such Jewels could
not have belonged to him that impigno^ate the same, who neither had them as a
Merchand nor leweler, neither did nor could make use of them for his own
wearing* Dec^mber 12. 1665. Ramsay contra Wilson. Here the first Author
Impignorat them by Writ, and immediately ^ent abroad. NEAREST OF KIN surviving
the De^unct, Transmit their share of the deads part to their ^xecutors, and it
does not accres^o^^^ the rest of the nearest of kin or to their Executors,
February 1^. 166^. ^ell contra Wilkie. IN NONE^TRY the full Rent is due from
the citation in the general De^^arator, and not from the time of the Sentence
only (...), and accordingly the special Declarator was sustained* July 25.
1666. Harper contra his Vassals Idem. June 12. 1673. Faw contra Lord Balmerin^
and Lord Pourie. NOVITER V^NIENS AD NOT ITIAM was sustained to reduce the
Circumduction of a Term, upon the Suspenders making Faith that the Writs now
produced to prove what was then ^o have been proven, were found out by her,
since the Term was Circumduced, June 29. 1665. Norvil contra Suntar. OATH OF A
WIFE never to come in the contrary of her Bond granted (...), was found not to
hinder her to allege that the Bond was null ipso jure, February 18. 1662.
contra (...). Oath of parties being taken, and they deponing upon the Tenor of
a Writ and assoilzied thereupon, were decerned thereafter upon production of
the same Writ, as not being contrary to the Oath* but being only in so far as
the Deponent Remembered the Tenor of the Writ, November 23. 1665. Campbel contra
Doctor (...). The Oa^h of an author was found competent against a singular
Successor in an Appryzing, for proving the ^ame satified by intromission, seeing
before this Defenders Right the matter was Litigious, and an Act Extracted,
referring the intromission to that Authors Oath, July 14. 1666. Sharp contra
Glen. OATH OF CALVMNIE was found Competent as to one point of a Libel, where
the rest was not to be proven by Oath, but in respect there could be no evident
difference as to that point betwixt the Oath of Calumny and Verity, and that
the point was no ways probable but by the Oath of Verity, the Oath of Calumny
thereanent was refused, February 20. 1667. (...) contra (...). OATH EX OFFICIO
^nent having of Writs, was found to be given, if at any time the Deponent had
them, and how he put them away, that it might appear if fraudulently, but not
to depone if he knew who had them, as not being proper, November 1^. 1662.
Children and Creditors of Bryson. OATH IN LITE ^ was admitted for proving of
Ware in a Pack given in custody, where the keeper opened the same, though he
made Inventary before Witnesses by a Baillies Warrant* January 3. 1667. Packman
contra Bran. OATH QVALIFIED was not sustained importing a compensation, yet the
^ame was admitted to be proven as an Exception at advising of the cause,
December 9. 1664. Lermont contra R^ssel. AN OBLIGATION by three persons to
cause a Minor releave a sum not bearing conjunctly and severally, was found not
to oblige every one in solidum, as being for an indivisible Fact, but resulting
in a divisible sum, July 16. 1669. Dennistoun contra Semple of Fulwood. OFFER
of the remander of a Sum not being special and not being Consigned, was found
not to purge a Failzie, December 19. 1661. Deuar contra Countess of Murray.
Offer conditional to pay a su^ for a Mother on condition it were at such a time
and place, and were made known whether or not it were accepted, was found not
obligatory after the Mothers death, unless the condition had been fulfilled
then (...), June* 24. 1664. Allan contra Colner.
Offer of Caution to a Wodsetter that he ought to quite possession, or restrict
to the Annualrent, was sustained though made at the parties dwelling House,
when he was out of the Country, seeing the Act of Parliament did not require
that offer to be by Instrument; and though the instrument of offer did not bear
a Procuratory to him that made the offer, the said procuratory being now
produced, June 16. 1671. Lord Lovi^ contra Lord Mcdonald. THE OFFICE of a
Commissar Clerk was found no^ to be annulled by his absence for a time out of
the Country, and being denunced sine crimine, February 6. 1666, Archbishop of
Glasgow contra Logan. An Office of a common Servant, viz. a Town Clerk being
given ad vitam* was found to imply a tacit condition to be also ad culpam, and
that such a fault did resolve the same, as was of knowledge and consequence,
February 14. 1665. Town of Edinburgh contra Thomson. OVERSE^RS were found
liable for nothing, if they intrometted not, January 10. 1665. Swintoun contra
Norman. PART AND PERTINENT of Lands disponed by a Minute, was found to extend
to a common Pa^^urage in a Muire possessed as pertinent of the Land in the
Bargain, and that the Writes upon the extension of the Minute, ought to bear
the ^ame expressly, February 14, 1668. Borthwick contra Lord Borthwick. Part and
pertinent cum pascuis and pasturn in a Charter given by the King to the Feuars
of his Property, was found to carry common pasturage in the Muire of the
Barony, which being now possessed 40. years by the Feuars of the Barony, is
presumed to have been so at the time of the Charter, being past memory, and
that interruptions of any other Right exclusive of this common pasturage, was
sufficient to preserve the same, February 15 166^. Lord of Haining contra Tow^
of Selkirk. ^art and pertinent was not excluded, albeit an alleadgeance was
proponed on an old Se^sine of the Lands in question, as being separatum
tenementum, the Seasine being ^ound null, and no Title for Prescription,
February 15. 1671. Earl of Argile contra Lord of Mcnauchtoun. ALL PARTIES
HAVING INTEREST not necessary to be cited at the M^r^at Cross in the Declarator
of the Expyring of a Feu ob non solutum (...), though the Summons bear warrant
for the citation, December 1. 1664. Ea^l. of S^therland contra Gordoun.
PARIOIDE does not infer Treason as against the Act of Parliament against murder
under Trust, which is meaned by paction, in re^pect of the special Act of
Parliament against Paricide, which does not exclude the Paricides Collaterals,
but him and his descendents from the succession of the slain, which therefore
cannot belong to the Fisk, January 22. 1663. Zeaman contra Oliphant. PASSING
FROM A REASON of Suspension pro loco and tempore, was found not to hinder the
proponing of the same against that Decree, and against an Appryzing thereon,
the matter being yet illiquid, and a singular Successor in the Appryzing* June
17. 1664. Lord of Tulli^llan contra (...) and Bra^foord. Passing from a Reason
of Compensation, and taking up a Writ for instructing thereof, was admitted
before Extracting of a Decree, though the Writ was long in the Chargers hand,
not being judicially given up to him, and that another emergent exception might
now be admitted, July 14. 1664. Lord Balmerino contra the Creditors of Dick.
PAYMENT made before the hand, was found Relevant against a singular Successor,
the Kings Dona^ar of Forefa^lture, because it was but of one Term, and so
accustomed by the Baro^y to pay at the Entry, and be free at the ^sh, January
7. 1662. Earl of Laud^^dail contra Tennents of Swintoun. Payment made b^na fide
to Bai^ns of a Sum by a Disponer in ^avours of these Bairns, was sustained
though after Reduction raised, unless a Reason had been Libelled against that
which was ordained to be paid to Bairns* and shown before payment, July 14.
1662. M^ntgomerie of Mack^ichill contra Wallace. Payment made bona fide to a
Procurator, was thought to be Relevant, though the Procuratory should be
improven, if therein there did appear no ground suspicion to have put the
Debtor in ma^^ fide, February 1. 166^. Elphingstoun of Selms contra Lord Rollo
and Lord of Niddrie. Payment made by Heretors to Ministers of their Stipends
during the time they Preached and before any Process against them, was found to
liberate the Heretors, notwithstanding they were outed by the Act of Parliament
anent these Ministe^s who entered since the year 1649* and had not gotten
Presentation and Collation, whereunto the Heretors ^e^e not obliged t^ inquire,
seeing the Ministers were suffered to Preach without challenge, February 10.
1666. Collector of the vacant Stipends contra the Heretors of May^ole and
Gi^van. Payment made b^na fide was found not to extend to payment made by a
Tennent before the time, nor to a Sub-Tenent to the Tennent before the Term,
February 5. 1667. Lady Traquair contra Howa^son. Payment made of a Decree by
giving Bond of borrowed money, and taking Discharges of the Decree, was found
no Homologa^ion or Transaction, but that after the party might quarrel both
Decree and Bond in consequence, unless abatement were gotten upon Transaction
of the Sum in the Decree, seeing it was not voluntarly done but upon Caption,
I^ly 3. 1668. Rue contra Houstoun. Payment of the Rent of a Shop was sustained,
being a Ta^k set by a Father to a Tennent for the annualrent of a sum, though
the Father had given a Right to his Son, reserving his own Liferent, seeing he
set the Tack as Feear, and though the Son after his death warned only by
Chalking the Door, without any other intimation, the Tacks-man was Liberate of
the Rent for his Annualrent, as bonae fidei possessor by his Tack, till he was
cited on the Sons Right, February 16. 1669. Hamiltoun contra Harper. Payment
inferred by consecutive Discharges of all years preceding, was found not
effectual where a preceding year was acknowledged ^esting by these, who
obtained the discharge, and where the Giver thereof had given a Warrant to a
third party to li^t that year to his own behove, albeit that was not intimate
to the Tennents, February 18. 1669. Cockburn and Gilespie her Husband contra
St^uar^ and the Tennents of Lintoun. Payment being proponed by one pursued as
Representing, if he deny not the passive Titles, the Pursuer is liberate from
proving thereof, November 6. 1669. Scot of Hartwoodmires Supplicant. Payment of
a Tocher contracted by a Wife for her self, was inferred by presumption that
she lived twenty two years, and that in his Testament he acknowledged his
Tocher was paid, which was not esteemed as legatum liberatio^^s to affect the
Deads part only, but with the presumption did import an absolute Discharge,
February 16. 1671. Scot contra Dods. A PENSION secular was ^ound only as an
Assignation to Mails and Duties, not to affect the Ground against singular
Successors, albeit it bear to be paid out of the readiest Fruits of such
Lands, and was cled with possession, December 11. 1662. Clapp^rtoun contra
Lord of Ed^em. PERRIL of a House sold, and thereafter burnt was found to ^e
the buyers, though the Disposition bear an obligement to put the buyer in
possession* seeing he voluntarly took possession and Rebuilt the House, and
paid all the price, December 13. 1667. Hunter contra Wilson. PERSONAL
OBLIGATIONS of Appryzers to communicate their appryzings, are not effectual
against the Appryzers singular Suc^essors, July 6. 1661. Telzifer contra
Max^oun and Cunningh^me. Personal provision by a Back-bond of the same date
with a Feu, bearing that the Feuar might Renunce the Feu when he pleased, was
found valide against the singular Successor of the granter of the Feu, seeing it
did not alter any thing of the real Right of the Feu, but only the personal
obligation in the Feudal Contract, obliging the Fever and his Heirs to pay the
Feu-duty* yearly, February 12. 1669. Brown contra Sibbald. POSSESSION of
stolen Goods by using them in the Pleugh four months, was found not to secure
the possessors, but that they might be recovered summarly by the Sheriffs
warrant without citation, but if the Possessors did acquire Right by an onerous
Title, they were not to be Restored, but prejudice to the Owner to recover the
same by Process, yet so as the Sheriffs warrant did exclude from violent
profits, July 6. 1671. Strachan^ contra Gordouns. POSSESSOR BONAE FIDEI facit
fructus consumptos suos, was found not to extend to a Mother, who by several
presumptions appeared to have known the Right of her Children, wherein private
knowledge was enough, November 20. 1662. Children of Wolmet contra Lady Wolmet
and Dankeith her Husband. Possessor bon^ fidei, etc. albeit his authors Right
was Reduced in Parliament, whereto he having but a Tack needed not be called,
and so he had no standing Title, his Tack falling in consequence, seeing nothing
was done to interrupt his possession, July 19. 1664. Douglas and Sinclar her
Spouse contra Lord of Wedderburn. Possessor bon^ fidei, etc. was extended to
one who had a second Right to a Reversion, and had first Redeemed and possessed
thereby, and was not found liable to the other pursuing upon his prior Right as
to bygones before Citation, although he had not acquired the benefit of a
possessory judgment by possessing 7. years, November 18. 1664. Guthrie contra
Lord of Sornbeg. Possessor bon^ fidei, etc. was found not to take effect to
one who had obtained a Decree to Removing, for not payment of ^he duties in
absence, and produced not his Infeftment, but (...) infef^ment of another
person of that same Name, which being a fraudulent deed, he could not thereby
have a Title cum bona fid^, June 21. 1671. Neilson contra Menzies of Knock.
A POSSESSORY ^IVDGEMENT was not sustained upon five or six years possession,
or less then seven years, December 13. 1669. Hamiltoun contra Tennents of
Vppersheils and Rowan. A possessory judgment was found not competent upon
seven years after interruption, but that the Interruption continued till
prescription, July 22. 1664. Montgomerie contra Hume. Here the interruption was
by a Decree of Removing, which gave the other civil possession. A possessory
judgment was not admitted against an annualrent, which is debitum fundi, June
25. 1662. Adamf^nt contra Lord Balmerino. A possessory judgment was found not
competent to a Wife by her Husbands possession, against another deriving Right
from him, the wifes infeftment not being onero^s, or upon her Contract, but
gratuitous, December 7. 1664. Lady Craig and Green-head her Husband contra Lord
Loure. Possessory judgment is not competent upon Possession of Warrandice
Lands against Recourse upon Eviction, which may be without Reduction, January
9. 1666. Brown contra Sco^. A possessory ludgement on 7. years possession was
found valide to a party infeft, though entering by the Conjunct fe^ar as Heir
to her who was not F^^ar but Li^erenter, February 20. 1667. Cranstoun contra
Wilkison. A possessory judgment was not found competent upon seven years
possession, by virtue of an Appryzing, on which there neither followed
Infeftment nor Charge against the Superior to Infeft, February 6. 1668.
Iohnstoun contra Erskin. A Possessory judgment upon a public Infeftment, and
seven years possession, was ^ound not Relevant against a Pursuit for Recourse
upon Eviction by Infeftment of warrandice, unless there were seven years
Possession after the Eviction, February 20. 1668. Forbes contra I^nes. A
Possessory Judgment was Sustained upon seven years possession peaceably before
intenting of the Cause, albeit there was interruption by Citation before these
seven years, and albeit there was ^urceals of lustice during the last seven
years, and that the Pursuer was Minor, July 15. 166^. Earl of Wintonn contra
Gordoun of Letter^urry. A Possessory Judgment was sustained on an Infeftment
on a voluntary Disposition against an appryzer, who had denunced the Lands
before that Disposition, who^e Denunciation was not found to render the matter
so litigious as to exclude a possessory judgment by seven years uninterrupted
Possession thereafter, July 17. 1668. Steuart contra Murrayes. POYNDING OF THE
GROUND for an annualrent de^^rned was found to take effect, not only against
the Master and Tennents therein called, but all others coming in after, though
singular Suncessors, and not to be abated by vastation as a Feu-duty, and to
have access against the whole, or any part of the Ground, though now belonging
to several Heretors, but so as the payer should have Assignation to the debt,
and a time to recover relief o^^ the rest, neither was the Decree excluded by
20, or 30. years possession of a singular Successor as a possessory judgment,
June 26. 1662. Adamsons contra Lord Balmerino. Poinding of the Ground was found
competent against the apparent Heir of the Granter of the Annualrent, without a
Charge to enter Heir, January 2. 1667. Olephant contra Hamiltoun. Poinding of
the Ground was sustained on an annualrent, although there was no possession
thereon for above seven years without Declarator, and though a posterior
appryzer was in possession more than seven years, which was not found to give a
possessory judgment against a prior annualrent, January 1. 1668. Old Lady
Clerkingtoun and the young Lady. A PRECEPT was ^ound to oblige the Granter
thereof, it not being answered, albeit it did not bear value received, seeing it
was upon an other Precept, direct to the Drawer of the last precept, and so was
an acceptance, January 22. 1667. Findlason contra Lord Cowper. A precept of
Seasine upon obedience was found not to hinder the Reduction nor improbation,
nor to import acknowledgement of the Defenders Right, February 20 1662. Lord
of Mochrome contra Lord of Martoun, Ariol and others. PREMONITION by a
Procurator was sustained, though it bear not the Procuratory shown, seeing it
bear not it was called for, if it now be shown, or proving by the other parties
oath that a procuratory was shown, January 18. 1662. Veatch contra Lyel of
Bassendoun. PRESCRIPTION was found only to run from the Term of payment of
Bonds not from the date, and that the Interruption by Citation upon the first
Summons is sufficient to interrupt, though there was no continuation or second
summons, February 17, 1665. Butter contra Gray. Prescription on 40. years
silence was found not effectual against a Wife pursuing the Cautioner for her
^u^band in her Contract of Marriage, obliging to employ a Sum to her in
Liferent, quia non val^bat agere, during her Husbands life, who would not
concur, and therefore the prescription was compted from his death and yet the
other obligement in the same Contract, in favors of the Husband obliging the
Wifes Father to pay the Tocher, was found to prescribe from the date, July 5.
1665. Mckie contra Steuart. Prescription was ^ound interrupted by a citation,
albeit not so legal but that the Defender might have excluded the pursuit upon
informality, especially being in re antiqua, and where the custom of the
Regality did not appear, Novem. 25. 1665. White contra Horn. Prescription was
^ound never to extend to exclude any person to serve themselves to any of their
predecessors, if no other has been served before, in which case the Retoure
cannot be quarrelled, but within 40. years, if deduced after the year 1617. or
if before, then it must be quarrelled within forty years, or else it must
prescribe by the general Act of prescription, November 28. 1665. Young contra
Iohnstouns. Prescription by not paying Teind for forty years, was found not to
take away the Right of the Teind totally, having been once paid, but only as
to years prec^eding the forty years, February 7. 1666. Earl of Pa^mure contra
Parochioners. Prescription non c^rcit contra non valentem agere, which is
understood of Actions, which might have attained possession, and not of
Declarators or Reductions, February last 1666. Earl of Lauderdail contra
Viscount of Oxenfoord. Prescription was found interrupted by a Decree of
poynding the Ground, though therein the Heretor was not Called, July 15. 1666.
Sinclar contra Lord of H^rdmanstoun. Prescription of an oblation of a
Cautioner, bound conjunctly and severally with the principal, was not inferred
by the Creditors not getting payment, or pursuing the Coutioner for forty
years, which did not presume he past from him, but his getting annualrent from
the principal within the forty years, was ^ound sufficient to preserve the
Bond as to both, December 18. 1667. Gairns contra Arthure. Prescription of a
Tack of Teinds not cled with possession for more than 40. years from its date,
was ^ound not to annul that Tack, but as to years before possession, and a
prorogation of the Tack, was sustained as to times coming, January 19. 1669.
Earl of Athole contra Lord of Strowan. Prescription was not sustained upon 40.
years uninterrupted possession, and one single Seasine as the Title of
prescription, unless according to the Terms of the Act of Parliament singular
Successors produce as their Title, not only a Seasine but a Charter or Precept
as the warrant thereof, and that universal Successors produce one or more
Seasines upon Retoures or Precepts or clare constat continuing and standing
together by the space of forty years; which standing together was not
understood of standing unreduced, but standing not fallen in the hands of the
Superior by Noi^-entry, so that either the obtainer of the Seasine behoved to
live after the ^ame and possess 40. years, in which case one Seasine were
sufficient; or if he dyed within the forty years, his Heirs possession were
not sufficient by that Seasine, b^t behoved to be renewed, and so to continue
Seasines as well as possession for forty years from the beginning of the first
Seasine; but no necessity was found to produce the Retour or Precept, where
Possession was by Seasines one or more, the Seasines as well as Possession
being continued for forty years, February 15. 1671. Earl of Argile contra
Lord of M^naughtoun. Prescription of an annualrent constitute indefinitely out
of two distinct Tenements, was found not incurred as to the one, in respect of
the annualrenters uplifting the whole annualrent out of the other in the same
manner, as payment of annualrent by the principal Debtor preserves the
obligement of the Cautioners, though they paid no annualrent for forty years,
and the Heretor distressed was found to have proportionable relief out of the
other Tenement, though both were now in the hands of different singular
Successors, and required different Seasines, July 22. 1671. Lord Balmerino
contra Hamiltoun of Litle-prestoun. Prescription of annualrent mortified to an
Hospital, was sustained by freedom there from forty years without
consideration of the pious use, or that the Poor had yearly Overseers chosen,
and were not esteemed as Minors, or without any abatement of the time of the
Troubles when there could be no Process, June 30. 1671. Bead-men of the
Magdalen* Chapel contra Drysdail. Prescription of the annualrent of a Bond was
elided, because the principal sum was paid to the Feear, and it was sufficient
that the annualrent was due within forty years preceding that payment, which
annualrent was due to the Executors of a Liferenter this was stopped and
altered as to this, that it was not found relevant to preserve the annualrents
that were within forty years before the last payment, but that they were
within forty years before the intention of the Cause, all annualrents or
actual prestations preceding that forty years prescribe, because every years
payment is a several obligation, and that has no effect as to the rest, the
first interlocutor was, July 22. 1671. And the second, February 7. 1672. Blair
of Balhead contra Blair of Denhead. PRESVMPTION of allowance was sustained to
take away public burdens paid by a Tennent, though his Tack bear to be
relieved thereof, and he produce Discharges of his Rent, and also Discharges of
public burdens, unless by writ or his Masters Oath he prove they were not
allowed, December 2. 1664. Veatch contra Paterson. Presumption that Tickets of
public burdens were allowed to Tennents in their Rent, was sustained to elide
the Tennents pursuit thereon for payment thereof, albeit his Tack bear a clause
to relieve him of all public burdens, Here the Tennent left the Land several
years before the pursuit, and never did any diligence to get these allowed, but
it was sustained by the Masters Oath, that these were not allowed, December 20.
^664. Paterson contra Veatch. Presumption of a Wifes Warrant to borrow a small
sum and impignorat a Bond therefore, was sustained, she having the Bond in her
custody, February 4. 1665. Paterson contra Pringle. PRIVILEGE of Burghs to
arrest persons of find Caution of answer as Law will, was found to extend to
the Pear of Leith as a part of the Burgh Royal of Edinburgh its privilege, and
if done by the Water Baillie, but not if in the Burgh of Batony of Leith, or by
the Baron Baillie, January 18. 1663. Hamiltoun contra Mitchel and Keith.
Privilege of Burgh was ^ound not to extend to Incarcerat unfreemen found
within their Burgh till they find Caution as Law will, albeit by a former
Decree they were Decerned to desist from Merchandice competent to free
Burrows, and that thereby they might only seize upon these Goods by the Act of
Parliament, January 30. 1663. Town of Lin^^thgow contra Borrowstounness.
PROBATION of immemorial possession or Custom, was not found instructed by a
Decree mentioning a former Decree wherein the same was proven, unless the
Testimonies were extant or produced, December 13, 1664. Bishop of the Isles
contra Hamiltoun. Probation of a Disposition being onerous to exclude ^ucrative
Succession and absolvitor thereon in a Process, was not found sufficient as
repeated from another Decree, not being de recent^, except it had been after a
long time when Witnesses were dead, and in that case their Testimonies if
extant, behoved to be seen again, January 6. 1665. contra Edmonstoun of Carden.
Probation of a Defense was admitted partly by Oath what was the Cause of the
Bond, and partly by Witnesses, that the condition thereof was contraveened,
June 15. 1665. Aikman contra Probation of the Delivery of a great bargain of
Victual, was not inferred from the Declaration of a person entrusted by the
Debtor to receive it, seeing there was a time limited to obtain his
Declaration, after which his condition and trustiness might change, and could
not perpetually oblige the Intruster, July 18. 1667. Executors of the Earl of
Dirletoun contra Duke of Hamiltoun, Earl of Crawfoord and others. Probation was
found to be according to the most pregnant Testimonies, though others Witnessed
a greater quantity, this was in a matter old, and in the estimation of ^osse,
November 23. 1667. Lord Justice Clerk contra Lord of Lambertoun. Probation by
one Witness and the Oath of the Pursuer in supplement, in favors of a party
who had been absent ^ut of the Country in the Kings Service, pursuing for his
share of a Ship and Goods against the remnant Owners meddled with by them in
Anno 1638. was sustained by the Admiral, but Reduced by the Lords, and the
Pursuer ordained to adduce farther probation, February 12. 1668. Captain
Strachan contra Morison. PROCESSES being Dispute to the full in present^a, The
Lords by Act of Sederunt, ordained the Clerks not to give up the same, or any
Process Dispute at full, though there were no Interlocutor thereon; But
ordained it to be kept till the Dispute were advised and Interlocutor
pronunced, June 6. 1665. Town of Edinburgh contra Thomson. PROMISE to relieve a
Cautioner who relieved the promisers Goods of poinding, was found not probable
by Witnesses, though within an hundred pounds, where the promiser was dead,
July 3. 1668. Don^ldson contra Harrower* A Promise by a Wife after her Husbands
death, never to quarrel a Tack of Liferent Lands which was in Writ for several
years, was found to exclude her, and not to be as a verbal Tack valide only for
a year, but as pactum de non repugnando, January 8. 1670. Scot contra Murray. A
PRO-TVTOR being an Overseer intrometting with the Pupils Bond^, was found only
liable for the whole Bonds received by him, though he uplifted the annualrent
of a part of them only, and for the annualrent thereof, but not for any other
means or Estate of the Defunct, because there was no antecedent Law or Rule to
oblige him, but an Act to Sederunt was ordained to be made and published, that
all persons ^edling so in the future should be liable both for intromission and
omission as Tutors, June 10. 1665. Swin^oun contra. A PRYZE Ship was found not
justly taken, belonging to a Prince holding of the Kings Enemies, unless he
contribu^e to the War, January 4. 1667. Harison contra Lord of Lud^uhurn. A
Prize Ship was liberate belonging to Neuters, not the Kings Enemies nor Alies,
albeit carrying Counterband-Goods, unless it were proven that the War was known
at the place they ^o^sed from when they loused, and that Acts of Hostility, and
declaring Prizes in Neighboring places was not sufficient without publication
of the War, or knowledge thereof, July 23. 1667. Iurgan contra Captain Logan. A
^rize Ship was found justly adjudged as carrying Counterband-Goods, albeit a
Swedish Sh^p, and by the Swedish Treaty, such Counterband-Goods were allowed to
the Sweds, which was only understood, (they being the g^owth of their own
Country) July 27, and 31. 1667. and November 6. 1667. Packman contra Captain
Allan. A Prize being taken pursued by two Privateers, was ^ound equally to be
divided betwixt both, and not according to the proportion of their Guns, seeing
the least and lightest of the Frigots did Seize when the other was at a
considerable distance, and his conco^rse and con^ortship, though made without
consent or special Commission from the Owners, being both in precinct^ belli
and profitable for the security of either party, February 7. 1668. Cuningskie
contra Captain Mastertoun. Prize Ships being Questioned as having in them the
product of Co^nterband-Goods carried in to the Kings Enemies in the same
Voyage, from which the Ship was returning, was found not sufficient by the
Tenor of the Admiral of Scotlands Commission, bearing Warrant to seize if the
product of Counterband-Goods in that Voyage were found, but by the Law and
Custom of Nations, and therefore the Lords granted Commission to ^ry the
Custom of Holland, France, England and Spain, February 21. 1668. Packman
contra Allan. A Prize being taken upon probable grounds, and adjudged by the
Admiral, the Kings tenth part, and Admirals fifteenth part, being paid, and
the Goods sold, the Decree of Adjudication being Reduced, the privateer was
found liable but for the value that the Goods might have given by rouping, if
they had been preserved and sold when and where they were adjudged, February
24. 1668. Captain Mastertoun contra Strangers of O^^end, but the Kings 10th
part, and Admirals 15th part, were not allowed. A Pryze Ship of Hamburgh taken
as carrying Counterband-Goods to the Da^es, after Acts of Hostility betwixt the
King and them, was liberate, because she was taken before the Proclamation of
the War against the Danes, but the Captain was found to have probable Ground to
Seize, and was found only liable for what profit he had made of the Ship and
Goods, unless he had been the culpa by the spoiling or mis-appryzing thereof,
February 25. 1668. Merchants of Hamburgh contra Captain Dis^ingtoun. A Pryze
Ship belonging to the Sweds, was found War^antably taken, because she was
Navigat with Hollanders the Kings Enemies, contrary the Kings Proclama^ion of
War, albeit they h^d a pass conform to the Swedish Treaty, wherein it is
permitted to the Sweds to make use of Hollanders as Masters, he becoming a
sworn Burges of their Town, without mention of what Nation the remnant company
might be of, February 25. 1668. Owners of the Ship called the Castle of Riga
contra Captain Sea^oun. A Prize Ship was found justly adjudged, because a great
part of the company were Hollanders, in respect of the Kings Proclamation of
War, ordaining Ships to be taken that had in them any number of men, or goods
belonging to Enemies, albeit the Ship was a Swedish Ship, and had a pass
conform to the Swedish Treaty, which bear that such a pass being found there
should be no further inquiry in men or goods ^isi gravis suspiti^o subsit,
seeing that Treaty bear a liberty to the S^eds to have a Hollands Master
becoming a sworn Burges of any Town of Sweden, and had no such privilege for
the mariners, June 30. 1668. Paterson contra Captain Anderson. A prize Ship was
found justly taken being insisted against on several grounds, as having a
number of the Kings Enemies the Hollanders Sailers, being only proven to be
three, and the company nine, as having been two years with the Kings Enemies
Merchandising, but not in the War, and by having a small parcel of Tar, as
Counterband in the same Voyage, upon all jointly, the Lords declared but not
upon any point alone, July 9. 1668. Capta^^ Allan contra Parkman. In prize
Ships competent and omitted as a particular custom of Scotland, was not
sustained against the strangers, but they were found to have the benefit of
the Law of Nations, June 15. 1669. Loyson contra Lord of Lud^uhar^ and Captain
Wilson. A prize Ship declared as carrying Counterband, having on Board Oak
cutted at three foot and an half for making Barrels, in respect the Admirals
Commission bear Clapboard as counterband* though Testimonies from the
Admiralities of England, Holland, and Flanders were produced, that such Timber
was not accounted counterband, a great number of the Lords being of a contrary
judgment, June 29. 1669. Captain contra
A prize Ship being in question, which being alleged to be fraughted from
Norway to London with Timber, by the Kings proclamation, warranding Ships even
of his Enemies Countries to be employed for bringing Timber for the Rebuilding
of London, they getting certificates and passes from the Duke of York, the Ship
having on Board 1500. Dails not belonging to the London Merchants, the same was
found sufficient to confi^cate the Ship and these Dails, but not to confiscate
the Cargo belonging to the English Merchands* if he could produce a pass
conform to the Proclamation and the Kings Letter, bearing that he was
sufficiently informed that this Ship had a valide pass, and therefore ordering
her to be restored, was not found Relevant to liberate the Ship, or Merchants
Cargo without production of the pass; but the Letter was understood to be ^alvo
jure, not proceeding upon the hearing of parties, albeit the Duke of York did
asset that he had formerly given a pass to that Ship, July 13. 1669. Captain
Wood contra Ne^lson, here the Skippers Testimony alon^ was received to prove
against the Owners. A prize Ship being adjudged by the Admiral and the Decree
being quarrelled, because the Skipper had a pass declaring the Ship and Goods
wholly belonging to the Sweds the Kings Allys, the pass was conform to the
Swedish Treaty, which clears expressly that where such passes are, ^eq^id ampl^s
exigatur in bon^, aut homines nullo modo inquiratur, The adjudication was
sustained, in respect that the pass by the oath of the Skipper and company was
found to be a contrivance, and there was no sufficient probation that the Ship
and Goods belonged to the Sweds, and that the Treaty bears si qua gravis
susp^^io subsit, that seazure may be made, June 29. 1671. Burrow contra Captain
(...). A PVPILS person was found to be kept by her Mother who was Widow, till
her age of eleven years, and then by a Friend of her Fathers side, but not by
the Tutor who was nearest to succeed. February 6. 1666* Lord of D^ry contra
Relict and Daughter of his Brother. RATIHABITION Vide Clause January 9. 1663.
Mason contra Hunter. RECOGNITION committed by a Defunct's alienation was not
stopped upon the privilege of Minority quo minor non tenetur placitare, etc.
February 19. 1662. Lady Carnagy contra a Lord Cranburn. Recognition was not
clided, because as importing ingratitude which is criminal, it was purged with
the death of the Committer, but was sustained against his Successor, Ibidem.
Recognition was found to be incurred by alienation of Ward Lands, albeit the
Seasine taken was without the Acquirers Mandat subscribed, but by a general
Mandat out of the Chancellary, seeing it was taken by his Grandfather, giver of
the Alienation, and albeit the Disposition bear only (^ailing of the Disponers
Heirs of his Body) seeing it had a Warrant for seasing this party de prese^ti
nominatim; nor was it reduced upon Minority to annul the Seasine and shun the
Recognition, January 30. 1663. Inter eosdem. Recognition was incurred by giving
an Infeftment base to a Grand child, not being then alioqui successuru^ of Ward
Lands, though Taxed Ward, and though granted to Heirs and Assigneys, which was
only understood that the Disposion, Charter or Precept before Seasine might be
assigned but not after, nor was it respected that the Seasine as not Confirmed
was null, nor that it employed a tacit condition that the Superior consented,
nor that the Giver was an illiterat person, and the case dubious, here the case
was favorable for the Donatar, who was the Disponers eldest Daughter, and who
was past by, and the second Daughters Heirs, though strangers, were preferred
in all, February 5. 1663. Inter eosdem. A Donatar of Recognition granting a
Precept to a Vassal in the Lands falling in Recognition, acknowledging that
Vassals predecessors Right and his own in the ordinary Terms of a precept of
clare constat, albeit the precept did also bear in obedience of Precepts out of
the Chancellary, yet the same with the Seasine following thereon, was found to
exclude the Donatat and all deriving Right from him thereafter, June 24. 1668.
Gray contra Howison and Gray. Recognition was found not to be incurred by an
Infeftment taken upon a Tutors Precept, being no Act of lawful Administration,
and done under the Usurpation when Recognitions were not allowed on that
ground, July 15. 1669. Jack contra lack. Recognition was found not in^erred by
a Disposition not subscribed, nor delivered till the granter was on deathbed,
and that deathbed was competent by exception against the Recognition, as not
being a possessory but a pe^itory judgment, July 20. 1669. Barclay contra
Barclay. Recognition was found inferred by Infeftment of Ward Lands, when the
Disposition contained a Precept of Seasine and was delivered in liege po^stie,
without reservation, albeit the Seasine was taken when the Disponer was on
deathbed, Ibidem. Recognition was incurred by Alienation of Ward Lands holden
of the King, though done when the Superiors consent was not required before
the Kings Restoration, seeing neither after the Ves^al nor Sub-vas^al ^ought
Confirmation, not being refused by the King to these who sought it, December
15. 1669. Ma^tland of P^^trichi^ contra Gord^un of Geight. In a Recognition the
Donatar was found only obliged to produce the Kings Gift as his Title, without
neces^ity to instruct that the King was Superior of the Lands Ward, Law
presuming these if the contrary be not proven, and a Term was assigned for
obtaining the Infef^ment to be produced, whereby Recognition was incurred,
February 17. 1671. contra M^^ulloch. DECLARATOR OF REDEMPTION was not stopped,
because the Reversion was not produced, the Pursuer being an appryzer, and
offering to pr^ve by the De^enders oath that it was in his own hand, February
18. 1662. Children of Wolmet contra Ker. Redemption was sustained at the
instance of a singular Successor, albeit he showed not the Reversion at the
time of the order, nor now, but offered to prove that it was in the defenders
own hands, February 14. 1663. Colonel Montgomery contra Halyburton. In a
Redemption the sums were not ordained to be given up till a Wodsetters apparent
Heir was Infeft as Heir, and that the Declarator without Resignation was not
sufficient, February 10. 1665. Campbel contra Bryson. Redemption was sustained
upon Consignation of a liquid debt due by the Wodsetter to the Reverset, upon a
Clause in the Contract of Wodset, January 2. 1667. H^g contra Hog. REDVCTION of
a Retour was found sufficient to reduce a Decree against the party as Heir,
albeit the Decree was obtained before the Reduction of the Retour, and the
obtainer of the decree was not called to the said Reduction July 24. 1661.
Mitchel contra Hutches^n. Reduction of a Decree upon the Reduction of the
Retour, whereupon the Decree proceeded was sustained, albeit the Obtainer of
the Decree was not called to the Reduction, though after his Decree as not
being a party necessary, Ibidem. Reduction of a Decree obtained against
Infants charged to Enter Heir, was ^ustained, though not raised inter anno^
utiles, seeing it lay over and was not insisted in all that time, since it was
not known till anni utiles were past, July 17 1661. Fleming contra Forrester.
Reduction was not found necessary where all was produced that was craved to be
annulled, and the rest only in consequence, but that a Libel by Declarator of
nullity was competent, February 26. 1662. Viscount of Stormont contra Creditors
of Annandail. In a Reduction and improbation, the Defender was allowed to
propone his Defenses upon the Writs produced by him as sufficient to exclude
the Rights produced by the Pur^uer before certification contra non producta,
without necessity to the De^ender to declare that he would make use of no more
writs, December 20. 1662. Lord of Mochrom contra Lord of Martoun and others.
In a Reduction of a Valuation no need was found of calling a Wodsetter
publicly Infeft, being an improper Wod^et, and seeing the Obtainer of the
Decree his Heir having the reversion and possession was called, July ^3. 1664.
Earl of Landerdail contra Lord of Wolmet. Reductions take ^away all consequent
Rights that need no several Reasons as falling in consequence, albeit the
parties interressed therein were not called to the Reduction of the principal
right, July 1^. 1664. Douglas and her Husband contra the Lord of Wedderburn.
Reduction of a Decree of Exoneration was sustained against the Executor
without calling the Creditors or Legators, January 11. 1665. Arnot contra
Arnot. Reduction of an Heretable Right was sustained on an Appryzing on the
pursuers own Bond assigned to himself and a charge thereon, without Infeftment,
and the general Clause thus limited, against all Writs granted by the Pursuer
and his Predecessors to whom he does succeed jure sanguin^s or his authors,
whose Rights and Pogresses thereto he produces, or to the Defender or his
Predecessors to whom he may succeed jure sangu^nis or his authors, who, or some
to represent them are called, January 20. 1665. Little contra Earl of
N^thisdail, In a Reduction no Process was sustained for reducing an Heretable
Right till the Defender^ authors were called, though the Pursuer declared he
insisted not against that authors right being common author, but against the
Defenders right from that author, seeing that author was bound in Warrandice,
and therefore behoved to be called, January 30. 1665. Lord Borthwick contra
Ker. In a Reduction ex capite inhibitionis, the Defender producing a sufficient
Right to exclude the Pursuer, being before the inhibition, the Defender being
indigent, the Lords ordained the parties to dispute their Rights as if it had
been in a general Reduction, January 2. 1666. Brown contra Wilson, and
Callender. Reduction was ^ound to extend to a Term before Sentence February 16.
1666. Borthwick contra Skein. In a Reduction the authors being cal^ed, one
dying a^^er conclusion of the Cause, the same was not advised ^il one
^^presenting him were called, though the reasons were only against the first
authors Right, and ^o the rest would fall in consequence, seeing all were
interressed in the Wa^randice to Defend the first authors right, July 14. 1666.
L^ith contra Lesmore and others. Reduction of a Bond was not sustained against
the Creditor who was denuded by Assignation intimate to the Pursuer before the
Citation, July 2. 1667. Lord Blantire contra Walk^^^haw. In Reductions of
Rights of Lands without improbation, The Lords declared they would grant two
Terms to produce, N^vem^er 26. 1667. H^y of Hay^^^un contra Drummond and
^ep^urn. Reduction ex capite inhibitionis, was sustained though the inhibition
was only on a Clause of Warrandice, and there was yet no actual distress, only
to take effect when the distress should take place as a Declarator of Right,
December 10. 1667 ^og contra Countess of Hume. In a Reduction ex capite
inhibitionis, the Defender was admitted to exclude the Pursu^rs Title and Right
by other rights (...) to the Inhibition, which the Lords would not reserve, but
received them by way of Defense, December 11. 1667. Inter eosdem. A Reduction
on deathbed was sustained at the instance of the Creditors of the apparent
Heir on this interest, that the debts of the apparent Heir might affect the
Estate disponed, if the Disposition were Reduced, February 16. 1669. Creditors
of my Lord Balmerino and Lord Cowper contra Lady Cowper. Reduction was found
necessary to take away a Decree of Double poynding, and that a second
Suspension of Double^poynding ^aised by a party who compeared not in the first
instance, was not sufficient, though in Decreets in absence Suspension without
Reduction is sufficient, February 4. 1670. Watson contra Sympson. REGALITIES
cannot be prejudged by the Bloodwits or Amerciaments of the Justices of Peace
within the Regality, but that ^uch only belong to the Lord of ^egality as was
^ound July 22. 1664. Earl of Sutherland contra M^^tosh of C^nadge. Regalities
having Chapel and Chancellary, general services need not be retoured to the
Kings Chancellary, January 19. 1667. Reid contra RELIEF amongst persons bound
conjunctly and severally, was fo^nd to follow, where one is distressed for all,
though there be no clause of relies expressed, Relict of the Minister of Ednem
contra Lord of Wedderburn. The like June 19. 1662. Wallace contra Forbes. The
like June 28. 1665. Mont^ith contra Anderson, Vide Clause, Ibidem. A RELICT was
found neither to have share of stock nor Terce of Annualrent of a sum bearing
Annualrent without Infeftment, June 24. 1663. S^ry^zeour contra Murrayes. A
Relicts third of movables was found not to be abated by the Husbands heretable
debts, as bearing annualrent, whether they exceeded the heretable sums due to
the Defunct or not, July 19. 1664. Inter eosdem. REMOVIN^ cannot be stopped by
alleging the De^ender is Tennent by payment of Mails and Duties to such a man
who is not warned, unless it be alleged he has infeftment, or Tacks for
Terms to run after the warning, but tacit relocation suffices not, January
30. 1663. Rl^^art contra Removing was sustained on a warning on 40. days,
albeit the party was out o^f the Country, being now cited upon 60. days,
without necessity to warn him by Letters of Supplement on 60. days, February
20. 1666. M^^ra^r contra Crichtoun. Removing was not sustained by a warning
made by the Feear before the Liferenters death, no not to take effect at the
next Whitsonday without a new warning, June 30. 1669. Agnew contra Tennents of
Dronlaw. RENVNCIATION to be heir was admitted, and a Decree thereupon reduced,
obtained against the Renuncer as charged to Enter heir, albeit they had raised
no Reduction thereof intra annos utiles, because the Decree was obtained at
the Uncles instance, in her in^ancy, and not insisted in within the anni
utiles, July 17. 1661. Relict of Fleming contra Forrester. A Renunciation of a
Fe^ was sustained to liberate the Vassal from the Fe^ duty, albeit the Feu was
constitute by a mutual Contract obliging the Feear and his heirs to pay the Feu
duty yearly, ^eing there was a Back-bond of the same date, that the Feuar might
renunce when he pleased, February 12. 1669. Brown contra Sibbald. Renunciation
of all Right and interest was found only to extend to all right the Renuncer
had, and not to any future right or rights, to which the Renuncer might succeed
unless it had been mentioned, July 27. 1671. Baillie contra Baillie. REPARATION
of a Kirk was found in no part to affect the Titular of the Teinds, but the
Heretors of the Land only, January 16. 1663. Relict of the Minister of Ednem
contra Lord of Wedderburn. Reparation of Manses done by the Incumbents before
1649. was found not to burden the Heretors for the value of 1000. merks conform
to the Act 1649* renewed 1661. but only for 500. merks, which was the Quota
before these Acts, and that not against singular Successors, January 8. 1670.
Charters contra Parochioners of Currie. REPROBATVRES were sustained though not
protested for at the Examination of the Witnesses, against whose Testimonies
the Reprobature was now used, being protested for before Sentence, July 30.
1668. Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun. Reprobature was not admitted to
be added after a Reduction was filled up and discust in a Devorce, but reserved
to a special Action of Reprobature, February 25. 1669. Inter eosdem.
Reprobature for annulling a Decree of Divorce of the Commissars, was sustained
at the instance of one who had bought the Liferent from the Husband, and which
would fall back to the Wi^e by the Divorce, who compea^ing before the
Commissars to object against the Witnesses, and interrogate them was not
admitted, and having in a Reduction before the Lords obtained the Witnesses to
be re-examined, their own Testimonies of corruption were not admitted to
ener^ate their former Testimonies, but Reprobatures were reserved, and being
insisted in, it was not found relevant that they were viles and pauperes, the
principal cause being Adultery which is a latent crime, neither that they were
infamous by common report, unless they had been declared infamous by a Judge,
or found culpable of a Crime or Fact, that the Law declares to infer infamy,
January 31. 1671. Inter eosdem. Reprobatur^ were found relevant being libelled
upon instructing or prompting of Witnesses, without necessity to allege that
the Witnesses undertook or deponed conform, and that in odium corrumpentis,
without inferring any blemish upon the Witnesses of prompted, who consented not
or swoar falsely, Ibidem. Reprobatures were found relevant upon libelling of
corrupting of Witnesses, upon giving or promising of good deeds more than would
be suitable for their Charges, Ibidem. Reprobatures upon corrupting of
Witnesses, by giving or promising bribes, or prompting Witnesses to depone, was
^ound only Probable by writ or oath of the parties who adduced the Witnesses
after Decree, and not by Witnesses, unless the Reprobatures had been pursued
before Decree proceeding upon the Testimonies of the Witnesses quarrelled,
this was stopped till the further hearing and was recalled, and Witnesses above
exception were found competent whether before or after Sentence, and the
Witnesses were ordained to be condescended upon; The first Interlocutor was the
14. of July 1671. and the second the 20th. of February 1672. Inter eosdem.
REQVISITION of a sum was sustained though it mentioned not the Procutatory
produced, seeing it bear that the same was known to the Nottar and Witnesses,
and thereupon the Defunct party did appryze, January 10. 1665. Steuart contra
Steuarts. A Requisition was sustained though it bear not a Procuratory
produced, seeing it was not called for then, and is now produced, and the
Procurator show Writs whereupon the Requisition was to be made, as the
Instrument bears, I^ne 28. 1671. Hume contra Lord Justice Clerk. A RETOVR was
found reduceable without the solemnity of a Summons of Error in Latin calling
the Inquest, seeing the point in question was that point of the Brieve, that the
parties Grandfather died last Vest and Seized, whereas the Seasine of an Uncle
and Father were now produced, which inferred ^o Error in the Inquest, who
behoved to serve to the last they saw infeft, and therefore the Lords reduced,
July 7. 1663, Mow contra Duchess of Balcleugh. A Retour being called for to be
reduced as proceeding without warrant or probation, and nothing being produced
but the Brieve, Executions and Service, but no Witnesses having deponed on the
propinquity of Blood, and none of the Inquest having declared so on proper
knowledge, The Lords would not therefore annul the Service, but ordained the
Inquest to be cited, to give their oaths on what ground they served, February
24. 1665. Mercer of Aldie contra Cowan. Retoures of Heirs are not reduceable
unless they be quarrelled within 20. years by the special Act Parl. 1617.
thereanent, which was only found to relate to Retoures deduced since that Act,
but by the general Act of Prescription 1617. the action of Reduction of
Retoures quando ecunque deduced, prescribes if not quarrelled within 40. years,
November 28. 1665. Young contra Iohnstouns, Vide Heir. A Retour of five years
possession of a Fo^efaulted person, was not sustained to be Reduced by way of
ordinary Action, but by a Summons of Error in Latin under the Quarter-Seal,
though such Reduction were often time^ allowed before, June 28. 1667. Hume contra
Creditors of Kell^.
A REVERSION granted by a person obliging a buyer to dispone to the Seller, was
found to extend to the Disponers Heirs, though not expressed, seeing the ordinary
Clause of paying the sum in the Disponers own time, was not ad^ected, and it
was held but as an omission non dedita opera, that Heirs were not expressed,
January 9. 1662. Earl of Murray contra Lord of Grant. A Reversion was not
^ound null, not being Registrate before 1617. by the Act 1555. which was found
in de^uetude, July 5. 1666. Earl of Hume contra his Wodsetters. A Reversion
bearing payment at the Wodse^^ers House at London, was ^ound satisfied by
Consignation at Edinburgh where his Successor dwelt, February 1. 1667.
Creditors of Murray contra Murray. A Reversion to a person and the Heirs of his
Body, was found ^ufficient to redeem by that person, albeit he had before
as^igned the Reversion, and disponed the Land to another, February 1. 1667.
Earl of Tillibardin and Sir John Drummo^d contra Murray of Ochter^yre. A RIGHT
REAL of Lands was found not burdened with a provision in the Disposition, that
the Lands should be affected with such a sum, against an Appryzer or singular
Successor, January 25. 1664. Colquhoun contra Adamson; But thereafter this case
being considered and the Clause for payment in the Infeftment, the Father who
granted it being in possession, it was ^ound relevant against the singular
successor till it were performed, November 7. 1606. Inter eosdem. SALMOND
FISHING in a River was found not to impede the letting out of a Loch into that
River, though hurtful to the fishing as was the Lords opinion, but because it
was a reference from the Parliament, who might make a Law thereanent, The Lords
granted Commission to visit before answer, July 1. 1661. Mayor of Bervick
contra Lord of Hayning. Salmond fishing by C^uives was found valide by an
Infeftment to a Burgh cum piscationibus and piscariis, without special mention
of Salmond fishing or Cruives, cled with immemorial possession, and which
Cruives the Burgh was suffered to change from one part to another within their
own bounds, being without pre^udice of the other fishings above, or putting
them in worse condition then they were before with the former Cruives, and
being but one Cruive Dyke, whereof the Lords would not determine the height, or
whether it should be stopped or not, but seeing they possessed immemorially the
former Dike, this was to be made conform in all points, and found that the
Hecks ought to be three inches wide and not five, and that the Act of King
(...) the 4th. bearing five, was an Error in relating a former Act of King
David's, there being no such Act amongst his Acts, but there being one Act of
King Alexanders amongst his Acts for three inches, it was ^ound that that
should have been related, as the Rule, and that Saturndays slop should be
kept of all the Cruives, and not of one only in the middle stream by opening
an eln in each Cruive, pulling up the Hecks thereof, and that from Saturnday at
six a Clock till Monday at Sun rising, and ordained the common custom, to be
proven the hinc inde concerning a constant open middle stream, which was not
repeated in King, la. 6. his Act; nor had the Lords respect ^o the
Ratifications of these Acts purchased in the Parliament 1661. being impetrate
by private parties, not Printed or past the Articles, or done in the style of a
general Law, January 26. 1665. Heretors of Don contra the Town of Aberdene.
SATISFACTION of an Appryzing, and of the sums whereupon the same proceeded, was
admitted by Exception upon what sums the apparent Heir, to whose behove the
right returned paid out therefore, and that by intromission and present offer
of what remained after count and reckoning, albeit the pursuit was not upon the
Appryzing, but a Reduction on an Inhibition upon the Bond whereupon the
Appryzing proceeded, June 28. 1671. Forbes of Watertoun contra Shein, Vide
Appryzing. A SEASINE on an appryzing within Burgh was sustained, though not
given by the Baillies but by the Provest, nor by the Town Clerk, but by another
Nottar, because the Baillies and Clerk were excluded by the English for the
Tender, July 3. 1663. Thomson contra Mckitrick. A Seasine not registrate of a
Liferent to a Wife, was found valide against the apparent Heir of the Granter,
though brooking by a prior Disposition, seeing it contains a power to the Father
to dispone and grant annualrents, February 27. 1667. Countess of Carnwath
contra Earl of Carnwath. A Seasine propriis manibus of a Husband to a Wife who
had no Contract of Marriage nor other provision, and had disponed a former
Liferent to the behoof of the Husband, was found a sufficient Title without a
warrant or Adminicle in writ, in respect of the Marriage and Duty of the
Husband to provide his Wife, June 19. 1668. Relict of Garigs contra Wallace of
Garigs. A Seasine within Burgh under the Clerks hand was sustained without
necessity to (...) it was regi^^rate in the Town Books, in re^pect of the
Exception in the Act anent Registration of Seasines within Burgh not requiring
them to be regist^ate in the Towns Books, June 30. 166^. Bur^et contra Swan.
The ^ike though the Seasine was by the Sherif^ Clerk, there being no Town Clerk
in Office, July 21, 1666. Thomson contra Mcki^rick. A Seasine propri^s manibus,
albeit sustained to a Wife without one Adminicle, who had no Contract of
Marriage, and had at that time quite her loynture by a former Husband to the
Husbands Creditors, yet two of the Witnesses being positive that they were
never Witnesses to any Seasine given to her, a third deponing he remembered not,
a ^ourth abiding by the Seasine, but deponed it was in Summer, where the
Seasine bear in Winter, was improven, though the Nottar offered to abide by it,
but the Lords refused to Examine him or any extrinsick Witness, in respect the
Seasine had no Warrant in writ, January 9. 1669. Wallace of (...) contra
^l^kerrel. A Seasine propriis manibus by a Father to his Son, reseving his
Fathers Liferent, was found valide against a second Wifes Infeftment in the
same Lands, though granted for a competent Tocher, albeit the Seasine had but
two Witnes^es, and had no Disposition or Precept to Warrant it, but an
Adminicle, viz. a Bond by the Father of the same date, obliging him to warrant
the Seasine, and that it was not a fraudulent ^atent deed, it being Registrate,
nor was it alterable by the Father as a Bairns portion, February 11. 1669.
Buchan contra Taits. SERVICE of Harrage and Carriage in a (...) was ^ound not
due but when demanded within the year, June 27. 1662. Watson contra Eleis.
SERVITVDE of Fail and Divot, Clay and Stone granted in a Muire definitely,
where there was no pas^urage therewith, was found not to hinder the Proprietar
of the Muire to Plew and rive out a part, where there was more le^t then was
like to serve the use of the Servitude ^or ever, yet so as if it should happen
at any time thereafter not to suffice, a part of that riven out should be laid
^ee for the same purpose, in this, respect was had to the public utility, the
whole Muire being otherwise improfi^able* and the restriction was not allowed
till the Muire was actually riven out and pl^wed, June 21. 1667. Watson contra
Fevers of Dunkeir A Servitude of putting over a Miln Damn upon other men's
ground was ^ound not consti^ute without his consent, though he show no
detriment to him thereby, June 22. 1667. Hay of Strowi^ contra Fevers. A
Servitude of common pasturage, though if ordinarily carry Fail and Divot, yet if
by cu^^ome Fail and Divot be excluded and hindered, it is ^ot excluded,
February 15. 1668. Lord of Haining contra Town of Se^kirk. SIMVLATION of a
Gift of E^cheat was inferred upon the Act of Parliament 1592. because the Rebel
was suffered to possess four or five years, in which (...) were patent, albeit
the Donatar obtained g^neral declarator long before, and was himself a lawful
Creditor, and that the Lands were appryzed before the Rebellion, seeing the
Appryzer possessed not but the Rebel, January 9. 1666. Oliphant contra
Drummond. Simulation of a gift of Liferent Escheat, was ^ound probable by the
Superior and Witnesses insert in the gift their oaths, that it was to the
Rebels behove, June 19. 1669. Scot contra Langtoun. Simulation of a gift of
Liferent taken by a party who had bought Lands for securing himself, in respect
the Sellers Escheat was ^^llen, was not inferred by allowing the Expenses of
the Gift in the price of the Land, which the Seller was obliged to warrant,
seeing he did not extend the gift any further than to the Lands bought to
himself, unless it were proven he knew of the other party competing his Right,
that it was perfected before he took the other Disposition of the same Lands,
and thereby was particeps fraudis with the Seller who granted double
Dispositions, 22. 1669. Hamiltoun of Corsse contra Hamiltoun and Viscount of
Frendraught. Simulation of a Gift of Escheat and Liferent was not inferred,
because it was granted to the Rebels Son, who was not in his Family, but had
means of his own, nor that the Father continued in possession for sometime
after Declarator, nor were the members of Exchequer admitted to prove that the
Gift was procured by the Fathers means and moyen, seeing the Son gave Back-bond,
that being satisfied of the debt in the Horning, his own debt and expenses of
the gift, there should be place to the Rebels Credi^ors, and did make Faith at
the passing of the Gift, that it was to his own behove, December 4. 1669.
^^ffrey contra Doctor (...). Simulation of a Gi^t of Li^erent was inferred from
the Rebels obtaining the gift b^ank in the Donatars Name, which being in his
hand and delivered to a Creditor for security of a just debt, the same was
found null even as to him, December 17. 1670. Langtoun contra Scot, A SINGVLAR
SVCCESSOR was not found liable for public burdens imposed by Committees of
Parliament, Ratified in Parliament, July 13. 1664. Grahame of Hiltoun contra
Heretors of Cla^kmannan Shire. SLANDER, Vide Commissaries.
IN A SPECIAL DECLARATOR of Eschea^* the payment of the debt before
denunciation, was ^ound relevant upon the Creditors Oath, but Nullity of the
Horning upon informality of Process was found not relevant, seeing these purged
not the Contempt and Disobedience, in not paying or suspending, February 10.
1663. Montgomrie contra Montgomrie and Lawder; in this case the alleadgea^ce on
the Back-bond granted to the Thesaurer by the Donatar, in favors of the
Creditors, was not found relevant without a second gift or warrant from the
Thesaurer. SP VILZIE was elided by Disposition and Instrument of possession,
though it was omnium bonorum, and no natural possession ^ollowed for two years,
seeing there was no forcible resistance, January 29. 1662, Irwing contra
M^kartnay. In a spuilzie many persons being called as accessory, there being on
others whereby the Defender might prove his Defense, The Lords declared if the
pursuer insisted against them all, they would ordain him first to insist
against the accessories, that such as were assoilzied might be Witnesses,
February 24. 1662. Inter eosdem. Spuilzie of Teinds was not elided by there 15,
and 17. Acts of Parliament 1633. Declaring the Teinds to be the fifth part of
the Rents, and that every Heretor shall have their own Teind until valuation be
intented, December 18. 1662. Lord Balmerino contra the Town of Edinburgh.
Spuilzie no^ being pursued ^ithin three years can only be pursued thereafter as
wrongous intromission, and the parties are not liable in solidum, but if all be
proven intromettors, they are liable equally, as being all presumed to have
equally intrometted, unless the greater intromission of some of them be prove
m, January 17. 1668. Strachan contra Morison. A Spuilzie was not elided by a
poinding, though one offered to make Faith the Goods were another then the
debitors, not being offered by himself, his Servant, or by his Commission,
seeing that party had a Disposition with an instrument of possession, and
several Acts alleged o^ his nat^ral possession, from whom the Goods were
poinded, July 6. 1666. Corbet contra Stirling. Spuilzie of Oxen the Pursuers
had in the Pleugh four months was elided, because the Defenders had
intrometted with them by an order of the Sheri^^, execute by his Officers, as
being stolen Goods, though there was no citation of pa^^ies for obtaining the
warrant, which might be summarly used for recovering of Goods, notwithstanding
of 4. months peaceable possession, unless with the possession the pursuer
should instruct a lawful and onerous Title, as having bought the Oxen in which
case Sentence was found necessary before the possessors were dispossessed, Iu^y
7. 1671. Strachans contra Gordouns. STIPENDS of Ministers affect the Teinds as
a real burden, and all intrometters even these who buy, as Merchands buying the
whole. Teind of a Man's Land for a year* so that they cannot pretend payment
made to the Heretor bona fide, seeing they should know that real burden, June
24. 1662. Vernor contra Brown. Stipends quoad Intrants were found to divide in
two Terms, that the Intrant before Whitsond^y has ^oth Terms, but after
Whitsonday and before Michalmass only one Term, July 24. 1662. W^yms contra
Cunninghame. Stipends were not found to burden and Heretor where there is a
Liferenter living, June 24. 1663. Menzeis contra Lord of Glen^rchie. Stipend
of a Minister reponed shortly after Michalmass as having Presentation,
Collation and Possession before, and wrongously put out, was found not to
prefer him to that years stipend against the lncumbent possessing and serving
the Cure (...) Michalmas bona fide, July 9. 1663. Kirkaldy contra Balcanquel. A
Stipend whereto a Stipendiar was presented at Lambass, and served from thence,
and was admitted shortly after Michalmass, reached not the whole stipend, but
the half, though the Presentation was before Michalmass and the actual service,
seeing the Admission was shortly after, June 7. 1664. Hay contra Collector of
Vaccand stipends. A stipend was found to affect the whole Teinds unbought where
there was not a Locality, and so the Minister might take himself to any Here^or
for his whole free Teind, and not pro rata without prejudice to him to pursue
for Relief, December 3. 1664. Hutcheson contra Earl of Cas^^ls. A Stipend was
found instructed by seven years possession without any Title in Writ, so as to
give a possessory judgment, November 25. 1665. Petrie contra Mitchelson. A
stipend was found to belong to a Minister Transported in January, who continued
preaching till April, and not to his Successors, who was presented before
Whitsonday, but not admitted till L^mbass, none compearing for the Collector of
the vaccand stipends, January 26. 1670. Mcqu^en contra Marquess of Dowglass and
Purves. STOLEN GOODS were ^ound recoverable by the owner, by warrant from the
Sherif^ summarly without citation of the possessors, though they had peaceably
possessed the Gooods four months in that pleugh, unless they had acquired
possession by an onerous Title, July 7. 1671* Strachan^ contra Gordoun^ and
others, Vide Spuilzie.
SVBMISSION betwixt Commissars to the Bishop without any determinat Ish, or
time determined to be filled up, or blank, but generally referring all
controversies that should arise to the Bishop was found valide and not
determined by a year, but a Term was affixed to determine what differences are
now occurring, February 3. 1669. Bosewel contra Lindsay of Wormis^oun.
SVBSTITVTION, Vide Clause. SVCCESSOR LVCRATIVE was not inferred by a
Disposition by a Father to a Son having an elder Brother living, or so
presumed, as lately before gone out of the Country, and so not then alioqui
successurus, February 28. 1662. Hamiltoun contra M^farlane of Kirktoun.
Successor lucrative being alleged by a Disposition of Land by a Father to his
Son in his contract of Marriage for a Tocher paid to the Father, and debts and
Bairns Portions far within the value of the Land, he was not found liable in
solidum, nor yet the pursuer put to a Reduction, but the passive Title was
sustained personaliter in so far as the onerous Cause was less then the
ordinary price at that time, with annualrent since the intenting of the Cause,
June 17. 1664. Ly^n of Mu^resk contra (...). Successor Lucrative was not
inferred by a Disposition, being only to a Nephew, the brother being alive who
was not ^ound alioqui successurus, as in the case of an Oye, November 22. 1665.
Scot contra Bos^w^l of Auchm^eck, Vide Lucrative Successor. A SVMMONS whereof
the Executions appeared visibly new, and the user would not abide by it, was
found not to be transferred, but whether an Inhibition raised on that summons,
would thereby fall, or if warrant might be granted to use new Executions on
that Summons, though year and day was past, and that by special privilege to
validate the Inhibition, was not decided, January 12. 1665. Wilson and
Callender her Spouse contra Summons not being execu^e within year and day from
the date thereof, no process was sustained thereon, July 22. 1665. Row contra
Viscount of Stormont. Summons on an Assignation libelled at the Assignays
instance was not sustained, seeing the date of the Assignation was posterior to
the date of the summons, albeit the Cedent concurred, Novemb^r 15. 1666.
Ab^rcromb^e contra Andersons. A SVPERIOR not being called to a Cognition of
Marches by Arbiters, or legally cited, does not annul the same, but it is but
prejudice to the superior when the Fee shall be in his hand, February 8. 1662.
Lord Torphichan contra A Superior by receiving an Appryzer was found not to
derogat from the Right of Ward in the Superior, though he made no reservation,
seeing it was a necessary Act for him to receive, July 19. 1664. Hospital of
Glasgow contra Campbell. A Superior bound in absolute warrandice against Ward,
having a gift of his own Ward to his own behove, was found not to distress his
Vassals thereby farther then for a proportional part of the composition and
expense^, February 15. 1665. Boid of Penkil contra Tennents of Cars^uth A
Superior was decern^d to receive an Adjudger, though the superior himself had
appryzed and alleged a better right, but the Infeftment to be salvo jur^
(...) and s^o, July 4. 1667. Chein contra Christie. A Superior giving a
disposition of his Vassals superiority, reserving their property, and which
disposition bear that the A^quirer should hold of the superior himself; The
said disposition with the Infeftment thereon was found null, as interponing the
Acquirer betwixt the superior and his vassal, but was sustained as a gift of
Non-entry, in respect it bear an assignation to all the casualities of the
superiority, and the general declarator thereon was found to extend to the
fe^-duties after citation, January 30. 1671. Douglas of K^^head contra his
Vassal. A Superior being charged to receive an Adjudger, was ^ound to have his
option either to receive him for a years rent, or to pay his sums getting
assignation to the adjudication, but ^o that the Land should be redeemable from
the superior for the sums, princ^pal and annualrent contained in the
adjudication, without any sum for composition of Entry, and that the
adjudication was in this as an appryzing by the 36. Act King James 3d. June 10.
1671. Scot of Thirl^stane contra Lord Dru^la^rig. SVPERIORITY of Kirk Lands
annexed to the Crown Anno 1633. reserving the Feu-duties to the Lords of
Erection who consented to the surrender, was ^ound not to be a ground for the
Vassal to force the superior to instruct his consent, but that it is presumed,
July 27. 1662. Watson contra El^is ^* Here Ha^^age and Carrage were excepted to
the King. Superiority and property of the same right coming in the same persons
by distinct means, and they infeft in the superiority, and supplicating the
Lords that they would ordain precepts out of the Chancellary to infeft them in
the property, seeing they could not infeft themselves; The Lords thought that
they might be either infeft upon the Kings precept or their own precept; or
both, November 26. 1668. Daughters of Mo^^oun supplicants.
IN A SVSPENSION a reason of payment by another Co-principal, was not found
requisite to be instantly verified, nor the Defender put to find better
Caution, though it was alleged he was in hazard of breaking, but only to give
his oath de calumnia, July 15. 1665. Vrquhart contra Blair. Suspension of a
Minister was found not to take away his stipend he not being deposed, July 26.
1661. Ker contra Minister and Parochioners of Carrin. Suspension granted on
supplication of all Hornings that should be condescended on, for Relaxation
only and to give personam standi in judgment, without stoping any other
execution, December 7. 1669. Vrquhart supplicant. TACIT RELOCATION was found to
endure for more years, during which it was not quarrelled, not the beneficed
person could expre^ly set together, January 16. 1663. Earl of Errol c^ntra
parochioners of Vry. Tacit Relocation of a Tennent warned, cannot defend ^he
sub-tennent against singular successors, who would only warn natural
Possessors, January 30. 1663. Rickart contra Here the sub-tennent had required
the Tennent to give his Tack for his defense. Tacit Relocation after an expyred
Tack of Teinds was sound interrupted by inhibition, though not used by the
setter of the Tack, but by a third party on a distinct Right, unless the
alleadger of the tacit relocation could condescend upon a right in the setter
of the Tack, that might exclude this pursuit, and he condescending that the
^etter of the Tack was presented as parson, and had seven years peaceable
possession thereby, the same was ^ound sufficient to maintain his Tennent by
tacit relocation, until the Parson took assignation from the pursuer, and so
acknowledged his right, which was found to take away the Tacit Relocation of
the De^ender from that time, though it could not have taken away an unexpyred
Tack, July 18. 1671. Earl of Hume contra Lord of Riselaw. A TACK set by a
debtor to his creditor for seven years for such a Tack-duty expressed, with a
clause to retain his annualrent in the first end, and not to be removed til the
principal were paid, was found valide against an appryzer subsequent as to the
endurance of the Tack, having a definite Ish, and not during the
non-redemption, and that there was a superplus of the Tack-duty above the
annualrent, for which superplus alone the Heretor might have set it, but was
not sustained as to the clause not to remove, which was found personal not
effectual against a singular Successor, June 15. 1664. Thomson contra Reid. A
Tack was found to be no such real Right, as the Back-bond of the receiver
thereof did not oblige his singular Successor, but that the Back-bond being of
the same date, was relevant to qualify the Tack against the singular
successor, which Back-bond bear a Reversion, which was not found needful to be
Registrate, neither was it intimate before to that singular successor, January
8. 1^68. Forbes contra A Tack of Land was found to give the Tennent no right to
any Minerals under the ground, as to Clay for making of Pipes, and that the
Tennent could give no License to any to dig the same, but de natura rei, it was
reserved to the Heretor, with a power to open the same, satisfying the Tennents
damnage, February 15. 1668. Colquhoun contra Watson. A Tack of Teinds set
without consent of the Patron for more than three years, was not found null
simply by the Act 1621, but was valide as to the three years, July 1^. 1668.
Iohnstoun contra Parochioners of H^^^oun. A Tack for four years, and ay and
while sum were paid, was found valide against the Liferenters Assigney,
December 18. 1668. Swintoun contra Brown; Here the Assigney was not found as a
singular successor* as in Rights passing by Infeftment. A Tack of Teinds set
for more than three years without consent of the Patron, was found valide by
his tacit consent and homologation, by taking Right to the Tack, and obtaining
prorogation thereon, January 19. 1669. Earl of Ath^l contra Robertson of
Strowan. A Tack of Teinds for several nineteen years and several life's, was
found not to be past from by the Tacks-mans taking Assignation to another
posterior Tack for a greater duty, or for greater endurance, seeing he did not
take the second Tack originally himself, but purchased it from a powerful party
to prevent his trouble, and did not brook by it, nor pay a greater duty than
was in his first Tack, June 24. 1669. Kenn^dy and More contra Iaffray. A Tack
of Teinds set by an University for a definite space, with an obligement to
renew the same in all time thereafter, was found not effectual after the said
definite time, nor obligatory upon the University, unless it had proceeded upon
a sufficient cause onerous, and albeit the same duty was received by the
University after the (...) time, It was found no homologation of the
obligement, but as brooking per racitam relocationem, July 13. 1669. Old
College of Aberden^ contra the Town of Aberdene. A Tack of a House by word for
a year being fourteen days before the Term, was found not to admit locum
penitentia by giving over within forty eight hours after the taking, but that
the Setter setting again to another, imported acceptance of the overgiving,
though that other possessed not, and the possessor not removing precisely at
the Term, did not liberate the Taker, in respect of the custom of Edinb^rgh
not to remove till six weeks after the Term, January 7. 1670. Ker contra
Dawnie. A Tack g^anted by a Tutor in secur^ty of a sum borrowed for the Pupils
use, having no special Ish, but to endure while the Money (...) paid, was
sus^ained, February 21 1671. Armor contra Lands. A Tack ^o the Tack^ man during
his le^e and the life of his first Heir, was not understood to be his Heir
entered, but that his eldest son having survived him who might have been Heir,
he needed no service for the benefit of a Tack, but that part thereof was
fulfilled, though he never possessed conform, June 17. 1671. Lord Lovat contra
Lord M^donald. Tack Vid^ Clause, December 10. 1661. K^nrosi contra Lord
Hunthil. November 23. 1664. Scot contra Lord Barefoot, etc. TAXATION 1633. was
^ound sufficiently discharged by the discharge of one who was held and repute
Collector, without showing any commission, or being a person in Office,
December 14. 1665. Duke of Hamiltoun contra Lord of Clackmannan. Taxation by a
stent Roll, was found only valide as to the Taxation it self imposed, but
without power to add any thing for future expenses by the stent, but that the
Taxation behoved to be ^ifted gratis, if paid without a charge, and if there
were a charge, the Lords would modifie competent Expenses, but did not allow an
Imposition to be added to the Taxation, December 15. 1666. Lord Colvil contra
Fevers of C^^lross. Taxation 1633. was found discharged by a general discharge
to the Sheriff in the Clerk of Taxations Books, without showing the Sheriffs
Discharge to the particular Heretors, December 6. 1667. Duke of Hamiltoun
contra Taxation was found to affect these contained in the stent Roll, seeing
they conveened not and were stented, albeit if they had conveened they could
have freed themselves, their interest being Teinds wholly allocat to the Kirk,
(...) 17. 1668. Steuart contra A^cheson. Taxation was found not to be due for
^nclosed ground conform to the Act of Parliament, 1661. and that the Act of
Convention could not derogate therefrom, February 29. 1668. Duke of Hamiltoun
contra Maxwel of Mur^ith. Taxation and l^an burden not singular successors,
June 25. 1668. Inglis contra Balfour. Taxation was ^ound not to be due by the
Director and Writers in the Chancellary as Depen^ents on and Members of the
College of Justice, January 22. 1669. Collector general of the Taxations
contra the Director of the Chancellary. The Officers of the Mint were also
found free by a late exemption eodem di^. Taxation appointed to be uplifted by
Magistrates of Burglis was found only to oblige these who were Magistrates of
the Burgh for the time personally by their office, and that the Town nor
subsequent Magistrates were not liable for what they uplifted and made not
count for* June 2^. 1669. Pearson of Balmadie contra Town of Mountress.
Taxation imposed Ann^ 1665. giving abatement of a third to the temporality of
the Westeth Shires, was found to extend to the Kings Property there, July 14.
1669. Duke Hamiltoun contra the Fevers of the Kings property. TEINDS though
valide were found not to be debitum fundi affecting singular successors, (...)
20. 1662. Earl of Callander contra Monro. Teinds were found not to affect the
Heretor where there was a Liferenter, June 24. 1663. (...) contra Lord of
Glenrchie. The privilege of being Teind free competent to the Cyst^rtian
order, and the like to Templers and Hospitallers as to Lands in their own
Labourage, was ^ound competent not only to the Temporal Lords of Erection; but
to their Vassals, July 15. 1664. Crawfoord contra Lord of Prestoungrange.
Teind fish was found due by the Merchants who bought the fish immediately as
they were taken in whole Boatfuls, in the same way as if they had intrometted
with the whole cropped upon the ground, they would be liable for the Teind,
December 13. 1664. Bishop of the Is^es contra Merchants of Edinburgh. Teinds
were found due paroch^ notwithstanding of the Kings Gift, unless Mortification
or Possession thereof were proven, June 27. 1665. Ferguson contra Steuart of
A^heog. Teinds may not be drawn summa^y upon Inhibition, where they were in
Tack, and not drawn immediately before, but a Decree must preceed the drawing,
and therefore parties having a colorable Title, the Teinds being so drawn,
obtained ed Restitution, January 21. 1665. Lairds of Bairfoot and Bei^stoun
contra Visco^nt of Kingstoun.
Teind being by long custom paid only as to the half Teind, Viz. the 20t^.
Lamb, the Heretor or Possessor was not found liable ^s to bygones for any more,
February 11. 1665. Scot of Thirlestoun contra Scot of ^roadmeadow. Teind of
Herring, Killings and Ling taken in and about the Isles, as the patrimony of
the Bishop of the Isles, was ^ound not to extend to Killing and Ling, taken by
the inhabitants betwixt Arran and Hesay, they proving immemorial possession
free of any Teind, November 24. 1665. Bishop of the Isles contra fishers of
Greenock. Teinds were found not taken away by a Decree of Parliament,
ordaining the Titular to ^ell upon payment of such a price, it never being
offered, so that the Teinds remained due till it were paid or offered, and
upon refusal consigned, February 2^. 1669. Earl of Kin^ardin contra Lord of
Ros^yth. Teinds of a Paroch were found to belong to the Prebendats of the
Chappel-Royal, without any other Title but the Books of assumption, and three
Presentations by the King, and that forty years possession by the Minister did
not infer Prescription against the Kings Chapel in respect of the Kings
interest and Act of Parliament, declaring the Kings interest not to be
prejudged by the neglect of His Officers, but the said long possession was
found sufficient to the Minister for all years preceding the citation,
February 1. 1671. Ferguson contra Parochioners of Kingarth. THE TENOR of an
interdiction being pursued, the production of the Letters of Publication was
found a sufficient adminicle, seeing such Writs use not to be retired as Bonds,
July 26. 166^. Lord of Milntoun contra Lady Milntoun. Tenors of Writs proven
before inferior Judges was found null, January 28. 1663. Lord of Balnagoun
contra Mackenzie. Tenor of a Registrate Bond admitted to be proved by reply,
was not found sufficiently instructed, by an Extract under the English hands
that kept the Registers at London, though his Oath was taken Anno 1658. That
it was a true Extract, July 27. 1665. Captain Muire contra Frazer. Tenor of a
Contract of Marriage containing Clauses extraordinary, as that the half of the
Man's money should befall to the Wife in case there were no Heirs betwixt them,
was not sustained without Adminicles in Writ, albeit the Tenor of it was insert
in the style Book of him that Wrote it, and the Tenor was offered to be proven
by the Writer and Witnesses insert, and though it was offered to be proven that
the Husbands whole means came by the Wife, June 13. 1667. ^arrower contra
Hartlay. TERCE was found not to extend to a Bond bearing a clause of Annualrent
without Infeftment had followed, June 24. 1663. Scrymzeor contra Murrayes. A
Terce was not found taken away by an Infeftment in Lifer^nt, not bea^ing in
satisfaction of the Terce, albeit the Liferent was competent and suitable to
the parties condition, and there was never a Contract extended betwixt them but
a Minute* January 27. 1666. Cri^^toun and Eleis her Spouse contra Maxwel of
Kirkhouse. A Terce was found not to extend to Teinds not constitute by
Infeftment, but was found to extend to a grass yeard let to Tennents, it not
being a Garden or Orchyard, as pertinent of a Tower or Fortalice, February 9.
1667* Moncreif contra Tennents of N^wtoun and Zeaman. Vide base Infeftment,
Bell of Belfoord contra A Terce was found to be excluded by a Wifes acceptance
of Land in satisfaction of her Terce, albeit a part of the Lands accepted
proved ineffectual to her, her ^nfeftment by her Husband, not having been
confirmed by the Superior, who was preferr^d to her, and the acceptance was
found a simple Renunciation, competent to the Superior to exclude the Terce,
and that she could brook no part ^f the Land by virtue of her Terce, and that
the Superiors founding upon the clause accepting Lands in satisfaction of the
Terce, did not import his approbation of her Right to the Lands accepted, seeing
she wanted the Superiors consent, as being an essenti^l requisite to her
Infeftment of Ward Lands, and so could admit of no Homologation more than if
she had only the contract without any Infeftment* This was stopped to be farther
heard, whether the Relict might brook, at least a third of the Ward Lands
accepted as a Ter^e of these Lands, though she could not brook the whole Ward
Lands accepted, being within a Terce of all her Husbands Ward Lands especially
since the Clause bear that she accepted the Li^erent Lands in satisfaction of
all farther Conjunct fees, but should be repu^^ed a Terce as being in lieu of
all farther Terce* whether in that case she renunced only the Terce of any other
Lands, bu^ not the Terce of the Lands accepted, June 23. 1671. Lady Ba^^^agan
contra Lord Drumlanrig. THE TERM OF PAYMENT of Bairn^ p^rtions (...) at such
a^^ age, the same was found as dies (...) qui pro condition habetur, and they
not attaining that ^ge their nearest of Kin had no right, January 17. 1665.
Edgar contra Edgar. A TESAMENT Nuncupative by a Scotsman made in England or
abroad where he resided, was found null as to the nomination of Succession,
notwithstanding the Law of the place, which rules only as to the Solemnities of
Writs, but not to Substantials or appoynting of Successors, January 19* 1665.
Schaw contra Lennox. A Testament containing a Legacy of a Wodset was sound
void, though it was done (...) pr^^inctu bel^i, February 21. 1663. Wardlaw
contra Frazer of Kilmundy. A Testament confirmed, bea^ing persons to be
nominate Tutors, and that they compeared judicially, accepted, made Faith, and
found Caution, was found not sufficient to defend against a Reduction, without
production of the Tutors Subscription, as the warrant to make the Tutor liable
for the Pupils means conform to the Inventary, unless there were other
adminicles to astruct the same, albeit the confirmation was thirty seven years
since, seeing the acceptance was no ordinary act of process, nor no process was
moved upon the confirmation till of late, Ia^uary last 1665. Kirktoun contra
Lord of Hunthil. A Testament confirmed was found to be execute at the
Executors instance by a Decree, though he had not obtained payment, an^ though
he was Executor dative and a mee^ stranger, so that after the Executors death,
the sums in the Decree could not be confirmed by an Executo^ ad non executa of
the first Defunct, November 17, 1666. Doun^e contra Young. A Testament was
reduced because the Testator being alleged not to be compos ment^s, the
Nottar, Written and Wi^nesses insert, and other extra^eous Witnesses deponed,
that about the time of the Testament and thereafter the Testator was not* in
his right mind, and to every question that was proposed, answered always yea,
yea, although they were not present at the making of the Testament, and were
contrary to the Witnesses insert, this was stoped to be further heard, June 9*
1668. Meall^xander contra Dalrymple. A Testament beginning in the ordinary
style of a Testament, and then disponing Land, thereafter containing a blank,
wherein by another ink and hand* the Defuncts eldest daughter was named
universal Legatrix and Executrix, but after all the movables were dispon^d to
the eldest Daughter, which Testament being quarrelled by reduction, was found
null as to the disposition of the Lands, and as to the nomination of the
Executor and Legatar, the same was not sustained though filled up before the
Defuncts death, albeit it was offered to be proven by the Nottar and W^tnesses
insert, that the Defunct gave warrant so to fill it up, but it was sustained as
to the disposition of the movables as a Legacy, in so far as the Defunct could
Legate, which may subsist though the nomination of the Executor be wanting or
void, July 13. 1670. Daughters of So^ityay contra the eldest daughter.
Testament Vide clause December 15, 1668. Windrham contra El^is* THIRLAGE was
found constitute by long custom of payment of Intown Multure in mollendino
reg^o, but was not extended to the Te^nds of that Barony though possessed
promiscu^ far above fou^ty yea^s, without more then custom, and was not
excluded by the Fevers of the Barony their Feus granted by the King cum
mollendini^ and mul^uri^ in the tene^das only, which was thought but past in
the Exchequer of course without observation* January 8. 1662. Steuart contra
the Feua^s of Aberledno; The like without allowing any part of the cropped
multure free for expenses of labor, and Hinds-corn, but only the Seed,
Horse-corn and Teind, January 14. 1662. Nicolson contra F^uars of Tillicutrie.
Thirlage was sound constitute by an old Decree against the Tennents
possessors, without a calling their Master, and long possession conform
thereupon, albeit the Heret^r was Infe^t cum mollendi^^^^* and that Witnesses
being examined hinc inde conce^ning the possession and interruption, by going
sometimes to other Mi^ns were proven, yet not so frequently as might not be
Olandestine, June 24* 1665. Colonel Montgomerie contra W^lla^e and R^ie.
Thirlage was inferred where the Fever of the Miln was Infeft in the Miln with
the mul^ures of the Lands in question per expressum, and was in possession of
insuck^n Multure thereof forty years, albeit the Defende^ was infeft before,
without the burden of astriction, and did sometimes go to other m^^ns, which
being frequent in all astrictions, was found not to be a competent interruption
June ^9, 1665. Hereto^ of the Miln of K^thick contra Feuars. Thirlage was
infe^red by infeftment of a miln with the multures etc. generally, with a
precept from a Bishop then Heretor of the Lands in question, ordaining his
Tennents to pay their multu^es to that miln, which with long possession was
found sufficient* albeit it had no consent of a Chapter, December 7* 166^,
V^^tch contra Duncan. Thirlage being constitute by an infeftment from him who
(...) of Land and Miln, was found no to be prejudgeed upon the alleged
insu^^^ciency of the Miln, unless the insufficiency were alleged to be
through the fault of the Hereto^ of the Miln, February 9, 1666. Heretors of
(...) contra Fe^ars.
Thirlage was not Inferre^ by an infef^ment of ^ands with such a miln and the
multures used and wo^t, which was not extended to L^nds of another Barony
^olden of another Superior, though they then belonged to the Dispone^, and
were in use to come to that miln, December 11* 1666. Earl of Cassils contra
Tennents of Dalmortoun. Thirlage though constitute by a Vassal, has no e^^ect
against the Superior during the Vassals Ward, unless the superior consented,
neither is his consent inferred by his receiving an Assignay to the Appryzing
with reservation of the multures in the assignation, unless that reservation
had been in the Charter, Ibidem. Thirlage in a Vassals Charter to the
Supe^iours miln, was ^ound not to infer multures upon the Vassal, though he
moved his Tennents to come to his own miln, and got a g^ea^er duty therefore,
but that the Tennents were only liable personally for abs^racting, December 10,
1667. Earl of Cassils contra sheriff of ^alloway and Tennents of A^^hn^troch.
Thirlage constitute by infeftment bea^ing mult^res and sequels, was found that
the ordinary miln-se^vices to the miln damn and miln sto^^es was included in
the right, unless by paction or pres^ription the same was taken away, February
27* 1668. Mai^land contra L^^^y. TOCHER being proportionable and suitable to
the parties, was ^ound a cause o^erous ad (...) December 23* 1665. Burnet
contra Lepers. TRADS-MEN in Suburbs were ^ound not to be simply excluded from
working in Subu^bs of Burg^^s by the ^54* Act Par. 1592, but that they should
not work to the ^nhabitan^s of the Burgh* December 4. 1669. Weavers of Pearth
contra Weavers of the Bridgend of Pearth. TRANSACTON was not inferred by giving
a Bond for the same sum in the Decree and Chap^^on thereupon, se^ng there was
no abatement obtained, July 3. 1668. Row contra Houstoun. TRANSFERRENCE of an
old Summons was stoped, where the first Executions were new and not abidden by,
January 12* 1665. Wilson and Chalmers contra Transferrence of a Cause that had
lien long over, was found sufficient to give Process in the principal Cause
and not to require any other Walkning, February 20. 1666. Lord Saltoun contra
Saltoun and Rothimay. TRUST of an assignation to the Cedents behove, was found
proven by Witnesses ex officio upon presumptions, the matter having lien long
over, and it being instructed that the assignation was never delivered to the
Assigney, but in the hands of the Writer, and some missives were adduced to
instruct the Trust, though not proven holograph but by comparison of some other
writs, February 22* 1665. Viscount of King ^toun contra Colonel Eull^rtoun*
Trust inst^^cting a Bond to be to another ^arties behove by presumption was
sustained, January 12, 1666. Executors of Stevinson contra Crawfo^rd. Trust in
a di^position of Lands being to prevent the rigor of Creditors, the person
entrusted was found to have no power to receive more of the debts componed for
than he truly paid, albeit there was no express Trust as to componing or
paying of su^s, November 15. 1667. Maxwel contra Maxwell. Trust of an
Assignation to the behove of a third party, was found where the assignay
acknowledged that he received the assignation from that party on their Terms,
that what ^^e should get by it should be allowed in a Decree due to him by
that party, which therefore was found to make the assignation to the parties
behove, though ^t was not acknowledged that that party had the Assignation
blank, and therefore an obligement by that party to relieve the Debtor of the
deb^, was found equivalent to a Discharge and to exclude the Assignay, December
7* 1666. Mont^^^th ^ontr^ Lord of Glorre^. Trust Vide Diligence, December 18.
1666. Casse contra Want. Trust was found probable not only by Writ or Oath of
party, but also by Evidences and Adminicles, whereupon Witnesses ex officio
were Examined, February 6. 1669. Ru^e contra Rule. Upon Trust of an Assignation
to an Appryzing, Witnesses, ex officio were Examined on all Circumstances,
February 24. 1669. Earl of Annanda^l contra Hume and other Creditors of Hume.
Trust in Bonds and personal Righ^s were found not ^o constitute the sums in
bonis defuncti in the entrusted person, but that the Trust might be proven by
Writ against the nearest of kin of the entrusted person, and against the
debtor for making payment, without necessity of confirming the Bond that was
in the name of the entrusted person, Iu^e 9* 1669* Street contra Hume of
Br^^^field. Trust of a Gift of Escheat to be to the behove of the Vassal, was
^ound probable by the Witnesse^ inser^ in the Gift and the Superiors o^th June
19. 1669. Scot contra Langt^^n. Trust of a Disposition of Land for payment of
the instrusted person, and then of the intruste^s Creditors, some of whom had
appryzed from him and were infeft, the person entrusted was not found in
capacity to pay other Cieditors, and prefer them to these who had done more
timely Diligence, though the Inhibition and Appryzing was not against the
Entrusted person, July 24. 1669. Crawfoord contra Anderson. A TVTORS oath was
found not relevant to prove a condi^ion or agreement with the Defunct against
the Pupil, though there were concurring probabilities and Testifica^es December
7. 166^. Ecles contra Ecles. Tutor Vide Assignay, Ramsay contra Earl of
Wintoun. A Tutor or his Assignay was found to have no process against his Pupil
(...) his Tutor compts were ended, ex presumptione juris, that the Assignation
was procured by the Pupils means and to his behove, Iu^y 24. 1662. Cranstoun
contra Earl of Wintoun. A Tut^ix her Assignation though not formal, bearing the
Tutrix as taking burden for the Pupil and not the Pupils name also Assigning,
yet was sustained, June 17. 1664. Justice contra Earl of Queen^berry. A Tutor
was not found liable for annualrent of his Pupils annua^rent of considerable
sums from the several years they were due, but that once in his Tutory he was
obliged to uplift the same, though in secure Creditors and great men's hands,
and that he was obliged to pay or reimploy them at the end of his Tutory, and
so was found liable for the annualrent of the annualrent a finita tutela,
though it was not uplifted, January 21. 1665. Kintor contra Boyd. A Tutory was
found not to be instructed by a confirmation bearing, that the Tutor accepted
and made Faith, without Warrant under his hand, or some Adminicles to astruct
it, though the Confirmation was thirty seven years since, January 31. 1665.
Kirktoun contra Lord of Hunthill. A Tutor was not found proven by his
discharging as Tutor Testamentar, where by the Testament it was evident he was
but Overseer, June 10. 1665. Swintoun contra Notman. A Tutors oath was found
valide against the Pupil, as to the Tutors intromission in name of the Pupil,
yet so that the Tutor deponing that he did not remember the quantity and price,
he was not holden as con^est as if he were a party, but might be compelled by
Horning and Caption to Depone as a Witness, June 27. 1665. Cant contra Lock. A
Tutor was found liable to uplift his Pupils annua^rents, and to re-imploy them
sometime during the Tutory, and therefore was sound liable for annualrent of the
same post (...) tutelam, but if he dyed within the Tutory, he was not found
liable for annualrents of annu^lrents, being in secure hands but not uplifted,
July 4. 1665. Boyd contra Kintore A Tutor pursuing a Mother for delivery of her
Daughter his Pupil to be Educate with some of her Fathers Friends, having a
great portion out of his Estate, that she might not be abused in her Marriage
by her Mother or her Friends; the same was sustained after the Pupils age of
eleven years, though the Mother was unmarried and the Daughter vali^udinary,
February 6. 1666. Lord of Dury contra Lady Dury. A Tutor was found to have a
year to employ sums not bearing annualrent, and not to be obliged to uplift
sums where the Pupil was fully secured, or where on a sudden the Debtor break,
but was found liable for all Diligence according to the Debitors condition by
Horning, Caption, Arrestment, Poinding and Appryzing of the Debitors Estate,
which should be known to him, and not for Horning only, July 9. 1667. Ste^in
contra Boyd. In a Tutor count the Tutor was not found liable for the Services
he got to the Pupils Tennents in kind, and that where he was super-expended, a
Decree might be at his instance against the Pupil on the Pupils own Process,
January 11 1668. Grant contra Grant. A Tutor was found liable to count as Tutor
and not as Pro-Tutor, on production of a Writ under his hand, designing himself
and acting as Tutor Testamentar, without necessity to the Pursuer to produce
the Testament, December 2. 1668. S^atoun contra S^atoun. A Tutor was found
liable for the Annualrent of his Pupils sums, which were in responsal Debitors
hands, but not to re-imploy the same upon annualrent, in respect the Tutor dyed
durante tutela, and that what annualrents he had received, his Successors were
only liable for the same, and the annualrent thereof from the time the Pupil
past pupillarity, it being sufficient to lift and employ the annualrents of
Pupils sums at any time during the ordinary course of the Tutory, after the
Pupils passing pupillarity, July 9, 1669. Kintor contra the Heirs and
Successors of Logan of Coatfi^ld* This was stopped on the Pur^uers Bill, till
it were further heard upon the grounds of the first Decision. A Tutor having
cited his Pupils Friends on both sides, that ^t might be declared by the Lords
that the Pupils Lands were ^racked above the true value, and that they were not
able to pay their Rents without casting the Land waste, no party appearing, the
Process being considered by the Lords, they granted Commission to Gentlemen in
the Country to try the matter of Fact and report, February 5. 1670. Tutor of
colz^an contra nearest of kin of the Pupil.
A Tutory granted to two, and bearing them to be jointly, was found void by the
death of either, January 17. 1671. Drummond of Riccartoun contra Feuars of
Bothkenneth. TVTOR DATIVE of a furious person was found not to exclude the
nearest Agnat as Tutor of Law to be served quandocunque, though the Idiot was
necessitate to pay upon the Tutors citation to make forthcoming, January 21.
1663. Mr. James Steuart and Robert his Tutor Dative contra Spreul. V^^^MUS
HAERES being gifted, was found to have no effect till there be be a declarator
thereupon in the same way as in Bastardy, July 30. 1662. Lord of Balnagoun
contra Dingwall, The like July 31. 1666. Crawfoord contra Town of Edinb. USE OF
PAYMENT of a duty to a Minister for Teinds, and his discharge for the whole
Teinds for a long time, was found sufficient against him who had the Tack and
Prorogation of these Teinds, until interruption by Citation or Inhibition,
though the duty was very small, and the Minister was but stipendia^ having that
quantity allocat out of these Teinds, January 19. 1669. Earl of Athol co^tra
Robertson of Strowan. VSVRY was not inferred by a Creditors taking a Tack for
his further, security, for so much Victual, or 20. shilling less than the (...),
at the setters option, that abatement being for the setters pains and hazard in
getting in the price, November 23. 1664. Scot contra Lord of Barefoord.
VICCARAGE was not found due out of Yeards which were apar^ of the Chanons
Portions, which had never paid Viccarage, June 30. 1668. Minister of Elgin
contra his Pa^ochioners. THE VIOLENT PROFITS of an Ox Sp^ilzied in Laboring
time, was found to be 5. shilling every day during the Laboring time, February
28. 1668. Lord Justice Cle^k contra Hume of Linthil. VITIATION of a Contract of
Marriage diminishing the Tocher and Ioyntu^e by the Husband and Father after
the marriage, was found not to prejudge the Wife who consented not, but her
Right was extended as before the Vitiation, in prejudice of the Husbands
Creditors infeft by him, albeit the Contract being Registrate, the Vi^^ation
could not not appear to the Creditors when they lent their Money, June 11.
1670. Hunter contra The Creditors of Peter. VITIOVS INTROMISSION was not ^lided
because the Defunct dyed Rebel at the Horn, and so there was nothing in bonis
defuncti, unless the Defender alleged he had the gift of Escheat ante motam
litem, February 17. 1662. Gray contra Dalgarno. Vicious Intromission was
retrinched to single avail, because the Defender entered in possession by a
disposition of the movables, though no delivery or possession was in the
Defuncts life, February 27. 1662. Chalmers contra Dalga^no. Vicious
Intromission was purged by the Intrometters confirming within year and day
after the Defuncts death, the Executry being his Wifes, albeit after intenting
of the pursuers cause, January 28. 1663. Stevinson contra Ker and others.
Vicious Intromission was purged by a Disposition and Instrument of Possession
in the Disponers Lifetime, though the Defender judicially acknowledged there
was no natural possession, July 6. 1664. Brown contra Lawson. Vicious
Intromission was not sustained after the Intrometters death, against any
representing him, where there was nothing done to instruct it in his Life,
further than Quo ad val^rem, but not as an universal passive Title, July 10.
1666. Cranstoun contra Wilkison. Vicious Intromission was elided, because the
Intrometter had warrant from the Donator of the Defuncts Escheat* though there
was no Declarator, seeing the Warrant and Intromission was ante notam litem.
July 4. 1665. Innes contra Watson. Vicious Intromission was not inferred by
intrometting with 50. pound, the Intrometter having after his Intromission
confirmed himself Executor, and omited that sum, but was only found liable for
the sum it self, February 26. 1668. R^oth contra Cowan. Vicious Intromission
was found not receivable by Defense against an Assignay, viz. That the Cedent
who was Creditor to a Defunct, was vicious Intrometter with his goods and so
Debtor, the Assignation being for an onerous cause, January 20. 1671. Captain
Ramsoy contra Henrison. WARD was found not to fall by the death of an Appryzer
who had Charged, unless he had put the Superior in culpa, by prese^ting a
Charter to be subscribed by him, and offering a Sum with a Bond, and Caution
for what more the Lords should modifie for that years Rent, and that therefore
the Ward fell by the death of him against whom the appryzing was led, February
9. 1669. Black contra French. Ward being gifted by the King, the Donat^r was
found to have interest to call for production of the Defender her Sister ^^d
Fathers Retoures only, for instructing of what was Ward, and not their other
Evidents, December 20. 1669. Earl of Rothes contra Tutors of Buccle^gh. Ward
was found to take no place where the Defunct was denuded by an Appryzing and
the Appryzer infeit, albeit the appryzing was on a Bond granted to his Mother,
to the be^ove of her Son, which was not found to be a fraudulent precipitation
to exclude Ward, it being granted in the Defuncts liege pouftie, but so soon as
the Appryzing was satisfied either in the Defuncts time or after his death, the
Ward of the Defunct's Heir took effect, July 20. 1671. Lindsay of Mo^nt contra
Maxwel of Kirkonnel. A Ward was not found to give Right to the Donatar, to
cause an Appryzer Restrict to as much of the Rent as will satisfy his
ann^alrent, that the Donator might have the superplus, by the Clause in the Act
of Parliament 1661. betwixt Debtor and Creditor, which was only found proper
and personal to the Creditor and his Heir, Inter eosdem. Ward and Marriage of a
party killed in the late War, was found not to be taken off by the Act of
Parliament 1640. Declaring the Ward and Marriages of these that should die in
that Service not to fall, which Service was found to terminate by the next
Pacification Ann^ 1641. here parties were agreed, so that it was not acuratly
debated, or determined whether the salvo in the Act resc^nding these
Parliaments during the Troubles, except as to private Rights acquired thereby,
would reach to the exemption of Ward and Marriage by the Act 1640. being held
an exemption during all the Troubles, should be so interpret now, which was
not proposed, July 28. 1671. Hadden contra Lord of Glenegi^s. WAKNING was not
^ound necessary, where upon hearing parties Decre^ts were pronunced, though it
was sto^ed upon a Bill, and lay several years over* which stop imports not a
recalling of the D^creet, but a stoping the Extracting of it till the parties
might be heard upon the grounds of the Bill, July 1. 1671. Brodit of L^th^m and
the La^ of Ri^cartoun contra the Lord Kenmuire. WARNING was sustained at an old
Kirk, albeit Divine Worship was at a new Kirk not Erected by Parliament, or
though Erected, if Hornings and Inhibitions used to be at the old Kitk, January
24* 1667. Earl of Arg^le contra Campbel. Warning not bearing that it was read
at the Kirk door in ordinary time of Divine Service, was admitted to be so
mended at the Bar, January 25. 1667. Inter eosdem. Warning at the Kirk and
House was sustained on fourly days, though the party warned was out of ^he
Country, the Act of Parliament anent Warning requiring no further, February
20. 1666. Mcbrair contra. WARRANDICE was ^ound employed of a Legacy in realiena
scienter legata, June 18. 1664. Murray contra Executors of Rutherfoord.
Absolute Warrandice was ordained to be contained in assignations of Bonds for
an equivalent Cause, as the price of goods, and that it should bear expressly,
not only that the debts were due, but that the debtor was solvendo, June 24.
1664. Moffat contra Black. Warrandice being absol^te in an Assignation by a
Creditor to a Cautioner, that he might get his relief, bearing (against all
deadly as Law will) was found not to extend to the Debitors being solvendo,
June 26. 1664. Hajcontra Nicols^n. Absolute Warrandice was found employed in a
Contract of Marriage, wherein a Mother as Executor gave such a sum in full
satisfaction of a Daughters interest, and that only to warrant against the
Defuncts seperveening Debt, as to the superplus above the sum accepted by the
Daughter, but simply for all the portion, unless the Mother would count for all
her Daughters share, November 16. 1664. Fleming contra Fleming and her Spouse.
Warrandice was found to give recourse, though th^re could be no present
distress, seeing there was a clear ground of further distress by the warranders
own deed, granting double dispositions, July 1^. 1666. Bur^et contra Iohnsto^^.
Warrandice absolute in a disposition of Lands, was found to extend to warrant
Lands designed for a Horse and Cows Grass by a subsequent Law, albeit the Law
extended in self as if it had been of a former date with another abroga^ Law,
seeing these Laws did differ from the former* and did not revive it, July 12.
1667. Watson contra Law. Warrandice being special by Infe^tment, though base
and ex intervallo, and after the principal In^eftment, is effectual for
recourse, without declarator, and being cled with possession of the principal
Lands, and can only be excluded by a possessory judgment upon 7* years after
the eviction, but by no possession how long soever before the eviction,
February 20, 1668. Forbes contra Innes. Warrandice in a Disposition bearing the
seller holds Ward, that therefore he should warrant the buyers, who were to
^old Few of him, and to relieve them of any Ward that should thereafter fall,
which was ^ound to be effectual against the Sellers Heir, though denuded of the
Superiority, and not to burden the present Superior, July 18. 1668. Colquhoun
contra St^uart of Bars^ub. Warrandice in whatsoever Terms conceived, was found
to extend no furt^er than the sums paid out, and the expenses of the party*
January 26. 1669. Boil of Kelburn contra Wilkie.
A WIF'S Contract of marriage was found a debt (...) to other personal
Credi^ors of the Defunct, Febru^ry 8. 1662. Crawfoord contra Earl of Murray. A
Wi^e and her friends at whose instance execution of her Contract was provided,
was admitted to pursue a Reduction of a deed done by the Husband in prejudice
thereof du^ing ^is life, February 12. 166^. Leck^^ contra (...). A Wife was
found conveenable without calling the Husband, he being 20. years out of the
Country, and she repute widow, June 19. 1663. Hay contra Corstorphin. A wifes
oath was found to prove against the Husband, where the matter was litigious, by
a process against the Wife before her marriage, July 19. 1663, Edgar contra
Murray. A Wifes infeftment was found valide till her Tocher were repaid, albeit
the Marriage was disolved w^thin year and day, Iu^y 20. 1664. Petrie contra
Paul. A wifes furnishings even for her mournings for her husbands funerals,
being of that quality that should have mourning, was found not to be the wifes
debt but the husbands executors, November 2. 1664. Murray contra Ne^lson. A
wifes infeftment Stant^ martrimonio being (...) and beside her Contract, was
found not to be validat by her husband possession, that his Creditors might not
quarrel it by exception, it being anterior to the infeftment, December 7. 1664.
Lady Craigie and Greenhead contra Lord Lour, Vide Clause, December 20. 1664.
Young contra Buchannan. A wife having her husbands bond in her hand, and
impignora^ing in (...) 100. pound, it was sustained against the husband, upon
presumption of her having warrant by having the bond, February 4. 1665.
Paterson contra Pringle. A w^^es infeftment in liferent was sustained by her
Seasine, adminiculat by her Contract of Marriage, albeit the sealine was not
immedia^ly on the Contract but related a bond granted for the same cause, which
was not produced, I^ne 29. 1665. Norvel contra Steuart. A wi^e was ^ound not to
be excluded from her liferent, because her To^lier was not paid, she not being
obliged therefore, albeit the Contract bear, that the Tocher being paid it
should be so applied upon security, July 5. 1665. Mack^^ contra Steuart. A wife
was not found liable to her husbands creditors appryzing his j^s meri^^, for
the Rent of Houses possessed by her self for their aliment, as to years
preceding the intenting of the Ca^se, December 7. 1665. Smith and Duncan
c^ntra Robertson. Here the Creditors had access to the wifes other Tenements,
though the husband shortly after his marriage left the Country, and the wife
had obtained D^^reet of adherence and was proceeding to divorce. A wifes
obligation with her husband for a firm obliging them to pay conjunctly and
severaly, and also obliging to (...) an annualrent out of either of their
Lands* was found null as to the obligement to infeft even as to the wife,
De^^mber 15. 1665. Bleis contra Keith. A wifes renunciation of a part of her
jointure after her contract of marriage and first proclamation, was reduced as
being done without consent of her husband, albeit the husband knew of the (...)
and yet went on in the marriage, and albeit he was an unsuitable match to her,
and that not only as to the husbands interest and during his life, but also
simply as to the wife, Ia^^ary 5. 1666. Lady Bu^e and her husband contra
Sheriff of (...). A wife was found not to have interest to pursue the Defuncts
Debi^ors for her half, but only the Executors* December 15. 1667. Lady Cranburn
contra Lord Bu^ley and others. A wifes account of furniture for her person
subscribed by her, was found valid^, albe^t she was then married and a ^^i^^or,
without instructing the goods received and just price, she being p^rsona
illustris, and the account not great for her own furniture, February 20. 1667.
(...) contra Duchess of Monmouth. A wi^e cled with a husband was found liable
for drugs furnished to her and her children at her command, ^he having a
peculiar Estate, wherefrom her husband was excluded, and he being ou^ of the
country, December 19. 1667. Gairn^ contra Arthur. A wife acquiring Lands, was
found not to presume that the same were acquired by the husbands money, and to
belong to him and his heirs, unless it were instructed that she had heretables
or other sum^ exempted a commun^one (...), especially seeing the wi^e dispo^ed
her Lands to another, and her husband as Baillie of the Burgh gave Seasine
thereon, January 29. 1668. Brown contra Nappi^land. A wife predeceassing, her
third of her husbands movables was found not ^o comprehend the best of ilk
kind, but that it ^el^oved to be l^^ aside as heirship moveable, wherein the
wife had no interest, December 8. 1668. Go^^^et contra N^ir^, though the
husband was al^ve and could then have no heir. A wife in he^ cont^act of
marriage having discharged and renu^ced (...) here^able sum due to her in
favors of her debitors, who gave a new heretable security of the same date to
her ^uture spo^se, the wif^ having made her husband her Executor and Lega^ar,
and dying within year and day, the discharge and renunciation g^anted in
favors o^ a third party, was found not ^o be (...) by the dissolu^ion of the
marriage, but that the old security continued i^^ovar by the new ^ecurity
granted to the husband, who was only obliged to restore the ^um in that
security to his wifes Ex^u^ors, as a moveable obligation* and not to her heir,
and that so it belonged to the husband himself as Executor, Dec. 11. 1668. Scot
con. Ai^on. A wi^e was found to be burdened with her husband^ her^table deb^s,
December 23. 1668. Mckenz^e ^ontra Rober^son. A wi^e purs^ing for her provision
by her con^ract of marriage* which bear, her to be provided to the annualrent
of her Tocher and as much more, the same was sound effectual, and that the wife
was not obliged to instruct that her Tocher was paid, seeing she was no^
obliged for payment thereon in the contract, an^ the husband having only a ^um
provided to himself and his wi^e in life^ent, and after their deceasses to the
man's (...) daughters by a former marriage, the wife having confirmed the same
for implement of her contract, was pr^^erred to the daughters, and their
substi^u^ion was ^ound nu^l by the Act of Parliament 1621. without* reduction,
January 5. 166^. Syms contra Brown. The like before, February 22. 1665. Campbel
contra Campbel. A ^ifes infe^^ment upon her contract of marriage was sustained,
though it bear that the husband should employ the Tocher and an equivalent sum
for the wife in li^erent, albei^ the Tocher was never paid by the Father, not
by the husbands neglect, but by the fathers insolvency from the time of the
con^ract, seeing the husband did not object t^^ same, but granted infeftment,
Ian, 11. 1670. Hunter c^ntra Credi^ors of Pet^r. WITNESSE^ were admitted to
prove setting down of Marches by Arbiters, February 8. 1662. Lord Torph^hen
cont^a. Witnesses were admitted to prove a Warrant and Command, being the
Messengers Domestics and so (...) persons, January, 4. 1663. Ma^^o^n contra
Hunter. Witnesses were admitted to prove the Loan of Books, though far above
100. pound, January 21. 1665. Scots contra Fl^^cher. Witnesses were ^ound to
prove a bargain of Victual a^^er 1^. years time, July 14. 1665. Ma^^h^son
contra Gib. Witnesses Testimonies taken by the Commissars in a Divorce cr^ved
^o be Reduced, was found not to be published, but the Clerk was ordained to
give a Note of their Names, Design^tion, Age and purging of partial Council and
the like, b^t not of the particulars in the cause, January 4. 1666. Lord of
Mil^toun contra Lady Mil^toun. Witnesses were not admitted to prove a Bond
blank in the Creditors Name, delivered to a Desender, to infer an obligement to
re-deliver the same, February ^0. 1667. Iohnstoun contra Iohnstoun. Witnesses
were found to prove Adultery, albeit their Testimonies were not of the same
individual Act at the same time and place, Adultery being crimen genericum
inferred by re^^erable Acts, and though neither of the Witnesses knew the Woman
with whom the Adultery was committed, but heard her named at the time they saw
the Acts by the Adulterers servant, and that some other Witnesses knew that she
was not the Adulterers Wife, February 25. 1667. Lady Milntoun contra Lord of
Milntoun* Witnesses Testimonies were found not to be in^ringed upon theirown
re-examinaton in a second instance, as being suborned or corrupted post ^us
acquisi^un^ by the first sentence* albeit in the first Testimonies they were
not purged of partial Council, Ibidem. Witnesses were found sufficient to prove
a ^argain to have been anterio^ to a Writ, and that Writ was reduced upon that
Sentence as posterior and prejudicial to the bargain, January 21. 1669.
Creditors of Pollock contra Pollock. Witnesses were admitted to prove a
Merchant count as to Articles more then three years preceding the Citation, it
being a cur^ent account, though begun by the Defunct and continued after h^^
deceass by his Funeral provision, and by the Chamber^^^^ of his Heir then a
Pupil, seeing three years interv^e^ed not in any part of the account, February
26. 1670. Grahame contra Lord of Stan^byres. Witnesses were admitted to prove
the v^^iation of a Contract of Marriage, and not to annul it but to extend it
as it was before the vi^iation, June 11. 1670. Hunter contra Creditors of
Peter. Witnesses were admitted to prove intromission with Mails and Duties of
Tennents, though silver Rent, intrometted by one who was infe^t in an
annualrent out of the Tenements, albeit by the intromission, the principal sum
for which the annualrent was constitute, would be satisfied, and the infe^tment
extinct, February 4. 1671. Wishart contra Arthur. Witnesses were admitted to
prove an appryzing to be to the behove of the apparent Heir, in respect of this
concurrent presump^ion, that the appryzing was assigned to the appear and Heirs
brother, February 22, 1671. Gordo^n contra Mcculloch. Witnesses were admitted
to prove^ Ministers possession of ^ands to be by tollerance of an Her^^or, and
^o not ^o be a Gl^ib belonging to the Kirk, where the Ministers possession was
decen^^lis and trien^alis, but that writ was necessary (if his possession ha^t
been for 40. years) to prove the tollerance, June 22. 1671. Minister of contra
Duke of ^al^leugh. WITNESSES EX OFFICIO were received for proving the delivery
of a Bond blank in the Creditors name* the matter being betwixt brother and
sister where Trust was very presum^able, February 21. 1667. Iohnstoun contra
Iohnstoun.
Witnesses were examined ^x officio to prove Warrant or Command to a deed done
in prejudice of him, who had the Commission to do the same deed, and could have
^indered others, February 21. 1667. Lord R^^toun contra Lord of Lambertoun.
Witnesses and the writer of a disposition were examined ex officio on the Terms
of the Treaty, and whether when the writ was read, being an absolute
disposition, it was not read as being redeemable, July 2. 1667. Allan contra
Fairie. Witnesses ex officio being admitted hinc inde, not the greatest
quant^ty proven by two, but the quantity proven most pregnantly, was followed,
November 23. 1667. Lord Justice Clerk contra Lord of Lambertoun. Witnesses ex
officio were examined to instruct the cause of a Bond to be by arbitriment and
exorbitant, it being 37. years dorment without annualrent, and the sum filled
up with a different hand, February 6. 1668. Chis^holm contra Witnesses taken ex
officio proving the employing of a Wright in his wo^^ in a Lodging possessed by
the ^mployer, and his frequent direction anent the work, were found to prove
against his Heir, though above 100. pound, and though direction alone without
sensible acts is only probable by writ or oath, July 21. 1668. Thomson contra
Earl of Glencairn. Witnesses ex officio (...) ^^de examined in a Reduction on
death bed, albeit the day of compearance was not come, to prevent the death or
collusion of the most necessary Witnesses, February 16. 1669. Creditors of my
Lord Balmerino and Cowper contra Lady Cowper. Witnesses ex officio were
ordained to be examined before answer* for clearing a Trust of the right of ^n
appryzing* upon diverse probabilities hinc inde alleged, February 24. 1669.
Earl of Annandail contra (...) and Credi^ors of Hume. A Witness examined ex
officio prevaricating in his oath, first denying and then acknowledging the
same thing, was declared in famous and set on the Pillory with a Paper on his
^ace, signifying his Fault, Iu^y 6. 1669. Barclay contra B^rclay. Witnesses ex
officio being examined were admitted to take away a Bond wholly blank, or blank
in the Creditors name, F^bruary 2, and 3. 1670. Jack contra Boyd of ^^nkil, and
the Earl of K^ng^orn con^ra Lord of P^^arro. Witnesses ex officio were
examined anent the being of a Bond amongst the Writs of a Creditor or his
Factor, that thereby the debtor might be liberat of the Bond as being retired,
but was not admitted to prove payment or sa^isfaction thereof, though it was an
old Bond, without any diligence or payment of annualrent for a long time,
February 14. 1671. N^^peir contra Earl of Eg^^toun. Witnesses ex officio were
examined in a circumvention for annulling a disposition made by a simple person
of his whole Esta^e, without reservation, on these points, whether the writ was
read to him when he subscribed, whether he was drunk, so that reason and
judgment was disordered, and what motives were used to make him subscribe,
July 11. 1671. Stev^ns contra Ne^lson. WITNESSES INSERT in a writ and the
Writer were ^ound to have ^ccession as users of that writ as false, yet was
examined, though they were socij crimin^s, and Forgers by their own confession,
being in an imporbation* January 26. 1670. Lady To^vi^ contra Cap^ain Barclay.
A WODSETTER was found to comp^ for the superplus above his ^en^, though the
Wo^set wa^ before the Act of Parliament, 1661. betwixt Debtor and Creditor,
albeit therein the Usurpers Act, and all such Acts made or to be made were
^enunced, January 29. 1662. Lord of Laming^oun con^ra Che^slie. A wodset
bearing in the Reversion a Tack ^a^ within the worth of the Land to be given
after Redemption, was sustained as not Vsur^ry, but the Wod^etter was at a
great loss by a Liferent med^o ^^mpore, June 21. 1662. Lord of Polwar^ contra
Hu^^. A Wodsetter pursuing for his money, was found not to have access thereto
tilll he recovered the Possession taken from him by a third party intruding,
seeing he did not de recenti intimate the in^rusion, and demand his money,
February 17. 1665. Hopringle of Torsonce contra Ker of S^nderland-hill. A
Wodset being redeemed^ upon an Order used, though without citation of all
parties having interest at the Market Cross on the declara^or, albeit thereby
the Wodsetters Wi^e, who had a base subaltern infeftment from him in Liferent,
was excluded, and the Redeemer was not found obliged to know the same, albeit
registrate in the Register of Seasines, July ^7. 1665. Hamiltoun contra her
Tennents. A Wodset by a Father to a Son redeemable by the Father during his
Li^e from his Son on a Rosenoble, being craved to be declared, the Son having
appryzed, and thereupon alleging that he had right to the Reversion a^ and
while his A^pri^ing were Redeemed, and till that, his Father could not Redeem.
which at first was susta^ned, the case of the Son being favorable, the Father
having disponed the whole right to a second Wi^e, but being thereafter deba^ed
in presentia, the Lords were of different judgments and decided not, in
respect the case seemed to hinder Debitors to Redeem a^terior Compryzings, till
they Redeemed all pestelor Compryzings, December 5. 1665. Reg contra ^eg. A
Wodset containing a Clause of Reversion for granting a Tack for certain years
after the Redemption, was found not to be derogat from by the Act betwixt
Debtor and Creditor, but that it might be quarrelable by the Act 19.
Parliament 1449. If the Tack were set but about the half of the true Rent as it
was worth the time of granting the Wods^t, and so being Vsu^ary, ^ February 15.
1666. Lord L^y contra Porteo^s. Wodsetters having Wodset before the Act of
Parliament 1661. were found comptable for the super^lus more than pays their
Annualrent, not from the date of the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, but from
the o^^er made to give them security upon quiting their Wodsets, and that
notwithstanding there was in the Wodset a Clause Renuncing the Vsurpets Act,
suspending the payment of principal sums, and ordaining Lands to be taken in
satisfaction thereof, and all Acts of that nature, and albeit there be an
exception in the said Act, when the benefit of such Acts are Renunced, which
was not found to relate to the Clause anent Wodsets, which is posterior to that
exception, February 21. 1666. Lord Borthwick contra his Wodse^ters. Wodsetters
before the Act 1661. choosing to retain the possession, were found comptable
for the superplus, not from the Summons, but from the date of the offer to find
Caution, which was admitted after the Citation, but it was found that the
Wodsetters were not bound to declare their option, whether to quite the Wodset
or restrict till Caution were offered, February 12. 1666. Ogilbie contra A
Wodsetter by his Wodset being obliged upon payment to Renunce, and by his
missive Letter acknowledging payment, his Son and apparent Heir having received
a disposition of his other Estate without a Cause on^rous after the Wodset, but
before the missive Letter, was found liable as l^crative Successor to enter to
the Wodset Right and to Renunce, January 15. 1668. Earl of Kinghorn contra
Lord of Vdn^y. A Wodsetter was found comptable for the superplus after o^^er
to find Caution, though he had a posterior Ratification and ^ik after the Act
1661. June 19. 1669. Scot contra Langton. A WRIT ^iz* a Bill of Exchange by a
Drover sub^cribed only by a mark, and another hand writing such a man's mark,
The Lords did not allow it as probative, but before answer ordained the writer
and witnesses to be examined ex officio, February 26. 1662. Brown contra
Iohnstoun of Clacharie. A Writ was sustained though subscribed but by one
Nottar, being a Contract of Marr^age, whereon Marriage followed, July 19. 1662.
Breadi^ contra Breadie and Murie. A writ was found not to prove, being the Act
of a Town Council without Citation or Subscription of the party, bearing
consent to a penalty imposed upon unfree-men. February 13. 1663. Town of
Linli^hg^w contra unfree-men of Borrowstownness. A writ was sustained though
not delivered being in ^avours of the granters Son though a Bastard, February
25. 1663. Aik^nhead contra Aik^nhead. A writ wanting w^tnesses designed, was
not sustained simply on designation being a very old writ without other
adminic^es to astruct, seeing the improbation by such witnesses being dead, was
not competent as in recenti, July 15. 1664. Colvil contra Executors of the Lord
Colvil. A writ viz. a Bond was found not taken away by witnesses offering to
prove payment* though the Bond was made in England to Englishmen, where that
probation is competent, being made by Scots-men residing in Scotland and
registrate here, and so to be regulat by the Law of Scotland, December 8. 1664.
Scot contra Anderson and Neilson. A writ was not found null as wanting Writer
and Witnesses insert, being made secundum consuetudinem loc^ in Ireland,
Fe^uary 1. 1665. Elphing stoun of S^lmes contra Lord Rollo. A writ quarre^^ed
as null* the witnesses not being designed, was not sustained, unless living
witnesses were condescended on, or adminicles to astruct the verity of the
debt, February 3. 1665. Falco^er contra Earl of King^orn. A writ alleged null
because the writer was not designed* was sustained upon designing the ^riter,
albeit the writ was old and appeared to have been blank in the sum, Creditor,
and Debtor December. 5. 1665. Cunninghame contra Duke of Hamiltoun. A writ viz. a
Bond was taken away by this manner of probation by oath that it was for a
Prentice-see, and by witnesses that the Prentice was put away within a year and
an half after the entry, as to a proportional part of the Prentice-see to the
time thereafter, June 15. 1665. Aikman contra A writ being no count Book but
some louse Scheduls, was found not probable to instruct a debt against the
writer of it, who deponed that he wrote the same, but declared also that he had
paid the sum, July 1. 1665. Nasmith contra Bower. A writ wanting witnesses
being offered to be proven holograph, albeit it cannot instruct its own date,
or that it was subscribed before the Defunct was on deathbed, yet the
alleadgance on deathbed was not sustained by way of exception or duply,
January 11. 1666. Sea^on and the Lord of Touch contra Dunda^. A writ being an
assignation to an appryzing, was taken away partly by the assigneys oath, and
partly by witnesses ex officio, proving that the appryzing with the assignation
blank in the assigneys name was retired, and lying by the assigneys father who
was debtor in the sums and amongst his writs the time of his death, February
27. 166^. Creditors of the Lord Gray contra Lord Gray.
A writ was not sustained as having but one witne^s to that subscription,
though another witness generally designed, deponed he saw not that party
subscrib^, but that the subscription was his hand-writ to the best of his
knowledge. and several other subscriptions were adduced to as^ruct the same
comparatione l^terarum, seeing there were not two witnesses insert to this
subscription, January 4. 1667, Dow of Ar^ho contra Ca^pbel of Calder. A writ
being a discharge by a Master to his Tennents was sustained, though without
witnesses and not holograph, and without necessity to prove the truth of the
Subscription in respect of the common custom to take such discharges, July 4.
1667. S^haw contra Tennents. A writ being a bond was found not probative,
having only the clause of Registration and Subscription on the one side* and
all the rest on the other side with another hand, unless it were astructed with
other evidences and adminicles, July 16. 1667. Hamil^oun contra Symontoun. A
writ subscribed by Nottars was sound null because the Nottars subscription said
that he subscribed for the party, but bear not at his command, which was not
allowed to be astructed by the witnesses insert, July 26. 1667. Philip contra
Cheap. A writ being a Bond subscribed with initial Letters was sustained, it
being found proven the debtor was accustomed so to subscribe, and there being
three Witnesses and the Writer examined, whether de facto he subscribed the
Bond, two affirmed, and two denied their subscriptions, the Creditor^ oath
being taken ex officio, affirmed the truth of the debitors subscription, who
being a person of good fame and credit, and no improbation insisted in, the
Bond was sustained, Novomber 16. 1667. Lord Cult^ra^ contra Chapman. A writ
having lain 33. years dormi^nt, witnesses and arbiters were examined ^x
officio, whether or not the writ was put blank in the arbiters hands, and being
found by the party filled up with five times so much as was their mind, though
there was no adminicle in writ to evidence the cause thereof, upon
consideration of the long latency of it and the necessity of money the party
was in who had it, January 6. 1668. Chis^h^lme contra Rennies. A writ
subscribed by a principal party and certain cautioners, bearing the day, place
and witnesses of their subscription, and after the witnesses names bearing as
subscribed by another party as Cautioner at blank, without any thing following
either of the date or witnesses; The Bond was not sustained against that
Caut^oner upon the Creditors condescending on the date and witnesses to be the
same with these of the principal and the other Cautioners, but the Lords ex
officio ordained the witnesses to be examined whether they saw the Cautioner in
question subscribe with the principal and other Cautioners, reserving to their
own consideration what the Testimonies should operat, January 24. 1668.
Magistrates of contra Earl of Findlator. A Writ wanting witnesses being pursued
on against the subscribers Heir, and being offered to be proven holograph, he
was admitted to allege that though holograph it could not prove it self to be
of the da^^ it bear, but was presumed to be subscribed in l^cto, which was
sustained being thus proposed without a Reduction, seeing the Bond was not
sufficient of it self but needed probation, and the alleadgeance of deathbed
was instantly verified by the presumption of Law, that the writ instructed not
it self to be before the Defuncts sickness, November 14. 1668. Calderwood
contra Iohnstoun. A writ requiring two Nottars, subscribed but by one was found
to be valide, if the verity of the subscription were proven by the subscribers
oath, and that it might not be res^led from, but that the oath might not be
taken in prejudice of an Assignay for an onerous cause, December 18. 1668.
Swintoun contra Brown. Writ cannat be taken away by witnesses, was ^ound not to
infer that witnesses cannot be admitted to prove a Bargain anteriour to the
writ, upon which bargain the writ may be reduced as posterior in prejudice of
Creditors, seeing the payment or discharge of the writ is not proven by the
Witnesses, January 21. 1669. Creditors of Pollo^k contra Pollock* A writ being
a Bill of Exchange subscribed only by a mark and not initial Letters was found
to prove, there being some witnesses who deponed they saw the mark put to, and
others that the party being a Merchant Drover was accustomed so to subscribe
Bills of considerable sums, which were ordinarily accepted, and answered by him,
but this being the first writ sustained by a mark, was only approven by all the
circumstances and not to be drawn in example, many of the Lords being contrary
to the allowing this or any such, February 1. 1669. Brown contra Iohnstoun of
Clacharie. A writ being a Tac^^ was found null, as not being subscribed by two
Nottars, though it was subscribed by one and a judicial act of Ratification
thereof in a Baron Count, which was not found to supply the want of the other
Nottar, seeing the first Nottar was Clerk of the sam^ Court, and all was but one
assertion, December 18. 1668. Swintoun contra Brown.
FINIS.

