ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF WITHIN THE DIOCES OF ELY: In the first Visitation
of the R. Reverend Father in God, MATTHEW, LORD BISHOP OF ELY.

printer's device of phoenix rising out of flames

Printed at London, by Richard Badger. 1638.

The Tenor of the Oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens, and any other of
every Parish, that shall be sworn to make Presentiments.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every one of you, shall and will truly
consider, and diligently enquire of every one of these Articles here given you
in charge, and of all the branches thereof, and make true answer to all
particulars therein demanded; and that all affection, or favor, or hatred, or
hope of reward or gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice of any person, and
all other pretenses set aside, you shall and will present every such person of
your Parish, or within it, as has committed any offense or fault, or made any
default mentioned in any of these Articles, or which is vehemently suspected,
or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault, or default; wherein you shall
deal uprightly and fully according to the truth, neither presenting, nor
sparing to present any contrary to the truth: Having in this action God before
your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth and virtue, and to
suppress vice, and to discharge your own consciences. So help you God, and
the Holy Contents of this Book.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Articles to be inquired of in the Dioces of Ely, at the Visitation, holden in
the year of our LORD, 1638.
Chap. 1. Concerning Religion, Doctrine, and Church Government.
ARE there any abiding in your Parish, or resorting to it, who (as far as you
know, or have credibly heard from persons of deeper judgment) do at any time
preach, teach, deliver, publish or maintain any heresy, or any erroneous and
false opinion contrary to ye faith of CHRIST, or any sentence, matter, or
cause, which has heretofore been determined, ordered or adjudged to be
heresy, by the authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four
general Councels, or any of them, or by any other general Council,
determining the same to be heresy by the express words of holy Scripture? Or
are there any which do deny or impugn any of the 39 Articles of Religion
agreed upon in Anno 1562. and established in the Church of England? And is the
Declaration, which the Kings Majesty prefixed before those 39 Articles,
concerning the selling of the questions late in difference, duly observed by
all within your Parish, according to His Majesty's commandment?

2 Be there any in your Parish that have denied, or persuaded any other to
deny, withstand or impugn the Kings Majesty's authority and supremacy, in
causes Ecclesiastical within this Realm?

3 Be there any in your Parish that have affirmed, that the Form of
consecrating Bishops, and making Priests and Deacons, as it is used in the
Church of England, is not holy, right, true and lawful? Or that the Government
of this Church, under the Kings Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers, is unlawful or antichristian?

4 Is there in your Parish any that has been, or is vehemently suspected to
have been present at any unlawful assemblies, conuenticles, or meetings,
under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion? or do any affirm and
maintain such meetings to be lawful?

5 Be there any abiding in, or resorting to your Parish, that are commonly
reputed to be ill affected in matter of the religion professed in our Church,
or taken to be Recusant Papists, or factious separatists, refusing to repair
unto the Church to hear divine Service, and to receive the holy Communion? Or
that have or do publish, sell or disperse, or conueigh to others any
superstitious, seditious, or schismatic Books, Libels, or Writings,
touching the Religion, State, or Ecclesiastical government of this Kingdom of
England? Present their names, qualities and conditions, if you know or have
heard of any.

6 Have any in your Parish spoken or declared anything in derogation or
deprauation of the form of Gods worship, and the set form of common prayer
prescribed and established in the Church of England, or in dislike of the
administration of the Sacraments, or of the other Rites and Ceremonies set
forth and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer and the Canons
Ecclesiastical? Or do any preach, speak, and declare, that the Book of Common
Prayer contains any thing that is repugnant to the holy Scripture, or not
meet to be used? Or do use any scomfull words against those godly Sermons,
called, the Homilies of the Church?

Chap. 2. Concerning Public Prayer, and the Administration of the Holy
Sacraments, etc.
1 Has any in your Parish caused, procured, or maintained any Minister, to say
any common or public prayer, or to administer the Sacrament of Baptism, or of
the Lords Supper, otherwise or in any other manner, than is mentioned in ye Book
of Common Prayer? Or has any interrupted, hindered, let, or disturbed ye
Minister in reading of divine Service, or administering the Sacraments in such
manner as is mentioned in the said book? Or has any interrupted him in his
preaching, or reading the Homilies?

2 Is the Sacrament of Baptism rightly and duly administered according to the
form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; with due observation of all
Rites and Ceremonies prescribed to be used in the same, without adding or
altering of any part of any prayers, or interrogatories? Is the sign of the
Cross every time used, and the Surplice never but worn in the administering of
it?

3 Has the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism been at any time
deferred longer than till the next Sunday or Holiday, immediately following the
birth of the child? And do they all come to Church when a child is to be
baptized, at, or about the beginning of divine Service? And is the baptizing
performed immediately after the second Lesson?

4 Has the Sacrament of Baptism been refused to be administered to any
children borne in, or out of wedlock, their birth being made known to the
Minister of the Parish, and they offered unto him to be baptized? Or have any
such children died unbaptized?

5 Have the parents of the child baptized, been at any time admitted to be
Godfathers or Godmothers to the same? Or have any been admitted to be
Godfathers or Godmothers to any child, before they have received the holy
Communion? Or have there been admitted more (or less) than two Godfathers and
one Godmother for a male child, and two Godmothers and one Godfather for a
female? Or have any Godfathers or Godmothers used any other answers or speech
in Baptism, than is by the Book of Common Prayer appointed? Or have they given
to the children baptized any name that is absurd, or inconvenient for so holy
an action?

6 Have any children been baptized in private houses (except upon great
necessity: and if so, what was the same?) or by any Lay-person, or Midwife, or
Popish Priest, or by any other than your own Minister? And have all children
which were privately baptized, if they lived, been afterward brought to your
Church, that the Congregation and the Minister of the Parish (in case they were
not baptized by him) might be certified, whether they were lawfully baptized or
no?

7 Have the children that have been borne to any Popish Recusant in your
Parish, been publicly baptized in your Parish Church, by your own Parson,
Vicar, or Curate? Or by whom else were they baptized, or where, to your
knowledge, or as you have heard? you are to give all the notice you can, both
of them and of their Parents.

8 Has the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly and reverently
administered in your Church or Chapel, so often, and at such convenient times,
that, at least thrice every year (whereof once at Easter) every Parishioner
within your Parish, being of the age of 16 years, or upwards, might receive
the same?

9 Has the said blessed Sacrament been delivered unto any, or received by any
the Communicants within your Parish, that did vnrcuerently either sit, stand,
or lean; or that did not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees, in
plain and open view, without collusion or hypocrisy?

10 Have any of your Parish, which are openly known to live in notorious sin
without repentance; or any excommunicate persons or schismatics, common and
notorious deprauers of the Religion and Government of this Realm (without
unfeigned sorrow showed by them for their impiety and wickedness) been
admitted to be partakers of the holy Communion?

11 Has any of your Parish been debarred from the said holy Communion, without
just cause, or without intimation presently given to the Ordinary or Bishop of
the Dioces? Name every such person, and the person that debarred him, or them.

Chap. 3. Concerning the Church, the furniture, and possessions thereof.
1 Have you a Parish Church and Chancell now standing, and in use, or is the
same profaned, or demolished, in part, or in whole?

2 Have you in your Church or Chapel, the whole Bible in the largest Volume,
of the last translation, the Book of Common Prayer, the two Books of
Homilies, and Bishop Jewels Works, all well and fairly bound? And have you
also in your Church, the form of the Divine Service, for the 5th day of
November, and for the 27th day of March, and the Book of Constitutions or
Canons Ecclesiastical?

3 Have you in your Church or Chapel, a Font of stone set and fastened in the
ancient usual place, whole and clean, and fit to hold water? A convenient and
decent Communion Table, with a carpet of silk, or some other decent stuff,
continually laid upon the Table at the time of divine Service; and a fair
linen cloth thereon laid, at the time of administering the Communion? what did
either of them cost? what be they now worth in value? And is the same Table
placed conveniently, so as the Minister may best be heard in his
administration, and the greatest number may reverently communicate? To that end
does it ordinarily stand up at the East end of the Chancell where the Altar in
former times stood, the ends thereof being placed North and South? Is it at any
time used irreverently, by leaning or sitting on it, throwing hats or any thing
else upon it, or writing on it; or is it abused to any other profane or common
use? Are there any steps or ascents in your Chancell up to the Communion Table?
Have you also a decent rail of wood (or some other comely enclosure covered
with cloth or silk) placed handsomely above those steps, before the Holy Table,
near one yard high, and reaching cross from the North wall to the South
(except by the order of the Diocesan it be made with the ends returning unto
the East wall) with two convenient doors to open before the Table: And if it
be a Rail, are the Pillars or Ballisters thereof so close, that dogs may not
any where get in? Also are the ten Commandments set up in your Church or
Chapel, where the people may see and read them; and other chosen sentences
written upon the walls of your said Church or Chapel, in places convenient for
the same purpose?

4 Have you in your said Church or Chapel a convenient seat for your Minister
to read divine Service in? Where and in what part of the Church does it stand?
how far from the Chancell? and which way does the standing thereof cause the
Minister to turn his face, when he kneeleth therein at prayer? Have you also a
comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place, with a decent Cloth or Cushion for
the same? Have you a comely large Surplice? what cost it by the yard? and how
long have you had the same? Have you also a fair Communion Cup of silver, and
a cover agreeable to the same; a Flagon of silver or pewter, with all other
things and Ornaments necessary for the celebration of divine Service, and
administration of the Sacraments? And have you a chest wherein to put the alms
for the poor, with three locks and keys unto it: and another Chest for the
keeping of the Books, and the Communion Vessels, and Ornaments of the Church?
Or where are they kept ordinarily?

5 In the said Chest, have you a Register book in Parchment, wherein to
register the Christenings, Weddings, and Burials? And is the same book written
and kept in all points according to the Canon? And is the Christian name of the
mother as well as of the father, therein duly registered? And is there a
transcript thereof tran^mitted every year into the Bishops principal
Registry? Have you also a fair Paxer-booke, wherein every Preacher which is a
stranger, is to subscribe his name, the day when he preached, and by whose
authority he is licensed? And have you also a Table set up in your Church, of
the degrees, wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry?

6 Is your Church or Chapel, with the Chancell thereof, as also the Vestrey,
and the Church Porch (if you have any) and your Parsonage house or
Vtcarage-house, and all other houses thereto belonging, your Parish Almes-house
and Church-house, in good reparations? And are they employed to godly and their
right holy uses? And if any of them be ruinated and wasted, in whom is the
default? And is your Church, Chancell, and Chapel, decently and comely kept,
as well within as without? and are the seats in them well maintained, and the
bottomes of them either boarded or paued? the Steeple and Bells preserved, the
windows in no part stopped up, but well glazed, the roof and walls clean, the
whole floor kept paued, plain and even, and all things there in orderly and
decent sort, without dust rubbish, straw or litter, or any thing that may he
either noisome or unseemly for the house of God? The Parishioners using none
but Pesses and fast matts in their seats, as need shall require?

7 Are there any arms and furniture for soldiers, or other munition, ladders,
buckets, timber, or any other implements for public or private use, stored and
kept in your Church, Vestry, Sleeple, or any other part of the
Church-buildings? How long has it been so? And by whose authority or direction?

8 Is there any in your Parish, that has or does refuse to contribute toward
the reparation of your Church, or toward the provision of such things as
belong thereunto?

9 Is your Churchyard or Chappell-yard enclosed and well fenced, and kept
without abuse? and if not, whose is the default? Has any person within your
memory, or that you have credibly heard of, incroached upon the Churchyard, by
setting up any kind of building or fence upon it, or by opening any door, gate
or style into it? Has any used that place (consecrated to an holy use)
profanely or wickedly? Has any used any chiding, brawling or quarrelling
words, or stricken any person either in the Church or Churchyard? Has any
person behaved himself rudely and disorderly in either; or used any filthy or
profane talk, or any other rude and immodest behavior in them? Is there any
ordinary passage used through the Church, or any common walking therein, or
carrying of burdens, or playing of children? Or have any other Plays, Feasts,
Banquets, Suppers, Church-ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts, Leets, or
Lay-iuries, Musters, exercise of dancing, stoole-ball, football, or the like,
or any Faires, or Markets, boothes, stalls or standings; or any other profane
usage been suffered to be kept in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard? Have
any annoyed your Churchyard or the fences thereof, by putting in of cattle,
by hanging up of clothes, or by laying any dust; dung, or any other
filthiness there? or by making water therein, especially against the
Church-wals? When graves are dug, are they made six-foot deep (at the
least) and East and West, and are the bones of the dead piously used, and
decently interred again, or laid up in some fit place, as beseems
Christians? And is the whole consecrate ground kept free from swine and all
other nastinesse?

10 Does your Clarke or Sexion, or any Constable or Bailiffe, or any other
person (by occasion or pretense of any secular office or service whatsoever) at
any time take upon him, within the Church or Churchyard, to proclaim any
Sessions, or any other appearance, or to warn any Courts or other meetings, or
business? or to cry any hawks, dogs, or other cattle, or any thing else: or
to publish any Precepts, or other writings or Orders, for any Lay-occasion, or
business whatsoever? for such things should rather be done in the market, or
without at the Churchyard style, unless by supreme authority it be otherwise
commanded.

11 Are your Churchwardens careful to take special order, that no dogs be at
any time suffered to come into the Church, to the disturbance of the diu'ne
Service, and the polluting of that holy place of the Christian congregation?
And do any of the inhabitants (of what condition soever) or of their company,
bring their hawks into the Church, or usually suffer their dogs of any kind to
come with them thither, to the profanation of the house of God, and his holy
worship, and to the great scandal of the Christian profession?

12 What Legacies have been given to the use and benefit of your Church, and
how have they been bestowed? who has received and detained them without due
employment? Does any detain or imbozell, or has sold and made away any of the
Church goods, or used or employed them otherwise, than by Law they ought to do?
Have you any Stock or yearly Reuenew belonging to the Church? what is it? how
is it employed?

13 Is your Church full, or vacant of an Incumbent? And if vacant, who
receives the fruits thereof, and who serves the Cure, and by what authority?
And is it a Parsonage, or Vicarage, and Presentatiue, or Donatiue? Or have you
but a stipendar^ Priest only? what is the common value and means of his place
known or reputed to be?

14 Is there in your Parish, or any where about you (that you know or have
heard of) any Church, Chapel, or Oratory, now demolished, or likely to be
ruined, or that is converted to any private or secular use?

15 Has any private man, or men, of his or their own authority (for ought you
know) erected any pewes, or builded any new seats in y^ Church or Chancell?
And what pewes or seats have been of late years new built, by whose
procurement, and by whose authority? And are all the pewes and seats uniform
therein, and so ordered, that they which are in them may all conveniently
kneel down together in the time of prayer, and have their faces up Eastward,
toward the holy Table? And also that men and women do not fit promiscuously
together? Is the middle alley of the Church, or any of the other alleyes or
Isles, or the body of the Chancell, built upon (in any part thereof) for the
setting up of pewes or seats; or for the enlarging of anythere adjoining? Are
there also any kind of seats at the East and of the Chancell, above the
Communion Table, or on either side up even with it? And is the Chancell fully
divided from the body of the Church, and how, or in what manner?

16 Are there any privy closets, or close pewes in your Church? Are any pewes
so lostily made, that they do any way hinder the prospect of the Church or
Chancell, or that they which are in them be hidden from the face of the
congregation? What galleries also or scaffolds have you in your Church? How are
they placed, and in what part of the Church? When were they built, and by what
authority? Is not the Church large enough without them to receive all your own
Parishioners? Is any part of the Church hidden or darkened thereby, or any of
the Parishioners annoyed or offended by them?

17 Are any Tombs or Monuments for the dead, suffered to be erected, without
the good license and approbation of the Ordinary first showed to the
Churchwardens? Are there any so made, that they cumber some room which may
not well be spared; or trouble any seat or passage; or hinder the prospect of
the Church or Chancell, or the light of any window; or be inconvenient to the
Minister in executing any part of the divine Offices; or be so set up, as to
give any scruple or offense to men's Christian devotions in their holy prayers
and adoration? Are any other mean toys and childish gew-gawes (such as the
fonder sort of people prepare at some burials) suffered to be fastened up in
your Church at any ones pleasure? or any Garlands and other ordinary funeral
Ensigns to hang, where they hinder the prospect, or until they grow foul and
dusty, withered and rotten? And is your Churchyard pestered and cloyed with
frames of wood, piles of brick, or stones laid over the graves? Do any take
upon them (as they please) to set up or lay great stones there at the head and
foot of any grave, without the Incumbents leave and the license of the
Ordinary?

18 Has any in your Parish defaced, or caused to be defaced, or purloyned any
Monuments or Ornaments in your Church, or any Inscriptions of Brass, any Lead,
or Stones there, or any part of the Glasse-windowes, or the Organs? When was it
done, and by whom?

19 Has any Popish Recusant, being lawfully excommunicate, or any other
excommunicated person been buried in your Church or Churchyard, before
absolution from that censure and excommunication obtained? And if yea, then by
whom, and when?

20 Be the profits, tithes, or any commodities Ecclesiastical, belonging to
the Parsonage or Vicarage of your Parish, converted to the use and benefit of
the Patrons, or of any other but the Incumbent, and by them received and
detained? And how long have they been so? And is there but a Curate or
slipendary Priest kept in any place, where you have heard, or do believe an
Incumbent should be possessed, and what allowance has be?

21 Is there any other Cure annexed to your Parish, or any Chapel of ease
belonging to the same? How are they served, by whom, and upon what allowance?
Is there any other kind of Chapel or Chapels within the precincts of your
Parish? To whom do they belong? When were they erected? and when consecrated?
Have you in your Parish any house or houses, whereof any room is ordinarily
used for Preaching, or saying the divine Service, and administering the holy
Communion? How long has it been so? and by what authority or license?

22 Have you a true Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tithes,
within your Parish, or without, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken
by the view of honest men in your said Parish, appointed by the Ordinary? And
is it safely kept and preserved, and in whose hands? And has there a true
copy thereof, under the hands of the Minister and Churchwardens, been
transmitted and laid up in the Bishops Registry, there to continue for a
perpetual memory thereof? And if you have no such Terrier yet made, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his
absence, your Curate, are now appointed to make diligent inquiry of the
premises, and to make, subscribe, and sign the said Terrier, and to bring in a
true copy of it into the Bishops Registry, within three months after the
receipt of this book of Articles?

Chap. 4. Concerning the Ministers, Preachers, and Lecturers.
IS your Minister, Parson, Vicar, or Curate reputed to be a Graduate in either
of the Universities, yea, or no? And if he be a Graduate, then of what degree
is he? what is his Christian and Sire-name?

2 Is your Minister a licensed Preacher, yea or no? And if he be licensed, then
by whom? Does he preach usually in his own Cure, or in some other Church or
Chapel near adjoining, where there is no Preacher, once every Sunday? And
how often has he been negligent in so doing? Does he also preach standing,
and in his C^ and Gown (not in a Cloak) with his Surplice and Hood also if he
be a Graduate, and with his head uncovered? And if he be not a licenced
Preacher, does he take upon him in his own Cure, or elsewhere, to expound any
Scripture, or matter of doctrine, or does he keep himself only to the reading
of Homilies published by authority; and besides, procure Sermons to be
preached amongst you, once every month at least, by such as are lawfully
licenced? And does he or his Curate upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon,
read some one of the Homilies prescribed by authority, and before the said
Homily, use that form of exhorting to prayer (only) which is prescribed in
the fifty fifth Canon, and no other prayer of his own, either before or after
it?

3 Is your Minister resident with you upon his benefice? or if absent, how long
time has he been so? and where is he resident for the most part? And does he
in his absence make allowance to the poor, and what allowance does he make?
Has he any other Benefice, and does he supply his absence by a Curate settled
and dwelling in your Parish, that is licenced to preach, and what allowance
does he make to his Curate, and how often in the year comes he thither
himself?

4 Is your Curate licenced by the Bishop of the Dioces? And does your Minister
or Curate serve any more Cures then one? If yea, then what other Cure does he
serve, and how far are his Cures distant one from the other?

5 Has any being no Priest, or Deacon, presumed at any time (under pretense of
being a graduate, or a Scholar of the University) to read common prayers
openly in your Church or Chapel; or to serve the Cure of your Parish, or to
preach there; Has any Deacon not having received the full order of Priesthood,
taken upon him alone to administer the Communion in your Church or Chapel;
You are to present the names of any, that have herein offended as far as you
know or believe?

6 Does your Minister, Preacher, or Lecturer, only read the Communion Service,
commonly called the second Service, at the Communion Table? Does he begin his
Sermon at any time, or part of the divine Service, but immediately after the
Belief called the Niceene-creed? Does he before his Sermon use any form of
Prayer which is of his private conceiving or collecting, and of his own
inuenting or choosing. or does he contain himself within that brief form
only, which is prescribed by the Church (in the 55. Canon) thereby only to
exhort and move the people to join with him in Prayer for Christ's holy
Catholic Church, and for the Kings most excellent Majesty (naming him and his
royal Titles) for the Queen, the Prince, and the royal Issue; for the
Archbishops also and the Bishops; for the Council, the Nobility, the
Magistracy, and commons of the land, and to give thanks to God for the
faithful departed out of this life? And then (this moving to prayer being
done, as briefly as conuenientlly may be) both he always conclude it with the
Lords Prayer?

7 Does your Preacher or Minister at the close of his Sermon, wholly forbear
to use any kind or form of Prayer (not being prescribed,) as also to pronounce
the blessing (out of the Pulpet) wherewith the Church uses to dismiss the
people? But does he there conclude only with, Glory to God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost: and then coming from the Pulpit (if the Sermon were
made within the Church or Chapel) does he, or whosoever then officiates, at
the same place where he left before the Sermon, proceed to read the remainder
of the divine Service; and at the close of all to give the Blessing, and not
before?

8 Does every Priest and Deacon in your Parish daily say the Morning and
Evening prayer, either privately or openly, unless (...) be upon lawful
cause hindered? Does your Curate say the same daily in your Church or Chapel,
with the tolling of a Bell before he begin? Especially does your Minister or
Curate do it on every Sunday and Holiday, and their Eues, and on the day of the
conversion of Saint Paul, Saint Barnabies day, and every day of the holy Week
next before Easter; as also on all Wednesdaies and Fridayes, at fit and usual
times, according to the form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, in a
reverent manner over, and as audibly and distinctly as he uses to Preach? Does
he also read all those Psalms and Lessons, and no other, with the Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel, which are appointed for the day? At the end of every
Psalm, due they stand and say, Glory be to the Father, etc. and does he leave
out and not read the Contents of the Chapters? After the Lessons, does he use
no other Psalm or Hymn, but those which the Book of Common Prayer has
appointed? Does he read the Creed of S. Athanass^ (called the Quicunque vult,)
on all those days for which it is appointed, and the Commination on Ash
wednesday, adding the Letany on every Wednesday and Friday?

9 Does your Minister and Curate at all times, as well in Preaching or reading
the Homilies, as in reading the Prayers and the Letany, in administering the
holy Sacraments, solemnization of Marriage, burying of the dead, churching of
women, and all other offices of the Church, duly observe the Orders and Rites
prescribed, without omission, alteration, or addition of any thing? And does
he, in performing all and every of these, wear the Surplice duly, and never
omit the wearing of the same, nor of his Hood, if he be a Graduate?

10 Does your Parson or Vicar having a Curate under him, notwithstanding read
divine Service himself frequently and publicly at the usual times, both in
the forenoone and after noone, in the Church which he possesses? and does he
also administer both Sacraments, every year in such manner, and with the
observation of all such Rites and Ceremonies, as are prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer in that behalf? and how often in the year has he done it?

11 Does your Minister, Preacher, and Lecturer, every year, of purpose and
expressly (yet not by way of disputation, but by plain conclusion and
determination) only teach and declare the lawful authority which the King has
over the State, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; and the just abolishing of all
Popery and foreign power or jurisdiction over the same?

12 Has your Minister, or any Preacher among you published in his Sermons any
doctrine, which is new and strange, and disagreeing from the Word of God, and
from the Articles of Christian Faith and Religion, agreed on and published Anno
Domini 1562. Or has he taught any thing, which he would have the people
religiously observe and believe, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures,
and that which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of
that doctrine, according to the Canon, as you conceived, or have been informed
by others of better judgment?

13 Does your Minister go to the administration of holy Baptism, ever
immediately after the second Lesson? Does he always (at first) ask, whether
the child be baptized or no? Afterward does he ever use and never omit, both
to take the child in his hands, and also to make the sign of the Cross, to as
to touch the child's forehead in making the same? Does he at any time publicly
baptize but in the Font, or with any Basin, Bucket, or Paile, or other vessel
set into the Font? Has he ever deferred, or willingly neglected, or refused to
baptize any infant within the Parish, being in danger of death, notice thereof
having been given to him? And has any child dyed without baptism, by his
default?

14 Does your Minister or Cur^ten admonish the people, that they defer not
the baptism of their infants any ^ger, after they are borne than is
prescribed, unless upon a great and reasonable ^ain^, declared with Minister
or Curate, and approved by him; nor that they procure them to be baptized at
home without great necessity.

15 Has your Minister admitted any person to answer as Godfather or Godmother,
at the christening of a child, that has not before received the holy
Communion, and is not able to recite the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments,
and the Articles of Belief, and to answer to the same, being required? And
does he at the Font, as soon as he has baptized any child, admonish them to
bring the child to the Bishop to be confirmed, as soon as it has learned the
Catechism?

16 Does your Minister, every Sunday and Holiday before evening prayer, half
an hour or more, catechize and instruct the youth; and ignorant persons of
your Parish, both male and female in the ten Commandments, the Articles of
Belief, and the Lords Prayer? And does he use for that purpose, the Catechism
set forth in the Book of Common Prayer, and diligently hear, instruct, and
teach them in the said Catechism? Or what other Catechism does he use either
in public or private: And be the youth and ignorant persons of your Parish,
sent in due time unto your Church, by them that ought to send them, to be
catechized and instructed by the Minister? And if not, you are to present the
names of those that make default in sending them, and of all those that use not
to come, or care not to learn.

17 Are your afternoone-sermons (if there were wont to be any) turned into
catechizing by question and answer, where and whenever there is no great
cause apparent to the contrary? And is this truly and sincerely performed,
without mockery, or in show only, and so, without any long or large discourse
(Sermon-wise) upon the said Questions and Answers? but only to explain the
same in few and brief passages easy to be remembered?

18 Does your Minister use to administer the holy Communion, at least thrice in
the year (whereof once at Gaster) to every parishioner in your Parish, that is
sixteen years of age and upwards; and first to receive the same himself,
kneeling, on every day that he administreth it to others; and to administer it
to none but to such as do kneel at the receiving thereof? And does he always
use the words of institution, according to the Book of Common Prayer, without
alteration, at every time, that the Bread and Wine is renewed? Does he also
use to deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant severally, and with his
own hand, repeating to every one, all the words appointed to be said at the
distribution of the holy Body and blood of our Lord JESUS, and upon no pretense
(till the Church appoint otherwise) omitting any part of the words, or saying
them all but now and then to many at once? And is there warning given by him,
to the Parishioners, publicly in the Church, at morning prayer the Sunday
before every time of his administering of the Holy Communion for their better
preparation thereunto?

19 Has your Minister admitted unto the holy Communion any of his cure or
flock, which he openly known to live in sin notorious, without Repentance,
or any that have maliciously and openly contended with their neighbors, before
they be reconciled; or any Churchwardens, or Side-m^n, who having taken their
oaths to present to their Ordinary all such public offenses, as they are
particularly charged to enquire of in the Parish, have and do notwithstanding,
wittingly and irreligiously incur the horrible crime of perjury, either in
neglecting or refusing to present such public offenses, as they themselves
know, or have heard to be committed within your Parish?

20 Has your Minister at any time admitted unto the Communion any that refuse
to be present at public prayers, or who are notorious deprauers of the Book
of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, or of the Orders,
Rites, or Ceremonies therein prescribed; or of any thing contained in the
thirty nine Articles, or in the Book of ordaining Priests and Bishops? Or who
have spoken against or depraved his Majesty's Sovereign Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, unless they and every of them do first acknowledge their
repentance for their sin, and promise to do so no more?

21 Does your Minister or Curate admit any to the Communion, before they can
say their Catechism, and be confirmed?

22 Does your Minister together with the Churchwardens and Quest-men, take
diligent heed and care, not only that all and every one of your own
Parishioners do receive thrice every year; but also, that no strangers of any
other Parish, do come often and commonly to your Church, from their own
Parish Church, or do there receive the holy Communion?

23 Does your Minister, before the several times of administration of the
Lords Supper, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if any of them have their
Conscience troubled and disquieted, to resort unto him, or to some other
learned Minister, and open their grief, that they may receive such ghostly
counsel and comfort, as their conscience may be relieved, and by the Minister
they may receive the benefit of Absolution, to the quiet of their Conscience,
and avoiding of all scruple? And if any man confess his secret and hidden
sins, being sick or whole, to the Minister, for the vnburthening of his
conscience, and receiving of spiritual consolation or ease of mind from him,
Does he the said Minister (or has he at any time) by word, writing, or sign,
openly or covertly, directly or indirectly, reveal and make known to any
person whatsoever, any Crime or Offense, so committed to his trust and secrecy?

24 Has your Minister solemnized the Marriage of any person under the age of
twenty one years, without the consent of their Parents or Governors; or has
he married any, which do not audibly say and answer in all things appointed by
the Liturgy; or any without a King, or in times prohibited, or without the
Banes first published three several Sundaies or Holidaies, in time of divine
Service, in the several Churches or Chapels of their several abodes, except
they brought him a special license from the Archbishop, or Bishop of the
Dioces, or his Chancellor so to do? And both he begin in the body of the
Church, and then go up to the Table, as to appointed? Also does your Minister,
so often as there is any marriage, appoint to have a Communion? After the Gospel
does he say a Sermon (if he be licenced to preach) wherein to declare the
office of man and wife, according to holy Scripture; Or else does he read that
which the Church has appointed to be read at Matrimony?

25 Does your Minister use the form of thanksgiving for women after
childe-birth immediately before the Communion Service? Or has he admitted
thereunto any women begotten with child in Adultery or Fornication, without
license of his Ordinary?

26 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his Parishioners, to give somewhat according to their
abilities, to godly and charitable uses; especially does be enforce it upon
them with earnest exhortation (as is prescribed) at the time of the oblation or
offering before the Communion, and upon their sick beds, or when they make
their wills?

27 Does your Minister or Curate resort unto such as be dangerously sick in
your Parish (if he be sent for, or notice of their sickness being given unto
him) to instruct or comfort them in their distresses, according to the order of
the Book of Common Prayer, not omitting then especially, to move them earnestly
to liberality toward the ^oore?

28. If any being sick do desire the prayers of the Congregation, is it done
at the time of divine Service after the three Collects? and according to the
form in the Liturgy for the Visitation of the sick? and not only by giving
their names to the Preacher, and mentioning of them in the Pulpit, before or
after a Sermon?

29 Has your Minister ever refused to bury any which ought to be interred
with Christian burial? Or has he deferred the same longer than he should?
Does he go before the Corpse to the Grave, and there say the whole service
appointed, not omitting the Lesson or any other part? Does be devoutly kneel,
when he says the prayers, and the Collects at burial? or has he admitted
any to Christian burial. which by the Laws of the holy Church of this Realm,
ought not to be so interred?

30 Does your Minister, being a Preacher, well studied indiuinity, and having
any Popish Recusant or Recusants in your Parish, labor diligently with them
from time to time to reclame them from their errors? Or otherwise is he over
conversant with them or suspected to favor them?

31 Has your Minister, (or any other taking upon him the calling of a
Minister) preached, baptized children (except in case of necessity) solemnized
marriage, churched any women, or ministered the holy Communion in any private
house or houses? If yea, then where, when, and how often has he done it?

32 Do you know, or have heard of any which are reputed to be Ministers (or
of any other of the Laity, either Male or Female) that presume to make matters
of Divinity their ordinary Table-talk? Or that under pretense of holiness and
edification, take the liberty at their Trencher-meetings, or where several
company (not being all of the same family) are assembled, rashly and profanely
to discourse of holy Scripture? Or amidst their cups, to dispute or determine
any Articles of Faith and Religion, or touching any point of doctrine or
Ecclesiastical discipline, at their own pleasure, did to their own fancy?
you shall name the persons, times, and places, as far as you know or have
heard, and can remember.

33 Does your Minister every six months, in your Parish Church, openly in the
time of divine Service, upon some Sunday, denounce and declare, excommunicate
by name, such as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, not seeking
to be absolved? And has he said divine Service, whiles any excommunicate
person has been present in the Church? Or has admitted any person, that has
been excommunicate, into the Church, without a Certificate of his absolution
from his Ordinary, under the seal of the office, and not by any note or Ticket
only under the hand of the Register, or any other Clerk? Or has he stayed or
forborne to denounce any excommunication or suspension or absolution that has
been sent him from his Ordinary, further then the next Sunday or Holyday after
receipt thereof under Seal?

34 Has your Minister been at any private meetings or conuenticies, to
consult there, about the impeachment or deprauing of the doctrine of the Church
of England, or of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any part of the government
and discipline of the Church; or to practice any form of their own, either
for worship or discipline?

35 Does your Minister, upon Sundays at Morning Prayer, declare unto the
Parishioners, what Fasting-dayes and Holy days are to be kept, the week
following?

36 Does your Minister in the Rogation days, go the perambulation of the
circuit of your Parish, saying and using the Prayers, Suffrages, and
Thanksgiving unto God, appointed by Law, according to his duty; thanking God
for his blessings, and praying for his grace and favor?

37 Does your Parson or Vicar maintain and keep in due reparation, the
Mansion-houses, and all other edifices and fenses belonging to his Parsonage or
Vicarage without suffering them to grow into ruin or decay?

38 Has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint, or to hold or continue any
private or public fasts, or meetings, for preaching or lecturing on any
working-day, in his own Parish or elsewhere, or prophesies or exercise, or any
other such thing, not being approved by his Ordinary for the time being?

39 Is your Minister studious in holy Scripture, and abstaineth from
mechanical trades, bodily labor, soliciting of causes in Law, common buying
or selling of Horses or other Cattle and all other employments not besitting
his calling and holy Function? Does he usually wear a Gown with a standing
collar, and sleeves strait at the hands, and a square Cap? Does he in
iourneying use a cloak with sleeves, commonly called a Priests-cloake, without
guards, buttons, or cuts? Does he at any time in public wear any coife or
wrought nightcap, but only a plain cap of black silk, satin or velvet, and
of a decent fashion, and proper for Divines? Does he at any time go abroad in
his dublet and hose without a Coat or Cassock, or wear any light colored
stockings, long hair, deep bands, great ruffled booted, or any other indecent
thing? Or is he any way excessive in apparel, either himself or his wife?

40 Is your Minister suspected, or known to have obtained his Benefice by any
Simoniacall compact, directly or indirectly? Or is he reputed to be an
incontinent person, a frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, or Alehouses, a common
gamester or player at dice or cards, a common swearer or drunkard, a brabler or
brawler, given to contention, usury, brocage, or common merchandising, or
otherwise faulty in any other kind that is scandalous to his function?

41 Has your Minister publicly in your Parish Church or Chapel, once every
year read over the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical agreed upon by the
Clergy of both Provinces, An. Dom 1603, in such manner as the same is commanded
to be done?

42 Is there any in your Parish or resorting thereunto, who having taken holy
Orders of Priest or Deacon, does uoluntarily relinquish and forsake his
calling, and lives in the course of his life as a lay man? Or any that having
been silenced, or suspended by authority, so remains without conforming
himself in due obedience to the Church? And how does he employ his time; and
where or whence has he his maintenance, as you know or have heard?

43 Have any been admitted to preach in your Church, who do not before the
Churchwardens subscribe their names in your book provided for that purpose,
and the day when he or they preached, and the name of the Bishop or Bishops of
whom they had license to preach?

44 Has any Preacher particularly impugned and confuted any doctrine delivered
by any other Preacher in the same Church, or in any Church near adjoining,
before he acquainted the Bishop of the Dioces therewith, and received order
from him, what to do in that case?

45 Have you any Lecturer in your Parish, and on what day is your Lecture? If
any such be, does he, twice at the least every year, read divine Service both
morning and evening, two several Sundaies, publicly in his Surplice and Hood?
And also twice in the year administer both Sacraments, with such Rites and
Ceremonies as are prescribed in the book of Common Prayer?

46 Does the Lecturer (whosoever he be) read the divine Service according to
the Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood before every
Lecture?

47 Does your Preacher or Lecturer behave himself in his Lectures and Sermons,
as he ought to do, teaching obedience, and edifying his auditory in matters of
faith and good life, without intermedling with matters of State, or news, or
other discourses not fit for the Pulpit; and also without favoring or abetting
Schismatics or Separatists (that are at home, or are gone abroad) either by a
special prayer for them, or by any other approbation of them, and their
schismatic courses?

48 Have you any Lecture of Combination set up in your Parish? And if so, is it
read by a company of grave and orthodor Divines, near adjoining, and in the
same Dioces? And does every one of them Preach in a Gown, and not in a Cloak?
And when and by whom were they appointed? And what be their names?

49 Is any single Lecture (maintained by your Town or otherwise) suffered to
preach, he not first professing his willingness to take upon him the cure of
souls nor actually taking a Benefice or Cure, so soon as it may be fairly
procured for him? What is his (...)at license has he? And has he a settled
contribution affixed to the Lecture (...) is it arbitrary, and for this
Lecturer only? What sum does it amount to ordinarilly? By whom is it usually
paid or collected or of late years has been?

50 If any Psalms be used to be sung in your Church, before or after the
morning and evening prayer, or before or after the Sermons (upon which
occasions only, they are allowed to be sung in Churches) is it done according
to that grave manner (which first was in use) that such do sing as can read
the Psalms, or have learned them by heart; and not after that uncouth and
indecent custom of late taken up, to have every line first read, by one alone,
and then sung by the people?

Chap. 5. Concerning Matrimony.
BE there any in your Parish, that have married within the degrees of affinity
or consanguinity, by the Law of God forbidden, as is expressed in a certain
Table published by authority in Anno 1563. And if any have so married, what be
their names, and where were they married and by whom?

2 Has any been married secretly in private houses, or without their Parents
be Governors consent signified, being under the age of twenty one years?

3 Have any persons been married in your Parish, the Banes having not been
thrice published, three several Sundays or Holidays in time of divine
Service? Who were the parties, and who were present at such marriages; and what
Minister married them?

4 Have any persons by license or without, been married in your parish Church,
neither of them at that time dwelling in your Town? Or has any marriage (that
you know, or have heard of) been made at any time, by license or without, but
between the hours of eight and twelve in the morning? Or was not the divine
Service then openly and duly said, the Assembly being called together by the
tolling or ringing of the Bells, as is at other times of divine Service used? Or
has the Minister solemnized any marriage (without Banes published) by virtue of
any license granted by the Archdeacon or his Official, or by any other
license then of the Archbishop or Bishop of this Dioces or their Chancellors,
or Vicars general, or the Commissary for faculties. And has any License been
granted by any to such persons as were not of good state and quality? Name the
persons and all particulars, as far as you know or can remember.

5 What popish Recusants, or their Children have been married in your Parish?
In what sort was the matrimony solemnized? when? and by whom?

6 Do any person, being lawfully married, live asunder? and in whom is the
default, as far as you know or believe?

7 Do any (heretofore divorced, or not) keep company at bed and board, with
any other man or woman, then with the person that he or she were married to?
what be their names? when and where were they married, and how long have they
continued so together?

8 Have you any in your Parish, which live together as man and wife, and yet
not known, by whom, where, or when they were married?

9 Have all new married persons (the same day of their marriage) duly received
the holy Communion? If not, by whose default was it, as you conceive?

10 When any Marriage is solemnized in your Parish Church, is there any thing
accustomed to be said or done (in the Church, or Chancell, at the Church
door, or in the Churchyard; either by the parties themselves, or any other
that accompany them, or that are then and there present) which is not
prescribed by the Rubricks of the Book of Common Prayer, or the Canons of the
Church, and which is impertinent or uncomely for that holy business, and not
befitting the reverence of that sacred place, in which they are assembled?
specify what it is, and present the parties.

Chap. 6. Concerning the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
BE the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners yearly in
Easter-week, according to the 89. Canon? And has any taken upon him to be
Churchwarden, not being so chosen? Or has any continued above one year in
his office, without a new choice?

2 Have any of the Churchwardens retained any of the Church-goods in their
hands, and not made a just account at the going out of their office, of what
they have received and ex^ended; or not delivered to their successors, by Bill
indented between them, whatsoever money or other things belonging to the
Church, that remained in their hands?

3 Are there in your Parish yearly, two, three, or more discreet persons,
either chosen by the Minister and Parishioners in Easter-weeke: or if they
cannot agree, appointed by the Ordinary to be Sidemen, or Assistants in joint
office with the Churchwardens?

4 What rates or leuies (as you know or have heard) are yearly or commonly
made in your Parish for Church uses? What is the usual sum thereof
ordinarily? and what are the particular uses? or where are they written down,
to which the same are for the most part employed?

5 Do the Churchwardens and Sidemen or Assistants, diligently see, that all
the Parishioners do duly resort to the Church, upon all Sundaies and Holidayes,
and there continue the whole time of divine Service and Sermon; suffering no
idle persons to walk, or talk, or stand idle, either in the Church,
Churchyard, or Church, porch, during the time of divine Service or Sermon; but
causing them either to come into the Church, or else to depart? And have they
the said Churchwardens and Sidemen forborne, either for reward, favor, or
affection, to present them, that have been, or are negligent in coming to
Church, or that use to walk or talk therein, or that have bin found by them
standing idle, (...) talking abroad, either in the Churchyard or streets in
the time of Divine Service or Sermon, on Sundaies or Holidays; or that have
not received the Communion yearly, at the Feast of Easter, or within one
month before or after?

6 Do you know of any Churchwardens, which within forty days after Easter,
in their year, did not exhibit to the Bishop, or his Chancellor, the names and
surnames of all the Parishioners, as well men as women, (which being of the age
of 16. years and upward) received not the Communion the Easter before? And
have you this last year exhibited a bill of them or are you ^so ready so to
do?

7 Do the Churchwardens against every Communion, advise with the Minister,
about the providing of a sufficient quantity of fine white-bread, and of good
and wholesome wine, for the number of Communicants that are to receive? And is
the wine brought in a clean and sweet standing pot of pewter or of other finer
metal? Upon the Communion days do your Churchwardens (immediately after
the Sermon or Homily, and the Ministers exhortation to remember the poor)
gather the devotion of the people in a fair and solemn manner, and put the
same into the poor man's box?

8 Do the Churchwardens suffer any one to read divine Service in your Church
at any time (whatsoever he pretend himself to be) till sufficient notice be
taken, by themselves or some other credible person) not only of his being in
holy Orders, but also of his License to read there. Or do they suffer any man
to preach, till he have subscribed his name in their Paper book, and the day
wherein he preached, and by whose authority he is licenced?

9 Has the Churchwardens suffered the Church, Churchyard, or Chapel, to
be profaned by Plays, Games, Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church-ales,
Drinkings, Temporal Courts, or Leets, Lay-iuries, Coroners inquests, Parish
accounts, Musters Wrestlings, wasters, dancings, ^r, at any time acted, kept,
or held in them?

10 Have any man that you know or have heard of, by speech or writing, or upon
the assertion of any other man affirmed; that men ought not to take the office
or the Oath of a Churchwarden, or of presenting at the Bishops Visitation? Or
that the said oath is unlawfully given them; or that being taken, it is but of
course, and binds them not, nor need to be regarded; or that (the said oath
notwithstanding) it is free for them, neither to make inquiry, nor to answer;
but to do what they list, and to leave out and pass by whom they will, and
what they will, in their Presentiments? Or do you know of any that have abused
the Churchwardens or other Sworn-men in your Parish, or given them evil words
for executing of their office, or to dishearten or deferr them from executing
it as by has and duly they are bound?

Chap. 7. Concerning the Parishioners.
DO any in your Parish profane any Sunday or Holyday, by any unlawful gaming,
drinking, or tippling in Tauernes, Innes, Tobacco-shops, or Alehouses, in the
time of Common Prayer or Sermon; or by working, or doing the work of their
trades and Occupations? Do any in your Parish buy or sell, or keep open their
Shops, or set out any wares to be sold on Sundays or Holidays by themselves,
their servants, or apprentises; or have they any other ways profaned the said
days? And has the Kings Declaration concerning the lawful sports and
recreations been published among you, yea or no. If so, when was it done, in
what manner, and by whom?

2 Is the fifth day of November observed and kept in your Parish, with Prayer
and Thanksgiving unto God, in such form, as is by public Authority appointed
for the day? Is the 27. day of March also well and duly observed? are the Bells
usually rung in joy of those days? Do any in your parish take upon them (in
such public manner) to observe any other days in the year but these two?

3 Is there any in your Parish that has been heard to impugn or speak
against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use
of them; or to affirm by word or writing, that the form of making and
Consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons, or any thing therein contained, is
repugnant to the word of God or that the Government of this Church under his
Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers is
Antichristian? Or has spoken reproachfully, or disgracefully of the Kings
Majesty's Courts Ecclesiastical, or of the proceedings thereof?

4 Have yon any in your Parish, that do come to the Sermon only, and not to
divine Service; or which use to come late to Church, and to depart from Church
before the Blessing be given, wherewith they are to be dismissed at the end of
Service? Or that do not reverently behave themselves entering into the Church,
and during the time of divine Service? Do all (both men and women) devoutly
kneel, when the General confession of sins, the Letany, the ten
Commandments, and all Prayers and Collects are read, as well as Baptismes,
Marriages and Burialls, as at other parts of the divine Service? Do all use due
and lowly reverence, when the blessed name of the Lord JESUS is mentioned: and
stand up when the Articles of the Creed are read? Do anymen cover their heads
in the Church, (unless it be for infirmity, in which case they may only wear
coifes or night-caps,) or then and there give themselves to babbling, talking,
or walking, and are not attentive to the Prayers and Hymns, and to hear Gods
word read and preached? Do all say Amen audibly, and make such other answers
both in the Letany, and all other parts of divine Service, as by the rule of
the Common Prayer book, are to be made by the people?

5 Do any within your Parish, men or women, being sixteen years of age and
upwards, or any other, lodging or commonly resorting to any house in your
Parish, wilfully absent themselves, from your Parish Church or Chapel, upon
Sundaies and Holidays and other days appointed, at morning and evening
Prayers, or refuse to receive the Communion. or persuade others from coming to
Church, or receiving the holy Communion?

6 Have you any popish or puritanicall Recusants in your Parish, that be of
insolent behavior, not without public offense; or that do boldly b^esse
themselves in persuading seducing or withdrawing others, either abroad, or in
their own families from the Religion established in the Church of England? And
how long have the said popish or puritanicall Recusants obstinately abstained,
either from divine Service, or from the Communion? Whether of any long time, or
of late only?

7 Are there any in your Parish, who do absent themselves at any time from your
own Church, and do resort to any other Parish or place to hear other
Preachers? Or are there any in your Parish, that do communicate, or that do
baptize their children in any other Parish? Or do the Parishioners of any
other Parish resort unto your Church? how long have they done so? and upon what
occasion or license?

8 Is there within your Parish or in any Parish near you that you know of, in
any house or family, any one that is called or reputed a Chaplain, or that is
known or supposed to have entered into holy orders? Or any that live there in
employment as a Scholar? Present there names if there be any such, and how
long they have been there, and his name in whose house they keep.

9 Is there any in your Parish, who do refuse to have their children baptized,
or themselves to receive the Communion, at the hand of your Minister, because
he is no Preacher, or does not edify in their fancy?

10 Does any married woman within your Parish, after childbirth neglect to come
to Church according to the book of Common Prayer to give thanks to God for her
safe deliverance, valled in a decent manner, as has been anciently accustomed?
does she also come to Church at or near the beginning of divine Service that
day, and when the thanksgiving for her is to be said, does she go and kneel
in some convenient place nigh to the Table, (but without the enclosure) while
the Priest standing within, by her, gives thanks for her? And does she then
offer her accustomed offerings, and receive the holy Communion, if there be one?

11 Are there within your Parish or thereunto resorting, any players on Stage,
or with Puppits, or any Musicians; Fiddlers, Rimers, or Iesters, which do use
any profane or filthy passages, in their songs, speeches, or gestures, to the
dishonor of God, abuse of Scripture, or the corrupting of good manners; or
which do publish any thing scandalous to the Church, or reproachful to the
holy Clergy?

12 Do you know of any man or woman, that has abused their Parson, Vicar, or,
Curate, or any other that is in holy Orders, with contumelious words, or
unciuill gestures or deeds, or behaved themselves rudely toward them? Or that
have reproached either the marriage or the single life of Priests, or have said,
or done any thing else that did redound to the (...) or dishonor of their
persons or of their holy function and calling?

13 Have you any in your parish that are commonly known, or reputed to be
blasphemers of Gods holy name, common and usual swearers, drunkards, usurers,
filthy speakers, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, bawdes,
concealers of fornicators or adulterers? Have any in your parish been detected
of such notorious crimes, and what penance have they done for the same?

14 What corporal punishment for any such, or any other offense, has been
commuted and changed into a pecuniary mulct or sum of money, by any
Ecclesiastical Judge exercising jurisdiction within this Dioces, what was the
sum of money by any of them so received and taken, and to what uses was the
same employed? And upon such Commutations, was the unfeigned repentance of the
delinquent published in the Church? And has Commutation been granted to one
and the same party above once, for any crime of the same kind

15 Do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses, cause their children,
servants and apprentises to come to the public catechizing on Sundays and
Holidays, to be instructed and taught therein? And those that do not their
duties herein, in not sending them to it, or not duly coming, or not learning
and answering, you shall present their names?

16 Have any in your Parish received or harbored any woman begotten with child
out of wedlock, and suffered her to depart without punishment first inflicted
on her by the Ordinarye You shall truly present as well the party harboring,
as harbored; and who is suspected to be the father of the child?

17 Is any person or persons suspected or detected heertofore of incontinency,
and therefore departing out of your parish for a season, now returned again?
Or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your knowledge, or as you
have heard? You shall not fail to present the whole truth in that behalf, as
far as you know?

18 Do all your parishioners, of what sort soever, receive the blessed
Sacrament, thrice every year at least, and when they do receive it, do they
all according as the Church expressly them commands, draw near, and with all
Christian humility and reverence come before the Lords Table? And not (after
the most contemptuous and unholy usage of some, if men did rightly consider)
sit still in their seats or pewes, to have the blessed Body and Blood of our
Savior go up and down, to seek them all the Church over?

19 Are there any deceased in your parish, whose last Wills and Testaments have
not yet been proved? or did they dye intestate? And if so, who has taken upon
him the administration of their goods, and whether by lawful authority from
the Ordinary, or without? What be the names of such deceased, and of their
Executors and Administrators?

20 What persons be excommunicated in your parish, and for what cause to your
knowledge? And how long have they stood excommunicate? And do any of them, not
being absolved, presume to be present in the Church at divine Service? And do
any familiarly use the company of such as do obsturately stand excommunicate,
knowing the same; and what be their names?

Chap. 8. Concerning Schoolmasters, Physicians, Chirurgions, Midwives,
Parish-clarks, and Sextons.
Have you any School master in your Parish, that teaches publicly or in any
private houses? And if so, what is his name, and how long has he been there?
Is there any teaching of Scholars to read or write in the Chancell, or in any
part of the Church? Does any Papist keep a Schoolmasters in his house, who
comes not to Church to hear divine Service, and to receive the holy
Communion? What is his name, and how long has he taught there or elsewhere?
Does your Schoolmasters teach any Papists or Sectaries children, that come not
to Church? Does he bring his scholars to Church, and duly instruct them all
to learn the Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer, at the least once every
week; or what other Catechism does he teach? Is he of honest and sincere
life, and religion, and conversation? Is he a Graduate, and sufficient to
teach, and diligent in teaching and bringing up of youth?

2 Is any thing withholden or otherwise employed, that has been given to the
use of a school in your parish? What is it? by whom is it imbezelled?

3 What Physician or Surgeon have you in your parish, who not being a Doctor
of Physic, or otherwise sufficiently licenced in either of the Universities,
does notwithstanding practice physic? what other persons have you among you,
either male or female, who take upon them to profess or practice physic or
surgery? And who be Midwiues in your parish?

4 Have you a fit Parish-clark (aged 20. years at least) and a Sexton? Is your
Clark or Sexton of honest life, able to read and write? Are his and the Sextons
wages duly paid without fraud or diminution, according to the ancient custom
of your parish? What are the said wages by the year? By whom are the said
Clark or Sexton chosen? Are both or either of them diligent in his office, and
serviceable to the Minister? Does he keep the Church clean and the doors
locked? Is there any thing lost or spoiled through his default?

5 Does your Clark or Sexton take upon him to have, or suffer any superstitious
or any unseasonable ringing of the Bells at any time, or any ringing without
good cause, such as the Minister and Churchwardens have not allowed? When
notice is given of any Christian passing out of this life, within the parish,
does he neglect to toll a passing bell, or to ring presently after the
departure?

6 Does your parish Clark or Sexton or any other of your parish exact or
require more then the ordinary and accustomed Fee for any service done by him
or them, in or ^at marriages christenings and burials; or for any thing else
concerning the same? or have they refused to do their duties therein, until
they have received what they demanded?

Chap. 9. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
WHat peculiar or exempt Jurisdictions know you of, within the compass of this
parish?

2 Are there any Ecclesiastical Officers exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Dioces, or any Ministers or Clarks under them, who do
take or exact any extraordinary fees, for any cause that you know of, or by way
of gratuity for expedition?

3 Have any Churchwardens and Quest-men, concealed and not presented any
abuses or offenses punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court? Or have any such
offenses, being by them presented to the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official, or
any other using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this Dioces, been
suppressed or left unpunished, for bribe, reward, pleasure, friend-ship, fear,
or any other partial respect?

4 Are any assemblies called Vestry-meetings, held in your Parish? when and how
often are they? In what place, and by whom? Has any thing (that you have heard
of) been proposed, treated or concluded therein, touching the divine Service,
or the doctrine and discipline of the Church? Or any thing meddled with, for the
government of the Church or parish, which belongs to the Ecclesiastical
cognition and Jurisdiction?

5 Does the Archdeacon once in three years, visit and survey your Church,
touching the repaires of the same, and upon any defect found, has he made
certificate of it, as far as you know or have heard?

6 Are there placed by the Registrar, two Tables containing the several rates
and sums of all fees due to the Judge, and other officers of your Courts; one
in the usual place or Consistory, where the Court is kept; the other in the
Regestry; in such sort as every man may come to view the same without
difficulty? and does the Chancellor, Archdeacon, or Official, or any other
Minister of the Court, exact or extort any other greater fees or sums of
money, then in the said tables are contained?

7 Does the Archdeacon his Official, or Surrogate, make commutation of any
penance; or does the Chancellor, or any Surrogate under him commute or change
any penance or corporal punishment, for any money, without the consent of the
Bishop? And what money have they or any of them received for such commutation,
and of whom? when, and what was the offense, for which any such sum of money
was received, or appointed to be paid?

8 Does the Chancellor, Archdeacon, or Official, or any other person using
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, speed any act in any cause, privately of
themselves, and not in the presence of some public Notary or Actuary? Or (for
want of them) in the presence of two (or more) sufficient witnesses, and then
cause the same act to be registered?

9 Is the number of Apparitors increased in this Dioces? And wherein, and in
what manner is the Country ouerburthened or grieved by them? Has any of them
under pretense of authority, cited or summoned any person unlawfully; or has
any of them taken any reward for the concealing of any offense or sin, or that
the offenders might escape punishment? Who be they that have so done? Or do
any of them take any fees that are not usual? Have they threatened any to
prosecute them, if they had no reward given them? Or do any of them cause any
party to appear in any Ecclesiastical Court within this Dioces, without a
citation first obtained from the Judge of the Court?

10 Has any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer whatsoever, Advocate, Register,
Procter, Clarke, or other such Ministers, any way abused themselves in their
Offices, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that behalf provided, that you
know of?

11 Does the Registrar or any of the Clerks in Ecclesiastical Office, when
any obtain Absolution from the Judge, neglect to send forth the same under the
Seal of the office, or does any of them presume to give signification unto the
Minister of the Parish, only by a Note or Ticket, under their hand, to the
intent that notice thereof should be taken, or the same be published in the
Parish by him?

12 Lastly, have you and every of you, by your selves read, or have caused to
be read to you, all these Article? Have you well examined and inquired into
every particular therein intended? Have you sincerely, uprightly, and without
any partial affection or concealment, presented and made known all and every
of the offenders in any of the particulars, either as they are taken in truth
to be, or by common fame reported?

If you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance, worthy the
presentment in your judgment and fit to be reformed by Ecclesiastical
censure, though it be not expressed in these Articles, yet you shall likewise
present the same by virtue of your oaths.

The Minister also of every Parish may and ought to join with the
Churchwardens, or other Sworn-men, for the presenting of offenses; and if they
be so irreligious as not to do it, the Minister of himself may and ought to
present either the offenses, or the Churchwardens and Quest-men, for not
presenting, the same and is required in his Canonical obedience so to do.

There must be distinct answer made to every Article, and to every branch
thereof, as far as they know, or have heard of any offense, otherwise the
presentment will not be admitted.

And if (their Oath and all this punctual direction and advertisement
notwithstanding) any Churchwardens or other Sworn-men, shall follow the
customary manner, and be careless in inquiring and presenting as they ought,
then shall they not be able hereafter to say, that they had not fair warning
to the contrary given them in the spirit of meekness; or to complain, that
they are hardly dealt with, if (upon information and proof otherwise had) they
be called to answer their wilful perjury, in some other Court, or course of
justice, for neglecting to inquire and present to all the particulars herein
proposed.

And to the intent that all things above mentioned may (by the help of God) as
well be kept, as set in good order, the Chancellor of the Dioces, and the
Official, and all their Surrogates are hereby required, that so far as to them
in their several places it shall appertain, they do faithfully inquire after
all these things, and in all places of their Jurisdictions exact a due
observance of the same.

The Parson, Vicar, or Curate of this Parish is required to receive this book,
and upon the Sunday next after the receipt hereof, immediately after the
Morning Service to publish the contents of the Process which is sent forth.
That all Preachers and Lecturers (if there be any in the Parish) together with
the Churchwardens and two or three of the chiefest Parishioners beside, as
also all Physicians, Schole-masters, Chirurgions, Midwiues, and Sequestrators
and all other whom it does concern, may take notice of the day and place
specified in the said Process, for appearance at the Lord Bishops Visitation:
and after publication so made, this book of Articles is to be presently
delivered to the said Churchwardens, for the use of themselves and the rest
that are to make the presentiments.

Ma. Elien

FINIS.

