ARTICLES to be enquired of within the Dioces of Winchester, in the
Metropoliticall visitation of the most Reverend Father in Christ, Matthew by
the providence of God, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan. 1575

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. 1575

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

For the Clergy.
IN primis, whether any have intruded them selves, and presume to exercise any
kind of ministry in the Church of God, without imposition of hands and
lawful calling by ordinary authority, and whether any admitted but to
Deaconrie usurp the office of the Minister.

2 Item, whether any lay persons take upon the^ to read openly in the
congregation divine service, in any Church, Chapel or oratorie, without they
be thereunto upon some urgent cause, or great necessity for a time licenced by
the ordinary. Wherefore such have been allowed, and how long they have served,
and whether any of them have taken upon them to solemnise Matrimony, or to
minister any Sacrament.

3 Item, whether any homicide or felone, any notoriously infamous, and
disabled by the Ecclesiastical laws, any ordained out of the Dioces where
they were borne, or by long time made their abode without letters dimissories
from their ordinary, exercise the ministry, or any Ecclesiastical calling
in this Dioces.

4 Item, whether any Deacon or minister be removed from any other Dioces to
serve in this, without letters testimonial of the ordinary from whose Dioces
he came to testify the cause of his departing thence, and of his behavior.

5 Item, whether any Deacon or minister in this Dioces go not comely and
soberly in apparel according as it is appointed in the Queens majesty's
Injunctions, and in the aduertisementes, or live disordinatly in riotyng,
gamyng, haukyng, huntyng, or beholding and garyng at any Idle pastime, or
exercisyng any laicall trade, or mystery for gain and lucre sclaunderous to
their calling in the Church.

6 Item, whether any being once ordained Priest or minister, does not still
continue in their calling, or frequenteth and resorteth not to the Common
prayer, or at times appointed communicates not, or have cast of their calling,
and go and boast the^ selves like lay men.

7 Ite^, whether any of them say or sing in private conuenticles Mass, or any
service contrary to the laws of this Realm.

8. Item, whether any be permitted to preach in any place within this Dioces,
not being thereunto lawfully lyce^sed either by the Queens Majesty, or the
Archbishop of the Province, or the Bishop of the Dioces, and whether the
Parson, Uicare or Curate and Churchwardens of every Parish do call for every
such license, and peruse it before they suffer the party to preach.

9 Item, whether your Preachers set out in their sermons the Queens Majesty's
authority over all her subjects, and in all causes, and exhort their hearers
to due obedience under the same, to the following of her Majesty's Injunctions,
and other laws, statutes, orders, aduertismentes and decrees set forth by
common authority for the establishyng of Christian Religion and maintenance of
the Ecclesiastical policy in this Realm, or whether any of them have done
or said any thing to the contrary.

10 Item, whether they likewise in their preaching excite and styre up the
people to charity one with another, to godliness of life, often and devout
receauyng of the holy Communion, frequentyng divine service, hearing the word
of God read or taught, and such like, and also to all kind of Civil duties
meet for subjects, or be curious in moving new needelesse doubts, whereby the
people may be sooner styrred to debates and controversies, then edified in
wholesome doctrine, continued in Christian love, or provoked to godly life.

11 Item, whether in their conversation and behavior, they be modest, grave,
and sober, according to their calling, and for the better credit of their
doctrine, or otherwise.

12 Item, whether your Parsons or Uicars, be continually resident upon their
benefices, if they be absent, where they be: whether in their absence their
cures be sufficiently discharged and served.

13 Item, whether they have any other or more benefices, in what country or
Dioces they lie, whether they came to any of them by fraud, guile, deceit, or
symonie.

14 Item, whether they make or cause to be made their monthly and quarterly
Sermons, instruct and examine the youth of their Parishes in the Catechism at
Euenyng Prayer on Sondayes and holidays: whether they move the Parishioners
and the Pare^tes to buy the Catechism lately set forth with additions by the
Queens Majesty's authority: whether they read the Homylies on Sondayes, when
there be no Sermons, and the Queens Majesty's Injunctions every quarter.

15 Item, whether and how long after his Induction, your Parson or Uicare read
openly in your Church at divine service, the Articles of Religion which
concern the confession of the true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the
Sacraments appointed to be publicly read by an Act of Parliament made in
the xiij. year of her Majesty's reign.

16 Item, whether they pronounce divine service and other things to be read at
common prayer plainly and distinctly to the hearing and intelligence of the
people, and minister the Sacraments reverently, in such sort as is set forth
by the laws of this Realm, the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, and the
aduertismentes, without any kind of variation.

17 Item, in the time of celebration of divine service whether they wear
surplisses, or celebrate the said service in the Chauncell or in the Church,
Baptize in Basins or in the Fontes standing in the places accustomed, minister
the holy Communion in water bread, or common bread, in profane Cups, dishes,
bowls, old massing Challices, or in a decent communion cup provided and kept
for the same only of purpose, and whether the Communicantes receive sta^dyng,
sittyng, or kneeling.

18 Item, whether they have entered into their benefices without lawful
ingresse thereunto by Institution, or Collation and Induction, whether they
maintain their mansions houses, Chauncels and other edifices pertainyng to
their benefices and Churches in sufficient reparations, and whether they make
spoil or wast of any thing partaining to them.

19 Item, whether such of them as may dispend an C. pound in spiritual
livings by the year, allows to the exhibitio^ of some Scholar in Cambridge
or Oxford iij. pounds vi. s. viij. pence yearly, and what scholar receaueth
it.

20 Item, whether any of the^ have demysed any of their benefices, or any part
of them otherwise then is appointed in an Act of Parliament. an. 13. of the
Queens majesty's reign cap. 17. or in defraude thereof convey the fruits of
the same by some other shifts any other ways.

21 Item, whether they record from time to time in a Register all marriages,
Christening and Burials, and yearly deliver the copies of them to the Bishop
by Indenture.

22 Item, whether in the days of perambulatio^ they use any other rite or
Ceremony then to sing or say in English the ij. Psalms beginning. Benedic
anima mea. etc. with the Letanie and Suffrages thereto, and one Homely of
thanks giuyng set forth and divided into four parts, without any other
superstitious ceremony heretofore used, whether women go about with them, and
to what value there was heretofore wont to be bestowed at the sta^dyng and
restyng places of the said Rogations to be bestowed.

23 Item, whether they use to comfort the sick specially at the time of their
passing out of this transitory world, and what textes of Scripture they have
ready for the same purpose.

24 Item, whether any of them or their Curates not being lawfully authorized to
preach take upon them to expound any Scripture, or by the way of exhortation
move any matter of doctrine, but be content only to read gravely and aptely
the service, lessons, and Homelies set forth without any glosing or addition to
the same.

25 Item, whether they admit any notorious sinners or uncharitable persons to
the holy Communion, any that can not say without book the Lords Prayer, the
Articles of Christian Faith, and the x. Commandments, or suffer any children
to answer as Godfather or Godmother at Baptism except they have received the
holy Communion, and can say the Catechism.

26 Item, whether they keep competent hospitality, according to their
lyuinges, and if they be not resident, whether they bestow the xl. part of
their living yearly amongst the poor, if their living be above xx. l. a
year.

27 Item, whether such beneficed men, or enjoying any spiritual living, as be
not reside^t at their liuinges, if they pretend study at any of the
Universities, be once in the year called home to the Ordinary to be examyned
how they profit in learning, whether any be suffered with the living of the
Church to become serving or waiting men, Lawyers clerks, or otherwise to live
dissolutely or in a mere lay vocation therewith.

28 Item, whether your Parson, or Vicar was inducted into possession of your
parsonage or vicaredge since the xiij. year of the Queens majesty's reign,
whether he was then Deacon or minister, and in what year of his age: whether
he was an able preacher lycensed thereunto, and by whom: whether, and how long
after his induction he read openly in your Church at divine service, the
declaration of uniformity in Religion set forth by the two Archbyshoppes of
Canterbury and York.

29 Item, whether any parsonage or vicarege, or any other spiritual living in
this Dioces be holden by the name and title of any beyond the seas, and whether
the cause of his being there be lawfully approved and allowed.

30 Item, besides benefices with cure of soul, what other dignities,
promotions, prebendes or spiritual lyuinges your Parson or Vicar has, what be
their names, and where they lie.

31 Item, whether the proprietaryes of parsonages with vycariges endowed, leave
a sufficient portion of the fruits, or annuitye to the Vicares to discharge
the cure of souls, and to keep hospitalitye: whether they help and assist
them in the preaching and setting forth of Gods word, and seeing the Queens
majesty's Injunctions, and other statutes, orders, and aduertismentes set forth
by public authority well observed: Whether they wythhold from their Vicares
their due portions of fruits or monye, or ouercharge the^ with reparations of
Chauncels, duties for visitations and synods, or other paymentes, and whether
for the ease of the said Vicares, they pay such duties as by composition or
custom has heretofore been due.

32 Item, whether the parish clerks be admitted without the consent of the
Parson or Vicar: whether they be not obedient to the Parsons, Vicars, or their
Curates, specially in matters touching the celebration of divine service, and
the Church business: whether they keep the books and ornaments of the Church,
the quyer or the place where divine service is appointed to be done, the
Communion table, the Pulpit, and the Font fair and decent, for divine service,
administration of the Sacraments and preaching: whether any withhold from the
said Clerks their accustomed wages, relief and benevolence.

33 Item, whether any Scholemaster teach openly or privately within this
Dioces, in any noble or gentleman's house, or any where else not being allowed
and examyned by ye Ordinary for sincere Religion, honest conversation, and
sufficient learning: whether they teach any other Grammar, or any other
Catechism then is set forth by the Queens majesty's authority: whether they
suffer their scholars to read any books tendyng to the impugnyng and
derogation of the order of religion now set forth, or propounde to them any
Themes, vulgares, or subtle questions, whereby matters of Religion concluded
and establyshed might be made doubtful unto them, or they induced to deryde or
scoff at any godly order, Ryte or Ceremony now set forth and allowed.

For the Laytie.
34 IN primis, whether any parishioner is negligent or obstinate in coming to
his own parish Church or Chapel for divine service, and their receauyng the
holy Communion at the least thrice a year, contempne the word of God, or
indeed or word despises or sets light by the public order of Religion
set forth and establyshed.

35 Item, whether any contempne, hurt, stryke, or any ways abuse any minister
or Deacon, specially in the time of celebration of divine service,
administration of the Sacraments, or preaching of Gods word, or whether any of
them neglect or refuse to bring or send their children and servants to be
catechysed.

36 Item, whether Innes, Tauernes, victayling and typling houses or gamyng
places be patent or entered into, in service or preaching time, whether there be
any adulterers, drunckards, baudes, scoldes and brawlers, privy and crafty
sowers of discord, open and manifest usurers, sorcerers, inchaunters, or any
having confidence in any such deuilishe imaginations in your parishes.

37 Item, whether you Churchwarde^s and sworn men, and such as were before
you, have according to the act of Parliament therefore in the first year of
the Queens majesty's reign provided, levied of every one that wilfully or
negligently is absent from Church, or irreverently behaueth himself at common
prayer as is in the said act appointed xij. d. for every such offense.
Whereunto the said forfayture is applied, what account thereof yearly is made,
and whether your poor man's box be accordingly kept, and the alms thereof
accounted yearly to your parish.

38 Item, whether all Images, altars, Shrynes, and other monumentes of Idolatry
and superstion be utterly defaced and put out in your parishes: whether your
Churches and Churchyardes be well repaired, adorned and fenced: whether the
Roode loftes be pulled down, and a partition made and kept betwixt the
Chauncell and the Church, according to the aduertisments. Whether likewise all
mass books, Antiphoners, Grayles, and other such books which served for
superstitious Latin service, be defaced and abolished.

39 Item, whether you have in your Churches all things requisite for common
prayer and administration of the Sacraments, and preaching: As a Bible of the
largest volume, the book of common prayer, a table of the x. Commandments
before the Communion bourde, the aduertismentes, the admonition for degrees of
matrimony, a convenient pulpit well placed, a comely and decent Communion Table
standing upon a frame with a fair covering of some carpet, silk or linen
cloth to lay upon it, a Communion cup with a cover of silver, and such like.

40 Item, whether any sale of your church goods have been made, by whom, and to
whom: whether an Inuentory be kept of all such goods as have from time to time
been purchased, given or bequeathed to the Church, whether an account be thereof
yearly made: whether the said goods be increased or decayed, and by whose
default or negligence: In whose hands the said Church goods or any of them
remain.

41 Item, whether you see that on Sondayes and holidays, Innes, tauernes, and
victualling houses be not frequented at service time, and shoppes also shut up,
and your Parishioners cease from worldly business, whether any other holidays
be kept then such as be appointed in the book of Common prayer, whether any
heresies, false opinions, Popish and superstitious doctrine, be maintained in
your Parishes and by whom.

42 Item, whether there be any in these parts, that have married within degrees
of affinity or consanguinitie, by the laws of God forbidden, so set out in a
table for an admonition. Any man that has two wives, or any woman that has
two husbands. Any that being divorced or separated aside, has married again.
Any married that have made precontractes. Any that have made privy or secret
contractes. And that have married without banes thrice solemnly asked. Any
couples married that live not together, but slanderously live a part: Any that
have married out of the Parish Church, where they ought to have the same
solemnised.

43 Item, whether therebe any secret or privy co^uenticles or exercises in
disputations for matters of Religion in any of your Parishes, whether any
superstitious and superfluous ringyng at burials, Saints eue^s, or festival
days be suffered. Whether any Lords of misrules, Summer Lords or Ladies,
disguised persons come irreverently into the Church and specially in the
service time to play any games, who they be that commit such disorders or
accompany and mainteyne them.

44 Item, whether any patrones have by the^ selves or by other directly or
indirectly practiced for the presentyng of any Clarke to any spiritual living
before the said presentation, or after to have money or money worth or any
other commodity. Whether the Church of your Parish be void, how long it
has so been, who receives the tithes and profits thereof, and by what
authority, whether the patron or any other have pulled down any Church,
chau^cell or mansion house taking away the lead, belles, ornaments, goods or
glebe lands or converted the tithes, revenues or possessions of the said
Church to his own private use.

45 Item, whether any conceal the will and testament of any departed or
fulfill not ye same, chiefly in Legacies bequethed to good and godly uses,
whether any executor have defrauded any widow, fatherles child, or any other in
their minority of their legacies, or any administrator appointed to administer
to the use of any in their minority have beguiled them and not given account
of their said administration. Whether any administer without probate of the
Testament or taking authority from the ordinary, and whether any legacies
heretofore given to uses now forbidden, be not converted to some godly and
lawful use.

46 Item, whether midwiues be of sober life and vncorrupt religion, not
suspected of Papistry, whether any of them use in the time of women's travel
any witchcraft, charms, Latin prayers or inuocations, or take upon them to
Baptize, whether when they be present at the delivery of any child known or
suspected to be begotten in unlawful matrimony, do not straightly charge the
mother to declare who is the father and where it was begotten, and immediately
certify the ordinary or at the least the Curate and Churchwardens of the
Parish thereof.

Articles of inquiry for the exercise of spiritual jurisdiction within this
Dioces.
47 IN primis, whether the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Dioces have been
exercised by expert and hable men such as the law requires. Whether the
Chau^cellor, Archdeacons, or any under them have at any time suffered faults
and tra^sgressions to remain unpunished for money, gain, pleasure, friendship,
or any other affectionat respect, whether in matters of instaunce betwixt
party and party they have denied audience, specially at the complaint of the
poor fre^dles and fatherles, or by admitting frivolous and unfit matters, or
excludyng and barring reasonable and necessary defenses, have delayed or
peruerred justice or the execution thereof. Whether they have impeached or
manaced parties in judgment so that they have been stayed or compelled to
desiste from persecuting their Appeals or complaints to the Queens maiestic
or the Archbishop for just griefs and wrongs to them procured.

48 Ite^, whether any of them have been burdensome to any in this Dioces by
exacting and taking excessive fees, rewards or commodities by the way of
promotion, gift, contribution, redemption of penance to their own use,
obteining of any benefice or office, or any other like ways, whether in their
visitatio^s and Sinodes they spend the time any otherwise then in dilligent
Inquisition and reformation of disorders, or suffer the Clerks or servants
of their retinue riotousely to behave them selves.

49 Item, whether Archdeacons in their visitations see that all necessary
books and orname^tes for divine service be had in every parish, and whether
Church goods and stocks be augmented or empayred, whether Churches,
Churchyardes, ma^sion houses be well repaired and fenced. Whether in their
Synodes they take account of the Clargy how they profit in the study of holy
Scripture, whether they grant any license to celebrate matrimony the banes not
thrice sole^nely asked, either for prohibition of time or any other such cause.

50 Item, whether they have uprightly and unfeignedly both observed in their own
persons, and toward all other put in due execution the Ecclesiastical laws
of this Realm the Queens Majesty's Injunctions and other her highness
commandments, orders, decrees, and aduertisementes set forth for the public
administration of Gods holy word and Sacraments. Whether they have commended
and favored all those that sought the same, and condignely punished all those
that sought the contrary.

51 Item, whether the Deanes of your Deanries be of the best learned sort, and
best conversation, and least suspected for superstitious or schismatic
doctrine and opinions: whether they do mark the life and study of the
clargie, and inform the Ordinary or Archdeacons thereof: whether they be
negligent in executing mandates or precepts sent unto them from any
Ecclesiastical court: whether they enquire of light women which come into
their Deanries to be brought a bed, of Curates and scholemasters not licensed,
of privy co^tractes and marriages, of concealed Images and monuments of
superstition, and of other close disorders used within their Deanries,
certifying the Ordinary thereof for due and spedy reformation.

52 Item, whether your peculiar Judges exercise their Jurisdiction by
themselves or by learned deputies, and not by unable men, as their farmers and
such like: whether they have skillful registers and perfect record of their
acts and procedings: whether they wink at such as be harbored in their
peculiers for avoiding of process and correction in this or any other Dioces,
and detect them not to the Ordinary.

53 Item, whether your apparitors have taken money or money worth, for
concealing or cloking of any vice, or have conveyed any offenders from one
place to an other to escape punishment, or cited any body without due process,
or delay the execution and seruyng of their process, or give warnyng to the
party cited, to keep him out of the way, or dispitefully serve their process
in time of divine service, to the disturbance of the parish: whether they
appointe vndersomners or substitutes to do their office, or threaten any with
process, or without, for bribes in corn, woll, chese, or any thing else:
whether any of them be ouerchargeable to the Clargie or Layty in trauailyng
about the executing of their said processes.

54 Item, whether the Registers and Notaries within this Dioces make just and
true records of acts done and passed in their presents, and deliver at ye
parties request true copyes of the same without excessive taking: whether they
or any of them take annual fees of any of the clergy, or their farmers, for
exhibiting proxies in visitations or synodes, or excusing their absence, and
saving their apperance when they should iudicially come in, or any other
respect, whereby parcialitie might grow, and equity be excluded out of
judgment.

55 Item, whether the Proctors of the Ecclesiastical court be co^te^ted with
their ordinary fees: whether any of them encourage their clyentes to persist in
evil and wrongful causes, or bargayne with them before hand for the gain of
any suit after the euictio^: whether any of them devise and object frivolous,
impertine^t and dilatory matters or allegations, to the intent to prolong
suits, and hinder the expedition of Justice, and specially in causes of
Matrimony, alementation of fatherles children, and such like summary matters.

56. And generally you shall enquire and present all evil lyuers or offenders
of Gods most holy laws, and specially such as stubburnely refuse to conform
themselves to unity and good Religion, or that disturb the same by brutyng
abroad rumors of the alteration thereof, or seek new devises and innouations.


