The Advice and answer of my Lord ye Prince of Orange, Cou^tie Nassau etc. and
of ye States of Holland and Zeland, made by the Estates general on thisside,
upon the Articles conceived and and after concluded and accorded* ^n fourm of a
pertuall Edict between Lord Don John Duke of Austrich, Knight of ye Order of
the Golden Fleece of the part and in the name of the Catholic king of Spain
of the one party / and the said general Estates of the other.

Translated out of Dutch into English,

Imprinted at London by John Judge and John Allde.

MY Lord the Prince of Ore^ge and the states of Holland and Zeland, having see^
ye credible letteres sent from my Lords the general states of the low
countries, by my Lord of VVillersall, and Master Paul Bays Advocate of
Holland, In company of my Lord the Amba^sador from the Emperor, and thereunto
being ernestly requested, to be brought over unto the aforesaid Lord and
Prince, and having understood there by that the aforsaid Lords and states
destred to have their advice upon any Article concluded on, by manner of an
everlasting Edict, in the name of the King, and confirmation of the peace,
being between the lands over and on this side, and Do^ John of Eastenrick. The
which Articles having been wholly showed unto them, having answered, and do
answer the same which hereafter follows.

That is to say. At the sight of the aforsaid Articles, they cannot leave but
commend the ernest zele and great desire which ye aforsaid Lords and states,
do show to have, in setting again our poor distressed native Country, in
his perfect quietness, and peace which has long time been wished and desired.
And they understand firmly, that the aforsaid Lord and states, have had no^e
other regard or meaning in the same, then that once they might deliver these
poor oporessed people from so may miseries and calamities, wherewith welnigh
they already have been destroyed and overwhelmed, thorough the cruel and
insufferable tyranny of the proud Spainish nation, and their unlawful
government, by them brought in. And in ye time to come, good order and sure
remedy as may be appointed, yt heed after we fall not in the like danger,
with one firm and unviolable maintnance of the old privileges, laws and
liberties of the lands, and that specially has been their purpose, with the
aforesaid Articles to defend, in all and over all, the last pacification made
and concludes in the city o^ Gaunt, the 8. of November last past. Such as in
all their letters, (...) and protestations they have always promised and
assured, the same being surely worthy of praise and commendation^ by all our
posterity. But notwithstanding, after that the aforesaid Lord and Prince and
states of Holland and Zeland had perused the aforesaid Articles from point to
point, according to the present opportunity of the cause, and necessity of the
sa^e, ye which forces the^ to ouerlooke and way all the circumstances, like as
in the time of our forefathers, the which in the like occasions, never have
left to approve and obtain of their Princes, new and commendable Privileges. So
then they have thought that with the aforesaid Articles, the good zeal and
desire of the aforesaid Lord and states before mentionned: is not in all
things, wholly and perfectly accomplished. For first it seems that the
aforesaid old privileges of the lane, the which they by all kind of ways
destred to have established: certain byewayes are found, which tend greatly to
the abridging of the same, so that the power and liberty of gathering the
general states together in them to whom of old time and right it did
appertain: covertly taken away, as also that the states of the land are bound
unto new bonds, and oaths hertofore never used. Beside the which men may
evidently se, the manifest inuiolating of the said privileges, in the unjust
withholding of the County of Buren, who as all the world knows, was taken
and carried away against all law, reason, and yt privileges of the aforesaid
lands, the which ought more to have been considered of, in that at the
beginning, the said privileges were so infringed, and a matter which manifestly
and specially, ought to have served to the erecting and establishing of the
same, especially in seeing of one particular person the which in no one cause
could have offended, which gives small hepe that the same hereafter shall be
kept, unto the whose people and Cities in general.

Against yt which there shall lack no matter for to accuse the^ of crimes and
rebellion. Adding thereto, that in this dealing is handled manifestly, against
the aforsaid pacificacie of Gaunt, and for that it is against the same, it
tends to ye subversion of the whole, whereto the aforsaid Articles seem to
extend, the which more plainly appears, in that th'approbatio^ and agreeing
of the same, in no part is so plain and simple, as the reason and weight of
such a ^ace well requires, but wholly depending on certain denialis, limited and
submitted to an innumerable of deceitful delays, and in all being like the
same which in the time of madame of Pa^ which has caused this great and
terrible bloodshed, against the which also was recovered by the Deputy of the
aforesaid Lord, Prince and states of Holland and zeland protestations and acts,
belonging to the agreement well ^eer in like effect done by the consent of the
states.

Moreover the aforsaid Lords, Prince and states of Holland and zeland, do
find as they understand, some points being so co^bersome unto their native
country, that they suppose the remembrance of the same for ever, as also unto
their posterit^e, should be imprinted an everlasting shame and stain unto them,
in that that we not only should have rewarded them their wages that
euercharged, and unworthily used us: but also should tread in composition and
agreement with those which we by open proclamation, and the authority of the
King, and of the states have declared and perticulerly by ^n instruction before
the states of the holy Empire, have caused to be accused for accent Villayues
and Rebels, the which had made any covenants or conspirasies with the
Spaniards. And that which is more, we wittingly have consented and suffered
them to carry out of our native country all kind of bag and baggage, out
Jewels, money, goods, merchandise, and assesments, without any gainsaying.
Moreover the aforesaid Lords, Prince and states of Holland and zela^d do think,
yt there is not sufficiently see^ and never wa^ed ye respect, honor and
thankfulness that we owe to the right noble and most mighty Queen of England,
as also unto my Lord the Duke, and brother to the King of France, the which
have showed their redines with their whole good will in helping us with their
goods, in pulling us out from the oppressions and slavery, wherein we found our
selves as the^ agreeued. Therefore reason would have required, that they should
have been therein comprehended with plain and honorable speeches. And lastly we
do not find in the afforesaid Articles, that the inhabitants of Holland and
zeland, were provided for with any assurance, although in the last handling of
the peace at Breda, many necessary and reasonable a^^^^ances were presented, and
as should have been also done the last time when they handled of the peace at
Gaunt. If so be that their deputeds, so well with their mouths as with their
writings, did declare, that they in no manner of ways, understood to handle
with any other then with the states them selves: they would have showed, how
they on their side, walked in good truth, protesting if their meaning had been
to have received Don John, and yt they must have tractated with him in that
sort as they now do: they would have required other assurances, such as
reason and the occasion of the cause should have required. And in these
Articles is not only one assurance, but also no mention made of the
perticulers, by substituting them wholly in to their own again, touching their
gods, states, and governments, the which they have in diverse plates over on
this side, as also in the country of Bourgoingen, the which nevertheless
following the ^oo^ of the pacificacie, the which at that some time was not
handled there with the general states of the lands over on this side, and over
these with express words might not be specified, accerding to all reason
ought well to have been provided for, and that is more they can p^rceiue none
assurance in the aforesaid Articles. Also for the other provinces, and all the
poor common people over on this side, seeing that neither of the ^a^^ng of
holds or Cast^ls (out of ye which as it is well known unto every one, much
evil is chanced) as is not once touched or expressed, neither also pronounced
any perticulers, nor declarings of the ob^^n^usnes therein once mentioned, the
which unto the common people cannot be otherwise but suspicion, the which
openly, and now in the last departure unto this present has been threatened,
be^^^ing therefore truly good assurance for the time to come when as the la^d
shall be unweaponed, and Don John established in the authority, and government
if it were but the view of the'ramples of the times past. But it seems to the
contrary that the states shall be joined with such governors, as shall be to their
contentation for this time, as if they meant hereafter to take from the^ al
mea^es whereby they might hold them selves assured against the evil intent of
such as they appointe to b^ their governors.

To make short, there were many other such Articles, which after they thought
of the aforesaid Lord Prince and states of Holla^d and zeland ought ^el to have
been ouerseen and marked, it was therefore their purpose, to put in writing all
the same, and to send it ever to the aforesaid Lord and states, and only to
declare unto them that it was now the time, following the footsteps of our
progenitors, to request, follow and obtain the increasing and multiplying of
the privileges, laws and liberties, left unto us by them. And specially having
thereunto so good an occasion and opportunity, that we fall not again in to the
like calamity. But when as they were busy in drawing the aforesaid, points
and articles and to put them in writing, to the end as before, there is come to
their bands the copy of the missiue which the aforsaid Lord and states, had
written unto ye aforesaid Don John, out of ye which they have understood, yt
the forsaid Lord and states, have promised, without any tarying for answer
upon the said Articles, to conclude with the said Don John, and to require him
to subscribe the same Articles, with promise to cause them to be published, and
to receive him in to the country whereof the aforesaid Lord, Prince and states
of Holla^d and zela^d have wundred much, seeing such a change, perceiving yt
the date of the^ aforesaid missiue welnigh was of ye sa^e time (so as they
shortly after came unto t^eir hands) that the aforsaid Lord of VVilleruall, was
come unto them, for abooue the contrarieties which they found in this dealing,
they also thought that the hastines of a cause of so great a co^seque^ce whereon
the whole welfare, or destruction of al these low countries does hang: was
much abridged, though notwithstanding, forasmuch as they hold and firmly
believe the same to be chanced, to deliver their native countries the sooner
from the Spaniards, and other strange oppressors, so the^ they can do none
other but wish (as they do from the bottom of their hearts, and pray unto the
Lord God) that the event and end may be such as all those which are true
sooners of their native countries do desire. And so much as appertains unto
them, forasmuch as it were now in vain to use many reasons to ye contrary, or
to debate or gainsay a cause or matter being done. They do promise and assure
the aforesaid Lords and states, that they will maintain ye peace of Gaunt by all
manner of ways, hoping that the meaning of the said Lord and states is sure
also, beseeching them, that they in all mishaps will show them selves in their
deeds to be such, as they on their side at all times are ready to do.
Nevertheless, that men may plainly see with their deeds, that they desire naught
else* but to further the departure of the Spaniards, and other strangers, and
confirm the peace and quietness, with their old privileges, laws and liberties
of the lands, they are contented to commend and subscribe unto the aforesaid
Articles confirmably and with condition, that the said Lords and states, first
and before all others it may please them, firmly and vnchaungeably to conclude,
and to deliver to them sufficient and fourmable acts and obligatorie,
subscribed by the Lords, states, and governors, heds and coloneled of the
provinces, that if sobee that the Spaniards, according to the order taken and
appointed with Don John, be not departed out of the land^ over on this side, in
deed and truth, and that in such time as to them is appointed. For to beware
once of such lingering and delays, the which continually unto this time, have
been so hurtful unto us, the forsaid Lords and states shall break and cut of
all former comunication with them, and pursu them with wepon in their former
departure, without any more hereafter to stand or deal with them by way of
communication, howsoever the same might be, and also that it may please them
again, to deliver acts and bo^ds, that after the aforesaid departure, neither
they nor the aforsaid governors, heads and colonels, shall receive, suffer or
acknowledge yt said Do^ John, nor any other for governor of ye land, before yt
he shall have erected and wholly satisfied again, in all points which strive any
ways or are contrary to the aforesaid privileges, laws and liberties of the
land, or any ways prejudice unto the pacificacie of Gaunt, following all this
and that every one shall be set and appointed in their goods again, as well in
Burgo^yen as over on this side and that all the aforsaid privileges, and
liberties, shall be confirmed, ratified and established, following the same: with
the aforesaid L. and estates, in the time of the handling of the peace at
Gaunt: sole^nly did promise by their writings, to their Deputed^ from the Date
of the 24. of October. 1576.

Done at Middelborough the 19. of February. 1577.

