THE NECESSARY, FIT, AND CONVENIent Education of a young Gentlewoman.

WRITTEN BOTH IN French and Italian, and translated into English by W. P.

AND NOW PRINTED WITH THE three Languages together in one Volume, for the
better instruction of such as are desirous to study those Tongues.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip* 1598*

ALLA GEN^ILLE and valcrosa Fanciulla Madama Marieta Catanea.
ANiuno (caera and gratiosa fanciulla) poteua io dedicare la institutione della
fanciulla nobile, a chi ella piu che a voi si convenisse: ne altro dono vi
poteua fare che piu di questo istesso vi douesse in alcun tempo esser caro.
Percioche oltre che in v^i sola fu la cagione, perch io a scrivere intorno a
cio mi mouessi: porta seco il mio dono, non meno chiaro and illustre testimonio
delle molte rare virtu del vostro bello and candido animo, che dell amore and
della reuerentia, ch'io ho al Signor Siluestro Cataneo vostro padre a ch'io di
cio ho s^ritto, Senza che qua^cu^que noi da cosi gran principij qua^i in voi si
veggono, prendiamo certa speranza, che habiate da voi stessa a diuener tale in
breue, quale si desidera da noi, come nondimeno le belle piante, aggiugnendou^^
(...) and la do^^^ (...) gricoltore, pro^^ (...) frutti and piu dilica^^ (...)
soaui, cosi a quella belle (...) di spirito and a quella generosita che hauete
dalla matura, aggiugnendo noi, la cura and lo siudio, debbiamo sperare che i
frutti della vostra virtue and peruengano piu tosto a maturita, and siano di
maggior soauita and di maggior dolcezza, che perauentura (essendo lasceati
inculti) non si de credere che fussero stati in alcun tempo giamai. Molti doni
hauete voi a cognoscere da Dio che a molti sono negati: fra quali voi and gia
cominciate ad essere tuttauia and (come speriamo) serete piu sepre per
loinnanzi illustre: Percioche and egli vi diede l'animo, ornato a pieno di
tutte le sua piu belle and piu rare gratie: and dalla natura piu souente molto
che no^ vorremo a noi auara de suoi ricchi doni: hauete hanuto gratia and belta
pari: and (quello che fu premio neg^i auoli vostri di gran meriti and speriamo
che sia princivio in voi grande all honorato viuere) vi ha data la fortuna
nobilita finalme^te ^ale: che accompagnata da quelle belle virtu che si veggono
risplender nel vosiro animo, vi faranno nella ^ostra piu matura eta, (come
horae in questa nouella and anchora acerba fra le rave fanciulle della citta
nostra hora vi veggiamo essere) raro essempio fra le illustri and famous done
del nostro secolo, di tutto quel been che si puo possedere da noi. Fortunata
sete voi nel vero: alla quale e pracciuto a Dio far chosi largo dono delle sue
gratie: ma molto piu farete feed che siate fortunata al mondo: se cosi serete
voi sempre cauta in conseruarleui, come vi si mostro liberale egliche vene fece
dono. Et se quelli che hanno fatto acquisto di molte and copiose richezze,
congraue and sollecita cura, quelle istesse guardando, no^ rendono may in
alcuntempo cosi se stessi sicuri che rimangano mangano (...) questa istessa
cura: con qua^to maggior studio, and con quanta magior contezza, derremo noi
procurare di conseruarui que beni nell' acquisto de quali e postae tutta la
humana felicita, nella perdita la infelicita tutta and la miseria? A questo
fine tendono i saui ammaestramenti, i consigli, and i ricordi di quelli che u^
ammae strano, and mira di pari quel tanto ch' io horae ne scriuo, che come che
non sia tutto quello che si conuiene a fanciulla di tanto valor quale sete
voi, se mirerete nondimeno piu al volere and al disiderio, che di gran lunga
co^uiene che superi in me il potere, essenda infinito l'vno: di debole vittu
l'altro: ne lo hauerete a grado fra quelle cose che vt sono piu care. Frae
tanto con queste mie poche fatiche, l'animo mio dedica^doui che e grande, and
in niuna part indegno che sia accettato da voi, preghera nostro Signore che
accompagnando i voti nostri col favor suo, a quello che noi meno habbiamo
potuto supplisca egli che solo puo quello che vuo le, and vucle quello che a
nostro pro and a nostra salute sia. Voi all' incontro niun altro guider done
mag giore estimando poterci rendere, se pure habbiamo potuto per voi far cosa
che vi torni ad honor and ad vtilita quando che sia, che di rendreui tale
quale vi habbeamo insegnato ad essere, vi forzerete con caldi preghi parimente
sollecitare Iddio, che non e may in darno da preghi humani sollecitato, che
voglia renderui sicura da nimici della humana felicita, che sono in questa vita
infiniti, si che in voi la purita and il candore del vestro innocente animo, in
niuna guisa rimanga da loro offeso and co^taminato. Con le gratie and conle
viru che vi sono donate da Dio vi ^'e posto a debito il been and virtuosamente
adoperarui: and come dagli alheri si atte^dono que frutti che per occolto
instinto and per loro natia natura, si creed che debbano produrre: cosi da vol
si attendono tutte quelle belle virtuose operationi che sogliono partorire le
virtu, che sono inserte nel vostro animo. La speranza che s'ha di voi e tanta,
che per molto che cresciate in virtis, in prudentia in accortezza, in modestia,
in vera bonta, non mat a pieno tuttauia si rendera il mondo satisfatto di voi
che pius sempre del vostro valor si promettera. Et per^io imitando quelli i
quali hauendo affar lungo camino and malegeuole, piu si studiano and accelerano
i passi voi hauendo ^a tendere tanto piu innanzi a tutte l'altre che sono
mediocri, quanto maggior forze vi ha date Jddio a cio fare che non ha dato
loro: sempre con tema di non rimanerui a dierto con molto vestro biasimo, vi
auanzerete sempre piu di giorno in giorno. Et quiui preagandoui vera and
perpetua felicita faccio fine a Dio accommandandoui.

A GENTILLE ET VERTVEVSE FILLE Madame Mariette Catanea.
IE ne pouois a person, treschere and gracieuse Fille, dedier l'Institution
de la fille nobile, a qui elle eust mieus conuenu qu'a vous, and ne vous pouois
fair present, qui plus que cestuy vous deueroit estre quelque temps aggreable.
Car outre ce qu'en vous seule a este la cause, pour laquelle ie me suis a cela
esmeu, mon present port auec soy tesmoignage non moins manifest and illustre,
de plusieurs rares vertus de vostre bell and vertueus esprit, comme d'amour and
reverence, que i'ay enuers vostre pere le Signeur Siluestre Cataneo, a qui i'ay
cscrit de cela. Sans quoy, combien que de si beaus commencemens, qui sont en
vous apparens, prenions esperance cer^aine, que de vous mesmes deuiendries en
bref tell, comme nous desirons, ce neantmoins, comme les belles plants en
leur adioustant continuelle cultiuation, and la main expert du laboureur,
produifent leurs fruits plus dous and delicats, ainsi a celle b^aute d'esprit,
and a celle noblesse ^ue vous auez de nature, ad^outant soin and solicitude,
deuons attendre que les fruits de vostre virtue paruiennent plustost a maturite,
and soient de plus grande douceur and suauite, que perauanture estans laissez
sans cultiuer ne se doit croire, qui'ils eussent este en quelque temps a
iamais. Vous deuez recognoitre auoir eu plusieurs dons de Dieu, qui a beaucop,
d'autres sont deniez, enter lesquelles toutefois desia commencez a estre, and
(comme esperons) serez doresnauant tousiours plus illustre, pource qu'il vous a
done l'esprit pleinement enrichy de toutes ses plus belles and plus
singulieres graces, and de Nature, le plus souuent beaucop enuers nous auare de
ses riches biens que ne voudrions, auez recu grace and beauty egales, and (ce
qu'a este en voz ancestres pris and loyer de grand valeur and esperons que ce
sera en vous beau commencement de vertueuse and honorable vie) vous a done
finablement la fortune tell noblesse, laquelle acompaignee de ces belles
vertus, qui fe voient reluire en vostre esprit, vous rendront en vostre aage
plus mure (comme a present on ceste nouelle and encore verde, enter les
excellentes filles de vostre cite a ceste heure vous voyons estre) singulier
exemple enter les dames illustres and renommees de nostre temps, de tout bien
qui se peut posseder de nous. En verite, vous estes bien heureuse, a qui il a
pleu a dieu fair don si liberal de ses graces, mais beaucop mieus don ne rez a
cognoistre au monde, que vous estes heureuse, si tousiours serez ainsi
diligente a les vous conseruer, comme Dieu s'est monstre enuers vous liberal a
vous les donner. Et si ceus qui ont fait amas de grandes and copieuses
richesses, gardant icelles par facheuse solicitude, ne se rendent iamais tant
asseurez d'eus mesmes, qu'ils demeurent du tout anrancurs d'vne tell cure and
soucy, par combien plus grand soin and diligence, deurons nous procurer de
conseruer tells biens, en l'acquisition desquels gist and consiste toute la
felicite human, and en la perte, toute l'infelicite and malheur? A tell but
taschent les bons enseignemens, confeils, and preceptions de ceus qui vous
enseignent, and tout ce que i'en escris pour le present, laquelle chose,
combien qu'elle soit moindre, qu'il conuient a fille tant vertueuse comme vous
estes, toutefois si vous auez plustost esgard au vouloir and desir, qui doit en
moi beaucop surmonter la puissance, estant l'vn tresgrand, and l'autre de
petite valeur, le prendrez en gre, enter les chooses, qui vous sont le plus
aggreables, vous dediant ce pendant par ce mien petit labeur mon affection, qui
est grande, and non du tout in digne d^estre acceptee de vous, prieray nostre
Signeur, qu'accompaignant noz desirs de sa faueur, vueille fournir a ce que
n'auons peu acheuer, lequel seul peut ce qu'il veut, and seul veutee qui est a
nostre profit and nostre falut. Vous alencontre, estimant ne nous pouoir render
autre plus grand pris and loyer, si toutesfois ayons peu fair pour vous chose
qui turn quelque temps a vostre honneur and profit, que de vous render tell,
comme auons enseigne a estre, vous vous efforcerez, pourchassant enuers Dieu
par prierer ardantes, qui iamais n'est de prieres humaines requis en vain,
qu'il vous vueille asseurer des ennemis de la felicire human, qui en ceste
vie sont en nombre infiny, de forte che la blancheur de nettete de vostre
esprit, en nulle forte n'en demeure offensee ou souillee. Auee les graces and
vertus, qui de Dieu vous sont donnees, vous est enioinct bien and vertueusement
viure, and comme des arbres on s'attend d'auoir tells fruits, que par secret
instigation and par leur naiue virtue on croit, qu'ils doiuent produire, ainsi
de vous s'attendent toutes fes belles operations que les vertus engendrent, qui
sont entees en vostre esprit. L' esperance qu'on ha de vous est si grande, que
iacoit que croissies en vertus, prudence, attrempance, and vray bonte, iamais
toutefo is le monde ne se contentera de vous, se promettant tousionrs
d'aduantage de vostre valeur. Et pource ensuyuant ceus lesquels ayant a fair
loin voyage and difficile, plus s'efforcent de se haster, veu qu'il vous faut
d'autant plus mettre peiue d outrespasser les autres qui sont movennes, comme
Dieu vous a done plus gra^des forces a ce fair, qu'il n'a faict a else,
tousiours craignant, qu'a vostre grand deshonneur ne demourez derriere, vous
vous aduancerez tousiours de iouren iour. Et faisant icy fin, ie vous souhaite
vraye and perpetuelle felicite. a Dieu soyez.

TO THE WISE AND Virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress Marietta Catanea.
RIght wise and courteous gentlewoman, I could not devise to dedicate this
Treatise (of the necessary, fit, and convenient education of young
Gentlewomen) to one to whom it is more convenient and necessary, then to your
self; neither yet present you with any thing that more then this might be
agreeable unto you. For besides this, that in you only has consisted the
cause that moved me thereunto, my Present brings with it no less manifest
and notable witnesses of diverse rare and eminent virtues that are imprinted
within your virtuous mind, then love and reverence, which more earnestly I
bear unto the lord Siluester Cataneo your good father, to whom I have written.
And although by so good beginnings hitherto apparent and known to be in you,
we conceive a certain and most assured hope, that of your self you will in short
time become as virtuous as we desire: notwithstanding, as the fairest plants by
the continual labor and expert hand of the husbandman, procure fruits much
more delicate and sweet than otherwise they would, so by adding that care and
diligence which is meet and convenient, unto the virtuous mind and nobleness
of nature, already ingrafted in your heart; we may expect and persuade our
selves, that the fruits of your virtues will soon be ripened, and become of a
most sweet and pleasant taste: which peradventure, not being labored, would
never prove so exquisite. You are to acknowledge the receipt of diverse gifts
by God bestowed upon you, which to many others are denied: among whom,
although already you have made a beginning (as we hope) you shall from
henceforth be much more commendable, in that it has pleased him to indue you
with a spirit most richly replenished with all his most goodly and singular
graces, and of Nature (commonly more spating and covetous in departing her rich
gifts among us, then we could wish) you have received equally both grace and
beauty (which in your ancestors was much commended, and which we hope will
be in you a good beginning of a virtuous and honorable life.) Lastly, fortune
has given you Nobility, which being accompanied with those most goodly
virtues that are already seen too openly in you, will in your riper years
(as presently in this new and springing youth you are seen and known among
the most excellent maidens of this City) make you a singular example to the
renoumed and Noble Ladies of this our time, touching all the good qualities
that of women may be required. And in truth you are most happy, as being one
to whom it has pleased God to be so liberal of his grace, which you shall
much more show unto the world, if you be always as careful and diligent to
preserve them, as God has showed himself liberal in imparting them unto you.
And if such as have gathered and heaped together great quantities of treasures,
keeping them with great watchfulness, are never so well assured thereof, that
they continue wholly freed from such care, with how much more study and
diligence ought we to procure the conservation of those goods, in the
attaining whereof, lies and consists humane felicity, and in their loss,
all infelicitie and misery? To that end only tends the good instructions,
counsels, and precepts of those that teach you. and all that which at this
present I write, which although it be less then is convenient for so virtuous
a Gentlewoman as you are: nevertheless, If you respect the mind and good
desire that in me ought to surmount ability, the one being most great, and
the other of little value, you will accept it in good part, and lay it up
amongst those things that are most precious unto you: In the mean time by this
my labor dedicating my affection unto you (which is great, and not altogithet
unworthy to be accepted by you) I beseech the Lord, that guiding our desires
with his favor, he will supply that which we could not perfect, who only
can do what pleases him, and will do nothing but that only which is for our
good and eternal salvation: you to the contrary, esteeming that you can yield
us no greater praise or reward, (although we have done that for you which in
time may turn both to your honor and profit) then to become such a one as we
have taught you to be, you will enforce your self by earnest and hearty
prayers unto God (who never refuses to hear such as humble themselves unto
him) that he will defend and keep you from the enemies of humain felicity,
which in this life are infinite in number, in such manner, that the clearenes
of the purity of your mind, may in no sort be soiled nor offended. With the
graces and virtues by God bestowed upon you, you are likewise enjoined to live
well and virtuously: and as from trees we expect and attend such fruit as by
secret instigation and their proper virtues we hope they will bring forth: so
from you are expected all the good and notable operations that virtue
ingendreth, and that already are ingrafted in your heart: The hope that is
conceived of you is so great, that although you grow up and increase in virtue,
prudence, tempetance, and generositie, the world nevertheless will not
therewith be satisfied in you, still promising it self a larger quantity of
your great worthiness: and therefore following such as having a long and
difficult voyage to perform, do make the more have, so much the more you must
enforce your self to surpass those that are your inferiors, as God has
granted you greater means to attain thereto, than he has given to them:
always fearing, that to your great dishonor you stay not behind, and you
shall from day to day advance your self. Where with making an end, wishing you
all true and perpetual felicity, I bid you farewell.

LA INSTITVTIONE della Fanciulla noble, di M. Giouanni Michele Bruto.
AL SIGNOR Siluesire Cataneo.
VOlesse Jddio, Signore, che poi che in molti modi sem per sino da miei prim'
anni ha contra di me incrudelito la mia nimica fortuna: si al meno hora in
ammenda di insinite sue in giurie and graui and acerbe, mifi mostrasse ella in
tanto fauoreuole, che s'io pensassi a quello che pro and giouamento ui potessa
in aleuna gauisa recare, cio cosi a voi potesse parere segno di liberate and di
cortese animo, come di grato and di raccordeuole, and altrui rendere testimonio
non meno del ualor and della virtu vostra, che de vostri fauori and de
beneficij, donde cio meritaste. Et nel vero, come per lo piu sempre, i gran
beneficij ^olgono a chi si fanno speranza di esser conosciuti per piu che grati
and riconoscenti di loro, douendosi cio ascrinere a debito piu tosio and ad
^^ffitio che a uera ui^tu, cosi in quelli che gli fanno, se non e uera and soda
u^^^^ che ne saccia feed, che sa hora ella ampramente in voi, been spesso
sogliono essere non meno di ambitioso animo (che in Caesare, and in ^^^t' ^l^^i
fu) che di liberale and di cortese, testimomo. Ma peiche ^^tta^olta cosi e
gr^^^e la virtu and le doti del no^^^^ an m^, che non che la copia delle
ric^ezze uosire and delle facu^^a, le que^^ non s^no p^^ di quello che a
moderato Gentithuomo, and di temperato animo pue bastare, ma vincono di gren
lunga la fortuno de gran Re and de gli Imperateri: assai been farete no^ f^de
al m^ndo, che tutto q^e^lo che da me si scriua che a commodo and a piacere ui
possi (quando che sia) tornare. non meno cio si debba da me all virtu^ vostre
che a benesicij, and non venghi in me al ^^contro piu dalla memoria di questi,
che dal riconoscimento di quelle, trahendo elleno a forza a riuerirui and
amarui qualuncnnque si sia che pure di loro in alcuna guisa ne habbia contezza.
Jo di questi di, in molto otio, il quale molto senza fallo conuiene che
habbiano tutti quelli, i quali non vsano in questa citta per cagione di
trafico, nella quale hoggidi (come negli ampi and vasti spatij dell' Oceano
mettono con perpetuo corso da diverse parti della terra tutti i fiumi)
concorrono da tutte la parti del mondo infiniti, con grandissimi thesori: mi
sono ingegnato, che quelle fatiche le qua li gia lo per lo adietro, and molte,
and graui ho fat, in molti Latini and Greci scrittori: partorissero non pure
a me solo, me a tutti quelli etiandio, a quali piacesse l' honesto and virtuoso
viuere caro and dolce and soaue frutto. Percio che hauendo io gia quasi sotto
communi luochi and certi capi, post tutte quelle virtu, che percioche
appartengono alla vita de gli huomini and a cosiumi, sono Morali de Latini
chiamate: di quelle istesse, con finata, ma dolce (com'^o mi creda) and grave
mamera de lettere in tal guisa and contal' ordine ho diuisato: che ne pura
dalla inuidia istessa, importuna detrattrice delle hon^ste and lode^o^i
fatiche, mi si potra neg^re, che io a nostri huomini non habbia molto and di
commodita and di gieuamento apportato, a quali piaccia pel d^itto call della
virtuosa vita, tendere a laudeuole and honesto fine. Fra tutte queste che molte
sono and vary f^u se: questa a voi si dedica: nella quale diuisandos^ de modi
co quali si dee alleuare honesta and ben nata fanciulla, ho io creduto che
essendo voi padre il quale per rara prudent^a and virtu conoscete piu che alcun
aliro quanto sieno piu chare and piu pretiose gemme quelle che ornano gli
animi, che tutte quelle donde se ne vanno le gran gentildonne per lo piu
superbe and altere fra le molte, non vi si potesse da me fare di questo ne piu
charo, ne piu ricco dono. La qual cosa tanto ho piu io fatto arditamente,
quanto piu viuendo voi dalla vostra Marie^ta per molto spatio discosto, hauete
non so come a temere che la tenera virtu di lei and debole, quantunque ella
questa istessa da due cosi illustri famiglie quali la Catanea sono and la
Spinola trahe grandissima, non hauendo mess piu alte le sue radici, nella
indulgentia de l^auola and ne vezzi and nelle lusenghe de suoi languisca. Ha
ella della natura alti and generosi principij, and perch (come sperate) fra
lealtre gran gentildonne della sua citta quando chesia, habbia a diuenire and
honorata and illustre troppo been anchora inquesta sua fanciullezza fa feed che
sia la maggiore and la miglior part in se stessa. Percioche come di rado
auiene che generosa pia^ta and uscita da fertile terreno produca (tralignando
dal suo natio ceppo) acerbi and insoaui frutti, cosi appena che io mi faccia a
cre dear, che figliulo, il quale sia nato di gra^ padre and di illustre virtu
non si mostri in molte parti se^pre simile a lui. La qual cosa sepure veggiamo
alcuna volta altrimenti auenire in alcuni, tutta la colpa si dee dire che sia
nella educatione, la quale essi no^ hanno hanuta tale, quale alla generosita
della loro natura si co^uenina. Che tutta vol ta no^ pure negli huomini
veggiamo auenire: ma been spesso ne brutti animali, and talhora (per non mi
partire da questo istesso essempio) nelle istesse piantes Percio che and in
queste istesse, mancandole diligente and assidua cura, veggiamo languire la
natia loro virtu, and esse finalmente in saluatichire, and ne generosi caualli
quell' ardore and quella viuacita estinguersi, che loro diede la natura
parimente, no^ essendo chi loro ammaestri and insigni a diuenire quelli che
essere per se s^essi no^ possone, ageuolmente. Qua^to piu dunque ci da la
fanciulla nostra che sperare dalla natia sua virtu, tanto piu come di cara
cosa, and di raro valor, diuenuti ge^osi, destiamo in noi cura di
conseruargliebe. Ne siamo cosi trascurati, che non si dando noi'l altre nostre
cose che ci debbone esser molto meno care se nonne ad huomini di rara feed and
ben da noi conosciuti, i nostri pa^ti lasciano in pre da a chi o co^ souerchia
indulge^tia i loro teneri animi corrompi: o con importuna seuerita (che no meno
si dee schiuare) a vitioso timore and biafim^uole auezzi, o forse ad od^o and a
disprezzo di quelle cose che piu essi debhono and velera and seguire fra
l'alore. Grave and prudente and ripieno di alto consiglio dee essere colui
qualunque egli si sia da chi i teneri fanciulli, hanna ad apprendere i modi and
le maniere dell honesto viuere: ma sopra tutto si de egli essere geloso che gli
animi loro p^ri and ripieni di candore and di diuina bellezza non si veggano da
ma^^hie and da brutture di graui vitij and errori ectaminati. E^ se bella and
accorta donna prendendo consiglio dallo sp^^chio non patisce che si veggano le
sue bellezze pure in part da piccio^o neo offese, le quall sono a breue tempo
riguardeuoli, and come caduco siore, languiscono and facil^^^nte perdono tutta
quella gratia che prima haue^atio, and quell^ vennsi a, quanto maggiormente
quell anime, nelle quali si vede espressa la imagine di Dio, non anchora dalle
brutture de vitij contaminata: debbono non pure da quelle macchie che sono
grandi, and si veggono, ma da qualunque picciolo neo essere sicure tenute and
diffese. Nelle vesti tessute di porpora and d'oro, and ricche di superbi fregi
and ornamenti (cosi siamo noi diliciati) non vogliamo qua^to per noi si possi
il piu che si vegga macchia per molto che ella minuta sia, and fugga da gli
occhi di coloro che fisamente and con curiosa diligentia ni mirano. Et siamo
noi tutta via cosi traseurati, che (come a noi la cura de nostri parti non
appart^nga) cosi o non may, o di rado di loro pensando per molto che essi
vadino macchiari di sconci vitij and bruti, o poca o niuna stima perauentura
facciamo. Il che poi^he di tanto momento, o and da noi tanto si dee temere:
nell elegger noi quelli che habbiano adesser rettori and maestri de nostri
piccioli figliuoli, tanto derremo noi essere piu dilige^ti and accurati, quanto
piu glialtri sono che altrimenti fanno: in vna cosa sola (senza piu) che sia
posta la loro salu^e isti mando: se loro diamo que modi and quelle ma^iere che
essi habbiano a seruare nel corso d^lla loro vita tanto and arduo and difficile
and malagenole. Et volesse I d^io che come in cio e posta la salute, and la
conseruatione delle Repub. and de grandi jmperij, cosi i pre^cipi credess^ro
che eito fusse, and vi impi^ gassero i loro pensieri piu di quello che non pare
che essi facciano. Perch chi non sa, checome ne corpi solament^ che le membra
hanno sane and robuste, si conserua facilmente la sanita: and ne Musici
strumentisi sent alhora dolce and soaue armonia, che ha^no le voci ci^seuna
per se siessa and giuste and concordi and equabili, and con piaceuole varieta
fra se stesse temperate ad uno istesso suono: cosi nelle citta solamentie nelle
quali si veggono i cittadini moderati, and nella varieta degli statine quali
viuono con dolce and equabile temperaetura concordi and inte^ti ad pub^^co
been: si conserua la commune salu^e, and si sent quella armon^a, della quala
ne piu dolce, ne piu temperata si puuo vdire? Non nas^e may a priuato hu^mo
sigliuolo che in vno ist^sso tempo non habbio acquistato un Cittandino quella
patria, nella quale egli nacque. Et come non pur gli huomini, ma le bestie
istesse and quelle pure che sono fra l'altre piu fere non si scordano de parti
loro ma gli danno il latte and gli mstriscono: cosi prendendo aff^tto dipardi
and di genitori i Prencipi and i Rettori delle citta debbono riconoscere come
suoi parti que che ci nascono tuttodi, and curare che non meno ne dubiosi and
contrari tempi della Repub. siano alla patria loro gioueuoli: che vtili and
cari a loro naturali padri. La qualcosa con merauiglioso ordine se^uando la
citta de Lacedemonij, and co^mette^do la cura de fanciulli, non ad huomini
stranieri and non conosciuti, ma a sauij and honorati Cittadini and gia^ ne
primi magistrati de la Repub. versati con somma laud per molti secoli, and la
liberta loro gloriosamente diffesero and ottenero l'Imperio e'l principato lle
Greci and il conseruorono. Ma per tornar homai alla sanciulla nostra, come che
io non istimo che molti sieno que padri, a quali per molto sauij che essi sieno
and intendenti, si debba commettere la cura de loro figliuoli, vincendo
facilmente la reneeezza degli animi loro che e infinita, la virtu been spesso
and la prudentia: si le haueua nondimeno la sua fortuna cosi fida scoria and
cosi sicuro in voi, suo padre apparechiata: che per peruenire a quel fine, al
quatendono tutti quelli che sono ben nati, non si poteua da lei piu oltre
desiderare. Percioche voi per virtue and per prudentia singular: and per
grandezza di amore: le poteui dar quella institutione, la quale ne huomo
stranieri, nel quale fusse diffetto di amore: ne degli suoi istessi alcuno, nel
quale la molta tencrezza and la indulgentia superasse la prudentia and la virtu
le poteua dare in alcun mode. Ma poiche la fortuna malegno dispensatrice delle
sue gratie, a voi dando necessita di viuere da lei lontano, nel quale ella
tanto doueua sperare: colei oltre a cio le ha tolto, che le doueua sola and
poteua appresso di voi esser gouerno and sostenimento, in vno istesso tempo che
le fu sigliuola non le douendo ella piu oltre esser madre: sia tutto il vostro
pensiero in trouar grave and prudente donna, and di santi and religiosi
costumi: la quale fatta vicariaia, vei, ne per diffetto di amore, ne per
mancamento di prudentia sia poco atta ad informar il tenero animo di lei in
quella guisa che si conuiene allo siato nel quale ella^nacque. Veggo a quanto
malageuole impresa vi obliga, l'affettione paterna, appena potendo voi
sospicare come non pure nella vostra citta (quantunque ella popolat: ssima sia)
ma in moli altre insiemi, si possa trouar donna, nella quale con vero amore and
Christiana charita vi siano quella cosi gran qualita congiunte, che noi le
desideriamo, Ma farete voi in cio quello istesso appunto, che se haueste affar
scielta di raro and excellent pittore, che nella case vostre o le camere, o le
sa le, hauesse a dipignere: al quale appreesentereste voi inna^zi, i disegni di
Raphaello, o di Michel Agnolo, o di Alberto Dnreto, o di Giulio Romano, che
sono stati nella nostra eta, and seranno sempre tenuti excellenti: non tanto
perch speraste ch'egli vi hauesse a riuscir tale appunto: ma perch, vendendo
voi da cosi gran paragone, quanto egli piu o meno alla excellenza di cosi grand
pittori si auicinasse: si faceste voi giudicio alho ^a, quanto egli potesse
been and acconciamente quella impresa recare a fine, alla quale egli si hauesse
a porre. Molto mi pare hauer disiderato, in colei che ha a costumare la nostra
fanciulla: perch dove ella and prudente and grave donna sia, and di santi and
religiosi costumi: si ha ella tutto quello, perch compiuta and valorosa donna,
puo fra noi meritar laud. Ma perch tuttauia da piu rara and piu excellent
Jdea facendo ritratto: lei meglio and quasi pe suoi proprij lineamenti possiate
conoscere, partendomi dal generale and piu da vicino facendomi, per piu certe
and piu particolari qualita, ne la descriuero: no^ da quello che sogliono esser
le altre mediocri, and sono per lo piu: ma da quello che debbono essere,
egolando mi,

SIa ella adunque, di cosi rara prudentia and accortezzache (quello che appena
possono l'altre in molto spatio di tempo) conosca ella in breuissimo, da modi
and dalle maniere della fanciulla auisata, quello che di lei si habbia a
sperare, and quello che a temore: and a quello che si teme, ne principij con
ispediti and presti rimedi occorrendo: curi che quello che si spera, con saui
and prudenee ammaestrame^ti, quasi dandogli nutrime^to pertie^ghi tosto a
maturita. Anzi perch molto piu grave pericolo been spesso soprasta da quello
che si teme: che vtile and commodita da quella che si spera: innanzi ad
ognialtra cosa, sera ella sollecita: che tutto quello che ella vt teme di male
(che speriamo che o poco debba essere ruttauia o non nulla nella nostra
fanciulla) le tolga dall' animo: in cio imitando il prouido agricoltore, quale
non prima getta il buon seem, in quel terreno che egli ha buono, and fertile
giudicato, che no^ ne lo habbia, purgato diligentemente, le ber be sterili and
inutili, and i pruni and le vepri che qua and la visono sogranati, estirpando.
Ne derra per iutto cio, cessare la sollecitudine in lei and il timore, and
poi^he toltole dall' animo quanto per^lei si puote il piu, tutio quello che al
profitto della virtu, le hauesse potuto nuocere, le hauera mandato il seem di
lei, and ne la hauera veduta nascere finalmente, sera la seconda sua eura, che
(come spesso nouelle and tenere piante, se non sono appoggiate a saldo and
fermo sostegno percosse deali' empito de venti cadono a terra and languiscono,
and muoiono finalmente) quando che sia, combattuta dall' empito delle passioni,
and degli affetti, la virtu che germogliera nel suo tenero animo, non habuendo
fermo and saldo sostegno, dove appoggiarsi, perisca. La qual cosa poiche
tutta^ia non puo auenire se nonne per lo spatio di molto tempo, assai si puo
egli far feed a chi dubitasse di cio, che non solamente nella fanciullezza
quando si gettano negli animi nosiri i semi delle virtu, ma anchora piu inna^zi
molto and nella eta piu prouetta, and quando gia elle sono cresciute in noi,
and froriscono, fare a noi misterio, di chi con la sua prudentia and con la sua
virtu ci facc^a spalle and ci regga: sino che, mess altissime in noi le sue
radici (non alt^^meuti che si vegga salda and robusta quercia sprezzars
immobile l'impetu^so f^ato di Austro and di Borea) piu oltre non si tema da
noi: che per multo che fassino negli animi nostri, impetuosamen^e, i venti
delle humane passio^i, elle siano suelte in aleun tempo da noi. Ma perch di
sopra si disse, che questa cosi sauia and valorosa donna, haueua a conoscere
quello che si ha^esse a temere, and quello che sperare della fanciulla: ella a
cio fare, vsera sauio and maturo configlio: ne per cognos cere quello a che
ella s^^ a inchinata (come V^^ss^ ^per riconoscere fra le fane^ulle di ^icomede
Achille, fra le molte merci che ^^li seco haueua recate scoperse l'armi and gli
a^nesi di caualliere, a quali hauendo egli ass^sati gli occhi come a suo vero
oggetto, pale^^ se stesso finalmente) ^e appresentera innanzi vitiosi oggetti,
fra gli honesti and ^andeuoli: questi is^essi biasimandole and detestandole
molto: anzi le monstrera, gli oggetti delles contrary virtu, and questi
istessi ^^pieni di tanta bellozza, and di ^anto splendore, che tutto che ella
per occulto and ^acito istinto di natura si conosca ell' opposito vitio
tralignare, si senti nondimeno accender lanimo, di disiderio a^deme di velere
cequistariersi, and in cio prima si consermi, che oggetti de vitij contrarij,
le ingombrino la mente. Conosca ella di quanto ornamento and di quanta gratia
sia in Gentildonna la pudicitia and la castita, and se si vedra che ella (come
di cose cara and valorosa fanciulla and cosi bon nata si de sperare) senta
piacere de cio, and disideri non pure di parere, ma di esser tale, si habbia da
lei abhorrisca dal contrario vitio, dove se si vedesse, quello che ne in quest
anni, ne in questa indole habbena si puo sospicare che possa auenire) and ne
sembianti and ne gesti diuersa inchinatione che been a cosi sauia and
intendente donna sera palese, si alhora ella si volgera alla part piu sicura:
and (souente facendone nascere accortamente occasion) le contera quello che
molte done grande and famous, fecero, intorno a cosi bella virtu donde si
acqui storone fama al mondo and grido immortale. Non tacero io qui cio ch' lo
ho veduto osteruare dalla maggior part de padri: i quali molto plu molli and
delicati nel sodisfare a loro piaceri: che saui and aueduti nel curare la
salute de loro figliuoli: non cosi tosto, hanno le picciole fanciulle, iprimi
elementi appresi: and gia possono vna parola da un alira diuisare: che le hanno
posto innanzi versi amorosi, and lasciui da imprendere: le loro memory,
tenacissime sempre per lo piu a ritener quello che gia habbiano vna voita
apparato, in cotal guisa effercitando: che io intendo, che come vna peste, da
colei si deba schisare, che fanciulla (quale la nostra e) di alta speranza and
di generosa indole, habbia ad alleuare and a nutrire. Da egli vie piu per
tempo, che saui^ and accorto padre non dee volere: and la eta and l'vso corooto
del viuere de i molti, copiosa and abundan^^ materia al vitio: senza eheiegli
tanto prima and con cosi frettolosi passi sia preuenuto ad noi. Molti chiari
and illustri essempi, di virtuose done, and famous, se le leggano piu tosto,
dalla fauia maestra: ehe ellae con assidua and accuratae lettione, part dalle
sacrae lettere, part dalle history, de vecchi and moderni tempi, hauera
raccolti: donde non solo le porgera diletto: ma quasi con acuto stimolo and
pugnente le mouera l'animo a volere and a desiderare la virtu, and a sprezzare,
and hauere in odio il vitio, Diuengono in questa guisa, gli animi grandi and
heroici: ne pure di noi gia fatti maturi, and di natura virile: ma delle tenere
and delicate fanciulle etiando: ne may se le rappresenteranno innanzi, quelle
famous Claudie, Portie, Lucretie, and Gitanie, che non si desti ne loro animi,
generosa emulatione, di diuenire quandochesia, simili a loro, in turto
disprezzando quelle, che per contraria via, habbiano corsi i giorni della loro
vita. Ne pure si vieterano alla nostra fanciulla, quelle lettioni, che l'animo
di lei per se stessomolle, facciano languido pus and effeminato: ma tutte
quelle cose, etiando, che lei in alcuna guisa, possiono rendere di se stessa,
and del suo valor indegna. Fra le quali, appena si puo credere, quanto danno
apporti, l'vso di quelle done, and la domestichezza: nello quali, la nobilita,
and gli ornamenti and le gemme and l'ore, o pure la sinta religione and la
santita) che molto piu e pericoloso) coprono brutti and corrotti costumi.
Alhora facilmente, troua il vitio da chi esser imitato: ch' egli e diffoso
dalla authorita de grandi. Et non altrimenti che i morbi, allhora sono piu
contagiosi, che in quelli a chi si sono^appicati: si vede piu viuace color and
piu apparenza disanita: i vitij nascocti nelle grandezze and ne gli honori, o
pure coperti dalla hipocrisia and dalla santita simulata: molto piu grauamente
offendono che quando la corrotia vita, o la humile fortuna degli huomini, loro
fa paelesi. Non c^edo che mi faccia mestiero raccordare (quello che hanno fatto
alcunni) che si tengane le cosi fat fanciulle, in tutto l'ontane dall' vso
and dalla domestichezza de maschi, quana^ tunque essi siano di quella istessa
eta. nascendo con gli buomini, i semi della lussuria insieme in loro: and been
spesso, piu souente, che non vorremmo, and piu per tempo, producendo a maturita
i frutti di lei: che gia insegno Girclamo grave and di somma authorita, con
lessempio di quella sfacciata and mal vagia donna: che si glorio, quanto ella
poteua riandar con la memoria ne tempi a dietro) non esser stata may senza que
sru^^^, che si sentono ne maritali congiugnimenti. Da tanto pericolo, per se
s^^ssa, senza piu, terra la maestra, la fanciulla lontana: and in tutto le
vietera (che dati e poco s^hifato) si come brutta and in tutto a lei
sconuouole, la domestichezza delle fanti and delle seruenti, and di cotali
donniciuole bergo^e and tenzoni^ri, che sisogliono riparare nella case delle
gran gentildonn^: and sono per lo piu cagioue di grauissimi errori, facendole
vedere che niun alira cosa sia meno degna di sauia and ^ostumata fanciulla: che
se ella fia vdita fra le fanti intorno al fuoco a badare a loro cicalaments and
nouelle, and a raccor tarne. Non parisca cio in aleun modo la sauia donna: and
in vece di quelle fauole che per ingannar il tempo si contano nelle veglie
dalle fillatrici: con piaceuoli narrationi and graui, hauendolasi sempred
canto, s^ingegni de arricchirle and adornarle l'animo, non meno di belli and
honesti pensieri, che di grati and di piacenoli motti: che ella fara
ageuolmente: quando ne suoi ragionamenti con motti pronti and arguti, che ella
a tempo vi traponera. and con vaghe and dolce maniere di dire dilettandole:
quando con co^mode and opportune digress^oni, and graui and sententiose,
eccitandole l'animo al disiderio di quelle laud, che tuttauia ella
(diuenendone inuidiosa) ode che si danno a quelle che si sono been and
virtuosamente adoperate. Ne mi spiace, polche il continuo vso di quella do^na
che le sera maestra, per la molta grauita, and per la santita di costumi
partorita piu facilimente nel suo bell' animo, affetto di riuere^tia, che
occasion di piacere and di trastullo: il quale pur si dee piu alla
fanciullezza che ad alcun altra part della nostra eta: che fra molte, si
faccia sciltea di ge^tile and ben nata fanciulla: che non solo per bellezza
d'ingegno and di spirito, le sia occasion di emulatione alla virtu: ma le sia
di dipporto and di ricreatione anchora dalle cose piu graui and piu severe.
Rendono satieta and aschifilta quelle cose che anchora sono di loro natura
piacenoli, and che come loro proprij oggetti delettano i sensi: and mouono con
disusato piacere, questa piu che alcu^ altra eta. La qual cosa se e vera, come
par che ella sia: qna^to piu si de egli temere che no^ auegna in quelle cose
nelle quali (essendoui molta grauita) si vede poca piaceuotezza o non nulla!
Anzi questaistessa donna grave and prudente, sera auisata: percioche ne teneri
fanciulli non possono cosi esser deste le forze dell' intelletto, che gano
sempre intenti all considerationi piu graui: che nelle maniere and ne modi
suoi, temperi con la piaceuolezza, la granita: and se pure nel gastigare i
leggieri errori della fanciulla, hauera a parth si dal mezzo (che ^u^^auia non
vorremmo) ^iu toslo pleghi alla i^dulgentia che alla s^^^rita. J^^itera ella in
^io il saulo medito and discreto, i^ quale a ques^i ist^ssi fan^^^^ ((...)
risana^^li da grave infermita) ^^^stra c^perto di guechero and di melle
amarissimo (...), e^l ^^^^arbaro and l'agari^^: assine, che da finta ^^^^ezza
ingannati, d^^uo ^^oco a quell' amaro, che loro po^^i certo argomento di sanita
and di vita, and gueris^ano s^almente dall' ha^^to male.

SE le mostrera ella sempre conridente and lieta faccia and rigi^ua di vna
gratia amabile: and l'duisera (errando el^^) in tal guisa: (che senza
ripigliarnela ^i^ ^^^amente, ella conos^erd nondimeno esser rip^esa, riserhando
sempre le parole graui and minaccieu^li, and ^l sapraciglio al dassezzo: che
tuttauolta non si ved^r^i in lei se non di rado, and a breue tempo (...)
accioche quello chen noi vogliano, che le sia rimedio and a^gomento di salute:
preso in consuetudine and in vso, non si^ p^co temuto estimato. Anzi, dove le
parra che la fanciulla, quasi dal subito horrore del tuono o del fulmine
diuenuta aitonita, hauera dall' ospetto turbato e tristo della sua facia,
concetto souerchio terrore nell animo, in un tratto sp^egando il front. and
mostrando lieta and serena facia: con dol^i and saui a^smaestramenti, and
lontani in tutto da ogni seuerita, and dalla acerbita delle riprensioni: le
rachet ^ra and tranquillera lanimo, sgombrando da lei in un tratto quel terrore
che dianzi hauera concetto: sopra tutto come brutto castigo and isconueuole a
gentil animo quello delle percosie and delle battiture ifihifando. Percioche
noi, non solamente non vogliamo, che questa nostra non faccia per timore quello
che ella dee, che se non e deg^^ in questa eta di biasimo, non e di gran laud:
ma etiandio (solo che ella di cio capeuole sia, che appena da gran virtu si puo
aspeitare and ben confirmata) non intendiano pure, che faccia quello istesso
che ella conosca esser degno di laud, con isperanza di laud. Tanto si
promettiamo noi del suo valor, che speriamo, che solo che ella vegga la
bellezza della virtu and la maesta, l^i sola, si come quella nella quale
conosca essere tutta la sua felicita posta and il suo been: vaga diuenutane and
innamorata, sola per se stessa voglia senz' altro and sola disideri. Vege go
essere openione d'alcuni che le picciole fanciulle si debbano ammaestrare da
suo prim' anni nelle lettere: che io tuttauia in niuua guisa posso farmi a
eredere che been sia. Raccontano i mali i quali sopraslanno alla vita degli
huomini: la inchinatione and la proeliuita che si ha dalla natura al vitio sino
dalla prima origin and dalle fascie: gli essempi de maluagi and scclerati
huomini: la vita corrotta and i costumi di quelli che viu^no con noi: i molii
piacere le delitie le morbidez ze, gli inganni and le insidie del commune
nimico: dalle quali non veggono ^ome si possino difendere gli animi incauti de
gli huomini, non pure delle ^enere and dilicate fanciulle, senza l'armi delle
lettere and della doitrina. All quali querele s'io in vna guisa sola volessi
rispondere, che alla vita degli huomini molto piu souente il mal vso delle
letiere ha danno and incommodita recato, che utile o commodita il diritto and
laudeuole: sospicherebbono perauentura alcuni ch' io volessi cio fare, in
biasimo and in dispezzo delle lettere, ch'io non inte^do in alcum modo. Senza
fine sono gli essempi, co qualimi serebbe facile mostrare cosi essere i
opporrei Roma sede dell' Imperio del mondo and vittoriosa di tutte le stranieri
nationi, secento o piu anni hauer mancato de studi delle lettere: and come
sospetti all' honesto viuere and virtuoso hauer cacciati della citta con
publico decretto i philosophi: questa i^^essa all' incontro, allhora che piu i
studi della philosophia and della eloquentia, ne suoi fiorirono, perduta la
liberta, finalmente, esser caduia in seruitu and hauer vbbidito all' imperio di
un solo. Et Athene che si creed che sola fra tutte l'altre citta habbia
ottenuia la gloria delle leitere, and insegnata la sapientia al mondo: all'
hora esser statae foggiogata, che l'Academia, il Portico, il Liceo, piu furono
dalla frequentia di nobili and illustri philosophi celebrati: and in questa
istessa citta essersi interdetto l'vso della eloquentia, come peste and roina
del publico been, and come contaminatrice della leggi and della giustitia.
Raccorderei Sparta, laquale per molti secoli and per molte eta, in tutto
sprezzando come piu conuenienti ad huomini otiosi and molli and dilicati, che
ad huomini forti and bellicosi, i studi delle scientie and le letiere,
fiorirono Prencipi della Crecia con immortal gloria. Et perch io prendo a
costumare vna fanciulla Christiana lasciando gli altri essempi, opporrei
l'authorita di Ch^isto insallibile verita: il quale non pure non lodo, ma
detesta in iutto la sapientia del mondo, come nimica alla santita del viuere
and alla religione. Ma hora non e mio proponimento ne fia giamai, che quei mali
che vengono dalla malitia degli huomini, and dalla loro corotta natura, voglia
attribuire a sacri studi delle lettere: a quali non harrei io data opera molt'
anni, con ferma speranza di continoarui sino all' vltimo della mia eta se cio
hauessi stimato: si intendo io been di mostrare che in fanciulla honesta and
ben nata, non si debba cio tentare: essendo molto piu i mali che di lei si
temono, che i beni, che si sperano se ellla sia nelle lettere ammestrata.
Vogliono che sia casta and monda and Christiana, quella dottrina che si
proponera alla institutione di lei: alla quale nondimeno, ella non potra
peruenire, se non co donuti mezzi. Et quando pure vi sera peruenuta: niuno le
vietera, se ella potra leggere per se ssessa and ince^dere i Christiani poeti
Prude^tio, Prospero, Giuuenco, Paolino, Nazianzeno, and molt' altri: perch
meno legga, gli amori di Ouidio, di Caiullo, di Propertio, di Tibullo, and di
Enea, and di Didone appresso a Virgilio: and fra Greci poeti gli amori degli
Iddij istessi and gli adulterij and gli incesti loro appresso Homero. Questa
istessa^ (poiche siamo cosi ambitiosi che vogliamo vedere le nostre figliuole
disputar nelie schole de philosophanti) non sera meno bastante quantunque volte
le aggradi, a difender le openioni di Epicuro: che quelle di Zenone, o di
Chrisippo. Et perch a costoro pur piace, che ella imprendi la Philosophia and
la sapientia da Platone: io non co^porterci in aleuna guisa ad vna no^ may da
me conosciuta: non pure a quella che mi fusse figliuola: che ella leggesse nel
co^uitto di Platone, gli atti lasciui and gli amori e'i vezzi di. Alcibiade. Le
assegnano dotto and grave maestro and di santi costumi: quasi che quando cio
sia, questo istesso cosi possia spoguarsi della natura dell' huomo, come been
and feliceme^te insegnar i precepti della Saplentia: and dove siano priest le
faci della ^ibidinc: che sempre sono nell' vso and nella domestichezze, di
quelsesso, and di quella et a: non sia in luy materia atta, a dar luogo a cosi
fatto incendio. Furono qua and la pieni i deserti dell' Egitto and della
Thebaida, di santi Padri: i quali gastiga^do tuttauia, con aspre penitentie and
digiuni inco^partabili, la loro carne, domauano perauentura, non vincevano in
tutto may la violentia della libidine and delle passioni. Et santo Girolamo
nascosio sra le fiere, negli antri and nelle spelunche, and percotendosi, il
petto tuttauia giorno and notte, diceua che gli pareua been spesso, versar ne
chori delle belle and dilicate fanciulle di Roma. Propongono fra non molte
Done illustri and famo se in letiere, Cornelia madre de Gracchi: la quale non
dimeno come insegno a figliuoli ad esser seditiosi and violenti, non meno che
eloquenti, and dotti: cosi ammaestro la figliuola (come hanno sospicato graui
and dotti Scrittori) a dal morte al marito, che fu la grandezza and la inaesta
di quello Imperio, All done di Lelio, non si da maggior laud, che quella del
parlar con pura and dolce and Romana fauella: che io non nego che si conceda a
fanctulla nobile and ben nata: la quale tuttauia, senza molti maestri haere:
essendo alleuata in grande and honorata casa: non potra se non parlar been in
quella fauella, che le e natia. Ne Portia di Bruto si loda (come questi
^redone) piu perch ella dal padre hauesse appresa la dottrina and i deereti de
Stoici: che niuno degli antichi serittori e che afferma: che per hauer seruata
inuiolabili feed al marito, and fortezza and grandezza d'animo degna di Catone
che le fu padre. Mantinea, Assiothea, Lasthenia (lascio Leontio che diffese
contra Theophrasto la volutta) le quali mutato il femiuile, in habito di
maschio entrauano nelle schole di Platone: and fra morbidi and dilicati giouani
disputauano, del moto and de principij and delle cause: and Dama che insegno al
mondo, la doctrina di Pithagora sao padre and Aspasia and Diotima, and
Thargelia, che illustrorono i fiudi della Philosophia non piu peraue^tura
meritorono laud di dotte and eccellenti do^ne appresso il mondo: che openione
di peco honneste: no^ essendo nuino (como io mi creda) che sta pure di buono
intendimento: che non ami piu tosto hauer le figliuole indotte and pudiche che
sospette della loro honesta: and valenti ne sludi della Philosophia: and di
g^an nome fra disputanti. Et di Corinna tanto celebrata dalla antichita, and
molte volte pronunciata vincitrice, cotra Pindaro prencipe de Poeti Lirici: sa
Iddio se piu sincero giuditio fu: che quello di Phrine, la quale con perpetua
nota and infamia, di cosi grave and santo giuditio: fu da gli Areopagiti
dichiarata innocente: che si puo dire di quella istessa Erinni i versi, della
quale furono giudicati degni che si pareggiassero alla maesta and alla
grandezza di quelli di Hornero. Da^le quali (comunque si andassa la bisogna)
non prendera may sauio padre essempio: ne si terra sicuro, che le sue tenere
figliuole, and di fragile natura, si mostrino audaci ne Theatri, and ne publici
spettacoli, a contendere della gloria, and della preminentia delle lettere. Ma
perch non paia che a me manchino essempi in contrario: poiche si ha a
contendere pin con la authorita che con la regione: veggano quasti cosi
pertinaci difensori (dove poco fa mestiero) delle lettere: che per vno essempio
da essi recato: a me non sia facille, opporne molti in defensione della verita,
che essi oppugnano. Sono ripiene le antiche history parimente and le mod^rne
di generosi fatti, di rare and eccelenti done: le quali o illustre essempio di
castita and di pudicitia, o di generosita, and di grandezza d'animo (che si
vide in molte done and vergini Spartane, and in molte Roman si^^ilmente
auenire) fece chiare al monao and illustri and famous, senzalo studio delle
lettere. Potrei raccordare le Persiane, le Francesi, le Thedesche, le Melie, le
Phocesi, le Chie, le Argiue, and altre quasi infinite, i nomi delle quali,
furono celebrati negli antichi tempi, and sono ne nostri tuttauia: and con
maggior loro gloria, been and virtuosamente adoperandosi, lasciorono materia a
dotei huomini di scriuore: che non scrissere di molti huomini illustri, o
Erinna, o Sappho, o Coronna: essendo molto piu soda, and piu vera laud il fare
le imprese grandi, che lo scriuere di loro been and accociamente. Nelle lettere
adunque a me non pare egli, in guisa alcuna, che si debba fanciulla
ammaestrare: nella quale intendiamo, che sia maggior ornamento, che sia maggior
ornamento l'honesta and il vero valor, che la lieue fame del molto sapere, and
delle molte scientie, che ella si habbiae acquistare. Percioche essendo a noi
preposti duo finine studi delle lettere, il delettare, and il giouare: ne
questo si puo sperare da quella donna, che come oi e data per compagna dalla
natura all fatiche, cosi ha in tutto a essere attina and intenta al gouerno di
noi and delle famiglia: (...) quella maniera di studij* quali delettano se le
puo concedere, senza grave pericolo di offender la bellezza and il candor del
suo animo. Poi che adunque non si commettono all done i gouerni degli sta^^,
and delle Repub, ne cosiloro si conuiene come gia a Dracone, a Licurgo, a
Sclone and Numa Pompilio, scriuer quelle leggi, donde regolati gli huomini
viuano been and moderamente: ne come a professori delle scientie and delle
faculta insegnar nelle schole la prudentia delle leggi, and la Philosophia: and
ne studi che delettano, non e meno pericole, che elle imprendino ad esser
accorte and lasciue innamorate: che a seriuer elegy, dottamente, and Ode, and
Epigrammi, and sonetri, and canzeni: sieno pur elle^ o^trette alla cura, and
(...) gouerno della famiglia: and inuidiando a quelle, the per vera virtu
furono illustri: di quelle, che con molto pregiuditio della loro honesta
volsero parere al mondo Diotime, Aspasie, Sappho and Corinne, facciano poca
stina o nonnulla. Compensisi con il non molto prositto loro nelle lettere, il
molto danno che le puo auenire, and lesi mostri (se pure in cio fussero
pertinaci) quanto meglio loro si conurgna, l'ago, e'l fuso e la conocegia, and
l'arcolaio, concerta laud di honest and gradu matrone che lo stite and la
penna con dubbia fama, se in ^sse siano piu lettere che honesta and valor.
Aniuno e dubbio, che non sia per diuenir perfetta and compiuta donna collei
(che tu^^a fiata per osser mandote la maggior part giouanette and fanciulle a^
gouerno delle case, appena si de eredere, che possa ad ateuna adduren^re) la
quale di pari and da precetti di moire sauij, and dall^ngo vso, habbia appresi
i modi del gouern^r b^^e and prudentemente la sua fani^glia: che in niuna part
assentires, che el^a auan^^ando in se si essa, la condition and lo stato di
dona attiua, and (per nomin^^la con voce s^^anier^) economica, suffe ^rdita per
la scala della natural Philosophia cos^ ar^ua, re^tar di sai^re alia
contemplatione della cose: che piu dagli otiosi huomini, and per moli anni
neile lettere ess^rcitati, si puo desiderare che sperare. Ma poiche con tanto
pericolo si a ia speranza di questo isi fso: and in tutte ie altre faculta che
per prattica, o per scientia si acquistano (dounend si sar scielta) si eleggono
piu tosto quelli che sono dall'vso informati and dalla isperantia, che i molto
scientiati, and non molto prattichi, non altrimenti commetteremo noi la cura di
noi ^tessi, a prudente matrona and ben intendente, and pel nolto vso delle cose
fatta sauia and accorta, che hauendo noi a na^igare, and la salute and le
feculta ad esperto and prouido nochiero commetteremmo, poca stima facendo noi
di chi informato solo dall' astrolabio, and dalle carte di Tolomeo, ce
prometesse (non essendo piu vscito fuori delle sue case) sicura nauigatione. Si
derra egli a noi parere assai, che la nostra sauia fanciulla, fatta cauta dagli
auisa and da saui ammaestramenti della dotta maestra, faccia feed qua^do si sia
che da ei il tempo and la occasion cio richiegga, che ella sia per been and
suauiamente la sua famiglia gouernare. Ne voglio io tuttauolta, che ella sia
priua della commodita del leggere, and dello intendere, essendo cio caro and
bell' ornamento in sauia and volorosa donna, non pur di commodo and di vtilita.
Anzi ^egga ella molte cose dagli huommi dotti lasciate scritte ad informatione
and vso di noi: pure che (come di^nzi si disse) non le si pongano innanzi versi
lasciui and amorosi (che fanno il p^^) o fauole and nouelle, and ai molt altri,
and del Boccaccio istesso: le quali se si leggono da noi and si osseruano, piu
per la vaghezza dello style and della dicitura, and per l^ b^l numero, and per
larmornia delle parole scielte and illustri and significanti, che per la
mar^ria, si leggono and si osseruano. Legga elia ad^ique, poiche tutto hoggimai
i^ questa nestra c^a, e recat^ da dotti huomini nella lingua nosira, oltre a
sacri libri, i quali copia gra^de somministramo, che fa^no ad culto and all'
ornamento degli animi: quello che scrisse Plutarcho delle done illustri, degli
antiqui tempi: and quello che molti secoli poi, il Boccaccio istesso: and degii
altri alcuni anchora p^u vicini a questa eta: and vegga tutto quello, ^he ella
leg (se pure si puo) (...) vaghe and hell ^ituro diuisat^: che app^na si puo
dire quanto, ^esse ^e^ mouer gli animi de teneri and de^^cati fanciulli. Hauera
ella da cosi eara and bel^a lettione, and da cosi fatto spettacolo, ne pure
dalle parole che poco (se sono ignude di essempi) a que^a^etate insegnano, mada
illustri fatti anchora, and da gloriose imprese di gra^ done and famous per
rare virtu, done ella aceresca quelle belle doti, che le ha donate
liberalissima la natura, di ornamento and di gratia, an ^i pure di generosiia
and di grandezza d'animo degna di gran gentil donna and di matrona, Legga and
tacita seco ammiri le done Troiane, le Sabine, le Phocesi^ le Argiue, le
vergini Roman, le Thedesche. Raro essempio di piera verso la patria ha^era
ella in Megistona in Aretaphila, in Policrita, and in quellae tanto gloriosa
Giudithe and H^ster, di amo^e verso i mariti and di inuiolabili feed, in
Lucretia, in Portia, i^ quella ba^bara Camma, della sua honesta, and della
ingiuria del morto marito, in vno istesso tempo gloriosa vindicatrice. Di iutte
le virtu (per lascia^ homai le stranicre) di pieta, di religione, di sanita, di
feed in ta^te and tante sacre vergini, i nomi delle quali sono illustri
appresso di noi: in Cecilia, in Agatha, in Theodora, in Barbara, and in altre
infinite: che con il sangue and co^ la istessa vita, incredibili and inusitati
torme^ti sopporta^do, resero certo testimonio al mondo, della lo^o feed: and la
nostra religione tale fecero, quale hora essere la veggiamo. Fra le quali
narrationi, vi si tramettera^na a tempo le piaccuoli: nel'e quali tuita volia,
vi sera cura di ricrcarle l'animo, and di darle allegiamento: non vi s^ra
occas^m^ che desti in l^i quei pensieri, che in al^una guisa possino offender
bellazza del suo animo. J^ non inte^do (non ne essendo mes^^iero) darle co mici
precetti religione: percioche in mi tengo certo, che a cosi santo and valor^so
huomo, si commettera in^^rno a cio la cura di lei: che tutto quel lo che io ne
dicessi, vi potrebbe parere non meno venir da mancamento di giuditio, che esser
s^u^rchio. Con tutio ^^o non lasciero io di dire, che (chi si sia a chi voi
questo ^arico diate) sia auisato che nell' animo del la fanciulla si formi vera
religione, and pieta si schisi in tutto come pesse capi taie, la superstitione.
Ne ^^edo io, che hora, mi faccia bisogno che piu da cap^ facendomi, dimostri,
come l'vna dall' altra differe^te sia. Percioche la religione e virtu, and ista
tutta nella medi^crita, laquale come ha da un ca^to la impieta, che e l'vno de
suoi estremi cosi ha dall' altro la si^perstitione la quale e non meno spesso
dell' impic^a per^^ic^osa. Et ci^ non pure al santo huomo sera palese, che
costumera nelle cose alla religione and al ^^lto diuino appartenenti ^a
fanciulla, ma a quella istessa donna sa^^ia and intendente, che hauera nell'
altre cose la cura di l^^. La quale sopra tutto ^ingegner a con ogni suo
studio, di farnela humile, and di facile and mansueto animo, essendo la
hunnlita n^ solo Christiana virtu and civil, ma di tutte le Christian and
civilly virtu, basi and foundamento. Et percioche ella e partorita in nci, dal
riconoscimento di noi stessi (quanto to potra capere nell' infermo animo di
lei) dalla sapientia di Dio, dalla bonta, dalla potentia: che ella conoscera
essere infinita, non solo dalla hauer egli con cosi mirabil ordine creato di
nulla il mondo, and ripieno de ta^ta varieta di cose: ma dal conseruarnclo in
questo istesso essere con eterna and diuina prouidentia: le mostrera, che non
pure quello che puo esser in vna picciola sanciulla, ma tutto quello che ne i
gran Re and negli Imperatori: and quanto conobbero and qua^to intesero, tuiti
quegli huomini che ne vecchi tempi vscirono del Liceo, del Portico and dell'
Academia, congrido and fama illustre di sapientia: esser in comparatione di
quello che puote, and che sa Iddio, o poco o non nulla: tutta quella che in noi
possi in alcuna guisa hauer nome di bonta, comparata con quella di lui,
maluagita istimando. A cio fare, le rechera innanzi tutto quello che ella da
valenti and dotti and religiosi huomini, o pure da curiosa and dilige^te
le^tione hauer a offeruato: mostrandole che nostro Signore venne non perch a
lui fusse ministrato: ma per minisirar egli: and che a suoi disse, che
contendeuano del p^^ degno luoco, che chi era maggior fra gli altri, si
istimasse inferiore. E^che chi si humiliaua si essaltaua: che voleua dire, che
quelli solomente si essa^tauano che conos^euano s^ s^essi: la quale virtu
essendo diuina, non solo f^ n^ nostri ^audcu^lo sempre, ma fu in Socra^^
i^ies^o argomento etiandio di rara sapientia ^giudi can^^osi meritamente colui
saper mo^^o, che conoscesse non saper rulia. Acquis^era ella ageuolmente cosi
bel^a virtu, se se le insegner a, a mirar sempre non solo all piu nobili di
se, and all peu potenti: ma anchora (percioche questo di molto maggior momento
e) all piu virtuose, and all pito sauie, and non all meno, come fanco le
sciocche and le poco intendenti. Sentira ella in cio doppia vtilita Percioche
conscendo che molte hanno nel mondo, and done and signo^e di gran regni, and
di gran principati, che per nobilita, and per ricechezze, and per potenza le
sono saperiori: scemera nel suo animo tutto quello che dianzi vi fusse di
alterezza and di arrogantia che e cosi brutto vitio: and dal mirare all piu
virtuose (che ella conoscera essere in suo potere) si forzera di acquestarsi
quello di che ella si conoscera hauer mancamento. Anzi se le fara vedere,
quanto sia brutta cofa e and sconcia, che apprendendo le done da quelle che
veggono tuttoeli nelle chief comparir piu riccamente ornate, and piu been and
piu liggiadramente che l'altre acconcie, noue guise di ornamenti and di
abbigliature, donde elle per piu vaghe and per piu belle, siano fra l'altre
conosciute: che elle cosi poco inuidiose sieno, di quelle belle virtu and di
^uegli ornamenti, donde le sauie and valorose done, sentono ^uttauia
co^me^dare: non essendo elleno cosi sciocche no^dimeno, che no^ conoschino
quanto di openione appresso il mondo and di slima cio possi loro arrecare. Part
alla maggior part, che mol^o, porti di ornamento and di gratia a cara and
gentil fanciulla, se ella fra le molte, diuenutae dotta maestra del ca^tare, o
del sonar a vari strome^ti si renda famosa and illustre. Che io (cosi da forti
and da gagliarde ragioni confermato) no^ solo non posso co^mendare, ma giudico
che come cosa di no^ lieue pericolo, debba esser in lei schifata in tut^o and
fuggita. percioche, come che la musica, se e a laudeuole, and ad honesto fine
vsata, non habbia in se vitio, and mereti luogo fra l'altre arti che percioche
oppartegono propitiamente ad huomini ben nati and civilly, seno liberali
chiamate: tuttallia sotto nome di virtu (come sono l'alire arti and faculta
tutte, seroccame^te per virtu conosciute dalla maggior part) porta ella dolce
and soaue esca a graui and importanti mali. Quantu^que ne pure questa istessa
musica che si mostra degna per la sua belta, che l'altre le siano co^pagne che
sono liberali: piu si de dire che sia nel cognoscere le proportioni and gli
interualli. and gli altri concenti delle voci: che fanno per lo piu huomini
volgari and in dotti: che (come veggiamo che Platone fa nel ^imeo intorno alla
fabrica del mondo) nel conoscere le armonie and le proportioni delle cose, le
quali apparte^gono all' altre scientie and all faculta. La qual cosa se e non
si dira egli che piu sia musico o Adriano Vellarte, o Cipriano, o Giacches, o
Giusquino, il quale alcuni anni a dietro fu, o Comberto: che il Genoa e il
Maggio and il Pereto, and le Spagnielo e il Zimara: de quali i primi sono
anchor tuttauia, furono glialtri a memoria de nostri padri illustri philosophi
and di gran nome. Et nondimeno come i primi sono eccellenti maestri di canto
and furono: cosi i secondi perauentura, non appressero tanto da questi istessi
volgari maestri, che hauessero potuto vna nota dall' altra diuisare. Si
rimouera adunque la nostra fanciulla in tutto dall' vso della musica: and
poiche ella apre l'adito a molti vitij, sotto honesto velo di virtu: tanto piu
si derra ella da noi schifare, quanto meno il pericolo d^ cio appare and e
maggiore: Sia concesso l'vso del canto, and di questa lusinggheuole armonia, a
quelli che sianchi dalle cure noiose and graui, di ristoro, and di
alleggiamento hanno mesiiero: che ad Agamemnone appresso di Homero auenne, and
a Saul ne sacri libri, il quale da fiera and trista passione era a mansueta
and tranquilla mente dalla Cethera di David riuocato and dal canto. Ma dove
ella dee a cosi honesto sine hauer luogo: si e ella in vso nelle delitie and ne
conuitri and nelle cene solenni: nelle quali, come che la opulentia and la
dilieatura delle viuande non rendino a bastanza glianimi languidi and
dissoluti, sono chiamati d^tti and eccellenti maestri di canto: i quali quando
con maestra and dotta mano, le cethere and le viuole ricercando: quando con
altri stromenti, and quando con dolci and soaui voci intonando artoficiosi and
lasciui canti (non altrimenti che disposta and arida materia, alla quale sia
vicino il suoco sottil aura che disubito si sia leuata, auampa and accende) con
noue maniere di incendij, ardono and infiammano gli animi di quelli che da
lu^ga and inuecchiata virtu non siano resi sieuri. Dalla falsa and lusingheuole
armonia delle Sire, quell' Vlisse ta^to da Greci and da Latini scritiori
celebrato, che nutri nel suo grembo di celeste ambrosia la Sapientia figliuola
di Gioue, appena pote re^dere se stesso sicuro: and noi di tenera and dilicata
fanciulla, and alleuata nelle delitie and cresciuta, tanto prometteremo a not
stessi, che no^ dubi teremo, che non pure dallo vdire, ma dallo impre^dere cosi
non lusingheuole art, non languisca quando si sia, and non diuenga molle and
lasciua and effeminata. Sauiame^te istimo Platone che grave momento recasse
intorno a costumi degli huomini nelle citta, qual maniera di musica fusse
appresso cittadini in vso. Della qual cosa ne fece a pieno feed la citra de
Lacedemonij, la quale sprezzando in tlitto l^vso di quella musica, che
indeboliua and saceua la^guidi gli animi, and quella ab^racclando che qu^si
vir^le and generoso suono intonando face ^a gli l^uomi^, animosi and ardenti
and desiderosi di gl^^^^ and di immor^^^ta si dis^es^ per mo^te ^ta and per
molti secoli incorrota. N^ a Licurgo essendo egli sapientissimo, piacque che
nele pugne (il qual vso e peruenuto sino a nostri tempi si sentisse il shono di
tali stromenti, donde ^^infiacchissero gli animit ma donde si eccitassero and
accendessero alla diffesa della comm^ne salute and della liberta, and
moderassero i mouimenti inconditi del corpo, accioche con temperata misura and
con certo ordine, andassero contra loro nimici: che tale maniera di musica,
quale hora vsiamo noi a nostro diletto, s^aue and delicata, in tutto hauerebbe
partorito contrario effetto negli animi loro: quantunque per altro and di gran
cuere, and been animati fussero siati per se s^ si. Ne pure in questa cut a,
nella quale per molii seceli, non hebbero lucco quelle delitte, donde and molt'
alire and quella che hebbe l'imperio del mo^de roi^^rono^ma in Athene, cosi
studiosa inuentrice de pi^ceri and delle delicie co^^ delle la^^deuoli arti and
delle s^ien^^, Al^^^de (ha^^^do (...) nell ani^^^ do^ca and meraniglioso
concento and d^uina armonia de sacri stu^^^ de^la Philisophia) con generoso
spirito sprezzo in tutto questa istessa cosi dilicata and lusi ^gh^^uol^ art,
che con tanto maggior nostro danno quanto meno e da nti conosci^^to, cosi si
place. Ma perch non paia che noi quasi con diliborato animo, habbiamo preso a
pugnar con la musica: co^cediamo che ella si stia appresso a caloro, che o vero
non hanno dove meglio impiegar le sue hoar, (...) pure non possono: and creclia
no che sauiamente rimpto^^^^we^st^ Philippo ad. Alessandro che tr^ppo ^^l^ si
suffe amanzato ne (...) della musia and trapp^f^^sse (...) eccellen^^, and che
debba pare^e ali^ui assci se non solo i gra^^^ (...) gli ^a^^mini ^^u^^^ and le
c^stumati gen^^ ^^m^e, ^^^st^no le loro (...), a musta and a cator^^ and (...)
piu loro cont^entisi l'e d^^e, che l'esser vdu^ cantare been and acconciamente.
La qual cosa a questo istesso Philippo, con dalie and placeuole maniera, un
gran musico and famoso di que temoir^^ faccio, dicendogli, m^^tre che sonando
egli ^^taula, era da lui metiament notato, che con lo strumento scorda^o
facesse sp^acenole and insoaue armonia non voglia Jddie, o Re, che meglio di
cio possi in alcun tempo for gludicio. Ma lasclando ho^^^mai la musica a
spensierati and otiosi: imprendi la fanciulla nostra, non pure che modi tutti
di cucire and di ricamare che stanno been in gentil donna, mal'vso ancora del
filare and del tessere: ne credi che cio si disconuegna alla bonoreuolezza di
quello stato dove ella e nata: poiche Augusto prencipe and monar cha del mondo
velle che la figliuola and la nipote cio sapessero. Anzi perch ella quando che
sia diuenuta madonna, sappia riconoscere gli vssuij delle fanti sue and de
famigliari: noti con curiosa diligentia come acconciamente elle o spazzino le
sale and le camere, o apprestino i conuitti, o tenghino curate le dispense and
i cellieri: ne sia cosi ambitiosa, che ella si sdegni allhora che si faccia il
bucato o il pan ritrouaruisi, ma sia sempre a tutte le facende della casa
present. Percioche allhora si potra sperare che ella gia fatta donna, sia
quella che ella derra essere: se essendo fanelulla, quello che de essere gentil
fanciuila and di be costumi mostrera di conoscere and sera. Ma perch, in donna
sopra tutto nobile and di grande stato, sono alcune virtu che se vi sono, paio
no degne di poca laud, no^ vi essendo, fanno been spesso che esse incorrono in
gran biasimo: nel viuere suo habbiasi cura che essendole concesso quello che
faccia mestiero al nutrimento and al sostegro della sua vita: in tal guisa ella
costumata and auczza, non solo no disideri ma disprezzi in tutto quello che
esca della gola and irritamenta sia. Ne mi spiace in quesio vitio (quello ch'
io dissi che in aleun al^ri and sopratutto in quello che e contrario alla
pudiciua non si deuesse osseruare) che dalla faccia di lui and dalla
disparutezza impari ad hauerlo in adio and a sprezzare: and non e dubbio punto
che come Pallade offesa dalla deformita della sua faccia mentre che ella
iuttauia sonando il zussolo se vedeua gonfiare in istrana guisa le guancie
nello specchio sdegnata ne lo gitto a terra, and ne lo spezzo che ella veduto,
quanto sia sconcio and disdiceuole and quanta brute zza porti all sauie done
and costumate cosi brutto vitio, diuenuta di se stessa gelosa, non lo
abhorrisca in iutto and ^'habbia in odio. Non si bugiarda, and ami piu tosto
(se cio pure le auiene) co^fessare il vero nel vitio, che fignere il falso
nella virtu. Per^ioche la confessione del vitio e occasion di penite^tia and
la simulatione della virtu di alterezza d'animo and di arrogantia. Et quello
che e piu grave, come il morbo fatto palese si puo sanare, la sanita fir^ta non
lascia occasion di curare il morbo che e occulto: cosi il vitio palese con
opportuno rimedio curandosi, da luoco alla sanita: la virtu simulata, non vi si
apponendo il rimedio, vt^isce il contrario vitio. Dalla stretta domestichezza
and dalla pratti^a delle molte co^pagne sia tenuta lontana. Percioche nel
gregge numeroso vi esempre piu che temere che nel meno: and se questo istesso
infetta grave and pestilente morbo, molto put vi (...) pericolosa la
contagione: and nella moltitudine, se vi sono vitij schiseuoli, and brutti and
corrotti costumi: piu malageuolmente sono schifati che nel poco numero:
prendendo sempre fomento il vitio dall' essempio de i molti and dall' vso, and
noi vogliamo che la nostra viua con vna sola compagna and no^ piu: and che ella
cosi sugga la moltitudine, che non ne la abhorrisca tuttauia. Anzi sera ella
ammaestrata a mosi^arsi sempre a tutte le sue compagne affable and dolce, and
ad honorarle and ad esserle liberale and cortese del piu degno luoco: ne solo
quando le seranno pari, ma (accioche elle conoscano la sua cortesia esser
maggiore) dove anchora le seranno infericri: sopra tuti glialiri vitij odiando
la superbia and giudicandola indegna di se stessa. Non sij ne garrula ne
tenzeniera: and conoschi, che been spesso suo l'essere il prolisso fauellare
occasion di graui errori, non solame^te in quella eta alla quale piu che ad
alcu^ altra, si conuiene l'imparare: ma anchora (and questo istesso piu souente
che alirui non farebbe mestiero) nella piu matura and piu grave, and della
quale e proprio l'insegnare and l'ammaestrare. Attendi adunque, dove sauie
do^ne sieno and graui and intendenti, quello che ragionino: essa di rado sia
attesa. Percioche come a quello che fauella soprasta sempre pericolo di errare,
cosi a quello che ascolta e proposta certa speranza ci farsi piu sauio and
migliore. La qual cosa perch alla nostra auegna, notera ella quello che si
dira con laud da qualunque and con biasimo: che troppo been imparera a
conoscere, dal volto, da cenni, and da sembianti degli ascolranti: i quali come
con lieta faccia sogliono applaudere a quello che sia detto sauiamente, da
quelli che fauellano: cosi sogliono assentire con trista and maninconica, and
quasi con vno issinime^to, a quello che scioccamente dicano and con poco
auertimento, o di quel luoco, o di quel te^po, o di quelle persono, o di quelle
cose istesse delle quali ragionano o pure di se stessi. Jn questa guisa fara
ella scielta di quello che credera che si debba dire, and di quello che si
debba tacere, imponendo certa leg a se stessa, di far l'vno and di fuggir
l'altro, and lo fara. Conoschi da cio quanto parcamente ella habbia ad vsare
l'vfficio della fauella and della lingua: che la natura sapientissima artifice
and ottima and diuina maestra ha voluto che ella si stia come in vno steccato
richiusa fra gli ordini de denti, dove le orechee fece patentissime and sepre
pro^te allo ascoltare and allo inte^dere. Molti vari esse^pi and degni da esser
ma^dau da lei alla memoria, hauera ella and da mole' altri degli antiqui and da
Erasmo sopratutto in quel libro o'oro ch' egli lascio scriue do vitij and delle
virtu della lingua: ibquale da nostri huomini tuttauia in questa nostra volgar
fauella si leg (s'^o non minganno) con non mezzano loro prositto, and percio
non ne ragiono piu a lu^go. Nel vestire, essendo questa vna di quelle cose che
si chiamano indiffere^ti perch l'vso solo le fa parare o buone o ree
variame^te: no^ habbia ella che inuidiare all sue co^pagne, ne tuttauia
aua^zando di pompa di rieche vesti quelle istesse dia a loro occasion
d'inuidia: a se stessa di arrogantia and di ambitione: non essendo meno
pericolosa cosa l'esser inuidiato: che brutta and isconueneuole l'hauere ad
altri inuidia. Et percioche piu a dietro si disse, che ella doueua schifare la
troppa domestichezza non tanto delle compagne, ma delle fanti and delle
scrue^ti, and di cotali bergole anchora: ella talmente fara questo istesso, che
non si scorga ne modi and nelle maniere sue indicio di superbo animo and
altiero: la fante, la cameriera, la lauandaia, co^ donnesca maesta and condita
di piaceuole and dolce humilita, richiedendo de loro vfficij. Conoscera ella
quanto si habbia a temere da cotali femine, and ree and maluagie per lo piu
sempre, da loro costumi: essendo elle molto piu facili a dire quello che no^
debbono, che ad vdire quello che debbono: and molto piu auisate nel notare gli
altrui, che i propri diffetti. Con tutti quants potra il piu, sera amabile and
verra honorar i buoni and osseruare per meritare, il loro amore: and non
sprezzare i cattiui per non si acquistare il loro odio. Un vitio schifera grave
molto and sconcio: and piu di questa eta che d'alcun altra: il quale percioche
si copre quasi con il velo di vna vicina virtu and laudeuole molto, and di
grande ornamento, difficilmente dalla maggior part si auertisce and si schiua:
and e posto tutto in vna vitiosa vergogna and brutta, la quale been spesso
passando in habito and in natura si ritiene anchora nella pirs matura eta, non
occasion di non lieue biasimo. Et nel vero come il troppo ardire, che si
conuiene piu tosto a quelle che recitano ne theatri and ne publici spettacoli,
che a gentili and costumate done, si de come capital vitio notare and hauere a
schiuo: cosi all incontro la troppa timidita and la vergogna dove ella non
habbia luoto, e da bamba and da sciacca, and non da quella sania donna, and di
quel valor, che vediamo che nella nostra e. Et percio fug, gendo questi due
estremi, se essa hauera fallo commesso che sia proprio di quegli anni, si sera
ella parime^te vergognosa, ma nel riconoscerio solamente and non piu: and non
essendo in guisa alcuna pertinace ne ostinata in negarlo, fara feed che in
ammenda di cio non si possi da lei render piu grave castigo, che quella istessa
vergogna che ella ne hauera presa. Et all incontro do^e le fara mestiero di dar
contezza di se stessa and della sua virtu sera pronta ma non audace: and con un
subito rossore che ella tantost con virtuosa confidentia sgombrera da le sue
belle guancie, mostrera che sia in lei animo riuerente, ma lontano da
biasimeuole vergogna and vitiosa. In cotal guisa ella confaccia lieta and
temperata da dolce grauita and con gliocchi castigati dira dise stessa quello
che (come che ella conosca che la habbia ad esser recato a laud) diss mulera
nondimeno and fignera di non riconoscere, facendo turtauia feed che ella ami
piu tos^o ^essere che il parer buona. Habbia ella i suoi di porti and i suoi
piaceri, ne suoi giardini, and nelle sue ville: delle quali ne piu delitiosi,
ne di maggiore o piu dolce amenita, ha la Icalia o altra part dell. Europa che
piu illustri sia o piu nominata fra noi. Ne tuttauia ella vi dimorera cosi
longamente che ella si scordi de medi and de coslumi cittadineschi: quantunsono
cosi copiose di case and di ricchi palazzi le ville vostre: che niuna cosa vi
si scorge perch elle non debba no citta populatissime esser istimate. Jo mi
sento cosi trapportar da quel diside ch'io ho di ornar and di far bella la
fanciulla nostra, o pure di scoprir and di riuocar a maturita in lei, que be
frutti de quali ella ha concetto da voi genereso seem: che come quelli che
caualcando tuttauia trapportati da profundi pensieri, passano spesso quel luoco
istesso, al quale arriuar intendeuano: cosi io gia mi auegno esser vscito o
pure suiato fuori di que confini ch'io hauena prescritti a me stesso in questa
maniera di seriuere. Jmperoche, facendo fine, pregaro I ddio, il qual solo puo
piu ch'alcun consiglio and industria humana, che la nostra figliuola, senza
bisogno delle nostre iustructioni, diuenga tale da se stessa quale la
desiderate: and noi congiettura^do la sufficienza di voi suo padre, speriamo,
anzi ci assicuriamo, che qualche volia ella sara tale.

L'INSTITVTION d'vne Fille noble, par M. Iehan Michel Bruto.
AV SIGNEVR Siluestre Cataneo.
PLeusr a Dieu, puis que par pleusieurs moye^s depuis ma ieunesse, la fortune
tousiours s'est trouuee enuers moi cruelle and ennemie, que maintenant a tout
le moins, en recompense de ses iniures infinies and cruelles se mo^strast
enuers moy si favorable, que si ie ne pensasse a ce qui vous peust porter
vtilite and prouffit, cela vous peust sembler sign d'esprit, non seulement
recognoissant, mais courtois and liberal: and render (ou scroit besoing) aus
autres tesmoignage, non moindre de vostre valeur and virtue, que des faueurs and
benefices. Et en verite, comme le plus souuent les grans benefices, ostent
espoir a ceus a qui ils se font, qu'ils seront estimez plus que recognoissans
des benefices receus, car cela se doibt plustost attribuer a deuoir, que vray
virtue, ainsi, s'l n'y a en ceux qui les font vraye and solid ver^u, qui en
rend tesmoignage (ce qu'elle faict ampleme^t en vous) bien souuent soulent
estre plustost sign d'vne cueur ambitieux, come cut lules Caesar and plusieurs
autres, que de liberal and courtois. Toutessois, puis que les graces and vertus
de vostre esprit sont si grandes, que non seulement surmontent laboudance de
vos richesses and facultez (combien toutesfois qu'elles ne soyent plus gra^des
que celles qui peuuent suffire a un Gentilhomme modere and d'esprit noble) mais
encore de beaucop celles de gra^ds Rois and Empereurs, do^nerez assez a
congnoistre au mo^de, que tout ce que par moy est e^crit, qui vous puisse
tournir a co^modite and plai sir, ne se doibt moins attribuer a vos vertus, que
aux bien faicts: and ne proceed en ^oi plus de souuena^ce de ceus cy, que de la
remembrance d'icelles: lesquelles induyse^t a vous porter ho^neur and a mer,
quiconque soit, qui seuleme^t d'icelles, en aucune sort ait accointa^ce. Ces
iours passez auec bon loisir (qui sans fault necessairement doibt estre a tous
ceus, qui ne hante^t ceste ville a l'occasion de trafiquer, en laquelle pour le
iourd'huy, ainsi qu'en la spacieuse and large mer Oceane, se deschargent toutes
les riuieres d'vn course perpetuel de plusieurs endroits de la terre,
s'assemblent de toutes les parties du mo^de, gens infinis auec tresgrans
auoirs) i'ay faict diligence qu'iceux miens labeurs que par cy deuant ay
employe graves and difficiles en pleusieurs auteurs Grecs and Latins,
rendissent non seuleme^t a moy dous and amiable fruict, mais a tous ceux qui
vou droient viure honestement and vertueusement: car ay ant desia dispose,
comme en certaines sentences and lieus co^muns toutes les vertus, qui (pource
qu'elles appartiennent a la vie and meurs des hommes) sont en Latin appellees
Moralles, ay d'icelles, par feincte, mais agreeable (comme ie pense) and grave
maniere d'Epistres traicte en tell sort and facon, que voire, ne la mesme
envy mesdisante labeurs honestes and louables, ne me pourra nier qu'a nostre
nation n'aye rapporte grande commodite and proussit: principaleme^t a ceux qui
vandront par le droit chemin de vie vertueuse tender a louable and honest fin.
Enter toutes cet Epistres qui sont en grad nombre, and diuerses entr'elles,
ceste cy vous est dediee, en laquelle traicta^t par quel moyen se doit vne
fille honest esleuer and instituer, de sort qu'on puisse esperer qu'elle sera
de grand renom, ie me suis persuade (que vous estant pere, qui par excellent
prudence and virtue entendez mieux qu'vn autre, de co^bien plus aggreables and
de plus grand valeur soyent les vertus, qui ornent l'esprit, que toutes celles
bagues qui ornent le corpse, lesquelles rendent souuent les Dames plus superbes
and haultaines) ne se pourroit, par moy, vous prese^ter don plus rich and
aggreable: laquelle chose i'ay tant faict plus hardiment, que vous, vous tenant
bien loing de vostre fillette, craignez, ne scay comment que sa tender and
foible virtue (co^bien que de deux tant illustres maisons, come sont Catanea
and Spinula, en ait grande succession) n'ayant encore si profondement mis ses
racines, perdist sa force aus mignottises de sa Mere grand, and aus car esses
des siens. Elle a de nature excelle^s and nobles co^menceme^s, and desia en son
enfance co^mence apparoir qu'en elle est la plus grand part, parquoy elle
(co^mme auez esproir) doiue estre quelque iour illustre, and honnoree enter les
autres Dames de sa Cite. Car come peu souuent aduient, qu'vne bonne plant,
sortie d'vn fertile terroir, (forlignant de son naturel tige) produyse aigres
fruicts and amers: ainsi a grand peine me donnerois a ente^dre, qu'vn enfant
nay de bon pere and illustre par sa virtue, ne se monstre en plusieurs
endroicts, semblable a luy. Laquelle chose, combien que par fois voyons en
aucuns aduenir autrement, il faut dire, que toute la fault proceed de
l'institution, qui n'a este tell comme appertenoit a la gene rosite de leur
nature. Ce que toutesfois, ne voyons seulement aduenir aux ho^mes, mais aus
chooses irraisonnables, voire (pour ne m'eslonger de mon exemple) aus plants
mesmes. Car deffailant enuers le soing and diligence continuelle voyrrons que
leurs vertns naturelles perdront leur force, and finablement deuiendroot
sauuages. Parcillement les bons cheuaus perdront beaucop de celle generosite
and viuacite qu'ils ont eu de nature, si on ne leur monstre and enseigne a
estre tells que d'eus mesmes ne peuuent aisement deuenir. D'autant doncques que
la naifue virtue de nostre fillette nous done plus grand espoir, d'autant plus
deuons estre soigneus, comme de chose precieuse and de grand valeur, excitans
en nous mesmes grand pensement and solicitude pour la conseruer: ne soyons tant
nonchallans, que ne confient noz autres chooses (qui doiuent estre beaucop moins
estimees) sinon a gens de foy singuliere and tresbien a nous cogneus, exposons
noz enfans a l'aduenture a ceus, qui, ou par traictement trop delicat
corrompent leur tender esprit, ou par importune rudesse les accoustument a
timidite malseante, ou par adventure a mespris and haine des chooses qu'ils
doiuent enter autres plus ensuynre and aimer. Grave, prudent and plein de bon
conseil, doibt estre celuy (qui qu'il soit) de qui les petis enfans doiuent
apprendre les manieres and moyens d'honnestement viure, mais sur tout, doit
estre soingneus que leurs esprits purs and nets, remplis de bonte and beauty
divine, ne se voyent maculez de taches, and souillez de grandes fautes. Et si
vne belle dame and propre, se gouuernant selon le miroir, n'endure que sa
beauty soit en aucun endroit, maculee d'vne petite tache, laquelle toutesfois
ne dure que brief temps, and comme fleur caduque flaitrir, and facilement pert
toute celle grace and bienseance qu'elle auoit du commencement, combien
d'aduantage doiuent ces ames, esquelles on voit exprimee I image de Dieu non
encore maculee de la souilleure de pechez, estre tenues franches and gardees,
non seulement de macules grandes and apparentes, mais de quelque petite tache
que ce soit? En robes tissues de pourpre and d'or, and riches de precieuses
franges and ornemens (tant sommes nous delicat) ne voulons (ta^t qu'il est en
nous) qu'on y voye vne tache, pour menue qu'elle soit, and ne se monstre qu'a
ceus, qui de bien pres and curieusement la regardent. Et neantmoins, nous
sommes (comme si le soing de noz enfans ne nous touchast en rien) tant
negligens, que s'ils sont entachez de vices enormes and vilains, nous en
faisons ou peu, au parauenture nulle estime. Laqnelle chose, puis qu'elle est
de si grande importance, and que deuons porter tell soing d'eslire Recteurs and
maistres de noz petis enfans d'autant deuons nous estre en ce plus diligens and
curieus, comme il y en a plus d'autres qui font autrement en vne seule chose,
estimans consister leur salut, que nous leur donnions tells moyens and manieres,
qu'ils doiuent ensuyure tout le course de leur vie tant malaise and difficile.
Pleust a Dien, que comme en cela gist le salut and co^seruation des Republiques
and grand Empires les princes creufsent qu'ainsi fust, and y employassent leur
pensement, plus qu'ils ne semblent fair. Car qui ne scait, que comme en un
corpse qui a les members sains and robustes se conserve facilement la sante, and
en instrumens de Music se sent dous accord quand les vois sont chascune a
part soy eguales, and d'vne plaisante variete enter else accordantes a un
mesme son, ainsi seulement en tells Citez, esquelles se voyent les Citoyens
modestes, and en la diversity des estats qu'ils exercent aucc douce and
bienseante equalite d'vne volunte ententifs au bien public, se co^serue le
commun salut: and se sent tell accort, que ne se peut ouyr plus dous ne plus
propre. Iamais ne naist un fills a homme prive, qu'au mesme temps ce pays,
auquel il est nay, n^ayt acquis un Citoyen. Et comme, non seulement les hommes,
mais les propres bestes, and celles mesmes, qui enter les autres sont plas
cruelles, n'oublient leurs petis, mais les allaictent and nourrissent: ainsi
les Princes and gouuerneurs de villes, recognoissans comme leurs enfans, ceus
qui naissent tous les iours, and prenant affection paternelle enue^s eus,
doiuent auoir soing, qu'ils ne soyent en temps dangereus and contraire, moins
duisables a la Republique, qu'vti les and bien aymez de leurs peers naturels.
Laquelle chose, par merueilleuse ordonnance gardant la cite des Lacedemoniens,
and commettant la cure des enfans, non a gens estranges and incogneus, mais
sages and bien entendus Cytoyens (qui iadis a leur grand honneur, auoyent
administre les plus amples and honnorables offices de Republique) par long
temps ont glorieuusement defendu leur liberte and retenu and conserve l'Empire
and Seigneurie des Grecs? Mais pour reuenir a nostre fille, comme ie n'estime
qu'on trouue beaucop de peers ausquels (pour sages and entendus qu'ils soyent)
l'on doyue commettre le soing de leurs enfans, and moins encores de meres, veu
que leur prudence and virtue est bien sonuent vaincue, and surmonte de la grande
affection qu'ils ont enuers eus, si luy auoit toutesfois sa bonne adventure
appareille en vous son pere, vne tant seure and loyalle guide, que pour
paruenir a tell fin (a laquelle taschent tous ceus qui sont de bonne maison)
elle ne pouoit desirer d'aduantage. Car vous, par virtue and prudence
singuliere, and per grand amor, luy pouiez donner tell institution, laquelle
un estranger, en qui eust este fault d'amour n'aucun de sa pare^te en qui la
tendresse and mignardise eust surmonte la prudenee and virtue, ne luy pouuoit
donner en aucun maniere. Mais puis que fortune malign, distributrice de ses
biens, vous (en qui elle deuoit auoir son attente) a contrainct d'occuper
vostre entendement en chooses de grande consequence: en outre, luy a oste celle,
qui seule, apres vous, la deuoit, and pouoit gouuerner, and luy estre appuy,
tout vostre pensement soit, de luy cercher vne dame, pleine de grauite and
prudence, de bonnes manieres and conscience, laquelle tenant vostre place, ne
par faure d'amour ne par disette de prudence, ne puisse enseigner son tender
esprit en tell sort qu'il appartinent a l'estat, auquel est nee. Ie vois a
combien difficile enterprinse vous oblige l'affection paternelle, d'autant que
a grand peine uon seulement en vostre ville, co^bien qu'elle en soit
trespeuplee, mais en pleusieurs antres ensemble, se puisse trouuer dame, en
laquelle, auec vraye amor and charity Chrestienne, soyent si gra^des qualitez
coniointes, que nous les demanderions. Mais ferez, en tell endroict, comme si
eussiez a choisir un peintre excellent, qui deust peindre quelques chambres ou
sales en vostre maison, auquel vous presen teriez les patrons d'Albert Durer,
and Raphael d Vrbin, ou de Iules Rommain (qui de nostre remps ont este, and
seront tousiours estimez peintres excellens) non pour vous attendre qu'iceluy
peust fair tout le semblable, comme, pource que voya^t chose de si grand
paragon, and a co^bien plus ou moins approcheroit de l'excellence de si
reno^mez peintres, alors peussiez iuger, comment il porroit bien and nettement
venir a bout de tell enterprise, de laquelle il se voudroit mesler. Il me
semble, que i'ay beaucop desire, en celle qui doit instituer nostre fille: car
si elle est pleine de grauite and prudence, and bien moriginee, elle a en soy
tout ce pour quoy dame parfaicte and vertueuse doit enuers nous meriter
louenge. Toutesfois, afin que, comme regardant un excellent and singulier
patron la puissiez, quasi par ses traicts and lignes, cognoistre m'esloignant
des precepts communs, and considerans la chose plus profondement, vous la
descriray par plus certaines and particulieres qualitez: non come sont
communement les autres, and plus souuent, mais me reiglant selon ce qu'elles
doiuent estre.

ELle sera doncques douee de prudence tant singuliere, que (cela, qu'a peine
les autres peuuent en lo^gue espace de temps apperceuoit) elle, apprise par les
gestes and contenances de la fille, cognoistra bien tossed ce qu'on doit esperer
and craindre d'elle, and preuenant du commencement par brefs and expediens
remedes a ce qui est a craindre, soigne auec dous and prudens enseignemens,
quasi nourrissant cela qu'on espere d'elle, qu'il paruienne tossed a maturite. D'
auantage, pource qu'il pend beaucoup plus grand danger en ce que nous doutons,
que prouffit and vtilite en ce que nous espero^s: elle sera, deuant ^out,
soingneuse de luy ofter du cueur, tout ce qu'elle craint en elle de mal,
(lequel tou tesfois nous esperons estre ou peu ou point en nostre fille)
imitaut en cela, l'expert laboureur qui ne met la bonne semence en cha^p, qu'il
scait estre bon and fertile, que premierement, ne l'ayt diligemment purge and
arrache les mauuaises herbs, espines and ronces, and qui sont surcreues en
iceluy. Cela faict, ne doit pourtant cesser en elle sacrainte and solicitude:
mais apres qu'elle aura oste de son cueur, le plus qu'elle pourra, tont ce que
luy empescheroit l'augmentation de virtue: and y aura mis la semence dicelle,
and veu germer: sa second solicitude sera que (comme bien souuent les tendres
and nouuelles plants, n'estant appuyees a ferme and solid appuy, esbranlees
de l^impetuosite du vent, tombent par terre, and perdent leur vigueur, and
finablement meutent) la virtue, qui en son cueur aura germe quelque temps,
combatue de l'impetuosite d'affections, n'ayant ferme and solid appuy a quoy
se soustenit, ne per^isse. Laquelle chose (puis qu'elle ne peut aduenir, sinon
par iong espace de temps) pourroit assez manifestement prouuer a celuy qui en
douteroir, que, non seulement en nostre enfance, quand on ieite en nostre
esprit la semence de virtue, mais aussi en aage plus parfaict, quand en nous
croissent and florissent les vertus, nous auons besoing de celuy, qui par sa
prudence and virtue, nons soustienne and gouuerne, iusques a ce que la virtue ait
bien profondement prins en nous sa ricine, afin que (comme on voit un chesne
fort and robuste se tenant immoble, mepriser l'impetueus soufleme^t du vent de
Bise and Midy) on n'ait crainte qu'en nos cueurs combien que souflent
impetueusement les vens d'humaines affections ne soit ladicte virtue quelque
temps de nous arrachee. Mais a cause que cy deuant a este dict, que ceste tant
sage and prude^te matrone deuoit cognoistre, ce qui estoit a craindre and
esperer en la fille, elle^ vsera, a ce fair, de sage and meur conseil, and
pour scauoir ce a quoy elle sera inclinee (comme Ulysses pour recognoistre
Achilles enter les filles de Lycomedes, enter plusieurs de ses merceties, luy
monstra les arms and harnois des Cheualiers, aus quelles ayant ses y^uls
fichez, finablement se manifesra soy mesme) ne luy presentera aucunement deuant
les yeuls chooses vicieuses, en les fort blasmant and detestant, mais luy mettra
au deuant les contraires vertus, garnies de si grande lueur and beauty, que
(combien qu'elle, par s^crette instigation de nature, forlignast au vice
contraire) elle sentist toutesfois son cueur, s'enflamber d'ardant desir de les
vouloir acquerir pour soy, and en cela se confirmast, aincois que les vices
contraires luy encom brassent l'esprit. Elle luy donnera semblablement a
cognoistre, combien la Chastete est grand ornement and beauty en un dame
d'honneur, and s'il appert qu'elle (comme lon se peut attendre de fille tant
singuliere) prend plaisir de l'ecouter, and desire, non seulement de resembler,
mais d'estre tell, lors on aura assez bons gages, que son cueur a borreur du
vice contraire, and si elle appercoit (ce que a grand peine se peut
souspeconner de pouoir escheoir en un tell esprit and aage) par quelques signs
ou sem blans, autre inclination de cueur, comme bien pourra cognoistre vne
femme tant sage and prudente, elle s'enclinera alors verse la party plus seure,
and (prenant le plus aduisement qu'elle pourra, occasion) luy comprera ce que
plusieurs dames de renom, ont faict autour de si belle virtue, moyennant
laquelle else ont acquis grand bruit, and renommee immortelle. Ie ne me tairay
de ce que i'ay veu du plus grand nombre des peers, lesquels estant plus
delicats and effeminez, pour satisfaire a leurs plaisirs, que sages and
diligens a procurer le salut de leurs enfans, si tossed que les petites filles
out apprins a lire, and peuuent discerner un mot de l'autre, leur ont done
pour apprendre par eueur, chansons amoreuses and impudiques, excita^t, par ce
moyen leur memoire, le plus souuent idoine pour viuement retenir a iamais, ce
que elle^ ont vne fois apprins par tell moyen, ce que ie veuls, comme vne peste,
estre euite de celle, qui doit nour rir and enseigner vne fille (comme est la
nostre) de bon naturel, and de qui on a grand espoir. L'aage debile de
l'enfance and mauuaise conversation de plusieurs, done plustost qu'vn pere
sage and prudent ne doit vouloir, copieuse and abondante matiere au vice, sans
que premierement il soit de si long temps prouenu de nous. Ceste sage
maistresse luy lira plustost, ou fera lire, plusieurs exemples des dames
vertueuses, and de grand renom, qu'elle aura diligenment recueilly, tant de la
Saint escriture, comme des histoires modernes, and du temps pass, en quoy
elle non seulement y prendra plaisir, mais luy seruira d'esguillon, and luy
incitera le cueur a vouloir and desirer la virtue, mespriser and auoir le vice
en abomination. Les courages deuiennent par ce moyen magnanimes and heroiques,
non seulement de nous autres, paruenus a maturite and de nature* virile, mais
aussi des filles tendres and delicates, and iamais ne leur seront representees
tells dames de renom, comme Claudia, Portia, Lucretia, Octauia, sans leurs
esmouuoir un noble desir de les ensuiure, and deuenir quelque iour semblables a
icelles, mesprisant du tout and vituperant celles qui par le chemin contraire
ont pass le course de leur vie. Et non seulement a nostre fille sera defendu de
lire chose, qui puisse render son esprit (de soymesme assez delicat) plus
foible and effemine, mais aussi toures celles qui acunement la pouroient re^dre
indigne d'elle mesmes and de sa reputation. Enter lesquelles a grand peine se
peut croire, qua^t do^mageable soit, la familiarite d'icelles dames, qui soubs
noblesse, accoustremens, bagues d'or and pierrerie, ou qui est trop plus
da^gereux soubs faincte religion and honestete, cache^t acoustuma^ces
corro^pnes and brutalles, L'on treuue alors facileme^t qui face meschancete,
quand l'authorite des gra^s personnages la soustie^t. Et tout ainsi que les
maladies sont alors plus conttgieuses, qua^d ceus qui en sont infectez, ont la
couleur plus viue and plus appare^te de sante, les vices cachez soubs la
noblesse and hon^urs, coueers de faus femblant, and de feincte, honestete,
endo^magent beau coup plus, que quand la vie me^chante ou basse condition de
tells personnages les discouure and manifest. Ie n'estime qu'il soit besoin
admonester ceste prudente femme (ce que aucuns on faict) que nostre fille soit
totallement retiree de l^accointance and familiarite des enfans, encores qu'ils
soyent semblables d'aage, veu qu'en ce mesmes temps auec la vie, sortent aussi
les semences de luxure, and mesmes le plus souuent and plustost accroissent
leurs fruicts que nous ne voudrion^. Ce que Hierosme docteur grave and de
grande authorite enter les autres, demonstre par l'exe^ple d'vne femme eshontee
and luxurieuse, laquelle se vantoit and glorisioit grandement, a cause que
d'autant qu'elle auoit souuenance de son premier aage, elle n'auoit lamais este
despourueue du plaisir qu'on sent en la co^^unction de marriage. De si grand
danger eslongera la maistresse nostre fille, and ne luy perm^ttra a^ cunement
qu'elle (come chose brutte and a ell^ malseante) ^it acco^ntance (ce que de
plusieurs n'est gueres euite) auec cha^bricres and servants, and autres femmes
bab^llaides, le^quelles le plus souuent hantent es maisons des femmes
illustres, and sont souuentesfois occasion de grans maus, and luy feravoir and
cognoistre, que nulle chose n'est plus messeante a vne sille sage and bien
meriginee, que de estre veue and ^uye enter les ch^^bri^^es, aupres du feu
s'arrester a leurs caquets and devises, and en conter. La bo^ne dame ne
souff^ira cela aucunement, and au lieu de tells fables, qui pour passer le
temps, se content du soir enter les filleresses aupres du feu, l'ayant
tousiours pres d'elle, s'efforcera non moions de luy entichir and orner
l'esprit de beaus and bonestes pensemens que de devises plaifantes and
facetieuses: ce qu'elle fera aisement, maintenant la delectant en ses propos
auec mots prompts and ingenieux, and douces and belles manieres de narrations,
qu'elle scaura commodeme^t entremesler: puis par conuenables digressions and
bonnes sentences luy resueillant le cueur, au desir de tells louenges,
lesquelles elle (esta^t deuenue enuieuse) voira estre attribues a celles qui
ont bien and vertueusement vescu. Et ne me deplaist puis que la continuelle
familiarite de celle dame qui sera sa maistresse (laquelle par sa gra^de
grauite and honestete engendrera plus facilement en son bon esptit affection de
reverence, que occasion de plaisir and recreation, laquelle sied mieus a nostre
eufance, qu'a autre temps de nostre aage) qu'entre plusieurs se face eslite
d'vne gentille and bien moriginee fille, qui non seulement par bonte,
entendement and esprit luy done occasion d'ensuyure la virtue, mais luy soit
soulas and recreation de chooses plus graves and plus seueres. On se fache and
envy acunesfois des chooses qui de leur nature sont plaisantes, and qui comme
de leurs propres objects delectent le sentiment, and esmouuent d'vn singulier
plaisir tell aage plus que null autre: laquelle chose si elle est, comme elle
semble veritable, de combien plus doit elle craindre qu' elle n'auienne en
tells chooses, ausquelles ayant beaucoup de grauite, se voit ou null ou bien
petit plaisir? Mais, qui plus est, ceste bonne dame sera aduisee, puis qu'aus
enfans les forces de l'entendement ne peuuent estre si viues, qu'elles soyent
toufiours empeschees a penser a chooses graves, qu' elle scache en ses manieres
and facons compasser la graune auec plaisir and recreation: and s'il fault que
pour chastier aucunes petites fautes de la fille elle ayt a se reurer de la
mediocrite (ce que routesfois nous ne voudr^ons) plustost s'inclinera a douceur
qu'a rigueur. Enquoy elle doit fair comme un sage and discret Medecin, lequel
ayant a curer and gua^ir ic^us enfans de grieves maladies, leur monstre le
tresa mer aloe and reubar^e ou l'algaric sucre ou amielle, afin qu'iceus,
attraic^ez de la feinte douceur, puislent prendte chose si amere, qui leur
cause de render la vie and sante, and guarit du mal qu'ils ont reccu.

AVssi ces^e bonne dome se mons^rera tousiours a elle d'vne face nante and
ioyeuse, and pleine d'vne grace amiable, and (si elle faict mal) l'enseignera
de tell sort, que sans l'amoneste^ trop aigrement, elle neantmoins se
cognoisse reprinse, reseruant tousiours parolles graves and visage triste,
iusques au dermet, ce que toutesfois ne se voi^a en elle, que peu souuent and
de petite duree: asin que ce, que luy voulons seruir de remede, and estre cause
de salut, prins en accousturnance ne soit vilipende and peu estime, ains quand
il luy sera aduis que la fille, comme espouuente d un subit tonnerre, a^ra du
regard triste and de son visage trouble, coneeu en son cueur un effroy and peur
superflue, alors tout d un train deployant le front, and monstrant chere
ioyeuse, par dons and sages enscignemens, and du tout eslongez de seuerite and
de aigre reprehension, luy adoucira and appaisera l'esprit, deschassant ^out
d'vn train la frayeur qu'elle auoit au parauant conceue: en se gardant sur tout
de la battre and frapper, comme chastiement brutal, and mal conuenable a cueur
franc and honneste. Car nous ne voulons ^eulement, que ceste nostre fille face
par crainte ce qu'elle doit (laquelle chose, si en tell aage n'est digue de
vitupere, n'est cer^es de grand louenge) mais aussi, veu qu'elle en est
capable, ce qua grand peine ne se peut attendre d'vne qui soit solidement
consirmee en virtue, nous n'entendons, d'autant qu' il nous sera possibile, qu'
elle face chose, qui luy semble digne de louenge, a^^c espoir d'estre prisee.
Nous estimons tant de sa valeur, qu'auons espoir, qu^^^lle voyant l'excellence
de virtue, en laquelle seule cognoisse co^fister tout son bien and selicite,
deuenue amoureuse d'icelle, la desirera tell comme elle est, sans espoir
d'autre prouffit. Ie voy aucuns estre d'opinion, qu'on doit aux icunes filles
enseigner les lettres and sciences: ce que toutesfois ie ne me puis persuader
estre bon. Ils deduysent les maus eminens a la vie human, l'inclination and
procliuite que naturellement auons au vice des nostre premiere naissance, voire
des que sommes au berceau: les exemples de mauuaises and meschantes persons,
la vie and coustumes corrompues de ceux qui hantent auec nous, un tas de
plaisirs, voluptez, recreations, pass temps: les deceptions and tromperies de
nostre commun ennemy, dequoy ils ne voyent comment les prudens esprits des
hommes se pourroyent defendre, (ie laisse les tendres delicates filles) sans la
prorection des lettres and doctrine. Aus quelles plaintes, si par un seul moyen
ie vousisse respondre, que le mauuais usage des lettres a le plus souuent este
cause de do^mage and inco^modite a la vie human, que le droict and louable
d'vtilite and proffit: aucuns parauenture pourroyent soupeconner, que ie
voudrois fair cela en mespris and vitupere des lettres: ce que ie n'entens
aucunement, l'amenerois exe^ples infinis, par lesquels pourrois facilement
monstrer estre ainsi. I'opposerois Romme siege de l'empire du monde, and
victorieuse sur toutes nations estranges, auoir este six cens ans and
d'auantage, sans l'estude des lettres, and dechasse d'icelse par arrest public
les Philosophes, come suspects au viure honest and vertueus. Et qu'au
contraire, lois que l'estude de Philosophy and eloquence florissoit le plus en
ses citoyens, auoir perdu la liberte, finalement estre tombee en servitude, and
auoir obey a l'empire d'vn homme seul. Et la cite d'Athenes, qui enter toutes
les autres, est reputee d'auoir seule obteuue la gloire and renomme des
lettres, and enseigne la sapience au monde, alors auoit este subiuguee, quand
in Academie, le Portique, le Liceus furent, par la freque^ce des nobles and
illustres Philosophes, les plus celebrez: and en icelle mesme cite auoit este
prohibe l'vsage de l'eloquence, comme peste and ruin en bien public, and comme
co^tamineresse des lois and de la justice. Ie ramentcurois Sparte, qui par
longue espace de temps, du tout mesprisant les estudes, les sciences and
lettres, comme plus conuenables aus hommes oyseus effeminez and delicats,
qu'aus hommes robustes and belliqueus: ont, auec gloire immortelle, este
Princes de la Greece, and pource que l'enterprens a instituer vne fille
Chrestienne delaissant tous autres exemples, i'opposerois l'autorite de Jesus
Christ, verite infallible, lequel non seulement ne prise, mais vitupere du tour
la fagesse du monde, comme ennemie de vie honest and de religion. Mais ma
prosition n'est a present and ne fut iamais, que ie vueille attribuer tells
maus, qui prouiennent de la malice des hommes, and de leur nature corrompue,
aus sacrez estudes de lettres: aus quelles ie ne me fusse employe plusieurs
ans, auec ferme espoir d'y continuer iusques a la fin de ma vie, si l'eusse
pense cela. l'entens toutesfois de bien prouuer, qu'en vne fille honest and de
bonne maison, on ne doiue intenter tell chose, estant les dangers plus griefs,
qu'on en craint, que les biens qu'on en espere: si elle est instituee en
lettres. Ils veulent que la doctrine a elle proposee pour son institution, soit
pleine de chastete and purete, a laquelle ne antmoins, elle ne peut paruenir,
sinon par moyens conuenables. Et quand elle y sera paruenue, person ne luy
defendra, veu que d'elle mesme lira and entendra les Poets Chrestiens,
Prudence, Prospere, Iuuence, Paulin, Nazianzene, and les autres: qu' elle ne
life aussi les livers d'amours d'Ouide, de Catulle, de Properce, de Tibulle:
and en Virgile d'Eneas and Dido: and enter les Poets Grees, les foles amors
des Dieus mesmes, and leurs adulteres and paillardises en Homere. Icelle mesmes
(puis que nous sommes (ambitieus, que voulons voir nos filles disputer aux
escolles des Philosophes) ne sera moins suffisante, quand bon luy semblera, a
defendre les opinions de Epicure, que celles de Zeno and Chrysippus: pource
qu'il leur plaist, qu'elle apprenne la Philosophy and Sapience de Platon, ie
ne comporteroye en aucune maniere, qu'vne fille estrangere and a moy incognue
(tant s'en fault, que ie le consentisse a ma fille) lire au conuiue de Platon,
les acts impudiques, amors and caresses d'Alcibiades. Ils assignent a elle un
maistre docte, grave, and diligent, and de coustume honest, tout ainsi, comme
quand cela sera ainsi faict, il puisse aussi bien desponiller la nature, de l
homme, comme bien and pruden^ement enseigner les precepts de Sagesse, and que
les esguillons de luxure, qui sont tousiours apprestez en l'accointance and
familiarite de ce sex, and de tell aage ne soit en luy matiere conuenable, pour
donner occasion a tell embrasement. Les desers d'Egipte and de la Thebaide,
furent pleins de saints Peers, lesquels, en chastiant touresfois leur chair
par aspre penitence, and ieusnes incomportables, domptoyent par-auenture, mais
ne pouuoyent iamais du tout vaincre la violence de luxure and affections. Et
saint Hierome, cache enter les bestes sauuages, en cauernes and spelonques,
and batant neantmoins iour and nuict sa poictrine, nonobstant tout cela, disoit
luy sembler souue^tesfois, qu'il conuersoit enter les assemblees des belles and
delicates filles de Romme. Ils proposent, enter peu de dames illustres and
reno^mees en lettres, Cornelia mere des Graches citoyens Ro^mains, laquelle
toutesfois, come elle a enseigne ses enfans a estre no^ moius seditieus and
violence que doctes and eloque^s: ainsi a enseigne sa fille (come ont
soupeconne aucuns graves and doctes autheurs) a donner la mort a son mary, en
qui estoit la magnificence and la majesty d'iceluy empire. Aus dames de Lelius
ne se done plus grand louenge, que celle de parler la la^gue Ro^maine d'un
style dous and aggreable, ce que ie ne nieray estre accord a vne fille noble
and de bo^ne maison, laquelle toutesfois sans auoit plusieurs maistres, estant
nourrie en vne bonne and honorable maison, ne pourra que bien parler sa langue
naturelle. Aussi n'est Portia se^me de Brutus plus prisee (comme ceus cy
estiment) pour auoir apprins de son pere, la doctrine and decrets des
philosophes Stoiques (ce que nully d'entre les anciens Autheurs afferme) comme
pour auoir guard loyaute entiere a son mary, and patience and magnauimite de
cueur, digne de Cato, qui fut son pere. Mantinea, Assiothea, Lasthemia (ie
laisse Leontium, qui defendit la volupte contre Theophraste) lesquelles,
changeant l'habit feminin, entroyent accoustrees en hommes en l'elcole de
Plato: and enter les amoureus and effeminez iouuenceaus, disputoient du
mouuement, des principes and des causes: and Dama qui enseigna au monde la
doctrine de Pythagoras son pere: and Aspasia, and Diotima and Thargelia, qui
ont illustre les estudes de Philosophy, n'ont plus merit louenge de dames
doctes and excelentes, qu'opinion de peu honestes: ne se touua^t celuy (comme
ie croy) de bon entendement, qui n'ayme me plustost auoir la fille indocte and
pudique, que suspec^e de son honest^te, and excelente en lestude de
Philosophy, and de grand renom enter les disputateurs. Quant a Corinna, iad^s
tant celebree de l'antiquite and plusieurs fois prononcee vincresse contre
Pindarus, prince des Poets Lyriques, dieu scait, si le judgment a este plus
veritable, que celuy de Phryna: laquelle, auec tache perp^tuelle d'vn si grave
and saint Senate, fut des Areopagites declaree innocente: ee qu'on peut dire
d'icelle mesme Erina, les verse de laquelle ont este iugez dignes d'estre
paragonnez, a la majesty and magnificence de ceus d'Homere. Desquelles (comment
qu'il en a este) ne pre^dra ^amais un pere sage exemple, n'aussi s'assurera,
que ses tendres filles, and de narure fragile, se monstrent audacieuses aus
Theaters and spectacles publiques, pour disputer de la gloire and p^eeminence
des lettres. Mais, a fin qu'il ne soit aduis, qu'exemples me defaillent, au
contraire, puis qu'il faut plustost estre ^n different auec authorite que
raison, que ceus qui sont tant opiniastres defendeurs des lettres, ou else ne
sont gueres de besoin, voyent, que pour vne example qu'ils pourront alleguer,
il m'est facile d'en opposer plufieurs en defension de la verite, qu'ils ne
cessent d'oppugner. Les histoires tant antiques que modernes sont pleines de
nobles faicts de dames rares and excelentes, lesquelles tant par exemples
renommees de chastete comme de noblesse and magnanimite de eueur: ce qu'a este
veu tant en plusieurs dames and pucelles de Sparte, qu'en beaucoup de dames
Rommaines aduenir, qui ont este fameuses and renommees au monde sans l'estude
des lettres. Ie pourroys r'amenteuoir les Persiennes, les Francoyses, Thioises,
Melies, Phociennes, Chies, Argiues, and plusieurs autres infinies: les noms le
squelles ont este celebrez au temps pass, and le sont encore a present, and
mettant en oeuure leur virtue auec leur gra^de gloire, ont laisse plus de
matiere d'escrire aux hommes scauans, que n'ont Erinna, ou Sappho ou Corinna,
escriuant de plusieurs hommes illustres* veu que c'est plus grand ho^neur, and
loue^ge plus solid, fair grandes entreprinses, qu'escrire d'eus bien and
soingneusement. Il ne m'est donques auis en quelque sort che se soit, qu'vne
fille se doiue instituer en lettres and arts'd humanite, en laquelle nous
ente^dons l'ho^nestete and vraye virtue estre mieus seante and meilleur
orneme^t, que le bruict and legiere reno^mmee de grand scauoir and science,
qu'elle se pourroit auoir acquis. Car veu qu'aus estudes des lettres nous sont
proposees deus chooses finalles, assauoir, l'vne pour la recreatio^, lautre pour
le profit: cela ne se peut esperer d'vne tell dame, laquelle comme elle nous
est donnee de nature pour compagne a noz labors, ainsi don du tout estre
active and attentive au gouuernement de nous and de nostre famille, and ne luy
peut, celle maniere destudes, qui donnent recreation, estre accordee, sans
grand danger d'offenser la beauty and resplendisseur de son esprit. Puis
donques que ne se commettent aus dames les gouuernemens des estats and
Republiques, and ne leur conuient come iadis a Draco, Licurge, Solo^, and Numa
Pompilius ecrire les lois, par lesquelles se reiglant les hommes, puissent bien
and moderement viure, ne comme a Professeurs de sciencez and facultez,
enseigner aus escoles la prudence des lois, and la Philosophy: and veu qu'aus
estudes, qui donnent recreation, il n'y a moins de danger, qu'elles apprennent
d'estre subtiles and impudiques amoureuses que de escrire doctement elegies,
odes, epigrammes, ballades and chansons: soyent aussi retraintes a la cure and
gouuernement de la famille, qu'elles ayent envy d'ensuiure celles, qui par
vraye virtue reno^mees, sirent peu d'estime de celles, qui, auec grand prejudice
de leur honestete ont voulu estre reputees au monde Diotimes, Aspasies, Sappho
and Corinnes. Qu'on esgale le petit profit en estudes des lettres, au grand
do^mage, qui leur en peut auenir, and leur soit remonstre (si toutesfo is ils
demeurent en cela opiniatres) combien leur soit l'eguille plus conuenable, le
fuseau, la quenouille, and la rouet, auec certain reputation de marrones
graves and honestes, que le still and la plume, auec renommee incertaine, si en
icelles y a plus d'erudition, que d'honestete and virtue. Il n'y a celuy qui
doubt, que tell dame ne deuie^ne parfaicte and accomplie (ce qu'a grand peine
se doit croire qu'il puisse aduenir, veu qu'elles sont la plus part mariees en
leur ieune aage, and commises a l'administration de leur maisons) laquel^e
ensemble, and de preception de plusieurs sages, and de longue experience, ayt
aprins les moyens de bien and sagement gouuerner sa famille: can ie
n'accorderoye nullement, qu'elle surmontant en elle mesme, l'estat and
condition d'vne dame active, and (pour la nommer d'vn mot estra^ge) economique,
osast, montant pat l'echelle de Philosophy naturelle si difficile, paruenir a
la contemplation des chooses, ce que plustost d'hommes oiseux and de plusieurs
ans exercitez aus lettres se peut desirer, qu'attendre. Mais, puis que
l'esperance de tell chose s'acquiert auec si grand danger, and qu'en toutes
autres facultez, qui se peuuent acquerir par science ou practique (ayant a
choisir) se prennent plustost ceus qui sont formez par usage and experience,
que ceus qui ont grande science and peu de practique: non autrement
commetterions nous la cure de nous mesmes, a vne matrone prudente, and bien
entendue, and deuenue, par longue usage, sage and experre, que si nous eussions
a nauiger, donnerions noz biens and facultez a un sage and expert marinier,
faisant peu d'estime de celuy qui seulement par information de l'astrolabe, and
des carts de Ptolomee, nous prome^teroit (n'ayant iamais sorty de sa maison)
seure navigations. Il nous deura sembler estre assez, que nostre sage fille,
estant deuenue ^^ne, par les aduis and enseignemens de sa prudente maistresse,
done a cogno^stre quelque iour, quand le temps and l^occasion le requerra.
qu'elle sera suffisante pour bien and sagement gouuerner sa famille. Toutesfois
ie ne veus qu'elle sort priuee de la co^modite de lire and de l'entendre, veu
que cela n'est seulement vtile and profitable a femme prudente and vertueuse,
mais aussi rich and precieus ornement. Ainsi elle lira plusieurs traictez
escrits par hommes doctes, a nostre profit and informatio^, moyennant qu'on ne
luy meter enter les mains, come dessus est dic^, verse amoureus and impudiques,
ce qu'on fait le plus, ou fables ou nouuelles, tant de Bocace mesme, comme de
plusieurs autres, lesquelles, si else sont leaves and obseruees par nous, cela
fait plustost pour la douceur du style, and de la diction, and pour le beau
nombre and harmony des paroles es^e^es, illustres and signifiantes, que pour
la matiere. Elle lira donques, puis que tout est maintenant traduit d'hommes
doctes, en langue vulgaire, outre les livers de la saint escriture, qui
fournissent abondament ce que duit a l'ornement de l'esprit, ce qu'a escrit
Plutarque des dames de renom du remps pass, and ce que plusieurs long temps
apres, and Boccace meime en ont escrit, and aucuns autres autheurs qui ont este
plus prochains de nostre temps, and regardera ^out ce qu'elle pourra l^re (si
toutes fois cela se puisse fair) en belles peinctures and pourtraicts,
lesq^els a p^^ne peu on dire, combi^n d'efficace ils ont pour esmouuoir
l'esprit des enfans tendres and delica^s. Elle aura d^vne si belle lecture, non
seulement des paroles, lesquelles si else ne sont bien garnier d'exemples, ne
profitent gueres a tell aage, mais aussi des beaus faicts and glorieuses
enterprinses de dames illustres and renommees, dequoy elle accroistra ses
belles vertus que nature luy a liberalement done de bonne grace and orneme^t,
and pour mieus dire, de noblesse and magnanimite digne d'vne tell dame and
matrone. Elle lira, and aura en admiration les dames Troiennes, Sabines,
Phociennes, Argiues, les vierges Romans. Et prendra singulier exemple de
piete verse la patrie de Megistone, Aretaphile, Policrite, and de celle tant
glorieuse Judith and Hoster, and d'amour enuers leurs maris, and loyaute
incorrupte de Lucrcce and Portio, and de celle barbare Camma, qui, tant la
sienne honestete, que de l'iniure de son mary occis, fut en un mesme temps
glorieuse vindicatrice. Sum (pour fair vnefois fin des estrangers) elle
trouuera exemple de toutes vertus, teligion, sainctete and loyaute en ta^t de
vierges sacrees, les noms desquelles sont verse nous renommez, come en Cecile,
Agathe, Theodore, Barbara, and aurres infinies, qui par leur sang and leur
propre vie, souffrant tourmens incredibles and inusitez, ont rendu au mo^de
certain tesmoinage de leur foy, and out rendu nostre religion tell, comme a
present nous la voyons. Enter lesquelles narrations on pouia a selon le te^ps
entremesler les plaisantes, aus quelles toutesfois on aur a soin de luy recreer
l'esprit, and donner allegement, sans occasion d'exciter en elle tells
pensemens, qu'en aucune sort puissent nuire a la beauty de son esprit* le
n'entens pas, vou qu'il n'en est besoin, luy enseigner ce qu'appartient a la
religion, car ie fuis certain que d'vn homme tant honest and vertueus, sera
done order en l'institution d'elle, que tout ce que i'en diroys vous pourroit
sembler proceder autant de faure de judgment, que de superflu. Nonobstant quoy,
ie ne laisseray de dire, que qui que ce sort a qui vous do^nerez celle charge,
soit aduisce de former en l'esprit de la fille vraye religion and piere,
euirant du iout comme peste capitale, la superstition. Ie croy qu'a cost heure
n'est besoin, que, deduy sant la chose du commencement, ie demonstre en quoy
l'vne soit difference de l'autre. Car la religion est vne virtue qui du tout
consiste en mediocrite, laquelle tout ainsi que a l'vn des costez a l'impiete,
qui est l'vn de ses extremitez, ainsi a de l'autre cost superstition, qui bien
souuent n'est moins pernicieuse que l'impiete. Cela ne sera seuleme^t manifest
a l'homme saint, qui instituera la fille en chooses appartenanres a la religion
and service divine, mais a celle sage dame and bien ente^due, qui enter autres
affairs aura soin d'elle, laquelle s'efforcera de tout son pouoir de la render
humble, and de cueur dous and traictable, veu que humilite n'est seulement
virtue Christie^ne and civil, mais frondement and colonne de toutes les vertus
Christiennes and ciuiles, and pource qu'elle s'engendre en nous de la
cognoissance de nous mesmes, ^utant qui son debil esprit poura comprendre, luy
do^nera a cognoistre de la sapience de Dieu, de sa bonte de sa puissance
(qu'elle deura scauoir estre tresgrande non seulement d'auoir par ordonnance
tant admirable de rien cree le monde, and remply and garny de si grande variete
de chooses, mais de le conseruer en ce mesme estre, par providence eternelle and
divine) non seulement n'estre rien tout ce qu'ily peut auoir en vne petite
fille, mais aussi tout ce que peut estre en grans Rois and Empereurs, and ce
qu'ont sceu and cogneu tous ces personages, qui au temps pass sont sortis du
Licee and du Portique, and de l'Academie, auec bruit and renommee illustre de
sapience, en comparation de ce que Dieu scait and peut, estimant tout ce qu'en
nous peut, en aucune maniere, auoir nom de bonte, acomparage a la sienne, estre
mauuaistie. Pour cela fair, luy mettera au deuant, tout ce qu'elle pourroit
auoir apprins d'hommes doctes and conscientieus, ou par lecon diligente and
curieuse observation, luy enseignant que nostre Signeur n'est pas venu pour
estre seruy, mais pour seruir luy mesme, and qu'il did a les Apostres, qui
estoient en different pour la plus digne place, que, qui estoit plus grand que
les autres, s'estimast inferieur, and que, qui s^humihoir, s^esleuoit, qui
vouloit dire, que ceus la seuleme^t estoient esleuez, qui se cognoissoient eus
mesmes, laquelle virtue tant divine, n'a seulement este louable enter nous
Christiens, mais fut en Socrates mesmes aussi sign de singuliere sapience
iugeant a bon droict celuy estre bien scauant, qui se cognoissoit riens
scauoir. Elle pourta aiseme^t acquerir tant belle virtue, si on luy enseigne de
prendie tousiours guard, non seulement aux plus nobles qu'elle, and aus plus
puissantes, mais aussi (qui est de beaucoup plus grande importance) aus plus
vertueuses and plus sages, and non aus inferieures, comme font les sottes and
peu entendues. En quoy elle sen^ira double vtilite, car cognoissant qu il y a
au monde dames de grand royaumes and signeuries, qui en noblesse, richesses and
puissance sont superieures a elle, amoindrira en elle mesmes tout ce qu'au
parauant auoit de hautainnete and arrogance, vice sort lait, and prenant
egard^^us plus vertueuses, tant qu'elle cognoistra estre en son pouoir tachera
d'acquerir celle virtue, de laquelle elle se cognoistra auoir fault. Aincois
elle luy fera apparoir, combien cest chose brute and desor donnee, que les
dames, a l'exemple de celles qu'elles voyent tous les iours comparoir aus
eglises plus richement ornees, and mieus and plus galamment accoustrees que les
autres, apprennent nouuelles sorts d'accoustrements, parquoy else soyent
cogneues enter autres les plus belles, and de meIlleure grace, qu'elles se
soucient si trespeu de ces belles vertus, and beaus ornemens, desquels else
appercoiuent tant de dames sages and vertueuses estre prisces, n'estant
toutesfois si sottes, qu'elles ne cognoissent combien d'estime and reputation
cela leur puisse do^ner au mo^de. Il est adnis a la plus grande party, que
cest a vne fille de bonne ma^^on, grande grace and ornement, s'elle, enter les
autres deuenue grande maistresse de cha^ter and iouer sur plusieurs instrumens,
se de monstre excellent and illustre, ce que (encor quil soit conferme par
fortes and gentiles raisons) ie ne puis seulement ne priser, mais judge que
comme chose de non peu de danger, doit en elle estre euite. Car comme la
mosique, si elle est vsee a louable and honest intention, n^a en soy vice, and
merit lieu enter les autres arts, besquels appartenans proprement aus hommes
ciuils and de bo^ne maison sont app^llez liberaus, toutefo^s, sous v^^bre de
virtue (comme sont des autres arts and fac^ltez, de la plus grande party
folement cogneues pour virtue) elle port dou^^ amorce a griefs maus and de
grand consequence. Combien que no se doit aussi dire c^ste mesme music,
laquelle se mo^stre digne pour sa beauty, d'estre accompagnee des autres
nommees liberales, consister plus en la cognoissance de proportions, pauses,
and autres accords de vois, ce que font pour le plus hommes vulgaires and
indoctes, que (comme voyons que Plato faict au Timee, autour de la fabrique du
monde) en la cognoissance des armonies, and proportion des chooses, qui
appartiennent aus autres sciences and facultez. Laquelle chose, si ainsi est,
on ne dira point qui soit plus grand musicien, ou Adrian vvillart, ou Cypria^,
ou Iaquet, ou Iosquin, qui furent quelques ans passez, ou Gombert, que Genua,
ou Magius, ou Perrettus, ou l'Espagnol ou Zimara, desquels les premiers sont
toutefois encor en vie, and du temps de nos peers, furent les autres
philosophes illustres and renommez. Et comme neantmoins les premiers sont, and
ont este maistres excellens en music, aussi parauenture n'ont tant apprins
les secondes de ces mesmes co^muns maistres, qu^ls aye^t peu discerner enter
l'vne notte and l'autre. Nostre fille doncques sabstiendra du tout d'vser de la
music, and puis que sous honest couuerture de virtue, elle ouure la port a
plusieurs vices, elle deuroit estre de nous plus euitee, d'autant que le danger
est plus grand, and moins apparent. Concedons l'vsage du chant and de ceste
mignarde armonie a ceus, qui, fachez de curez ennuieuses and importantes, ont a
faite de recreation and alegement, ce qu'est aduenu a Agamemno^ en Homere, and
au roy Saul en la saint escriture, lequel estoit, par la harp and chant de
David, reuoque d'vne fiere and triste passion, a douceut and tranquilite
d'esprit. Mais au lieu d'en vser a tant honest intention, si en use on en
passetemps, en banquers and soupers solennels, ausquels, comme si la
sumptuosite and suauite des viandes ne rendissent les esprits assez laches and
dissolus, on accoustume de fair venir doctes and excellens musiciens,
l'esquels d'vne main docte and expert, maintenant touchant la guiterne and
violons, puis auec autres instrumens, entonnant auec dous and bon accord
chansons artificieuses and impudiques, (non autrement que bois see and bien
dispose, ayant pres de soy le feu, pour peu de vent subitement s'alume and
brusle) auec nouuelle maniere d'embrasement, brulent les cueurs de ceus, qui,
de virtue solid and confirmee, ne sont asseurez. De la fausse mignarde armonie
des Syrenes Ulysses tant renomme par autheurs Grees and Latins, and nourri de
viande celeste au sein de Sapience, fille de Jupiter, a peine s'est peu
soymesmes asseurer, and nous pou^rions nous tant fire d'vne tender and delicate
fille nourrie and esleuee delicatement, sans craindre, qu'elle non seulement
oyant, mais apprenant un art tant mignard, ne deuienne quelque fois lache,
delicate and effeminee. Plato estimoit sagement estre chose de grand
consequence aus coustumes des hommes en la cite, de quelle maniere de music
vsassent les citoyens. Dequoy en a rendu la cite des Lacedemoniens, ample
tesmoignage, laquelle (mesprisant du tout la music, qui affoiblissoit and
faisoit les esprits langoreus? and aimant celle, qui, renda^t un son viril and
magnifique, rendoit les hommes courageus, ardans and desieurs de gloire and
d'immortalite) s'est defendue par plusieurs anges and siecles, sans corruption.
Aussi n'a pleu a Licurge, homme de grande sapience, qu'en batailles (ce qu'a eu
duree iusques a nostre temps) se sentist le son de tells instrumens, par
lesquels se pourroyent les eueurs acouardir: mais desquels ils s'exciteroient,
and animeroient a la defense du bien commun, and de la liberte, and
semodereroient les mouuemens desordo^nez du corpse, afin que par mesure
attrempre, and certain ordonnance marchassent co^tre leurs ennemis: car celle
tant douce and delicate maniere de music, comme nous vsons pour le present a
nostre delectation, eust engendre en leurs cueurs effect du tout contraire,
combien qu'autrement ils eussent eu d'eus mesmes grand courage, and eussent
este bien ammez. Et non feulement en ceste cite (en laquelle par long temps,
mont en lieu tells delices, moyennant lesquelles plusieurs autres, and celle
qui a eu l'empire du monde, ont este ruinees) mais aussi en Athenes, ou tant
curieusement ont este inuentez toutes sorts de plaisirs and delices, comme des
sciences and arts louables, ayant Alciblades app^r^en on son esprit, un dous
and merueilleus accord, and divine armonie des estudes sacrez de philosophy,
m^sprisa d'vn noble courage cest art tant delicat and mignard: lequel, a nostre
si grand do^mage, d'autant qu'il nous est moins cognen, nous plaist d'auantage
Mais a fin qu'il ne semble, que nous, comme de propos delibere ayons enterprins
a combatre la music, concedons qu'elle soit auptes de ceus, lesquels au vray,
ou ne peuuent, ou n'ont enquoy mieus employer leur te^ps: and eroyons que
Philippe a sugement reproach a son fills Alexandre, qu'il auoit trop proffite en
music, and y estoit deuenu trop excellent, and qu'il do^t aus au^^es sembler
estre asses, si non seulement les grans princes, mais les hommes ciuils, and
dames bien instituces, prestent l^uis aureilles aux musiciens and ch^n^r^s, and
estiment que l'ecouter, leur est plus conuenable, qu'estre escoutee bien
propr^ment chanter. Laquelle chose, un grand maistre and renomme musicien de ce
temps, la, fort gracieusement reprocha a ce mesme Philippe, luy disant, lots
qu'en sonnant il estoit de luy reprins, (comme si par instrumens mal accordez,
fist armonie lourde and mal plassante,) Ia a Dieu ne plaise, o Roy, que ^amais,
tu en puisse saire me^lleur judgment. Mais la^stant desormais la music a gens
debauchez and oiseus, nostre fille apprendra, non seulement toutes les manieres
de coudre and peindie a l'esguille, qui fouent bien seantes a vne dame
d'honeur: mais aussi tout ce qui appartient a la que nouille, fuseau and
tissure: and me pense que cela messiet a l'honneur and estat d'on elle est nee,
puis que Caesar Auguste prince and monarque du monde, a voulu que sa fille and
sa niepce l'ayent sceu. Et qui plus est, asin qu'elle deuenue dame, scache
recognoistre les offices des servants and domestiques, and qu'elle note par
curieuse diligence, combien aptement else netroyent les chambres and sales,
and apprestent le manger, and tienuent nets les caves and despenses: and ne
soit si ambicieuse qu'elle dedaigne se trouuer present quand on fait la
lexiue, and le pain: mais soit tousiours present a toutes les affairs de la
maison. Car alors on se pourra attendre, qu'elle deuenue dame, sera tell
qu'elle doit estre: veu qu'en son enfance che demonstre a cognoistre and
scauoir ce qu il appartient a vne fille bien instituee and morig^nee. Mais
pour^e qu'aucunes vertus, lesquelies estant en vne dame veritablement noble and
de grand estat semblent estre de petite louenge: si else n'y sont oussi, les
font bien souuent encourir en grand vitupere: qu'elle, en se sacon de viure,
ayt soin, ayant ce qu'elle a besoin, pour le maintien and entretenement de sa
vie, qu'ainsi accoustumee and vsitee, non seulement ne desire, mais deprise du
tout ce qui la pourroit ir^iter, and prouoquer a gloutonnie. Et ne me d^plaist
en ce vice (ce que l'ay dict qu'^n aucuns autres: and, sur tout, en ce qui est
contraire a la chastete ne se d^uroit obseruer) que de son premier regard, and
laidour, l'apprenne a hayr and mespriser: and n'y a nulle doubt, qu'elle (comme
Pallas, qui, voyant par le miroir, ses jove's laidement s'enster tandis qu'elle
iouoit de la flute, courroucee, l'ayant iectee par terre, la rompit) voyant
combien soit malseant, and combien de difformite port aus dames sages, and
bien instituees un vice tant difforme, se recordant d'elle mesmes, ne l'ait du
tout en horreur and desdain. Elle ne sera mensongere, and aimera plustost (si
cela touresfois luy aduient) confesser la verite en son vice, que feindre en
faulsete, virtue. Car la confession du vice, est occasion de penitence and la
simulation de virtue, l'alteration de cueur and arrogance: and (qui est le plus
dangereus) comme la malady quand elle est manifest se peult curer, la sante
fainte, ne laisse occasion de guarir la malady, qui est secret: ainsi le vice
manifest, estant guary par remedes conuenables, done lieu a la sante: la
virtue simulee, sans que le remede y soit applique, nourrit le vice contraire.
Elle sera tenue lointaine, de l'estroite familiarite and accointance de
plusieurs compaignes: car il y a tousiours plus a craindre en un grand tropeau
qu'en un petit: and s'il est infecte de quelque grief mal and pestilent,
d'autaut est il plus dangereus and contagieus: and si en la multitude y a vices
qu'on doit euiter, and manieres deprauees, else sont plus malaisement eschoues
qu'au petit nombre: veu que le vice s'accroist, par l^vsance de plusieurs: and
voulons que nostre fille viue en compaigme d'vne tant seulement: and qu'elle
escheue tellement la multitude, qu'elle ne l'ait toutessois en horreur: voire
sera enseignee, de sa monstrer tousiours douce and affable^ a toures ses
compagnes, and a les honorer and estre liberale and courtoise enuers else,
leurs cedant le plus digne lieu: and ce non seulement quand else seront ses
semblables, mais afin qu'elles cognoissent sa courtoysie estre plus grande)
quand else seroyent aussi inferieures a elle: hayssant orgueil sur tous autres
vices: and le iugeant indigne d'elle mesmes. Elle ne sera ne cacquetresse ne
riotteuse, and cognoistra que bien souuent le babillement est occasion de
grosses fautes, no^ seulement en tell aage, auquel plus qu'en aucun autre
conuient apprendre, mais aussi (plus souue^t qu'il ne soit besoin a aucun) en
l'aage plus meur and grave, and duquel il conuient proprement l'amonester and
enseigner. Elle prendra doncques guard a toutes, mais quand elle se trounera
enter dames sages, graves, and entendues, sera attentive d'oyr ce qu'elles
disent, sans qu'elle parle souuent: car comme celuy qui pa^le, tousiours est en
danger de faillir, aussi a celuy qui escoute est proposee certain esperance de
deuenir plus sage and meilleur. Laquelle chose afin qu'elle auienne a nostre
fille, elle prendra guard, and notera ce qu'on dira auec louenge, ou vitupere
de quelqu'vn: ce qu'elle apprendra fort bien a cognoistre, a la chere, signs
and semblant des escoutans: lesquels, comme d'vne mine ioyeuse ont de coustume
applaudir, a ce qui a este sagement dict enter eeus qui deuisent ensemble,
aussi s'accoustument d'vne chere triste and melancolique, and quasi auec vne
angoisse, accorder a ce qu' else disent mal proprement, and auec peu d'egard
ou du lieu, ou du temps, ou des personages, ou de tells chooses, desquelles
else deuisent, ou bien d'elles mesmes. En tell sort elle feta election de ce
qu'il luy sera aduis qu'elle doit dire, and de ce qu'elle doit taire: se
mettant vne loy a elle mesme de fair l'vn and d'escheuet l'autre, and le fera.
Elle cognoistra, que sobrement ell^ doit vser l'office de la la^gue and
parolle, que la nature tressage ouuriere, tresbo^ne and divine maistresse, a
voulu estre enclose (comme de vne hay) enter vne rengee de dents, la ou elle a
faict oreilles trescreuses, and tousiours promptes a oyr and escouter. Elle
aura plusieurs exemples singuliers, and d^gnes d'estre mis par elle en memoire,
and aussi de plusieurs livers d'anciens autheurs, and sur tout d'Erasme en son
liver door qu'il a laisse escrit des vices and vertus de la langue, le quel par
noz ge^s nagueres traduict en nostre vulgaire, se lit (a mon aduis) auecleur
grande vtilite: and pource ie n'en toucheray plus aua^t. Qua^t a son vestir,
veu que c'est vne chose qu'on nomme indifferente, car la seule accoustumance
les faict sembler diuersement bonnes ou mauuaises: elle ne portera envy a ses
semblables, ne aussi, les surmontant en pompeusite de riches abillemens leur
donnera occasion d'auoir envy sur elle, and a elle mesmes d'arrogance and
ambition: veu que ce n'est chose moins dangereuse d'estre enuiee, que d'auoir
envy. Et a cause, que cy deuant a este dict, qu'elle deuoit non seulement
escheuer trop grande familiarite de ses semblables, mais encore plus de ses
chambrieres and servants, and de tells femmes legeres, en ceste chose elle se
porteratellement, qu'en sa contenance and maniere ne puisse apparoir a la
seruante, chambriere ou lauandiere cela proceder d'vn cueur superbe ou
arrogant, s'enquerant de leur office d'vne grauite matronale, ornee de
plaisante and douce humilite. Et cognoistra combie^ on doit craindre la
conversation de tells femmes, qui le plus souuenr sont mauuaises, and beaucoup
plus faciles a dire ce qu'elle ne doiuent que d'escouter ce qu'elles doiuent:
and plus accoustumees de reprendre les vices d'autruy, que leurs propres
defaures. D'autant qu'elle pourra, sera amiable enuers tous, and desidera
porter honneur and reverence aus bons, pour meriter leur amor: and de ne
mespriser les mauuais pour n'encourir en leur haine: un vice doit elle sur tout
euiter, qui est dangereus and mal seant, and plus peculier a tell aage, qu'en
null autre: lequel, a cause qu'il se couure quasi sous couuerture de vne pro
chain virtue, fort louable and de grand ornement, difficilement pour la plus
par, y prend on guard, and le peur on escheuer: and consiste totaleme^t en vne
honte malseante and lourde: laquelle passant en acoustumance and nature, se
retient encore en l'aage de maturite, non sans occasion de grand vitupere. Et
en verite, comme trop grande hardiesse, qui est plus conuenable a ceus qui
representent farces aus theaters and spectacles publiques, qu'aus dames bien
apprinses and de bonne maison, se doit comme vice infame, noter and escheuer:
ainsi au contraire timidite superflue and honte ou elle n'a point de lieu, est
propre aus enfans and ignorans, and non de vne dan^e prudente and de tell
valeur que nous voyons estre la nostre. Parquoy done, euitant ces deus
extremitez, si elle aura co^mis quelque fault, propre a tell aage, elle sera
pareillement honteuse: mais en la seule recognoissance de sa fault, and non en
autre chose, and n'estant en la nier aucunement obstinee, rendra tesmoignage
pour s^amender, ne se peut par elle pre^dre plus grief chastiment, que celle
mesme honte que elle en aura eve. Et au contraire la ou luy sera besoin de
fair apparoir sa virtue, elle sera prompte, mais no^ audacieuse, and par vne
subite rougeur, qui soudainement par vertueuse confidence aura surprins ces
belles jove's, demonstrera qu'en elle soit un eueur reverent, eslongne d'infame
honte and reprochable. En tell sort, elle, d'vne chere ioyeuse, and attrempee
de douce grauite, ayant les yeus, baissez dira de soy mesmes, ce que toutesfois
elle (combien qu' elle scache, que ce luy sera attribue a lonenge) dissimulera
and faindra ne ^^en soucier: demonstrant toutesfois, qu'elle desire plustost
estre, que sembler bonne. Pour ces recreations and passetemps ella iray en ses
iardins and villages, lesquels sont en ce pays tant delicieus, and de tell
gaiete, recreation and amenite, que ni en Italy, ni en autre party de
l'Europe se treuuent autres qui soie^t enter nous tant celebres and renomez.
Toutesfois elle n'y demeurera si longuement, qu'elle oublie les manieres and
coustumes des villes, combien que soient nos villages ta^t copieus, en
edifices, maisons, and riches palais, que nulle chose y deffaille, pour
laquelle ils ne doiuent estre estimez pour villes trespeuplees. Ie me sens si
fort tra^sporter d'vn ardant desir que i'ay d'orner and decorer nostre fille,
ou, pour dire la verite, de decouurir and reuoquer a maturite les beaus
fruicts, qu'elle a conceu de vostre noble lignee, que, comme ceus qui
chemine^t, aucunefois transportez de profondes pensees, bien souue^t passent le
lieu mesmes, auquel ils entendoient d'arriuer, ainsi ie m'appercois estre pass
ou pour mieux dire desuoye outre les limits, que ie m'estois ordo^nees en
ceste maniere d^eserire. Pource, faisant fin, ie prieray Dieu, lequel seul peut
plus que null conseil and industry human, que, sans que nostre fille ait
besoin de nos enseignemens, elle deuienne de soymesmes tell, comme vous la
desirez: and nous (faisa^^^ conjecture de vostre su^^^^ sance, qui estes son
pere^ esperons and sommes esse^rez, qu'elle sera quelque iour tell.

THE NECESSARY, FIT, and convenient education of a young Gentlewoman.
Written to the Lord Siluestre Cataneo.
I Would to God seeing that by diverse means from my youth hitherto, fortune
has always been found a mortal enemy unto me, that at this instant (in
recompense of her infinite injuries and cruelties) she would show her self so
favorable toward me, that if herein I take care to do that for you, which
may hereafter breed your utility and profit, it may be esteemed of by you, to
proceed from a mind not only thankful, but courteous and liberal, and (where
need shall require) give testimony unto others not only of your valor and
virtue, but of your deserved favors and courtesies. And in truth, as most
commonly great courtesies bereave all hope from those to whom they are done,
yet they shall be esteemed more than as acknowledging of benefits received,
which ought rather to be artributed to duty then true virtue: So, if in those
that do them, there be not true and certain virtue, that yeldeth testimony
thereof (as in you most amply it appears) often times they rather seem to
be signs of an ambitious mind, (as was in Julius Caesar and others) than a
liberal and courteous. Nevertheless, seeing that the graces and virtues of
your mind are so great, that not only they surmount the abundance of riches
and treasures (although not greater than such as may suffice a Gentleman of
moderate and noble mind) but much more those of great Emperors, you will make
sufficiently known and evident unto the world, that all whatsoever I have
written herein, that may redound and turn to your commodity and pleasure,
ought no less to be attributed to your virtues than your liberalities: and
for my part I stand not so much upon the one, as I account of the other, which
induce all men to honor and love you, that in any sort are acquainted with the
same. Not long since, having leisure and convenient time, (which without doubt
all men have that come unto this town not to deal in Merchandise, where as
into the large and wide Ocean sea the rivers from all places of the world with
a perpetual course do continually fall, merchants from all places with great
treasures do assemble) I used the means that these my hard and difficult
labors (which heretofore I had bestowed in perusing diverse Authors both
Grecians and Latins) might not only yield me a sweet and amiable fruit, but to
all such as desire to live in honest and virtuous life. For having already set
down as in certain sentences and common places, all the virtues which (because
they appertain to the life and manners of men) are termed Moral, I have
handled them in a fained, yet in apt (as I suppose) and grave manner of
Epistles, that carping envy (accustomed to discommend all honest and
commendable actions) can not deny, but that I have wrought and produced great
co^meditie and profit unto our Nation, specially unto those who by the right
path of virtuous life, would attain unto a commendable and honest end. Among
all these Epistles wuich are many and different, this is directed unto you,
wherein showing by what means a young Gentlewoman and daughter of noble birth
ought to be nourished, taught, and instructed in such manner, that there may be
hope of great commendatio^. I persuade my self (you being a father, who by
excellent wisdom and virtue understand better than others, how much more
agreeable and of greater valor those virtues are that adorn the mind, than
all the jewels which deck and beautify the body, and most commonly make women
more proud and hautie) that by me there could not a richer nor more agreeable
Present be given unto you: which I have done so much the rather, because that
you being far from your daughter, fear (for what cause I know not) that her
tender and budding virtues (although the harvest which she has reaped from
two so notable families as those of Catanea and Spinula, be very great) not
having as yet taken deep root, might lose their forces by the over great
tenderness of her Grandmother. Naturally she has excellent and notable
beginnings, and already in her infancy it appears that she is endued with
many virtues: wherefore (as I hope) she will in time be honored and admired
above all the ladies of this city. For as very seldom it happens, that a
good tree standing in fertile ground (degenerating from his nature) brings
forth sharp and bitter fruit, so can you hardly make me believe, that a child
borne of a good father, and one that for his virtues is much esteemed, will not
in many points resemble the parents: Which although sometimes we find in some
to fall out otherwise, in that case we must impute it to the education, that
has not been such as appertained and belonged to the generositie of their
nature. Which nevertheless, we see not only to happen unto men, but also unto
unreasonable creatures, and (not to varry from my example) to plants. For
wanting the care and diligence that continually ought to be used about them,
we shall presently perceive them to loose their natural virtues and forces,
and in the end become wild. Likewise good horses will loose much of that
generositie and liveliness of nature which was in them, if they be not taught
and learned to be such, as of themselves they can not easily become. Seeing
then, that the lively virtues of your daughter procure a greater hope, so much
the more ought our care to be, as of a thing of greater estimation and value,
stirring in us great care and foresight to preserve the same: let us not be so
negligent, that as not trusting nor delivering our riches and treasures (which
are much less to be esteemed) but to sure men, and such as are of credit, so
we expose not our children negligently into the custody of those, who, either
by over tender education corrupt their young and unripe senses, or by
importunate rigor use them to an unseemly fear, or peradventure to misprision
and hatred of that, which above all things they ought most to follow and to
love. He of whom young children ought to learn the means and manners of good
and honest life, ought to be grave, wise, and full of good counsel, and
specially to be careful that their minds being pure and clean, filled with
bounty and divine beauty, be not found spotted and soiled with great and
eminent faults. If a fair and comely Lady beholding her self in a glass,
will not endure that the beauty of her face shall be disgraced or in any wise
spotted, (which beauty nevertheless in dureth but for a time, and vanishes
like a flower, easily loosing all that grace and comelines that first it had)
how much more ought those souls wherein we may behold the image of God to be
most lively imprinted, and not as yet soiled with any filthiness of sin, to
be kept and preserved not only from great and apparent spots, but from any
disgrace whatsoever? Touching our gowns imbrodered and fringed with gold and
precious stones (wea^ so curious) that upon them we will not (as near as we
can) that any spot be seen how little soever it be, although it appear not
but to such as look very near and curiously upon them: and yet (as if the
care of our children touched us not) we are so negligent, as that if they be
spotted or blemished with most inorme and wicked vices, we make either small,
or peradventure no account thereof. Which thing, seeing it is of so great
importance, and that we ought to have such care to choose Tutours and Masters
for young children, so much more diligent and curious ought we to be herein,
as we find many that do the contrary, esteeming their welfare to consist in
this, that we leave them such means and manners as shall be necessary for
them during their lives, to run through this troublesome and unstable world.
I would to God, that as therein consists the welfare and preservation of
commonwealthes and great Empires, princes would believe that it were so, and
thereunto apply their minds more than they seem to do. For who knows not,
that as in a body whose members are whole and strong, health is easily
preserved: and in instruments of music there is heard a sweet harmony when
the strings are well tuned, and agree in one with pleasant and variable notes:
so only in such Cities where modest Citizens are found, and in the diversity
of trades and faculties by them used with good and decent equality and minds
intentife to the public wealth, common commodity is preserved: and there is
such agreement, that more convenient and proper can not be found. As soon as a
son is borne unto a private man, at that same instant that town or country
wherein he is borne, has gotten a Citizen or inhabitant. And as not only men
but bruit beasts (and those namely which among the rest are most cruel) forget
not their little ones, but feed and cherish them, so Princes and governors of
towns (acknowledging as their children such as are daily borne therein, and
take a fatherly affection toward them) ought to be careful, that in a
dangerous and unconstant time, they be no less esteemed of and dear unto the
commonwealth, than profitable and well beloved of their natural parents. Which
thing the Lacedaemonians observing with great strictness, and not committing
the care of their children to strangers and unknown persons, but unto wise and
grave citizens (who in times past to their great honor, had served in the
greatest and most honorable offices of the City) long time with great honor
defended their liberties, retaining and preserving the Empire and Signorie of
the Grecians. But to return to the edification of our young gentlewoman: as I
am of opinion that there are not many fathers to whom (how wise soever they
be) men should commit the care of their children, and less number of mothers;
because their wisdom and virtue is often overcome and surmounted by the great
affection they bear unto them: and yet her good fortune had in you her father
prepared her so sure and loyal a guide, that to attain to the same end
(whereunto all such as are of noble house aspire) she could desire no more. For
that you by virtue, singular prudence, and great love might give her those
instructions which a stranger (in whom love might want) nor any of her kinsmen
(in whom tenderness and delight would surmount wisdom and virtue) could not
in any wise give her. But seeing that envious fortune (dispiser of her good)
has constrained you (on whom only she ought to attend) to employ your time
otherwise in matters of great importance: and further, to take her away, who
only next after you, ought and might govern her, and be her stay: all your
care must be to find her out some Gentlewoman full of gravity and wisdom, of
good conscience and behavior, who supplying your place, neither for want of
love nor wisdom, may be unable to instruct and bring her up in such sort as
belongs to her estate. I well perceive to how difficult an enterprise I tie
your fatherly affection, for that very hardly not only in this your town
(although very populous) but in many others likewise, there is not a
Gentlewoman to be found, in whom (together with true love and Christian
charity) such great and good qualities as we demand are to be found. But
herein you must do, as if you were to choose an excellent painter that should
paint the Hall and chambers of your house, to whom you shall show the patterns
of Albert Dure, Raphael Vrbin, Michel Angel, or Iules Romain (who in our time
have been and always shall be esteemed most excellent painters) not looking
that he should do the like, but that seeing such notable patterns, she
should strive to follow them: which done, you shall perceive how he will be
able to accomplish the work he takes in hand. It seems unto me that I
have required great matters to be in her that should bring up your daughter:
for if she be full of gravity, wisdom, and well manered, she has in her all
that which makes a pefect and virtuous Gentlewoman with us to deserve great
praise and commendation. Nevertheless, to the end, that as beholding an
excellent and singular patron, by the lineaments and proportions you may in a
manner know it, estraunging my self from common precepts, and with more
weight considering the thing, I will describe her unto you by more certain and
particular qualities, not as others most commonly are, but bending my self to
show you what they ought to be.

She shall then be so singular wise, that she (a thing which in long time can
hardly be perceived by others) being taught by the gestures and countenance of
the young Gentlewoman, may soon know and perceive, what is to be hoped and
feared in her, and in the beginning by brief and expedient remedies preventing
that which is to be feared, by care and good instructions, and as it were,
cherishing that which is to be hoped in her, that it may soon proceed to
ripeness. Further, because there depends much more danger in that which we
doubt, than profit or utility in that which is hoped and expected, she shall
before all things be careful to dissuade her from that which she fears in
her to be evil, which nevertheless we hope to be very little, or not at all
in our gentlewoman, therein imitating the expert husbandman, which casts not
good seed into a field, which he knows to be fat and fertile, but does first
diligently purge and cleanse it of weeds, thorns, and other herbs wherewith it
was ouergrowen: which done, yet must she not leave off fear and watchfulnes:
but after she has dissuaded her as much as she may from all that might impech
and hinder her mind from the augmentation of her virtue, and therein shall have
sowed the seeds thereof: and seeing them spring up, her second care shall be,
that (as many times tender and young trees not being well and surely proped
do often fall to the ground, and so loosing their vigor, in the end die and
wither away) virtue which for a time shall have sprung and taken root in her,
being tossed and tumbled by the impetuositie of affections, shall not be
unstable and weak for want of good foresight, and so decay. Which thing
(seeing it can not happen but by space of time) may easily be tried by such as
doubt thereof, that not only in our infancy (when men cast the seed of
virtue into our minds) but also in riper years when virtues increase and
flourish in us, we have need of him who by his wisdom and virtue, susteineth
and governs us, until such time as that virtue has taken deep root in us,
to the end (as you see a strong and sturdie oak which is not able to be stirred
nor shaken, not only not to move at the blustering blastes of the West and
Northen winds) there be no fear, that although never so many winds of
humane affections do blow upon us, yet the said virtue shall not at any time be
driven away. But because heretofore it has been said, that this so wise and
prudent matron ought to know, that which is to be feared and hoped in the young
gentlewoma^, to the end she may attain thereunto, she shall use wise and
convenient counsel, and to know whereunto she is inclined, (as Ulysses to
know Achilles from the daughters of Lycomedes, among diverse devises he showed
him the armours and harness of knights and valiant warriors, whereon casting
his eyes, in the end he discovered himself) she shall never set any vicious
thing before her eles, but much blame and detest them: and rather put her in
remembrance of the contrary virtues, garnished with so many good persuasions,
that (although by secret instigation of nature she be somewhat provoked to
the contrary vice) she may nevertheless feel her heart inflamed with ardent
desire to win them, and thereto conform her mind, although the contrary
vices still seek to strive against them. She shall likewise show her, how
great an ornament and beauty Chastity is in a Lady or Gentlewoman of honor,
and if it appear that she (as it is to be expected in so worthy a
Gentlewoman) take pleasure to hear her, desiring not only to resemble, but to
be the like: then you have sufficient warrantise, that her heart abhors the
contrary vice: and if she perceive (which can hardly be suspected to be in
one of that spirit and age) by certain signs, and other inclination in her
mind, as so wise and prudent a woman may easily judge, she shall then lean
toward the most assured stay, and (advisedly taking occasion) show her what
diverse Ladies of honor and reputation have done touching that notable virtue:
by which means they have attained unto great praise and immortal renown. I
will let pass to show you, what I have seen in the greatest number of
fathers, who being more delicate and effeminate to satisfy their pleasures,
than wise and diligent to procure the welfare of their children, as soon as
their young daughters learned to read and could discern one word from
another, they have given them certain amorous and impudent songs to learn by
heart, by that means stirring their memories, most commonly apt with all
lively capacity still to retain that, which by such means has been taught
them: which as a plague I would have shunned and detested by her, that is to
learn and bring up a young Gentlewoman (such as ours is) of good nature, and
of whom there is great hope. The weak age of infancy, and the evil
conversation of diverse persons (sooner than a wise and prudent father would
wish) do administer copious and abundant matter unto vice, unless it be so long
time before prevented by us. This wise matron shall rather read unto her, or
cause her to read diverse examples of vettuous gentlewomen and such as were of
great renoume, which she shall diligently collect and gather together, as well
out of the holy scriptures, as other histories, both of times past and present:
wherein she will not only take pleasure, but serve her for an aule to prick her
forword to will and desire virtue, and to despise and abhor all vice and
filthy abomination. By this means our courages become magnanimious and
heroical, and not only we that have attained to ripe years, but also young
and delicate gentlewomen: and they shall never read of such women of renown,
as Claudia, Portia, Lucretia, and Octauia, without being stirred up with a
noble desire to follow their steps, dispising and wholly dispraising those that
by the contrary means have passed the course of this their mortal life. And it
shall not only be forbidden our gentlewoman to read any thing that may induce
her mind (very delicate of it self) to become more feeble and effeminate, but
all such things as may by any means make her forget her reputation. Among the
which (it is hardly to believed) what mischief is bred by the familiarity of
those dames that under pretense of gentilitie, giving of apparel, jewels,
gold, and precious stones: or (which is much more dangerous) under show of
religion and honesty, use most corrupt and most beastly enticings and
allurements. Men are seen easily to work mischief, when by the authority of
great personages they are supported and vpholden: and as diseases are most
contagious, when such as are infected have most lively and apparent color of
health: vices hidden under titles of nobility and honor, and covered with
false and dissembling shows do in that sort much more hurt, than when the
wicked life and base condition of such men discovers and makes them known. I
think it not needful that this wise matron should be admonished (which some
have done) that our gentlewoma^ should be wholly with drawn from the
acquaintance and familiarity of children, although they be of equal years:
for that at the same time, with their young years the seeds of luxuriousnes do
issue, and often times, yea and sooner than we would, increase their fruits.
Which Jerome (a doctor and man of great authority) among other things,
shows by example of a shameless and dishonest woman, that much vaunted and
glorified in her self, that as long as she can remember, she had never been
destitute of the pleasure that is is found to be in the conjunction of
marriage. From this so great danger the Mistress of our gentlewoman must
always be wary to keep her, and suffer her not in any wise, (as a brute and
uncomely thing in her) that she be acquainted (which of many is not much
shunned) with maids, servants, and other prating women, that most commonly
haunt the houses of gentlewomen of account, and many times are causes of great
mischiefs: giving her to understand, that there is nothing more inconvenient
for a young gentlewoma^ wise and well manered, than to be seen and heard among
the maids, staying by the fire to hear their tales and prating speeches, and
to delight therein. This the wise matro^ must not endure: and instead of such
tales (which to pass the time maids and young girls do much delight in at
night when they sit by the fire) she shall always have her in her company, and
enforce her lelfe by all means to enrich and adorn her mind with good and
honest thoughts, together with pleasant and wise conceits: which she may
easily do, using in her speech diverse prompt, ingenious, sweet, and pretty
morals, which she may conveniently intermixe: for that by convenient
instruction and wise sentences she shall stir up her heart to the desire of
such praises, as she (growing envious) shall perceive to be attributed unto
those that have lived well and virtuously. And I dislike not, (seeing that the
continual familiarity of this matron that shall be her mistress who by her
great gravity and honesty will sooner engender in her an affection of
reverence than occasion of recreatio^, which is more convenient in our
gentlewoman than in any other time of her age) that among diverse others, she
choose a gentle and well mannered maid, that not only by mildness,
understanding and spirit, may give her occasion to follow virtue, but also be
a comfort and recreation unto her, in her most grave and severe affections. We
are oftentimes wearied and loath the things which of their nature are pleasant,
and that as by their proper objects delight the senses with a singular
contentment, specially at those years: which if she be, (as commonly she
seems) how much more ought she than to fear, that she will be the like in
such things, wherein finding much gravity, there is little or no pleasure
seen. But which is more, this wise matron shall be advised, because that in
children the force of understanding can not be so lively, being always hindered
by overmuch gravity, that she must in her ordinary exercises mingle certain
pleasure and recreation: and if to correct some small faults in the gentlewoman
she be forced to leave her ordinary course of speech (which nevertheless I
wish should not be) let it rather be done with mildness than by rigor.
Wherein she must do like a wise and discrete Physician, who being to cure
such children of grievous diseases, shows them most bitter Aloes, Reubarbe,
or Agaricke, covered with sugar or honey, to the end that being enticed by that
composed sweetness, they should swallow down such bitter medicines, as may
cause them both to recover their healths and lives, and heal them of their
sickness.

THis matron also in like manner shall always show her a pleasant and merry
countenance, full of amiable and delightful gestures, and (if she do evil)
she shall teach her in such sort, that without using too much bitterness she
may nevertheless perceive she is reproved therein, always using grave
speeches and a moderate countenance till she has done reproouing: which
notwithstanding must not be often nor with many words: to the end that the
thing which we desire, should serve as a remedy and cause of her amendment,
being common and accustomed, should not be neglected and naught esteemed: and
when she perceives the young gentlewoman (as being stricken with fear) to be
grieved and show a fearful countenance, then presently vnbending her brows
and giving a comfortable look, by good admonitions and wise instructions,
altogether estranged from severe and bitter reprehensions, she shall mollify
and appease her mind, driving out the fear which before she had conceived:
above all things holding her hands from beating or striking her, as a beastly
and inconuenie^t kind of correction, to a frank and honest mind. For we mean
not that our young gentlewoman shall do her duty without fear, (which thing,
if at that age it be not worthy blame, she is not greatly to be commended) but
also seeing she is capable (which is hardly to be expected in one that is
confirmed and grounded in virtue) we mean as much as possible may be, that she
shall not do any thing unto her self seeme-worthy of praise, in hope of
commendation. We esteem so much of her worthiness, that we hope (that
beholding the excellency of virtue, wherein only she knows all her good and
felicity to consist) she will become amorous thereof, and only desire it
without hope of further commoditte. I know some that are of opinion, that young
gentlewomen should be taught learnings and sciences, which for my part I think
not convenient. Which to prove they induce the eminent evils that depend on
humane life, the inclination and readiness unto vice, which naturally is in us
even from the beginning, and when as yet we are in our cradles: the examples
of evil and wicked persons, the life and corrupt manners of those that
accompany us, and a multitude of pleasures, delights, recreations, and
pastimes: the deceits and willines of our common enemy, from the which they say
they perceue not how the wise and prudent minds of men may defend themselves,
(I speak not of tender and delicat young ge^ntilwome^) without the protection of
good learning and doctrine. In which complaints, if by one only means I should
answer the^, that the evil use of learning has commonly been more cause of
hurt and discommodity to humane life, then the means of utility and profit:
some men peradventure would suspect that I seek, do it in dispraise of
learning, which in no sort is my intent, I could produce an infinity of
examples, whereby I might easily prove it, I could name Rome the imperial seat
of the world, and victorious over al strange nations, and show that for the
space of 600 years and more, it was without the exercise of learning, and kept
from it, by the public ordinance of Philosophers, as an obstacle against
honest and virtuous life. And to the contrary, when ye study of Philosophy
and eloquence flourished most in the Citizens thereof, it lost her liberty,
and in the end fell into servitude, and obedience of one man. And the city of
Athens, that among all others is reputed only to have attained to the glory
and renown of learning, and taught wisdom unto the world, as then had been
subjected, when the University (frequented by noble and notable Philosophers)
was in greatest commendation: and in the same City the use of eloquence has
been forbidden, as a plague and ruin of a Commonwealth, and a contamminater
both of laws and justice. I could show you of Sparte, which for long time
wholly despised learning, study and science, as a thing more convenient for
idle, effeminat, and delicat, then for strong and warlike men: with immortal
glory they were Princes of Grecia, and because I undertake to teach and bring
up a Christian young Gentlewoman, refusing all other examples, I will set down
the authority of Jesus Christ, the most infallible truth, who not only does
not commend, but wholly despise the wisdom of the world, as an enemy to an
honest and religious life. But yet my proposition at this present is not, nor
never was to impute such mischiefs as proceed from the malice of man and their
corrupt natures, to the sacred study of learning: wherein I would not have
spent so many years, with most assured hope therein to continue all my life, if
I had been of that opinion: yet I mean sufficiently to prove, that in a
young gentlewoman of good birth, we must not expect it, the dangers which
therein are feared being much heavier, tha^ the good that thereby is hoped may
be profitable, if she be brought up in learning. They will that the learning
propounded unto her should be full of chastity and purity, whereunto
nevertheless she can not attain, but by convenient means: and having gotten
it, no man can let her, but she will read Christian Poets, Prudence, Prospere,
Iuuence, Paulin, Nazianzene, and others: as also books of love composed by
Ovid, Catulle, Properce, Tibull, and Virgil, of Eneas and Dido: and among the
Grecian Poets, the foolish love of the gods themselves: and in Homer their
adulteries and fornications. Likewise (seeing we are so ambitious, to cause
our daughters to dispute in Philosophers schools) she will be no less able
when it pleases her as well to defend the opinions of Epicure as those of Zeno
and Chrysippus: and because it is their desire that she should learn the
Philosophy and wisdom of Plato. I will not altogether deny that a strange
gentlewoman, unknown to me (yet you must not understand that I would permit
the same unto my daughter) may read in Platos discourses, the impudent
actions, loves, and daliances of Alcibiades. They appoint her a master that is
learned, grave, diligent, and of honest behavior, let it be so, yet may he
corrupt nature, and show himself a man, (as the wise man well and learnedly
declares) and the prouocations of lust, which are alwais prompt and ready, by
acquaintance and familiarity with that sex, and at such age, may be
sufficient matter to give him occasion to attempt such things. The deserts of
Egypt and Thebaide were full of holy fathers, who seeking to chastise their
flesh by strict penance and unsupportable fastings, it may be they overcame it,
yet could they never wholly vanquish the violence of lust and sinful
affections. And Saint Hierome hidden among wild beasts in holes and caves,
every day striking his breast in prayer: notwithstanding, he said that
sometimes he thought himself to be among the beautiful gentlewomen of Rome.
For an example among a few notable and renowned women in learning, they induce
Cornelia mother to Graches a Citizen of Rome, who as she taught her children to
be no less seditious and violent than learned and eloquent, so she instructed
her daughter (as some grave and learned Authors suspect) to kill her husband,
in whom consisted the magnificence and majesty of the Empire. To the
gentlewomen of Lelius there is no greater commendation given, then that of
speaking the Latin tongue with a sweet and pleasant style, which I deny not
is permitted to a gentlewoman of noble house, who nevertheless without
instruction of diverse masters, being brought up in a good and honorable
house, will but perfitly speak her own natural speech. So Portia wife to
Brutus, is not so much commended (as these men suppose) because she learned of
her father the doctrine and decrees of Stoicke Philosophers (which none of the
ancient Authors affirm) as for preserving her faith undefiled unto her
husband, with patience and magnanimity of heart, worthy of Cato her father.
Mantinea, Assiothea, Lasthemia, (I leave out Leontium that maintained lust
against Theophrastes) who changing her feminine habites, entered in men's
apparel into Platos school: and among the amorous and effeminate young men,
openly disputed of the motions, principles, and causes of love. Dama that
taught the world the doctrine of Pythagoras her father: and Aspasia, Diotima,
and Thargelia, that beautified the studies of Philosophy, have not more
deserved the praise of excellent and learned matrons, then an opinion of light
and uncivil women: and I think there is ^ot any man of good judgment, that
^ad not rather have his daughter vn^earned and shamefast, than suspected of her
honesty and excellent in the ^tudie of philosophy, and of great renown among
the learned. As for Co^inna, in times past famous among the ancients, and often
times pronoun^ed a victor against Pindarus, prince of the Lirique Poets: God
knows if the judgment were truer than that of Phryna, who with a perpetual
spot to so grave and holy a Senate, was by the Areopagites declared innocent:
and that it may be said of the same Erinna, that her verses were judged and
esteemed worthy comparison with those of Homer: of whom (although there have
been some) a wise father will never take example, nor assure himself, that
young gentlewomen by nature weak and feeble, will show themselves audacious in
public Theaters and common spectacles, to dispute for the glory and
pre-eminence of learning: but to the end it shall not be thought that I want
examples to the contrary, seeing I must rather strive against authority than
reason, that such as are so opinious defenders of learning (where it needs
not) may see, that for one example which they could allege, it is easy for me
to oppose many in defense of the truth, which they cease not to oppugn. All
histories as well ancient as modern, are full of the valiant actions of rare
and excellent ladies, who as well by notable examples of chastity, as by
noblenes and magnanimity of courage, have deserved praise: which has bin seen
not only in diverse ladies and maids of Sparta, as in many gentlewomen of Rome,
that have been famous and renowned in the world, without study or learning. I
could induce the Persians, the French, Thioises, Melies, Phociennes, Chies,
Argiues, and infinite others: whose names in times past have been celebrated,
and as yet are famous: and ioying virtues with their glories, have ministered
more matter for wise me^ to write upon, than ever Erinna, Sappho, or Corinna
did, writing of many famous men. Seeing it is more honor and praise to
accomplish great enterprises, than well and wisely to describe them. I am not
therefore of opinion, in any sort whatsoever, that a young gentlewoman should be
instructed in learning and humane Arts, in whom we account honesty and true
virtue to be more comely and a better ornament, than the report and light
renown of great science and knowledge by her attained unto. For that seeing in
the study of learning there are two principal points: the one recreation: the
other profit: that cannot be hoped for in a woman, who as by nature she is
given us for a companion in our labors, so she ought to be active and attentive
to govern our houses, nor this manner of study which procures delight may
not be granted unto her, without great danger to offend the beauty and glory
of her mind. Seeing then that the government of estates and commonwealthes is
not committed unto women, and that it becomes not them like Draco, Licurgus,
Solon, and Numa Pompilius, to prescribe laws, whereby men must govern
themselves: they must live well and moderately, and not like professors of
sciences and faculties, in schools to teach the wisdom of laws and of
Philosophy. And seeing that in the studies which procure recreatio^, there is
no less danger that they will sooner learn to be subtle and impudent lovers,
than learnedly to write verses, poetry, ballads and songs. Let them likewise
be restrained to the care and government of their houses, that having a desire
to follow those, who truly renowned for virtue, made small account of such as
with great prejudice of their honesties, would be esteemed in the world to be
Diotimes, Aspasies, Sappho and Corinnes. Let the small profit got by learning,
be compared with the great hurt that may happen unto them, and they shall be
showed (if nevertheless they remain opinious therein) how much more convenient
the needle, the wheel, the distaffe, and the spindle, with the name and
reputation of grave and honest matrons is for them, then the book and pen with
an uncertain report: if in them there be more learning than honesty and
virtue. There is no man that doubts but that such a woman will be soon
perfect and accomplet (which will hardly be believed, seeing they are for the
most part married in their young years, and put to the government and care of
their houses) who of her self and by the rule of diverse wise women and of long
experienee, has learned the means well and wisely to govern her house: for I
will by no means grant, that surmounting in her self the estate and condition
of an active dame, and (to name her strange) economique, should presume
(mounting by the so difficult ladder of Philosophy) to attain to the
contemplation of things which may rather be expected and desired in men that
are idle and long time exercised in learning: but seeing the hope of such
things is gotten with so great danger, and that in all other faculties that may
be attained by science or practice, (having choice) those are sooner taken
which are formed by use and experience, than such as have great experience and
little practice: And will we not in other sort commit the care of our selves
to a matron that is prudent, provident, and by long practice wise and expert,
then as if we were to fail on the sea we should deliver our merchandises and
goods to a wise and cunning Sayler; making small account of him, who only by
information of the Astrolabe and Sea-cardes, would promise us (having never been out of his doors) a safe passage. It should seem sufficient unto us,
that our gentlewoman being become wise by the advice and instructions of her
matron, should one day when occasion serves, show her self to be
sufficiently taught well and wisely to govern her house: yet I will not that
she should be debarred from the commodity of reading and understanding,
because it is not only commodious to a wise and virtuous woman, but a rich and
precious ornament. She may read diverse Treatises written by learned men, for
our profit and instruction; so she be not suffered (as I said before) to
peruse amorous and impudent verses, or fables and news: as the tales of Bocace
and others: which if they be read and observed by us, it is rather for the
pleasantness of the style, with the great variety and harmony of words
magnificall, brave and singular that are therein, than for the matter. She may
read (seeing at this present they are translated) besides the books of holy
Scriptures, (which sufficiently set down that which belongs to the ornament
of the mind) the works of Plutarch written touching women of renown, who in
times past lived in the world: and that which many long time after, and Boccace
himself have written, with other Authors that lived in our time: and shall
read if it may be done) in fair pictures and painted tables, which with great
efficacy move the minds of children that are tender and delicate. By this
reading she shall find not only words, which not being garnished with
examples, profit much to that age, but also the notable actions and glorious
enterprises of famous and renowned women, wherewith she may increase the
notable virtues by nature liberally bestowed upon her, with all good grace and
ornament: and to speak more aptly of nobility and magnanimity worthy such a
lady and matron: She shall read of and admire the women of the Troianes,
Sabines, Phociennes, Argiues, and the virgins of Rome. And shall learn a
singular example of piety toward her country, by Megistone, Aretaphile,
Policrite, and of those godly women Judith and Hester, and of love toward
their husbands, by Lucretia and Portia, and the Barbarian Camma, that at one
instant became a glorious revenge both of her honesty and the injury of her
slain husband. And to conclude (that I may make an end of rehearsing
strangers) she shall find examples of all virtues, religion, holiness, and
loyalty, in so many sacred virgins whose names are renoumed among us, as in
Cecile, Agathe, Theodore, Barbara, and infinite others, who both by shedding of
their blood and loosing of their lives, enduring most incredible and accustomed
torments, have given unto the world most certain testimonies of their faithes,
and made our religion as at this day we find it. Among the which (as time
serves) some pleasant matters may be mixed, wherein nevertheless there must be
care had to recreate her mind and move her to delight, without occasion
offered to stir up in her such thoughts, which in any sort may be hurtful
unto the beauty of her mind. I mean not because it is needless herein, to
speak what belongs unto religion, as being assured that by so honest and
virtuous a man, order shall be taken for her instruction therein. Least all
that which I have said might in your judgment seem to proceed as much from
want of understanding, as superfluous. Which notwithstanding I will tell you,
that to whomsoever you commit this charge, let him be advised to frame the
gentlewomans mind to true religion and piety, above all things shunning
superstition as a most pernicious plague. I am of opinion, that at this present
it is not necessary, that entering into the depth thereof, I should discourse
how far the one differs from the other. For that religion is a virtue which
consists only in a mean, and as upon the one side it has impiety, as one
of her extremities; so on the other it has superstition, which often times is
no less pernicious than impiety. This shall not only be made known to the
learned man that is to instruct her in points of religion and divine service,
but also to the wise matron, who among other affairs is to have the government
of her: and she shall strive by all means she may, to make her humble and of a
gentle and tractable spirit: for that humility is not only a Christian and
civil virtue, but the foundation and pillar of all Christian and civil
virtues: and because it ingendreth in us the knowing of our selves, as much as
her weak mind may comprehend, she shall show her of the wisdom of God, of his
goodness, and his power, (which she ought to learn to be most great, not only
by so admirable a means to have created the world, filling and garnishing the
same with so many varieties of things, but by preserving it in one estate, by
his divine and eternal providence) and that not only all whatsoever may be in
a young gentlewoman, but also that which is in great Kings and Emperors, and
all whatsoever has been known by those men who in times past came out of
Licea, Portica, and the Universities with report and fame of wisdom and
learning, is nothing in comparison to that which God knows and can do,
esteeming all our knowledge and what other thing soever we can do, in respect
of his wisdom and power, to be wholly vain and unprofitable. Which to
effect, she shall set before her all whatsoever she has gotten from wise and
conscionable men, or by diligent and curious observation, teaching her, that
our Lord came not to be served but to serve, and that he said unto his Apostles
that strove for the highest place, That he which exalts himself shall be
brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted: meaning thereby,
that those only should be exalted that knew themselves: which divine virtue
has not only been commendable among us Christians, but in Socrates it was
also accounted a sign of singular wisdom, judging (and by good reason) that
man to be very wise, which acknowledged himself to know nothing. She may
easily attain unto that virtue, if she be taught to be careful to follow
the steps not only of her betters, but also (which is of much more
importance) of the wise and virtuous, and not of her inferiors, like fools
and those that have no understanding. Wherein she shall reap a double
commodity, for knowing that in the world there are Ladies of great Realms and
Signeories, who in nobility, riches, and power, are her superiors, she will
in her self lessen all pride and arrogancy before conceived (a vice most
ugly) and beholding the most virtuous, until she knows she has the means,
she will seek to attain unto those virtues which she wants. Withal, she
must show her how brutish and uncomely a thing it is, that women, following the
example of such as daily are seen in the Church richly adorned, and better and
brauelier apparelled than others, learn to devise new suits of apparel, that
they may be known among the rest of the fair dames, sooner than to beautify
and set themselves out with virtues and godly ornaments, for the which they see
so many wise and virtuous ladies praised and commended: nevertheless not being
so foolish, but that they well perceive how much reputation and honor they may
attain thereby. Most men are of opinion, that to a gentlewoman of honor and
reputation, it is a great grace and ornament if she (among other things)
becomes expert to sing and play upon diverse instruments, and to show her
self excellent and famous therein, which (although it be confirmed by strong
and good reasons) I can not altogether praise, but I esteem that as things of
no great moment, she may well learn them. For as music, if it be used to
good and honest intent, is not vicious of it self, but deserves place among
the rest of the Arts, which belonging properly to men that are civil and of
good birth, are calked Liberal: nevertheless, under a color of virtue (as all
other Arts and faculties of the greater part are esteemed virtues) it has in
it a secret baire that leads to grievous mischiefs, and those of great
consequence. Although it is not likewise to be said, that the music which for
the pleasantnes thereof, may be accompanied with the others called Liberal
sciences, consists more in knowledge of proportions, pauses, and other
accords and notes of voices, which is more practiced by common and unlearned
persons, than (as we see that Plato did to Timea touching the fabrication of
the world) in the knowledge of harmonies and proportions of things which
appertain to the other faculties and sciences. Which if it were so, it could
not be judged who is better musician Adrian Willart or Cyprian Iaquet, or
Iosquin that lived not long since, or Gombert than Genua, Magius, Perettus,
Espagnol or Zimara, whereof the first are yet living, and in our fathers time
the others were renowned and famous Philosophers. And as nevertheless the first
are and have been excellent masters in music, so it may be the second have
not learned so much of those common masters that they could discern the
differences between the one note and the other. Our gentlewoman then shall
abstain wholly from using music: and seeing that under the honest couerture
of virtue it opens the gate to many vices, by us it ought to be the more
avoided, because the danger is great and less apparent. Let us grant the use
of singing, and of this curious harmony, to such as being wearied with great
and important affairs, have need of recreation: which we read in Homer was
done to Agamemnon: and in the scriptures to king Saul, who by the harp and
songs of David was moved out of a fierce and cruel passion, to peace and
quietness of mind: but in stead of using it to so honest and good intents, it is
used in pastimes, in bankets, and solemn feasts, wherein (as if sumptuousnes
and sweetness of meats did not sufficiently move our spirits to become
dissolute and wanton) it is more a custom to have excellent musicians, who by
their cunning and experience play upon gitternes, violes, and other
instruments, with sweet and pleasant voices, singing artificial and impudent
songs (even as dry wood lying near unto the fire, with a small wind is soon
kindled and burns) with a new and fresh charge burn the hearts of such as by
virtue and good government, are not well staid and affected. By the false
harmony of the Sirens, Ulysses (so much renowned both by Greek and Latin
Authors, and nourished with celestial meat in the bosom of Sapience, Jupiters
daughter) could hardly assure himself: and should we then be so well
persuaded of a weak and delicate young gentlewoman, tenderly bred up, that as
not to fear, that she not only hearing but learning so pleasant an Art,
should not in time become licencious, delicate, and effeminate? Plato wisely
esteemed it to be a thing of consequence in cities, to know what manner of
music men should use. Whereof the Lacedaemonians have well showed, for
(despising all music, as enfeebling and making the spirits of men to become
languishing, loving that which yielded a strong and magnificall sound,
procuring men to be courageous, fierce, and desirous of glory and
immortality) they forbad it for along time without any exception. Licurgus
also a man of great wisdom, could not endure it that in the field (which has
continued until this time) there should be any instruments sounded that might
procure a meekenes in man's heart, but such as should incite them unto courage
and animositie for the maintenance of their liberty and common wealth, and
thereby moderate the disordinate motions of the body, to the end that by a mean
and certain ordinance they might march against their enemies: for that the
sweet and delicat manner of music, which at this day we use for our delight,
would have engendered the contrary effect within their hearts: although
otherwise of themselves they would they were of great courage and animositie.
And not only in this city (wherein of long time such delights have had no
place, by the which many others, and that namely which has had the Empire of
the world, have been clean overthrown) but also in Athens, where with so great
curiosity all sorts of pleasures and delights, as also sciences and
commendable Arts have been invented. Alcibiades perceiving a sweet and
marvelous accord, and as it were a divine harmony of sacred studies of
Philosophy, with most noble courage despised this Art so delicat and wanton,
which to our great hurt, insomuch as it is less known unto us, pleases us
the more. But to the end it shall not seem that we (as of set purpose) have
enterprised to strive against music, let us grant that it may be used by them,
that in truth either can not or know not better how to employ their time: and
let us think that Philip did wisely reprove his son Alexander, saying that
he had profited too much in music, and therein was become too singular: and
it ought to suffice others, if not only great princes but civil men and
ladies well instructed, vouchsafe their ears to musicians and singers,
esteeming that the hearing is more convenient for them, than to be heard sing.
Which a great and cunning musician of our time most wisely reproved in the
same Philip, by saying unto him when as sounding an instrument he was by the
king reproved (as from an instrument not being well tuned there is heard but
harsh and unpleasant music:) God forbid, O King, that thou should never
give better judgment. But leaving music to people that are riotous and idle,
our gentlewoman shall learn not only all manner of fine needle-worke, (which
are things convenient and well beseeming an honorable gentlewoman) but
whatsoever belongs to the distaffe, spindle, and weauing: which must not be
thought unfit for the honor and estate wherein she was borne, seeing Augustus
Caesar, prince and monarch of the world, would that his daughter and his
cousin should learn it. And which is more, to the end that being become a
mistres, she shall look into the duties and offices of domestical servants,
and see how they sweep and make clean the chambers, hall, and other places:
make ready dinner, dressing up the cellar and buttery: and that she be not so
proud that she should disdain to be present when they lay their bucks, and when
they bake, but to be present at all household works. For then it may be hoped
she (being a mistress) will be such as she is expected to be, seeing that in
her youth she seeks to know that which appertains to a gentlewoman well
mannered and instructed. But because certain virtues which being in a
gentlewoman of noble and great estate, seem to be of little value and
commendation, and also being in her is a great disgrace unto her, that she
having sufficient for the maintenance and entertainment of her life, should
busy her self about her house: and that being used thereunto, she should not
only not desire but despise any thing whatsoever may stir and provoke her to
gluttony. And it disliketh me not touching this vice (as all others, specially
that which is contrary unto chastity ought not to be observed) that touching
the first point thereof, she learneth to hate and despise it: and there is no
doubt that she (like Pallas who looking in a glass and beholding her cheeks
to be swollen when she played upon a flute, being grieved thereat having
thrown the flute upon the ground, brake it in pieces) seeing how unseemly it
is, and how much deformity so foul a vice brings to wise and well instructed
matrons, she will call it to mind and wholly detest and abhor it. She shall be
no liar, and shall rather (if it so fall out) confess the truth of her fault,
than being in fault to feine and deny it, for that confession of a fault is an
occasion of repentance, and the dissimulatio^ of virtue the alteration of the
heart and an entrance into pride: and (which is more dangerous) as a disease
when it is known may easily be cured, but health being dissembled is a means
not to help it being kept secret; so vice discovered being healed by
convenient remedies, gives place to health: and virtue dissembled, without
application of remedy, nourishes the contrary vice. She shall be kept from
familiarity and acquaintance of diverse companions, for there is always more to
be feared in a great assembly than in a small company: and if it be infected
with any present evil, it is so much the more dangerous and contagious: and if
also in the multitude there are vices to be avoided, they are much more uneasy
to be escaped than in a small company, for that vice increases and
augmenteth by the frequentation of many: and we will that our gentlewoman shall
live in company of one companion only, and in such manner avoid multitudes,
that nevertheless she may not detest them, but rather be instructed always to
show her self courteous and affable in all companies, and to honor them,
using liberality and courtesy toward them, and give them place, and that not
only to her equals (but to the end they make known her courtesy to be great)
her inferiors, hating pride above all vices, in such manner as not esteeming
of her self. She shall be no prater, nor riotous, and shall know that often
times prating and many words is cause of great faults, not only in that age,
wherein more than in any other it is convenient to learn, but also (oftener
than is necessary in some) in a riper and grauer age, whereof she must be
expressly admonished and forewarned. She shall then respect all companies, but
when she is in company of wise, grave, and expert gentlewomen, she shall be
attentive to hear what they say, and speak little: for as he that speaks
is in danger to err, so to him that keeps silence, it is accounted a kind
of hope to become wise. Which that it may happen unto our gentlewoman, she
shall mark and note what is spoken to the praise or dispraise of any, which
she shall easily learn to know by the countenance, signs, and behauiors of
the assistants: who as with a joyful countenance do use to commend and
applaud that which is wisely spoken in an assembly: and to the contrary with a
sad and melancholy cheer, and as it were in great anguish, seem not to
agree to that which is improperly spoken, and that with little respect either
of the place, time, persons, or of the things whereof they discourse, neither
yet themselves. In this manner she shall make choice what she were best to
say, and what will be necessary to refrain, ordaining a law unto her self
to do the one and to eschew the other. She must know that she is to use her
tongue and speak with all sobriety, which Nature (a wise workewoman and a
most divine mistress) would should be enclosed (as with a hedge) between two
ranks of teeth, whereas she has made the ears open and always ready to hear
and hearken what is spoken. She shall find many singular examples and worthy
by her to be holden in memory, and also many books of ancient Authors, and
especially in Erasmus in his golden book by him written concerning the vices
and virtues of the tongue, which not long since translated in our vulgar
tongue, is by them (as I suppose) red with great commodity and profit: and
therefore I will speak no more thereof. As touching her apparel, seeing it is
a thing termed indifferent, (for that custom makes them seem diversely good
or evil) she shall not envy her equals, neither yet surpassing them in costly
apparel shall not give them occasion to envy nor accuse her of pride and
ambition: for that is a thing no less dangerous to be envied, than to envy.
And because it has been said before, that she ought not only to avoid and
shun too much familiarity of her equals, but much more of her servants and
maids, and such light women: herein she shall behave her self in such manner,
that neither in countenance nor behavior, the servant maid, or washer, may
perceive that it proceeds of a proud and stately mind, looking into their
works with womanlike gravity, adorned with pleasant and comely gesture: and
shall know how women ought to fear the conversation of such women, who for the
most part are wicked, and many of them readier to speak that which becomes
them not, than to hear that they ought to hear; and use more to reprove the
vices of others, than to look into their own faults. As much as she may she
shall be amiable unto all, desiring to honor and reverence such as are good, to
win their love, and not despising the evil least she should incur their
hatred (a vice above all things to be shunned) being dangerous and unseemly,
and more peculiar in that age than in any other: which because it is hidden as
it were under the couerture of a good and commendable virtue, for the most part
is hardly discerned, and so can not easily be avoided, and yet consists
wholly in a gross and unseemly shamelessness: which being once crept into
the customs and manners of the mind, will still appear in riper years, not
without cause of great shame and reproach. And in truth, as over much boldness
(which is fitter for such as show themselves upon open stages and in public
spectacles, than for gentlewomen of good countenance and well instructed) ought
to be well rooted and avoided, so to the contrary, superfluous fear and shame
where there is no cause of reason, is proper to children and ignorant persons,
and not to a wise Lady, and one of that valor which shows to be in our
gentlewoman. And therefore these two extremities being avoided, if she shall
have committed any fault proper to that age: she shall likewise be shamefast but
in the only acknowledging of her fault, and not in any other thing, and not
being obstinate in denying it, she shall give cause of hope of amendment: and
there can be no greater punishment administered unto her, than the shame which
as then she finds in her self: and to the contrary where occasion shall be
offered to make her virtue known, she must there be prompt and ready and not
bold, but with a little blushing (that presently by virtuous confidence will
enter into her face) she shall show that in her there is a reverent heart,
estra^ged from infamy, shame, and reproach. And in that sort with a chereful
countenance te^pered with seemly gravity, her eyes looking down, she shall
say that of her self, which notwithstanding (although she know it will be
attributed as a commendatio^ unto her) she shall dissemble and feign as though
she passed not for it: showing nevertheless that she rather desires to be, than
show to be good. She shall for her recreation use to pass her time in her
gardens and cuntry houses, which in this cuntry are so delightful and
pleasant, recreatiue and beautiful, that neither in Italy nor in any other
part of Europe, there are any to be found that may surpass the^: yet she shall
not stay there so long, that thereby she should forget the customs and manners of
the cities, although our villages are so full of houses and pleasant buildings,
that nothing is wanting whereby they may not seem to deserve the names of
populous towns. I feel my self so much tra^sported with the arde^t desire I
have to adorn and beautify our gentlewoma^, or to say the truth, to discover
and ripen the notable perfections by her conceived from your noble family,
that as many which walk abroad being transported by profound conceits, do often
pass the place, whither they meant to go: so I perceive my self to be past,
or to say truth, strayed beyond the limits that herein I meant to observe.
Wherefore ending herewith, I beseech God, who only can do more than all
counsels and industries of man, that without our instructions our gentlewoman
may of her self become such as ^ou desire: and we (esteeming of your
sufficiency, being her father) hope and are assured, that in time it will be
so.

FINIS.

