i^ e The puri^ of our lady scorpius ^^ iii f 27 The last quarter a later day
about.ix. a clock / before no^e / moist and meately warm iiii G Sexagesima
sagittarius 10 v a 24 vi b capricor 8 vii c 23 viii d The sun^e in pi^ aquarius
7 B ix e 22 The new moan a satarday at.iii. a clock before none / moist and
froste x f Pisces 7 xi G Quinquasige 22 xii a aries 6 B xiii b Shrouetyde 21
xiiii c Asshe wenisd. taurus 5 xv d 19 The first quarter a fridaye about.xi.
a clock at after none / cold and wyndy. xvi e Juliane virgy. Gemini. 2 xvii f
16 xviii G The.i. sunday of lent 28 xix a cancer 10 B xx b 23 B xxi c Imbre
days leo 5 B xxii d Cathe. s. petri leo 16 B xxiii e leo 28 xxiiii f Mathy the
apo virgo. 10 The full moan a sundaye at.i. a. clock before none / moist. xxv
G The.ij.sunday of lent. 22 xxvi a libr. 4 B xxvii b lib. 16 B xxviii c Oswalde
bys lib. 28 B i G (...) ^^ye sag. 29 ij a cap. 12 The last quater a theusdaye
about.vij. a clock / before none cold and moist. iij b capri. 26 iiij c S.
Ambrose aq. 10 B S v d aq. 25 vj e Saint Sixtus pis. 10 vij f pis. 25 viij G
Low su^daye ari. 9 The new moan a mondaye aboure.x. a clock at after none /
wyndi. ix a ari. 24 x b The su^ne in tau. tau. 8 xj c tau. 22 xij d gem. 5 xiij
e Saint Juli^na gem. 18 xiiij f can. 1 xv G The.iij. su^day after ^^ster can.
14 xvj a can. 27 The first quarter a ^heusday about.vij. a clock before none
variable and wyndi xvij b S. Anicete leo. 9 xviij c S. Eleuther leo. 22 xix d
vir. 4 xx e Saint Victor vir. 16 S xxj f S. Symeo^ bis. vir. 28 S xxij G
The.iiij. su^day lib. 9 xxiij a S. George m^. lib. 22 xxiiij b S. wilfride bys.
scor. 4 The full moan a we^n^sday at.viij. a clock before none / moys^ and
wyndi xxv c S. Mar^e ^ua. scor. 17 xxvj d Saint Clet^ scor. 29 xxvij e S.
Anastas^. sag. 12 xxviij f sag. 25 B xxix G The.v. sunday capri. 9 S xxx a S.
Erke^walde capri. 23 j e Nicomede m^. ari. 0 B ij f Marcellyne ari. 14. B iij G
The first su^day ari. 29 B iiij a (after trini. sun. tau. 13 v b S. Boniface
tau. 26 vj c Mello^ archbys. gem. 10 The new moan a thursdaye about.iij. a
clock at after none wyndi and variable. vij d Tra^s. of.s. wulst. gem. 23 xiij
e Medar. and gild. can.+cer. 5 ix f Tra^s. of.s. edmu^ 18 B x G The. ij sunday
leo. 0 B xj a leo. 12 B xij b The sun in ca^ leo. 24 xiii c vir. 6 xiiij d
Basyl bishop vir. 18 The first quarter a frydaye about.v. a clock at after
none / moist and wyndi xv e Uite / modeste lib. 1 xvi f S. Richard lib. 14 B
xvii G The.iij. sunday lib. 26 B xviij a scor. 8 B xix b scor. 21. xx c Tra^s.
Edward sag. 4. xxj d walburge vir. sag. 17. B xxji e Albone martyr capri. 1 The
full moan a saterdaye at.v. a. clockefore none / reyen / wind / and great
tempest xxiii f S. Andrey capri. 14 xxiiii G Natiui. ^. ^oh. capri. 28 xxv a
Trans. Elegii aq. 13 B xxvi b John and Paul aq. 27 xxvij c S. Crescens pis. 12
xxviij d Leo pope pis. 27. B The last quarter a frydaye about.ix. a clock at
after none / varyable. xxix e Peter and paul ari. 12 xxx f Co^memo. paul ari.
25 B

George seyfridt of S^


