Orders conceived and set down by the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council,
by her Highness special direction, to be put in execution for the restraint
of killing and eating of flesh, as well by the Lord Mayor within the City of
London, and the Officers of the liberties and exempt places in and about the
same, as by the Lords lieutenants in the several Counties of the Realm.
In the xxxij year of the Queens Majesty's reign.

FIrst, her Majesty's pleasure is, upon her understanding of the great disorder
heretofore and commonly committed in killing and eating flesh in the time of
Lent, especially in the City of London, and the liberties thereto adjoining,
that the statute made in the fifth year of her Majesty's reign for restraint
thereof be put its due execution by way of inquisition, and charge of Iuries,
and by any other good means.

And for the better information of the truth in this behalf, and redress of
this inconvenience, the said Jury shall call before them, and send for any of
the servants of any Inholders, Victuallers, Tauerners, and Keepers of ordinary
tables, and such other that utter victualles, to examine them upon their
corporal oaths, what flesh has been dressed, hilled, uttered, or eaten in
their houses during the said time of Lent: which if they shall refuse to do,
then they shall commit to prison the said servants, so refusing upon their
oaths to declare the truth.

And because a great part of this disorder grows by the Butchers of the City
and of the Country, that hill and bring flesh to the City: Her Majesty's
pleasure likewise is, that there shall be only six Butchers licended by the
Lord Mayor to kill flesh within the City and liberties thereof, without
exacting any thing of them for their licenses.

Also every of these Butchers to be so licenced, shall be first bound in the
sum of one hundred pounds to her Majesty's use, to sell no flesh in the time
of Lent, but to such persons as shall show them special warrant from the Lord
Mayor, under his hand, and that the Butchers do truly keep particular books
of their daily sales, and of the names of those to whom they shall so sell,
with the quantities, and the times thereof.

That the Lord Mayor give order to these Butchers, not to sell any flesh but at
reasonable prices, and for that purpose the prices shall be set down by the said
L. Mayor, such as may be reasonable both for the buyer and seller: and if the
Butcher shall break that order, then to be forthwith discharged, and committed
to prison, and another put into his place.

That the Lord Mayor himself shall grant no warrant for buying of flesh in
Lent, but to such as shall have and show to him license according to the laws
of the Realm to eat flesh, and the said license to be viewed and registered,
first by some two meet persons to be appointed for this purpose by the Lord
Mayor, and Books to be kept thereof, to be showed further when the same shall
be required, unless it be to Ambassadors and Agents of forrene Princes, to
whom notwithstanding no further quantity shall be allowed, then ratably for
their own train.

That the L. Mayor shall presently now before Lent cause all Inholders,
Tablekeepers, Victuallers, Alehousekeepers, and Tauerners within the City, and
liberties thereof, to appear before him, or such persons as he shall appoint
meet for that purpose: and shall take bonds of every of them in good sums of
money to her Majesty's use, not to dress any flesh in their houses this Lent
time for any respect, except it be for some such person that lies in their
house, and that also has license through sickness, or other necessary cause
to eat flesh. Bonds shall be taken also of the Poulters, not to utter any
Poultry ware, but such as shall be also licensed to eat flesh.

And for the Butchers and others that come with victuals out of the country to
the city, the L. Mayor shall cause certain persons whereof some to be named to
the L. Mayor by the Wardens of the Fishmongers, to watch at the gates and other
like places in the suburbs, where flesh may be brought in, for the
intercepting thereof. And in case the same shall be found to be brought to any
person not warranted nor licensed to eat as is aforesaid, then the same to be
forfeited and sold at the discretion of the L. Mayor, for the use of the poor
in the Hospitals and prisons in the City, and the bringers to be imprisoned.
And this watch to be continued daily during the whole time of Lent: and if any
of these watchmen be found negligent and corrupt in his charge, then he to be
committed to prison, there to continue during the whole Lent.

And to the end the said Orders may be duly executed, it is thought convenient
that the L. Mayor should send for the chief Heads of the Company of the
Fishmongers, and shall cause them to make choice of four wise and discreet
persons of the said Company, and men of good wealth and ability, to whom
they shall commit the charge to make enquiry after such as shall be found
transgressors of the said Orders: who in respect of their travel bestowed in
that behalf, shall have the mortie of such bonds as shall be forfeited by
transgressing of the said Orders, and the other moytie to be converted unto
godly uses, by the discretion of the Queens Majesty's high Almner.

And that there may be due execution of the said Orders, as well without, as
within the Liberties, it is thought convenient, that they that have the chief
charge over the places privileged and exempt, where any Leets or Law days are
kept, shall authorize under their hand and seal the said four persons above
mentioned, to make search within the said privileged and exempt places for
such as shall transgress the said Orders, and shall for their travel therein
employed, receive the moytie of the Bonds forfeited, as is above mentioned. And
for the avoiding of corruption and partiality in the said persons, it shall be
necessary that they take their oath, and give bond in some good and large
sums, to see, as much as in them lies, a due observation of the said Orders.

And for that it is to be doubted, that the said Fishmongers, upon the
observation of the said Orders, will take occasion thereby to enhaunse the
prices, as well of Fresh as of Sea fish: It is thought meet, that the L. Mayor
shall take order with the said Fishmongers, that as well the salt as fresh fish
shall be uttered at reasonable prices.

Lastly, it is ordered that no Butcher shall kill any Beeues, but such as shall
be specially licensed thereunto, for the furnishing of such ships as shall be
employed by sea, either in the way of traffic, or otherwise. And that such
Butchers, as shall be licensed either within or without the liberties to kill
any flesh, shall every fourteen days at the least, give a true certificate
unto the Lord Mayor and head officers of the places exempt, of such numbers of
Veales, Lambs, and Muttons, as shall be by them weekly killed: to the end,
there may be a true certificate made every fifteen days unto the Lords and
others of her Majesty's privy Council, what numbers of the several kinds
above mentioned shall be killed, either within the City, or the places exempt.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printed to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. Febr. 22. Anno. 1589.


