A Publication concerning the Custom or Subsidy of all such sorts of Silks
with Lawnes and Cambricks, as are granted by her Majesty's Letters Patents
under the great Seal of England, unto Thomas Bellet and Roger Houghton of
London Gent.
HEr Majesty by her Letters Patents bearing date the ix. of January in the
xliii. year of her Majesty's most gracious reign, has been pleased to grant
unto the aforesaid Patentees All the Customs and Subsidies of Veluets,
Sattens, Taffeties and Sarcenets, whether wrought or unwrought, Or by what
other name or title soever, And also of all Lawnes and Cambricks, Callico
lawnes, Stripped lawnes, and others, Together with all manner of Raw silk,
Sleauesilks and Sowing silks whatsoever, which shall be brought into the Realm
of England or dominions thereof from any parts beyond the Seas by may of
Merchandise, reprisall, or otherwise howsoever, During the space of ten years
from the first of March next ensuing. And for better execution hereof,

FIrst her Highness will and pleasure is, That the said Patentees or their
Assigns shall have a convenient place in the Custom houses of London, etc. to
receive and collect without interruption of all persons watsoeuer the foresaid
Customs and Subsidies. And that the Clerks of Shippers entries shall suffer
the Patentees or their assigns at all times to take true Copies of the same.
And that none of her Majesty's officers shall at any time make compositions,
nor give order for the landing of these goods, nor give forth and Bills of
store, nor make any Certificates for the carrying of any of these goods from
port to port, without the consent and subscription of the Patentees or their
Assigns, nor any of her Majesty's Wayters or Searchers shall entermedle with
any the demised premises, except such as shall be thereunto appointed by the
Patentees or their Assigns.

ANd also her Majesty straightly charge and commands all Keykeepers, and
Wharfingers, that they suffer not any ships wherein any of these goods shall be
brought, to fall unto their Keys, before Entry made with the Patentee or his
Assigns, And upon demand by them made, shall deliver true notes of these goods
which shall be delivered at their several Keys, And that no goods entered at
sight, shall be opened without the presence of the Patentees or some of their
deputies, So as they be attendant for the Merchants more speedy dispatch.

ANd where by the Laws of this Realm, All these sorts of Merchandises ought
to be sealed before they be put to sale: Her Majesty notwithstanding is
graciously pleased in favor of such Merchants as pay their Custom duly, to
give no authority by these Letters Patents to seal any goods, but only the
goods of such Merchants as shall after the date hereof be contricted for
concealing of these kind of Customs before the Lord Treasourer for the time
being, or the Chanceller and Barons of her Majesty's Exchequer or any two of
them: And that then after such conviction, none of the said Merchants shall at
any time during the said term put any of the said Merchandises to sale by them
hereafter to be brought in before they be sealed, upon pain of forfaiture.

ANd where it is supposed that many deceits be committed by the Masters and
owners of ships, Keykeepers, Mariners and Watermen: For prevention hereof the
Patentee has power to examine upon oath them and other persons, whom it may
concern, as well as any of her Majesty's Customers, Searchers, and such other
Officers, may do in like case. Always provided that this shall not extend to
give any power for the swearing or unjust molestation of any Merchant, Factour,
or owner of such goods or Mercandize.

ANd further if shall be lawful for the said Patentees or their Deputies in the
presence of some of her Majesty's Officers, and in some other Majesty's
Storehouses, to open any other goods, wherein they shall suspect any of these
goods to be packed. And for the better execution of the service, at all times
with an Officer to search any Ship or vessel, shop, warehouse, etc. And at
their own charges to put aboard of any Ship at her first arriual one man or
more to see the discharging and vnlading thereof.

ANd lastly her highness pleasure is, That all her Officers as well of the
Admitaltie as otherwise, shall be ayding and assisting unto the Patentees and
their Deputies for the better execution of this Patent, and performance of this
service.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1600.


