An Account of the Penitent Behavior, Last Speech and Confession OF Captain
Charles Walsingham, WHO BEING Found Guilty the Last Sessions at the OLD BAILEY
of Wilful Murder, was Executed at Tyburn on Friday, June 14. 1689. with all
the Circumstances that attended his Pious and Exemplar Departure out of this
Life, into the Eternal State.
CAptain Charles Walsingham having taken his Trial at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, upon Three Indictments. The First, for killing one Mr. Carr on the
28th of December last, by giving him several mortal Bruises. The Second, for
killing John Stoner, by giving him a mortal Wound with a Rapier in the Belly on
the 29th of March last. And the Third, for killing John Harbin on the 28th of
May, 1688. by giving him a mortal Wound with a Rapier under the Armpit, etc.
Upon this being found Guilty of Wilful Murder, and Sentence of Death passing
upon him, he was conveyed back to Newgate, where, for a time, he continued not
much sensible of the deplorable Condition he was in; but diverse Eminent
Ministers using spiritual Applications to soften the Hardness of his Heart, he
grew more and more affected, closing with their Advice and Counsel, and in a
short time a wonderful Change visibly appeared. And although he expected
nothing less than to dye on the 31 of May, when the other Nine Prisoners
suffered: Yet to afford him a larger space of Repentance, to make his Peace and
Reconcilement with Heaven, Their Majesty's were Graciously pleased to allow him
a Reprieve till this Day, when, about Eleven of the Clock in the Morning, he
was brought in a Cart to Tyburn, the place of Execution, and there accompanied
by Three Ministers of the Church of England, and another Gentleman, who came to
consolate him in his last Exigency and Passage to another Life, when (before
the Executioner had unbound him, the Sheriffs Officers having charge to take
care of his Body, as to its being delivered to his Friends in order to its
Interment) Mr. Wells, one of the Ministers, asked him, How he found himself as
to the settlement of his mind for Death, and a future Estate? Pointing to the
Beam, and bidding him look upon that, which in a short time would be
instrumental in sending him into Eternity, to appear before the great God, the
Judge of all the Earth, from whom no Secrets are hid. And then proceeded to
exhort him to a true and sincere Repentance, That his great and manifold Sins
might find a place for Pardon and Forgiveness; And that he is (...) as he was,
by sinning against so much light and knowledge, might be washed and cleansed
from his crying Sins in the Blood and through the Merits of Jesus Christ,
desining him to bear up in his Afflictions, and in his Sufferings own his
Vileness, and give Gl^^^ to God, proceeding fervently to pray that God of his
insinite Mercies and Compassion toward Sinners, would look upon and strengthen
him to bear patiently the Death he was about to suffer.

After these and the like Expressions and Prayers, he earnestly desired the
Players of the People; and the Ministers read sundry Comfortable Expressions,
suitable to the sad Occasion, out of the Common Prayer Book, etc. And then
(...) him to unburthen his Conscience, and not conceal any thing that lay heavy
upon his Mind, or might hinder him from looking up with a steadfast Faith, and
Assurance in God's Mercy, through Jesus Christ. To which with some Sighs, he
replied in general terms, That he had been a great Sinner, and had been much
carried away by Evil Company, desiring the Spectators to look upon him as a
deplorable Spectable of God's Justice, and to take warning by him as being cut
off in the Flower of his Youth, hope he might be an Example to them and others,
how they went on in a course of sinning.

Being after this, and a Prayer made for strengthening him, and the Implori^
God's Mercy toward his Precious and Immortal Soul, demanded, if he had an^
more satisfaction to give the People, as to his Life, Conversation, and
Penitence, he desired a Paper might be taken out of his Pocket, saying, That
was all he thought fit to leave behind him; and not being capable of reading it
with an audible Voice by reason of the Faintness his condition had reduced him
to, Mr. Wells read it. The Heads and Substance of which was, viz.

That he did heartily and unfeignedly acknowledge his many and heinous
Tran^gressions against God and Man, and was fully Convicted of the danger of
the smallest Sin, but that he had been guilty of many Sins, and drawn away
others commit the like, but begged hearty Pardon of God, and all that he had
injured hoping they all, that heard his being brought to a shameful and
ignominous Death by the Just Judgment of the Almighty's Sufferance, would walk
more circumspectly, and apply their time to make their Peace, before they were
hurried out of the World, desiring God would open their Eyes and turn their
Hearts; begging Pardon of those he had injured by shedding Innocent Blood,
Imploring it might not be laid to his Charge. And that he had Blessed God that
he had given him a time to Repent, when he had hurried others out of the World,
without any such space or opportunity; desiring the Auditors to make Good of
the precious opportunity put into their hands, lest some of them might be in
like manner carried out of the World, without time to Repent. Praying therein
for the King and Queen's Majesty's by Name; as also for the Welfare,
Settlement, and Tranquillity of the Nation, desiring God to Bless the CHURCH of
ENGLAND, of whom he confessed himself a Member, and concluded the Paper with a
Pious and hearty Prayer, etc.

The Paper being read, he was Prayed with, and desired to forgive all People
that had any ways injured him, and ask Forgiveness of those he had injured,
which he did with an audible Voice, and then proceeded to make a Confession of
his Faith in the Apostles Creed. After this several Passages were again
repeated out of the Common Prayer, and in consideration he stood upon the brink
of the Grave, and might truly be termed a Dying Man, the Prayer used at the
Visitation of the Sick was read, with other Consolation; and being subject to
some little Fainting under this great Trial, he was supported a little by a
Person that was in the Cart to assist, yet the Minister at his Instance,
declared that it was not through the fear of Death, for his Life having been
all along Martial, the fear of Death, as it was merely so, was beneath him, but
the sense of his Sins had broken him under the sense of God's Wrath and
Displeasure, which he might justly fear, did not the greatness of his Mercy
interpose. However, there was hopes of Pardon and Salvation to Sinners, upon a
true and sincere Repentance, minding him of Mary Magdalen and others; and after
diverse other Prayers for confirming him in this his great Extremity, he kissed
and embraced the Ministers, and prepared himself for Death, not desiring a
Psalm, though it was offered, lest it might discompose him, as being now solemnly
fixed upon Thoughts of Eternity, and appearing before the Dreadful Tribunal,
etc. Being bid by one of the Ministers to say at his going off, Lord into thy
hands I recommend my Spirit, Lord receive my Soul; he continued so to do after
the Cap was drawn over his Eyes, till the Cart drew away.

In Sum, his Penitence and Behavior was such, that he drew Tears from most of
the Eyes of the Spectators. As for his Quality, he was a Gentleman born, and
had very good Education, giving himself up to Martial Exploits confessing his
too much Passion and Rashness had been the occasion of the Bloodshed, without
any Malice or Design. He was cut off in the Flower of his Age not exceeding
Thirty Years, being a very proper and comely Person; and his Corpse wa put in a
Mourning Coffin, and carried back in a Coach, in order to his Interment.

Licensed,

June 14th. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-bridge. 1689.


