GESTVS EVCHARISTICVS OR A Discourse concerning the GESTVRE At the receiving of
the Holy EUCHARIST OR SACRAMENT Of The Lords Supper

By GEORGE ASHWELL B. D. Rector of Hanwell.

1 Cor. 11. 29. -- (...). D. Aug. in Psalm. 98. -- Nemo Panem istum manducat,
nisi prius adoraverit. OXFORD Printed by W. H. for Joseph Godwin and Richard
Davis, Anno Dom. 1663.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL His Worthily Honored Patron, SR ANTHONY COPE Of
HANWELL, BARONET.
Worthy Sir,
THE unhappy Contentions* which have now broken the Church into so many
Factions, began first about Ceremonies. A slight quarrel in outward Appearance.
But the Apostle has told us, that a little fire kindles a great quantity of
Fuel. Jam. 3. 5. And this Age has found it too true. The same spirit of
Disobedience, which began at these dry leaves, or Chips of Discipline, as they
seemed unto most at the first, invading by Degrees the solid Timber, and
setting the whole wood in a flame. Great Differences have arose about these
small matters. And we have at length almost lost the Substance of Religion,
through our eager and unseasonable contending about the Circumstantialls. The
Non-Conformists indeed, with much confidence and Clamor, lay the Blame of
these Divisions upon the Rigor of their Superiors, in requiring an exact
obedience to the Ceremonies, and pressing too hard upon tender Consciences. I
could heartily wish, that some of Them who pretend so much to this Tenderness,
and are so sensible of the least Burden bound by the Hand of Authority, had
Consciences of a more even Temper, and a more constant Size* But it is strange
to me, to see them contract and dilate their Consciences at pleasure, according
to the Difference of Objects, (like the Pharisees of old, who strained at
Gnats, and swallowed Camels) at the same time scrupling at small Duties, and
swallowing down great Sins; and making disobedience to Man's laws, one of the
best Characters of Gods Servants, as if the fifth Commandment were abrogated
among the Jewish Ceremonies; and Christian liberty consisted in opposing Those
whom Christ has set over us. Would to God they would at length lay aside their
Prejudices and Passions, and show themselves as zealous for the Peace of the
Church, as they have been for maintaining of Parties. Which I hope they will
do, when they consider seriously with themselves,

First, that the smaller the Ceremony is, which they contend about, in
opposition to lawful Authority, the Disobedience is the greater, because in a
matter of so easy Performance; and consequently, the Schism is more
Groundless, and the offender more Guilty.

Secondly, that these unhappy Contentions among the Guides of Religion, whether
True or pretended ones, have already produced most sad effects among the
People; whilst some have been misled into the grossest errors, and others have
thought themselves the only Christians, by confederating in a Schism: some,
distracted amongst the multiplicity of opinions, and walking uncertainly after
contrary calls; others amazed, and at a stand; and too many, willing to
persuade themselves, that Religion it self is scarce worth the seeking, or
contending for.

Thirdly, that the experience of these late years has sufficiently taught us,
there is no hope of unity in the Church, without Uniformity in the Service of
God, and the Rituals of our Religion. Several Churches indeed, who are
Independent of each other, (as the States are wherein they are seated, being
ruled by different Laws and Governors) have, and may vary in Ceremonialls,
without breach of Peace. But to suffer every private Person to follow his own
fancy in matters of Religion, or the Dictates of some idolized Teacher, whom he
has chosen for his spiritual Guide, in opposition to the Government of the
Church and State, wherein he lives, is the ready way to bring in an Infinity of
Schisms, and confound all.

A small Gap, or two, in a Hedge seems inconsiderable at f^rst; and the thin,
tender Rind of an Apple seems as inconsiderable a Fence to the Fruit which it
incloseth: yet frequent experience instructs us, that the neglect of the one
has made way, both for the Cattle within to stray forth, and loose Themselves,
and perish in their wanderings; and for stranger Cattle, to break in, and
devour the Field. And the paring away of some small Portion of the other, has
caused the whole Fruit, first to discolor, and then to putrify. Such an Hedge,
such a Rind, is the Order and Discipline of the Church, which consists in
Ceremonies, and external observances; the least breach wherein, though not
considerable at the first making, yet waxes larger by insensible Degrees, and
at length eats out the very Substance of Religion; as the late Times have
evidenced to our Smart and Shame.

Now to close up these Differences in the matter of Ceremonies, which first
occasioned them, I humbly conceive it the most fair and rational way (seeing
that holy Scripture says little, or nothing of Them in particular) to make an
impartial search into the Records of Antiquity, and the Judgment of those
neighboring Churches of ours in the West, which generally pass amongst us
under the Title of Protestant, or Reformed. For none of the contending parties,
who pretend to any Christian Modesty or Ingenuity, will, I presume, disavow
either of These, to both which they make an open claim. Seeing They pretend
all to follow primitive patterns, and the example of those Neighbor Churches
which have purged themselves from the Superstitions, and Corruptions of the
Church of Rome. Yea they frequently make the pretended Conformity to These, a
specious plea fortheir own Nonconformity to the Laws and Orders of their
Mother Church. Now it is the Design of this small Treatise, to demonstrate the
Consonancy of the Church of Englands Judgment and Practice unto Both these, in
the Gesture of kneeling at the Holy Eucharist. A Gesture which has been much
scrupled at by some, and absolutely cried down by others, as Superstitious, if
not Idolatrous; as quite contrary to the nature of the Sacramental Supper,
which it attends, and to the Practice of our Savior, and his Apostles at the
first institution. Upon what Grounds these Clamours have been raised, whether
true or mistaken, let the indifferent Reader Judge, upon the Survey of these
Papers; wherein I have taken some Pains, to track the footsteps of the
Churches Practice in all Ages and Places, as far as the light of History, and
my slender Reading could discover. Withal, I have endeavored, to clear the
Mistakes of Those, who have so eagerly set themselves against kneeling, whilst
they pleaded for sitting at the receiving of this Sacrament.

And I have made choice of This, among some other Ceremonies that are
questioned, because it is of a more general Concernment. The Surplice, and
Cross in Baptism, with some otbers that are stumbled at, concern the Clergy
alone, who are enjoined to use them in their Ministry. But as for kneeling at
the Sacrament, it concerns all alike, the People as well as the Priest, who
are Both commanded to use it, and in case of Nonconformity debar themselves of
the many and great Advantages of so Blessed a Sacrament, and so exclude
themselves from the Communion of the Church, in the highest Mystery of our
Religion. Now if this small Discourse prove so happy, through Gods Blessing, to
scatter the Prejudices of some, and confirm the waverings of others, and so
become a means of contributing ought toward the Peace of the Church, I have
my much wished for end; and shall have just cause of joining my Thanks and
Praises, with Theirs who receive any Benefit thereby, unto the great God of
Truth and Peace.

As to the choice of the Person, to whose Protection I have made bold to
recommend so inconsiderable a Treatise; the very Title in the Front of this
Epistle will, I hope, either defend or excuse me to the World, though the
Discourse it self be unworthy of his Acceptance. For the very name of Patron
is a sufficient Evidence of my Obligations, and may justly claim whatsoever I
can do in this kind, as a Testimonial of my Gratitude; which I must show as I
can, when I cannot as I would. And your Nobleness, I well know, looks not so
much at the Greatness of the Gift, as the good will of the Giver. Who, if God
please to grant him life and leisure answerable to his Desires, will be ready
to second this with some farther proofs of his observance. But this is not all.
Your known zeal for maintaining the good Orders of the Church, with your
exemplary Reverence at the public Service, and particularly, at this holy
Sacrament; besides that Influence which your Suffrage and Authority had, in
reviving the Ancient Law for the Gesture of kneeling thereat, might justly
challenge this Dedication at my hands, though I had no other Reason or Relation.

I have nothing more to add, but what I am bound upon all good occasions to
remember; my hearty prayers for a Blessing upon Your Self, your Noble Lady,
and all the Branches of your Ancient Family. And more especially, at this
Present, that God would so prosper your Counsels and endeavors for the Public
Peace, as we may once more Worship God in the beauty of Holiness, glorifying
Him with one Mind and one Mouth, and serving Him with that Edification, that
Order and Decency, which he has commended unto us by the great Apostle of the
Gentiles; that so you may prove an eminent Instrument of Glorifying God in this
world, and as eminent an Object of his Glorification in the world to come.
Which is the Cordial and Constant Prayer of,

Worthy Sir, Your much obliged, and Faithful Servant to Command, GEORGE
ASHWELL.

The chief Heads, or Points Handled in this Treatise.
WHat Gesture our Savior and the Apostles used at the eating of the Passover.
page 1. How probable, that they used the same at the Celebration of the
Eucharist. 4 The Scripture herein silent. 6 The Example of the Primitive Church
the best rule to guide our practice in this case. 7 Lying on Couches in the
Church forbidden by ancient Councils. ib. Sitting not used at all in Divine
Service, except at the reading of the Lessons, and the hearing of the Sermon.
8. Standing, the received gesture for many ages. 11 Yet not generally used. 12
But on the Lords Days, and some others, especially between Easter and
Whitsontide. 13. Testimonies out of Antiquity against kneeling at the communion
examined. 19. Standing used by the Minister at some parts of that service. 22
That the people kneeled at Divine service, at other times then those before
mentioned. 23. That the Communicants always used a Gesture of Adoration at the
Receiving of the Sacrament. 34 What Gesture the Churches of Christ at this day
use in receiving it. 57. Testimonies of some of the most eminent Divines of the
Reformed Churches. 72 Observations from Historical passages, and reasons,
justifying the practice of the Church of England in this particular. 80
Objections answered. 116.
Page 5. l. 1. r. that Feast. ib. l. ult. dele after. p. 8. l. 26. r. the
Gesture. p. 19. l. 19. depended. p. 36. l. 8, 9. depositum, fideliter reddit.
p. 43. l. 10. Gardinerum. p. 46. l. 5. wherewith. p. 47. l. 19. whence. p. 61.
l. 23. Basil. p. 62. l. 26. Conference of all the three parties, jointly agreed
and concluded upon this and several other etc. p. 87. l. 17. dele and. p. 109.
l. 2. r. might. p. 142. l. 5. not only such as were without.

GESTVS EVCHARISTICVS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Gesture at the receiving of the Holy Eucharist, or
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
WHat Gesture our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles used at the Institution,
and first Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, is not expressly mentioned in the
Gospel. That which they used at the eating of the Passover, is set down, and
expressed by two words, which are promiscuously used by the Evangelists to
signify the same Gesture, viz. sometimes by (...), and sometimes by (...). By
(...). Matt. 26. 20. Mark 14. 18. Jo. 13. 23. By (...). Luke 22. 14. Jo. 13.
1^. Both which words our last English Translation commonly renders, Sitting
down [at the Table] answerably to the Gesture now in use amongst us: but the
words properly signify, Discumbere, vel Jacere, to lie down, in a leaning
posture, on certain low Couches, such as were then in use (hence called Lectuli
caenatorii, vel discubitorii) the principal Guest at the head of the Couch; the
Second, a little lower, and behind him, laying his Head in the Bosom of the
first, and so successively, as many as the Couch would conveniently hold. That
this was the posture of our Savior, and his Apostles, at the eating of the
Passover, will appear not only by the proper signification of the words, and
the known Custom of the Jews in that age, but also by a Passage recorded by St.
John, touching our Savior, and himself, John 13. 23. There was one of his
Disciples, whom Jesus loved, (...), who leaned on the Bosom of Jesus. Compared
with John 21. 20. Where we read that Peter turning about, saw the Disciple whom
Jesus loved, following, (...), who also leaned on his Breast at Supper; yea,
the Jews had been so long accu^^omed to this Gesture before our Saviors time,
that when some Thousands of them were to be miraculously fed by him, with a few
loaves, and fishes, though they were then in the open fields, yet they readily
applied themselves to the same Posture, when upon our Saviors command, they
were distributed into several Companies, con^isting of equal numbers, to
partake of that food, wherewith he purposed to satisfy them all. (...), He
commanded his Disciples, ut accumbere facerent, to make them all lie or lean
down upon the Grass. Then it follows, (...), They lay, or leaned down in ranks,
by Hundreds, and by Fifties. Mark 6. 39, 40.

Now, this Table Gesture the Jews had learned of the Greeks, and Romans, who
for many years had lorded it over them, and taught them this among other
Customs. To say nothing of the Persians, under whose Dominion they had lived
for many years before, upon their Return from the Babylonish Captivity; for
they also used the same Posture at their Feasts, and Banquets, as we read,
Esth. 1. 5, 6. Where in the description of the Royal Feast, which King
Ahasuerosh made the Citizens of Shushan, in the Court of the Palace-Garden;
among other particulars, whereby the magnificence of the Feast is set forth, we
find mentioned Beds of Gold, and Silver. And at the Banquet wherewith Queen
Esther enterteined the King and his great Favorite Haman, we find him
supplicating for his life to the Queen, lying prostrate on his face, upon the
Banqueting Bed, whereon she reposed, Esther 7. 7, 8.

But if any desire to see more touching the use of this Table Gesture, among
the Jews, they may please to consult the following passages in the History of
the Gospel. For (...). See Mat 9, 10. and 22. 10. and 26. 7. Luke 7. 37. and
22. 27. and Jo. 6. 11. For (...). See Mat. 15. 35. Luke 11. 37. and Chap. 14.
10. and 17. 7. Joh. 6. 10. and 21. 20.

It is probable indeed, that our Savior and his Apostles used the same Gesture
at the Celebration of the Eucharist, which they had used at the eating of the
Passover; First because we read that this Sacrament was instituted at the Close
of the Feast, before the food was quite taken away from the Table, viz. at the
end of the last Course. So St. Matthew tells us (...), as they were eating,
Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, etc. St Mark says the same, Chap. 14. 22.
with whom we may compare St. Luke, Chap. 22. 15, 19. Secondly, because the
Evangelist St. John tells us of himself, that he leaned on the Bosom of Jesus,
a little before Judas went out. John 13. 23. with chap. 21. 20, 24. Now, that
Judas, before he went out to betray his Master, received the Sacrament with the
rest of the Apostles, is not only the Judgment of the Church of England
(expressed in the Exhortation before the Communion) but the general opinion also
of the ancient Fathers; Both grounding their Judgment, as I suppose, on those
words of St. Luke. Chapter 22. 19, 20, 21. Where the Evangelist tells us, that
after our Blessed Savior had delivered the Sacrament in both kinds to his
Apostles, he added these words, Behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is
with me on the Table.

Probable I say, not certain, because St. Luke, and St. Paul both tell us that
this Sacrament was instituted after Supper. The Evangelist informing us, that
our Savior took the Sacramental Cup, (...), after Supper: which circumstance
the Apostle also thought fit to remember us of, where he particularly relates
the order, and manner of the Institution, viz. 1 Cor. 11. 25. And St. John
tells us, that Supper being ended, our Savior arose from the Table, and washed
his Disciples feet, and afterward set himself down again. So that, for ought
is expressed to the contrary, he might possibly vary his Posture, and his
Disciples with him, when he celebrated that Gospel-mystery, which he then
instituted, in the room of the Jewish Passover, especially when the Text says,
that he began the Celebration thereof with a new Benediction; which clearly
appears by comparing, Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28. with Luke 22. 17. 20.

Thus the Scripture leaves us somewhat in the dark, as touching the Gesture
which our Savior, and his Apostles used at the first Institution: which
doubtless it would never have done, if the Gesture then used had been oblieging
to posterity; whereas we find not there mentioned so much as a certain pattern
to imitate, much less any Precept to bind us unto Obedience. Now, in such a
case as this, I know no better rule to guide our Practice by, then the examples
of the Primitive Church, which in all reason should best know what the Apostles
both did and taught, and therefore is to be looked upon, as the best keeper and
witness of what they left us, as the most faithful Depositary of their
Principles, and the most authentic Directress of our Practice. Now, if we
please to consult the most ancient Records of those early Times, this we shall
find.

First, The Council of Laodicea (which was somewhat ancienter then that of Nice,
and whose Canons were afterward received into the Code of the
Church-Universal) absolutely forbids the posture of lying on Couches in the
Church, at the Celebration of the Lords Supper, or the feasts of Charity which
accompanied it.

The words of the Twenty eighth Canon of that Council, are these, (...); that
is, The Feasts of Charity are not to be kept in the Lords house, or in the
Church, neither may ye eat, or make Couches in the House of God. The same
Gesture was (...) afterward forbidden to be used, in the very same words, by a
great Council of Greek Bishops assembled in Trullo, and that under the pain of
Excommunication, viz. Can. 74. Both Councils, as I suppose, either conceiving
this Gesture not reverent enough for so venerable a Mystery, or (at least) much
subject to abuse, which I the rather think, because I find some such like abuse
crept into the Church of Corinth in those early days, which the Apostle also
sharply taxes, 1 Cor. 11. 22. 29. Have ye not houses to eat, and to drink in?
Or despise ye the Church of God? he that eats, and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. Where
he blames them for using the same freedom, and bold carriage at the Lords
Table, and the Feasts of Charity, which waited on it, as at their own ordinary
meals, thereby making no difference between their Corporal and their Spiritual
Repast; for which cause these Agapae, or Feasts of Charity* were afterward
left off, when the Abuse began to spread so far, as universally to prevail.

Secondly, for Sitting, this Gesture which our Non-Conformists so much contend
for, as the most proper for the Holy Communion; it was so far from being
appropriated thereto of old, that (upon the best search I could make) I have
not found it used at all in Divine Service, except at the reading of the
Lessons, and the hearing of the Sermon. For Justine Martyr implies that during
this part of the Service, the People sat; when he thus informs us concerning
the Christian Assemblies of his time (such at least, wherewith he was
acquainted.) After the reading of the Lessons, and the Exhortatory Sermon of
the (...), or Bishop, (...), that is, we rise up altogether, and send up our
Prayers, Apol. 2. But whether, or no this was permitted to the People in all
places, I much question: partly, because Optatus tells us, Populus in Ecclesia
sedendi licentiam non habet, that is, the People is not licensed to sit in the
Church; partly, because in most, if not all the Eastern Churches at this day,
the People have no seats at all allowed them in the Church, as I shall show
anon. However, this is clear enough, that after the first Service was ended,
the Catechumens, and some others dismissed, and the office of the Communion
begun, the People never sat, no not so much as in the Intervals of that
Service. For first, the same Justin Martyr, in the place alleged, makes not
the least mention of any return to Sitting, after they once arose upon the
ending of the Sermon. Secondly, St. Austin implies, that after the Beginning of
the Communion Service, they constantly used a Gesture of Adoration (which sure
no sober man can think to be sitting) until the whole was ended; worshipping
God without any Interruption, in Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and
Thanksgivings, partaking of the Holy Supper, offering, and devoting themselves
to God; So he, Epist. 59. ad qu. 5. And long before him, His Countryman
Tertullian speaks more home, and particularly to this purpose. De Orat. c. 12.
Where he reprehends the irregular carriage of some in his Church, who sat
after part of those Prayers were ended. Vel propterea in nobis reprehendi
meretur, quod apud Idola celebratur. Eo apponitur irreverentiae crimen, etiam
ipsis nationibus, siquid saperent, intelligendum. Siquidem irreverens est
assidere sub conspectu, contraque conspectum ejus quem cum maxim reverearis ac
venereris. Quanto magis sub conspectu Dei vivi, Angelo adhuc Orationis astante,
factum istud irreligiosissimum est; nisi exprobramus Deo, quod nos Oration
fatigaverit? That is, The Gesture of sitting after Prayers, therefore deserves
to be reproved, because it is used in the Idol-Temples. Add hereunto the Sin of
Irreverence, which the very Heathen, if they were wise, would take notice of:
for it is irreverent to sit in his presence, whom Thou do highly honor, and
regard. How much more irreligious is this Gesture, in the sight of the Living
God, the Angel of Prayer yet standing by, unless we think fit to upbraid God,
that our Prayers have tired us? Where, in his mentioning the Angel of Prayer to
stand by, he seems to allude to that Passage in St. Luke, chap. 1. 11. where we
read, that the Angel Gabriel appeared to Zachary the Priest (as he was
officiating in the Temple) standing on the Right side of the Altar of Incense;
or else, to that Vision of Saint John, Rev. 8. 3, 4. Wherein he is said to have
seen an Angel standing at the Altar, having a golden Censer, to whom there was
much Incense given, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints.

Thirdly, as to the Gesture of Standing, there is more to be said for it; for
there be clear Testimonies of Antiquity, that this was the received Gesture at
Divine Service for many Ages; especially, on the Lords Day, and some other
Solemn Feasts then celebrated.

But whereas some great Champions of the Non-Conformists have confidently
affirmed, that there was no Kneeling at all, but Standing only used in the
Church, from the year 150 to the year 1220. when the Decree of P. Honorius
first came forth; as it makes little for them, could it be proved, so will they
be found also not a little mistaken in the Thing it self, which they so
confidently assert. First, if it could be made appear, it makes against all
those who sit at the Communion, or at any other part of the Public Service.
But secondly, upon better Examination, we shall find this Gesture of Standing
not so generally used, as they would bear us in hand; whether we regard the
parts of Divine Service, or the times and places in which it was performed. St.
Austin I am sure, who is one of their prime Witnesses, durst not be so
confident, but modestly tells us, ut autem stantes in illis diebus, and omnibus
Dominicis oremus, utrum ubique servetur, ignoro: That is, Whether this Custom
of Standing [between Easter, and Whitsontide] and on every Lords Day, be every
where observed, I cannot tell. Epist. 119. c. 17.

I shall endeavor therefore to lay down the Truth in this particular, as near
as I can, out of the best Authors, I have met with; and then I shall show how
this ancient Custom of Standing at Divine Service does by no means prejudice
the practice of our Church at this day, which is, to kneel at the receiving of
the Communion. My Propositions shall be four.

PROP. I. The Primitive Church used Standing at Divine Service, on the Lords
Day, and some others, especially, between Easter, and Whitsontide, which
practice was afterward confirmed, and commanded by the first General Council
held at Nice; the Twentieth Canon whereof runs thus, (...). That is, Because
there be some who kneel on the Lords Day, and in the days between Easter, and
Whitsontide, that all things may be alike observed in every Diocese, it seemed
good to the Holy Synod, that all should make their Prayers unto God standing.
Now, this Canon of the Nicene Fathers enjoined this Gesture universally, for
Uniformity sake; or revived it, where it had been before laid down; but that it
was long before observed, will appear by the Testimony of Tertullian, De Cor.
Mil. cap. 3. Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare.
Eadem immunitate a die Paschae in Pentecosten usque gaudemus, that is, We count
it unlawful to fast on the Lords Day, or to worship kneeling; we enjoy the same
freedom from Easter till Whitsontide.

Notwithstanding, that Advocate of Non-conformists is much mistaken, who
understands [Statio] in Tertullian, of Public Prayer; and supposes, that
the Lords Days were called, Dies Stationum, from the Posture of Standing, then
used in Divine Service; Whereas it is clear by several Passages in his
Writings, that by [Dies Stationum] he means, Set and Solemn Days of Fasting,
wherein Divine Service was drawn out to an extraordinary length. The Similitude
being taken from the Stationes Militares, The standing of Soldiers on the
Watch, or Guard, when the Enemy was at hand, and ready to assault them. The
reason was, because when they kept those Stations, or Watches, they fasted all
the while. Si Statio de Militari exemplo nomen accipit (nam and militia Dei
sumus) utique nulla laetitia, sive tristitia obveniens castris, stationes
militum rescindit. Nam laetitia libentius, tristitia solicitius administrabit
disciplinam. Tert. de Orat. cap. 14. that is, If our Christian Stations [or
Fasts] take their name from the Army-Pattern (for we are Gods Militia) sure
neither joyful nor sad Accidents which befall the Camp, take the Soldiers off
from their constant Watches, for Military Discipline is observed more
cheerfully by the joyful, more carefully by the sad. A little before, he has
these words concerning the same Subject. Similiter de Stationum diebus, non
putant plerique Sacrificiorum orationibus interveniendum, quod Statio solvenda
sit accepto corpore Domini. Ergo devotum Deo obsequium Eucharistia resolvit, an
magis Deo obligat? Nonne solennior erit Statio tua, si and ad aram Dei
steteris? accepto corpore Domini, and reservato, utrumque salvum est, and
participatio Sacrificii, and executio officii; that is, Likewise touching our
public fasting Days [or Stations] many think it not then fitting to
communicate in the Service of the Holy Eucharist, because their Fast must end,
when they have taken the Lords Body. But does the Eucharist dissolve the Duty
and Devotion, or the stronglier obliege us to perform it unto God? Will not thy
Fast [or Station] be the more Solemn, if thou stand also at Gods Altar? If thou
take the Lords Body, and reserve it, both Duties are preserved inviolate, as
well the partaking of the Sacrifice, as the performing of the Service? Also, De
Cor. Mil. cap. 11. Jam, and Stationes, aut alii magis faciet, quam Christo? aut
and die Dominico, quando nec Christo? that is, Will the Christian-Souldier keep
his Fasts, and Watches to any other, rather then to Christ? Or on the Lords
Day, when none are kept unto Christ? For he had told us at the Third Chapter
before, Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus; On the Lords Day we judge it
unlawful to fast. Besides, in his Tract de Jejunio, he mentions, Quartae
sextaeque feriae Stationes; that is, the Fasts [or Stations] of Wednesday, and
Friday, which are generally known to have been of old observed for Fasting
Days, throughout the Christian Churches.

But however he be mistaken in this Particular, by a mis-interpreting of [Dies
Stationum] in Tertullian, for the Lords Days, yet the Thing it self, That
Christians stood at Prayers on those days, is witnessed by the concurrent
Testimonies of Saint Cyprian, Jerome, Chrysostom, and Augustine, for the Elder
Times; by Venerable Bede, and his Scholar Alcuinus, for the Middle Age; yea as
low as Anselme, and Hugo de S. Vict. which last flourished near the middle of
the Twelfth Century. The same is witnest also by three of the Councils; viz. by
the Sixth Council of Carthage, held there by 217 Bishops. An. Dom. 419. Can.
20. By the great Council of Eastern-Bishops assembled in Trullo, a large room
of the Emperors Palace so called at Constantinople. Can. 90. It was held in the
year 680. And lastly, by a Council of Western Bishops, assembled at Turone, by
the command of Charles the Great. An. Dom. 813. Can. 37. I think it not
material to set down all their words. It will be sufficient to transcribe the
words of this last Council, and the last Doctor named, whereby it will appear
that this custom continued very long, even in these Western parts. The Thirty
seventh Canon of the Council of Turone begins thus: Sciendum est, quod exceptis
diebus Dominicis, and illis Festivitatibus, quibus and universalis Ecclesia, ob
recordationem Dominicae Resurrectionis, solet stando orare, etc. that is, You
are to know, that excepting the Lords Days, and those Festivals on which the
Universal Church, in memory of our Lords Resurrection, is wont to pray
standing, etc. And Hugo de S. Vict. observes, that the People stood at Prayer,
until the Collect, Domine Deus Pater, qui nos ad principium etc. that is, O
Lord, our Heavenly Father, which have safely brought us to the Beginning of
this Day etc. Which is the last Collect, at Morning Prayer, in our English
Liturgy, at the first Service. Between which, and the Second, or
Communion-Service, the People went forth of the Church, as he there tells us,
His finitis, omnes exeunt; that is, These Prayers being ended, all depart. Now,
of these Prayers at the first Service, he further says, Et haec omnia in
Dominicis, and caeteris festivis diebus stando dicuntur, propter memoriam
Dominicae Resurrectionis, cum quo omnes Sancti spe consurrexerunt; that is, All
these Prayers are said standing, upon the Lords Days, and some other Festivals,
in memory of our Lords Resurrection, with whom all the Saints are risen in hope.

When, and upon what Reasons, this Gesture came afterward to be left off in
these Western Parts, I cannot as yet learn. Whether it were changed into
kneeling, as the more humble, and reverend Gesture; or that kneeling was taken
up in opposition to the Greek Church (wherewith this of the West was then at
variance) which used standing in Divine Service, and yet uses it: or, because
the Ground, and Motive thereof ceasing in time (viz. The testifying of our
Saviors Resurrection to the Infidels) and becoming every day less pressing, as
the World came more, and more in to the Faith of Christ, the Gesture of
standing, which depends thereon, vanished by Degrees, and was altered into
that of kneeling; I cannot determine; but shall leave it unto those who have
read more, and can judge better.

I shall add only three Testimonies, which the Adversaries to kneeling at the
Communion urge in favor of their Nonconformity, and then examine briefly what
strength there lies in each of them. The first is taken out of Justine Martyr,
in the place forecited, at the latter end of his second Apology; where,
describing the manner, and method of Divine Service at the public Assemblies,
he tells us, that after the Sermon was ended, (...), etc. The people rose up
altogether, and sent up their Prayers unto God, which when they were finished,
Bread and Wine (with water) were brought, or offered. Then the Bishop in like
manner sends up Prayers, and Thanksgivings, (...), with his utmost devotion,
the People joyfully attesting their consent, by saying, Amen. Then distribution
is made to every one of the Elements so consecrated, or blessed etc. In which
words, say they, there is not the least mention of any alteration of the
peoples Gesture to kneeling, after they once rose up, upon the ending of the
Sermon. To which I answer: First, This is but a Negative Argument, and proves
nothing. No change of Gesture is here mentioned, therefore none there was.
Secondly, as there is no mention of changing their Gesture into kneeling, so
(much less) of any change thereof into sitting* which is now so eagerly
contended for; for we use to rise from our seats, that we may kneel to Prayers,
but never to sit at them. Thirdly, I shall prove anon by sufficient Witnesses,
that the People fell down, or kneeled at some part of the Communion-Service,
and used a Gesture of Adoration, in the Act of Receiving.

The second Testimony, is that of Dionysius Alex. in Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib.
7. cap. 9. Where writing to Xistus Bishop of Rome, concerning one who desired
Rebaptization, because he had been formerly baptized by the Heretics in a
wrong Form, with a Baptism, as he said, full of Impiety, and Blasphemy; He
tells Xistus, that he durst not Rebaptize him, although troubled in mind about
it, because the Person so baptized by Heretics had often communicated, heard
the Eucharistical Service in the Church, and said Amen, with the Rest, (...),
that is, Standing at the Holy Table, and that he had reached forth his Hand to
partake of the Holy Food. To which I answer, First, That the word [(...)] may
well be rendered by juxta sistere se, vel adesse, and so signify rather his
presence at the holy Table, then his manner of Gesture. Ruffinus therefore
renders it thus, Quod tamdiu in Sacramentis nobiscum particeps fuerit; That he
had been so long time Partaker with us in the Sacraments. And again, Neque
audet ultra ad mensam Dominicam accedere; Neither dares he any more approach
unto the Lords Table. Secondly, the Party might well stand near the Lords
Table, at some part of the Prayers, and yet change his Gesture in the Act of
Receiving: Which that it was the Custom, I shall show anon.

The third Testimony is that of Theodoret, Eccles: Hist. l. 5. c. 17. Where he
brings in Saint Ambrose thus speaking to the Emperor Theodosius, or rather
thus admonishing him by his Deacon, when he was entering into the Chancel, to
receive the Communion, which was allowed to the Clergy only, Exi, and sta cum
aliis laicis, (...), Go forth and stand with the rest of the Laity. But this
proves not, the Laity stood when they actually received, but that they waited
for it in that posture.

PROP. II. The Priest or Minister, who officiated at the Lords Table, stood at
some Parts of that Service. Which is appointed also by the Rubric in our
Communion Service to the Priest that consecrates, agreeably to this ancient
Practice. Those ancient Constitutions, which go under the name of Clemens, lib.
8. ca. 12. thus inform us, (...); that is, The Bishop clothed in a white
shineing vestment, and standing at the Altar praying. Saint Augustine also
tells us the same, Quis audivit aliquando Fidelium, stantem Sacerdotem ad
Altar, dicere in precibus, offero tibi sacrificium Petre, vel Paul? that is,
Which of the Faithful ever heard the Priest standing at the Altar, to say in
his Prayers, I offer sacrifice to thee, O Peter, or to thee, O Paul? St.
Chrysostom witnesses the same for the Eastern Churches, when he makes this
complaint, which we read, ad Ephesians. Hom. 3. (...), that is, We stand in vain at
the Altar. There is none to communicate.

PROP. III. It appears notwithstanding by several good Authors, and by many of
the same Witnesses which are produced for standing, that when Divine Service
was celebrated on other Days (besides the Lords Day, and the time between
Easter and Whitsontide) the People kneeled; yea, even on the Lords Day, at some
part of the Prayers; and more particularly, at some part of the
Communion-Service; the Minister also, who officiated at the Lords Table,
joining with them in the same Gesture.

Origin. Hom. 5. in Number. Qu^d genua flectimus orantes, and qu^d ex omnibus
coeli plagis ad solam Orientis partem conversi Orationem fundimus, non facile
cuiquam, puto, ratione compertum. Sed and Eucharistiae, sive percipiendae, sive
eo ritu quo geritur explicandae, quis facile explicet rationem? Et tamen omnia
haec operta and velata portamus super humeros nostros, c^m ita implemus ea and
exequimur, ut a magno Pontifice, atque ejus filiis tradita, and commendata
suscepimus. that is, That we kneel, when we pray, and praying turn to the East
alone, amongst all the Coasts of Heaven; it will not be easy for any one I
think, to assign a certain reason. So also for the Ceremonies, wherewith the
Eucharist is celebrated, or received, who can render a ready Reason? Yet all
these we carry covered, and wrapped up upon our shoulders (alluding to the
Levites, who so carried the Parts and Vtensils of the Tabernacle) when we so
execute and perform them, as we have received them delivered and commended unto
us, by the great High Priest, and his Children, that is, by Christ and his
Apostles.

Saint Jerome expounding those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 14. Flecto
Genua; I bow my knees, etc. has these words, Haec autem spiritualiter
exponentes, non statim juxta literam orandi consuetudinem tollimus, qua Deum
genu posito suppliciter adoramus, and, fixo in terram poplite, magis quod ab eo
poscimus, impetramus. Legimus enim and Paulum in littore sic orasse, and
geniculationes in Oratione praeceptas. That is, When we expound these words in
a Spiritual Sense, we do not presently take away the custom of praying
according to the Letter, whereby we humbly worship God upon our bended knees;
and fastening them to the earth, the easilier obtain that which we beg of him,
for we read, that Paul so prayed on the Shore; and that kneeling is commanded
in Prayer.

Saint Aug. de Cura pro mortuis, cap. 5. Orantes de membris sui corporis
faciunt, quod Supplicantibus congruit, cum Genua figunt, cum extendunt manus,
vel etiam prosternuntur Solo, and siquid aliud visibiliter faciunt; quamvis
eorum invisibilis voluntas, and cordis intentio Deo nota sit; nec ille indigeat
his indiciis, ut humanus ei pandatur animus; sed his magis seipsum excitat homo
ad orandum, gemendumqu^ humili^s, atque ferventi^s. Et, nescio quomodo, cum hi
motus corporis fieri, nisi motu animi praecedente non possint, eisdemque rursus
exterius visibiliter factis, ille interior invisibilis, qui eos fecit, augetur;
ac per hoc cordis affectus, qui, ut fierent ista, praecessit, quia facta sunt,
crescit: that is, Those who pray, order the Members of their Body, as becomes
Suppliants, when they bow their Knees, or stretch forth their hands, or lie
prostrate on the ground, or what other Gesture they use visibly, although their
will and intention of Heart, which are invisible, be known to God; so that he
needs not these outward Signs, whereby the mind of man should be discovered
unto him. Yet by such Gestures, a man quickens and stirs up himself, to utter
his Prayers and Sighs the more humbly and fervently. And, I know not how,
though these Gestures of the Body depend upon some precedent motion of the
Mind, yet that inward, and invisible motion is increased and strengthened by
these outward visible Gestures; and that affection of the heart, which preceded
them, is thereby augmented.

Caesarius Bishop of Arles, who flourished in the latter end of the Fifth
Century, has these words. Hom. 12. Qui vult Missas ad integrum cum lucro
animae suae celebrare, usque quo Oration Dominica dicatur, and Benedictio populo
detur, humiliato corpore, and compuncto cord, se debet in Ecclesia continere.
That is, He that will celebrate the whole Liturgy to the gain of the Soul,
ought to abide in the Church, until the Lords Prayer be said, and the Blessing
be given to the People, with an humbled Body, (viz. kneeling) and a contrite
heart. The same Father entitles his Thirty fourth Homily, De genibus flectendis
in Oratione; Of kneeling in Prayer, wherein he thus admonishes the People.
Rogo vos, and admoneo, fratres charissimi, ut quotiescunque juxta Altarium a
Clericis oratur, aut oration Diacono clamante indicitur, non solum corda, sed
etiam corpora fideliter inclinetis. Nam dum frequenter, sicut oportet, and
diligenter attendo, Diacono clamante, Flectamus Genua; Maximam partem populi,
velut Columnas, erectos stare conspicio; that is, I entreat and admonish you,
my dear Brethren, that as often as the Clergy pray at the Altar, or Prayer is
enjoined you by the voice of the Deacon, you would loyally bow as well your
Bodies as your Hearts. For whilst I often, and diligently (as behooves me)
observe you, whilst the Deacon cries aloud, Let us bend our knees, I see the
greatest part of the people, to stand as stiff as the Pillars in the Church.
Whereby it appears, that this Exhortation of the Deacon, and consequently the
Gesture of Kneeling at some part of the Public Prayers, was very anciently
used, since it is mentioned by him, as a Thing used of old, not newly
introduced at that time into the Church. Again he says; I would feign know of
Them that will not kneel, nor bow down their Heads, if they should sue for any
needful Thing to the Judge, or any other Person in Power, whether they would
supplicate standing, and holding their Heads in an upright posture? Lastly, he
presses us with the example of our Savior. Orat prostratus in terra Medicus,
and non inclinatur aegrotus? Orat, qui judicaturus; Et orare dissimulat
judicandus? That is, The great Physician prays, lying prostrate on the Earth,
and shall the diseased Sinner disdain to bow? He thus prays, who is to judge
us; and shall he that is to be judged make slight of it? No man, says he, Can
drink of an earthly Spring, unless he stoop, or bow down; so no man can drink
of Christ, the living Fountain, and the River of the Holy Ghost, unless he bow
down in all humility.

5. Alcuinus, who flourished in the latter end of the eighth Century, in his
Book de Divinis Officiis, cap. 18. tells us, Pontifex veniens ante Altar, sive
(ut in alio Ordine legitur) transiens in dextram partem Ecclesiae, infra
thronum, dicit, Oremus. Et Diaconus, flectamus Genua: That is, The Bishop
coming before the Altar, or (as another Rubric has it) passing to the right
side of the Church, below his Stall, says, Let us pray; then the Deacon cries,
Let us kneel. A little before he says, Pro periculis hujus vitae, and pro
Haereticis, and per omnes alias Orationes genua flectimus, ut per hunc habitum
Corporis mentis humilitatem attendamus; Excepto, quando pro perfidis Judaeis
oramus; that is, We kneel, when we pray against the Perils of this life, when
we pray for Heretics, and throughout all the rest of our Prayers, that so by
this Gesture of Body, we may wait on the humility of our mind; except only,
when we pray for the unbelieving Jews. The reason whereof he subjoyns; Because
they bowed the knee mockingly to our Savior, thus doing a good work amiss. The
Christians therefore avoided kneeling, when they prayed for them, to
demonstrate their hatred against dissembled Services.

6. Anselme (or Hervaeus) on Ephesians. 3. 14. commenting on the same words with
St. Jerome, says, Per flexionem Genuum intelligimus humilitatem Supplicantis;
nam ad hoc solent in Oratione flecti Genua, ut humilitas interior denotetur,
and humiliori supplicatione affectus Orationis commendetur, that is, By the
bending of the knees, we understand the humility of the Suppliant, for we
therefore use to bow our knees in Prayer, that we may signify our inward
Humility, and recommend the Devotion of the Prayer, by the humble Gesture of
the Suppliant.

7. Hugo de Sto. Vict: de Off. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 2. In the place forecited;
When he had told us of the posture of Standing at Prayers on certain days, he
immediately subjoyns, In aliis autem diebus* Genua in terram fixa tenemus, dum
dicuntur Preces quae dicuntur propter levia peccata; Et dum dicitur
poenitentialis Psalmus, Miserere mei Deus, qui propter gravia peccata
frequentatur, that is, But on other days, we kneel down upon the ground, whilst
those Prayers are uttered, which are made for our lighter Sins; Also, whilst
the Penitential Psalm, Miserere mei Deus, (viz. the 51.) is repeated for our
more grievous Transgressions.

The Council of Turone, held by the Western Bishops, under Charles the Great,
and Leo the Third, not only mentions, but commands the same Gesture of
kneeling; in the forecited Canon 37. Sciendum est, quod exceptis diebus
Dominicis -- Fixis in terram Genibus, suppliciter Dei clementiam nobis
profuturam, nostrorumque criminum indulgentiam, deposcendum est. Cujus rei in
Evangelio ipse Dominus nobis debit exemplum. Sed and Stephanum Martyrem, and
Apostolum Paulum eadem fecisse, liber Actorum Apostolorum testis est, ex quibus
intelligi datur, oportere Christianum humiliter ad terram posterni, ne forte
illi dicatur, Quid superbis terra, and cinis? that is, You are to know that
excepting the Lords Days -- We must humbly on our bended knees implore the
mercy of God, to be helpful to us, and crave the pardon of our Sins; whereof
the Lord himself, in the Gospel, has given us an example. The like does the
Book of the Acts of the Apostles witness of Stephen the Martyr, and Paul the
Apostle; by which ye may understand, that a Christian ought to prostrate
himself humbly to the Earth, least it be said unto him, Why art Thou so proud,
O dust, and ashes.

Yea, long before most of these Testimonies, we have the practice of the
Christian Soldiers under Marcus Antoninus, to commend this Gesture unto us; and
that, confirmed by an eminent Miracle. Thus Justin Martyr, at the end of his
second Apology, relates the Story, out of the Epistle of the Emperor to the
Roman Senate: That he with his Army, being exceedingly distressed for want of
water, in the borders of Germany; the Enemy also being near, and ready in far
greater Multitudes to assault them; the Christian Soldiers, who were in his
Army, being called forth by him, (...), casting themselves down upon the
Ground, prayed for the Emperor, and his Army, that God would relieve and
comfort them in their distress, as having now wanted water for the space of
five days; (...), As soon, says the Emperor, as they cast themselves on the
Ground, and prayed unto the God whom I knew not, immediately water came down
from Heaven, very cool, and refreshing on the Romans, but upon their
Adversaries, hail accompanied with fire, (...), that is, Yea we immediately
felt the presence of God, upon their Prayer, as of an invincible, and immortal
Deity. So highly did God approve, and reward the Prayer of these
Christian-Souldiers, which was attended by this humble Gesture.

But the most principal Testimony of all (which therefore I have reserved last)
is that of St. Chrysostom, in 2. Ep. ad Cor. Hom. 18. in Morali. page 647.
Edit. Savil. Where relating the particulars of the Communion Service, he thus
speaks; (...). That is, One may see how the People bears no small part in
the public Prayers. For Prayers are made both by Priest and People, for the
Possessed and the Penitents; all uttering one, and the same Prayer, Prayer full
of compassion. Then, when we have excluded those from the sacred Rails, who are
not in a capacity to partake of the holy Table, another Prayer uses to be
made, whereat we cast our selves down on the Ground altogether, and rise up
altogether: Which practice of the Greek Church, thus recorded by St.
Chrysostom, w^ll agrees with what I before alleged, touching the Latin
Church, out of Caesarius, and Alcuinus, who both witness, that the People were
admonished to kneel, when the Bishop, or Priest administered at the Altar.

PROP. IV. What ever Gesture was used at the Public Prayers (which was varied,
as we find by the Precedent Testimonies) yet this is sufficiently clear, that
the Communicants always used a Gesture of Adoration at the Receiving of the
Sacrament; thereby testifying that religious Honor, and Divine Worship, which
they owed and acknowledged due unto God the Father, who gave; and to his
Blessed Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who is therein given unto us, with all his
Merits and Graces, and the Benefits of his Passion; Which I hope will be judged
to come home unto our purpose, and serve to justify both the Practice, and
Precept of our Church, in using and enjoining the Gesture of kneeling, whereby
we now usually express the Act of Adoration.

1 That ancient Author of the Book, De Cardinalibus Christi operibus, among St.
Cyprians works (who ever he were, he was an Orthodox Doctor, and contemporary
as well with St. Cyprian, as with Cornelius Bishop of Rome, to whom he
dedicates his work) in his Tract, De Coena Domini, has these words: Pauperes
spiritu ad hoc mysterium eligit, and diligit Spiritus Sanctus, and eorum, qui
pompatic^, and gloriose sacris se Altaribus ingerunt, obsequia detestatur; that
is, The Holy Ghost loves, and chooses such to be Partakers of this Sacrament,
as are poor in Spirit; and abhors the Servic^^ of those, who pompously, and
proudly press unto the holy Altars. And after speaking of the Communicant, he
describes him thus. Inter Sacra Mysteria, ad gratiarum actiones convertitur,
and inclinat^ capite, munditia cordis adepta, se intelligens consummatum,
restituens Peccator sanctificatam Deo animam, quasi Depositum custoditum
fideliter, reddit, and deinceps cum Paulo gloriatur, and laetatur, dicens, Vivo
jam non ego, vivit vero in me Christus. That is, While the Sacrament is
administering, the Communicant applies himself to Thanksgiving, and having bowed
his head, and conceiving himself to be now perfect, upon the cleansing of his
heart, the reconciled Sinner entirely commits his sanctified Soul, as a
Depositum, into the hands of God; and thence forward glories, and rejoices
with Paul, saying, It is not I that live now, but Christ lives in me. Now this
Bowing of the Head, here mentioned, was a Gesture of Adoration, at the
receiving of the Sacrament; and that proud manner of approaching, or pressing
unto the Holy Table (or Altar; as the phrase of old was) which he so much
condemns, seems too applicable unto Those, who make choice of Sitting at the
receiving of the Sacrament, upon presumption of their Coheirship with Christ.

Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem, Orat. Mystag. 5 ta. thus instructs the
Communicant, how he should approach to the holy Table, at the receiving of the
Sacrament: (...); That is, When thou approachest [the Holy Table] come not with
thy hands rudely stretched forth, nor with thy fingers parted wide asunder; but
supporting thy right hand with thy left, as being to receive the King [of
Heaven] and hollowing the Palms thereof, so receive the Body of Christ, saying
withal, Amen -- Then approach to receive the Cup of [Christs] Blood, not
rudely stretching forth thy hands, but bowing thy self, and saying, Amen, after
the manner of Divine Worship and Adoration. Where these three Things are
observable. First, That the manner of partaking the Sacramental Bread and Wine,
had a peculiar Reverence annexed to it, expressed by a particular Posture of the
Hands, and whole Body; to contradistinguish it to our own ordinary Repast at
meals. Secondly, That the Communicant in the Act of Partaking, bowed himself
after the manner of Adoration, to express his inward Devotion unto God.
Thirdly, That at the same time, he said, Amen; thus testifying his Assent to
that Short Prayer, wherewith the Sacrament was delivered, and thereby showing
that he joined with the Minister in it. And sure kneeling, which is a Gesture
of Worship, well suits with Prayer, which is a part of Worship.

Ambr. de Spu. Sto. lib. 3. cap. 12. Qua ratione ad Incarnationis Dominicae
sacramentum spectare videatur, quod ait Propheta, Adorate Scabellum pedum ejus,
consideremus, Legimus enim alibi, Coelum mihi Thronus, Terra autem Scabellum
pedum meorum. Sed nec terra adoranda nobis est, quia Creatura est Dei. Videamus
tamen, ne Terram illam dicat adorandam Propheta, quam Dominus Jesus in Carnis
assumptione suscepit. Itaque per Scabellum, Terra intelligitur; per Terram
autem, Caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysteriis adoramus, and quam Apostoli
in Domino Jesu adorarunt. Neque enim divisus Christus, sed unus, Neque cum
adoraretur tanquam Dei filius, natus ex Virgin negabatur. That is, Let us
consider, how that of the Prophet, worship his Footstool, may seem to belong
unto the Mystery of our Lords Incarnation. For we read elsewhere, Heaven is my
Throne, and Earth is my Footstool. But neither is the Earth to be worshipped by
us, as being the Creature of God. Let us see nevertheless, whether the Prophet
does not say, That Earth is to be worshipped, which the Lord Jesus assumed in his
Incarnation. By the Footstool therefore, is the Earth to be understood; and by
the Earth, the Body of Christ, which to this day we also worship in the
Sacrament, and which the Apostles worshipped in the Lord Jesus. For Christ is not
divided, but one and the same. Neither when he was worshipped, as the Son of
God, was he denied to be the Son of the Virgin.

Augustine commenting on the same words of the Psalm (the 98 with him) viz.
Psalm. 99. 5. has these words. Quaero, quid sit Scabellum Pedum ejus; and dicit
mihi Scriptura, Terra Scabellum Pedum meorum. Fluctuans converto me ad
Christum, quia ipsum hic quaero, and invenio quomodo sine impietate adoretur
Terra, sine impietate adoretur Scabellum Pedum ejus. Suscepit enim de Terra
Terram, quia Caro de Terra est, and de Carne Mariae carnem accepit. Et quia in
ipsa Carne hic ambulavit, and ipsam Carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit.
Nemo autem Carnem illam manducat, nisi prius adoraverit. Inventum est
quemadmodum adoretur tale Scabellum pedum Domini, and non solum non peccemus
adorando, sed peccemus non adorando. That is, I enquire, what is meant by his
Footstool, and the Scripture tells me, the Earth is my Footstool. In the
midst of my waverings, I turn me unto Christ, for him I seek here; so I find,
how the Earth his Footstool may be worshipped without Impiety; Because he took
Earth of the Earth, for Flesh is of the Earth, and he took Flesh of the Flesh
of Marie. And because he conversed here in the Flesh, and gave us his very
flesh to eat unto Salvation. Now there is none who eats that flesh, but first
worshippeth or adoreth. We have found then how this Footstool of the Lord may
be adored, so that we shall not only not sin in adoring, but sin by not adoring.

Theodoret in his second Dialogue, which he calls (...), brings in Eranistes an
Eutychian, and Orthodoxus a Sound Believer, discoursing together concerning our
Saviors Incarnation. Among other Passages of that Dialogue, he puts these
words in the mouth of Orthodoxus, which, as they make against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, so they are express for a Gesture of Adoration, at the
receiving of the Sacrament. The words are these, (...). That is, The
Sacramental Elements [viz. Bread, and Wine] after Consecration, depart not from
their proper Nature; for they continue in their former Essence, Shape, and
Form; and are visible, and tangible, as they were before; but they are
considered [or regarded] for such as they are made, and believed, and are
adored as those ve-very things which they are believed to be. Which last words,
though they cannot justly be extended to justify that Adoration which the
Church of Rome gives unto the Host, (as being grounded on the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which is here expressly denied) so they must needs import
thus much, that the consecrated Elements were received with an Adorative
Gesture.

Joan: Climacus, who lived toward the latter end of the Sixth Century, relates
a Story of one, who (it seems) being Possessed, and brought to the Communion,
uttered there some blasphemous words: whereupon he says afterward; If those
foul and impious words be esteemed as mine, (...), What is the Reason that I
adore, when I receive the heavenly Gift (meaning Christ in the Sacrament) can I
at the same time both bless, and blaspheme? Thus he, lib. 30. Graduum perfect.
p. 298.

Hitherto also may we refer that Story which Greg. Naz. tells us of his Sister
Gorgonia, in his Oration on her, viz. That being sick, she carried with her
some of the consecrated Mysteries [or Sacramental Elements] which she had
reserved, and then in the stilness of the night, when her Disease gave her a
little Respite, (...), She kneeled, or fell down before the Altar, and with a
loud voice called on him whom she worshipped; and in conclusion she was made
whole. Sure, she did now in her Sickness, what she, and others did in their
Health, when they come to the Lords Table, that is, Fall down, and kneel. And
Peter Martyr, contr. Gaudmerum, Object. 38. expounding these words of
Nazianzene, which were misapplied by the Romanists to justify their Adoration
of the Host, yet confesses, Super altar coli quidem Christum, sed coli in
Symbolo, sicut in Symbolo significatur. That Christ is worshipped upon the
Altar, but worshipped in the Sign, as he is represented in the Sign. Which is
all that we intend or desire. The same is confirmed by another Story, which
Sozomen tells us of a certain woman, a Macedonian-Heretick; who coming to the
Sacrament only to please her husband (who had threatened to put her away in case
she conformed not to the Catholics) took the Bread from the Bishops hand (the
Bishop was St. Chrysostom) (...), and holding what she had received, bowed
down, or prostrated her self as to prayer; But whilst she was in that posture,
she conveyed the Bread away; her maid thereby privily stealing a piece of
common Bread into her pocket. Sozom. Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 5.

But there is none speaks more home and clear for this Gesture of Adoration, at
the receiving of the Sacrament, then St. Chrysostom, two passages of whom I
shall set down. The First in his Twenty fourth Homily, on the 1. Epist. to the
Cor. in Mor. Where speaking of the Wise men from the East, who adored our
Savior in his Infancy, he adds these words. (...). That is, This Body the
Wisemen reverenced, even when it lay in the Manger, and approaching thereto,
worshipped with great fear, and trembling. Let us therefore, who are Citizens
of Heaven, imitate at least these Barbarians -- But thou see this Body not in
the Manger, but on the Altar; not held by a woman, but presented by the Priest
-- Let us therefore stir up our selves; and show far greater reverence then
those Barbarians, least by our careless, and rude coming, we heap fire on our
Heads. The second Passage we have in his third Homily, on the Epistle to the
Ephesians, in Morali. (...). The Royal Table is set forth -- the King himself
is present, and do thou stand gaping? Thy garments are foul, and make thou
no account of it? But they are clean; why then fall down, and communicate --
When thou see the Chancel doors opened, then suppose that Heaven it self is
unfolded from above, and that the Angels descend.

By these Testimonies it sufficiently appears, that the Primitive Christians
received the Sacrament with an adorative Gesture; and this was so commonly
known, that the very Heathen took notice of it, and (among other Slanders,
wherein they aspersed Christians) charged them with worshipping of Ceres, and
Bacchus, the supposed Deities of Bread, and Wine; whereof we can assign no
other probable Reason, than the Christians Bowing, or Adoring, when they
received the Bread, and Wine at the Communion. St. Aug. is my Author.

Now this forementioned Gesture, which the Greeks call (...), and the Latins
Adoratio, was the most humble Gesture of Reverence, and therefore in holy
Scripture, is often joined with [(...)] falling down to the Earth. Mat. 2. 11.
and 4. 9. Act. 10. 25. Herodotus observes of the Eastern Nations, that the
manner of Equals, was to kiss one another on the Cheek at meeting; Of
Inferiors, to kiss the hand of the Superior; but of Suppliants and Petitioners,
who would express the greatest Humility, to bow themselves before him toward
the Earth. So we read in Holy Scripture, that Abraham bowed himself to the
Hittites, when he petitioned them for a Sepulcher, wherein to bury Sarah his
Wife. So Jacob to his elder Brother Esau, when he petitioned him to be
favorable to him, and accept his present. So the Patriarchs to Joseph, when
they petitioned him for a supply of Corn, in the time of Dearth. So David to
King Saul, when he pleaded his Innocence; So Nathan the Prophet, and Bathsheba
to David, when they supplicated him in behalf of Solomon etc. This Gesture
therefore was used by the Primitive Christians, in their most Solemn Prayers
and Services, wherein they endeavored to express the greatest Piety, and
Humility. And more especially at the receiving of the Holy Sacrament, the
Ancients rightly judging, that the Solemnity of the Eucharist was the chief
part of that public Worship, which was due unto God only; since the Place
where the Eucharist was celebrated, was peculiarly entitled, The Place of
Prayer. So Saint Augustine tell us, Sermon. 237. de Temp. Post Sermonem fit
missa Catechumenis, manebunt Fideles. Venietur ad locum Orationis. After
Sermon, the Prayers for the Catechumens are said, The faithful tarry behind.
Then we come to the Place of Prayer.

By this Gesture also the Christians of old made a public profession of their
faith, that Christ was God, and man in one, and the same Person, and present by
his Divine Power in the Sacrament; thus honoring the Son, as they honored the
Father, according as we are commanded, Jo. 5. 23: and as every one is bound to
do, who believes in him aright, that He is God manifested in the Flesh. 1 Timothy
3. 16. Without a sound and right Faith, we are no fit Partakers of this
Sacrament; and that Faith, which we have in our Heart, we are to express
outwardly, upon every just Occasion; and especially in the Acts of God's
public Worship, wherein we testify, and make known to others, what we inwardly
acknowledge. For it is not sufficient to believe with the Heart, we must
confess also with the Mouth, as we read, Romans 10. 10. and consequently, we are
to profess the same Belief by our bodily Gesture, as well as by our Speech,
seeing there is the same reason of Both, namely, the outward witnessing of that
Belief which is within. And this is more especially requisite, when Sects, and
Heresies arise, which corrupt, and pervert the Articles of Faith concerning our
Savior, either denying his Godhead, or dividing his Person, as some then did,
and as others at this Day do. To oppose, and contra-distinguish themselves unto
These, the Christians of those elder Times adored Christ in the Sacrament, thus
honoring him and his Father, (...), with the same undivided worship (as Naz:
tells us in that Oration which he made to the 150 Bishops assembled at
Constantinople) thus openly testifying their Belief in him, as coeternal, and
consubstantial to the Father, and worthy of the same Honor with him. The same
Father thus elegantly expresses it in his (...), or Sentences, which he thus
put into Greek verse.

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
The sense whereof is this. He is a fool, who worships not the Eternal word of
God equally to his heavenly Father. He is a fool, who worships not the Word
incarnate appearing amongst us, equally to God the Word in heaven before his
Incarnation. Such an one, either separateh God the Word from his Father, or the
humane nature from the Word.

These are the chief of my witnesses, who give the most clear and pregnant
Testimonies concerning the Practice of the Ancient Church in this Particular.
To them I shall add some others, who though they speak not particularly for a
Posture of Adoration, yet when in more general Terms they either press, or
mention the use of an humble and a reverend Gesture, they cannot in reason be
thought to mean any other, than what the former more expressly declared.

Dionys: Eccles: hier: cap: 3: calls the Sacramental Bread and Wine, which are
placed on the holy Table, (...), Venerable, or adorable Signs: (...), the
Venerable [or, adorable] Signs are set on the Divine Altar, whereby Christ is
represented, and partaken of.

Origin in his fifth homily, in diversos-Quando sanctum cibum, illudque
incorruptum accipis epulum; quando vitae poculo, and pane frueris, manducas and
bibis corpus and sanguinem Domini; tunc Dominus sub tectum tuum ingreditur; and
tu ergo humilians teipsum, imitare Centurionem, and dicito, Domine non sum
dignus ut intres sub tectum meum. That is, when thou partakest of the holy
food, and immortal Banquet, when thou enjoyest the Bread, and Cup of life, thou
eatest and drinkest the Body, and Blood of the Lord, then the Lord enters
under thy Roof. Thou therefore, humbling thy self, imitate the Centurion, and
say, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my Roof.

Cypr: Testim: ad Quirinum, lib. 3. 94. Cum honor and timore Eucharistiam
accipiendam, that is, the Eucharist is to be received with fear and honor.
For which he cites 1 Cor. 11. 27.

Ambr: [or rather Hilarius] in 1 Cor. 11. 28. Devoto animo, and cum timore
accedendum ad Communionem docet, ut sciat men's se reverentiam debere ei, ad
cujus corpus sumendum accedit. Hoc enim apud se debet judicare, quia Dominus
est, cujus in mysterio sanguinem potat, qui testis est beneficii Dei. Quem nos
si cum disciplina accipiamus, non erimus indigni sanguine and corpore Domini --
non inultum scientes, corpus Domini negligenter accipere. that is, The Apostle
teaches us to approach unto the Communion with fear, and a devout mind, that
our Mind may know, we owe reverence to him, to the receiving of whose Body we
draw near, for this he ought to judge within himself, that it is the Lord,
whose Blood he drinks in the Sacrament, which is a testimony of God's
favor. Whom if we receive with Discipline, we shall not be unworthy of the
Blood, and Body of the Lord -- knowing that to receive the Body of the Lord in
a negligent manner, will not be unpunished.

The Discipline which he speaks of, is the outward Order, and Carriage
prescribed by the Church. Whereof St. Cyp: long before him speaks in his Tract
De Orat: Dom: Sit Orantibus Sermo and Precatio cum Disciplina, quietem
continens and pudorem. Cogitemus nos sub conspectu Dei stare. Placendum est
divinis oculis, and habitu corporis, and modo vocis. that is, Let the speech
and Prayer of Supplicants be with Discipline, showing tranquillity and modesty;
Let us consider, that we stand under the Eye of God? We must please his Divine
Eyes, both with the Gesture of our Body, and the Tone of our Voice.

Eusebius Emesenus (or rather, Gallicanus) hom: in secundam Dom: post Epiphan:
Quando ad Christi Sacramentum accedimus, and fragilitatem nostrum consideramus,
quid aliud dicit unusquisque nostrum, nisi non sum dignus ut intres sub Tectum,
non sum dignus ut corpus and sanguinem tuum suscipiam in ore meo. When we
approach to the Sacrament of Christ, and consider our frailty, what else says
every one of us, but this, I am not worthy Thou should enter under my Roof;
I am not worthy to take thy Body and Blood into my mouth.

Eligius Episc. Noviomensis, who flourisht about the middle of the seventh
Century, hom: 15. Cum timore, and compunctione mentis, omnique reverentia
debemus accedere ad Altar, and ad mensam corporis, and sanguinis Christi, and
dicere humiliter cum Centurione, Domine, non sum dignus ut intres sub tectum
meum. We ought to approach unto the Altar, and to the Table of the Body, and
Blood of Christ with fear, and compunction of mind, and all Reverence; and to
say humbly with the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy that Thou should enter
under my Roof.

Damasc: de Orthod: fide l. 4. c. 34. (...) (viz: Sacramentum) (...). Let us
come with all fear, and a pure Conscience, and an assured Faith, and that which
we believe without doubting shall be altogether done unto us; and let us honor
it (viz: the Sacrament) with all Purity of Mind, and Body.

Alcuinus de Divin. Off: Licet omni tempore peccatores nos esse ex cord
cognoscere debeamus, tunc quam maxim^ confitendum est cum illo sacro mysterio
celebratur remissionis Gratia, and indulgentia peccatorum, and cum humilitate,
and cordis contritione dicendum, etc: Although at all times we ought from the
Heart to acknowledge our selves Sinners, then especially we ought to confess
it, when the Pardon of Sins is celebrated in that holy Sacrament, and with
humility and and contrition of Heart to say, etc.

Observe here 1. Four of these Witnesses inculcate the example of the
Centurion in the Gospel for a Pattern of approaching to the Holy Table, whose
humility was as exemplary, as his Faith; as who durst not come in Person to our
Savior, but sent the Elders of the Jews to petition in his behalf; and after,
would not be so bold as to invite, or even to admit him into his house; but
sent Friends to excuse it.

2. Others call the Sacramental Bread and Wine, Venerable, or Adorable Signs,
(which Epithete shows, that Veneration is due at the receiving of them) and
say, They are to be received with honor, and fear (both which affections are
best expressed by the Gesture of kneeling) with Devotion also, and reverence, and
not in a careless Posture. Also, with Discipline, (i. e.) according to Order,
and not as every man fancies best.

3. That then chiefly we are to confess our Sins, and our frailty, to show
contrition of Heart, and to crave Pardon. And I suppose that no impartial
Person will deny, but that kneeling is a Gesture very suitable to express all
These.

4. Some of them expressly commend an humble Posture of Body, such as kneeling
questionless is.

I shall conclude these Testimonies with an Argument drawn from the Gesture
used at the Baptism of the Adulti, which we are told is kneeling. And sure the
same, or greater reason will prevail for the same Gesture in the use of this
other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which, I presume, the Non-Conformists
themselves hold at least worthy of the same kind, and degree of honor. Tert:
de baptismo, in fine thus tells us. Ingressuros Baptismum, orationibus crebris,
jejuniis, and geniculationibus, and Pervigiliis orare oportet, and cum
Confessione omnium retro Delictorum. Those who are to be admitted by Baptism,
must pray with Fasting, and watching, and kneeling; and with Confession of all
their past sins. Now, we come to the Communion also with fasting, and prayer
and Confession of Sins; why then, should not the same Gesture of kneeling be as
well made use of? Gaudentius Bishop of Brixia, an ancient Doctor of the Church
testifies the same in his 9th Sermon, of the Eating of the Paschal Lamb,
where speaking of Baptism, he says, Ore Dominum confitemur, laudamus,
benedicimus, obsecramus, manus supplices ad Coelum tendimus, pedibus ad
Ecclesiam currimus, and Vnam Trinitatis Deitatem flexis ad terram genibus
adoramus. We confess the Lord with our Mouth, we Praise, we Bless, we beseech
him, we stretch forth our suppliant hands to Heaven, we run to the Church, and
adore one Godhead in the Trinity, on our bended knees.

Thus much we have received touching the Practice of the Primitive Church. But
if we come down to our times, and examine what Gesture the Churches of Christ
at this Day make use of at the receiving of the Eucharist, we shall find it
generally the same with what they use at their most solemn Prayers, viz:
standing or kneeling. 1. The Greek Church (which is so largely spread through
the Turkish Empire) still reteineth standing at the public Service, which she
received from her Ancestors, and is much scandalized at the Latins for their
irreverent sitting in their Churches. She uses the same Gesture of standing at
the receiving of the Sacrament; yet with a low bowing of the Body, or gentle
bending of the knees of the Communicants, as their Rituals show. And with the
Greeks accord other remoter Churches, which are not of the Latin Communion;
viz: the Muscovitish, Abyssine, and Armenian. 2. In Muscovy the People stand
together, the whole time of Divine Service in the Body of the Church, and some
in the Church Porch; for Pew or Seat they have none within their Churches. When
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is celebrated, first, they confess
themselves of all their Sins to the Priest. Then, come they to the Church, and
are called up to the Communion Table, which stands like an Altar a little
removed from the upper end of the Church. Here, first they are asked of the
Priest, whether they be clean, or no? If they answer yea, they are taken to the
Table, where the Priest begins with certain usual Prayers, the Communicants
standing in the mean Time with their Arms folded one within another, like
Penetentiaries or Mourners. When these Prayers are ended, the Priest delivers
the Bread and Wine to the Communicants that stand in Order, speaking the usual
words, Eat this etc: Drink this etc. While this is doing the Communicants
unfold their Arms. 3. In the Churches of Armenia, the People sit not at all,
but stand, or kneel. So witnesses Joh: Avediowites an Armenian Priest, borne
in Parma in Armenia the Great, in his Relation of the Religion and Customs of
the Armenian Christians. 4. The Abyssine Christians demean themselves most
reverently in their Churches. No man may laugh, walk, or talk therein. They
suffer not Dogs to come into their Churches, or Churchyards. They suffer no
man to sit in their Churches. The Aged and weak are permitted Crutches to ease
themselves withal. Godignus de rebus Abassynorum. lib. 1. c. 21. At the
celebration of the Sacrament, after it is given in both kinds to the Priests,
and others of the Clergy, who stand at, or near unto the Altar -- Postea datur
Secularibus qui stant juxta portam principalem, tam viris quam mulieribus. Dum
datur communio, aut aliud quippiam officii fit, omnes stant erecti -- That is,
Afterward it is given to the Laity, who stand by the Chancel-door, both men,
and women. Whilst the Communion is given, or any other Service is done, they
all stand upright. So we read in the Ethiopick Liturgy, set down by Franc.
Alvarez in the Portugal Tongue, and translated by Cassander into Latin, viz.
cap. 1. p. 28.

But if we come nearer home, and look into the Practice of those Neighbor
Churches in the North, and West, which have reformed themselves from the
Errors, and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, we shall find them somewhat
varying indeed in this circumstance of worship; yet so, that they generally
observe that Posture, which the Scriptures tell us was used anciently in
Prayer, viz. kneeling, or standing.

Most of those Churches which hold to the Augustane Confession (being the first
Protestants, and most properly so called) thought not fit to alter the Gesture
which they found so generally and so anciently practiced in the Western Church,
and which they judged very agreeable to the Action in hand, but retained
kneeling at the receiving of the Eucharist, which they generally practice at this
day; and those few who use standing, adore at the receiving by the bowing of
their heads, or bodies. Now these Churches are the most considerable for number
and Quality amongst those of the Reformation, as being spread through the two
large Kingdoms of Denmark, and Sweden, the great Dukedom of Saxony, and
Marquisate of Brandenburg, and through the most part of the Principalities and
free Cities of Germany which embrace the Reformation; together with a great
part of Prussia and Poland.

2. The Bohemick-Churches (which have spread themselves not only through the
large Kingdom of Bohemia, and some neighboring parts of Germany, but even into
Poland also) retain the same Gesture of kneeling, as appears by the 13.
Article of their Confession, Entitled, De Coena Domini, Of the Supper of the
Lord. The words are these. Ministri Dominicae Coenae verba referentes, plebem
ipsam ad hanc fidem hortantur, ut corporis Christi praesentia^ adesse credant,
and procumbentibus interim in genua distribuunt. Plebs autem ipsa cum gratiarum
action sumit, in hymnis and canticis spiritualibus beneficia Dei recolens,
totam se in hoc impendit and exerit, ut juxta Christi verbu^ hoc faciat in ejus
commemoratione^. That is, The Ministers rehearsing the words of the Lords
Supper, exhort the people to this Faith, that they believe the presence of
Christ's Body, and then distribute it unto them, as they kneel down upon their
knees; The people receive it with Thanksgiveing, rehearsing the Benefits of God
in Hymns and Spiritual Songs, and wholly employ themselves in this, that they
may celebrate it according to Christ's command, in remembrance of him. And these
Churches deserve to be well regarded, as being much ancienter then Luther; for
planted they were by John Husse, and Jerome of Prague, who suffered Martyrdom
at Constance. Yea; the Members of these Churches were so considerable many
years ago, that the Council of Brasil thought fit to allow them the use of the
Cup in the Sacrament, whence they got the name of Calixtini.

3. The Reformed Churches of Poland, meetng by their Delegates in several
Synods of theirs, earnestly endeavored to agree upon some uniform Gesture at
the receiving of the Sacrament; but foreseeing that some of the ignoranter sort
of People would be hardly weaned from that whereto they had been so long
accustomed, they left it free from them to receive kneeling, or standing; but
absolutely rejected and forbad sitting, as very unfitting, and very scandalous,
because they observed it to have been affected, and used by those who turned
Apostates to Arianisme, and other blasphemous Sects, which denied the Godhead
of our Savior. This was unanimously agreed on by the three sorts of Churches,
which were settled in that large Kingdom; viz. Those of the Helvetick,
Augustane, and Bohemick Confessions; who (as they tell us in the Preface to
their Synodical Acts) after many sharp, and tedious Conflicts with the
Tritheites, Ebionites, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, which at last with
much ado they rid their Hands of; and after some unhappy Bickerings among
themselves, whereby they had given advantage to the Adversary, and hindered the
progress of the Reformation, thought fit to meet together, and then upon an
amicable Conference of several other particulars, chiefly relating to the
Eucharist, which had been the main Subject of their difference. The Title
prefixed to their Acts agreed on in their first meeting at Sendomire. A. D.
1570. is this, Consensus mutuus in Religionis Christianae capitibus inter
Ecclesias majoris, and minoris Poloniae, Russiae, Lithuaniae, and Samogitiae,
quae juxta confessionem Augustanam, Fratrum Bohemorum, and Helveticam, aliquo
modo a se dissentire videbantur. That is, The mutual agreement in the points of
Christian Religion, between the Churches of the Greater, and Lesser Polonia,
Russia, Lithuania, and Samogitia, who in their several Confessions (viz. the
Augustane, the Bohemick, and Helvetick) seemed to dissent from each other. They
met afterward at Cracow, A. D. 1573. on Michaelmas day, when and where it was
thus decreed. Conclusum est, ut secundum morem Primitivae Ecclesiae libertati
Christianae Ceremoniae inter nos permittantur; monitis tamen Fratribuss ut
siqui Sessione in Sacra Coena utuntur, eam Ceremoniam Arianabaptistis propriam
relinquant. That is, It is concluded, that according to the custom of the
Primitive Church, Ceremonies amongst us may be left to Christian Liberty; yet
so as to admonish the Brethren, that if any use sitting at the Lords Supper,
they leave that Ceremony as proper to the Arianizing Anabaptists. Another
general Synod of theirs, assembled at Petricow, A. D. 1578. inculcates the
same. Exoptandum, and optimum quidem esset, ut per totum Poloniae regnum in
omnibus Evangelicis Ecclesiis iisdem ritibus sacra Synaxis celebraretur. Et
certe non esset ea res adeo difficilis; quod ad ipsos Ministros, and
prudentiores homines, Illico in unam certam formam consentiremus. Sed quia
vulgus and homines simpliciores mutatione rituum offenderentur -- Proinde
Ceremonias libertati Christianae donamus, ac permittimus, ut stantes vel genua
flectentes Pii Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi sumant. Sessionis
vero ad mensam Domini, quia praeter Ritus in omnibus per Europam Evangelicis
Ecclesiis vulgo consuetos, Illi inter nos primi Authors extiterunt, qui omnia
temere in Ecclesia immutantes, and sine scientia Christum quasi imitantes a
nobis ad Arianismum perfidi Transfugae facti sunt; quare hanc propriam ipsis
(ut Christum, ita and sacra ejus irreverenter tractantibus) and tanquam minus
honestam ac religiosam, simplicioribusque admodum scandalosam Ceremoniam
rejicimus. That is, It were best, and to be wished, that the Holy Communion
should be celebrated with the same Rites in all the Evangelical Churches
throughout the whole Kingdom of Poland. And truly the Thing were not so
difficult, as to the Ministers, and the wiser Sort. But because the Vulgar, and
unlearned Sort would be offended with the change of their Ceremonies --
Therefore we leave and permit them their Christian liberty, so that the Godly
may take the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ either standing, or
kneeling. But, for sitting at the Lord's Table, because these first introduced
it amongst us, who, differently from the Rites commonly received in all the
Evangelical Churches throughout Europe, altering all things rashly in the
Church, and foolishly, pretending to imitate Christ therein, became perfidious
Revolters from us to Arianisme; therefore we reject this Ceremomony as peculiar
unto them (who as unreverently handle Christ, as they do his Sacraments) and
as being not so decent and religious, but very scandalous to the Simple, and
Ignorant. Lastly, Another General Synod of Theirs held at Wlodeslau. A. D.
1583: confirms the same. -- Quod attinet ad Ceremonias Coenae Domini;
Sententia jam olim in Sendomiriensi Synodo agitata, and Conclusio in Generali
Cracoviensi atque Petricoviensi Synodo facta and repetita, in hoc etiam
Wlodislaviensis Synodi Consessu approbata est; nempe, ne in usu sit Sessio ad
mensam Domini in ullis hujus nostri Consensus Ecclesiis Poloniae, Lituaniae,
etc: Nam haec Caeremonia (licet cum caeteris libera) Ecclesiis Christianis, and
Coetibus Evangelicis non est usitata, tantumque infidelibus Arianis, cum Domino
pari Solio sese collocantibus, propria. Cum itaque Sessio potissimum occasion,
and malo auspicio illorum, qui miserrime ex nobis exciderunt, and Dominum, qui
nos redemit, abnegarunt, in consuetudinem irrepsit aliquot nostris Ecclesiis;
Rogamus and Hortamur omnes istos Coetus and fratres nostros in Domino, ut
Sessionem commutent in Ceremonias nobis in Ecclesiis Evangelicis per Europam
consuetas; sc: ut administretur Coena Domini Stantibus, vel genua flectentibus
(cum Protestatione contra Artolatriam Papistis consuetam) Quem utrumque Ritum,
prout in quibus Ecclesiis hactenus usitatus est, nobis liberum, sine Scandalo,
and Vituperatione invicem relinquimus, and approbamus. That is, As to the
Ceremonies of the Lord's Supper, the Decree debated long ago in the Synod of
Sendomire, and the Determination made and repeated in the General Synods at
Cracow and Petricow, is approved also in this Session of the Synod of
Wlodislau, viz: that sitting at the Table of the Lord be not used in any
Churches of our Communion, in Poland, Lituania, etc. For this Ceremony,
(although free as the rest) is not used in the Christian Churches, and
Evangelical Assemblies, but is proper only to the Infidel Arians, who seat
themselves in the same Throne with the Lord. Seeing then that sitting crept up
by degrees into a Custom in some Churches of Ours, chiefly by occasion, and
the evil Advice of Those, who wretchedly fell from us, and denied the Lord, who
bought them; we entreat, and exhort all those Churches and Brethren of Ours in
the Lord, that they change their Sitting into such Ceremonies as are used by us
in the Evangelical Churches throughout Europe, viz: that the Supper of the Lord
be administered to such as stand, or kneel (with a Protestation against the
Bread-worship used by the Papists) both which ceremonies, according as either
has been used by us in our Churches, we indifferently leave free, and approve
to be used without Scandal or Blame.

4. The Reformed Churches of France, and others which follow the example of
Zurich and Geneva, do for the generality (as far as I can learn) communicate
standing, yet with a Bow, or low Reverence at their approach unto the Table;
where they take the Sacrament in both kinds, in an ambulatory Posture, passing
from their Seats to the Table, and from thence (after they have communicated)
to another part of the Church. And this Gesture they use not as condemning that
of kneeling, but being well nigh necessitated thereto in many places, by the
great number of Communicants, which otherwise could not be dispatched in any
competent time.

5. Of all the Foreign Churches, which go under the name of Reformed, I can
find but one which uses sitting, or forbids kneeling, viz. The Church of
Holland, with the most of her Confederates; (For in West-Friesland they receive
standing, as in other Calvinian Churches.) Thus we read in the Harmony of the
four Synods of Holland -- Liberum est stando, sedendo, vel eundo Coenam
celebrare; non autem geniculando, ob (...) periculum. Page 33. That is, It is
left free to celebrate the [Lords] Supper, Standing, Sitting, or Walking; but
not kneeling by reason of the Danger of Bread-worship. What force there is in
this Reason, especially to us at this day, shall be seen anon. In the Interim
we may observe, that they think not this Decree so necessary, but it may be
changed upon better consideration; for thus they say in the Conclusion:
Articuli hi ita mutu^ consensu sunt constituti, ut si utilitas Ecclesiarum
aliud postulat, mutari, augeri, and minui possint, and debeant. That is, These
Articles are so settled by mutual consent, that if the good of the Churches
require it, they may and ought be changed, augmented, or diminished.

6. Our neighbor Church of Scotland, being wrought upon by some Zelots of late
days, practiced sitting also for some few years, till kneeling was enjoined by
the Synod of Perth, and so continued till the beginning of these unhappy
Troubles, which I list not now to remember. But sure the effects thereof have
not been so pleasing or advantageous to these Nations, as to cause any sober
Christian to be an over-eager Advocate for sitting, or a severe Condemner of
kneeling; whenas we have seen to our Grief, that the introducing of sitting,
with too many other Novelties, unsettled all, and never left working till it had
well-nigh buried both Church and Kingdom in the same Ruins.

Let me add, that whatever the Practice of these two Churches be, or have
been, yet both their Confessions commend humility and reverence at the
receiving of the Sacrament, both which are certainly better expressed by
kneeling, then by sitting. Confessio Belg. thus -- Art. 35. Huic nos Sacramento
sacro-Sancto in coetu populi Dei cum summa humilitate, and reverentia
communicamus, memoriam mortis Christi Servatoris nostri cum gratiarum action
sancte celebrantes, and fidei religionisque Christianae confessionem public
ibi profitentes. That is, We communicate of this most holy Sacrament in the
Assembly of the people of God, with the greatest humility, and reverence,
sanctifying the memorial of the death of Christ our Savior with Thanksgiving,
and making public Profession of the Christian Faith and Religion. Confessio
Scot. Art. 21. thus -- Hoc libere and ultro confitemur, nos inter Christum in
aetern^ ipsius substantia, and elementa in signis Sacramentalibus distinguere,
adeo quod nec signa loco rei signatae adoramus, nec adoranda putamus; nec
despicimus, aut, tanquam inutilia, aut vana interpretamur, ver^m cum omni
Reverentia illis utimur. That is, This we freely and voluntarily confess, that
we distinguish between Christ in his Eternal Substance, and the Sacramental
Signs or Elements, so that we neither adore the Signs instead of the Thing
signified, nor think them fit to be adored. Neither on the other side, do we
despise them, or esteem them unprofitable and vain, but we use them with all
Reverence.

We are likewise to observe, that all the forementioned Churches, which use or
enjoyne kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, deny and openly protest
against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of the Host, and
therefore conceive neither of them to be favored, or countenanced any way by
this Gesture.

We have seen the Judgment of the Protestant, or Reformed Churches attested
partly by their public Confessions, and partly by their Practice; both which
are visible at this day. It will not be amiss to add hereto some few
Testimonies of the most eminent and leading Divines amongst those Churches,
especially such, who either framed or followed, or (at least) favored the
Model of Geneva; whom we shall not find so fierce against the Gesture of
kneeling, or Adoration in the Act of receiving, as some of their Disciples at
this day would bear us in hand, many of whom utterly reject it as unlawful. And
perhaps their Judgment may be more prevalent with some amongst us, who have
their Persons in so great Admiration, as in comparison of them, to despise the
Judgment of their Mother the Church of England, and to disobey her commands.

1. Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 17.. 37. Disputing against the Papists, who
give Divine honor to the Sacramental Signs, upon this pretense, Christo hanc
venerationem deserimus, We give this worship unto Christ. Answers thus -- Si in
Coena hoc fieret; dicerem, Adorationem eam demum esse legitimam, quae non in
signo residet, sed ad Christum in coelo sedentem dirigitur -- If this were done
at the celebration of the Lords Supper (for the Papists, we know, worship the
Sacrament, when it is carried about in Procession) I would say, That Adoration
only is lawful, which does not stop in the Sacramental Sign, but is directed
unto Christ sitting in Heaven. In which words, he clearly justifies, and
approves the Practice of all those Protestant Churches, which openly renounce
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of the Host, which is built on that
Tenet; directing their worship in the Act of kn^eling at the Sacrament, solely,
and immediately to Christ in Heaven.

2. Beza, Epist. 12, confesses -- Geniculatio, dum Symbola accipiuntur,
speciem quidem habet piae, and Christianae Venerationis, ac proinde olim potuit
cum fructu usurpari. -- Kneeling, in the Act of receiving the Sacrament has
truly the face of a godly and Christian Worship, and therefore might be
heretofore profitably used* Now, I would feign know, why this Gesture may not
be used as piously and profitably at this Day, as in those auncienter Times;
especialy, by us of this Church and Nation, amongst whom there is far greater
Danger of apostatizing from the Faith and Fear of Christ to Atheism and
Profaneness, than of reverting to Papal Superstition. The same Beza confesses,
that this Custom of kneeling was not derived from the Papists; but rather (as
he thinks) their Superstitious and Idolatrous Bread-worship took beginning from
this Custom. Wherein he will be found to be mistaken, for that was grounded on
the Opinion of Transubstantiation, as by and by I shall make it appear.

3. Peter Martyr: loc. Com: Clas: 4. c. 10.. 50. Quemadmodum August: admonebat,
sistendum non esse Gradum in Carne, sed accedendum ad Divinitatem; ita hic ego
moneo, adorando, cum percipimus Eucharistiam, non esse consistendum in
Symbolis, sed adorandum in Spiritu, and Veritate Christum sedentem in Coelis ad
dextram Patris. Quod quia simpliciores non intelligunt, propter confirmatum,
and roboratum errore^ Transubstantiationis, existimarim non esse inutile, si ab
adoratione externa, puta a Prostratione, vel Genu-flexione temperaremus, quoad
isti docerentur. Adoratio interna potest absque periculo adhiberi, neque
externa, sua natura, esset mala. Multi enim pie genu flectunt, and adorant,
illis Verbis Evangelii auditis, and Verbum Caro factum est. Nec tamen ipsa
Verba dicenda sunt adorari, verum significata. Quod idem hic fieri quid
prohibet, modo non adorentur Symbola, sed quod per illa significatur? Verum hoc
tempore, ob praedictam Causam fortassis Adoratio externa non est opportuna,
nisi frequens de his rebus esset in Concionibus mentio. As August: admonished,
that we should not stop in the Flesh (of our Savior) but approach to the
Godhead. So do I here admonish, that in our Adoration, when we receive the
Eucharist, we stop not in the Signs but adore Christ in Spirit, and and Truth,
now sitting in Heaven at the right hand of his Father. Which because the more
ignorant Sort understand not, by reason of the Error of Transubstantiation,
which is so rooted in them, I should not think it inconvenient to abstain from
outward Adoration, viz: from Prostration, or kneeling, till such were
instructed. The inward Adoration may be used without Danger, neither is the
Outward evil in it is own nature. For there be many who piously kneel, and
adore, when they hear those words of the Gospel, The Word was made flesh. Yet
those words cannot be said to be adored, but that which they signify. What
hinders, but the same may be here done, so the signs be not adored, but that
which is signified by them? Yet at this Time, for the Cause fore-alleaged,
perhaps outward Adoration is not so Seasonable, unless these Things be
frequently inculcated in our Sermons. In which words he sufficiently justifies
the Practice of our Church, wherein 1. The kneeling, or Adoring at the
Sacrament is directed to Christ alone in Heaven, not to the Bread, and Wine. 2.
The People have been instructed above these hundred years in the nature of the
Sacrament, and the object of worship; and are so far from the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or practicing any Adoration to the Outward Signs, that too
many have run into the contrary extreme of slighting, and profaning it, either
by thinking there is no Virtue or Presence of Christ in it, or by carrying
themselves in that careless manner at it, as if they believed none.

4. Musculus loc: Com: De Coena Domini. Non sic pueriliter desipimus, ut quod
Dominus mensae accubitu per occasionem Veteris Paschatis in hac est Sacramenti
istius Institutione usus, ad hoc esse factum existimemus, ut normam nobis, and
exemplum ad novi Paschatis Communicationem accumbendi praescriberet;
quemadmodum nec in eo nobis posita lex est, quam sequamur, quod non mane, sed
vesperi Sacramentum hoc instituit. Deinde non tam est commodum, ut ingens
Communicantium mulritudo ad mensas accumbat in Ecclesia, quam er a^ Domino, ut
cum paucis, duodecim viz: Discipulis, ad unam mensam accumberet: that is, We
are not so childishly foolish, as to think, because the Lord sat [or, leaned,]
at the Table at the Institution of the Sacrament, upon occasion of the old
Passover, therefore it was done to the end, that he might prescribe us a Rule
and Pattern of sitting at the Partaking of the New Passover; as he appointed
not us a Law to follow, in that he instituted not the Sacrament in the Morning,
but in the Evening. Besides, it is not convenient, that a great Company of
Communicants should sit at Tables in the Church, as it was for the Lord to sit
at one Table with a Few, viz: with twelve Disciples.

5. Daniel Chamier, De Euchar: l. 7. c. 11 10. Ipsa illa Celebratio est Actus
religiosus, ac proinde separari nequit ab Adoratione Christi. -- The
Celebration of the Sacrament is a religious Act, and therefore cannot be
separated from the Adoration of Christ. Again cap. 2. 9. Adoramus in
Eucharistia, sed non adoramus Eucharistiam, that is, We do not adore the
Eucharist, but we adore at the Euchacharist, or in the receiving of it. Now,
what fitter Gesture to express this Adoration by, than kneeling? sure, sitting
was never counted proper for Worship. The same Author: lib. 8. cap. 2.. 22.
Nemo unquam sic insaniit, ut omnes Circumstantias actionum Christi dixerit
observandas -- si sumpsisset Panem nec addidisset, Accipite, edite; tam certe
importunum esset urgere perpetuum Esum, quam Accubitum: Et si non tantum
accubuisset, sed etiam dixisset, Accumbite; tam serio accumbendum esset, quam
edendum. Sed neutrum est. Accubuit, non jussit accumbere. Dedit Panem, and
jussit edere. that is, No man was ever so mad, as to affirm that all the
Circumstances of Christ's Actions were to be imitated, and observed: -- If he
had took Bread, and not added, Take, Eat, it had been as absurd, and
unreasonable to press a perpetual Eating, as a perpetual Sitting. And if he had
not only sat, but said also, sit ye, we ought to have as seriously applied our
selves to Sitting, as to Eating. But it is neither so, nor so. He sat; he
commanded not us to fit. He gave Bread, and commanded us to eat. Let me add;
He bad his Disciples to do it in remembrance of Him, and his Passion, which
Remembrance, or Memorial is to last till Christ come again, as the Apostle tells
us. 1 Cor. 11. 26. And Consequently, the command binds the Church until his
second coming, at the World's End.

6. To these I shall add the Testimony of a Noble Frenchmam, a great Enemy to
the Superstitions of Rome, and as Famous for his Pen, as he was for his Sword.
It is Philip Mornay du Plessis, in his Book of the Mass, wrote on purpose to
confute the Popish Errors in this Point. viz: lib. 4. cap. 7. page 732: where
we find him easily distinguishing thus* upon Saint Ambroses words. Adoramus in
Mysteriis, non Mysteria: in Sacramentis, non Sacramenta: Creatorem in Creatura
Sanctificata, non ipsam Creaturam: that is, We adore at the Mysteries, not the
Mysteries themselves; at the Sacraments, not the Sacraments themselves: the
Creator in the Creature which is sanctified, not the Creature it self.

7. Yea, Mr. Cartwright himself the first Great Champion of the
Non-Conformists, in his first Reply. page 131, 132; acknowlegeth again and
again, that Sitting at the Communion is not Necessary. And though he say, that
kneeling is Dangerous; he says not, It is unlawful. Now, if it be confessedly
lawful, even in his Judgment, who was the first great Stickler against the
Ceremonies of the Church, methinks all should conform to that Practice which
has been so generally received amongst us, since the Reformation; and obey
lawful Authority, when it is thereby commanded. As for the Danger, pretended to
be feared; may not it be justly esteemed, a Fear, where no Fear is? when the
very same Authority which commands kneeling at the Sacrament, forbids the
Adoration of the outward signs or Elements, and openly declares it self
against the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation?

Having thus shown the Judgment, and Practice of most Christian Churches
throughout the World, as touching the Gesture used at the receiving of the
Sacrament; together with the Opinions, and Testimonies* both of the Ancient
Fathers, and some Modern Divines: My next work shall be, to draw some
Observations from those Historical Passages, which may serve to justify the
Practice of the Church of England in this Particular. To which I shall add some
other Reasons, drawn partly from Scripture-Grounds, partly from the nature of
the Duty, or Service, which this Gesture does accompany.

1. Though it be not clear in the Gospel, what Gesture our Savior, and his
Apostles used at the receiving of the Sacrament, yet that which they used at
the Eating of the Passover is expressly set down, viz: lying, or leaning on
Couches, according to the Custom of the Jewish Church at that Time; which they
thought fit to conform unto without the least Scruple, or Affectation of
Singularity. So did they likewise in singing of the Hymn after Supper, and
other Circumstantials, which were then generally practiced, and enjoined by the
Sanedrin, though without any express Command of God for them. And all this,
that they might not give just cause of offense, whereof our Savior was very
tender, where the thing enjoined, or used, was not absolutely sinful, or
extremely scandalous; yea, though sometimes he was not obliged thereto in strict
Justice; as appears in the Case of paying the Tribute-mony, Mat. 17. 24: which
although he was not bound to, as himself protested unto Peter, yet rather than
give offense in so small a matter, he bad Peter discharge it for them Both, and
wrought a miracle to that purpose. Now though our Savior, and his Apostles
used that Gesture at the Passover, which was then generally practiced in the
Jewish Church; yet they could not be ignorant that it was a different one from
that commanded by God, and practiced by his People at the first Institution of
that Feast; for that was Standing, as appears clearly enough by comparing the
Circumstances set down, Exodus 12. 11, 28: which cannot agree with sitting or
lying down, but with standing only. But Philo's words are express, who tells us
the Israelites were commanded to celebrate the Passover in Egypt, having their
loins girt, (...), and standing on their feet in a steady posture. A Gesture
suited to the present Exigent, when they were to be ready for an hasty march
out of Egypt. [See Philo de Sacrif: Cainis and Abelis. Maimon: in Corban
Pesach: cap. 10. S. 15. Babyl. Talm. in Pesachim. cap. 9.] This Beza also also
informs us of, as the general Opinion of the Jewish Doctors, in his Annot:
upon Mat. 26. 20. Jubet Dominus Agnum a stantibus calceatis, and ad iter
accinctis, cum festinatione comedi. Exodus 12. 11. Sciendum est igitur, illa, ut
and mandatum de Postibus, and superliminari aedium sanguine aspergendis, ad
illam unicam noctem pertinuisse, qu^ fuit Israelitis quam celerrime ex Aegypto
migrandum. Quod summo consensu Doctores omnes Hebraeorum testantur. That is,
The Lord commands the Paschal Lamb to be eaten in have, by such as stood, were
shod, and their loins girt for their Journey: Ex. 12. 11. Ye must know
therefore, that these Circumstances, together with the Command of sprinkling
the Door posts and lintels of their houses with Blood, belonged to that night
only, wherein the Israelites were to depart hastily out of Egypt; which all
the Hebrew Doctors testify with one Consent. Methinks this Conformity of our
Savior and his Apostles to the Custom then received by the Jewish Church,
though without any particular warrant, or Command of God under the law, yea
contrary to the Gesture used by the Israelites at the first Celebration, by
God's particular Injunction; (the one being a Posture of Have, or motion; the
other of Rest) should be looked on as the best Pattern of Imitation for all
Christians at this Day, that in such indifferent Things as these they should
readily conform, and apply themselves to the Practice of the Church wherein
they live, especially when determined, and enjoined by lawful Authority, least
otherwise they chance to incur the Guilt of Scandal, and Schism, and
Disobedience to their Superiors.

2. The Apostle sharply taxes the Corinthians, 1 Cor 11: for their unseemly
Carriage at the receiving of the Lord's Supper, because they used the same
freedom, and boldness thereat, as at their ordinary meals, in their own
Houses; whereas they ought to have made a great difference between the one, and
the other. He tells them, they might use a liberty at home, but when they came
into the house of God, they ought to consider in whose Presence they were, to
what Table they approached; and what an holy food they were to be made
Partakers of. Else, they should be justly accounted Despisers of the House of
God, the Church, unfit, and unwelcome Guests at his Table, and unworthy
Communicants, such as discerned not the Lord's Body from their common Food --
Have ye not Houses to eat, and to drink in? or despise ye the Church of God?
verse: 22. He that eats, and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation (or Judgment) to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body. verse. 29.
Now this may well serve to awaken all sober Christians to a due regard of their
Carriage at this holy Sacrament, that so a visible Difference may appear in
their Behavior at This, and at the taking of their common Food; least they
give too just an Occasion unto others (who observe them) to think, that they
value, and honor the One, no more than the other; and, which is worse, induce
the ruder Sort (who judge by what they see) to esteem the Sacrament
accordingly. We have had too many, and too sad instances of this Indifferency
in several Places, where sitting has been of late years in use amongst us. And
I have been informed by some Eyewitnesses, that in Holland (the only foreign
Church, in a manner, where this Gesture is practiced) this Abuse is too too
frequent; and though taken notice of, and inveighed against by the Ministers,
yet without effect; so powerful an Influence has this Custom upon them. They
therefore who so earnestly plead for this Gesture, might do well to consider,
and apply to themselves that Charge of the Apostle, which they so frequently
urge against the Ceremonies of the Church, Abstain from all appearance of
Evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22: and, the Instance of Sitting at meat in the Idols Temple,
whereby the weak and ignorant were by Degrees imboldened to eat Things
sacrificed unto Idols, in honor of those Idols. This presumptious knowledge,
and over-free walk of Theirs, becoming a stumbling block to the weak and
Ignorant, 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11. Now, they stumbled in giving too much honor to
a false God; Ours, in giving too little honor to the True. That ancient
Father Justin Martyr tells us, what value the Primitive Christians put upon the
Lord's Supper. (...). That is, We do not receive these, as common Bread, and
Drink, but as Jesus Christ our Savior was incarnate by the word of God, and
took flesh, and blood for our Salvation; so we are taught that the food which
was consecrated by him through the Prayer of the Word, and by which being
converted into our Substance, our flesh and blood are nourished, are the very
flesh and blood of that incarnate Jesus. Saint Aug: comes somewhat more home,
when expounding those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 29: he thus says. --
Apostolus indigne dicit acceptum ab eis, qui hoc non discernebant a caeteris
Cibis, Veneratione singulariter debita.-The Apostle says, the Sacrament was
unworthily received by them, who discerned (or differenced) it not from other
meats, by a veneration peculiarly due to it. Therefore, in his Judgment, it
was to be received with a Gesture different from that which we use at our
ordinary Meals; also, with such a Gesture as expesseth Veneration, or Worship;
and such an one, is kneeling.

3. The Primitive Church studiously avoided that Gesture at the receiving of
the Sacrament, which they used at their ordinary meals, as thinking it not
reverent enough; and, to put a distinction between their spiritual and their
corporal Repast, between the Service of God, and the Serving themselves at
Table. Whence that ancient Canon of the Council of Laodicea, confirmed many
years after, and revived in the Council of Trullo, whereby the lying upon
Couches at the Communion, and the love feasts which accompanied it, was
absolutely forbidden in the Church, because that was the ordinary
supper-posture in those Eastern Countries. Tertullian indeed speaking of the
love feasts, which followed the Eucharist, tells us that the Christians of his
Time used a Supper-posture at them. Apolog: cap. 39.- Non prius discumbitur,
quam oration ad Deum praegustetur, etc. Before we sit [or lie] down, we pray
unto God, etc. and a little after -- Aeque oration convivium dirimet -- Prayer
likewise ends the Feast. But he tells us not, that this was done in the Church,
much less, that they used the same Gesture at the Communion, which preceded it.
Yea, he elsewhere says, that it was different from it; when he mentions --
Stationem ad aram Dei, in qua Dominus adoratur, and sacrificiorum orationes
fiunt -- Standing at the Altar of God, where the Lord is adored, and such
Prayers are made as belong to the Sacrifices. Now standing, we know, was never
used or accounted for a Supper-posture. And if sitting had been necessary, how
durst the Primitive Church change it into standing? the example whereof is so
invidiously urged against the present custom of the Church of England.

4. The Church of Christ always looked upon the Communion-Service (whereof the
Receiving is a part) as a principal part of Divine Worship, wherein her
Children renewed their Covenant with God, and offered up themselves an holy
living Sacrifice, which is our reasonable Service -- We profess to yield the
unbloody Service in the Church of God, and to partake of the Mystical
Blessings, and by that means to be sanctified, as being made to communicate of
the Holy Flesh, and Precious Blood of Christ the Savior of all. Cyr. Ep. ad
Nestorium. Act: Conc: Ephesians: Tom: 1. c. 14. Nos servitutem, quae (...) dicitur
Graece, sive in quibusdam Sacramentis, sive in nobis ipsis debemus. Aug: de
Civ: Dei: lib. 10. c. 4. That is, we owe Service to God, which the Greeks call
(...), partly in the Sacraments, partly in our own Persons. And Calvin. Inst.
l. 4. c. 14.. 1. defines a Sacrament, Testimonium Divinae in nos gratiae,
externo signo confimatum, cum mutua nostrae erga ipsum Pietatis testificatione.
That is, A Testimony of God's favor to us, confirmed by an outward sign, with
a mutual witnessing of our Duty toward him. Indeed, this offering up of our
Selves, (which is most solemnly done in the Sacrament) is the true, and daily
Sacrifice of the Christian Church, the Mystical Body of Christ thus offering up
her Self by Christ her High Priest, and Head, unto God the Father, as Christ
once offered up himself to the same Father for his Body the Church. Now in
such a public, and solemn worship, as this, the Adoration of the Body must
needs go along with the Devotion of the Soul; else, it will be lame, and
imperfect. We shall show our selves ashamed of God, and deny to profess him
before men. God gives grace to the humble, but resists the Proud; and will
not vouchsafe to accept ought of ours, unless we first offer up our Souls, and
Bodies entirely to him. The Primitive Christians therefore constantly used the
same lowly, and reverential Gesture at the receiving of the Sacrament, which
they did at the Prayers that accompanied it; whether Standing, (as on the
Lord's Day, and all Days of public Assemblies between Easter and
Whitsontide) or kneeling, as on other Days.

And when the Western Churches thought good to turn standing into kneeling at
all public Prayers, on what Day soever, they used the same lowly Gesture at
the receiving of the Sacrament; and the Chancel, or Place where the Communion
was celebrated, was called, by way of Eminency, The Place of Prayer. Certainly
then, a Prayer-Gesture is most proper for this part of Divine Service. All
those therefore who think kneeling a fit posture for Prayer, and practice it at
other parts of the Public Service, cannot with any reason refuse to use it at
the receiving of the Sacrament; unless they will contradict the Judgment, and
condemn the practice of the Christian Church in all Ages.

5. When the Church anciently used standing in Divine Service on the Lords
Days, as the most proper Gesture, whereby to testify their Belief in the
Resurrection of Christ, yet when the Communicants approached unto the holy
Table to receive the Sacrament, they used constantly to express their
Thankfulness, and Reverence in a Gesture of Adoration, by bowing their Faces,
and Bodies to the Ground; wherein as they showed their great Humility, so they
showed withal their high esteem of the Heavenly Gift, which there, and then
God vouchsafed to bestow o^ so unworthy Receivers; which serves for a good
Pattern to us at this Day, that we express the same Reverence by a like Gesture
of Adoration. And seeing that now the Western Churches, and ours in particular,
usually expresses the act of Adoration by kneeling, what fitter Gesture, then
that for this holy, and solemn Service.

6. The far greater part of the Protestant Churches at this day, receive the
Sacrament kneeling; and those who receive it standing, when they receive, make
a reverential Bow at their approach to the Holy Table. As for Sitting, the
Gesture which is so much contended for, and affected by our Non-Conformists, it
was never heard of in the Christian Church, till of late years, and then used
but by one Foreign Church (that of Holland) which goes under the name of
Reformed. Whose practice herein, sure no wise and sober Christian will esteem
so considerable, as to judge it should give law to all the rest. Were it not
far more equitable of the two, that this should rather conform to the major
part? as those few Churches in the Primitive Age, which kept Easter on the
Fourteenth Day of the First month, on whatsoever day of the Week it fell
(though they had Apostolical Tradition for it) yet for Peace and Orders sake,
readily conformed to the greater number, which kept it always on the Lords Day,
as it was generally agreed on in the first general Council held at Nice.

7. Those few Churches and Divines which commend sitting as the fittest
Gesture, or dislike kneeling at the Communion, neither think that necessary,
nor this unlawful. They commend sitting, as that which they suppose most
consonant to the Primitive Practice, and to the nature of a Supper. the
groundlesness of which conceit has been in part demonstrated, and shall be
farther. And they mislike kneeling merely for the danger, or scandal thereof,
as that which they think countenanceth the Romish Adoration of the Host, and
confirms the Papists in their Idolatry, and Superstition. Now if this Reason
might pass for tolerable, and be allowed at first, whilst such Adorations were
in daily view to provoke the Reformers, or at least fresh in memory, and the
People newly weaned from such Superstitions, so as to make some few Churches,
and Doctors to lean unto the other extreme; yet it cannot be rightly judged to
have the same force at this day, when the People generally (especially those
who condemn kneeling) are so far from Popery, that they are running apace into
Profaneness, and Irreverence, and contempt of Divine Service. How many be
there amongst us, who have neglected the very substance of the Duty, in not
receiving the Sacrament for many years? how many, who think themselves above
the Ordinance? Yea, many, who deny the whole mystery of our Redemption, by
entertaining old Heresies concerning our Saviviour, whose death is therein
commemorated, and the Benefits thereof applied unto the worthy Communicants. As
for our first Reformers, they were so far from thinking it scandalous to
retain kneeling at the Sacrament, that they did it on purpose to avoid the
scandal, which otherwise would have been given to the Papists, and to stop
their blasphemous mouths, who vilified the Sacrament given in our Church, with
the odious, and ignominious Names of Bakers Bread, Vintners Wine, Profane
Elements, Ale-cakes, and such like reproachful Terms. Wherefore to testify
their due esteem thereof (the Bread and Wine being consecrated to so blessed
and holy a use, as is the Communion of the Body, and Blood of Christ) and repel
the slander of such virulent Tongues, they thought fit to show their inward
regard of it, by their outward Reverence in Kneeling. Thus, as Physic is
necessary for the Patient, not essentially, as his daily food; but
accidentally, because of his present Infirmity; so kneeling is prescribed, as a
necessary Gesture at the receiving of the Communion, partly to vindicate the
Church from the slanders of the Papists; partly to reform, or prevent the
irreligious Behavior of the Profane. And the same prudent course did the
Church of Christ take in the ancient times, at that other Sacrament of
Baptism; wherein she first used a threefold immersion, by an Apostolical
Tradition, to express her Faith in the Trinity, and her Detestation of the
contrary Heresies of Praxeas, Hermogenes, and Sabellius. But when the Arians
afterward abused this Rite to the countenancing of their error, touching the
diversity of essence amongst the three Persons, the Orthodox Christians, to
show their dislike thereof, used a single Immersion; yet not condemning the
other. So Greg. the Great, and Conc. Tol. 4. Can. 5. When Ar^anisme was
scattered, the Church freely used either one or other, as they thought fit. So
though some few Churches thought fit to use standing, or sitting at the
Communion, in the beginning of the Reformation, the Adoration of the Host
being then fresh in memory, the better to avoke the People from it, and to show
their own Abhorrence of it. Yet now, on the rooting out of Popery, and the
settling of the Reformation for so many years, the case is much altered. It is a
good Rule in the law, Causa sublata, tolli constitutionem ex causa illa ortam
-- That the cause being taken away, the constitution grounded thereon, sinks
with it. The Surgeon deals otherwise with a foul sore, then with a wound
that is come to Agglutination. How much more reason is there to retain kneeling
amongst us, who have had it appointed by our first Reformers, and found it
continued ever since, until these late unhappy Distractions, wherein we have
welnigh lost the Very Substance of Religion, together with the Ceremonies.

8. The Protestant Churches of Poland, though differing in some other
Particulars, yet when they met together at several Times and Places, to agree
(amongst other Points, which they accounted either most material or most
feizible) upon some uniforme order in the receiving of the Sacrament; though
they permitted Standing thereat to some of the Helvetick Confession, who had
been anciently used to it (for those of the Augustane, and Bohemick, always
communicated kneeling) and could not so soon or so easily be induced to break
their old Custom; yet they absolutely condemned sitting. The Reasons whereof
are remarkable, and to be well heeded by us of this distracted Nation, whose
case and condition does so near resemble Theirs. 1. They tell us, that none
scrupled at kneeling, but the simpler and more ignorant sort. 2. That some
affected sitting out of a foolish mistake, and pretense of imitating Christ
therein. 3. That this Gesture of sitting was contrary to the Practice of the
Evangelical Churches throughout Europe. 4. That it was introduced by the
Arianizing Anabaptists, who revolted from them, and fell into several
Blasphemous Errors, touching the Trinity, and our Blessed Savior, and handled
Christ as rudely and profanely, as they did his Sacraments, by setting
themselves in the same Throne with him, as if they had been his Equals; and
therefore it was fit to be left unto them, as a mark of Distinction, whereby
they might be discerned from the Orthodox Professors. I would to God, we had
not too much Ground of saying the same at this Day, when so many People amongst
us, have been drawn away and misled into several Blasphemous Errors (touching
Christ especially, and the Trinity) and are like to continue therein, and
increase in number, as long as they see such Unconformity, and Disobedience in
several of the Ministry. For how can we think, in any Reason, to reduce these
Sectaries unto the Unity of the Faith, whilst so many amongst us break the
Unity of the Church; and can neither accord with their Brethren, nor obey their
Superiors? Our Arguments will prevail little; and our Authority, less. Were it
not far better, after the example of these Polonian Churches, to leave sitting
unto the Sectaries, as a Character of difference, least otherwise we seem to
countenance them in their Errors? Especially, when that fancy of reigning with
Christ here upon Earth, has so strongly possessed many of their Brains, that
it has set them upon desperate Projects to make good, and fulfill their
Dreams. I hope that I shall not be thought to speak without Reason, when I have
told you, that Mr. Archer, the late Chiliast, has the same Ground for sitting
at the Communion, who would have it then used, as a Badge, and Cognizance of
Christians believing in Christ's promise of coming to Reign on this Earth again,
and to take them into a familiar and a kind of equal Conversation with him;
which Conceit of his methinks, may not be unfitly dashed by that Check of
Augustus, which he gave to one who entertained him meanly, I did not think that
you, and I had been so familiar. It is worthy also our observation, that as the
multiplying of Sects, and Heresies in Poland, was the unhappy fruit of the
Dissension of those Churches, (especially about the matter of the Sacrament) so
it proved the happy occasion of uniting them together. God grant, we may learn
wit by their example.

9. The nature of the Service, if well considered, requires the most humble,
and reverential Gesture. For in the receiving of this Holy Sacrament, we are
made Partakers of all the Benefits of Christ's Death, and Passion, which therein
are conveyed unto us, and thereby applied. We therein also offer up our selves,
both Souls, and Bodies, with all that we have, or are, unto God, in the nature
of a Peace Offering, or Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, for the many great
unspeakable Benefits, bestowed upon us through Christ, when he offered up
himself unto his Father a Propitiatory Sacrifice upon the Cross. Therein we
receive a Pardon of our Sins past; Power to subdue Corruptions, and overcome
Temptations for the time to come; Peace of Conscience arising from Both, and a
certain Pledge of our Resurrection to a Life Eternal. Do not all these, do not
any of these, require as much Humility, as Thankfulness? And is it not fit to
express that Humility (especially, in the Public Service, where God is most
honored, and requires us to honor him in the eyes of men) by the lowliest
demeanor, thereby to show, and testify our inward Devotion? If we were to
receive a Pardon, or any considerable favor from an earthly Prince, we would
not make the least scruple to receive it kneeling; but rather condemn any one
of unsufferable Pride, and Arrogance, Folly, and Ingratitude, who should think
much to use that humble Gesture. Nay, if we were but admitted to kiss the Kings
Hand, we would readily kneel to receive so easy, so ordinary a Favor.
Children use the like Gesture, when they ask their Parents Blessing; and when
a Subject does Homage to his Prince, he performs it with the same Reverence.
Shall we then doubt, or deny to perform the same, when we receive a Pardon from
the Great King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, sealed unto us in this
Sacrament? When we receive the Gift of Eternal Life, conveyed unto us by
Christ, of whom we are therein made Partakers? When also we do solemn homage
unto our Lord, and Savior, by devoting our selves wholly to his Service, who
once devoted himself a Sacrifice to God for our Salvation? Sure, there is
strength in this Argument, if either Reason, or Religion may be judge. For thus
God himself argues with his People by the Prophet Malachi. A Son honors his
Father, and a Servant his Master. If then I be a Father, where is mine honor?
and if I be a Master, where is my fear? Ye say, the Table of the Lord is
contemptible. And if ye offer the Blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil? And if
ye offer the lame, and the sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy
Governor. Will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of
Hosts? Ye brought that which was torn, and the lame and the sick. Thus ye
brought an Offering; Should I accept this of your Hand, says the Lord? I am a
Great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is dreadful among the Heathen.
Mal. 1. 6, 7, 8; 13, 14.

And if we look upon Scripture-Patternes, we shall find that the most eminent
Saints, and Servants of God have used the lowliest Gestures on any of these
Occasions, and that not only unto God in Person, but to his Deputies also who
represented him; to his Princes, Priests, and Prophets. When Abigail came to
ask pardon of David, for her husband Nabal, she bowed her self to the Ground,
and fell at his feet. 1 Samuel 25. 23. So did Joseph's Brethren to him, when they
were caught in a supposed Theft. Genesis 44. 14. Yea, so did Absalom (as wicked
and proud, as he was) upon his return to his Father. 1 Samuel 14. 33: when the
same Abigail would express her thanks to David for signifying by his Messengers
his intention of marrying her, she used the same Gesture. 1 Samuel 25. 41. The
like used Abraham to the Hittites, when they granted him the Sepulcher he
petitioned for. Genesis 23. 12. So did Jacob: Genesis 47. 31. Jehosaphat also, and
his People, on good News. 2 Chronicles. 20. 18. When Joseph brought his Sons to be
blessed, he thus expressed his Desire, Genesis 48. 12. Bathsheba, and the Prophet
Nathan did the like, when they petitioned David, in behalf of Solomon. 1 King.
1. 16. 23. Jacob thus expressed his respect to his Elder Brother Esau. Genesis 33.
3. Solomon his Duty to his mother Bathshebah, 1. King. 2. 19. Araunah his
homage to King David. 2. Sam. 24. 20. How much more Reverence is due, when all
these meet together, as they do in the Sacrament, wherein we receive a Pardon,
and a Blessing, and have our Interests in the Kingdom of Heaven renewed and
confirmed to us; wherein we offer up thanksgiving for the greatest of Favors;
petition the great God for Grace, and Glory in behalf of our Selves, and
others; and perform Solemn Homage to our Sovereign Lord, and Master?

But more especially we find these lowly Gestures used at the Sacrifices. So
the Israelites, when they blessed God thereat, by King David's command. 1.
Chron. 29. 20. The like they did at the firing of the Sacrifice; whereby God's
acceptance was signified, 2 Chronicles: 7. 3: and 1 King. 18. 39. Hezekiah also, and
his People, at the solemn Sacrifice. 2 Chronicles. 29. 29, 30. Now, in the
Sacrament there is not only a lively representation, and a grateful
Commemoration of that great Sacrifice which Christ offered upon the Cross for
our Redemption, (whereof all these were but imperfect Types, and Shadows) but
also an effectual Application of all the Benefits thereof, unto every worthy
Communicant. Therein also we offer up unto God all that we have, or are, the
Sacrifices of Praise, and Alms, as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 13. 15, 16. Our
Bodies also, and our Souls. And have we not reason to use the same lowly
Gestures at the time when so manifold a Sacrifice is offered up unto God?

Especially, when we find several Prophecies of these Gestures to be used
toward our Savior, which sure we cannot present him with at a fitter Time,
than when so solemn a Service is performed to him -- I have sworn by my
self, that unto me every knee shall bow. Isa 45. 23: which the Apostle applies
unto our Savior. Romans 14. 11. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow
before him -- Yea, all Kings shall fall down before him. Psalm. 72. 9, 11. Every
knee must bow, none excepted. Not the vilest, and most barbarous, those in the
Wilderness: not the highest amongst men, to whom all others bow; Kings are not
exempted. All then are comprehended and obliged to this Service; except we
intend by refractory Irreverence to contadict those Prophecies, and nullify
them as far as lies in us.

10. The most proper Gesture for Prayer is kneeling, as that which is the most
humble and devout. And this Gesture is recommended to our imitation by the most
eminent persons, and the most exemplary Patterns in both Testaments. By King
Solomon, a great Prince; by Daniel, a great Prophet; and by Ezra a famous
Priest, under the Law: by Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, the two great Apostles;
by Saint Stephen, the first Martyr; and by Christ himself, the great Pattern of
Perfection under the Gospel. Neither is this denied by the Non-Conformists, who
allow of kneeling at Prayers, both by their Judgment, and Practice at other
times. For though there be too many at this day, who are so wretchedly careless
and irreverent, as to fit at them; yet I hope there is scarce any of them so
strangely impudent, as to plead for sitting at Prayers, as the most fitting
Gesture, or to condemn kneeling. Now it is most clear, that in our Church of
England, the very same Authority which enjoins the Communicant to kneel at the
receiving of the Sacrament, enjoins the Minister, who gives it, to deliver it
with a Prayer; and which is more, the Receiver is to testify his assent to
that Prayer, by saying Amen, at the close, according to the ancient Custom of
the Church. This is attested, not only by those ancient Constitutions, which go
under the name of the Apostles, but also by Cyril of Jerusalem, for the East;
and by Saint Augustine for the West, as the practice, and general usage of the
Christian Church. Constable. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 13. thus directs the Service --
(...). That is, Let the Bishop give the Oblation [of Bread] saying, The Body of
Christ; and let him that receives it, say Amen. Then the Deacon having taken
the Cup, and delivering it, let him say, The Blood of Christ, the Cup of Life;
and let him that drinks, say Amen. Cyrill of Jerusalem tells us the same, in
his Instructions to the Communicant, Orat: Mystag. 5 ta. The Place before cited
-- (...). That is, Receive the Body of Christ, saying withal, Amen. Then
approach to receive the Cup of [Christs] Blood, bowing thy self, and saying,
Amen, after the manner of Divine Worship, and Adoration. Saint Augustine also
witnesses for his time, saying Vniversa Ecclesia accepto sanguine Christi,
dicit, Amen. That is, The Universal Church at the receiving of the Blood of
Christ, says, Amen. So he Resp. ad qu. Orosii, 49. Methinks, they who scruple
not to kneel at other Prayers, should make as little question to kneel at this;
which though a very short one, is a very solemn, and material one: especially,
when at the same time, if they really be such devout Receivers, as they would
be thought to be, they lift up their Hearts in secret Prayer, and Praise unto
God; in Praise, for the great Benefits there bestowed, Christ, and his Merits;
and in Prayer, for a Blessing upon the Sacrament, that it may prove effectual
to those ends for which God appointed it, and that themselves may for the
future walk in some measure answerable to so great, and undeserved mercies.
Sure kneeling will best suit both with that public Prayer of the Minister, and
this private one of the Receiver, as that which best expresses both his
Humility, and his Thankfulness. Now if any are pleased to cavil that the
Minister who officiates, and pronounces the Prayer, stands at the same time
when the Communicant is enjoined to kneel, they have as much reason to except
at him, when he uses the same Gesture at the pronouncing of the Blessing,
which is a like short Prayer; at Parents also; when they bless their Children;
and at the Priests under the Law, who used the same Posture, when they blessed
the People at the Passover: 2 Chronicles. 36. 27. Yea we read that Jacob sat upon
the Bed, when he blessed the two Sons of Joseph in the same Prayer-Form.
Whereas they, with their Father Joseph, received the Blessing with a very low
Bow. Genesis 48. 2, 12.

11. The more worthy any Creature, or Ordinance of God is in it self, or the
nearer Relation it has unto God, the more honor, and reverence is due
thereto. So the parts of the Tabernacle, and Temple, viz. The Court, the Holy
Place, and the Holy of Holies, had several Degrees of Holiness, and were
regarded accordingly. The Levites might officiate in the outward Court; the
Priests only in that which was called Holy; the High Priest only might enter
into the Holy of Holies, and that but once a year. So for the Sacrifices; some
of them must be eaten by any whom the Officer would invite; some by the Priest
alone; and others must be entirely offered up unto God, and consumed upon the
Altar. Now the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, has been always accounted the
most Sacred, and Solemn Ordinance of God in the Christian Church, and Christ
himself has taught us, that his Body, and Blood are therein contained, and
communicated unto us thereby. Whence it will follow, that we owe a
proportionable Reverence thereto, and are to honor God thereat, with the
greatest Humility, and Devotion. When the Angel of the Lord appeared in the
Bush, Moses was forbid to approach too near, and commanded to pull off his
Shoes, because the place, whereon he stood, was Holy Ground, Exodus 3. 5. Shall
we then irreverently approach unto that Table, whereat the Lord of Angels is
present attended by those Heavenly Officers; present, in so near, so strange,
so mysterious a way? Moses then hid his face at that dreadful sight, ver. 6.
and shall we come to the Sacrament with bold Looks and Gestures, as if we were
Christ's Fellows and Equals? When Jacob saw God, but in a night Vision, he was
presently struck upon his waking, with an awful Regard, which made him say, How
dreadful is this Place? this is no other, but the House of God, and this is the
Gate of Heaven -- Genesis 28. 13, 16, 17. Shall not we be alike affected at the
Sacrament, and ready to express our Regard of it, wherein we are admitted, not
only to his House, but to his Table; not only see the Gate, but eat the Bread
of Heaven, the Celestial Manna? The Ancient Fathers of the Church have
therefore upon all occasions, endeavored to strike an awe in us, and work a
due regard toward the Sacrament, by the high, and venerable Titles which they
bestowed thereon. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 10. 16. calls it, (...), Dreadful
Mysteries -- (...) -- The awful, and most dreadful Cup; and the whole Service,
wherein Christ is offered up representatively, instead of the slaughtered
Beasts under the Law, he calls -- (...), A Service much more dreadful, and
Majestical, then any under the Law. Greg. Naz. calls it, (...), The Copy or
resemblance of Great Mysteries. Saint Aug. de Verb. Dni. Sermon. 28. calls it,
Coeleste and venerabile Sacramentum, The Heavenly, and Venerable Sacrament.
Greg. M. Dial. 4. c. 58. tells us, that none of the Faithful doubt, but that at
the time of Consecration, ad Sacerdotis vocem Coelos aperiri, Angelorum choros
adesse, The Heavens are opened at the voice of the Priest, and the Quire of
Angels present. Dionys. (as before) calls the Sacramental Signs, (...),
Venerable or Adorable Signs. The Communion Table is also honored with the
Titles of, (...), Holy, Mystical, dreadful, royal. Sure, these ancient worthies
of the Church* were much mistaken in the misapplying of such Holy, and
Honorable Titles to the Sacrament, with the Service, and Table that attend it,
if no manner of awefulness, or veneration were due unto it: or they are much
mistaken at this day, who think the Ordinance so mean, and the Table so
contemptible (as those in the Prophet Malachi's time did) that any careless
Posture is good enough for it, and kneeling too good.

Adoration indeed is due unto God alone, but a Religious Reverence is due unto
such Creatures, and Ordinances of his, as have a peculiar Relation unto him,
and in regard thereof, are styled Holy; to his Day, his House, his Word, his
Service, consisting in Prayers, and Praises. All which, if taken by themselves,
are of the same Nature with other Days, Houses, Writings, and Services. Yet the
Non-Conformists, I presume, allow of some difference between the Church, and
their Private Houses; between the Bible, and other ordinary Books; between the
Service of God, and of Men, and scruple not to make that difference appear by
their outward Carriage, and Demeanor. How then comes it to pass that the
Blessed Sacrament of his Supper, that most Holy, and Solemn Ordinance, which he
left us as a pious Memorial of his Passion* when himself was now to leave the
World, should be thought unworthy of any peculiar Reverence, but have the same
neglectful Gesture used at it, as at our ordinary Meals?

Neither will the same Persons deny, but that at the time of Receiving, they
yield an intentional Reverence, or Adoration of Soul unto God. I would feign
know then* why they will not express it at the same time by an answerable
Gesture, such as kneeling is, whereby to testify their own Devotion, and
excite that of others. They allow of lifting up the Hands, and Eyes in Prayer,
with other significant expressions of their Zeal, and Devotion; why not as
well of kneeling at the Sacrament, whereby to express their Humility? I hope,
they will not say, they have none to express, or that they are ashamed to own
it in Public. There is no Pious Affection, or Disposition of the mind, but, if
it be real, and hearty, will endeavor to show it self outwardly upon all good
occasions. Godly Indignation in the Publican commanded his hands to knock on
his Breast. Luke 18. 13. Faith moved the Woman's hand, to touch the Hem of
Christ's Garment. Mat. 9. ver. 20, 21, 22. Charity stretched forth the
Samaritans hands, to bind up the wounds of the half-dead Traveller. Luke 10.
34. Sorrow for Sin caused Peter's eyes to pour forth streams of bitter Tears.
Mat. 26. 75. Zeal, and Earnestuess to know the will of God, and the way of
Salvation, fixed the ears of Lydia to attend the word of God, preached by Saint
Paul. Acts 16. 14. And Hope lifts up pure hands unto Heaven in Prayer, in
confidence of Gods Promises. I. Tim. 2. 8. And shall Humility only be Idle, and
uneffectual? Shall it have no power, or force at all, to demonstrate it self in
acknowledgment of so undeserved Mercies, whereof it is made Partaker in the
Sacrament, by some significant Gesture at the receiving thereof, in some
measure proportionable to the pious and lowly affection of the mind? I hope,
they will not reply, that no significant Ceremonies are to be used in Gods
Service, whereas some of their Forefathers have supplicated for Sitting, as a
Gesture fit to set forth Rest, and the accomplishment of Ceremonies in Christ:
Others disputed for it, because it is best agreeable with our Coheriship. And
others have urged standing, as better consorting with the Eucharist, which is a
Sacrament of Thanksgiving. If notwithstanding all this, they disclaim
significant Ceremonies, sure they are very uncertain Oracles to hearken unto,
and as unconstant Guides to follow.

12. All things indifferent, which are to be used in the Service of God, are in
the Disposition of the Church. But the Gesture in the Act of receiving the
Sacrament is such an Indifferent Thing; as having neither Precept, nor
Prohibition, nor express Determination in the Scriptures. Ergo. The truth of
the Proposition is confessed by Mr. Cartwright himself, in his first Reply, pa.
18. I know no man (says he) who ever denied, that the Church may make Orders
in such Things as are not specified, and precisely determined in the Word of
God. And the truth of the Assumption is sufficiently clear from Holy Scripture.
For neither in the Gospel, nor in St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians,
chap. 11. Where the order and manner of the Celebration is very punctually set
down; nor elsewhere in holy Writ, is there one word to be found touching the
Gesture which our Savior and his Apostles used at the first Institution; or,
which the Primitive Christians, in the Apostles days, used at the celebration
thereof; though the Apostle, in the place alleged, exactly sets down the other
circumstances of Time and Place. Much less is there any Precept touching this
particular, to bind the Church in all succeeding Ages. Doubtless, if the
Gesture which Christ and his Apostles used at the first had been material, or
necessary for our Imitation, it would have been left somewhere upon Record,
that so we might have had a certain Pattern to follow. But seeing it is not,
why should we not think it left free to be determined by the Church consonantly
to those Apostolical Rules of Decency, Order, Edification, and Peace, which are
prescribed? Romans 14. 19. 1. Cor. 14. 26, 40.

These Reasons, duly weighed, will serve to answer most of those Objections,
which have been urged against kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament. Yet
for the better clearing, and confirming of the lawfulness, and fitness, and
consequently of the necessity of using this Gesture, when commanded by lawful
Authority; I shall set down such Objections, as I have met with, and subjoyn
their Answers for farther satisfaction.

Object. 1. That Gesture which our Savior and his Apostles used, at the
Institution of this Sacrament, is most fit, and decent, and obliegeth all
Christians. So excellent and authoritative a Pattern has the force of a
Precept. Now, that our Savior, and his Apostles sat thereat, seems clear from
the History of the Gospel; wherein we read, that they sat at the Passover, at
the close of which Feast the Sacrament was instituted; and there is not the
least mention of changing their Posture throughout the whole time that the
Supper lasted. If the Apostles then kneeled not, but used a Fellow-like Gesture
with Christ, with whom they sat at the same Table, is it not a great
Hypocrisy in us, to pretend greater Reverence and Devotion in receiving it,
than the Apostles used?
Answer. 1. The maine of this Objection has been already answered in the parts
thereof, for I have already shown, that 1. There is not any clear Proof in the
Gospel, what Gesture our Savior, and his Apostles used at the first
Celebration of the Sacrament, which doubtless would have been mentioned, if
that which they then used had been necessary for the Service. 2. The Gesture
used at the Passover, which preceded it, was not sitting, but Lying down, or
leaning on Couches. 3. In the use of this Gesture at the Passover, Christ, and
his Apostles accommodated themselves to the present Custom of the Jewish
Church, wherein they lived; very differently from the first Institution, at
which time standing was used, and that by Gods command: which is a fair warrant
for us, to conform in the like case to the Practice of the Church wherein we
live; and not to take temporary Circumstances of Religious Actions, and
Services, for necessary, and universal Commands. 4. They might possibly, for
ought appears to the contrary, change that Gesture which they used at the
Passover, into a different one, when the Sacrament came to be celebrated;
seeing we read, that in the distance between them, our Savior rose from the
Table, and washed his Disciples Feet

2. If it could be clearly proved, that Christ and his Apostles used such a
particular Gesture at the receiving of the Sacrament, and that Gesture to be
sitting; yet no forcible Argument could be drawn from thence to obliege all
Churches at this day to use the same; no more then to conform our selves unto
other Circumstances which accompanied that first Celebration, which yet are
neither practiced, nor pressed by our Non-Conformists; viz. That it was
celebrated by Night, after Supper, in a private Chamber, by men only, and those
but twelve in number, and all of them of the same Family or constant retinue of
our Savior; also that the Bread was unleavened, and the wine mingled with
water, according to the custom of the country, as the Ancients generally held,
and as generally imitated. See Prove. 9. 2. Just. Martyr, Apol. 2. What a noise
would have been raised, if the Evangelist had told us [(...)] instead of
[(...)] that instead of [As they were eating] Christ took Bread, and blessed it
-- he had said [As they were sitting] -- And yet these men think it not
requisite to celebrate the Sacrament after Supper, as our Savior than did. As
little care do they take to imitate either Him, or his Hearers, in the Gesture
which they used at the Preaching and Hearing of the Word; for we read that it
was our Saviors Custom to sit when he preached, the people standing all the
while; which Practice our Non*Conformists do utterly cross, amongst whom the
Preacher stands, and the People sit all the while. Let me add one circumstance
more, which was preparatory to our Saviors first Celebration of the Sacrament,
and was very solemnly performed by him, viz. his rising from the Table after
the Paschal Supper, and washing his Disciples Feet. A thing done with so much
solemnity by our Savior, and the passages thereof so exactly set down by the
Evangelist St. John, that in all reason it might be thought to obliege the
Church to a perpetual, and universal observance, but that we find it otherwise
understood by the Primitive Christians, who never looked thereon as a necessary
binding Ordinance, or generally practiced it. Yea, if we more narrowly look
into the Passages there recorded. Jo. 13. 2-17. we shall find that it looks
like a Sacrament of it self, instituted, and enjoined by Christ at the very
same time, when he ordained the Sacrament of his last Supper. For we find
there, 1. An outward visible Sign; Water. ver. 5. 2. An inward spiritual
Grace; Part with Christ, Cleansing from Sin, Sealing of Pardon; which is the
Promise annexed to it, ver. 8, 10. 3. A mysterious Signification, then not well
understood by the Apostles, ver. 7. As neither was the mystery of his Death,
and Passion, though lively represented by the Sacrament of his Supper. 4. A
strict command of observance. ver. 14, 15. Ye ought to wash one another Feet.
For I have given you an example, that ye should do, as I have done to you. 5.
The necessity thereof shown in order to Salvation, ver. 8. If I wash thee not,
Thou have no part with me. 6. Let me add that Judas was at both alike, and
alike unclean. ver. 10, 11. Yet, notwithstanding all this, our Non-Conformists
think not themselves obliged to use this Ceremony. Why should they then think
themselves more obliged to use the same Gesture which our Savior, and his
Apostles used at the Sacrament of his Supper, in case it had been Sitting, and
that expressly mentioned in the Gospel?

3. As to the Gesture of the Apostles in particular, when they first received
the Sacrament from the hand of Christ, none of the Evangelists inform us what
it was, so that, for ought we know, it was different from that which he used at
the time of giving. But, suppose it were the same, (which is not proved) it
will not follow, that we are to use it at this Day. A different Behavior well
befits us toward Christ now afcended into his Glory, from that which his
Apostles used toward him, when he was conversant here on Earth. He then took
upon him the form of a servant, and made himself of no Reputation, Phil. 2. 7.
yea he tells his Apostles, that he came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, Mat. 20. 28. and accordingly he washed his Disciples feet at the same
time. Jo. 13. 5. We read not that any of his Apostles, after they were chosen
to that office, ever kneeled unto him, no not when they Prayed unto him,
Increase our Faith. Luke 17. 5. But the Case is much altered, now that he is
exalted unto his Kingdom, set at his Fathers right hand, far above every name
that is named, not only in this world, but in that also which is to come. Ephesians.
1. 20, 21. Now that all Power is given him in Heaven and in Earth. Mat. 28. 18.
and that all things are put under his feet, Ephesians. 1. 22. Every knee is to bow
unto him: Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. we know Christ no more after the flesh, says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 16. whence we read that Christ put back Mary Magdalene, when
she approached to touch him with the same freedom, and familiarity after his
Resurrection, which She had used to him before, Jo. 20. 17. Saint Matthew tells
us, that when his Apostles saw him in that mountain of Galilee, which he had
appointed to meet them in after he arose from the Dead, that they worshipped
him Mat. 28. 16, 17. S. Luke also informs us that they worshipped him, upon his
Ascension into Heaven. Luke 24. 51, 52. If then we will imitate the Apostles,
we must worship him, as they did, upon all good occasions, with a low, bodily
Reverence; more especially, in the Sacrament, wherein is lively represented to
the eye of Faith, that crucified Body of his, which he still represents to the
eye of his Father in Heaven, at whose right Hand he sits, and by the powerful
efficacy of that Sacrifice, obteines pardon of our sins, a mitigation of our
sufferings, and a gracious answer to our supplications.

Ob. 2. The Sacrament is called, The Lords Supper, by the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.
20. therefore a Supper*Gesture, is fittest to be used thereat, which, amongst
us, is Sitting. Whereas in the Practice of the Church of England, there is
nothing like a Supper. The Communicants neither eat nor drink together at the
same Table, but receive some small Portions of Both from the Hand of the
Minister. Neither are these commonly given at the Table but carried about by
him that officiates, to the guests, who are in several seats, whereby the use
of a common Table is overthrown and the Communion destroyed. Clemens Alex.
Strom. 1. witnesses of the time werein he lived, that when some had divided
the Sacrament they suffered ever one of the People to take his Part.
Ans. 1. The Sacrament is called, The Lords Supper not that it agrees in all
things with our ordinary Suppers, but by occasion of the first institution,
which was at Supper time, after the eating of the Passover. Whence the
Christian Church, from that time till ^his day, has generally received it in
the morning, fasting; and the Non-conformists practice the same, and yet think
not they violate the Order of Christ, in thus crossing that Circumstance of the
first Institution. It is observable also, that in the very same Chapter wherein
the Apostle calls it, The Lords Supper; he calls it also The Body and Blood of
the Lord, taxes them for their irreverence in partaking thereof, and their
disregard of so high, and holy an Ordinance, as if they valued it no more, then
their common food. And I have already showed, that the Church of Christ*
constantly, and studiously* made a Distinction between that Gesture which they
used at this holy Feast, and that which they used at their ordinary meals. But
I had rather answer this Argument from the Practice of the Objectours, in
relation to other circumstances which attend the taking of our common food, and
are the usual appurtenances of an ordinary supper; as sitting covered,
discoursing laughing, carving and reaching the Dish to one another, drinking to
and welcoming one another, with the like; for which there is the same reason,
and the same allowable freedom, if this Argument be of any force. Yet those
who urge a supper-Gesture, neither use nor urge these circumstances. It is
possible, this Gesture may have given occasion to some such rudeness in the
more clownish and ignorant sort, but, for ought I can find, are not justified,
or approved by any sober Persons of that way. For they generally sit bare when
they receive the Bread and Wine, receive them from the hand of the Minister,
return the Cup to him again, and are silent during the whole Time of the
Solemnity.

2. As to the carrying about of the Bread, and Wine by the Minister that
officiates, it is a deviation from the Order of the Church of England, which
exhorts, and charge all, by the mouth of the Priest who officiats, to come,
and draw near unto the Lords Table, and so comunicate together, as many as can
atonce; and all ought to do it successively, in proportionable Companies. If
they would have all communicate together at the same Table, at the same time,
they talk of Impossibilities, especially in numerous Congregations. Our
Savior, and his Apostles were a small Company, and so might conveniently meet
together at the same Table. But Larger Congregations, such as we now have and
admit to the Communion are not in a capacity of meeting there all together, but
must come to the Table in convenient numbers, one company after another, what
gesture soever they receive it with; whether kneeling, standing or sitting. And
yet they may be well said to partake of the same Table, because they partake of
the same Bread, and Wine, which is there placed, and consecrated, and thence
delivered unto them. Those noble Jewish Captives are said to partake of King
Nebuchadnezzars Table, though they came not near it, merely be-because
certain Portions of meat and wine, the same which the King ate, and drank of,
were sent unto See 2 Samuel chap. 11. 8. Genesis 43. 16. 32. 34.
them fom his Table, or by his special Appointment. Dan. 1. 3, 4, 5. the like
had Jehoiachin from Evilmerodach 2. King. 25. 27, 30. and Mephibosheth from
David. 2 Samuel 9. 10, 11. And those Idolaters, who are said to be Partakers of
the Table of Devils, in opposition to the Partakers of the Lords Table, 1 Cor.
10. 21. did not eat, or drink sitting at the Altar of the Idol, but only ate
part of those Sacrifices which had been offered on the Altar; whether in the
Temple of the Idol, or at their own Houses, v. 27, 28. and chapter 8. 10; when
several companies, at a great Festival Time, sit down successively at the
same Noble man's Board, they are all said to be partakers of one and the same
Table. And in Gentlemen's Houses, where the Cups, and Glasses are not usually
set on the Table, but brought unto the Guests, as they have occasion to drink,
yet all the Guests are as truly, and properly said to communicate of the Wine,
as of the Bread and Meat, which are placed on the Table whereat they sit.
Neither is the Lords Table made for a set, formal meal, but a spiritual
Repast, where there is as much satisfaction in a Bit as in a whole loaf, as
much virtue in a few Drops, as in a large draught of Wine. Let me add, that
the place urged for this communicating at one Table, viz. 1 Cor. 11. 21, 33.
belongs not to the Sacrament, but the Feasts of Charity, which accompanied it.
And these are long ago disused, nor are thought fit to be revived by those that
contend for the fitting at the communion, so that no argument can be drawn from
thence.

3. The Communicants usually receive Portions of the same loaf whereby they
signify themselves to be the same Bread and Body, as the Apostle speaks 1
Cor. 10. 16. But it is neither necessary, nor fitting, that to signify their
fellowship at the Communion Table, and to represent their eating and drinking
with Christ at his Table in his Kingdom, they should carve for themselves, or
deliver the Parcels to one another promiscuously; seeing the Apostle, in the
same place, makes an evident distinction between this holy Communion, and our
common Meals 1 Cor. 10. 16. and chapter 11. 22. Neither read we of any such Thing
at the first Institution (to which they would have our present Practice to be
conformed) that the Apostles took their several Portions of Bread without any
Delivery of them by Christ; much less that they promiscuously distributed them
to one another. But they took them severally from the hand of their Master, as
will appear by what is left recorded touching the manner, and method used in
the eating of the Passover; at the close of which Feast, the Gospel tells us,
that the Sacrament was instituted. For Beza (Annot. in Mat. 26. 20.) informs
us out of of Paulus Burgensis, and Emanuel Tremelius, both learned Jews and
Converts; and out of Scaliger De Emend. Temp. who was very well verst in the
writings of their Rabbis, that after the first Course ended, the Guests arose,
and washed their Feet: then, sitting down again at the Table, the Father of
the Family divided a loaf of unleavened Bread into two Parts, the one half
whereof he covered with a Napkin, till the End of Supper; when bringing it
forth, he divided it into as many Parcels, as there were Guests at the Table.
Then, he first took his own Portion, reliqua vero frusta sigillatim and ordine
discumbentibus caeteris porrigebat. The remainder he distributed severally and
in order, to the other Guests who sat with him at the Table. We have small
reason to question (comparing these Circumstances with what is recorded by S.
John, chapter 13. and consulting the Judgment of the most learned hereupon) but it
was this Bread, thus divided and distributed, which our Savior made use of at
the Institution of the Sacrament. And therefore, if we will follow this
primitive Pattern, we must not be our own Carvers at the Communion, but take
that Portion which is given us* by the hand of the Minister. Add hereunto,
that as the Consecrating of the Bread and Wine, so the Breaking, Pouring forth,
and Distributing of them, are Sacramental Actions, belonging to the Minister
alone, as appears by what our Savior did at the first Celebration. The
Communicants are only to take, eat, and drink, in memory of our Saviors
Passion, as the Apostles then did, and as we are commanded to do. Mat. 26. 26,
27. 1 Cor. 11. 23-26.

4. The words of Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. are these -- (...). that is, when some
distribute the Eucharist, as the Custom is, they suffer every one of the
People to take his Part. But these words prove not, either that the
Communicants sat at the Table, or took the Sacrament of themselves, without
any Delivery by the Minister. Rather they import the Contrary, that the People
took that only which the Minister distributed, that Part which he pleased to
give them. However, Tertullian, (who was contemporary with him) is plain
enough, when he tells us, (De Cor. Mil. c. 3.) Eucharistiae Sacramentum, non de
aliorum manu, quam Praesidentium sumimus. That is, We take not the Eucharist
from any other hand, then that of our Presidents. Now who these were he tells
us, in his Apolog. cap. 39. Praesident apud nos probati quique Seniores. Our
approved Elders are the Chief Governors [or Presidents] amongst us. The same,
whom S. Peter calls his Fellow-Elders, or (...). 1 Pet. 5. 1. the same, whom
Justine Martyr calls (...), Antistites, the Governors, and Bishops of the
Church. Who also witnesses the same, in his 2d Apology; where having first
told us, that the (...), or Bishop, having prayed, and given thanks with a most
intense Devotion over the Sacramental Bread, and Wine, the People closed it
with a loud, and unanimous, Amen. He immediately adds -- (...). that is, Then
Distribution is made to every one of the Communicants, of the consecrated
Bread, and Wine, and they who are absent have it sent them by the Deacons. S.
Cyprian tells us the same, lib. de lapsis. Where he relates a story, whereof
himself was an eyewitness, touching a Maidservant, who having polluted her
self with the Idol-Sacrifices, took the Boldness to come among other
Christians, before she had either confessed her sin, or was reconciled unto God,
and the Church by Repentance, and (unknown to him) communicated of the
Sacrament, but immediately after the receiving thereof, fell down Dead --
Sacrificantibus nobis latenter obrepsit -- Sacerdotem Dei nec occulta crimina
fefellerunt -- quae fefellerat hominem, Deum sensit ultorem. that is, she
crept in privily, as we officiated at the Communion Table -- yet her hidden
sins escaped not the knowledge of Gods Priest -- she who had deceived man, felt
God an Avenger. In the same place, speaking of the Delivery of the Cup, he
says Solemnibus adimpletis, calicem Diaconus offerre praesentibus coepit. When
the Prayers were ended, the Deacon began to give the Chalice to them that were
present. And this may be well thought necessary, if it were only for this good
end, that the unworthy might be kept off from the Sacrament; the Minister being
charged not to give holy things unto dogs. But why insist I any longer upon
this, when the Practice of receiving the Sacrament from the hand of the
Minister alone, is so well known, from all antiquity, in the Christian Church;
and so generally used at this day, in all Protestant Churches, except that of
Holland, and some few of her confederate Neighbors, where they use sitting. In
the rest, which follow Zuinglius, and Calvin, throughout Switzerland, Hessen,
the Palatinate, Prussia, and Poland, as they receive the Sacrament at the
Table, with a gentle bending of their knees, so they receive it severally, and
in order, from the hand of the Minister, who stands officiating at the Table.
The like do they in West-Friezland, though one of the Confederate Provinces. As
for the Churches of the Augustane Confession, which are commonly called
Lutheranes, the People universally receive it from the hand of the Minister;
but with this difference, that the former receive it into their Hands, but
these immediately into their Mouths.

Object. 3. Religious Adoration before a Creature (especially if consecrated
and signifying an holy Thing) with respect thereto, is Idolatry, except we have
a special command of God for it. But the kneeling before the Sacramental Bread,
and Wine is such an Adoration, Ergo, etc. If it be said, that the worship is
given, not to the Bread and Wine, but to God, and his Son Christ, who are there
present; the same excuse will serve the Papists, yea the Pagans themselves, who
pretend to worship, not the Image it self, but God in the Image. God censureth
the Intention of the worshipper by his outward Gesture, Jer. 2. 27. Neither is
there any manifester way of idolizing any Creature, than to kneel, and pray
before it. Hezekiah therefore not only removed, but brake in pieces the brazen
Serpent, when it was abused to Idolatry, though it had been set up by Gods
express command, and was reserved as a Monument of his great Mercy, and Power
shown toward his People. Lastly, if there be no Adoration given to the
Sacrament, but to God only, why is there not the like Reverence shown at
Baptism, which is a like Ordinance of Christ, and a part of his Service?
Answ. 1. The Limitations here given, are vain and idle; for to transfer the
Honor due to God alone, unto any Creature, is Idolatry, whether the Thing be
consecrated, or no; whether it have, or have not an holy signification. Neither
can any such Action be made lawful by a special command, because God dispenses
not with such Things as are intrinsecally, and absolutely evil, and expressly
repugnant to his Honor, which he professes, that he will not give unto
another, Jsa. 42. 8. It were absurd to say, It is unlawful to blaspheme, or
forswear, without Gods special warrant, by commanding, or permitting either.

2. To worship before a Creature, even with some respect thereto, is not always
Idolatry, or Superstition, so that the Creature be not the work of our own
hands, (such as an Image is) or such a work of God, as we fix our worship in,
or at least make it transient, through the Creature to God. The second
Commandment, which forbids all visible Idolatry, expresses the Prohibition in
two Points, viz. First, the making an Image to our selves, or of our own heads.
2. The bowing thereto, and serving it. Now neither of these condemns our
kneeling at the Sacrament. For 1. The Sacrament is no Invention of our own, but
an Ordinance of Christ's Institution, a Crucifixe (if I may so speak) of Christ
himselfs setting up. 2. By our kneeling thereat, we profess not any Bowing to,
or adoration of the Bread and Wine, but direct our Worship unto God alone. Now
God himself has taught us, that we may religiously adore before a Creature
(such as is consecrated to his Service, and has an holy signification) by the
example of his ancient people, the Israelites, who were most strictly forbidden
by God the very shadows of Idolatry; and ye^ not only might lawfully, but were
commanded to adore before, and toward the Temple, Altar, and Ark, which were
peculiarly sanctified to his Service. Ezra, when he prayed, cast himself d^wn
before the House of God. Ezra 10. 1. Daniel, though in Babylon, yet would needs
kneel at his Prayers with his face directed to Jerusalem, where the Temple lay
in its ruins. Dan. 6. 10. and this by direction from King Solomon. 1. Kings 8.
48, 49. King Solomon kneeled, and prayed before the Altar. 1. Kings 8. 54. And
the Israelites are charged to worship at Gods Footstool, that is, before the
Arc. Psalm. 99. 5. by which they are said to exalt the Lord, not to take away
any part of his Honor from him. Accordingly, we find them exhorting one
another to obey this Charge, We will go into his Tabernacle, we will worship at
his Footstool. Psalm. 132. 7.

3. The Pagans worshipped a false God in an Image, viz. either some Demon, or
Spirit, which they supposed to dwell therein, and to hear their Prayers, or the
Soul of some dece^sed Hero; or some of the Heavenly Bodies, (as the Sun, Moon,
and Stars) which were thereby represented; or some other Creature, which they
gave divine honor to. If any worshipped the true God by an Image, they imagined
him more peculiarly present therein, and as it were, confined ther^to, and so
made him a Topical God, as some judge the Samaritanes did; from those words of
our Savior Jo. 4. 21, 22. and so, as far as lay in them, changed the only true
God into an Idol, by a false Representation of him in their Fancies. As for the
Papists, and their Images, the general opinion maintained by their Schoolmen
is, that the same honor, which is due unto the Person represented, is to be
given unto the Image which represents him; according to which Tenet, Divine
Worship is directly and immediately given unto the Image of Christ. Durand
indeed, and some others express it more modestly, that they worship the Person
by the Image, as if he were really present. However all of them directly kneel
to the Crucifixe, or other Image, with an opinion of Holiness and Efficacy in
that Object, to make their Prayers more acceptable; and therefore entertain a
confidence in it, and by it, to be more easily heard of God. Whereas the
Protestants, who kneel at the Communion, do none of this, but conceive God, as
he is, and direct their worship to him alone, without any relation to the Bread
and Wine, in the Act of worship, either direct or indirect, mediate or
immediate. And this they profess to all the World, that their Action may not be
liable to any mistake.

4. God, who sees the Heart, knows the Intention thereof, without any outward
Expression; but will not judge of that Expression by the outward Gesture,
contrary to the intention of the Worshipper. The same outward Reverence,
whether Bowing, kneeling, or Prostration, is given unto God, and unto Man. Many
laudable examples whereof we have in holy Writ. All the difference is in the
intention of the Reverencer, which God perfectly discerns. Now at the
Sacrament, the worship is not at all directed unto the Bread and Wine, but unto
God alone; and this intention publicly professed in words. There is none calls
upon the Sacramental Signs, as those Idolaters in Jeremy, upon their Stocks,
saying, Thou art our Father; or, Thou have brought me forth. But we thank God
the Father for them, and receive them according to the order of the Church, our
Mother. Neither did the Pagans express the Divine Honor, which they thought
due to their Idols, so much by bowing toward them, or praying before them, as
by praying directly to them, by sacrificing and offering Incense, which were
the most solemn Services. Naaman the Syrian, when he petitioned for bowing in
the House of Rimmon, openly protested at the same time against offering of
Sacrifice unto any other God, than the Lord, the great God of Israel. 2 Kings
5. 18.

5. There is much difference between the Brazen Serpent, which King Hezekiah
destroyed, and kneeling at the Sacrament. That was a permanent solid Image:
This, a transient Action. That was of no use then, but kept as a Relic: This
is of very good use, to express our Humility, and Devotion, and so may still be
practiced. That was highly abused unto Idolatry, by having Incense offered to
it; and was like to be so still, if preserved unbroken, the People being then
very much given to Idolatry: This Gesture has not been so abused amongst us,
nor indeed is capable of the like Abuse; and the People at this day are far
more prone to Profaneness, then to Superstition. Lastly none of the Priests, or
People undertook to break that Image, although thus abused, but waited for the
command of the King, whose power alone made that Reformation, when it saw good.
Let the clamorous Inveighers against fancied Idolatries, and Superstitions use
the same Patience, Prudence, and Moderation.

6. As for kneeling at the other Sacrament of Baptism, the Persons usually
Baptized amongst us are newborn Infants, who are not capable of that Gesture.
But if any of elder years come to be baptized, it is the custom, I suppose, for
them to kneel. I am sure, it is the most fitting; and used in the Primitive
times, as appears by Tertullian, and many others. In the Interim, those who
assist at the Prayers, used at the Baptism of Infants, are wont to kneel.

Object. 4. Kneeling at the Communion has at least a great Appearance of Evil,
and gives offense unto the weak. Many Godly Persons are scandalized at it, and
debard of the Substance (the Partaking of the Sacrament) for want of yielding
to a Circumstance, contrary to their Judgment, and Conscience. Especially, care
is to be had of imposing on the Faith, and Conscience of so many Christians at
this day, who have been used so long to Liberty, and been strongly prepossest
with contrary Principles, though otherwise well-meaning, and pious. How many
will be in danger of falling away unto the Sectaries, and deserting the Church
altogether, if rigorously pressed to Conformity in this particular? What good can
there be imagined to arise from pressing of Conformity, which may exceed, or
equal these Mischiefs? Besides, what is indifferent in its nature, ought not to
be pressed as necessary, but a freedom allowed both in Judgment and Practice.
Answ. 1. That place of the Apostle, 1. These. 5. 22. may be aptly enough
rendered. Abstain from all kind [(...)] of evil. But if we understand it of
the Appearance of evil, (as most do) it must be understood of such an
Appearance, as gives just cause of Scandal (by drawing men into sin, or
hardening them in it, or hindering them from coming into the Truth, and Peace of
the Church, by discouraging weak Professors, laying stumbling blocks in their
way, or by causing them to stop, or fall, or return back again) not of such
things or Actions, as may accidentally occasion it amongst the weak, ignorant,
or froward, who are apt to take offense, where there is none given. For then it
were impossible to obey this charge, as appears by the experience of Christ,
and his Apostles, at whose speeches and actions many were offended, and those
such as were not only without the Church, but Disciples, and followers, and
visible professors. Our Savior was censured for a breaker of the Sabbath.
Joh. 5. 8-11. and 9. 14, 16. Mat. 12. 1, 2. for a neglecter, if not a Despiser
of Fasting; and that even by John's Disciples. Mat. 9. 14. for a friend of
Publicans, and Sinners, because he frequently conversed with them, and admitted
them to his company. Mat. 11. 19. for a Gluttonous person, and a Wine-bibber.
Ib. because his life, and carriage was free, and sociable; not tied up to such
Austerities, as that of John the Baptist. Yea he was taxed for a Blasphemer,
because he challenged a power to forgive sins. Mat. 9. 3, 6. Neither were the
Pharisees only scandalized at his sayings. Mat. 15. 12. But his Disciples also
so far offended, that they forsook him, Jo. 6. 60-66. yet we read not that he
forbore, or altered ought in his speeches or Actions, notwithstanding the
slanders, and scandals that were thence occasioned; but openly vindicated
himself in what he did, slighted the Censures, rebuked the Censurers, and
Calumniatours, and went onward, notwithstanding all these Clamours, in the same
path he had begun to walk in. S. Stephen also was taken for a Blasphemer
against the Temple of God, and the Law of Moses, Act. 6. 13. yet he resolutely
answered for himself, and confounded his Adversaries, though thereby he
occasioned his own stoning. But among all the Apostles, there is none more
remarkable in this kind, then S. Paul, who had as tender a care of the weak, as
any man. 1 Cor. 9. 22. as wary not to give offense to any. 1 Cor. 10. 33. like
a nurse, very careful of vexing a froward child. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. exceedingly
troubled, when any took offense, though causelessly. 2 Cor. 11. 29. Yet with
all his care, and pains, his tender compassions, and Condescentions, he could
not avoid unjust Censures, and scand^ls; but had more, and sharper Conflic^s
with the Authors of such, than any other of the Apostles, whom we read of. How
often do we find him complaining that he was undervalued, even by his own
Converts* below the false Apostles? yea vexed, and slighted, when he was in
prison at Rome, by his fellow preachers? Phil. 1. 15, 16. taken for an
Apostate, and a Turnecoate, an Adversary of Moses-Law, and his own countrymen
the Jews, and a Profaner of the Temple, notwithstanding his compliances with
the Jews. Yea this humble and charitable Condescension of his, whereby he
yielded to the weaker sort (wherever he came) in things lawful, and
indifferent, as Christian prudence directed him, was used, as an Argument to
condemn him, as if he complied with all sides for his own ends of safety, or
Reputation. Gal. 5. 11. and 2. 18, 19. Yet, for all this, he brake not of his
course, but went on as he had begun; not only vindicated himself from the
aspersions of the false Apostles, but even blamed Peter himself for his
fearfulness, and halting, and dissimulation. Gal. 2. 11-14. and openly
professed to his Corinthians, how little he valued their uncharitable censures,
and rash Judgments. 1 Cor. 4. 3.

2. Those who plead so earnestly for not offending the weak, should be careful
not to give just cause of offense themselves, by their wilfulness, and
perverseness, and Disobedience to Authority, which is one of the greatest, and
most dangerous scandals; whereby some are hardened through their persuasions and
example, who are already averse to the Orders of the Church: others are
disheartened and disturbed in their minds who are otherwise inclinable enough
to come in, and submit: A third sort are encouraged to censure, and tax those
of superstition, and Popery, and Idolatry, who readily conform. And all this,
in opposition to a Gesture, which the most knowing, and eminent amongst the
Objectours, must needs acknowledge to be lawful in it self, practiced for
many years by the Churches of the West, and at this day retained by a great
part of the Protestant ones. As for the weak, who are pleaded for, there be
too many who think themselves the stronger sort, and condemn all those of
weakness, who are not of the same judgment with themselves. However, they have
time, and means of getting strength (if they will but make use of them) to
better their knowledge, and confirm their minds in the true nature, and use
of Christian liberty, the power of Superiors in determining of things
indifferent, and that obedience which is due by the law of God to such Decrees
of theirs. And if some out of weakness are offended at others kneeling, there
be far more who be offended at their sitting upon far better Grounds. And is it
reasonable, that there should be no regard had of these; but that the weaker
and lesser part shall be authorized to scandalize the greater, and stronger,
and every way more considerable? Charity seeks not her own, nor is partial
to one side, but indifferently respects all Christians in their several
Degrees. And, if Charity bind me to regard all, Charity and Duty both bind me
to regard my Superiors, who command me to Kneel. If the zealous pleaders for
the weak would but please to be as zealous in informing them aright, in
settling their minds, and pressing those Duties which they owe to their
Superiors in Church, and State, the pretended scandal would soon cease, and
the Schism close.

3. Those who will be kept from the Substance of a religious Duty, because they
refuse to comply with a circumstance, enjoined by lawful Authority, and
confessedly lawful in it self (as being a Gesture no where condemned, but
rather commanded by God, in holy Scripture* may justly blame themselves for
their ignorance or peevishness; but cannot justly accuse the Authority which
commandes it.

4. What liberty our Superiors will allow to such as have been misled in those
licentious Times; how much, or how long, or to whom they will permit it, is not
for me to determine or pass my censure on; but to pray, that God would please
to direct them in so hazardous a Point, that they may do all according to the
Rules of Christian prudence, and for the good of the Church. Whatsoever I here
say, is directed to such as are misled, and for their satisfaction, who cannot
with any Reason, or Justice, claim a perpetual exemption from obeying the
laws, (though some of them possibly may be dispenst with for a while) seeing
thereby all Ecclesiastical Authority would be trod under foot, the Laws
broken, and abolisht, all disorder, and confusion introduced, Schism
authorized, and the Disobedient confirmed in their errors, without any hope of
ever reducing them to the Unity of the Church. Were it not a far more
Christian, and charitable Course for such who have misled them, or countenanced
them in their error, to show them it by confessing their own; and do their
utmost endeavor, by informing them aright, to return them into the good old
Paths of the Church, and become their Guides in the way? This would be the
best evidence of their Repentance, Selfdeniall, Humility and zealous care of
those Souls, which have been hitherto misguided through their means. S. Paul
thought himsef obliged to confess his error, after he was converted; and to be
more zealous in converting souls, then he had been in destroying of them; which
caused him to labor more abunda^tly then all the rest of the Apostles. 1 Cor.
15. 10. S. Austin thought himself bound, in his latter days to look back on
what he had done, preached, and written; and upon a serious review thereof, to
confess the Errors, not only of his life, but of his Doctrine; of both which
he has left public monuments unto all Posterity, in his two Books of
Confession, and Recantation. Has he at all disparaged, or disgraced himself by
these two Books? Nay, has he not got more honor to himself thereby, than by
any two of the rest? If in others, he has showed more of the Scholar; in
these he has showed more of the Christian. His high wit and learning may shine
forth more conspicuously in some other Treatises; but his deep humility and
large charity are more legible in these. He thought it no blot to his
Reputation, to publish his Error, but to persist in it. And his own
conscience, he judged, would have been polluted, and other men's ensnared, if he
had not purged it by this Confession, and Recantation; which now present it
unstained unto God, and his Church. Would to God, those who read the Books, and
see the good effects thereof, would follow the example. Then would the Church,
in due time, recover both its Purity and its Peace.

5. Those, who would not have any Constraint now put upon the Conscience of any
one, nor so much as a Restraint of their Christian liberty in the use of things
indifferent, might have done well to have been more tender of forcing others
(when their Party was in power) not only to the Gesture of Sitting, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, (denying it to such who would not conform thereto,
contrary to their Judgment, to the Laws, and to their former Practice) but to
such Oaths, and Covenants, as were contrary to those they had formerly taken,
and to the Laws of the Land, and the express command of their Sovereign Lord
the King. But the present Power, as it is placed in the right Hands, so it
uses those hands far more gently, and complyantly, for the drawing of all to
conformity, and Obedience. But it is one Thing, to bear with the weak for a
while; an other, to cherish the Refractory in their wilfulness. One thing to
forbear the inflicting of the Penalty on some certain Persons, until all
fitting means be used of weaning them from their Errors, and ill Customs;
another to abrogate, and nullify the force of the Law, by indulging a general
Dispensation. A moderate, and seasonable pressing of Conformity will not drive
any from the Church, who are any way pliable, or inclinable to come in, but
gently draw them farther, by showing the excellent fruits of Unity, and Order;
the Beauty and the Peace which accompany them, with the necessity thereof in
order to the recovery, and preservation of Both. Whereas, if the People be
still suffered to follow their own Fancies, and false Guides, under pretense of
enjoying that which they are pleased to call Liberty of Conscience, it will be
impossible ever to reduce them into the fold of the Church. They will wander
about still, as foolish sheep use to do, and please themselves in the By paths
of their own choosing, follow the call of every false shepherd, straggle
farther and farther into forbidden Pastures, and never entertain a thought of
returning into that Field, which they first so foolishly forsook, to tire
themselves in their inconstant wanderings. And if the Shepherds follow them in
these Vagaries, (unless it be with a pious and charitable design of reducing
them home) they will soon weary them in the Pursuit, and send them back at last
with as little Patience, as they had Prudence at their setting forth. S.
Augustine observes, that the Donatists never seriously recollected themselves,
nor considered the Error of their way, till they were awakened by the Thunder
of the Emperors Edicts, which affrighted them into the Fold they had so
giddily abandoned; and then they could thank God for so seasonable a severity,
when they saw the Benefit of the change; whereas otherwise, if they had bin
still left at liberty to do what they listed, they had perished in their wanton
extravagancies, and fooled themselves into Damnation.

6. The Benefits arising from Conformity are many, and great; as Order, and
Decency, which cannot be preserved without Uniformity. But chiefly the Peace,
and Unity of the Church, which are so necessary for the maintenance of Truth,
of Obedience to Superiors, and the solid Edifying of all Christians in the
ways of Salvation. Which sure are more considerable than the gratifying of some
factious Humourists, or seduced Proselytes amongst us. As for the allowing a
liberty in things indifferent, to the Judgment, and Conscience of the users,
the Church leaves all Christians absolutely free, whilst it declares them
indifferent in their own nature, various in several Churches, and Changeable
in the same; not essential Parts, but circumstantiall Appendixes of Gods
worship. But to crave the same liberty for the use, and practice of them,
without any limitation, or regard had to the Determinations of just Authority,
is such a liberty, which never any well-setled Church enjoyed, or defired (I
believe) since the Apostles times; such as is inconsistent with the Apostles
Rules of Order, and Decency, and such as would bring in that Confusion into the
Church, whereof God is not the Author.

Ob. 5. This Gesture of kneeling at the Sacrament gives the juster cause of
offense, because it had its Original from the Pope of Rome; and (which is
worse) upon a very ill Ground, or supposall, viz. upon the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, whereon it was built; the scandalous consequent of a false
opinion. For when that doctrine was agreed on, and finally determined in the
great Council of Laterane, under Innoc. 3d. then, and not before, was this
kneeling at the Sacrament, some few years after, enjoined by Honorius 3d. his
immediate successor, as a Gesture agreeable to express the Adoration which
was due to the Body of Christ, corporally present in the Sacrament. Now how can
that Gesture be fitly retained, much less rigorously imposed on all, which had
so false, and unwarrantable an Original?
Answ. 1. Suppose that this kneeling had been first introduced by the Bishop of
Rome, and that upon a false supposall, yet it follows not thence, that it may
not be used by the Reformed Churches, or imposed by our Superiors, upon a
true, and just Ground. Now, the Church of England, which enjoyneth kneeling,
openly declares her Judgment against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
the Adoration of the Host, which is grounded upon that Principle, or
Supposall. Whereby all Scandal, and the very Appearance of evil, is quite
taken away, whenas the same Authority which enjoynes the one, renounceth the
other, as our Church does in her 28. Article. When Naaman had openly professed
that he would not sacrifice to any God, but the God of Israel, he was dismissed
with a Blessing by the Prophet Elisha, and had an implicit leave given him
(testified by the silence of the Prophet) not only to enter the house of the
Idol Rimmon, but to bow down therein, whilst his Master the King leaned on his
shoulder. The other Tribes were satisfied at the building of the great Altar by
the Banks of Jordan, when they heard the answer of the Tribes of Ruben, and
Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, that they had not built it for sacrifice
to worship any false God by, or the true God in a Schismatical way; but merely
for a monument of Concord, and equal privileges in the service of the same
God. The Primitive Christians in Julian the Apostates time, and under the ten
Persecutions, would not so much as cast a Grain of Incense into the fire which
was made before an Idol, (no not to save their lives) because it would have
been looked upon and interpreted, as a divine, religious honor done to that
Idol. Neither would they bow themselves before the Romane-Eagles, the Ensigns
of the Camp, for the same Reason. Yet the same Christians made no scruple of
lifting up their hands and eyes toward Heaven, when they prayed in the open
fields (as that Legion of Christian Soldiers did (mentioned by Justin Martyr)
which obtained rain for the Army of Marcus Antoninus in a time of great
Distress) not fearing thereby to scandalize the Heathen, and confirm them in
their idolatrous worshipping of the Sun* Moon and Stars; because it was
sufficiently known unto the world, to whom they directed that bodily worship,
viz. not to the Host of Heaven, but to the Lord of Hosts. In like manner the
Church of England cannot be justly censured, for confirming the Romanists in
the Belief of Transubstantiation, and the suitable Practice of adoring the
Host, because she has professedly condemned both that Principle, and that
Practice, and openly declared that she directs not this Bodily worship of
kneeling to the visible signs in the Sacrament, immediately, or indirectly, or
any way whatsoever, (as it is commonly minced, and qualified with distinctions)
but solely and immediately to God in Heaven. Yea I remember to have some where
read, that the same primitive Christians refused not to bow down and prostrate
themseves before the Statues of the Emperors, because it was reputed a civil
honor, and so professed by themselves. And though they were taxed by some of the
Heathen for worshipping of Ceres and Bacchus, because they adored at the
receiving of the Bread, and Wine in the Sacrament, yet they constantly retained
the same Gesture, not thinking fit to alter it, upon so groundless a slander.
Yea Mr Cartwright acknowledges, in his Epistle to the Church of England, That
if among the Romish filth we find any good Thing, that we willingly receive,
not as theirs, but as the Jews did the holy Arc from the Philistines. For
herein (says he) it is true that is said, The sheep must not lay down her
Fell, because she sees the wolf sometimes clothed with it. And the Apostle
has taught us, that it is lawful to eat that meat which has been sacrificed
to Idols, asking no question for Conscience sake. 1 Cor. 10. 25, 27. Why may we
not then use that Gesture aright, which has been abused to Idolatry?

2. But upon a more serious and considerate Review of what was decreed by Pope
Honorius, some few years after the Laterane Council under Innocent 3. we
shall find, not that he enjoined kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament,
but Bowing at the Elevation thereof, and the carrying it about in Procession.
Which also appears clearly enough by the Practice of the Romanists at this
Day, who perform their Adorations accordingly. Honorius Decree runs thus.
Extra. De Celeb. Missarum. cap. 10. Sacerdos frequenter doceat Plebem suam, ut
cum in Celebratione Missarum Elevatur hostia salutaris, se reverenter inclinet;
idem faciens cum eam defert Presbyter ad infirmum. that is, Let the Priest
often teach his People, that when the Saving Host is elevated at the
Celebration of the Mass they reverently bow themselves; doing the like, when
the Priest carries it to the Sick. Ye see the Reverence here enjoined, is not
kneeling, but Bowing. And the Time whereat this Bowing is to be performed, is
not the Time of Receiving the Sacrament, but when the Host was elevated in the
Mass, or conveyed to the sick. This Decree was set forth in the year 1220.
and founded on a former Decree of the Laterane Council under Innocent 3d. some
5. years before; wherein it was determined, Jesu Christi Corpus and sanguinem,
in Sacramento Altaris, sub speciebus Panis, and Vini Veraciter contineri,
Transubstantiatis Pane in Corpus and Vino in Sanguinem, potestate divina. that
is, The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, in the Sacrament of the Altar, are
verily contained under the forms of Bread, and Wine; the Bread being
transubstantiated into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood of Christ by the
power Divine. See for this also, Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 4, 5. Where the
Cultus latriae, or divine worship exhibited to the Sacrament, is made the
necessary consequent of Transubstantiation. From the same fountain sprang the
Institution of that superstitious Festival of Corpus Christi, by Vrbane 4th.
Anno 1264. confirmed by Clement 5. Anno 1311. But what is all this to the
Church of England, or other Protestant Churches, which use kneeling at the
Receiving of the Sacrament, touching which Pope Honorius enjoined nothing, nor
meddled with it at all, but left it as he found it, practiced many years before
his time? whoever then retain this ancient Gesture, and comply not at all
with the Papists, in worshipping at the lifting up of the Host, or the
carrying it about in Procession, but contrariwise renounce Both, cannot be
said, with Color of Reason, to confirm them in their Error, or misguided
Worship, by obeying the Decree of P. Honorius. No more, then they can be said
to confirm them in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, by reteining those
words, This is my Body, This is my Blood, at the Celebration of the Sacrament;
on the misunderstanding of which that Doctrine was grounded. Why may not we as
justly retain the Adoration in the receiving, directing it to the proper
Object, Christ corporally present in Heaven, and spiritually in the Sacrament?
The [Sursum corda] in the Communion-Service [Lift up your Hearts unto the Lord]
which our Church has borrowed of the primitive Age, shows evidently enough
whither our Worship is directed.

Ob. 6. At the Sacrament we put on and act the persons of coheires and
represent our sitting with Christ at his Table, in his Kingdom of Glory, which
requires a gesture of familiarity and fellowlike equality, kneeling then is
very unsuitable, for it, as being a Posture of Inferiority, Subjection, and
Humility: Besides, it crosses the assurance of our Coheirship with Christ
because it implies an unfellow-like and inferior Condition in our future state
of Glory, and deba^^s us from sociall admittance and entertainment as Guests at
his Table.
Answ. 1. If these Patrons of Nonconformity did not openly profess a sound
belief in the Holy Trinity, and the Godhead of our Savior, I could not
imagine this objection could have proceeded from any other than some of those
monstrous Apostates in Poland, who revolted to Photinianisme, and other
Blasphemous Sects; so much pride and presumption it has in it, and so manifest
a Tendency to the embracing of their opinions. Neither has it more Reason,
than Religion in it, as being a Complication of Errors, and Absurdities and
groundless supposals. It supposes, 1. that we have a kind of equality with
Christ by our privilege of Coheirship; whereas there is a vast Distance
between us. He is Heir of all Things by Nature; we be Heirs by his free
Donation. Heaven was his possession from all Eternity; It is but prepared for
us, to be possessed after the Resurrection. it is his Inheritance by purchase;
ours by Promise. We are but Heirs in Hope, depending upon favor for Actual
Admission: He is actual Lord and Possessour, and has the Disposal of this
Kingdom at his Command. And however, by taking our Nature upon him, he became
of kin to us, and is not ashamed to call us Brethren; yet considering our
present vileness, and his Height of Majesty, methinks we should be ashamed,
and afraid too, not to acknowledge him such an elder Brother as is our Lord,
and Prince, who has the spirit without measure, anointed with the oil of
Gladness above his fellows, the supreme head of his Church, far exalted above
all Angels, as well as men. And all this, as Man. How much vaster a Distance is
there between us, and him, being considered as the Son of God, who thinks it no
Robbery to be equal unto his Father? and as such we consider him, when we
kneel to him in the Sacrament.

2. That our communicating at the Sacrament represents our future estate of
Glory, expressed by our Savior under the similitude of eating and drinking with
him at his Table in his Kingdom. Whereas our Savior clearly tells us, that we
are to celebrate it in co^memoration of his Passion that is past, not of our
preferment that is to come. This is my Blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. Mat. 26* 28. The Apostle tells us the
same: This is my Body, which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. 1
Cor. 11. 24. As often, as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show
the Lords death, till he come. v. 26.

3. That a Gesture of Humility, such as kneeling is, crosses, and hinders the
assurance of our Coheirship. Whereas, if we will believe the Scriptures, there
is no virtue which better assures our Interest in Christ, and the Promises
which are made to us in him, than Humility, which if it be not laid very deep,
as the foundation of all other Graces, the whole structure will soon come to
Ruin. The first lesson which our Savior gave his Followers, was to deny
themselves; without which they could neither bear his Cross, nor follow him.
Mat. 16. 24. And Christ's own Humility it is, which the Apostle would have us
set before our eyes, as a Pattern to follow, because thereby he obtained his
Glory. Phil. 2. 5-9. The deep Humility of the Centurion, and woman of Canaan,
very well consorted with an extraordinary Faith, and high Confidence in our
Savior; whereof the one thought not himself worthy, that Christ should honor
him so far, as to come under his Roof. Mat. 8. 8. And the other, as humbly took
upon Her the disgraceful name of a Dog. Mat. 15. 27. Yet both their Faiths are
so highly commended by our Savior, as none else seemed to come near them. O
Woman great is thy Faith. Be it unto thee even as thou will, said our Savior
to the one. Mat. 15. 28. I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.
Mat. 8. 10. says he to the other.

4. Christ's advancing our Nature, by exalting it to his Fathers right Hand, and
his assuming us into a kind of Fraternity, and Coheirship with himself, should
serve to make us the more humble, to confess our unworthiness, and to keep a
geater Distance; not to puff us up, and make us presume upon our Privileges.
It was the Guise, and Character of the Pharisees, to press for the highest
Rooms. Mat. 23. 6. Whereas Christ charge his own Disciples to sit down in
the lowest; withal telling them, that whosoever exalts himself, shall be
abased; and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted: Luke 14. 7, 10, 11.
This effect the high Favors of God wrought in the Blessed Virgin, and John the
Baptist. When the one heard from the Angel Gabriel, that she should be the
Mother of the Son of God; She replied, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord. And
humbly thanked God in her Song, that he had regarded the low estate of his
Handmaiden, Luke 1. 38, 48. And when Christ came to the other to be Baptized,
he refused, saying, I have need to be baptized of Thee, and come Thou to me*
Mat. 3. 14. Yea he counted himself unworthy to stoop down, and unloose his
shoe-latchet, Mark 1. 17. How much fitter then were it for us, who come so
far short of these two eminent Patterns; either, with the Prodigal in the
Gospel, to come unto our heavenly Father with the like humble Confession, I
have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son. Luke 15. 18, 19, 21. Or with the penitent Publican, to stand at
a Distance, cast down our Eyes, and knock our Breasts, and say, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18. 13, 14. So shall we be justified, with the
one, and be acknowledged for Children, with the other.

5. The Non-conformists refuse not to kneel in Prayer, wherein yet they
profess to speak with an humble confidence, and familiarity unto God, as to a
Father; and that by the Spirit of Adoption. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. why is not
the same Gesture as suitable at the receiving of the Communion, notwithstanding
they there put on the persons of Children, and Coheirs? Or why can they not
bend their knees, as well as bare their Heads, when they receive it? They use
not to fit bare when invited to the Table of their Superiors. Why use they
this Reverence, when invited to their Elder Brother, and Coheire? This
evidently shows they make a difference between their Carriage at a common, and
this holy Table. Let them then but conform their knees unto their Heads, by a
proportionable Reverence, and the matter is at an end. As for crossing the
Assurance of our Coheirship, sure the contrary experience of those many, who
receive it keeling, is a sufficient Argument, that the Assurance of our
Privileges, and interest in Christ, may very well consist with this lowly
posture; and is so far from being crossed, that it is furthered thereby.
There is no Duty exempted from Humility, which is so necessary to balance all
our Actions.

6. But suppose that which the objection would have; That the Lords Supper
celebrated here in the Church Militant represents the Supper of the Lamb in
the Church Triumphant. Rev. 19. 9. and that we are therein to act the persons
of Coheirs; yet it follows not from thence, that we should sit thereat, as
companions, and Familiars of Christ; seeing the triumphant Saints themselves,
who are admitted into that Fellowship, and are Christ's Guests at that Supper,
are represented to us by S. John in a quite contrary posture. And therefore if
we will do the will of God on Earth, as it is done by these Saints in Heaven,
we must imitate them in this also, by using the like Gesture. For Saint John
tells us, that the 24. Elders (who represent the chief Heads, or Pastors of the
Church) fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and worship him that
lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne. Revel. 4.
10. nor only so, but before the Lamb also, who appeared before the Throne, as
he had been slain; as he is also represented, when we worship him in the
Eucharist, Revel. 5. 6, 8, 14. The People join with their Pastors in the same
humble Gesture, and have the Angels for their fellow-worshippers. cap. 7. 9,
11. who are said to be fed by the Lamb, and to be led unto living fountains of
water, having lately come out of great Tribulation, and washed their Robes
white in the blood of the Lamb, v. 14. Now, in the Sacrament, we are not only
fed by this Lamb, but feed upon him; we have our spiritual thirst allayed by
this fountain of life, being thereby made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.
13. Therein also we are cleansed by the Blood of Christ, the Blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of Sins, Mat. 26. 27, 28.
The same Gesture is ascribed unto the 24. Elders and to the 4. Beasts, when God
had judged the great Whore, and avenged the Blood of his Saints. Revel. 19. 4,
7, 9. Is not the practice of these heavenly Inhabitants a good warrant and
Pattern to the Saints on Earth, to use the like prostration in the worship of
God? especially, at the Eucharist, wherein we offer up the same sacrifice of
Praise, for the favors bestowed on us through the merits of the Lamb slain,
and the judging of our Spiritual Enemies, who were conquered, and condemned,
when he sufferd on the Cross? But if any shall reply that S. John, in these
visions, describes the Church-Militant under the name of the
Church-Triumphant; I answer that though several Circumstances of the Text seem
to demonstrate the contrary, yet the Argument will not loose its force upon
this supposall, but rather get strength thereby. For from hence it will
necessarily follow, that Prostration, or bodily Adoration at the Supper of the
Lamb, viz. at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was the Gesture used by the
Christian Church in S. John's time; otherwise these visions of his had presented
us with an improper and untrue Representation thereof, which we cannot
reasonably imagine. So then the use of an Adorative Gesture at the Sacrament,
so ancient as the Apostles Days, will serve to justify our kneeling, if we had
no other Argument.

Ob. 7. Kneeling at the Lords Table is contrary to the law of nature and
decency, and to a Table of Repast. It is a private worship, during the public*
Besides, the Elements which Christ consecrated, and made choice of for the
outward signs in the Lords Supper, are mean and ordinary, and therefore he
cannot in any reason be thought to have intended any such Adoration* or
Reverence to be used at the partaking of them. Lastly, the Eucharist is a Feast
of Joy and Thanksgiving, and therefore a Gesture of Humiliation, such as
kneeling is, is improper.
Ans. This is a complication of petty cavils, which scarce deserve an answer,
but that I am unwilling to pass by any Objection which I have met with, least
it should prove a scandal to some weaker Christian, in case it lie unremoved.
I answer then,

1. It has been, I hope, sufficiently proved, that kneeling is most suitable to
the Duty performed at the Lords Table, and therefore agreeable to the Law of
God, who enjoynes that Duty. They are but ill judges of Decency, who so far
forget Themselves, and their Duty, as to approach unto Gods Table (where he is
so eminently present, and proffers such high, undeserved Favors to his
unworthy Servants) with the same Boldness, as to their own, or that of their
Equals. The Church of Christ, in all Ages, has thought it undecent to receive
the Sacrament with any other Gesture than that which they used at their public
Prayers, at which sitting was never used. Now Christian modesty and humility
should prevail with us so far, as not to censure and condemn so general a
Practice, but submit our judgment to that of the Church. But the great
Stumbling Block of the Non-conformists, in this Particular, is this, that they
look upon the Eucharist, as a common Feast amongst Equals, not as a Dole to
poor Beggars: upon Christ, as their Brother, not as their Lord: upon
themselves, as Guests, not as Suppliants; and forget the Altar of Worship,
whilst they are too intent upon the Table of Repast.

2. Why may not a private worship, be used during the Public? some kneeling,
whilst others stand, or sit? If the contrary hold good, no man may kneel, when
he first comes into the Church, whilst others perhaps are sitting at the
Hearing of the Lessons. No Preacher may kneel, when he enters the Pulpit,
whilst the People in the mean time are busied in singing of the Psalm. Yea
Hannah shall be condemned for praying at the Tabernacle, the Place of public
worship, when she privately importuned God to look on her Affliction, and give
her a Son. It appears by King Solomon's Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple,
that the Israelites put up their private occasional petitions in the house of
Prayer. 1 King. 8. 38, 39. 41, 43. S. Paul's practice shows the same. Act. 22.
17. When the Priest offered up the Sacrifices (which were of several sorts)
the several Parties which brought them, offered up withal their particular
Devotions, whether Confession, Prayer, or Praise, according to the nature of
the Sacrifice, and the condition of the Supplicant. When Zacharias offered
Incense in the Temple, the People were praying without; and, for ought the Text
tells us, every one singly by himself, during the time of the public Service,
which was performed in the name and behalf of the whole. This also condemns
the practice of all those who stand at the receiving of the Communion (as many
of the Non-conformists did, and many whole Churches now do, whom they will be
loath to condemn) whilst the maine of the Congregation, who yet keep their
Seats, or are newly returned to them, are employed in meditation, reading, or
singing of Psalms. The like is done in greater Congregations, where they sit
one Company after another. So that what ever Gesture is used, there must be
place left for private Devotions.

3. As for the meaness of the Elements, which is pretended in prejudice of
kneeling at the Receipt of them it is an Argument which savours of too much
folly and profaneness. For if we consider the Elements in themselves, they are
the Best, the most necessary, and the most excellent of Foods; Bread, the
staff of life, and strengthner of man's Heart; Wine the chief Refresher, and
Reviver of the Spirits. But if we look on them in their use and Designation,
(as they are to be looked on in the Sacrament) they are called by our Savior
himself (who best knew what they were) his own Body and Blood, that is,
sacred, and efficacious Instruments of conveying his Body and Blood unto us,
with all the virtues, and merits of his Death and Passion. And, whoever call,
or esteem such as these, mean and vile, are most unworthy Blasphemers, who as
little deserve to receive benefit from Christ, as they regard his Ordinances.

4. Joy and Thanksgiving very well suit with Humility, and a lowly Gesture.
What prudent or sober Person can judge it unfit to abase himself, when he
receives an high favor from a person of honor? or to bend his knees, when he
is dignifyed by his Prince? If we consider as we ought, either Gods Majesty, or
our own meanness, the more we are honored by him, the more we shall humble our
selves; confessing with Jacob, that we are less, than the least of Gods
Mercies; with Abraham, that we are Dust and Ashes; and with the Centurion in
the Gospel, that we are not worthy to receive Christ under our Roof. No sooner
had the Psalmist told us that God had set his Son Christ upon his holy Hill
of Sion, but he presently admonishes all of their Duty, viz. To serve the Lord
with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Psalm. 2. 11. And least any should
presume to plead a Privilege of Exemption, he calls upon the Greatest to
perform this Service, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth. v. 10. If those of the highest Rank must allay their Joy
with fear and Trembling, methinks, none of us should think our selves so
over-wise, great, or holy, as to neglect this instruction of the royal
Psalmist; but to express our Humility at so solemn a Service, as that of the
Eucharist; and abate somewhat of the swelling conceit of Coheirs, by remembering
that we are Children of this everlasting Father, as the Prophet Esaias styles our
Savior, Isa. 9. 6. and 8. 18. with Heb. 2. 13. and Subjects of this universal
Monarch, whom God has ent^roned upon his holy Hill, and put all Creatures
under his Foot, that so they might honor, and obey him, and be absolutely
subject to his Disposal.

FINIS.
ASHWELL'S PRIMITIVE GESTVRE At The COMMUNION.


