ANOTHER COLLECTION OF Philosophical CONFERENCES OF THE French Virtuosi, UPON
QUESTIONS of all SORTS; For the Improving of Natural Knowledge. Made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious Persons of that
Nation.

Rendered into English, By G. HAVERS, Gent. and J. DAVIES of Kidwelly, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring and John Starkey, and are to be sold at their
Shops at the George in Fleet Street near Clifford's-Inn, and the Mitre between
the Middle-Temple-Gate and Temple Bar. 1665.

IMPRIMATUR,

November. 20. 1663. WILLIAM MORICE.

PREFACE.
THe good Reception a Volume of the like Conferences appears to have found last
year by the speedy distribution of the Copies, has given encouragement to the
Version and Publication of this; wherein I assure my self the Readers will not
find themselves worse entertained at the second Course then they were at the
first; the Questions here being proportionably more Philosophical, and chosen
from such Subjects as are most inquired into at this day by the Curious of our
own Nation, who undoubtedly will find some contentment (if not satisfaction) in
reading what the Virtuosi of our Neighbour-Nation have discoursed touching
those Matters. I have often heard it spoken to the Commendation of an Eminent
Peer in the last Reign, That for an hour or two together he made the most
agreeable Conversation in the World; but if, upon parting, any one of the
Company happened to reflect upon what he had heard, he could not remember the
least particular passage, saving that he had spent such a portion of Time very
deliciously. 'Twas a happy Faculty for the Man; for he did his business by it,
and partly owed his Promotion to this Talent. I shall pronounce no otherwise
upon him but thus, That perhaps (as Tully said in almost a like case) he was a
better Gallant than a Wise Man should be: At least, this way of consuming Time,
argued a great Disease in Men's Minds, when they could be contented to feed upon
Air, and were so squeamish as not to be able to bear the wholesome Diet of solid
Discourse. It Is too apparent that the same Humor is still predominant in these
our days, wherein Gaming makes the whole Converse amongst the Gentry, who, like
rapacious Animals, meet together but to prey upon one another, whilst old
Stories, or News, and (for want of matter so innocent) Detractions, Derisions,
and Abuses are the only things that furnish talk to the Plebeians. Thus we
live, and yet pretend to be Reasonable Creatures; whilst true and solid Reason
is almost as obscurely discernable in our Commerce, as Sense and Motion are in
Sponges and Oisters. But it is hoped the better practice of some Excellent
Persons amongst our selves, may contribute much to the Reformation of this; and
to help it forward, it cannot but do some good (by exciting us to emulation) to
see what been already done by some Gentlemen of France, to whose excellent Wits
the World is beholden for these Conferences.

THE CONTENTS:
CONFERENCE CI. I. OF Sleep, and how long it ought to be. II. Which is the
strongest thing in the World. Page 1 CONFERENCE CII. I. Of the Gowt. II. Which
Condition is most expedient for the acquisition of Wisdom; Riches, or Poverty?
7 CONFERENCE CIII. I. Of Glass. II. Of Fucusses, or Cosmeticks. 13 CONFERENCE
CIV. I. Of Tobacco. II. Whether the Invention of Guns has done more hurt than
good. 19 CONFERENCE CV. I. Of Blood-letting. II. Which is the most Excellent of
the Soul's three Faculties, Imagination, Memory, or Judgment? 25 CONFERENCE
CVI. I. Of Dew. II. Whether it be expedient for Women to be Learned? 31
CONFERENCE CVII. I. Whether it be good to use Chemical Remedies? II. Whether
the Reading of Romances be profitable? 37 CONFERENCE CVIII. I. Of Talismans.
II. Whether a Country-life or a City-life is to be preferred? 43 CONFERENCE
CIX. I. Of Volcano's, or Subterranean Fires. II. Which age is most desirable.
49 CONFERENCE CX. I. Of Mineral Waters. II. Whether it be better to give than
to receive. p. 55 CONFERENCE CXI. I. Of Antidotes. II. Which is most
communicative Good or Evil. 61 CONFERENCE CXII. I. Why Animals cry when they
feel Pain. II. Whether it be expedient to have Enemies? 66 CONFERENCE CXIII. I.
Of the Iris, or Rainbow. II. Whether the Reading of Books is a fitter way for
Learning than Vocal Instructions? 71 CONFERENCE CXIV. I. Of the Milkie-Way. II
Which is most powerful, Gold or Iron? 79 CONFERENCE CXV. I. Of the cause of
Vapors. II. Which is less culpable, Rashness or Cowardice? 85 CONFERENCE CXVI.
Which Climate is most proper for Long-life? (The second Question is remitted to
the next Conference; and it is Resolved for diverse Reasons, that hereafter but
one be handled at a time.) 90 CONFERENCE CXVII. Which is most necessary to a
State, and most noble, Physic or Law? 93 CONFERENCE CXVIII. Of Sea-sickness.
96 CONFERENCE CXIX. Of Love by Inclination, or Sympathy. 99 CONFERENCE CXX. How
the Understanding moves the Will. 102 CONFERENCE CXXI. Whence come the Marks or
Spots wherewith Children are born? 107 CONFERENCE CXXII. Of the Original of
Forms. 111 CONFERENCE CXXIII. Whether Lean People are more healthy, and
long-lived than Fat? 114 CONFERENCE CXXIV. Whether we may better trust one whom
we have obliged, or one that has obliged us? 117 CONFERENCE CXXV. Of the
Causes of Freezing and Thawing. 119 CONFERENCE CXXVI. Of the Causes of the
Small Pox. 123 CONFERENCE CXVII. Whether we profit best by Precepts or
Examples? 126 CONFERENCE CXXVIII. Of Incubi and Succubae; and whether Devils
can generate. 129 CONFERENCE CXXIX. Which Animal is happiest, according to
Nature? 132 CONFERENCE CXXX. Whether is better, that Men have many Wives, or
Women many Husbands. 135 CONFERENCE CXXXI. Of the manner of Accretion. 138
CONFERENCE CXXXII. Whether the Dinner or Supper ought to be largest. 141
CONFERENCE CXXXIII. Which of the Humane Passions is most excusable? 144
CONFERENCE CXXXIV. Which is the most laudable Temperament? 147 CONFERENCE
CXXXV. Of Happiness and Unhappiness; and whether men are Happy or Unhappy,
because they really are so, or because they think themselves so. 150 CONFERENCE
CXXXVI. Of the Original of Precious Stones. 153 CONFERENCE CXXXVII. Of the
Generation of Metals. 156 CONFERENCE CXXXVIII. Whether there be an Elementary
Fire, other than the Sun. p. 159 CONFERENCE CXXXIX. Which is most desirable,
long or short Life? 162 CONFERENCE CXL. Of the Lethargy. 165 CONFERENCE CXLI.
Whether it be better to marry, or not to marry? 168 CONFERENCE CXLII. At what
time the Rational Soul is infused. 171 CONFERENCE CXLIII. Of Metempsychosis, or
Transmigration of Souls. 174 CONFERENCE CXLIV. Whether there were braver Men in
any preceding Age, than in the present. 177 CONFERENCE CXLV. Of the Serene,
which is a hurtful Dew falling in Summer-Evenings. 180 CONFERENCE CXLVI.
Whether the French are light and inconstant; and why? 183 CONFERENCE CXLVII. Of
the sundry Motions of the Sea and Rivers. 186 CONFERENCE CXLVIII. Whether is
better, to Love, or to be Loved? 189 CONFERENCE CXLIX. Of Hair. 192 CONFERENCE
CL. Whether Alterations of States have natural Causes. 195 CONFERENCE CLI.
Which is more healthful, To become warm by the Fire, or by Exercise. 198
CONFERENCE CLII. Whether Wine helps or hinders Digestion, and why? 201
CONFERENCE CLIII. Why it is colder at Daybreak than any other time of the Night
or Day. 203 CONFERENCE CLIV Whence the whiteness of Snow proceeds. 206
CONFERENCE CLV. Whether Courage be natural or acquired. 209 CONFERENCE CLVI.
Whether Men, not having learned of others, would frame Language to themselves.
112 CONFERENCE CLVII. Whether is better, to guard the Frontier, or carry the
War into the Enemies Country. 215 CONFERENCE CLVIII. Whence diversity of
Opinions proceeds. 218 CONFERENCE CLIX. Why there is more VVind at Sea than at
Land. 221 CONFERENCE CLIX. Whether it be easier to procure Obedience by
Gentleness than by Terror. 224 CONFERENCE CLX. Whether Trading derogate from
Gentility. 225 CONFERENCE CLXI. Why the French are so much incensed with the
Lie. 128 CONFERENCE CLXII. Why every one thinks himself well enough provided
with Wit; and some, better than others. 231 CONFERENCE CLXIII. How Animals are
bred of Putrefaction. 234 CONFERENCE CLXIV. Of Zoophytes, or Plant-Animals. 237
CONFERENCE CLXV. Of Trubbs or Truffs, and Mushroms. 240 CONFERENCE CLXVI. Which
is to be preferred, Company or Solitude? 242 CONFERENCE CLXVII. Whether Birds,
or four-footed Animals, or Fishes be most Intelligent. 245 CONFERENCE CLXVIII.
What is the cause of the Crisis of Diseases. 248 CONFERENCE CLXIX. What Bodily
Exercise is the most healthful. 252 CONFERENCE CLXX. Whether Virtue consists in
Mediocrity. 255 CONFERENCE CLXXI. Whether the Imagination be able to produce
and cure Diseases. 258 CONFERENCE CLXXII. Of Fascination, or Bewitching. 261
CONFERENCE CLXXIII. Of Amulets; and whether Diseases are curable by Words,
Tickets, or other things hanged at the Neck, or applied to the Body of the
Diseased. 264 CONFERENCE CLXXIV. Whether Fruition diminishes Love. 266
CONFERENCE CLXXV. Whether 'twere better to know all that men now know, or all
that they ignore. 269 CONFERENCE CLXXVI. Whether Music does more hurt or good.
272 CONFERENCE CLXXVII. Whether Barrenness is most commonly the fault of
Husbands or of Wives. 275 CONFERENCE CLXXVIII. Whether Complaisance proceeds
from Magnanimity or Poorness of Spirit. 279 Touching the means of
re-establishing Commerce. 282 CONFERENCE CLXXIX. What are the most common
Causes of Lawsuits; and why they are more now than heretofore. 288 CONFERENCE
CLXXX. Whether more hurt or good has proceeded from sharing the parts of
Physic between Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chirurgions. 291 CONFERENCE
CLXXXI. Whether there be any Real Evil besides Pain. 293 CONFERENCE CLXXXII.
Whether man be most diseased of all Creature, and why? 295 CONFERENCE CLXXXIII.
Of the Greeness of Plants. 298 CONFERENCE CLXXXIV. Of the Cold of the middle
Region of the Air. 300 CONFERENCE CLXXXV. Of the Generation of Males and
Females. 302 CONFERENCE CLXXXVI. Whether the French Tongue be sufficient for
learning all the Sciences. 304 CONFERENCE CLXXXVII. Of diversity of Colors in
one and the same Subject. 306 CONFERENCE CLXXXVIII. Whether we are more
perspicacious in the Affairs of others, or our own, and why? 308 CONFERENCE
CLXXXIX. Of the Original of Mountains. 310 CONFERENCE CXC. Whence proceed good
and bad Gestures, Gracefulness and ill Aspects. 313 CONFERENCE CXCI. Which is
most proper for Study, the Evening or the Morning. 316 CONFERENCE CXCII. Who
are the most Ingenious of the World. 319 CONFERENCE CXCIII. Of the Fraternity
of the Rosie-Cross. CONFERENCE CXCXIV. What Paracelsus meant by the Book M. 326
CONFERENCE CXCV. Of the Art of Raimond Lully. 329 CONFERENCE CXCVI. Why a
Needle Touched by a Loadstone turns toward the North? 332 CONFERENCE CXCVII.
What Sect of Philosophers is most to be followed. 334 CONFERENCE CXCVIII. Why
Mules breed not. 336 CONFERENCE CXCIX. Of the Mandrake. 338 CONFERENCE CC. Of
Panick Fear. 343 CONFERENCE CCI. Of the Water-drinker of S. Germain's Fair. 345
CONFERENCE CCII. Why dead Bodies bleed in the presence of their Murderers. 350
CONFERENCE CCIII. Of the Unicorn. 353 CONFERENCE CIV. Of Satyrs. 357 CONFERENCE
CCV. Of the Phoenix. 360 CONFERENCE CCVI. Of the Sensitive Plants. 362
CONFERENCE CCVII. Of the Bezoar. 365 CONFERENCE CCVIII. Whence proceeds the
sudden Death of Men and Animals upon descending into certain Pits. 371
CONFERENCE CCIX. Whether a Dead Body can be preserved naturally many years. 373
CONFERENCE CCX. Of the Remora. 375 CONFERENCE CCXI. Of Negroes. 377 CONFERENCE
CCXII. Of Ecstacies. 380 CONFERENCE CCXIII. Of the Cock, and whether the Lion
be frightened at his Crowing? 388 CONFERENCE CCXIV. Of the Sibyls. 392
CONFERENCE CCXV. Whether of two Bodies of different weight, the one descends
faster than the other, and why? 399 CONFERENCE CCXVI. Of the Silkworm. 402
CONFERENCE CCXVII. Why Ice being harder than Water is yet lighter? 406
CONFERENCE CCXVIII. Of Masks, and whether it be lawful for any to disguise
themselves. 409 CONFERENCE CCXIX. Of Fables and Fictions, and whether their
conveniences or inveniences be greater. 413 CONFERENCE CCXX. Whether it be
better to go to Bed late, and rise betimes in the Morning; or do the contrary.
416 CONFERENCE CCXXI. Whether the Child derives more from the Father or the
Mother. 420 CONFERENCE CCXXII. Whether is harder, for a Virtuous Man to do that
which is Evil; or for a Vicious Man to do that which is good. 423 CONFERENCE
CCXXII. Whether a piece of Iron laid upon the Cask, prevents Thunder from
marring Wine contained within it, and why? 427 CONFERENCE CCXXIV. Of
Stage Plays; and whether they be advantageous to a State, or not? 431
CONFERENCE CCXXV. Whether that Temperament of the Body which conduces most to
Health, be also the most convenient for the Mind. 434 CONFERENCE CCXXVI.
Whether it be more expedient for a Man to have only one Friend or many. 438
CONFERENCE CCXXVII. Of the Oracles. 442 CONFERENCE CCXXVIII. Of the Tingling of
the Ears. 447 CONFERENCE CCXXIX. Of Philtres, and whether there be any proper
Remedies for the procuring of Love. 451 CONFERENCE CCXXX. Of Atoms. 454
CONFERENCE CCXXXI. Whether the King's Evil may be cured by the touching of a
Seventh Son, and why? 458 CONFERENCE CCXXXII. Of Conjuration. 462 CONFERENCE
CCXXXIII. Of Natural Magic. 465 CONFERENCE CCXXXIV. Of the moles and marks
appearing in the Face. 468 CONFERENCE CCXXXV. Of Auguries and Auspices. 473
CONFERENCE CCXXXVI. Whether those Children who are born with Cawls about their
whole or some parts of their Bodies are always fortunate, and why? 478
CONFERENCE CCXXXVII. Of Antiperistasis. 482 CONFERENCE CCXXXVIII. Of the
Sympathetical Powder. 486 CONFERENCE CCXXXIX. Whether there be any such
Creatures as the Ancients conceived the Satyrs to be? 489 CONFERENCE CCXL.
Whether it be better to bury or to burn the bodies of the Dead? 493
PHILOSOPHICAL CONFERENCES. Part II.
CONFERENCE CI. I. Of Sleep, and how long it ought to be. II. Which is the
strongest thing in the World.
AS Nature is the Principle of Motion, so she is Of Sleep, and how long it
ought to be.
which is the cessation of the actions of an Animal, to whom alone it has been
assigned, in regard no other Creature besides becomes weary in its Operations:
For all Animals, even the lowest degree of Insects, sleep; although such who
have hard eyes and scales, sleep more obscurely then the rest; and Birds more
lightly then four-footed Beasts which suck, because they have a less and dryer
Brain, and consequently less need sleep, whose use is to moisten and refresh
that part. Hence Man, having of all Animals the largest Brain, has also need
of the longest sleep, which ought to be about seven hours. Wherefore I cannot
but wonder that Plato, in his first Book of Laws, would have his Citizens rise
in the night to fall to their ordinary employments; for this disturbing of
their rest were the way to make a Commonwealth of Fools; the Brain, by
watchings acquiring a hot and dry intemperature, which begets igneous spirits,
whose mobility not permitting the Mind to consider the species impressed upon
them, is the cause of unsteady and impetuous sallies of the Mind; as, on the
contrary, sleep too excessive fills the ventricles of the Brain (wherein the
Soul exercises her Faculties) with abundance of vapors and humidities, which
offuscating and troubling the species, the Mind thereby becomes slothful and
dull.

The second said, That Privations are understood by their Habits; and therefore
Sleep, which is a privation of Sense, cannot be better known than by the
functions of the outward Senses, which so long as an Animal exercises it is
said to be awake, and to sleep when it ceases to employ the same. And being
Sensation is performed by means of the animal Spirits, refined out of the
natural and vital, and sent from the Brain into the Sensories, which Spirits
receive the species of the sensible object, and carry it to the Inward Sense,
the common Arbiter and Judge of all external objects; hence, when those Spirits
happen to fail, or the Common Sense is bound up, the other external Senses
cannot discharge their offices: Upon which account the Philosophers have
defined Sleep, The ligation of the First Sense; or, The rest of the Spirits and
Blood: And the Physicians, The cessation of all outward Senses for the health
and repose of an Animal; hereby distinguishing it from the cessation of the
outward Senses in Swoonings, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Carus,
Coma, and such sorts of morbifick and praeternatural sleep, produced by causes
acting rather by an occult and somniferous property, then by excess of cold or
moisture; otherwise Winter, Ice, and the coldest things, should cause sleep;
Wine, Annis, Opium, Henbane, and abundance of hot Medicaments, should not be
Narcotick, as experience evinces them to be. But natural sleep is produced by
vapors elevated from the aliments into the brain; which moreover performing in
us the office of a Ventose or Cupping-glass, draws to it self those humid
vapors, condenses them by its coldness, and resolves them into a gentle dew,
which falling upon the rise or beginning of the Nerves, obstructs the passage
to the animal Spirits, the instruments of Sensation and voluntary Motion, which
it hinders; though not Motion, so much as Sensation; because the Nerves of the
hinder part of the Brain, destinated to Motion, being harder, do not so easily
imbibe those vapors, as those of the forepart, destinated to Sensation: But
when the Heat and Spirits, whereof there had been an absumption, are again
sufficiently repaired, they move anew toward the Brain, where they resolve
those dews which stopped the passage, and hindered the commerce of the vital
Spirits with the animal; whereupon we naturally and without violence awake: So
likewise, the violence of an extrinsecal object importunately striking the
external Senses, obliges the Soul to send other Spirits to the assistance of
the few remaining therein, and which before this supply apprehend objects only
confusedly.

The Third said, Sleep is not the Quiescence of the animal Spirits, for these
are active, and form Dreams whilst we sleep; nor of the vital, which have no
relaxation or rest so long as the Animal has life; much less of the natural,
Nutrition being performed best during sleep, which is the cause why sleeping
fattens. Neither is the Brain's humidity the cause of sleep, as it is commonly
held; but the defect of vital heat in the Heart, in a sufficient degree for
performing the functions of the outward Senses. Moreover the sudden seizing and
abruption of sleep, which we observe, cannot be produced but by a very movable
cause, such as the gross vapor of aliments is not; but the vital heat is,
being carried into all parts of the body in an instant: Whence it is that we
observe the same to be more pale during sleep, (as having less of the said
heat) than during Evigilation.

The Fourth said, That indeed the adequate cause of sleep is not a vapor
arising from the aliments, since it is procured by abundance of other causes,
which produce no evaporation; as Weariness, Music, Silence, and Darkness:
Neither is it the abovementioned deficience of Vi^^l Heat, which indeed is
necessary to the Organs, inasmuch as they are endu'd with life, but not to make
them capable of sense; there being sufficient in them even during sleep, when
the parts are found hot enough for Sensation, if heat were the cause thereof,
as it is not: But the right cause consists in the Animal Spirits, for which, as
being the noblest instruments of the Body, I conceive there is a particular
faculty in the Brain, which administers and governs them, sending them to the
Organs, when there is need of them; and causing them to return back, in order
to be restored and supplied: As there is a particular faculty in the Heart,
overruling and moving the Vital Spirits as it pleases; sometimes diffusing
them outward in Joy, Anger, and Shame; sometimes causing them to retreat, in
order to succor the Heart in Sadness, Grief, and Fear.

The Fifth said, The Empire of Sleep, whom Orpheus calls King of Gods and Men,
is so sweet, that Not to be of its party is to be an enemy to Nature: It Is the
charm of all griefs both of body and mind; and was given to man, not only for
the refreshment of both, but chiefly for the liberty of the Soul; because it
makes both the Master and the Slave, the poor and the rich equal: It Is a sign
of health in young people, and causes a good constitution of Brain,
strengthening the same, and rendering all the functions of the mind more
vigorous; whence came the saying, That the Night gives counsels; because then
the Mind is freed from the tyranny of the Senses, it reasons more solidly, and
its operations are so much the more perfect as they are more independent on
matter; and 'twas during the repose of sleep that most of the Ecstasies and
prophetical Visions happened to the Saints. Moreover frequent sleep is a sign
of a very good nature: For being conciliated only by the benignity of a temper
moderately hot and moist, the Sanguine and Phlegmatic, whose humor is most
agreeable, are more inclined thereunto than the Bilious and Melancholy, in
regard of their heat and dryness, which resolve and dissipate the animal
Spirits, as a vapourous humidity hinders their effusion, by the obstruction
which it causes in the original of the Nerves; or, which is most probable,
because the clouds of those vapors occupying the ventricles of the Brain, by
their humidity moisten and relax the animal Spirits, which remain immovable
till they be delivered from the importunity of those vapors; which moreover
more easily ascending, when the Body is at rest, it happens that Sleep is
frequently caused, not only by watchings, cares, labor, bathing, heat, and
other things which dissipate the Spirits; but also by sounds, gentle murmurs of
water, frictions, and motions, silence, and darkness; unless we had rather say,
That the animal Spirits, being most subtle and luminous bodies, retire inwards
during the darkness, which is contrary to them.

The Sixth said, That Sleep being not only a depravation but a total privation
of actions, since a thing exists but so far as it acts; at the same proportion
that we love our own Being, we ought to hate Sleep, and love Watching. The
great George Castriot, the scourge of the Turks, never slept more then two
hours; and the Poets had reason to term Sleep, The Image of Death, which the
Scripture also expresses by Sleeping. As therefore Death is to be avoided as
much as possible, so also ought Sleep; were it not that both of them, being
inevitable evils, all we can do is to keep as far off them, and suffer our
selves to be led as little to them, as may be. The Poets themselves seem
willing to imprint in us a horror of Sleep, when they feign it the Son of Hell
or Erebus, and Night, the brother of Death, the father of Morpheus, and that
his Palace was amidst the darkness of the Cimmerians. Moreover, the most
imperfect Animals sleep more then others, which is the reason Zoophytes, or
Plant-animals, as the Sponge, Coral, and Oisters, sleep continually; Snails,
and some Flys, three or four months; Bears, longer then other Animals; and
amongst these, Birds, as partaking more of the nature of Heaven, sleep less
then four-footed Beasts: A Child, so long as it approaches a bestial life in
its Mothers belly, and for the first years, sleeps more than when it is grown to
Manhood; and being again become by Age a Child, sleeps more than formerly, till
he comes to the last sleep of death, which reduces him to nothing. Women,
phlegmatic persons, drunkards, and block-heads, sleep more then Men, sober,
and witty persons. For we are no more to refer to the abuse of these Times in
sleeping very much, then to other Vices of the Age; amongst the rest, Idleness,
Eating and Drinking, wherein there is none sober at this day but exceed their
just measure.

Which is the strongest thing in the World.
has not an absolute but only a relative Being, a thing being called strong,
in comparison of others which are less so. Thus Antaeus was strong in respect
of all other men; but weak, compared to Hercules: And as Achilles was
invulnerable in every other part saving the heel; so Nature seems to have left
in us a certain weakness and defect in some parts, wherein some are more tender
then others: So that it is hard to find one thing alike powerful toward all
men, since by reason of our several inclinations every one is differently
affected: The Ambitious will hold for Honors; the Amorous, for Women, the
Drinker, for Wine; and Truth, which in the Scripture was judged strongest by
King Darius, who proposed the present Problem to his four Courtiers, would
possibly be deemed the weakest in the Judgment of the most; for to them that
should take her part, the same question might be put which Pilate asked our
Lord, What is Truth? It is so frequently disguised by lying, in moral matters;
so invelop'd in darkness, and subject to the deceit of our Senses in natural
things, that as it is the least understood, so we may say it is the least
followed; our inclinations never tending toward an unknown object. The
strongest thing therefore is that which has most power to incline our Will
toward it self; which Will following the counsel of the Understanding, as
again this acts not but by the species wherewith the Imagination supplies it,
it is to the Imagination that I ascribe the greatest strength in the world;
since all other things borrow all their power from the Imagination, by the
opinion of Honor, Profit, and Pleasure, which that Faculty makes us conceive
therein; and, on the contrary, the same Imagination ruins and destroys the
force of all things accounted the most powerful, whilst it considers them with
a different biass: It Is by it that one abhors nothing more then Women, whom so
many others idolatrize: Pleasures, Honors, Riches, and all the Goods of
Fortune, are but so many crosses and punishments to those who have conceived an
aversion against them: Death it self, as terrible as it is, oftentimes is
despised and sought after out of a powerful consideration of Honor; this too
being nothing else but a Fancy, magnified by the opinion raised of it in the
world: Even Virtue draws all her power from Imagination alone; for many a one
thinks he embraces her quite naked, whilst, like Ixion, he embraces nothing but
a cloud and a phantasm, and yet is as well satisfied with this as if he had a
perfect fruition of her.

The Second said, That the solution of this Problem depends upon the
understanding of the term [ Strength]: If it be taken for a certain quality and
power which renders things active, that must be the strongest thing in the
world which acts with most efficacy and power upon the most excellent things:
But forasmuch as there are as many sorts of agents, as there are degrees of
Being in Nature, in Morals, and in Transcendants, and we may compare things
together which are of a different genus; yet there being no congruity and
proportion but between those which are of the same species, it is hard to know
absolutely which is the strongest thing, since every one has a virtue wholly
peculiar, because it has a proper nature, which is the principle and cause of
the diversity of motions and actions. According to which distinction I am of
opinion, That of agents purely natural Fire is the strongest, since it alters
and destroys all natural Bodies; and its quality, Heat, is the most active of
all. Amongst living things Man is the strongest, inasmuch as he renders himself
master of all the fiercest Animals, which he knows how either to subdue or
tame. Amongst men Kings are the strongest, since they dispose of our Goods,
Lives, and Wills. Moral agents are different in force and activity, according
to the diverse constitution of subjects upon which they act, and make a
different impression. Honesty alone acts upon very few spirits; Pleasures, upon
most; Interest, upon all: Nevertheless since they act only by the opinion which
they produce either of an honest, profitable, or delightful Good, this Opinion
and Imagination must be the strongest of all moral agents. Amongst the actions
of the Imagination, which are the Passions, that of Love is the strongest,
because it serves for a foundation to all the rest; it being true, that we
fear, desire, and hate nothing, but so far as we love some other thing; so that
he who can be free from this Passion, would be exempt from all others. Amongst
Transcendents Truth is strongest; not that which is ill defined, The conformity
of our Understanding with the thing known; since there are things above us
which surpass the reach of our capacity, and yet cease not to be true: But this
Truth is a property and affection of Entity, wherewith it is convertible; and,
consequently, cannot be truly defined, no more then the other Transcendents;
since a Definition requires a Genus, which being superior, and more common,
cannot be assigned to Entity, or Truth, which is the same with Entity;
otherwise there should be something more general then Entity; which is absurd.
And although the nature of this Truth is not distinctly known, nevertheless the
virtue of its effects is very sensible; for it acts every where, and in all;
yea, above the strongest things in the world, whose actions depend upon the
verity of their Essence, which they suppose. And as this Verity is the
Principle of the actions of all Agents, so it is the End and First Mover, which
gives rise to all their inclinations, whereby they all tend toward one Good,
which is nothing else but Truth, which gives weight and value to Goodness: But
the force of Verity appears principally in that it acts upon the most excellent
thing in the World, to wit, the Understanding, which it convinces by its light,
wherewith it extorts consent; and this so much the more as the Understanding is
perfect; as we see in the Understandings of the Wise and Learned, who more
easily suffer themselves to be overcome by Truth, than the Vulgar; and in those
of Angels and Intelligences, who likewise yield to Truth. And because Verity
and Entity are the same thing, therefore God, who possesses Entity Originally,
is also the Prime Verity, which our Lord attributes to himself in the Gospel,
when he says, That he is the Truth and the Life. For whereas Truth is
oft-times altered and clouded in the world, and frequently produces Hatred, the
most infamous of all Passions; it is a defect not found but in dissolute
Spirits, who cannot support the brightness of it, and hate its light because it
discovers their faults: Yea, even when men contradict the Truth, and follow the
depraved motions of their most disorderly Passions, it is allways under an
appearance of Goodness and Truth. But if the shadow and appearance alone of
Truth, has so great an Empire over our minds, as is seen in the most erroneous
Opinions, which never want followers; with more just reason must it self, when
known, be invincible, and the strongest thing in the World.

In conclusion, were proposed amongst the strongest things, Time, which
consumes all; Death, which overthrows all the Powers of the Earth; Place, which
embraces all in it self; and Necessity, so potent that it is not subject to any
Law, but gives the same to all other things, which cannot avoid its Empire;
insomuch that the Ancients esteemed the Gods themselves not exempted from it,
but subject to the necessity of a Destiny.

CONFERENCE CII. I. Of the Gowt. II. Which Condition is most expedient for the
acquisition of Wisdom, Riches or Poverty?
THe Gowt, (called Arthritis, or Morbus Articularis) is the general name of all
aches of the Joints caused by fluxion, Of the Gowt.
which gave it the name of Gowt; and is different, according to the diverse
connexions of the Bones, and the Parts which it afflicts, being termed Podagra
in the Feet, Chiragra in the Hand, and the Ischiatick ach (by the vulgar,
Schiatica) in the Hip. Nevertheless every Articular Pain is not the Gowt, as
appears by Contusions, Luxations, Wounds, and the Pains of Women after
Childbirth; in Virgins after their Evacuation; and in Bodies infected with the
French Disease: But it is a Grief of the Parts indu'd with sense which are about
the Joints, accompanied sometimes with swelling, and caused by the fluxion of a
sharp and serous humor, transmitted out of the Veins and Arteries, into those
Parts whose motion it hinders; and because the Feet are most remote from the
source of heat, therefore Nature commonly drives thither the matter of this
Malady, whereunto they are more disposed then other Parts, as well by reason of
their composition of Nerves, Tendons, Veins, Arteries, Membranes, and
Ligaments, spermatick and cold parts; as of their continual motion, which gives
occasion to the fluxion: Hence the Gowt begins usually at the Feet, especially
at the great Toe, whose motion is greatest; which hinders not but that it
begins too in the Hand, Knee, and Hip, and sometimes in the Sides; and if the
matter abound, sometimes it seizes upon the Joints with such violence as would
make Nature succumbe, were the fits continual, and not periodical, as they are;
giving to some an interval of a year; to others, of six months, or less,
according as there needs time for collecting the humor in those parts. The
cause of this vehement pain is the acrimony of the corrosive and mordicant
humor, which makes a solution of the parts, whose coldness renders this evil
almost incurable, and makes it last forty days; the pain not being appeasable,
saving when the cause which produces it is resolved, whereunto the coldness of
its subject is not proper.

The Second said, That in the Gowt, as in all sorts of Fluxions, four things
are to be considered; the Matter which flows, the Place whence it comes, the
Way by which it passes, and the Parts upon which it falls. As for the first,
the Gowt has some Matter; not being, as some hold, a simple Intemperies, which
could not subsist so long, nor cause such pungent pains, much less a tumor, as
it happens sometimes in the part afflicted, which cannot proceed but from the
affluence of Matter: This Matter some affirm to be Wind, or Flatuosity, with as
little reason; for then it might easily be resolved, and would cause only a
pain of distension. Most hold that it is the four Humors, arguing from the
diversity of Symptoms of this Disease, and the various manner of curing; some
being eased by hot Aliments and Medicaments, others by cold: And lastly, from
the different color of the tumors, appearing sometimes red, white, or of some
other color, by reason of the blood, phlegm, or other humors which produced
them: But though a very acute pain may in this malady, as it does in all
others, attract the humors which abound in the body, and so cause a tumor;
yet this humor which makes the inflation, cannot be the cause of the Gowt;
since at the beginning, and before the parts are inflated, the pains are very
great; but cease and diminish upon the appearing of the Tumor. Some have held
it to be Blood alone; others, Melancholy; some, Bile, in regard of its mobility
and activity; many, following the authority of Fernelius, that it is a cold,
phlegmatic, and serous humor, and that every Gowt is cold. Mercurialis
observing that Blood could not cause such great pains, that Melancholy was too
heavy and thick to be active, Bile too subtle to descend, and Phlegm too cold
to excite such pungent pains and sudden motions, which cannot proceed from a
cold cause; conceived it was Phlegm mingled with Bile, the latter serving as a
Vehicle to the former, and that former to precipitate and make this latter
descend. Some others, confessing their ignorance, acknowledge, Qu' on n' y void
goutte, that they see not a jot in this Matter; referring this Disease to
occult and malignant causes, acting by an unknown property, as contagious and
venomous diseases do. I conceive it to be a salt humor, subtle, and picquant,
partaking of the nature of Salts, which are all corrosive; which acrimony and
mordacity of this humor is caused by the Salt or Tartar contained in its
substance, or derived to the Aliments (whereof the humors are produced) from
the Earth, which is full of such Salt, Nitrous, or Tartareous Spirits, without
which it would be unfruitful and barren, as is seen in Earth whence Saltpeter
is extracted, which can never produce any thing. This Nitrous Spirit being all
drawn out of the Earth by the Plants which serve us for food, and not being
tameable by our heat, much less convertible into our substance (for an Animal
is nourished with what is sweet, and has had life, wherewith these Mineral
Spirits were never provided) if the natural Faculty be strong, it expells them
with the other unprofitable Excrements of the first concoction, and Urine and
Sweat; and sometimes forms the Stone in the Kidneys, Bladder, or other Parts:
But if it happens, either through the weakness of the expulsive Faculty, or the
quality of the Matter, or some other defect, that this Tartareous Spirit is not
expelled, then it is carried with the Blood into the Parts, and being unfit for
nutrition, transpires by the Pores, if it be subtle enough; or else, in case it
be thick, and cannot be resolved, flows back into the great Vessels, and thence
into the Joints, where sometimes it is coagulated into knots and grits, and
turned into a hard matter, like chalk or plaster, (which shows, that the four
Humors are not the matter thereof, since the same do not suppurate) rendering
then the Gowt incurable, and the Reproach of Physians, because they find no
Cure for it; no more than for that of old Men, those who have a dry Belly, and
who live disorderly: But it is curable, says Hippocrates, in young people, in
such as have no gritts or hardnesses formed in the Joints, those who are
laborious, obedient, and to whom some great Evacuations arrive, many having
been cured of it by a Dysenterie. As for the Place where it is formed, and the
Way whereby the Matter which causes this Evil, descends; most, with Fernelius,
conceive it is the Head, not the internal part of the Brain, whose Excrements
are easily voided outwardly by the Nostrils; or inwardly, by the Infundibulum
or Tunnel, and other Cavities; but the outward part between the skull and the
skin; which being too thick and compact to give issue to the phlegmatic and
serous humors there collected, being begotten of the Excrements of the Jugular
Veins, which are expanded over all these Parts, those serous and thin humors
glide down between the Skin, and other Feguments, into the Joints: But the
Place of this Nitrous Matter abovementioned, are the Viscera of the Liver and
Spleen, which generate this Matter two ways. 1. By the vitiosity of Aliments
impregnated with this Nitrous Spirit, which they plentifully attracted from the
Earth; whence it is that Wine, which has more of this Spirit and Tartar then
any other Aliment, is, by consent of all, very hurtful to the Gowt. 2. By their
proper vitiosity; namely, a hot and dry Intemperies; whereby, instead of
concocting, they adure the Blood, and so fix that salt serosity, which is the
Salt or Tartar extracted out of its substance: Unless you had rather say, That
as in the Kidneys of Persons subject to the Stone, there is a certain
arenaceous or lapidifick constitution, proper for producing the Stone; so in
the Viscera of those who are subject to the Gowt, there is a particular
arthritical disposition, apt to beget that tartareous matter which produces it.
The Way whereby this Matter is expelled is the Veins and Arteries; these
Vessels manifestly swelling when the fits of the Gowt begin. Moreover, as this
Disease unexpectedly invades, by a sudden afflux of the Matter; so it suddenly
changes place, especially by means of Refrigerants and Repercussives, which
drive the Gowt from one Foot to the other, or into the Hand, and other Parts;
which cannot be done but by the Veins and Arteries. Lastly, The Parts upon
which this Matter falls, and which are about the articulations, are membranous
and sensible, because the Membranes being the first subject of Touch, ought to
be also of Pain, a Symptom thereof.

The Third said, That the greatest difficulty was, Why this matter rather falls
upon the Joints than other Parts, which are not incommoded therewith, neither
the Nerves nor the Veins through which it passes, no more than the Membranes
and sensible Parts; besides those which are about the Joints: The cause whereof
may be, That as in health the Parts by a strange property attract such humors
as are fit for their nutrition; the Lungs, bilious Blood; the Spleen,
melancholy Blood; the Kidneys, serous; the other carnous Parts, temperate
Blood: so in sickness, and ill constitution of the Body, some of these Parts
attract from all the rest certain humors wherewith they have most affinity: So
in the new Disease called Plica Polonica, the viscous and glutinous humor
which produces it, is chiefly carried to the hair, which it knotteth and
inta^gleth together; and to the nails of the Hands and Feet, which it makes
hard and black: And in the cure of Fracture of Bones, the Stone called
Osteocolla taken inwardly is carried toward the broken Bones, and causes them
to reunite. In like manner, the Humor producing the Gowt has some affinity
with the Bones of the Joints, especially with their Epiphyses.

The Fourth said, That the Gowty have wherewith to comfort themselves; not so
much for that they foretell the changes of the Air and Seasons, as for that this
Disease is a token of health, and an evidence of the strength and vigor of
Nature, which from the noble Parts drives the vicious humors upon the Joints.
But amongst its antecedent causes, the Air is not to be forgotten; especially
the hot and moist Air of the Spring, thawing the Humors lately congealed by
the Winter; to the vitiosity of which Air, is that popular Gowt to be referred
of which Athenaeus speaks in the second Book of his Deipnosophists; which
lasted twenty years, and afflicted two thirds of Men, Women, and Beasts;
although some attributed it to the want of Mulberries, which failed during
those twenty years, and which, they say, are good against the Gowt, because
they loosen the Belly, and correct the heat of the Stomach. Women, as
Hippocrates says, are exempt from the Gowt, saving in the suppression of their
Evacuations; Children, before the use of Venery; and Eunuchs, always; although
the intemperance and luxury of all of them has produced contrary experiences,
as well in this Age as in that of Seneca; which made the Poets say, That the
Gowt was the Daughter of Bacchus and Venus; the first, engendring plenty of
crude humors; the second, debilitating the heat, and cooling the Body; which
being rendered laxe, the humors fall more easily upon the Joints. And to show
the oddness of this Disease; Anger, Fear, and Joy have oftentimes both given
and cured it, the Humors being extremely agitated by those Passions.

Upon the Second Point it was said, That Wisdom being a Which Condition is
most expedient for the acquisition of Wisdom, Riches or Honor?
Poverty gives much more disposition to either than Riches; the Mind of a Poor
Man being more capable of Knowledge than that of a Rich; either for that Nature
compensates the want of the Goods of Fortune with those of Nature; or because
Necessity and Hunger sharpens and renders them more subtle; or else because
being free from the cares and pains caused by the conservation or acquisition
of Riches, they have a more calm Spirit, and more capable of the Sciences,
which require quiet and tranquillity of Mind. And as for Virtue, whose paths
are so thorny, Poverty has also many more accesses thereunto than Riches, not
only in the Law of Grace, in which our Lord says, That it is easier for a
Cammel, or a Cable, to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; whereof nevertheless the gate is the practice
of Virtues: but likewise in the moral sense of this present life, in which
Poverty and affliction, according to the Scripture, gives Understanding and
Prudence, teaches Temperance, Sobriety, and Chastity (its inseparable
companion) disciplines us to Patience, and to suffer courageously the miseries
of Life, the frequency whereof renders the Mind invincible. On the contrary,
Riches are amost always accompanied with Vices most repugnant to Wisdom; as,
amongst others, with Presumption, Vanity, Voluptuousness, and Delicacy; the
first of which is opposite to Science; for Pride proceeds only from Ignorance;
the second to Virtue, which the Poet calls masculine and laborious. Moreover,
Nature shows us of what quality Riches are; for the sand that produces Gold is
always extremely barren and naked of all sorts of Fruits; and so are the Minds
of those that possess it; and it is observed. That rich Nations, and such as
live in a good soil, are the most vicious, lazy, and dull; whereas those who
are in an unkind Land, are ordinarily more virtuous addicted to Industry.

The Second said, That as the Goods of Fortune, no less than those of the Body,
are referred to those of the Mind, as the Means to their End; in like sort, the
inconveniences both of Fortune and Body are hindrances in acquiring those
Goods of the Soul, which are the perfection of its two principal Faculties, the
Understanding and the Will; namely, Knowledge and Virtue: For Knowledge, and the
Arts called Liberal, require a generous and liberal, not a sordid and low Soul,
like that of a Poor Man (whom Alciat's Emblem very well represents, by a Lad
with one hand stretched up into the Air, with Wings fastened to it, intimating
a desire to fly higher; but the other hand fastened to a heavy Stone, hinders
him:) For their Spirit being laden with misery, thinks of nothing but of the
means how to live, and to be delivered from the heavy yoke of Necessity, which
deprives them of the means of having either living or dumb Teachers; yea, makes
them despise all the rigours of Laws, and oft-times abandons them to Rage and
Despair, which makes them hate their miserable life, and renders them masters
of those of others: Hence not only Mutinies, Seditions and Revolts are commonly
made by the Poor and Miserable, lovers of Innovation, wherein they are sure to
lose nothing, and may possibly gain; but also are almost the sole Authors of
Thefts, Murders, and Sacriledges. Whereas Rich Persons, having from their birth
received such good Instruction as the poor want, are more stayed in their
Actions, and better inclined to Honesty and Virtue, which without Fortunes or
Estates can never produce any thing great and considerable; whence, in our
Language, Riches are justly styled Means; without assistance whereof, Justice
can neither render to every one what belongs to him, nor repel the Enemies of
the State by a just War, whereof Money is the Sinew and principal Strength.
Upon this account they are sought after by all the World, and are not only the
end of the noblest part of Morality and Economy, (Families, which are the
Pillars of a State, not being preserved but by the lawful acquisition of
Wealth; in which, for this reason, some Politicians place Nobility; but all
agree, that they serve for an Ornament thereunto and heighten its luster); but
those who have parted with them cannot live without them, but are constrained
to beg of others. And in Policy, whether Riches be acquired or come by
succession, they are always in esteem; as on the contrary, Poverty is
disparaged with reproach, and is a sign either of baseness of Extraction, or of
Negligence and profusion. Hence a Poor Man is as unfit to be trusted with a
Public Charge, as with a sum of Money; and it is not without reason, that he
who is distressed with Poverty is extremely ashamed of it, this defect hindering
and being a remora to all his designs: Whereas Riches raise the Courage, incite
to great Attempts, and serve for a spur to Virtue, which thrives by Praise and
Glory, but freezes and languishes by the Contempt and Derision inseparable from
Poverty; which indeed has been commended by the same Sacred Mouth which
requires us to turn the other cheek to him that strikes us upon the one; yet
this hinders not, but that (speaking naturally, as we do here) it is better to
defend ones self, than to be beaten patiently.

The Third said, That in matter of Wisdom we ought to refer our selves to the
wisest of all Men, Solomon; who prays God to give him neither Riches, for fear
of Pride; nor Poverty, for fear of becoming a Thief; but a middle Estate: For,
as too great Plenitude and an Atrophy are equally contrary to Health, which
consists in a moderation and temper of qualities; so the condition of Persons
extremely Rich, and that of Beggar (the degree here under consideration) is
equally an enemy to Wisdom: And if in any case we ought to desire the Golden
Mediocrity, it is in the acquisition of Wisdom, especially of Virtue, which
consists in Mediocrity; either extreme whereof, is the Territory of Vice.

CONFERENCE CIII. I. Of Glass. II. Of Fucusses, or Cosmeticks.
AS there is in all sublunary Bodies a vital and celestial Spirit, without
which neither Food nor Physic has any virtue, Of Glass.
so all those Bodies have in them an incorruptible Matter, partaking of a
celestial Nature, which the Chemists call Virgin-Earth, and is the Matter
whereof Glass is formed, being found in all sorts of Bodies capable of
calcination and vitrification; but chiefly in Nitre, Saltpetre, Sand, Shells,
certain Stones, Wood, and Plants, from which they draw Glass, different in
beauty, according to the Matter whence it is extracted by means of a most
violent fire, which resolving the compound, consumes all its parts except that
vitreous matter, which is proof against its violence. We owe its Invention, by
Pliny's testimony, to certain Merchants of Nitre, who having landed in
Phoenicia of Syria, bordering upon Judaea, near a Lake called Cendevia, which
is at the foot of Mount Carmel, whence flows the River Belus or Pagida, of
small extent; and making their Kitchen upon the Sand of this River, used some
clods of their Nitre, as a Trevet for their Kettle; and the heat of the fire
melting the Sand and Nitre into Glass, they took notice of it, and published
the Invention. Afterward Moulds were found out, wherein to cast it into all
sorts of figures; Pipes or Tubes to run it in; others to blow it, and give it
all sorts of Colors, which almost miraculously arise from the very substance
of the Glass, without other mixture, only by the wind and blast managed
according to the rules of Art; as also Mills, to calcine and pulverise Gravel,
Stones, or Sand; amongst which, that of Vilturne in Italy, and of Estampes in
France, is most excellent for this use; for which likewise they employ the
Ashes of a Plant called Salicot, (Salt-wort, or Glass-wort) which grows in
Provence and Languedoc, named likewise Soude, because heretofore it served only
to glase earthen Pots.

The Second said, As there are but two things that can open Bodies in order to
their separation, namely, Water and Fire; which is verified by the proofs made
by Refiners of Gold and Silver; so there are but two things to separate, to
wit, the Volatile, and the Fixed. Fire commonly separates the Volatile, such as
sulphurous and aqueous things are; and Water separates the Fixed, as the Salt
from the earthy parts. Of Fixed things, some are so in part, as the same Salt;
others entirely, or altogether, as Earth; which is either slimy, clayie, or
sandy, which last species is made of the two former, as is seen in Rivers,
where the Water having washed away the fat part, nothing remains but the Sand:
By which means Nature renders Valleys and low Places more fruitful; and men, by
her example, have oftentimes raised, meliorated, and rendered low and marshy
places, formerly unprofitable, fit for culture, by stirring the Earth during
the Rain and Floods, which by this means carries away all the fat and unctuous
parts from the higher places into the lower, rendering the Mountains and Hills
sandy, and consequently unfruitful and barren. For, as Sand is incorruptible,
being neither putrifi'd by Water nor consumed by Fire; so neither can it
generate any thing, nor be turned into any other nature, like other species of
the Earth, which serve for nutriment of Plants and some Insects, and for the
production of Animals. On the contrary, it preserves things buried in it, as
appears by Mummies kept in it for two or three thousand years; and Fruits,
which are kept no way better than in Sand. Now, as Sand is the Matter of Glass
(for any Sand melted in the Fire vitrifies) so Glass suits with the nature of
its Principle, being, like it, incorruptible and eternal; yea, being it self
one of the Principles of Nature, according to modern Chemists, who reckon four;
namely, Mercury, resembling Water; Sulphur, or Oil, corresponding to Air; Salt,
to Fire; and Glass, to Earth; which Glass is found clean and pure in the center
of all mixed Bodies, there being nothing but may be reduced into ashes, and no
ashes but of which Glass may be made, which they call a shining and not burning
Fire, having affinity with that of Heaven, as the Fire kindled in Sulphur, and
any oily Matter, is both burning and shining; and that which is in Lime and
Salts is burning, and not shining, such as is seen in Potential Cauteries, but
not (as others have said) in Coals, which have some although a weak light.
Glass wants but one thing, and that is the removing its brittleness or
fragility; were it not for which, it would be the most precious thing in the
World. Of the possibility hereof a certain Artist having shown a trial to
Tiberius, has raised a desire in others to make like attempts, which have
hitherto been unsuccessful. Moreover, the Transparence of Glass, caused by the
simplicity and tenuity of its parts, is incompetible with the consistence which
renders things ductile and malleable, which is a tenacious viscosity, and
oleaginous humidity, from whence opacity proceeds; as appears by Horns and
colored Glass, which is less transparent then other, by reason of the
unctuosity of the Sulphur employed to give it that extraneous color.

The Third said, That Archimedes, in his Fabric of a Glass-Sphere, was as
judicious, in reference to the matter he chose, as the form; since the Matter
of the Heavens being incorruptible and diaphanous, they cannot be represented
better than by Glass, which has both those qualities. Moreover, all the
perfectest Bodies of Nature are of a vitreous substance; as, amongst others,
the first of all the Heavens, called the Crystalline. It Is held, That the
glorified Bodies are luminous and transparent, and (according to some) of a
vitreous Nature; which is the utmost perfection of every Body, and shall be
also communicated to the Earth at the last Judgment, to be executed by Fire,
which brings Metals to their highest degree of excellence; for by the help of
Lead, Gold it self is turned into Glass, so pure and perfect, that in the
Apocalypse Paradise is paved with such Glass of Gold; and in Ezechiel, God's
Throne is made of it; the word Hamal being a fit Etymology for our Esmah (or,
Enamel) which is nothing but Glass. And the affinity or correspondence of
Metals with Glass is so great, that, like them, it is extracted out of Sand,
elaborated in a Furnace, receiving the alliances of Nitre, Copper, and the
Lodestone, which they mingle in its Mine, to get an attractive quality of
Glass as well as of Iron. With purified Glass, called Sal Alcali, they
counterfeit the Diamond, Emerald, Turcoise, Ruby, and other precious Stones.
The Eye it self, the noblest part of Man, symbolises with Glass, by that
crystalline humor wherein the point of the visual ray terminates. But as all
things in the World, like Fortune which governs them (whom the Poet describes
of Glass) are no sooner arrived to the point of their perfection, but they are
most subject to be corrupted; so Fragility is inseparable from Glass, arrived
to that high degree; which proceeds from the connection of the Fixed and the
Volatile, which cannot but be brittle between two bodies extremely arid, as the
ashes of Glass-wort and Fern are with Sand.

The Fourth said, That as Gold is the Masterpiece of Nature, so is Glass of
Art, which cannot produce any thing more noble. Hence in France the making of
it is permitted only to the Nobless or Gentry, as a mark of the nobleness of
Glass, the fairest and cleanest of all Bodies, as partaking the most of Light,
the noblest and divinest of all sublunary Bodies, to which alone its affords
passage through its imperceptible pores, being by that means the most useful
and delightful piece of Architecture; the beauties and proportions whereof
cannot be seen but by Light, half of which Lattices intercept, but Glass
communicates entire; serving, moreover, to correct the defects of sight in old
men, by Spectacles; and of the Countenance, in Looking-glasses; by means of
which, Man perfectly knows himself. But to judge how Glass may be malleable, we
must know that it is composed of two Substances; the one, Earthy; the other,
Gummous, serving for cement to unite those dry parts, whose connection in any
Body whatsoever is impossible, but by aerious humidity, without which the
Earthy parts would fall to dust. Now to remedy the brittleness of Glass, 'twere
expedient to find out two Matters whose union might be closer, or to link them
together better by some more humid and oleaginous Matter than the ordinary,
which would no more hinder the transparence of Glass than it does that of Talk,
which is wholly oleaginous in its substance, and nevertheless diaphanous and
flexible. The Fire likewise, being very sharp and violent, consumes almost all
the moisture of Glass, and makes it more brittle, for which reason it ought to
be moderated.

Of Fucusses, or Cosmeticks.
and the most apparent token of the Beauty and Goodness of the Soul; so is it
the most desired: Love, the transcendent of all concupiscible Powers, being it
self nothing else but a desire of Beauty; and Good, the object of the Will,
being nothing else but the same with Fair. But this Passion is most conspicuous
in Women, who have received Beauty as all their portion from Nature, and that
wherein all their power and authority over Men consists. Now Beauty being
subject to the destiny of all other things, it is reason that Art supply the
defects of Nature, for preserving that rich treasure from the injuries of Time
and Years, by variety of Paints; as inseparable from the persons of Women, as
the desire of being fair is natural to them. Moreover, Vlpian, in Lib. 25.
Sect. 4. ff. De auro and argento legato, has given them a more particular
property in their Cosmeticks, than in their Clothes and Jewels, reckoning these
only amongst external Ornaments, but Paints and Pomatums in the Inventory of
their Feminine Accoutrements, as things annexed to their Bodies, and making up
part of its shape and essence. These Cosmeticks, besides Contentment and good
Nourishment, the natural and internal Principles of Beauty, (amongst the
species of which Nourishment, Asses milk was used by Poppaea, Nero's Mistress)
may be divided into such as only cleanse the spots and obscurities of the skin,
such as polish it, give it luster, take away wrincles, soften and smooth it;
and such as color it. The first are the most innocent, being nothing but
simple Waters distilled of Flowers, as Lillies, Nenufar, Bean-flowers,
Primrose, seeds of Cucumber and Melon, roots of Dock, Serpentine, Cuckow-pint,
Solomon's-Seal, Gladon, Kidney-beans, Lupines, the Liquor distilling from the
branch of a Vine wounded, Juice of Limons distilled in Balneo-Mariae, and
May-dew. Of the second sort, the gentlest are Whites of Eggs, Consummates of
Veal, Sheeps-marrow, Snail-water, the Oils of Almonds, Seeds of Gourd, Myrrh
and Camphire, and above all, the no less famous than rare Oil of Talk, the
Philosophers Stone of all Cosmeticks. As for coloring materials, there are but
two sorts in Europe, where Beauty consists in a lively Whiteness; namely,
Whites and Reds: Reds are made of Sanders tempered in Vinegar, the shavings of
Brasil or Alkanet, in Allum-water; or, of Vermillion. Whites are made commonly
of Sublimate, Ceruse, or Spanish-white, washed in the water of wild Tansey, or
of Pearls calcined and applied as Vermillion, by those who account nothing in
Nature more precious than Beauty. The Teeth, Hair, and Hands, as they
contribute to Handsomness, so they have their peculiar Cosmeticks. The Teeth
are polished by Powders and Opiates; especially by Acidum of Sulphur, and the
Spirit of Vitriol mingled with common Water. The Hair receives such color as
is most agreeable in each Country: In Italy most Women guild theirs with an
ounce of Honey, a dram of Saffron, and the yolk of an Egg mingled in
Barbers-suds; or else they rub the Comb well with Oil of Mastick and Tartar. On
the contrary, at Ragusa they black the Hair with Litharge, Black-lead, or with
leaden Combs. In France they powder them, to make them white. At Tunis, and
throughout all Barbary, the Women black the ends of their Fingers, Nails, and
Lips with green Walnut-shells, as our Ladies and Courtiers lay black patches
upon their Faces, to heighten or set off its whiteness the more. In fine, there
is no part of the Body but receives its Fucus and Color; only the Eye, like
the Soul, whose Mirror it is, is subject to no alteration of color; from which
Nature has with good reason left it exempt, that being unprepossess'd of any,
it might be the judge of true Beauty.

The Second said, It Is injurious to blame the Artificial Handsomness of Ladies,
since nothing can please us in any other things without it; Natural Beauty
being like a rough Diamond, unless Art polish it, and give it a foil. That we
differ one from another, we owe to Artifice; being all equal by Nature. The
goodliest Palaces appear so only by reason of their incrustations of Marble,
Guildings, and Pictures; and Painting it self, whose excellence is nothing but
the cunning mixture of Colors, is heightened and preserved by the
superinduction of Varnish. Music is flat without Quavers and Sharps, which are
disguisings of the Voice. All the Arts serve for nothing but the ornament and
embelishment of Man. What is Eloquence, with all its flowers and colors of
Rhetoric, but a Fucus of natural Discourse? or Pleading, but the Art of
setting off a Fact well, and rendering it plausible? The Complements and
Civilities of Courts, what are they else but a cloaking and disguising of the
thoughts? The truth is, Life being nothing but a Comedy, wherein the habits,
actions, and discourses are only disguises; are we to think it strange that
Women, who allways play one of the principal parts in it, sometimes borrow
Masks to disguise their Countenances? And if the insinuations and praises, made
use of by Men to caress them, are nothing but flatteries, why should not they
too reciprocally endeavor to deceive Men, whilst they represent for the object
of their Lies only the Image of Artificial Beauty?

The Third said, That the Countenance being the Tablet and Mirror of the Soul;
as Hypocrisy and Lying in the Soul, is contrary to Candor and Sincerity,
without which there would be no confidence nor true Friendship in the World,
but perpetual dissimulations and diffidences; so a Fucus upon the Face is
unlawful, and the more pernicious in that it is a speaking Lie: For as a Liar
speaks otherwise than he thinks, and has another thing in his Mind than upon
his Tongue; so a painted Face appears outwardly wholly other then what it
really is; unjustly covering, under the plaster and tincture of a Fucus, its
natural imperfections and defects; which to go about to mend, is to resist the
Wisdom of God, the Author thereof, who disposing all things wisely, has
perhaps denied the advantage of Beauty to certain Persons, out of foresight
that they would abuse it; and who otherwise having imprinted the Character of
his Divinity upon our Countenances, the Person that paints and disguises the
same, seems to be ungrateful, and unworthy of such a favor; yea, to deprive
himself of all credit among honest men: For, who will give belief to the Words
of one that wears a Lie upon his Forehead? Besides that in time those Mixtures
alter and destroy the health of the whole Body; Sublimate (amongst the rest)
the commonest of all Cosmeticks: Not to mention the danger of letting it get
into the eyes, and more of swallowing it down, it wrinkles the skin, renders
the eyes hollow, blacks the teeth, and corrupts the breath.

The Fourth said, since Beauty is one of the four gifts of the Body, it ought
not to be of worse condition than the other three, Health, Strength, and
Goodness of the Senses; but it is lawful to preserve and increase the same so
far as we can, especially that of the Visage, which being the Mirror of the
Deity, should be carefully adorned and embellished; considering too, that our
Lord commands us in the Gospel to wash our Faces, and suffered his own Feet to
be anointed with precious Unguents; the use whereof was common among the
Ancients, who anointed the Head, and all the rest of the Body, with Aromatic
Oils and Compositions, more for Beauty than for Health. And Physic, in one of
its parts called Cosmetica, treats of Fucusses, and Ornaments of the Body and
Face; which the Law approves in L. 21. ff. De Auro Mundo, making four sorts of
Fucus, namely, for Pleasure, Health, Ornament, and Cleanness. Moreover, 'twould
seem a contempt of that Divine Gift of Heaven* Beauty, not to preserve it. And
as no man, being to choose a dwelling house, but prefers a handsome and agreeable
one before another; so, if Souls had the choice of their Bodies when they come
into the World, they would undoubtedly take the fairest and best shaped,
because they might exercise their operations best therein. And indeed the Soul
is so curious of this Beauty, that as soon as any stroke, or other external
injury deforms the Body, it ceases not to repair the ruins thereof; and
without the continual industry which she imploys, not only to re-establish the
perpetual deperdition of our triple substance, but also to cause re-generation
of the consumed flesh, the reunion of parts disjoined by solution of
continuity, and to reduce to a better conformation the depravations thereof,
there would be more Monsters than Men. Why then should it be a crime for Art,
which perfects Nature, to assist her in this work, by taking away what is
superfluous, or adding what is deficient; which are also the two parts of
Physic.

CONFERENCE CIV. I. Of Tobacco. II. Whether the Invention of Guns has done
more hurt than good.
THe Herb called by the Spaniards Tobacco, from an Island of West Indies, Of
Tobacco.
wherein it grows in abundance, is named by the Indians Petun; by others, for
its great virtues, Herba Sancta; and Jean Nicot, Ambassador of Francis II.
having first brought out of Portugal into France some of the seed of it to
Queen Catherine de Medicis, with the description of its virtues, it became
denominated from him in French Nicotiane, or Herb a la Reine, (the Queens
Herb;) as in Italy it was termed Herb de Santa Croce, (of Holy Cross) because
a Cardinal of that name was the first that brought it to Rome. Some others
still call it Antarctical Buglosse, Henbane of Peru, and Indian Wound-wort. It
grows, many times, to the height of three Cubits, with a straight and thick
stalk, so fat that it seems anointed with Honey; it sends forth sundry large
branches, with many leaves long and broad, rounder than those of great Comfrey,
somewhat like those of great Personata, or Bur-dock; fleshy, fat, and little
rough, of a pale green, unpleasing smell, and biting taste: On the top of the
stalk it has many flowers, oblong, hollow, and large, in form of a Trumpet, of
a white inclining to purple; to which succeed little slender cods or husks,
full of a brownish seed, smaller than that of Poppey. Its root is thick, has
several lobes, is woody, yellow within, bitter, easily separating from its
bark, and, like all Herbs hot and dry, (for this is so in the second degree) it
requires moist places and shadow, and delights to be cultivated. Moreover, it is
kept in Gardens, as well for its beauty, as for its faculties of curing
abundance of Maladies; to which it is the more proper, in that it has an
unctuosity familiar to our Body, whose excrementitious humors (the seed of
most Diseases) it potently resolves. For as Plants are of a middle nature
between Minerals and Animals; so they are more proper and safe for the
preservation and restoring of Man's health than Animals themselves, which by
reason of their similitude act less on us; or than Minerals and inanimate
Bodies, which through the too great diversity of their nature act with too much
violence.

The Second said, That this Herb heats, resolv's, deterges, and is somewhat
astringent; whence it is, that its leafs applied hot to the head cure the
Meagrim and old headache, proceeded from cold or wind; and if the pain be
contumacious, you must rub the place first with oil of Orange-flowers.
Moreover, it is used for the Cramp, and all other pains arising from the same
cold humor; particularly, for that of the Teeth, by filling them with the leaf
bruised. Its decoction in common Water is good for maladies of the Breast of
the same kind, as the Asthma, and old Coughs, causing expectoration of the
phlegm which produces it. Also, Its smoke taken by the nose, and swallowed down
by respiration, frequently cures the Asthmatick, and such as have ulcers in the
Lungs; by the same reason that Galen says, he saw a Baker's Wife cured of one,
by frequent respiration of a hot and dry Air, which she attracted as she put
her bread into the Oven, and took it out again. The leaves roasted under the
ashes, and applied hot with their ashes to the Navil, are good for the
Wind-collick, and other obstructions of the Bowels proceeding from the
abovesaid causes; especially, for crudities of the Stomach. The Indian women
make use of it to kill worms, making their children take a very little quantity
of it with Sugar; but more safely by applying the leafs to the Navil, and
adding a very little of the juice in lotions. The same, applied, helps the
Stone-Collick, and is highly advantageous in strangulations of the womb, being
laid likewise upon the Navil; and if Women have their usual swoonings, the
smoke puffed into their nostrils fetches them again. They also ease the pains
of swollen limbs, and cold Gowts. Scurf, Itch, Child-blanes, and clefts of the
heels, proceeding from cold, are cured by being rubbed therewith, as also
venomous wounds and bitings: Whereof the Spaniards bear witness, who seizing
upon a part of the Indies, the Cannibals assaulted them with envenomed Arrows,
the wounds whereof they cured by sprinkling them with prepared Sublimate; all
their stock whereof being spent, the wounded died, till it was found that the
juice of Tobacco, applied, wrought the same effect. Moreover, the leaves stop
the blood of fresh wounds, and agglutinate them. The juice heals old Ulcers,
and prevents Gangreens. The Indian Priests, observing all these virtues,
transferred them to the Mysteries of their Religion: For being interrogated
concerning the events of War, they suck the smoke of this Herb with long Canes,
then suffer themselves to fall down, and being afterward awakened, relate
wonders to their hearers, giving them to understand that they have had divine
Dreams. They make use of it likewise, to recover weariness, and support hunger,
burning certain shells, and powdering them with equal quantity of these leaves,
of which they make pills, which they lay between the lower lip and the teeth,
continually sucking their liquor, which, if it nourish not, at least it takes
away the sense of the inconveniences of hunger and thirst; which is an
admirable secret, whereby they travel two or three days together. Possibly by
their example our Sailers, and Soldiers who have been at Sea, take Tobacco
with so much pleasure, that since they have once gotten a habit of it, they
cannot be broken from it by the severest Laws: For to alledg the prejudice of
excessive taking Tobacco, is of no more moment than what should be said against
Wine for its abuse; it having been said by many, That those things must be
excellent which are capable of being abused; and this may always be inferred
from that immutable practice of Tobacco, That there is a great familiarity
between it and our Nature; since the Grand Signior cannot hinder his Turks from
the use of it, who nevertheless abstain from Wine.

The Third said, That if ever Pliny's condemning and decrying Drugs and
foreign Roots was reasonable, it was chiefly at the time when the Trade of the
Indies transmitted them to us in Europe, and, with their use, new and unknown
Diseases: Amongst which Medicaments, Tobacco, as it is the most common, so it is
the more dangerous, in that a false opinion of health and purgation gives it
credit, although its temperament, hot and dry in a high degree, renders it not
only contrary to young and choleric people, and to the stomach, which it
provokes to vomiting; but by a peculiar malignity it is an enemy to the Brain,
causing Stupefaction, Vertigo, Lethargy, and a dullness of all its Powers, and
by a violent desiccation spoling its natural constitution: For it is so far from
dis-inebriating, that, on the contrary, by its sharp and biting vapors it
fills the head, and intoxicates much more; like Opium, the herb of which it
resembles; neither of them serving for any thing but to trouble the Reason;
upon which account Tobacco is a sworn enemy to Hellebore, which every one knows
is the remedy for Folly, and promotes the good constitution of the Brain. As
for the evacuation of phlegm, for which it is esteemed; besides that it is a
dangerous thing to purge such as are in perfect health, as most takers of
Tobacco are; it is certain, that all sort of smoke is bad for the Brain, which
it clouds and dulls, by stirring the animal Spirits, and filling the cavities
of its Ventricles, which it also infects by its smell, and pricks its Membranes
by its Acrimony, inseparable from every kind of fume; it being found, that men
have had black scirrhous spots in the Meninges, produced by the vapors of
Tobacco they were accustomed to take; which Custom also enuring Nature in that
manner to evacuate the pituitous excrements, whereof the Brain is never
destitute, if the use thereof be at any time interrupted, great accidents
happen by that defluxion, which had gotten a long course that way, and turned
the Custom of it into Necessity; which use. (besides) being shameful, and
proper only to Rogues and Robbers, whom our Arrests comprise under the name of
Takers of Tobacco; it seems that the name and effects of this Herb are of as
bad an odor as its smoke.

The Fourth said, That the Brain being the source not only of all cold
maladies, but also of most affections of the Lungs, whose situation and spongy
substance makes them the Emunctory of all the superior Parts; whence the
Asthma, Peripneumonia, Empyema, Phtisick, Cough, Orthopnaea, and other
affections of the Breast, caused by defluxion of humidity falling from the
Brain upon the Lungs; Physic has invented three sorts of Remedies to divert
the course of those Excrements, namely, Errhines, Ptarmicks, and
Apophlegmatisms. Errhines composed of Rue, Gentian, Celandine, Origanum, and
other detersive Simples, attract the phlegm adhering to the Membranes of the
Brain, and evacuate it by the Nose. Ptarmicks, or Sternutatories, which are
made of the abovementioned things powdered, or of Pepper and white Hellebore,
Euphorbium, Castoreum, and Pyrethrum, by their acrimony stimulating the
expulsive faculty of the Brain, to excretion of the pituitous Excrements which
are in its Ventricles. Apophlegmatisms, used either in Masticatories or
Gargarisms, or by rubbing the palate of the Mouth, are made of Mastick, roasted
Raisins, Hyssop, Origanum, bark of Caper-roots, Mustard, Turbith, and such
other things as melt and attenuate phlegm, and make it distill down the Palate
of the Mouth. Now Tobacco may serve for these three Uses, being taken either by
the Nose, or in the Mouth, as a Masticatory; but not in smoke, which is an
enemy to the Brain and Spirits.

Whether the Invention of Guns has done more hurt than good.
Claws, or Teeth for their defense, has yet produced Man wholly naked, and
without any other Arms but those of Reason; to show, that being a Reasonable
Animal, he needed no other arms to decide his Quarrels with his like, but
Justice and right Reason. Nevertheless, Necessity having obliged him to defend
himself from Beasts, Robbers, and Public Enemies, he has, instead of
fifty-cuffs, stones, cudgels, and bones of Animals, his first Weapons, made use
of Iron, framing it into Swords, Axes, Spears, and Javelins; till increasing in
malice, to offend at greater distance, he invented Slings and Balists, then
ambulatory Machins to enter Places, and beat down the Walls of Cities: Yea,
Fire was likewise brought into use; by some, that of Burning-glasses, with
which Archimedes burnt the Ships of Marcellus, who besieged the City of
Syracuse; by others, Granado's, and Pitch-barrels set on fire, as Caesar did at
the Siege of Marseilles and Alexandria. But all this was nothing, in comparison
to the Gun; which although, according to the Portugal Relations, invented in
the 85. year of our Lord, in the Kingdom of China, where most other Inventions
began, by one of their Kings, named Vitey, a great Magician; yet appeared not
in Europe till about the year 1350. when it was found out by one named
Bertoldus, a German, occasionally, by the experience which he saw happen in a
mixture of Sulphur and Nitre, enclosed in a vessel over the Fire, in order to
an operation of Chemistry, whereof he made profession. This mischievous and
diabolical Invention, having been hatched in the Country of the North, (whence
the Scripture assures us that all evil is to come) was afterward carried from
thence into Italy, and then into France, Anno 1366. by some Germans, who also
gave two pieces of Artillery to the Venetians who besieged Claudia Fossa, a
Town belonging to the Genoeses, from whom it was presently taken by these new
Engines; which, although small, and ill made, being only of Iron bowed, and
hoop'd together with Iron bands, yet failed not to produce their effect.

The Second said, Since Kings are called Gods in Scripture, 'twas reasonable
they should be armed with Thunder, which might make them reverenced by others;
there being no better expedient to preserve Majesty, than Terror. And as the
depravation of men renders War in these last Ages as necessary as just; so,
without doubt, the most powerful way of overcoming, must also be the most
advantageous and considerable. This is it which has made Artillery so esteemed
by Sovereigns, that they have lodged it in Arsenals and Magazens with their
Treasuries, and given it in charge to great Masters, principal Officers of
their Crown; making a show of it to Strangers, as the abridgment of their
Power, and a mark of their Sovereignty. Moreover, it is by this Cannon-Law that
all their Quarrels are decided: These are the last Ambassadors which carry
their Commands with execution; and those whose ears are stopped to their other
Reasons, always find peremptory ones in the mouth of their Cannons. For as the
Mosaical Law was given amongst Thunders and Lightnings from Mount Sinai; and
that of Christianity confirmed by a Tempest of Wind and Fire: In like manner,
Princes at this day establish not their Laws more powerfully than by help of
the Thunderclaps of their Artillery; as the Conquest of the new World makes
manifest, the easiness whereof is due only to this Invention, which made those
Nations receive Laws of Religion and State from such as shot the first Cannons
amongst them, at the report of which they presently yielded; conceiving that
there was something divine in those Machins, which have likewise been the Keys
of Gold, wherewith they have enriched Europe by another way of Alchimy than
that to which the Disciples of this Science employ it. Moreover, by this
Invention, which secures Commerce, the boldness has been taken to overrun the
World, and despoil it of all its Riches; the Conquest whereof has been more or
less easy, according as its use was known or unknown to the invaded Nations.
The truth is, he that shall make comparison of the ancient Machins, Rams,
Slings, Balists, or Bows, with any Firearms whatever, will find that theirs
were but Childrens-play, in respect of our true Combats. And so far is this
Invention from doing wrong to Valor, that (on the contrary) it advances the
same to its highest point: For if Valor appears only proportionally to the
dangers it incurs, then there is most room for the exercising of it where the
greatest are present. Now the ruin of some particular Persons, is not
considerable, in respect of the public advantage, to which the good of every
one, considered by himself, is subordinate; seeing that these Arms serve as
well for the Defensive as the Offensive, the one and the other being only
respective, regard being had no those that employ them; that which serves for
defense to one, being offense to the other. And besides, the Sword, which for
so many Ages has killed many more, would be more subject to this blame. But,
on the contrary, the excellence of a Weapon consists in killing and terrifying,
since it is an Instrument of War, whereof the principal end is to exterminate
Enemies; for the fewer are left, the sooner it is ended; and in the speedy
razing of their Fortresses, consists the beating down of their Pride and
Confidence. Wherefore, seeing no Invention in the World can be without its
inconveniences, one or two cannot counter-balance the good which Artillery has
brought, by the Conquest of so many Kingdoms and Riches; so that if Arms are
most useful for the preservation and amplification of a State, the Invention
of the Gun must be the more so, inasmuch as it is the most powerful Instrument
of War, surpassing all other Arms in execution; and making a Prince not only
obeyed during War, but also respected and redoubted in Peace, during which it is
employed to testify the public rejoycings and gladnesses.

The Third said, As Philosophy is the noblest exercise of Man, so Morality is
the fairest part of Philosophy; whence Socrates acquired the honor of having
brought it down from Heaven. The most excellent part of Morality is the
Politics, of which the noblest piece is the Art Military, as Mechaniques are
the noblest part of this Art. Hence Caesar is more particularly exact in
describing the construction of his Bridges, and other Engines, than his
warlike exploits. Since then the Gun is without dispute the goodliest part of
the Mechanics, it follows that the Gun and its Invention is the goodliest
thing of the World. For the excellence of an Engine consists in moving a great
weight speedily, and to the greatest distance that may be, as the Cannon alone
does, whose power would be judged impossible, did not Experience attest it: Nor
does its violence depend upon the ordinary rules of Nature, the Principle of
the regular motion of every Body; but it is caused by the same Nature
constituted in a violent state, in danger of admitting either a Vacuum or
penetration of Dimensions; to avoid which, she sometimes breaks the Cannon; or,
if the same be too strong, she violently drives out the iron bullet, which
hinders the free eruption of the inflamed matter, which, by reason of the
rarefaction of its parts, requiring 10000 times more place than before, and not
finding the same in the Cannon, issues forth to seek it; by the same reason
that an Exhalation inflamed in the middle Region of the Air, disengages it self
from its prison, by breaking the Cloud which holds it enclosed in its belly,
thereby forming the Lightnings and Thunders, whereof the shots of the Cannon
are true Images upon Earth, where nothing comes nearer Thunder; and
consequently the Power of God, who oftentimes imploys those Arms to punish the
crimes of men: Whence Pagan Antiquity assigned indeed severally a Trident, a
Sithe, a Bow a Helmet, a Lance, a Club, a Sword, and such other Instruments, to
their false Deities; but all attributed Thunder to the mightiest of the Gods.

CONFERENCE CV. I. Of Blood-letting. II. Which is the most Excellent of the
Soul's three Faculties, Imagination, Memory, or Judgment.
BLood-letting, (whose invention is fabulously attributed to the Seahorse, who
finding himself too full of Blood, Of Blood-letting.
rubs Arteriotomie; or in the Veins, and is termed Phlebotomie; which
Physicians, by good right, hold with Galen (in the Book which he writ thereof
against Erasistratus) for a singular remedy, and one of the readiest for all
sorts of Diseases, especially Inflammations, Fevers, Revulsions or Derivations,
griefs of the Eyes, difficulties of Urine, Pleurisy, Peripneumonie, Squinancy,
Epilepsie, Fractures, Luxations, and all acute Pains and Diseases. And as there
are two general and most frequent causes of Diseases; namely, Plethora, or
Repletion; and Cacochymia, or depravation of the Humors: Blood-letting is the
remedy of the former, and Purgation of the latter: But Blood-letting is the
best and safest, causing less agitation and disturbance in the Economy of the
Body than Purgatives, which are ordinarily violent, and enemies of Nature; yea,
it serves not only to evacuate the juices which abound in excess, but sometimes
remedies their depravation, by correcting the hot and dry Intemperies of the
Bowels, which is the cause of Cacochymie; because Bleeding of its own Nature
evacuates and makes revulsion, but, by accident refrigerates, and takes away
obstructions: Therefore Avicenna, and all his followers, enemies of
Blood-letting, are ridiculous; alleging, That the Blood being ( Fraenum Bitis)
the bridle of choler, this becomes exasperated and enflamed, the less Blood
there is to restrain it. For if there be any Humor that keeps Choler in order,
it must be Phlegm, which is contrary thereto; and not Blood, which symbolises
with it by heat: But Blood-letting checks the impetuous motions of Choler,
which it evacuates with the Blood, if it be in the greater Vessels; and if out
of them, as about the cavities of the Liver, it tempers them, correcting the
ardent constitution of the Liver which produces it.

The Second said, That by reason of Contraries, affections against Nature, as
well as Health, have their seat in the Parts, Spirits, and Humors. The Parts
are the seat of Maladies; the Spirits, of Symptoms and laesion of Functions;
and the Humors, of the Morbifick causes, either antecedent or conjunct. And as
these humors, which are the source and leven of most Diseases, being in a
natural state, are in their proper place, in the quantity and quality requisite
to their Nature; so in a state against Nature, they are out of their due place,
and offend either in quantity or quality. To these three defects Physic
opposes Revulsion, Alteration, and Evacuation; this latter is done either by
evacuating only the bad, by convenient ways in Purgation; or the good with the
bad, Blood-letting, which is defined an Evacuation of all the humors of the
Body, by section of the Vessels. For though the Blood be the Treasure of Life,
the Source of all Passion, and (if we believe Galen) the Seat of the Soul;
nevertheless, its corruption, as that of the best things of the World, being so
much the more dangerous as it is the most perfect and temperate of all the
Humors, it must be presently evacuated out of the Body; not only in plenitude,
where Nature requires nothing but to be discharged; but also in depravation of
the Blood, by mixture of the other Humors corrupted; of which the less there
is, the more easily they are subdued by Nature, which wants not strength to
re-produce more laudable Blood than that from which she was unburden'd: But
regard must chiefly be had to the distinction of Veins, according to the
diversity of Diseases. So the most apparent Veins of the arms are opened when
the Body is plethorick, without affection of any Part: If it be so by
suppression of the Months or Hemorrhoids, the Vein of the Foot must be opened:
If it be by Choler, then that of the right arm: If by Melancholy, then that of
the left arm, in regard of the situation of the Liver and Spleen; as for the
various communication of the Vessels the Cephalic, Basilick, or Median are
chosen. Hippocrates opens the Vein of the Forehead called Praeparata, in pains
of the Hinder part of the head; that of the Occiput, in fluxions of the Eyes;
the Hypoglottides, or Veins under the Tongue, in the Squinancy, for derivation;
that of the tip of the Nose, or great Canthus of the Eye, in its Inflammations;
the Jugulares and Salvatella, those of the Temples; and, in brief, all others
are opened according to the sundry intentions of the Physician.

The Third said, That Blood-letting is the greatest of Remedies; there being
none sooner communicated to all the Parts, which having need of nourishment,
which is carried to them by the Veins, you cannot evacuate any one sensibly,
but that motion will be communicated with all the Blood in the other Veins;
that is to say, over all the Body. Its use was anciently so rare, that Galen
and the Greeks made conscience of letting Children blood before fourteen years
of Age; and Avenzoar was accounted too ventrous in Phlebotomising his own Son
at seven. Hippocrates appoints it in four cases; in Inflammation, Metastasis,
Repletion, and Obstruction. It Is above all necessary, when the Body is too
replete, evidenced oft-times by spontaneous evacuations at the Nose, and
Hemorroids; whether this Repletion respect the Vessels, which are too full, and
in danger of breaking; or the natural strength, oppressed under the weight of
the humors: But it seems to me impertinent and unprofitable in case of
Cacochymie without Repletion, which requires Purgatives to purify the
sanguinary mass, and not this bleeding Remedy: For, there being three principal
seats of Cacochymie, to wit, the First Region, the Veins, and the Habit of the
Body; Blood-letting is alike unprofitable to them all. As for the First Region,
which is the sink and channel of the humors, Blood-letting cannot reach
thither, without emptying all the Blood of the Body; and should it penetrate
thither, it would draw those excrementitious humors into the Veins, where they
would corrupt the laudable Blood. But Cacochymie residing in the Region of the
Veins, Purgation (which only eliminates the corrupted humors, without the good
and laudable) is more proper thereunto than Phlebotomie; which, on the
contrary, sometimes evacuates the good juice, and not the vicious, when the
same is impacted and adherent to some part remote from the opened Vein. In
fine, Blood-letting is as little profitable when the impurity is in the habit
of the Body: Whence it is too hard to draw the humors into the Veins; but it is
more expedient to resolve and make them transpire by sweats, exercise,
abstinence, and other labors.

The Fourth said, That Blood-letting is profitable in every vitiosity of the
Blood, which either is corrupted in substance and quality, or offends in
quantity, or causes a fluxion upon some Part, or presses and loads it, or else
is too much inflamed: Nevertheless with this precaution, that regard is to be
had to the Disease; the strength, temper, age, sex, habitation, custom, and
particular nature of the Patient. But generally, every great, hot, and acute
Disease requires Phlebotomie; which, on the contrary, is an enemy to cold
Diseases, and all crudities; because it refrigerates, by the loss of heat and
spirits flowing out with the Blood. Also, diminution of strength, caused by any
evacuation or resolution, prohibits bleeding; but not that where the strength
is oppressed by abundance of humors, which must be presently eliminated.
Children, who need Blood for their growth, as breeding Women do for the
nourishment of their Child; old men, who want heat and Spirits; those who have
small Veins, or rare and softish flesh; ought not to be let blood but with
great precautions. Nor is Phlebotomie to be administered in great cold or great
heat, nor after great watchings and labors. And although the quantity of Blood
depends upon the strength, and the Disease, yet it is safest to take rather
less; but by no means to imitate the Ancients, who let Blood till the swooning
of the Patient, in Inflammations, violent Pains, and very burning Fevers; which
they sometimes cured by this course, but commonly caused a cold Intemperies to
the whole Body, during the remainder of life.

Which is the most excellent of the Souls three Faculties, Imagination, Memory,
or Judgment?
to the end to make himself known to men, has also contracted the same in each
part thereof, wherein we observe some shadow of the distinction of the Divine
Essence into Three Persons: And it is with this Ternary Number that he has as
'twere stamped for his own Coin the noblest parts of the World, which the
Pythagoreans have also for that reason divided into three; namely, The
Intellectual, which are the Heavens, (the place of Intelligences); the
Elementary, and the Animal; each of which is again divided into three parts;
The Intellectual or Celestial, into the Heaven of Planets, the Firmament, and
the Empyreal; The Elementary, into the Air, Water, and Earth; And the Animal,
into Vegetable, Sensitive, and Rational, which is Man, who comprehends in
himself eminently all those parts of the World; the Elementary being in the
Liver, the Animal in the Heart, the Intellectual in the Brain, wherein, as in
its principal Sphere, the Rational Soul establishes a particular World; every
ones Head being a Globe, which is divided again into three parts, which are the
Imagination, Memory, and Judgment: Amongst which, the Imagination, the
principle of the others motion and action, represents the animal World; Memory,
serving for a subject matter to receive the impressions of the species
consigned to it, is the Elementary; and Judgment, the Intellectual. The three
parts of each of which Worlds are again correspondent to the same Faculties.
The Imagination, upon account of the continual circumvolution of the Species,
is the Heaven of Planets: The Memory, in reference to the fixation of the same
Species, is their Firmament: And the Judgment, the highest of these Powers, is
the Empyraeal. To the three parts of the Elementary, The Imagination, for its
mobility and subtilty, is like the Air; Memory, for its soft humidity, fitting
it to receive all sorts of Figures, may be compared to the Water; and Judgment,
the base and foundation of the rest, for the solidity of its consistence and
siccity, symbolizeth with the Earth. Lastly, to the three parts of the Animal
World; the Memory, receiving increase or diminution by humidity, the principle
of vegetation, resembles the Vegetable; the Imagination, by its heat and
activity, the Animal; and the Judgment, the Rational. And though these three
Faculties be united in the substance of the Soul, nevertheless they are
different, not only in their temperaments, actions, and ages, but also in their
seats; as that of Memory is the hinder part of the Brain, which people scratch
to call any thing to mind; that of Imagination is the forepart, whence they
lift up their heads when they would vehemently imagine any thing; and that of
Judgment is the middle part, which is the cause why in a deep study people hold
down the head. But to make choice of each in particular, their operations must
be considered: Some make very much noise, and little action; as Advocates and
Proctors of a Court, who make much a do to put a business in order, to lay it
open, and digest it, although without deciding any thing; and such is the
Imagination, which unites and compounds the Species, represents them to the
Judgment, carries them to the register of the Memory, or extracts them out by
Reminiscence. Others make little bustle, and much action; as Judges; and so
does the Judgment. The last have neither stir nor action; as the Registers, who
only transcribe what is dictated to them; and so does the Memory, a passive
Power. The Sciences themselves, which fall under the Jurisdiction of the Mind,
are also subject to each of these Faculties. Memory has under it the Tongues,
Grammar, Positive Theology, History, Humanity, Law, Geography, Anatomy,
Herbary, and almost all the Theory of Physic. The Imagination has Eloquence,
Poetry, Music, Architecture, Geodaesie, Fortifications, most part^ of the
Mathematiques, and all the Arts whose works depend only on the force of the
Imagination. The Judgment has Philosophy, Scholastical Divinity, the Practice
of Physic and Law, and all the Sciences which depend on soundness of
reasoning. Nevertheless, because it seems that the Judgment cannot judge to its
own advantage without injustice, being both Judge and Party; it is best to
arbitrate in this sort, and say, That the excellence and necessity of things
being considered, or so far as they are for our profit, or that of others; for
our own profit it is best to have a good Judgment, and less of Memory or
Imagination: For the Imagination serves more for Invention, and this to ruin
its Author when it is destitute of Judgment; Memory to make a man admired; and
Judgment, for conduct and government.

The Second said, Since the Imagination gives the rise to all the motions of
the Soul, by the Species which it supplies to it, wherewith it forms the
Passions in the Inferior Appetites, Desires in the Reasonable Appetite, namely,
the Will; and Notions in the Understanding, which cannot know any thing but by
the phantasms or species forged in the Imagination; it must be the most
excellent of all the Faculties of the Soul. Moreover, the Temper which
constitutes it being the most laudable, and the Age wherein it prevails being
the most perfect, its Actions must also be the most sublime; since being not
performable but by help of corporeal Organs, the more perfect these are, the
more will the Minds actions be so too. Now the Qualities of the Imagination
have much more conformity to the Soul, according to the Opinion of some
Ancients, of an igneous nature; and according to others, an Entelechie and
continual motion, which either causes or depends on heat, the most active
quality of all, wherewith the Brain being impregnate, renders the Spirit more
lively, quick in retorts, and in all that they call Point d' Esprit, or
acumen; and inspiring Enthusiasms to Poets. On the contrary, the Judicious, who
want this Imaginative Virtue, are cold, heavy, and as tedious in conversation,
as the other are agreeable and welcome: Yea, the Judgment it self ows all its
advantage to it: For if it were equitable, it would regulate it self only by
the species which the Imagination represents to it; and if it be corrupted, and
without having regard to the pieces offered to its view, will follow its own
sentiments, it runs the hazard of committing a thousand extravagances and
impertinences. Yea, all the Judicious Sciences are ambiguous, and their
followers divided; a sure note of their weakness, as well as of that of
Judgment which guids them; since Abstracted Truth, its Object being unknown, it
must leave the same in perpetual darkness, unless it borrow light from the
Imagination. Moreover, the Sciences, Arts, and Disciplines of this Faculty are
all pleasant, and as delightful and certain, as those of Memory are labile, the
Faculty only of Children and Liars. Yea, the maladies of the Imagination are in
such veneration, that Hippocrates calls them Divine, as having miraculous
effects.

The Third said, That there is no entire and perfect Good in this World, is
verified also in the Goods of the Mind, which are not often possessed by one
single man, but every one has his share therein: For goodness of Wit,
consisting in the excellence of his three Faculties, Imagination, Memory, and
Judgment, the first of which forms the species, the second preserves, and the
last judges of, and frames its Notions from them; it is a very rare thing to
find a man possessing these three advantages in an excellent degree; besides
that, they are incompatible in one and the same subject, inasmuch as they
depend upon the contrary temperaments. The Memory on a hot and moist, such as
that of Children; which nevertheless must not be like water, which easily
receives, but retains not, all sorts of Figures; but it must be aerial, and
have some consistence and viscosity to retain the imprinted species. The
Imagination requires a hot and dry temper, for fabricating and composing
abundance of species; like that of choleric and young men, who are inventive
and industrious. The Judgment demands a constitution of Brain cold and dry,
like that of melancholy and old men, to hinder the sudden eruptions, or sallies
of the Mind; which therefore reasons better when the Body is at rest, than when
it is in motion, which produces heat, as much an enemy to the operation of the
Reasonable Soul, as profitable to those of the Sensitive or Vegetative, whose
actions are performed by the Spirits, and Heat. But the Imagination cannot know
any thing without Memory, which furnishes it with species; nor this remember,
without help of the Imagination; nor the Judgment conceive and judge without the
help of both. Nevertheless, as amongst Qualities there is always one
predominant; so amongst these three Faculties, one commonly excels the rest;
and the Judgment is the more excellent, inasmuch as it is peculiar to Man;
whereas the Imagination and Memory are common to him with Beasts. So that the
Judgment is our proper good, and is better worth cultivating than the Memory,
to which they who wholly addict themselves, are like bad Farmers, who improve
others Commodities, and let their own perish. On the contrary, they who only
form their Judgment, acquire the true Treasures of Wisdom, and may be said
rich of their own Stock: But great Memories are commonly like Aesop's Crow,
adorned with borrowed Plumes; and indeed raise admiration in the weak minds of
the Vulgar, but not in those who are accustomed to solid Truths, the Principle
whereof is the Judgment.

CONFERENCE CVI. I. Of Dew. II. Whether it be expedient for Women to be Learned?
IF Pindar deemed Water so good, that he thought nothing better to begin his
Odes with; Dew, which is celestial Water, Of Dew.
since it surpasses that as much as Heaven, whence it comes, is elevated above
the Earth. For Heaven is the source of Dew, whence it distills hither below,
impregnated with all ethereal qualities and properties, incommunicable to any
other thing; whether it come by a transcolation of super-celestial Waters,
which the Hebrews call Maim in the Dual Number, to signify the Waters on high
and those below; or whether there be a Quintessence and Resolution of the
Heavens whence it proceeds, like those Waters which Chemists distill from Bodies
put into their Alembicks, indu'd with their odor and other qualities, and
sometimes augmented in virtues: Whence some Divines endeavor to derive the
reason why Manna, which is nothing else but Dew condensed, for forty years
together wanting one Month, and allotted by God for sustenance of his people,
had all sorts of Tastes; for (say they) Heaven, whence it fell, contains
eminently, as the efficient equivocal cause, all the forms of things to whose
generation it concurs here below; and therefore God employed this Dew to
represent the several kinds of each Aliment, And Honey, whose sweetness is so
familiar to our Nature, (yea, so prized by the Scripture, that God promises his
people nothing so frequently, to raise their longing after the Land which he
had promised them) what else is it but this same Dew condensed and gathered by
the Bees, who rubbing their thighs upon the flowers and leaves of Plants on
which this Liquor falls, load themselves therewith, and lodge it in their hives?
Wherefore Naturalists seem too gross, in teaching, Dew to be only a Vapor
raised from the Earth, by the heat which the Sun leaves in the Air at his
setting, and; for want of other sufficient heat, unable to advance it self
higher than the tops of herbs: for its tenuity and effects manifest the
contrary; its tenuity much exceeding that of Water; witness their experiment,
who make an egg-shell filled with Dew ascend alone to the top of a Pike placed
a little bowing in the Sun; which it will not do, if filled with common Water,
how rarefi'd soever. Its effects also are, to penetrate much more powerfully
than ordinary Water; which is the reason why it very speedily whitens whatever
is exposed to it, as Linen and Wax; for the effecting of which, Rain requires
thrice as long time: But its penetrativeness appears yet further, in that it
dissolves even Gold it self; for which reason some have thought fit to wash
several times in it such Medicaments as they would have penetrate, as well as
others are wont to do in Vinegar.

The Second said. If it sufficed to speak of Dew in a Poetical way, I should
call it the sweat of Heaven, there spittle of the Stars, the dropping of the
celestial Waters, or the crystalline humor which flows from the eyes or the
fair Aurora; or else that it is a Pearl-Garland, wherewith the Earth decks her
self in the morning, to appear more beautiful in the eyes of the Sun, and the
whole Universe; to which if the Vapors serve for food, the Dew is its Nectar
and Ambrosia. But to speak more soberly, I conceive it a thin and subtle
Vapor, raised by a moderate Heat; till either meeting some Body, it adheres
thereunto; or being attracted near the Middle Region of the Air, it is condensed
by cold, and falls down again upon the Earth. Nevertheless, this Vapor
proceeds not only from a humor purely Aqueous, but somewhat partaking of the
Spirits of Nitre, Sugar, or a sweet Salt; since the thinnest part of it being
evaporated, the rest remains condensed upon leafs and stones, or becomes Honey
and Manna; and whosoever shall lightly pass his tongue over the leafs of Nut-tree,
and other compact and close Plants, shall taste a sweetness upon them in
temperate Climates or Seasons, which is nothing else but an extract of this
same Dew. Moreover, the fertility which it causes in the Earth, its purgative
and detersive virtue, sufficiently manifest this Truth. For Dew could not
fertilise the Earth, if it were bare Water, destitute of all sort of Spirits;
and particularly those of Nitre, which is the most excellent Manure that can be
used to improve Land; for the Earth from which it is extracted remains barren,
till it have been anew impregnated with those Spirits by the influx of Dew, to
which they expose it for some time, that it may again become capable of
producing something. This purgative virtue, whereof not only Manna partakes
(being a gentle purger, of serosities) but also pure Dew, which sometimes
causes a mortal Diarrhoea or Lax in Cattle, purging them excessively when it is
not well concocted and digested by the heat of the Sun, which consumes its
superfluous phlegm; and that detersive Faculty whereby Dew cleanses all
impurities of the Body, which it whitens perfectly, cannot proceed but from
that nitrous Salt, which, as all other Salts, is penetrative and detersive. Nor
can that ascending of the Egg-shell proceed from any other cause but the virtue
of certain leight and volatile Spirits; which being actuated and fortified by
the heat of the Sunbeams, are set on motion; and flying upwards, carry the
enclosing shell with them; which an aqueous humor cannot do; because though
the heat of the Sun could so subtilise, attenuate, and rarefie it, as to render
it an aerie Nature, which is the highest point of rarity it can attain; yet it
would not sooner attract the same than the rest of the air; much less would it
raise up the Egg-shell; but it would transpire by little and little through the
pores of the shell, or be expanded in it so far as it had space, and at last
either break it, or be resolved into fume; Heat imprinting no motion in Water,
but only rarifying and heating it by degrees; which is not sufficient to raise
up the Vessel which contains it, since the same being full of heated air, would
remain upon the ground.

The Third said, That all natural things being in a perpetual flux and reflux,
to which this Elementary Globe supplies Aliments, to make them return to their
Principle; Dew may be termed the beginning and end of all things, the Pearl or
Diamond which terminates the circular revolution of all Nature; since being
drawn upwards by the Sun from the mass of Water and Earth, subtilis'd into
vapor, and arrived to the utmost point of its rarefaction, it becomes
condensed again, and returns to the Earth, to which it serves as sperm, to
render it fruitful, and to be transformed upon it into all things, whose
qualities it assumes; because being nothing but a Quitessence extracted from
all this Body, it must have all the virtues thereof eminently in it self.
Moreover, anciently the ordinary Benedicton of Fathers to their Children was,
that of the Dew of Heaven; as being the sperm of Nature, the First Matter of
all its Goods, and the perfection of all its substance, recocted and digested
in the second Region of the Air: For the same vapor which forms Dew in the
Morning, being that which causes the Serein in the Evening; yet the difference
of them is so great, that the latter is as noxious as the former is profitable;
because the first vapors which issue out of the bosom of the Earth, being not
yet depurated from their crude and malignant qualities, cause Rheums and
Catarrhs; but those of the Morning being resolved of Air condensed by the
coldness of the Night, have nothing but the sweetness and benignity of that
Element; or else the pores of the Body being opened by the diurnal heat, more
easily receive the malignant impressions of extraneous humidity, than after
having been closed by the coldness of the night.

The Fourth said, Although Vapor be an imperfect Mixed, yet it is as well as
other perfect Bodies composed of different parts; some whereof are gross others
tenuious. The gross parts of Vapor being rendered volatile by the extraneous
heat, wherewith they are impregnated, are elevated a far as the Middle Region
of the Air, whose coldness condenses them into a cloud, which is ordinarily
dissolved into Rain, sometimes into snow or hail; into the former, when the
cloud before resolution is rendered friable by the violence of the cold, which
expressing the humidity, closes the parts of the cloud, and so it falls in
flocks: and into the latter, when the same cloud being already melted into
rain, the drops are congealed, either by the external cold, or else by the
extreme heat of the Air, which by Antiperistasis augmenting the coldness of the
rain, makes it close and harden; which his the reason why it hails as well
during the sultry heats of Summer, as the rigours of Winter. And amongst the
gross parts of the Vapor, such as could not be altered or changed into a
cloud, descend toward our Region, and there form black clouds, and mists or
foggs: But the more tenuious parts of this Vapor produce Dew; in which, two
things are to be considered. I. The Matter. II. The Efficient Cause. The
Matter, is that tenuious Vapor, so subtle as not to be capable of heat, and
too weak to abate it. The Remote Efficient Cause, is a moderate Heat; for were
it excessive, it would either consume or carry away the Vapor; whence if comes
to pass, that there is no Dew made but during the Spring and Autumn, which are
temperate, Seasons; but never in Winter or Summer, the former congealing those
Vapors, and the latter dissolving and consuming them. The Proximate Efficient
Cause is the coldness of the Night, which must also be moderate; otherwise it
congeals them, not into Dew, but white-Frost, as it turns the Waters into Ice
by the extreme cold of the Air; which moreover must be calm and serene, because
if beaten and agitated by Winds, the Vapor cannot be condensed, for the same
reason which hinders running Waters from freezing, as standing do; whence also
Dew is more frequent in low places than high. Now as Dew is formed of Vapor
alone; so if together with that tenuious Vapor, some terrene but very fine
parts be carried up, especially toward the morning, there is produced a very
sweet juice, of which Honey is made; and when those terrene parts prevail above
the humid parts of the Dew, there is made a less liquid juice called Manna,
whereof the best is found in Calabria; that of Brianson, and some other places,
being through want of heat less digested than is requisite; or mingled with too
many impurities, by the excess of that which attracted them too violently from
the Earth: But the sweetness of this Honey and Manna proceeds from a most
perfect mixture of siccity with humidity, in a degree which is unknown to us.

Upon the Second Point it was said, That God having subjected Whether it is
expedient for Women to be Learned?
) as Absolute Power is sometimes accompanied with Tyranny, so he has not only
reserved to himself alone the Authority of making Laws (whereunto Women not
being called, have always had the worst) but has also appropriated the best
things to himself, without, admitting them to partake therein: For Men, not
content to have reduced them by those Laws into perpetual Wardship, which is a
real Servitude; to have so ill provided for them in Successions; and to have
made themselves Masters of their Estates, under the Title of Husbands; further,
unjustly deprive them of the greatest of all Goods, to wit, that of the Mind,
whose fairest Ornament is Knowledge, the chief Good both of this World and the
next, and the noblest Action of the Souls most excellent Faculty, the
Understanding, which is common to Women as well as to Men, over whom too they
seem to have the advantage of Wit; not only for the softness of their Flesh,
which is an evidence of goodness of Wit; but because of the Curiosity, which is
the Parent of Philosophy, defined, for this reason, The Love and Desire of
Wisdom: And this vivacity is conspicuous in their loquacity and their
artifices, intrigues, and dissimulations; their Wits being like those good
Soils, which for want of better culture run out into weeds and briars. Their
Memory, caused by the moist constitution of their Brain, and their sedentary
and solitary life, is further favorable to Study. Moreover, not to speak of
those of the present Times, we have the examples of S. Bridgid, who excelled in
Mystical Theology; Cleopatra, Sister of Arsinous, in Physic; Pulcheria, in
Politics; Hupetia and Athenais, wife to Theodosius, in Philosophy; Sappho, and
two Corynnae, in Poetry; Cornelia, the Mother of the Gracchi, and Tullia,
doubly Cicero's Daughter, in Eloquence. Now if it be true, that Politics and
Oeconomicks are founded upon the same Principles, and there needs as much
Knowledge to preserve as to acquire; then since Women are in a Family what Men
are in a State, and are destinated to keep what Men get, why should not they
have the knowledge of the same Maxims as Men have by Study and Theory; inasmuch
as the reservedness and modesty of their Sex allows them not to have the
experience thereof, by frequentation of the World? Hence, our ancient Gauls
left to them the Administration of the Laws, and other exercises of Peace;
reserving to themselves only those of War. And as for other Sciences, since
their Encyclopaedy is a World which has yet many unknown or less frequented
Parts, if Women joined together with Men in the discovery of them, who doubts
but a feminine Curiosity would serve to exacuate the point of Men's Wits,
distracted by extraneous Affairs, and make marveilous progresses, and find out
sundry rare Secrets, hitherto unknown.

The Second said, That Women are of themselves prone enough to take the
ascendant over Men, without need of giving them that of Learning, which,
puffing up the mind, would render them more proud and insupportable than
before; the good opinion they would have of themselves, being inconsistent with
the Obedience to which they are bound. We read, That our first Father Adam was
indu'd with Knowledge, but not Eve; on the contrary, her sole desire to become
knowing, by eating the forbidden Fruit, ruined the whole World. The active life
of Huswifry, to which they are born; the tenderness of their Bodies, impatient
of the labors and sweat wherewith Science is acquired; the humidity of their
Brain, which is an enemy to Science; and the weakness of their capricious
Spirit; are sufficiently strong Reasons to prohibit that Sex the Sciences,
which require solidity of Judgment, always found wanting in the Writings of
Women accounted the most Learned: Because Judgment is an act of the Intellect,
reflecting upon its Notions; which reflection depends upon a dry Temper,
contrary to that of a Woman's Brain, whose Animal Spirits being obscured by the
clouds of humidity, she hits well sometimes at the first assay, but not in
second thoughts, which are always weaker than the first; a most sure mark of
their weakness: (On the contrary, the second thoughts of Men prevail over the
first.) Whence it is that they are heady in their desires, and violent in their
first Passions, wherein ordinarily they have neither measure nor mediocrity:
Therefore a Woman always either hates or loves; she never knows a mean.

The Third said, Since the more imperfect a thing is, the more need it has of
being perfectionated; were the Minds of Women weak and imperfect, as is
pretended, it would follow, that they have more need of the Sciences to cover
their defects. Had our first Mother been indu'd with Knowledge, she would not so
easily have suffered her self to be deluded by the fair promises of the Devil,
who rightly judging, that Adam with all his Knowledge would have discovered his
subtilties, was aware of meddling with him, but set upon the poor, idiot, and
ignorant Woman. It Is therefore an injustice to require Women to be more perfect
and wise than Men, and withal to interdict them the means of becoming so: For
how shall they be virtuous, if they know not what Virtue is? which being a
Habit of the Will (a Faculty of it self blind, till illuminated by the advisoes
of the Intellect, which are acquired by the Sciences) it is impossible for them
to attain it. Those who doubt lest the knowledge of natural things might
prejudice the honesty and modesty of that Sex, know not that the cognition of
bad things, as well as of false, is always honest and laudable; and that the
Understanding is no more soiled therewith, than the Sun by shining upon
dunghils. For though the Will receive tincture of goodness and evil from the
objects to which it tends, yet the Understanding is not corrupted by the most
impure and abominable things which fall under its notice. Yea, since Knowledge
depends upon purity and simplicity; which makes Divines say, That Angels and
separated Intelligences are more perfect in their cognitions than Men; it
seems, the safest course Women can take for securing their purity and Chastity
(their only Treasure) is, to make provision of Learning and Knowledge. Moreover,
it is a thing unheard of to this day, that a Woman was Learned, and not Chaste
and Continent; which the Ancients meant to represent by Minerva the Goddess of
Sciences, and the Nine Muses, all Virgins.

CONFERENCE CVII. I. Whether it be good to use Chemical Remedies? II. Whether
the Reading of Romances be profitable?
ALL Sublunary Bodies having been created for the health of Man, who is the
Rule of their Temperature, Whether it be good to use Chemical Remedies?
and the substance, as Aliments; nor corrupting it, as Poisons: but either
evacuating the peccant humors, or altering Nature, to restore it to its
natural temper, when they are rightly administered, and not otherwise; the
former are called Purgative, the latter Alterative Remedies. All these Remedies
were first found out by Experience, which gave place to the most ancient Sect
of Physicians, called Emperica, invented by Acron, and afterward supported by
the two general Maxims of the Methodists, of whom Thessalus was Author; which
were, To loosen constipated Bodies; and, To stop the fluxions of others.
Lastly, They have been authorized by Reason, joined to Experience; which has
given place to the most authentic Sect called the Dogmatists, or
Rationalists, and Galenists, from their Author; proceeding upon Hippocrates's
Principle, who cured Contraries by their Contraries; whereas the Chemists
(called also Hermeticks from Hermes Trismegistus, and Spagyricks from the
business of their Art, which is to separate and conjoyn Bodies) cure like
Maladies by like Medicaments; which they say act by a propriety of their whole
substance against Diseases; not by their temperament or various mixture of
contrary qualities, which nevertheless are alone active; for no action can be
between things perfectly alike, in regard one thing acts upon another only in
order to assimilate the same; so that if it be already like, there will not be
any action. Moreover by the reason of Contraries, since Health is preserved by
things of resembling Nature, it follows, That Diseases must be cured by their
Contraries. And as Health consists in Mediocrity; so Sickness, either in Excess
or Defect: On which account, Physic is defined Detraction and Addition,
because it retrenches what is superfluous, and supplies what is deficient. Now
both Excess and Defect are increased by use of things alike. Wherefore the
Chemical Principle being overthrown, all the Remedies founded thereupon ought
to be suspected.

The Second said, That those two Principles which seem contrary one to the
other, are not so, if rightly understood: For, when the Chemists say, That
Similia curantur similibus, they speak not of Diseases, as the Galenists do,
with whom they agree, That the same are augmented by use of resembling things;
but of the part diseased, which (being the Seat of Affections against Nature)
can alone be said to be cured, and not the Diseases; which being only a
privation, error, or disorder of the Body, cannot be capable of sanation, but
only the parts of the Body; which the Dogmatists, as well as the Chemists, cure
by Remedies like in substance to the Nature of those Parts which they
strengthen: For whatever is a Friend to Nature, called by Hippocrates, Morborum
Medicatrix, is also an Enemy to that which is against Nature.

The Third said, Since Remedies are the more excellent, by how much the nearer
they come to our Nature; it follows, That Minerals, Metals, and all Fossiles,
prescribed us by Chemistry, having malignant and venomous qualities, are much
more dangerous than the ordinary Remedies taken from Animals and Plants, which
have life as well as we. However prepared, they always leave an evil tincture
in the noble Parts, and whole Body, against which they act with violence; which
they have not only of their own Nature, altogether remote from ours; but also
from the Fire, which gives them an extraneous heat, contrary and destructive to
ours; any dry heat being an enemy to the natural, which is humid and benign;
and although they make use of Medicines extracted from Vegetables, yet it is
with as little success; since their purgative virtue depends on their
temperament, which is wholly destroyed by their Distillations and Extractions:
Besides that, being all hot, they are unprofitable to all acute Diseases
(ordinarily hot, and always the most dangerous) and noxious in Fevers, which
are generally complicated with most Diseases. Moreover, all Remedies acting by
the first, second, and third Qualities, which depend on a Matter tempered after
a particular Matter; therefore Mixts separated from rheir Matter, which serves
for a base and foundation to the actions of the Form, lose their former force
and virtue, which is more efficacious and sensible in a material and gross
subject, as that of ordinary Remedies is, prepared by decoction or infusion, in
Bolus, Powder, Opiate, Conserve, Lozenges, or such other solid Body; than in an
Essence, Spirit, or the like subtle and tenuious Body; which freed from its
grosser parts, which served to check it, flies like lightning into the Parts of
the Body wherein the Morbifick cause resides, which it can never subdue or
eradicate, though its virtue should not presently vanish, but be preserved in
the Body; which, besides being accustomed to material things, because they
conserve and compose it, it oftentimes receives great damage from too subtle
things; on which account, the Air of the Supreme Region cannot be attracted by
the Lungs.

The Fourth said, That the Characteristical of a Good Medicament being to Cure
Speedily, Certainly, and Pleasantly; the Chemical, being such, ought to be not
only employed, but also preferred above others. The speediness of their Effect
is from their Forms, which alone are active, especially when depurated and
loosned from Matter, a Principle purely passive, and incapable of action. They
are also agreeable and sure, as being deprived of their impurities, malignant
qualities, bad smells and tastes, by means of the various degrees of Fire;
whieh if it communicate an Empyreuma or Burntness to these Medicines, so it
does, not only to vulgar Remedies prepared by Fire, but also to all our Meats
and Aliments. Besides, many of these Chemical Remedies are prepared with a
moderate heat, as that of a Dunghill, Ashes, Balneum Mariae, which cannot give
them such Empyreuma: And should they all have it, yet being but an extraneous
and adventitious heat, it is easily separated from them, either of it self in
time, or speedily by ablutions, wherewith even Precipitate Mercury is rendered
very gentle, and Antimony void of all malignity. What is objected of the
violence wherewith Mineral and Metallic Medicines act, by reason of their
disproportion to our Nature, is as little considerable; since Hippocrates, and
the ancient Physicians, used Euphorbium, Hellebore, Scammony, Turbith,
Colocynthis, and such other most violent Remedies, which are still in use; and
Galen employed Steel, Sandarach, burnt Brass, and the like Medicines, taken
from Minerals wholly crude, and without preparation, which was unknown in his
time. Rondeletius uses crude Mercury in his Pills against the Venereous
Disease, whereof this Mineral is the true Panacaea: Cardan and Matthiolus,
crude Antimony; Gesner, Vitriol; Fallopius, Crocus Martis against the Jaundies;
almost all Physicians, Sulphur, against the Diseases of the Lungs; and such
Patients as cannot be cured by ordinary Remedies, they send to Mineral Waters.
And since not only Garlic, Onyons, and Mustard, which we use in our Diet; but
also the Juices of Lemmons, Citrons, Berberries, and Cantharides, although
corrosive, are still in use; why should we not use Chemical Medicines in small
quantity, purged from their corrosion, and taken with convenient Waters and
Vehicles?

The Fifth said, There is in all natural things a certain fixed Spirit, the
sole principle of their Virtues and Operations; which being separated from
them, they remain only Carcasses without Souls: As is seen in Earth, rendered
barren by extraction of its nitrous Salt; in Wine dead or sour; and in the
insipid phlegm of the same Wine, separated from its Spirit by Chemical
distillation, which separates the good from the bad, the pure from the impure,
the subtle from the gross, the form from its more crass matter; in a word, the
Spirit from its Body; which being impregnated with the virtue of the whole
Mixed, reduced into a very narrow Volume, is very active and proper, not only to
serve for Aliment to an Animal, which is nourished with this Spirit, the rest
being unprofitable, and as such converted into Excrements; but also principally
for the curing of Diseases, by repairing and strengthening the fixed Spirits,
which are the true feats of Diseases, as well as of Health; a Disease being
nothing but the laesion of the Functions, whereof the Spirits are the
Principles; whereas ordinary Physicians, instead of separating the virtues of
each Mixed, to oppose the same, as Specifical Remedies to all Diseases, as the
Chemists do, stifle and destroy them by the confused mixture of abundance of
Simples and Drugs, whereof their Medicaments are compounded, which by this
means acquire a new temperament and particular virtue, resulting from the
ingredients, whose qualities and properties are abated, or rather extinguished;
in like manner as of the Elements united together is made a Compound wholly
different from its principles. Wherefore we may justly retort against such
Remedies, what they charge upon those of Chemistry; namely, That they are taken
from dead Ingredients, corrupted and deprived, by the Fire, of their Radical
Humidity, wherein, consisted their prime purgative virtue, which is not so
easily dissipated; since when a Nurse takes a Purge, the strength of the
Physic is conveyed by her Milk to the Child; and we feed she-Goats and Pullen
with Purgatives, to render the Milk of the one, and the Flesh of the other
such. However, since there, are so many incurable Diseases, whose causes are
sufficiently known, but to which no Specifical Remedies are found; Chemistry,
which opens the means thereunto by the solution of all Bodies, ought to be
cherished, and not condemned, as it is by the ignorant or malicious, who must
at least acknowledge it one of the members of Physic, as belonging to Pharmacy,
which consists in the choice and preparation of Medicaments, and is part of the
Therapeutical Division. But we say rather, That the three parts of Medicine, or
its three ancient Sects, are the three parts of the World, Europe, Asia, and
Africa; and Chemistry is that new World, lately discovered, not less rare and
admirable than the others, provided it be as carefully cultivated, and rescued
out of the hands of Barbarians.

Upon the Second Point it was said, That Truth is not the Whether the reading
of Romances be profitable.
since oftentimes Fables and Romances have more attractives, and no fewer
followers than Histories; as the Poets meant to signify by the Fable of
Pigmalion, who fell in Love with a Statue. For Romances, which are nothing else
but the Images of a fantastic Beauty, are nevertheless loved and idolatris'd
by abundance of Persons; not only for the Eloquence, whose fairest lines are
seen in those fabulous Books; but for the Gracefulness and Gallantry of the
actions of their Personages, which may serve for a perfect model of Virtue;
which having never been found complete in all points in any Illustrious Man,
whose Life is always blemished with some spot, History cannot give us a perfect
example to imitate, unless it be assisted by Romances; without which,
Narrations purely Historical, describing a naked fact, are but excarnated
Sceletons, and like the first lines of a Picture grossly traced with a Crayon,
and consequently disagreeable, if artifice give them not color and shadows.
Thus Xenophon, and in our times Don Guevara, aiming to draw the Model of a
perfect Prince, one in the Person of Cyrus, the other of Marcus Aurelius, have
heaped together so many contrarieties to Truth, that they have made rather
Romances of them than Histories. Thus Achilles's exploits appear far otherwise
in Homer than in Dictys Cretensis; those of Charlemain, in Eginard and Ariosto,
than in the Annals: It Is to Romances that they owe half their Glory; and if
their Example has given any excitation to the Readers Spirits, it is what the
Romances aimed at, not the Histories. The Romancer is the Master and Contriver
of his Subject; the Historian is the Slave of it. And as by refraction of the
visual rays, variously reflected in a triangular Glass, is formed an Iris of
colors, which although not real yet cease not to please; so by the variety of
those accidents, variously interwoven with the mixtures of Truth and Fiction,
is formed so agreeable a Medley, that it delights more in its Inventions than
the Body of an uniform History; from which Romances borrowing the most
memorable accidents, may be termed the Essence and Abridgment of the same,
re-uniting all the Beauty, Pleasure, and Profit which they afford: For these
Books serve not only for delight, but profit; the one never being without the
other; since Fair, which is the object of Delight; and Good, of Profit; are
reciprocal and inseparable: And the pleasure we take in any thing is an
infallible mark of its goodness and utility; which is so much the greater in
Romances, as they instruct with pleasure, artificially marrying Benefit and
Delectation. Under supposed Names they freely tax, without incurring the envy
or hatred of those whom they reprehend. Thus the Prophet Nathan by a Parable
drew from David the condemnation of his Crime; which otherwise possibly he
would never have owned, or at least would have excused in his own Person. As
for the abuse and danger of reading these Books, for the most part filled with
dishonest Loves it is common to them with the best things of the World, that
they may be turned to a bad use: But if the Love be honest and lawful (as it
proves always in conclusion) the Romances deserve no blame for it; if unlawful,
the Lovers have always an unhappy end; and Vices are never unpunished. It Is
here that Distributive Justice is exactly kept; not by the blind Judgment of
Fortune, but by the judicious choice of the Author; that the Good are always
rewarded, and the Wicked punished. For the object of Romances, as well as of
Histories, is the description of humane actions; which being most often bad, by
reason of the depravation of Nature, they appear more scandalously in History
than in Romances. Why therefore do not their Censors likewise proscribe
Histories, so much more dangerous, as they afford us many true examples of
Sacriledges, Parricides, Adulteries, and Incests, the Authors whereof have
escaped punishment. And not to speak of the dangerous Maxims of Tacitus and
Polybius; Who would take the Fables of Herodotus, and the Prodigies of Livie,
for more probable things then those of Romances? To omit the contrariety of
Historians of the same time; so that we may say, That the truest amongst them
is the most likely.

The Second said, If the Platonists saying be true, That there is nothing real
in this World; but we perceive only shadows and phantasms in this life, which
the Scripture compares to a Dream; there will be little difference, as to
realty, between a History and a Romance. And though the one be a mere fiction,
yet this will no more infer the despising of it, than it does of a Comedy,
because the Actors are not the very Personages; or of a Landscape or Perspective
well drawn, only because it is the Invention of the Painter, and not of Nature;
whose Works, as excellent as they are, yet yield to those of Art, which we
esteem above the true and natural, from which the same are counterfeited; our
minds extremely delighting in Imitations; whence it is that we so much esteem
in their Copies and Representations such things whose Originals are
disagreeable to us. But that which augments the glory of Romances is, that
their declared enemies have not been able to encounter them but by Romances
too; as Plato and Isocrates could not reprehend the Sophisters, but by making
use of their Eloquence.

The Third said, That Romances are commonly either of the valorous Exploits of
Knights, or of Amorous pass-times. The first are for the most part ridiculous,
and full of Knights Errant, who force Enchanted Castles, kill Monsters, Giants,
and Men like Flies. The latter are infamous, contrary to Good Manners, and
dangerous to young Persons, entertaining them in a loose Idleness, the Mother
of all Vices; besides the dangerous impressions those Lies leave in tender
Minds, and which remain therein all their life after. But this belongs to all
fabulous Discourses, that they denote weakness of Judgment in those addicted to
them, and a disorderly Wit in their Authors. And since, according to
Physicians, the first degree of Folly is to imagine fantastical Opinions; and
the second, to tell them to others; the third (in my conceit) will be, to write
them.

CONFERENCE CVIII. I. Of Talismans. II. Whether a Country-life or a City-life
is to be preferred?
TAlisman (which the Chaldaeans call Tsilmenaia; the Hebrews, Magen; the
Greeks, Character) is an Arabic word, Of Talismans.
formed by transposition and addition to the beginning and end of the two
Hemantical Letters Tau and Nun, of the Hebrew word Tselem, which signifies
Image, Figure, or Character. For those Talismans (of which Zoroaster is made
the first Author) are nothing else but Images in relief, or engraved upon
Medals or Rings, ordinarily of Metal or precious Stones, in shape of Men or
Animals, fabricated under certain Constellations and Aspects of Stars, whose
influence they thereby receive and keep, being afterward instead of the same
Stars; yea, with the greater virtue, in that the reunion of influences being
made in one point, their activity is redoubled: As Burning-glasses take more
heat from the Sun, than perhaps he has himself. These Figures act, as they
say, either upon men's minds, as to cause one to be loved, honored, enriched,
or feared; or upon their Bodies, as to cure them: Of which some shadow is seen
in the magnetical cure of Wounds, by applying the Medicine to the Weapon that
did the hurt, or to the bloody shirt. Or else these Figures act upon natural
things, as to keep away from a place rain, hail, and wild or venomous Beasts;
only by natural means: For we speak not here of magical or diabolical
Characters, whose virtues for the most part depend upon either a tacit or
express compact with the evil Spirit, who sometimes really produces those
effects, often deludes our Senses; and not the Character, Word, Sound, Number,
or such other means, commonly inept, and incapable of such action. But we speak
only of natural Agents, which acting almost all by a propriety of their whole
substance, and by occult and sympathetical virtues, cause many strange effects,
which the ignorant Vulgar incongruously ascribe to Magic or Sortilege. There
might be doubt of the effect of these Talismans, if diverse Histories did not
give assurance thereof: For those Teraphins, such as Laban's Puppets were,
might be called Talismans, as the Brazen-Serpent and the Golden-Calf are by
Marselius Ficinus; the one to preserve from the morsures of Serpents, by its
sight; the other to turn away the heats and droughts of the Scorpion, and of
Mars. The Idols of the Pagans may also be put in this rank, as Memnon's Statue
in Egypt, which moved and spoke when shone upon by the Sun; that of Paphian
Venus in Cyprus, upon which it never rained; the Palladium of Troy; the Ancilia
or Bucklers of Rome, whick kept the Fortune of the Empire; the Dii Penates,
figured by two Serpents; those called Averrunci, who kept away domestic
misfortunes; Sejanus's Statue of Fortune, which the Emperors left to their
Successors; Virgil's brazen Fly and golden Horseleech, with which he hindered
Flies from entering Naples, and killed all the Horseleeches in a Ditch; the
Figure of a Stork, placed by Apollonius at Constantinople, to drive them away
thence in the year 1160; and that wherewith he drove away Gnats from Antioch;
those of Tripoli in Syria, and Hampts in Arabia, which were preserved from
venomous Beasts by the Talisman of a Scorpion engraven upon one of their
Towers; that at Florence, made against the Gowt, by a Carmelite named Julianus
Ristonius a Prato; those of Paracelsus against the Pestilence; and infinite
others; render their effects as common, as their existence certain: Which is
proved also by the example of Gamahes or Camaien's, which are Stones naturally
figured by the impressions of the Stars, which consequently may have influence
upon Artificial Figures. For as the Sun may lighten or heat a man's Picture, as
well as a Man; so may the Stars give their influences to the Figure of a Thing,
as well as to the Thing it self; especially when the subject is fitted
thereunto, as the Talisman is; not only by its metallic matter, symbolizing
with that of the Star, both in color and solidity; but especially by the
Figure imprinted on it, which is like the Sign whose influences it receives.
For though the Constellation be not very like that Figure, yet in regard the
Qualities of the Animal which the Figure represents, are like those of the
Sign, (whence the Constellations of the Zodiac are called, The Ram, the Bull,
etc. not for the resemblance of such Animals parts with those of those Signs)
the Figure of the Animals attracts them of the same Sign much more powerfully
by sympathy. And indeed we see many things have qualities consentaneous to the
Figure they bear; as the Stone called Ophites, for the small veins which cut it
in form of little Serpents, cures their poison; as also the Stones of Maltha
do, which bear the Figure of a Serpents-tongue; and the Herb called by that
name: The Squill and the Poppy, which resemble the head, assuage the pains
thereof: Wild Tansey and Eyebright cure the Eye, whereto they are like. But if
it be said, That it is not the Figure that acts in them, but a particular virtue
depending on the temper of their Qualities; since losing their Figure either by
distillation or infusion, (they cease not to act, yea more effectually than
before. I answer, That in the spirits of those same active qualities remains
always the Form and Figure; as some Chemists have resuscitated Roses and other
Flowers, by holding their ashes in a glass Phial, over a Candle.

The Second said, That Talismans cannot produce the effects attributed to them;
whether you consider them in their Matter and Substance, or in their Figure.
Not in the former; for any sort of Matter, as Wood, Wax, Stone, Metal, etc. are
made use of for cutting of these Talismans; which, besides, lose their Name
when they produce an effect by the virtue of their Matter; as a Scorpion
engraven on a Bezoar-stone would not cure the bitings of that venomous Animal
by its Talismanical Figure, no more than any other; but it is an effect
depending on the Stone it self. Nor do Simples cure by the resemblance between
the Parts of our Body and their external Figure (of which we speak here), but
by the virtue and property of their Substance, which remains when they are
powdered and despoiled of their Figure; which, moreover, is a Quality indeed,
but no active one; being only a certain situation and disposition of Parts, and
a mode of quantity; which depending on Matter, a purely passive thing, is as
incapable of any action by it self, as the Figure which terminates it. But
though the artificial Figure of a Talisman could act, it could produce no
natural effect, because beyond its power; much less upon the Will, to incite
Love or Hatred, as is pretended. For it is a ridiculous and groundless vanity to
imagine a sympathetical Commerce between a Constellation and a Figure of an
Animal, graven upon Copper, or such other Matter, which is much less fit to
receive the influences of the Stars to which such Animal is subject, than the
Animal it self, whose skin stuffed with straw were more proper to drive away
other Beasts of the same kind; there being nothing Living-creatures dread so
much as the dead Bodies of their own kind.

The Third said, It needs not to seek Reasons and Authorities to prove
Talismans, either in Art or Nature; since Man himself may be said to be the
Talisman and Perfection of God's Works, placed by him at the Center of the
Universe; as of old Talismans were placed at the Foundations of Cities: His
countenance being a Medal imprinted with all the Characters of the Stars, the
two brightest of which are at the Eyes; Saturn at the Eyebrows, the Seat of
Severity; Jupiter at the Forehead, the place of Honor; Mars at the Nose,
where Anger resides; Mercury in the Mouth, where Eloquence lies; Venus at the
Chin, and rounding of the Cheeks, the pourfit of the grace of this Medal, which
serves him for an Universal Talisman, in its Beauty to procure Love; in its
Majesty, to cause Respect; not only to drive away Flies or Frogs, but to reign
over all Animals, by the prerogative of this Face, before which they tremble.
Are not his Hands (the Artificers of his Felicity) Talismans noted with the
Characters of the Signs and Planets, which the Rules of Chiromancy uncypher? In
the Right Hand are his Days and Years, (says the Wiseman) the Talisman of his
long life; in the Left are Riches and Honors, the Talisman of his good
Fortune. In short, Is not his Soul the Talisman of his Immortality; which at
the instant of its Creation receiving all the influences of the Deity, and
retaining the Image thereof, has been inserted into this Work, not to preserve
it from Thunder and Tempests, which can touch only the least part of it; but
from Corruption and Extinction, to which all other Creatures are subject.

The Fourth said, He Is too sensual that impugns the truth of things, under
pretext that they fall not under our Reason; which though very weak and
uncertain, abusing the principality which it usurps over all the Faculties,
has turned its denomination into Tyranny: Whence if Experiences be alleged
she denies them, because not able to accord them with the weakness of her
Judgment. Witness what is seen in all the admirable works of Nature and Art, in
the Magnetical cure of Wounds, and that of Diseases, by Amulets or Periapts;
and what Cicero and all Antiquity affirms of Gyges's Ring, upon turning of the
Stone whereof inwards, he became invisible; and returning it outward, was
perceived. Such also was Minerva's Shield, wherewith Perseus combated the
Gorgons, which was of Glass, through which one might see, without being seen;
as also the Rings of those Mistresses of Alexander the Great, and Charlemain.
For if it be said of the first, That Olympias showing her self stark naked to
him, made him confess, That the great Beauty of all the parts of her Body was
the only Talisman wherewith she enchanted Alexander: The same cannot be said of
the latter; since after his death the Talismanical Ring found under her Tongue
caused Charlemain to love not only her, but also the Lake of Aix-la-Chapelle
whereinto it was cast; and that which was found in the Foundations of the Walls
of this City of Paris, under Chilperic, where there was a Fire engraven upon a
Brass-plate, a Serpent, and a Rat; which having been removed from the place,
the very next day a great Fire happened in the same City. For if every thing
below is as that which is above, and the effects of inferior things proceed
from the various configuration of the Celestial Bodies, as of the different
combinations of the Letters of the Alphabet are composed infinite Books, there
may be some proportion and correspondence between those Celestial Figures, and
such as are made upon fit and suitable materials; the knowledge of which
sympathetical Correspondences, is the true Magic; which is, by the testimony
of J. Picus Mirandula, the highest point of humane Knowledge, marrying Heaven
with Earth; as black Magic is detestable, shameful, and ridiculous.

The Fifth said, That every thing acts in the World by the first or second
Qualities, or by its Substance; whence proceed occult Properties and
Sympathies: But Talismanical Figures cannot act by any of these ways; for it is
certain, that they act neither by heat, cold, hardness, softness, or such other
first or second Quality, no more than by their Substance, which is different in
Talismans of Copper, Iron, Stone, etc. Although the Authors of this Art ascribe
the same virtue to all, provided they be graven with the same Figures, and
under the same Constellations and Aspects of the Stars, from whom alone they
make them derive their, strange virtues; alleging, as a Principle, That there
is nothing in the World but has both its Contrary and its Like, as well in
Heaven as on Earth; where we see not only the Marigold and the Sun-flower
follow the motion of the Sun; the Selenotrope, that of the Moon; the Cock
proclaims the approach of the Sun: As also, on the contrary, Dogs commonly run
mad in the Dog Days, and Lions under the Sign Leo: But also some Persons beheld
with an evil eye by some Planets, others being propitious. So to cure hot and
dry Diseases they engrave their Talismans under a Constellation contrary to the
Evil, as cold and moist; having regard to the Signs whereunto every Malady and
diseased Part is referred; which is an Invention of Paracelsus, who fancies
Poles, a Zenith, a Nadir, an Equator, a Zodiac, and other fantastical Figures
in our Bodies, answering to those of Heaven, without the least proof of his
sayings.

Upon the Second Point it was said, Since Man is composed of Whether a
Country-life or a City-life is to be preferred?
the best Life he can lead is that which is most proper for the perfection and
good of both. Such is the Country-life, being accompanied with the Goods of the
Body, Fortune, and the Mind. Those of the Body, as Health and Strength, are
possessed with advantage by Rusticks, who know not so much as the Names of
Diseases; the cause whereof is their Exercise and Labor, which dissipates and
resolves the humors that produce most Diseases; as also the purity of the Air
they breathe, which is the more healthful in that it has free motion, and is
less confined; for which reason Physicians send their recovering Patients to
confirm their Health in the Air of the Country: Which also supplies the Goods
of Fortune, the true and natural Riches, to wit, the Fruits of the Earth, and
the Spoils of Animals; Gold, Silver, and other artificial Goods, being but
imaginary and useless without those first, whereunto they are subservient. But
above all, the Goods of the Mind, which consist in Knowledge and Virtue (the two
Ornaments of its two chief Faculties, the Understanding and the Will) may be
acquired much more easily in a Country-life, in regard of the purer Air, which
begets like Spirits, as these frame purer Species and Phantasms, on which
depend the actions of the Understanding; which, besides, cannot meditate nor
improve without rest and silence, scarce found in a civil and tumultuary Life,
as that in Cities is, which hold our Minds as well as Bodies in captivity,
depriving us of the free aspect of Heaven, the rising and setting of the Sun
and Stars, and of the means of considering the Wonders of God in the production
of Flowers, Fruits, and Plants. Hence the Poets feigned the Muses, the
Goddesses of the Sciences, living in the Mountains of Helicon, and in Woods;
not in the enclosure of Cities, where Virtues are also more difficultly
practiced than the Sciences, nothing of them being left there but shadows and
phantasms, which under veils of Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, Complements, and
other testimonies of Virtue, cover Injustices, Sacriledges, Impieties, and
other Crimes unknown in the Country, where Simplicity and Innocence are sure
tokens of true Virtue; which is also better retained amongst the Thorns and
Sweats of the Country, than in the Luxury and Idleness of Cities. And if things
may be judged of by their beginnings, the Sacred History tells, That Cain, the
first Murderer, was the first that built a City, named Henoch, after the Name
of his Son; as a little after did the first Tyrant of the World, Nimrod, who
built Niniveh. On the contrary, all holy Personages have lead a Country-life:
Adam was a Husbandman, and so was Cain, as long as he continued in the state
of Innocence, which as soon as he lost he desired to become a Burgess. Jacob,
and the twelve Patriarchs his Sons, were Shepherds; as also the Kings, Saul and
David; and the Prophets Amos, Elisha, and many others; in imitating whose
example we cannot err.

The Second said, That Man being a sociable and political Animal, the
habitation of Cities is as consentaneous to his Nature, as the Country-life is
repugnant to the same. And therefore Men had no sooner discovered the
inconveniences of the Rustick-life, but they unanimously conspired to build
Cities, to the end to supply one another Necessities, and defend themselves
from wild Beasts and their Enemies, to whose fury they were exposed before they
lived in some Town, which is a Sacred Society or Unity of Citizens, all
aspiring to the conservation of the State, to the maintaining of the Laws and
Justice, and to the public Ornament and Glory; making Arts and Disciplines
flourish, and procuring Safety to all People, by the distribution of Rewards to
Virtue, and Punishment to Vices, which have not their effect but in public:
For our Lives would not differ from those of Brutes, if we were obliged to
dwell in Dens, or wander up and down Woods, as the Barbarians of the new World
do; whose Brutality, Irreligion, Cruelty, Ignorance, and Misery, compared with
the Politeness, Devotion, Humanity, Knowledge, and Happiness of others,
sufficiently manifest what difference there is between a City and a
Country-life.

CONFERENCE CIX. I. Of Volcano's or Subterranean Fires. II. Which Age is most
desirable.
THe effects of Volcano's and Subterranean Fires are no less Of Volcano's.
although the desire of teaching us the same, occasioned the death of Pliny, by
haying too near approached the Fires of Mont Gibel (or Aetna), and made
Empedocles cast himself headlong into them: But the former did not attain it;
and the latter left us nothing but his Pantofles. The Artifice of Man has
indeed excavated the entrails of the Earth, and descended into the Abysses of
the Waters, to get out their most hidden treasures; yea, he has pervaded with
his sight the vast expanses of Heaven, there to consider the Stars: But he has
not yet been able to familiarise the Fire to himself, which like a
Salvage-beast devours every thing it meets. Now although it be found almost in
all places, yet Sicily nourishes it more than any; having amongst others the
Mont Gibel, or Aetna, those of Hiera, Lipara, and many others in the Volcanian
Islands, which are adjacent to it; and of Stromboli, twenty Leagues distant
from these. Such also are those of Modena and Vesuvius in Italy, which smoke to
this day; the three burning Mountains of Hecla, Saint Croix, and Helga in
Ise-land, which cast forth Flames only at their feet, (their tops being all
covered with Snow) and whose Fire is augmented by casting Water in, which
serves it for Fuel. Such were also that which, by the report of Tacitus in the
fifteenth of his Annals, burnt the Territory of the Vbii under Claundius Nevo,
and could never be extinguished with Water, but with Stones, Cloth, Linen, and
other dry things; that mentioned by Titus Livius, which in three days reduced
into ashes three Acres of the Territory of Calena, at this day Carignola in
Campania; that which burnt for sixteen years together a great part of Scotland;
and not long since the Island of St. George, which is one of the Asores; and
diverse other fat Lands near the Sea, which continually supplies unctuous matter
to these Conflagrations; whence the most remarkable of them are seen in
Islands, and other maritim places.

The Second said, That the Pythagoreans, who place Fire in the entrails of the
Earth, as its Center, would not be so much at a loss here, as those who with
Aristotle hold, That it is there in a violent state, and contrary to its
Nature, which requires the highest part of the World. For since nothing violent
can be of long duration, How is it that Fire, the most active of all the
Elements, has not hitherto been able to free it self out of its Prison, and
get out of this state of confinement? It Is better therefore to say, That Fire
being the principal Agent of Nature, necessary to all sorts of Generations
which are made in all places, is likewise found every where, especially in the
Earth, where it is most sensible, and is preserved longest, in regard of the
solidity of its Matter: For Fire cannot subsist without Matter, which serves it
for Food and Aliment: Whence the Poets described Vulcan, the God of Fire, lame;
intimating its need of fuel and sustenance to support it; none of which being
found under the Orb of the Moon, above the higher Region of the Air, it is
reasonable to judge, that there is no other Elementary Fire on high but that of
the Sun; who by his heat, light, and other qualities, concurs more perfectly to
the generation of all Mixts, than that invisible and imaginary Fire. It Is
therefore necessary that Fire have Matter to feed upon; otherwise it dies and
vanishes, not only in an Enemy-country, and among its Contraries, who endeavor
to destroy it; but also in its own sphere or center, wherever it be, since it
must needs act there; otherwise it would be weaker in its Center than out of
it: But it cannot act upon it self; for then it should destroy it self: But
nothing acts upon it self; and therefore it must act upon some subject besides
it self. Wherefore the Matter of all Fire is any oily, fat, and aerious Body;
whence Ashes, wholly despoiled of that unctuous humidity, are incombustible.
That of Subterranean Fires is of two sort, Sulphur and Bitumen; both which are
observed plentiful in burning places. The Live or Fossile Sulphur, which serves
for Matter to these Fires, is a terrestrial fat or oil, mingled with the slime
of the Earth: For, the other sort of Sulphur, found on the surface of Stones,
is nothing but the purer part of the former, which being sublimed by heat, is
stopped and condensed by those solid Bodies into a Matter called Flowers of
Sulphur; by which example Chemistry makes the like Flowers. The Bitumen is also
a fat juice; which is either liquid, like Oil, called by some Petroleum, and
the Naphtha of the Babylonians; so inflammable that it attracts Fire at a
distance, and retains it in the Water, which serves it for nourishment; as is
seen in that Bituminous Fountain which burns four Leagues from Grenoble in
Dauphine, and many other, which cast forth both Flames add Waters at the same
Outlet. There is some too, of the consistence of soft Wax; as that slimy
Bitumen floating upon the Lake of Sodom: Some other hard, like the Pit-coal,
called Tourbe, whereof our Marshes are full; which is the most general Matter
of Subterranean Fires; to whose violence the Nitre found there, may also
contribute: for as Bituminous Earth makes these Fires durable, which otherwise
could not subsist so long with Sulphur alone, which presently is evaporated and
spent: So the Nitre and Saltpeter (wherewith the Earth is every where
impregnated, and which has been before shown to be the cause of its fertility)
is the cause of their impetuosity and violence, which the situation of places
may also promote.

The Third said, That the Earth, as well as the Air, has three Regions in its
profundity; the first tempered and altered either apparently or really,
according to the various disposition of the ambient Air: The second or middle,
extremely cold: The third always hot and burning. And as the Matter of Thunder
is a Sulphurous, Nitrous, and Bituminous Exhalation of the Earth, drawn up by
the Sun to the middle Region of the Air, where it is inflamed by Antiperistasis
of the ambient cold (because being in the next disposition to Inflammation, the
least concurrent circumstance presently reduces that Power into Act:) So the
enclosed and difficultly evaporable heat of the Earth, finding the same
easily-inflammable Matter there, namely, the Exhalations which issue from that
third Subterranean Region upon the opening of Mines, which testify by their
smell, thickness, and other qualities, how much they partake of Minerals; these
hot and dry Exhalations ascending to the second Region of the Earth, there meet
with cold Spaces, which being for the most part hollow or cavernous, and stored
with Sulphur, Bitumen, and other fat Earths, become inflamed by the
Antiperistasis of cold and the proximity of those Materials. And because the
Earth which feeds these Fires consists of two parts; the one arid, and the
other unctuous; this unctuosity approaching nearer the Fire, coming to be
consumed, the Fire must needs be extinguished; till the heat, excited by the
conflagration of many years, having attracted all the unctuosity of the
neighboring Earth, and this having by degrees impregnated that dry. Earth
which the Chemists call Caput mortuum, it becomes again inflammable, and
continues fired till the same be desiccated again; and so forward in a circle;
nothing hindering but that, as Plumeor Stone-allume is an eternally
incombustible Wiek, provided it be supplied with new Oil when the former is
spent, this Earth may do the like: Unless we had rather, that wise Nature
dispenses combustible matter in the bellies of Mountains, after the manner of
Vitruvius's his Lamps, which need filling but once a year; and those
Water-Receptacles for Birds, which are supplied with fresh as fast as the
former Water is spent. Or else, that Nature (excepting the extraordinary
eruptions which seldom happen to these flammivomous Mountains, and then only
when the Fire cannot get issue but by violence) makes what the curious often
aspire to, an inextinguishable Fire, or perpetual Light, by resolving again
into oily and combustible matter that which was evaporated by Inflammation; as
Water elevated in vapor by heat, falls down again in the same form. The
Architect, Nature, finding Cavities great enough in those vast Mountains to
facilitate what Art finds impossible, by reason of the smalness of Vessels,
which extinguish Fire when it has not Air, or suffer its Matter to exhale when
it has; although S. Austin and Lodovicus Vives make mention, the former of a
Lamp in the Temple of Venus, which could not be extinguished or consumed,
though neither Oil nor Wiek were put to it; and the latter, of another burning
Lamp found in a Sepulcher, where it had been fifteen hundred years, but upon
admission of Air forthwith went out. Although without recurring to this
subtilty, that of Fire, and its activity, is sufficient to attract or fetch in
its sulphurous food; which being only an excrement of the Earth, and like the
soot of our Chimneys, is found every where, but especially in Mines, which are
repaired in less time than is believed, and whose various qualities make the
variety of these Subterraneous Fires, of their duration, continuity, and
interval; which some have compared to Intermitting Fevers, excited in our
Bodies by an extraneous heat, which holds the same place in us as Fire does in
the Earth.

Which Age is most desirable?
and which differ according to every ones Nature; some being Puberes, having a
Beard and gray Hairs, and such other tokens, sooner than others, according to
the diversity of their first conformation; whence arises that of their
Division. Aristotle, following Hippocrates, divides them into Youth,
Middle-age, and Old Age; that is to say, the Beginning, Middle, and end: Or,
according to Galen, into Infancy, Manhood, and Old Age: According to most,
into Adolescence, Youth, Age of Consistence, and Old Age. Adolescence
comprehends Infancy, which reaches to the seventh year; the Age of Puerility,
to the fourteenth; Puberty, to the eighteenth; and that called by the general
name, Adolescence, to the twenty fifth. Youth, which is the flower of Age,
reaches from twenty five to thirty five. Manhood and Consistence, from thirty
five to forty eight; when Old Age begins, which is either green, middle, or
decrepit. These four Ages are the four Wheels of our Life, whose Mutations they
mark out: The first, next the primordia's of generation, is hot and moist,
symbolising with Blood; the second, hot and dry, with Choler; the third, cold
and dry, with Melancholy; the fourth, cold and moist; with Phlegm; which being
contrary to the primogenial humidity, leads to death. Now if it be true, as
it is said, That Life is a Punishment, and a Summary of Miseries, Old Age, as
nearest the haven and end of Infelicities, is the most desirable. Moreover,
being more perfect by experience, and alone fit to judge of the goodness of
Ages, which it has run through, we must refer our selves to the goodness of
its judgment, as well in this as in all other Points.

The Second said, Since to live is to act, the most perfect and agreeable of
all Ages of Life is that in which we best exercise the functions of Body and
Mind; namely, Youth (which alone seems fit to dispute the Prize with Old Age)
not only in regard of the health and vigor of the Body, wherein it surpasses
that declining feeble Age; but also of the actions of the Mind, which is much
more lively in young, inventive, and industrious Persons, than in the aged,
whose Spirit wears and grows worse with the Body; which has given place to
that most true Proverb, That Old-men are twice Children. For it is to give
Wisdom a shameful Extraction, and to make it the issue of Infirmity, to call
that ripe which is rotten, and to believe that good counsels proceed only from
defect of natural heat; since, according to his judgment who has best
decypher'd Wisdom, this Old Age traces more wrincles in our Minds than Faces;
and there are few Souls which by growing old become not sour and rancid, and
acquire not many vices and ill habits; of which Covetousness alone, inseparable
from Old Age, (and an Argument of weakness of Mind, in heaping up with so much
solicitude what must soon be parted with) is not much less prejudicial to the
State than all the disorders of Youth. But if the Chief Good consists in the
Sciences, the Cause of Young Men is infallible; for acuteness of Wit, strength
of Fancy, and goodness of Memory (which wholly abandons Old-men), and ability
to undergo pains and watchings, must contribute to their acquisition. And if it
consist in the secret delight we take in exercising virtuous Actions,
Young Men, who, according to Chancellor Bacon, excel in Morality, will carry
it above Old; it being certain, That the best actions of our Lives are
performed between twenty and thirty, or thereabouts, which was the Age at which
Adam was created in Paradise; as our Savior accomplished the Mystery of our
Redemption at the Age of thirty three years, which shall be likewise the Age at
which the Blessed shall rise to Glory, in which every one shall enjoy such a
perfect Youth as we ascribe to Angels; and put off Old Age, which, not much
differing from Death, may, like it, be termed the Wages of Sin; since, had our
first Parent persisted in Innocence, we should have possessed a perpetual
Youth. Moreover, it is at this Age that the greatest Men have appeared: Few Old
Conquerours have been seen; if any, he has this of Alexander, That he aspires
to the Conquest of another World, not having long to live in this. Wherefore
instead of pretending any advantage over other Ages, Old-men ought to be
contented that we use them not as those of Cea and the Massagetes did, who
drowned them; or the Romans, who cast them from a Bridge into Tyber, thinking it
a pious act to free them from life, whose length displeased the Patriarchs, the
Scripture saying, That they died full of (or, satiated with) days.

The Third said, That the Innocence of Children should make us desire their
Age; considering that our Lord requires us to be like them, that we may enter
into his Kingdom. Moreover, Nature, unable to perpetuate Infancy, has found no
sweeter Anodyne for the miseries and melancholy of Old-people than the sight of
Children, and the memory of things done or learnt in their minority; which
partakes the more of its source, the Deity, the less it is removed from it.

The Fourth said, Youth has too many extravagances to be accounted happy; and
'twould be against the order of Nature if (the Extremes) Infancy and Old Age
contained more perfection than that which holds the Middle, wherein she has
established the Virtue of all things. The weakness of the first shows that it
has not wherewith to content it self, but needs support from others, and is
therefore an object of Compassion, which never arises but from Misery. Its
Innocence, proceeding only from impotence and imperfection of the Soul's
operations, has nothing commendable; and it is as much unable to will as do
good: But true Innocence consists in the acting of difficult good. If
Childhood fear not the Future, it receives a present Evil with more pain, and
is as sensible of the least discontents, as incapable of consolation, or
prudence to avoid them; nor can it by hope anticipate or prolong the enjoyment
of a future good. In short, He cannot be happy who is not conscious of his
happiness, as Children cannot be. Then for Old Age, it is a second Childhood,
and more to be pitied, in that it always grows worse, partakes all the defects
of Nonage, and has this worse, that its desires, awakened by the memory of
past contentments, upbraid its impotence; and the thirst of getting is at
perpetual jar with the fear of leaving: Aches, the forerunners of Death, daily
attaque its patience; and there remains no cure of its Evils, but the extremity
of all Evils, To be no more. Infancy is therefore like the Spring, which has
only Flowers, and expects Fruits hereafter; so that it is an Age of Hope without
Enjoyment. Youth has only Summer-fruits, of little lasting. Old Age is a
Winter, without either Flowers or Fruits, possessing only Evils present, and
obliged to fear all and lose all. But Manhood, betwixt these two, resembles
Autumn, denoted by the Horn of Plenty, possesses the felicity of Life, enjoys
the Goods acquired, and by hope anticipates those to come; it has a Soul
commonly accordant with the Body, the Faculties of that making a sweet harmony
with the Actions of this. On the contrary, the Soul in Childhood seems not to
be well in tune with the Body; in Adolescence it is always at discord with the
Appetites of Sense; and in Old Age it jars with it self, and by a speedy
separation endeavors wholly to break the Consort, and have its part by it self.

CONFERENCE CX. I. Of Mineral Waters. II. Whether it be better to give than to
receive?
AS the goodness of Common Waters is judged by their having Of Mineral Waters.
and the least weight that may be, wanting all other virtues besides to cool
and moisten; so, that of Mineral or Medicinal Waters depends upon the qualities
of the Minerals wherewith they are impregnated, and by means whereof they purge
and alter the Body; Humidity being easily susceptible of extraneous qualities,
and preserving the same best in a dense and gross subject, as Water is. These
Waters are either cold or hot; the former are drunk, and the latter serve for
Bathing; as that of Aix in Germany; of Plombieres, in Lorrain; of Bourbon, in
Bourbonnois; of Bagnieres and Barege, in Gascony; of Balleruc and Barbotan, in
Languedoc; of Acqs and Tersis, near Bayonne; and abundance of other hot Baths
caused by Subterraneous Fires. Of cold Waters, some are acid and pungent to the
taste, as the Vitriolate, such as those of Spa in the Country of Liege, and of
Ponges in Nivernois: Others are sharp and rough; as those Springs of Forges and
Montdor near Rheimes, not long since found by Sieur de la Framboisiere; those
of Chasteau Thierri, of la Hearse near Belesme, whose acidity likewise argues
something of Vitriol; and diverse others, discovered daily by experience. Some
are found heavy, stinking, fat, and impure; other leight, pure, clear, and
sweet. Some are salt or brackish; of color reddish, green, black, and
otherwise different, according as these Waters are variously mixed; wherein
Minerals are contained either in substance and their grosser parts, or else
only their Spirits and subtiler parts, so well blended as that there appears no
extraneous Body at all; which mixtion depends on the Nature of Minerals, some
whereof are never perfectly mixed with Water, by reason of their hardness;
others, though soft and liquid, mix only confusedly, as oily Bodies: Others mix
easily; as Spirits, in regard of their tenuity; and Salts, which melt in the
Water.

The Second said, That in this matter Experience is rather to be consulted than
Reason, which falls short in the examen of many Waters, of which Histories are
full; as of those of Nile in Egypt, which make Women fruitful; of a Fountain
in Arcadia, which prevents Abortion; of the River Styx in the same place, and
of Leontini in Sicily, which presently kill such as drink thereof; of Cydnus in
Cilicia, which cures the Gowt. Such also is Fountain of de Jouvence in the Isle
Bonica, which makes old men young again; that of Ise-land, which hinders gray
hairs; the two of Baeotia, whereof one strengthens, the others abolishes the
Memory; two others of the Fortunate Islands, one of which causes Sardonian and
mortal Laughter, unless the other be presently drunk of; and those of Thessaly
and Macedon, one whereof makes the Sheep that drink of it to have black Wool,
which the other makes white, and both mixed together make it of several
colors; that of the Isle of Andros; and another a league distant from
Coblentz, which inebriate, having the taste of Wine, which the first retained
but for seven days, and quitted when carried out of sight of a Temple of that
Island dedicated to Bacchus; the oily Fountains of Zant; the red Spring of
Aethiopia, which causes loss of Judgment; as the Mad Lake in Prester John's
Country also does, which thrice a day, and as often in the night, becomes
blackish and sharp, and returns as often to its own sweetness; the Sabbatical
River mentioned by Josephus, which dries up every Sabbath Day (rendered
credible by that of Varins near Saumur, which has its flux and reflux, as the
Sea); the Water of the Babylonian Lake, which continues red eleven days in
Summer; the Fountain of Dodona, so famous among the Poets, at which they
lighted extinct Torches; like to another near Grenoble, which at the same
stream sends forth Waters and Flames; and many others, which convert Wood and
immersed Bodies into Stone; the true causes whereof are altogether unknown.

The Third said, That Mineral Waters, though humid to the touch, are
desiccative; as appears partly from their composition of Mineral, detersive,
and desiccative Spirits; and partly from their effects, which are to heal
Ulcers, dry up Scabs and Pustules, and correct the moist intemperies of the
Stomach, and other lower Parts. Some argue them all hot, from their acrimony,
virtues of penetrating, inciding, opening, attenuating, provoking Urine and
Sweat, cleansing the Reins and Bladder; all ffects of heat. Others account them
cold, because being drunk they cause shivering at Midsummer, correct the heat
of the Liver and Reins, cure hot Diseases, prejudice cold, and generally hurt
the Nervous Parts, to which, according to the Aphorism, Heat is friendly, and
Cold hurtful: But though actually cold, yet they have some have some heat in
power; and being composed of several unlike parts, produce different and
sometimes contrary effects: So Aloes and Rhubarb both loosen and bind: All
which effects may nevertheless be referred to three principal; namely,
Refrigerating, Deoppilating or opening, and Strengthening. They refrigerate by
their actual coldness and the acidity of Vitriol, which also by vellicating the
stomach, causes the great appetite we have during the the use of these Waters.
They deoppilate, not so much by their quantity (which has made some
erroneously say, that the same proportion of common Water would work the same
effect as these Medicinal Waters) as by their tenuity, which they have from the
metalline Spirits, which make them penetrate and pass speedily over the whole
Body. Lastly, they strengthen by their astringency, (for all Astringents
corroborate) which the Chemists attribute to their volatile Spirits, which, as
they say, join themselves to the fixed Spirits of our Bodies.

The Fourth said, That the three conditions of a good Medicament are, To Cure
Speedily, Safely, and Pleasantly; as Mineral Waters do. They are familiar to
us, by their nature of Water; Medicaments, by their composition, which is
discovered either by letting them settle, or by evaporating, or by distilling
them; as also by the smell, taste, and color, which becoming black by the
infusion of Galls; shows that there is Vitriol in them. And whereas the longest
and most difficult Maladies proceed from obstruction and cold, the hot or acute
being speedily terminated, these Waters are the most effectual Remedy of both;
for they penetrate, and, like a torrent, open not the great passages only, but
also the small veins of the Mesentery; and heat by their Spirits and Sulphur,
which has a heat very benign and friendly to the principal parts, especially
to the Lungs, whereunto it is a Balsom and Specifical. Above all, they are
admirable in curing Gravel, not only vacuating the gross and viscous humors,
which are the matter of the Stone, but sometimes breaking and dissolving the
Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder; which, amongst others, those of Spa perform,
by reason of their abounding in Vitriol, whose acidity and acrimony produces
the same effect upon Stones in the Body, as that of Vinegar does upon
Egg-shells, Pearls, and Corals.

The Fifth said, That the use of Natural Baths, whether hot or cold, may be
easily practiced in sundry Diseases; but it is important to discern the
occasions of taking them by the mouth, and their differences. For, besides that
their great quantity (the Italians prescribing above 200 ounces a day, others
25 pound) sometimes overcomes the strength, and extinguishes the natural heat;
some have malignant Qualities, and Enemies to the principles of Life, not so
much by reason of their Metalline Spirits, disproportionate to our Bodies, as
of the mixture of Mercury, Plaster, and other Earths entering into their
Composition; whence many die by taking the Waters, or come back from them more
infirm, by accidents following upon them, as Gowts, weakness of Stomach,
Imbecility, Lassitude, Livid Complexion, Dropsy, and other more dangerous
Evils than that for which they were recurr'd to.

The sixth said, To the end the use of these waters may prove healthful, regard
is to be had to the Persons, the Diseases, and the Nature of the waters. As for
the first; Children, old Men, breeding Women, and fat People, must not take
them without great necessity: For the second; Most waters are unprofitable, and
sometimes contrary to the disease; as, to the infirmities of the Breast,
Fluxions, Ulcers of the Lungs, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Convulsions, cold
Maladies, and all others of the Brain and nervous Parts. If there happen a
complication of Diseases, some of which require, others reject the use of the
Waters, regard must be had to the most urgent and dangerous. They have not
always the same effect; either because they are corrupted by Rain, or vehement
Heat consumes their subtilest Spirits, in which their chief virtue resides;
which likewise depend on the Quality, Quantity, Time, Place, and Manner wherein
they are to be used: For they must be taken in the Morning, fasting, in a hot
and dry Season, as well because they are then purest and leightest, as because
the Body better supports that quantity of cold Water, which relieves its
natural Faculties languishing in great heat; and, if it may be, they must be
taken at the Spring, the Spirits being easily dissipated by transportation. The
Quantity, and Time of taking them, are not to be measured by the number of
Glasses or Days, but proportionated to the Disease and its Causes, the diseased
Parts, the Age, Temper, Custom, and other Signs, from which Physicians take
their Indications: Which Conditions being well observed, it may be said, God
has not given Men any thing more profitable than these Medicinal Waters,
tempered by Nature her self, who makes us a free present of them; their
disproportion with our Bodies being the cause of their action upon them,
(otherwise we should turn them into our substance, as we do Plants and
Animals); the bad successes which happen by them being much more rare than
those of any other Medicaments, although the most rebellious Diseases are
commonly remitted to them.

Whether it be better to Give than to Receive?
since they give nothing but what they received before. For our common Mother,
the Earth, receives her fruitfulness from the impressions of the Air; the Air,
from the influence of the Stars; these their light and power from the Sun; and
he his from his Maker: Which the Platonists represent to us by the mutual
embraces of Porus and Penia; the one the God of Plenty, which is the original
of Gifts; the other the Goddess of Necessity, which is the cause of Receiving;
to show, that they necessarily follow one the other. And as in Nature the
attenuated and rarifi'd Parts strongly attract the next for hindering vacuity,
and the full reject what is superfluous; so in Morality we may say, That Giving
and Receiving are equally good and natural, not differing but in certain terms
and respects; otherwise a Man might be said more or less excellent or happy
than himself; there being no Person but has need to Receive and power to Give
at the same time, out of the Plenty or Necessity which he has of something;
For should he be stored with whatever he could wish, Might not we ask him, as
S. Paul does, What have thou that thou have not received? So then, it is
Reception that has put him into this happy state; and if there be any
excellence in Giving, it proceeds only from having Received before. Moreover,
the three points which make a thing esteemed in the World, Profit, Pleasure,
and Honor, are all on the Receiver's side: For he must have renounced all the
interests of Self-love that can believe there is more Profit and Pleasure in
Giving than in Receiving. And as for Honor, although it seem more openly to
favor the party of those that Give, nevertheless since Giving and Receiving
are Correlatives, the reason of either must be alike; and there cannot be
Honor and Virtue in the one, but there must be so in the other; nor, on the
contrary, Blame and Ignominy in the Receiver, but it reflects back upon the
Giver. And as he who loves, is less excellent than he who is loved, because he
has some perfection in himself which renders him lovely, which is ordinarily
wanting in him who loves; so, between the Giver and the Receiver, the latter
being as 'twere the Person loved, may be said more noble than he who Gives, who
is the Lover; for there is no less Liberality in the one Person to be willingly
obliged, then in the other to oblige him; and besides, Virtue being a habit of
the Will, he who Receives with Gratitude, and desires to Repay with Usury, may
be said as virtuous and as liberal in the act of his goodwill, as if he gave
effectively. But this Virtue, commonly appropriated to the Giver, is oftentimes
rather Ostentation and Vanity, than true Virtue. For either the Man gives such
things as himself needs, and then it is rather Folly than Virtue; or such as are
superfluous, in which case it is no Virtue for a Man to deprive himself of a
useless thing. Yea, sometimes it is more ignominious and dishonest to Give than
to Receive; for every thing restrained by the Laws is not only unjust, but
vicious and dishonest: Now the most part of Donations is restrained, not only
by that rule of Givers, who say, That the Title De Donationibus is the Title of
Fools, because to Give is to Lose; but the Emperors had an express Officer
called Comes Sacrarum Largitionum, who was to retrench the superfluity of their
Gifts, and put in execution that Formula of our Chambers of Accounts, Trop
done soit repete; Too large a Grant is to be recalled. Yea, the Donations of
private Persons were retrenched by the same Laws; even those between Husband
and Wife; Legacies, by the Law Falcidia; Feoffments, by the Trebellian;
Liberties, by the Caninian Law. But there can be no shame in receiving; since
not only Kings, but God himself Receives from Men; and the Grandeur of the
Messiah is not described by the Prophet, saving by the Presents he was to
receive of the Kings of Arabia and Saba; Gifts being a testimony of their
excellence to whom they are conferred: Whence the Lawyers hold, That a
Testamentary Legacy is a mark of Honor to the Legatee; as also they call the
Fee which Advocates receive, Honorarium: And the Wiseman commands us to Reward
the Physician by the word of Honoring him. In fine, The praeeminence of
Receiving above Giving sufficiently appears, in that our Lord invites us to
Give, only by the promise and hope of Receiving an hundred fold.

The Second said, Although to Give and to Receive be so difficult, that Seneca
justly complains, That we know not how to do either; yet the former is far more
excellent, according to S. Paul's testimony, who in the 20th of the Acts
exhorts the Christians to remember the Word of our Lord, That it is more
blessed to Give than to Receive. For since, according to the Maxim, A man
cannot give what he has not, nor receive what he has already; Giving is a
sign of Plenty and Perfection, as Receiving is of Want and Imperfection: Whence
it is nobler to be loved than to love, because Love is the desire of a Good
which we want, and is found in the Person loved. Moreover, since an Action is
the more excellent, by how much it is more virtuous and honest; Giving, which is
more virtuous because more difficult than receiving (as being contrary to our
natural inclination of Getting) is also more excellent. Wherefore Philophers
reckon not amongst Virtues the habit of Receiving, as being wholly mercenary;
but account Liberality and Magnificence a Royal and Divine Virtue: For, if to
Receive were an act of virtue, as Aristotle holds, who places Liberality as
well in Receiving as in Giving, it had not been a Virtue in Curious to refuse
the Treasures of the Samnites. But the action of Giving has been honored, not
only with the Name, but the Tokens and Ornaments of Virtue, Praise, and Honor;
as Ignominy oftentimes adheres to those that Receive. Now an Action is the more
virtuous, the more it is honored and commended; and since many who Receive are
ashamed of it, and unwilling to have witnesses of this action, whereas all that
Give derive glory for so doing; there can be no virtue in Receiving, because we
are not ashamed of Virtue, but only of Vice.

CONFERENCE CXI. I. Of Antidotes. II. Which is most communicative, Good or Evil.
AS every thing has its Contrary, so to Poisons there are Alexipharmaca, Of
Antidotes.
or Alexiteria, of a middle nature between Medicaments and Poisons, with which
they must have some similitude, that they may join with and encounter them in
the Body. Such is Vipers Flesh, which enters into the composition of Treacle,
against that Animal's bitings; in which Antidote diverse other Poisons are
blended, which nevertheless being corrected one by another, they remain not
only innocent, but serve to elude Poisons which attaque men by treachery,
seeeming Friends to them, that they may destroy them, more certainly than the
good Wife mentioned by Ausonius did, who having given her Husband Sublimate
enough to kill him, and fearing 'twould fail of its effect, caused him to
swallow down Quicksilver, which coming to be joined to the Sublimate, quelled
the strength of it, and by this means saved the Man. Diseases arising from
manifest qualities require contrary Remedies; as Plenitude, evacuation; a hot
Distemper, cold Correctives: But when the imperceptible puncture or biting of a
Scorpion makes the whole Body swell, or excites such other symptoms, then
Remedies acting by first and second qualities being found unprofitable, we must
have recourse to Specificks, which act by an inexplicable Property of
Substance, of which rank are our Antidotes.

The Second said, That Poisons and Antidotes, Medicaments and Aliments, are not
called so absolutely, but as compared to the Natural Heat: For when subdued and
turned into the Animals Substance, they are called Aliments; when Nature is
altered by them, Medicaments; when destroyed, Poisons; when preserved from
their malignity, Antidotes. Hence, according to the diversity of this heat, one
same thing is food to one and poison to others: As Hemlock is eaten by Goats
and Quails, Henbane and Mandrakes by Swine, Cantharides by Swallows, Flies and
Spiders by Poultry and Birds, although the same be poison to Men; some of whom
do receive no hurt by poisons, as it is reported of Mithridates, whose body was
so prepared by his Antidote composed of Rue, Nuts, and Figs, that he could not
kill himself by poison; of the Wench presented to Alexander who was fed with
Napellus or Monks-hood; of the old Woman in Sextus Empiricus who swallowed 30
drachms of Hemlock without harm; of Athenagoras the Argian who was not hurt by
Scorpions, wherewith the Aethiopians dwelling near the River Hydaspes are fed
as well as with Snakes, which Avicenna says, another man killed by being
bitten with them, possibly having his body full of a humor like fasting
spittle, which Galen says kills Serpents and other Insects. These Poisons and
Antidotes are either Natural or Artificial; those more frequent in Southern
then in Northern Countries, are communicated by Potions, Powders, Juices,
Vapors, Touches, and other detestable means. The Natural differ either in
Matter, or in Quantity, or in Quality, or in Operation. The Matter of Poisons,
which is found almost every where, is either within us, as the Seed and the
Blood, which by corruption oftentimes acquire a venomous quality; such as also
is that of the matter of the Epilepsie and Suffocation of the Womb: Or else
without us, in the Air, Water, and Earth; Fire alone being contrary to Poison
and putrefaction, which easily happens to the Air and Water through their great
humidity: But the Earth by its excrements and impurities supplies most Matter
to Poisons, which are drawn either from Minerals, from Plants, or from Animals.
Arsenic, Orpiment, Vitriol, Plastre, Lime, Sublimate, Borax, Verdegrease,
Quicksilver, Cinabar, Ceruse, and Red-lead, are of the first order. To the
second belong Aconite or Woolf-bane, Chamalea or Widow-wayle, Yew,
Spurge-lawrel, Thapsia or scorching Fennel, Tithymals, Hellebores, Vomiting
Nut, Opium, Nightshade, and many other Plants; some of which have only venomous
Flowers, as certain white Violets; others only their Fruits, as the Apples of
Mandrake; or only the juice, as Lettice and Poppies; or the Seeds, as Henbane
and Spurge; or the Roots, as Aconite and Hellebore. To the third belong Lepus
Marinus, the Salamander, the Fly called Buprestis, the Scorpion, Viper, Asp,
Adder, Toad, Tarantula, Shrew-mouse, and diverse others; which are venomous
either in all their parts, as Cantharides and Spiders; or only in some, as
Vipers in the Tail and Head, the Heart and Fork-fish in the extremities of their
Tails, the Wivern in one of its Claws: Or in their Excrements; as the Gall of
the Leopard, the Urine of a Mouse, the Foam of a Mad-dog, the Sweat of an
enraged Horse, and the Blood of a Bull. As for the Quantity; although all
Poisons act in a little volume, yet some require less Matter; as Opium acts in
less quantity than Hemlock; this, than the juice of Leeks; and this, than the
juice of Lettice. According to Quality; some are hot, and either inflame, as
Euphorbium; or corrode, as the Lepus Marinus, which particularly invades the
Lungs; the Asp, the Liver; Nightshade and Henbane, the Brain; Cantharides, the
Bladder. Others are cold, fixing the Spirits and natural heat, or hindering
their free motion; as Opium, and the Salt of Lead. Others are dry; as Lime,
Vitriol, and Arsenic, which consume the Radical Humidity: For Humidity being a
quality purely passive, and of it self incapable of causing pain, there are no
Poisons simply humid. They differ also in their manner of acting; the cold kill
by consopiting or stifling the Heat; Hellebore by vehement attraction of the
Humors: Some corrode the Substance; others alter, resolve, or putrify it. And
because all Poisons chiefly attaque the natural Heat, and the Heart; as the
Swoonings, Palpitations, and Weaknesses accompanying them witness: The
Antidotes must be Cardiacal or friends to the Heart, strengthening it, and
joining forces with it to expel or subdue the malignity of the Poison.

The Third said, Physic opposes Poison, either by Preservatives before it is
taken, or Remedies afterward. Preservation depends on the administration of
the six Not-natural things; as the avoiding of Air and Places infected,
perfuming them by burning of Wild-Thyme, Mountain-Majoran, Southernwood, Kings
Spear, or Cedar; anointing the Body with Rose-oyl, which is an Enemy to
Serpents and venomous Creatures; and eating in Vessels of Porcellane, and the
like, which discover Poisons. Simple Preservatives are either applied
outwardly, as the Topaz, Emerald, and other Amulets, worn next the skin; or
inwardly, as Bezoar-stone, Bole-Armenick, Lemnian or Sealed Earth,
Vincetoxicum, Turnep, Dittany, Garlic, Rue, Citron, Pomegranate, etc. Of
Compounds the most famous is Theriaca, or Treacle, made of above a hundred
Ingredients. When Poison is already introduced into the Body, whether by
biting, stinging, breathing, foam; or by the sight, as that of the Basilisk; or
by the touch, as that of the Torpedo; or by the mouth; regard must be had to
three things. 1. To strengthen the Natural Heat, that it yield not, but may
resist the Poison; and to corroborate the Entrails, for fear they receive any
malignant impression. 2. To destroy the force of the Poison. 3. To evacuate it
speedily, either by attraction (as by Sucking or Cupping) or by Incision and
Ustion, if the Poison was received extrinsecally; but if 'twas taken by the
mouth, it must be evacuated by Sweat, Urine, Siege, and Vomit, which is the
speediest and safest, provided it be provoked by familiar Medicaments, as
Butter, Oil, Milk, or the like unctuous things. These Antidotes are either
general, resisting all sorts of Poisons, strengthening the Heart and Spirits; or
else peculiar to some certain Poison. General, are Blessed Thistle, Angelica,
Valerian, Dittany, Scabious, Devils-bit, Pimpernel, Tormentil, Rue, Scordium,
Wood Sorrel, Wormwood, Plantane, Marigold, Fluellin, Gentian, Juniper Berries,
Bezoar, Treacle, Armenian and Lemnian Earths, the Horns of Heart and Rhinoceros,
and Ivory. Of Particular, Mummy is good against Tithymals; the Weesel and Man's
Ordure, against envenomed Wounds, the Root of Dog-rose, against the biting of a
Mad-dog; the Flower of Water-Lilly, against Hellebore; Cucumbers, against
Pharao's Figs; Wormwood, Garlic, and Mustard, against Toad-stools; Long
Birth-wort, against Aconites; Vipers Flesh, and all Precious Stones, against
Menstrual Blood; Baulm and Endive, against Spiders; S. Katherine's Flower, and
Dancing, against the Tarantula; Sea-Crab, against Nightshade; Citron-pill,
against Vomiting Nut; Origanum, or Wild-Majoran, against Mezaereon; the Seeds
of Winter-Cherry, against Cantharides, and the Salamander's foam; a roasted
Fox, and Oisters, against the Sea-Hare, Pigeons-dung, and Parsley-seed, against
Mercury; Treacle, against the Viper; Oil of Scorpions and Wasps, against their
Stingings, by sympathy drawing out the venomous Spirits, and rejoyning them to
their first Body. Of all which effects it is more expedient to admire, than
unprofitably search the Cause, which has been hitherto unknown to the greatest
Wits, and depends upon that of Sympathies and Antipathies.

The Fourth said, There are two sorts of Mistions in Nature; one, of Qualities;
the other, of Substantial Forms. In the first, the Qualities being rebated by
their mutual encounter, an agreeable harmony or temper results, in which the
prevailing Quality bears sway, and makes a Temperament hot, cold, dry, or
moist. In the second, these Qualities being altered, the Elementary Forms,
which were contrary only by their adversary Qualities, unite and conspire into
one particular Form, the Principle of Occult Properties, Sympathies, and
Antipathies, according as their Forms are found Friends or Enemies. Thus in all
Medicaments there is a temperament of Qualities, which is the cause that Pepper
is hot, Lettuce cold, etc. and a temperament of Forms, which makes Agaric purge
Phlegm; Sena, Melancholy; Rhubarb, Choler: some Drugs, Cardiacal; others
Cephalical, or Splenical. From the mixture of these Forms arises the action of
Antidotes and Poison; and not from that of the Elementary Qualities, although
they accompany their Forms, being their Servants and Vicegerents: Otherwise,
did Poisons kill by excess of heat or cold, Pepper and Cucumber would be
Poison, as well as Opium and Arsenick; and a Glass of Cold Water would be the
counter-poyson of Sublimate: And nevertheless there are many Alexipharmaca
which agree in first qualities with the Poisons they encounter.

Homer had reason to set two Vessels near Jupiters Throne; Which is most
communicative Good or Evil?
one full of Bitterness, the other of Sweetness; wherewith he compounded all
the Affairs of the World: Since by these contrarieties of Good and Evil, Man's
Life, and Nature it self, is divided. For if the Principle of Good consist in
Entity, according to Aristotle; and Evil, in Nonentity; Privation* which is
the Principle of Nonentity, and consequently of Evil, is as well ranked
amongst Natural Principles as Matter and Form, which are the Foundations of
Entity and Good. And we see, Corruptions are as common as Generations, and
Darkness as Light. But if we consider Evil in the vitiosity of Entity, then,
according to the Platonists, who call what is material and corruptible, Evil;
what is spiritual and incorruptible, Good: Man, consisting both of a material
and spiritual Substance, will be the Center where all Goods and Evils will
terminate: In which respect he will be like the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, placed by himself in Paradise; or like that, to which David compares him,
planted by the brink of Waters, which are Afflictions. For his Branches and
upper Parts being decked with Flowers, Leaves, and Fruits, which are the three
sorts of Goods which attend him; his Flowers (whose whiteness denotes the
Innocence of his first Age) are the Goods of the Body, which pass away with his
Spring: His Leaves (whose Verdure is the Symbol of Hope, which never leaves him
till death, being fading, and subject to be dispersed by storms) are the Goods
of Fortune: And his Fruits are the Goods of the Mind, Knowledge and Virtue,
which are more savory and nutritive than the rest. But if we behold the Roots
of this Tree, wherewith it is fastened to the Earth, and which are the original
of his Evils; some sticking to that Stock of Adam, the source of his Original
Sin, which sends forth a thousand Suckers of all sorts of Vices and Passions;
others, to that Clay from whence he was extracted, and which is the Principle
of all bodily Infirmities; we shall find that his good things are external, and
communicated from elsewhere; but his evil things are internal, and natural, and
consequently more communicative: For as to Vices, the Evils of the Soul, bad
Examples corrupt more than virtuous edify: And for those of the Body, Diseases
are more easily gotten than cured; and Health is not communicable to others;
but Epidemical Diseases are: A bad Eye, a tainted Grape, and a rotten Apple
infects its neighbor, but by parity of Reason might as well be preserved by
it. The Evils of others not on'y do us ill by Compassion, which is a sort of
Grief; but also their happiness causes in us Jealousy and Envy, the cruelest
of all Evils. Besides, Good is rare, and consequently not communicative; and
Possession fills, but satisfies not. Nor is Metaphysical Good communicable,
being an abstracted not a real Quality: And if Evil arise from the least defect
of a thing, and Good only from its absolute perfection; then since nothing is
absolutely perfect, Good is not communicated to any one thing here below; but,
on the contrary, Evil is found in all.

The Second said, That which has no Being cannot be communicated: But Evil is
not any thing real, and has not any Efficient Cause, as was held by the
Manichees and Priscillianists, condemned for establishing two Principles, one
of Good, the other of Evil, independent one on the other. For since Good
consists in the integrity and perfection of Parts, and of whatever is requisite
to the Nature of a Thing, Evil is nothing but a Privation, a defect and want of
what is requisite to its perfection. And, being a thing is communicated
according as it has more or less of essence, Good, which is convertible with
Being, must be more communicative than Evil, which is only a Being imperfect.
God, who possesses Being and Goodness primarily, communicates himself
infinitely; as does also Light, the most perfect of all created Substances.
Moreover, the Nature of Good consisting in Suitableness and Appetibility, by
reason of Contraries; that of Evil consists in Unfitness and Aversion; and if
Evil be communicated, it is always under the mask and appearance of some Good,
which alone is communicative by nature.

The Third said, Good is more difficult than Evil, which is commonly attended
with Profit and Delight, and consequently more communicative. For Nature having
implanted in us a love of our selves, does also instigate us to seek after all
means that may tend as well to the preservation of our Nature, as to our
Contentment; namely, Riches, Honor, Beauty, and all other Goods, either real
or imaginary; which not being in our power, but almost all in others hands,
cannot be much desired without sin, nor possessed without injustice, much less
acquired by lawful ways, much rarer and longer than the unlawful and bad, which
are many, and easy, and consequently more frequent.

CONFERENCE CXII. I. Why Animals cry when they feel Pain? II. Whether it be
expedient to have Enemies?
Why Animals cry when they feel Pain?
so was Voice to all Animals, to signify the motions and inclinations of their
Nature toward good and evil: But with this difference, That Voice is a Natural
Sign, having affinity with the thing it signifies; which Speech has not, being
an Artificial Sign, depending on the will and institution of its Author. Hence
it comes that there is great variety of Languages and Dialects among Men; but
one sole fashion of forming the same Voice amongst Animals; who being more
sensible of Pain than of Pleasure (the former destroying Nature, the latter
giving only a surplusage of Goodness) when the Evil is so great and pressing
that they cannot avoid it, impotence and weakness makes them send forth Cries,
to implore the help and assistance of their Fellows. For Nature having
imprinted in all Creatures a Knowledge of Good and Evil, and consequently an
inclination to the one, and an aversion to the other; she has also given them
means of attaining thereunto, to wit, Local Motion, to go thither of
themselves; and a Voice to seek of others that Good they want, and deliverance
from the Evil which presses them.

The Second said, That only such perfect Animals as have Lungs have the gift of
Voice; others, destitute either of Lungs, as Fishes; or of Blood, as most
Insects, (having little heat, of which Blood is the foundation) have no need of
Air, which is inspired only to cool and temper the excess of Natural Heat; and
so for want of Air, which is the matter of Voice, are almost all mute, except
the Dolphin, whose Voice is like that of Man. Grass-hoppers, Flies, Bees, and
other Insects, make a noise and sound indeed, by the collision of the Air and
their Wings, but have no Voice, which is defined, A significative sound made by
the mouth of an Animal; and by Aristotle, The stroke of the Air (attracted by
respiration, and emitted by the Lungs) against the Larynx, to express
something. So that the Efficient Cause of Voice is the Soul; the Matter, Air;
the Form, Sound, or the collision of two solid Bodies; the End, to signify
something: And so Animals cry, to signify the grief they resent: But why they
testify this grief by so different tones and accents, is as difficult to
understand, as the last differences in which Philosophers have placed that
diversity; as Howling, Barking, Bellowing. Braving, Roaring, Neighing, and such
other accents of Beasts; the cause whereof is hitherto unknown.

The Third said, Such Animals cry soonest and longest who have the strongest
Imagination, the most exquisite touch, the least ability to suffer, and the
least conscience, because most susceptible of apprehension and pain; and their
Spirits being diffused in a less bulk, are aptest to be moved and gathered
together about the Heart; which by this means being unusually oppressed,
communicate the sense thereof to the Lungs, which suffering by sympathy, and
being instruments for the hearts eventilation, perform their functions then
with more speed and violence, by an irregular motion, forced by the present
Necessity, and the pain which presses them; and so the Air which was contained
in their spongy substance, issues forth impetuously, and by collision with the
Epiglottis and other opposing parts, forms loud and resounding clamours: Whence
we may judge, That the secret intention of Nature, who disposes these Organs in
such sort that the Cry is a kind of interpreter of the Grief, was to give some
refreshment or ventilation to the Spirits thronged about the Heart, and also
intelligible tokens of the Evil suffered by the Animal, either to move the
injurer to compassion, or else to invoke the help of its own Species, or (by
unknown instinct) that of the Author of Nature: For we see that Animals, by the
motives of natural instinct, run to the cries of those of their own kind. And
since the Holy Scripture tells us, That not only Birds, and all other Animals,
but also insensible things praise God; it is credible that in their anguishes
they are lead by the same Principle to cry to him to help and preserve the Work
of his own Hand: Which is so true, that the wicked'st Persons are forced by the
interior motions of a hidden power to lift up their hands to Heaven in their
Afflictions, and implore Succor and Assistance from on High.

The Fourth said, That the Sense of Touch is both more universal and natural to
Animals than any other; being the first they have, and the last they lose: The
dolor thereof is expressed with Cries; to which Man, having the most exquisite
Touch, and consequently being most sensible of pain, is also more subject than
other Creatures. And if that Ancient said true, That Tears are mute execrations
of the Sorrows of Life, which we begin and end with them, Cries may be said the
more manifest and earnest, since they pierce the clouds, and see into ascend to
the the Throne of God, to demand succor of him, when none is found upon Earth.
It Is an impetuous sound uttered by an Animal, unable to resist present or
imminent Grief: For it is proportional to the violence of the Passion. Love,
which is the gentlest, renders it smooth and soft: Choler, the violentest,
makes it more vehement: And Grief, the most pressing of all, and tending to the
destruction of Being (which is equally abhorred by all Creatures) arises it to
the highest tone of which it is capable: Whence even Speech, which being
artificially divided into syllables and cadences is peculiar to man; yet in the
precipitateness of Grief, keeps not its measures, but breaks into an
inarticulate sound, like that of Animals. For explication whereof it must be
known, that the Cuticle, the chief seat of the Touch, and consequently of Pain,
is the expansion of the Nerves, the conduits of the Animal Spirits, which in
Pain either shrink inwards, and so cause stupefaction; or being irritated and
sent by Nature to the aid of the hurt part, by Sympathy move the Diaphragma,
and other nervous and membranous Parts: For, as of two Lute-strings set at the
same pitch, the one sounds upon the touching of the other; so in the Harmony of
the whole Body, there may be the same sympathy between the Spirits and the
Parts; an evidence whereof is seen in Tickling and Laughter, which is caused by
the contraction of the Diaphragm; which is the reason that the aspect of such
as Laugh and Weep is much alike. And because in Grief the coarcted Spirits
hinder respiration, and free motion of the Heart; ttherefore Nature, to ease
her self, drives them outward with violence, and with them moist vapors which
partly transpire by the pores, and are partly condensed in the Brain, whence
they flow through the eyes in streams of Tears, which by this means greatly
alleviate Grief, as the want of Them and Cries argues its vehemence: Besides
that, they may serve Animals to terrify their Enemies, or else to implore the
assistance of their Fellows; as we read of Elephants, that falling into a Ditch
they call other Elephants to their aid.

Whether it be expedient to have Enemies?
by God's Example, to draw Good out of Evil, and benefit from the most
pernicious things. So Physicians turn the strongest Poisons into wholesome
Remedies: Men use the spoils of the fiercest Beasts for nourishment, clothing,
and other purposes of Life: And many great Personages have taken occasion from
bodily Diseases, Shipwracks, Losses, Banishments, and other such unkindnesses
of Fortune, to give up themselves wholly to Virtue, and the Knowledge of Things.
Since then Enmity is the greatest of all Evils, as Unity is the most excellent
of all Goods, and the noblest of all Virtues, as having no Vicious Extremity,
but being perfect by being boundless; it is a Point of great Wisdom to be able
to draw some benefit from ones Enemies; whereof the principal is, that they
oblige us to stand upon our guard, to order our demeanor well, and so to frame
our Lives, that they may have no hold against us: For, as Friendship is the
Parent of Confidence and Liberty; this, of Negligence: So Enmity begets
Diffidence, and this Circumspection, with a great desire of Virtue, and shame
of Vice, whose turpitude makes us blush more in the presence of an Enemy than
of a Friend, who being our other Self, complies with our humors and
inclinations. And as Natural Agents are more vigorous in presence of their
Contraries (whence Fire scorches more in Winter than in Summer) so the presence
of Enemies redoubles our strength and courage; their neighborhood obliges us
to have always our Arms in our hands, and keep good Guard; which made Cato
declaim against those who razed the Cities of Carthage and Numantia, both
Enemies to Rome.

The Second said, That if a Man be vicious, it is more expedient that he have
Enemies than Friends; these too easily adhering to his debauches; but those
withdrawing him from them, either by reproaches, or by the example of a
contrary life. If he be virtuous, his Enemies make his Virtue shine forth,
whilst it serves him for a defense and apology against all their accusations
and calumnies; and he finds it his interest to continue his virtuous Practices,
that he may still refute them; whereas the flatteries and compliances of his
Friends insensibly corrupt him. Besides, seeing a virtuous Man cannot be said
absolutely perfect, but only to have fewer defects than another, his
dissembling or flattering Friends sometimes know them not; but an Enemy takes
notice of them, and blazing them abroad, gives him warning to correct them.
Yea, it seems a sign of a virtuous Man to have Enemies: For, besides that
Virtue has been always envied and hated, and the higher a Man is in merit and
dignity above others, he has the more Enemies; resemblance of Manners begets
Friendship, and disparity Enmity; and more without comparison are vicious than
virtuous: But the vicious being unable to love any but those like themselves,
hate all who follow not their example, as the virtuous do not, and so have the
greatest part of the World against them.

The Third said, That Enmities can produce no good, since either Vice, or
Malice, or Ignorance is the cause; it not being possible but either he that is
hated must be vicious, or else they that hate him malicious or ignorant. For,
as Friendship is founded upon, and cannot subsist without Virtue; so neither
can Enmity, without the Vice and Malice of him that hates, or his that is
hated, or both together. And as the Effects of Amity are Union, Concord,
Security, and Peace; so those of Enmity are Division, Discord, Diffidence,
Suspicion, Treachery, Hatred, and other such Effects, noxious not only to a
private Person, who cannot draw any benefit from what tends only to his ruin
(as all Hatred does); but also prejudicial to the Public, which is totally
destroyed by Enmity, which breaks the bonds of Civil Society. On the other
side, If all were Friends, one man would be a God to another (as that Ancient
said); and all men concurring together by mutual help, to the accomplishment of
one another designs, there would be no more difficulty in Affairs, because no
opposition; and the World would be nothing but a harmony of favorable
Successes. Contrarily, it is Enmity makes one man a Woolf to another, a Stone of
offense, and the Demon of his bad fortune: For, the benefit of understanding
our own Vices by our Enemies reproaches, is not to be compared to that which we
receive from the good counsels of Friends, who are better qualified for
redressing our imperfections, because converse affords the means to know them;
whereas the rude censures and affronts of an Enemy, being never taken in good
part, cannot any wise contribute to the correction of our Manners. A wise and
virtuous Man, who voluntarily endeavors to practice Virtue in all occurrences,
finds ways enough to do it, without waiting to be constrained thereunto by the
injuries and censures of Enemies: But the vicious will draw nothing from them
but fuel to his rancour and revenge, without being instructed concerning his
faults by the mouth of those whom he utterly disbelieves. However, we must draw
as much profit as we can from our Enemies; and it is the only comfort can be had
against Hatred, to make use of it as an Antidote against its own Poison. But
then, as 'twould be more expedient to have no Griefs or Poisons, than to be at
the trouble of finding Anodynes and Counter-poysons; so we may be allowed to
derive some remedy from Enmities against their Mischiefs, and make as much
profit of Vice as it is possible; but 'twould be expedient to have neither
Enemies nor Vices.

The Fourth said, That Nature subsists only by Contrariety. That, of the First
Qualities is the cause of all the Generations of Mixts in the great World.
Man's Life lasts only so long as the Natural Heat acts upon the Radical
Moisture; when their combat is ended, he must necessarily die. His
Understanding has no better means to obtain Truth, than by contrariety of
Opinions; whereof Identity is as disagreeable to the Mind as it is to Nature:
But his Will has no more powerful Means to attain to Virtue than Resistance,
which sharpens the Courage, and enkindles Resoltion. Therefore God has given
Man a domestic Enemy, the Sensitive Appetite; that it being continually at war
with the Will, might serve to exercise it, and render its Victories more
glorious; the Will, as well as the Understanding, growing rusty when they want
exercising, which whets and strengthens them both. Hence S. Paul was not heard
when he prayed thrice to be delivered from the importunity of his Enemy; God
judging it not expedient for his good; and having also permitted Heresies in
the Church, which the same Apostle says are necessary, to the end to prove the
Faith of its Members.

CONFERENCE CXIII. I. Of the Iris, or Rainbow. II. Whether the Reading of
Books is a fitter way for Learning than Vocal Instructions?
'TWas not without reason that the Poets feigned Iris to be Thaumas, or
Thaumasia; that is to say, Of the Rainbow.
of Admiration: thereby intimating our not knowing its cause: For Wonder is the
Offspring of Ignorance. Amongst many other things, Three we find to admire in
it; its Matter, Form, and Colors. Its Matter is not a moist Cloud, as most
imagine; for (besides that then we should see Rain-bows more frequently than we
do) a Cloud cannot reflect the Sunbeams with that variety or medley which we
observe therein: For there would be but one color, if the Cloud were
diaphanous; and otherwise, it will be black and dark. It Is not therefore in a
Cloud that the Rainbow is formed, but in the falling drops of Rain; as we see
some Fountains form one in the Air, by the ejaculation of the Water struck with
the Sunbeams; as also by the spurting of Water out of the mouth, opposite to
the Sun: For an Iris is not visible, unless we be placed between the dropping
Cloud and the Sun. If the Cloud be between our eye and the Sun, it will receive
the Rays only on that side which is next the Sun, and not on that side which is
toward us. Nor will any Iris appear, in case the Sun be between the Eye and
the Cloud: For, according to the common opinion, it cannot be seen higher than
three miles; but in this opposition of the Sun, the Iris will be remote from us
above 18 degrees, which make above 1100 miles, allowing 60 miles to a degree,
according to Ptolomie. Hence the Rainbow which appears before Noon, is always
toward the West; as that which appears about or after Noon, is always toward
the North, or the East; at which times we are between the Rainbow, and the
Sun. Hence such as are in the fifth Climate can never see one in the South. Now
the surfaces of these drops of Water (which fall confusedly and disorderly)
being irregular, and struck obliquely by the Sunbeams, they make a refraction
of his Light, like that which is made by Diamonds cut into Faucets, but more
permanent; because the drops of Water fall so swiftly and successively that
they seem continuous. A Rainbow then is nothing else but the Light of the Sun,
received in this falling Rain, and remitted to our eye by an Angle of
refraction, different from that of its incidence; for if it were equal, the
Image of the Sun would appear therein too, as we see it does in Parhelia's.
Indeed we may say, That the Rainbow is an imperfect and begun Parhelion; the
Light of the one being reflected regularly, and that of the other in confusion,
and disorderly: And, That its Arch and circular Figure proceeds from the
obliquity of the Sunbeams: Or else, That he being a Spherical Body, casts his
Rays circularly: Or, lastly, from the Spherical or Parabolical form of the
Cloud: Which is also true in the Iris which is formed in the night by the
Moon-beams, received in a Cloud dissolving into Rain; saving that her Rays,
being not so strong and luminous as those of the Sun, illuminate only the
surface of the Water, and therein paint a faint whitish color, and not such an
enamel of colors as is seen by day in the Solar Iris; which colors are
nothing else but an imperfect Light, which cannot be directly reflected to the
eye, by reason of the inequality of the Angles, and therefore at least forms
these Colors; of which the three principal are, Yellow, or Citrinous, which is
the highest; Blue, or Green, which is the middlemost; and Red, which is the
lowest: Amongst which there are found diverse others which partake of their
extremities; the diversity whereof proceeds from the diverse reception of the
Rays in the Parts of the Cloud, differing in opacity; which not being great in
the outmost part, the Sunbeams paint there a Yellowish color; but greater in
the middle, a Blew or Watchet; and greatest in the inmost or lowest part, a
Red: as Experience shows us in the like subjects, wherein Light diversely
modifi'd, represents very near the same variety of Colors; which although not
real (as those which arise from the various mixture of the four Elementary
Qualities) yet are not absolutely imaginary (as those are which are seen by
weak eyes about the flame of a Candle), but are true Colors, inasmuch as they
strike the Sight, which a sensitive and corporeal Power, and are alike
perceived by all; nevertheless, they are less material than Elementary Colors,
and are nearer akin to Light, not differing from the same, saving inasmuch as
it is here received diversely in the eye, according to the rarity or density,
situation, figure, and other qualities of the Object and Medium.

The Second said, The Rainbow (the fairest not only of all Meteors, but of all
Nature's Works; being, according to the Cabbalists, the Throne of God, who, in
the Apocalypse, is represented Crowned therewith) does not less dazzle the Mind
than ravish the Eye; it being observed, That the clearer things are to the
Sense the obscurer they are to the Understanding; and so on the contrary: For
it cannot proceed from the different rarity and density of the Cloud, which
being never alike, but infinitely various, should rather represent a thousand
different Figures and Colors; whereas the Rainbow has always a circular
Figure, and the same Colors. And as there may be found more Clouds in several
places, equally rare or dense, and equally distant from the Sun (who enlightens
Bodies equally distant after the same manner) so there should be more Rain-bows
at the same time in several places; which is contrary to experience: For we
never see two uniform Rain-bows at once; the other Bow, sometimes included in
the first, being not directly formed by the Sunbeams, but by reflection of the
Rays of the first Bow upon a neighboring Cloud; whence the Colors of such
secondary-Bow are not so lively as those of the first, but are reversed, the
yellow being lowest, the Green always middlemost, and the Red uppermost: For so
by the reason of Catoptricks, we see that the Species reflected have a
different situation from the Body which produces them (things on the right hand
appearing on the left, and contrarily); and the shadows of Bodies which pass
along the street entering by a small hole into a dark Chamber, reversed.

The Third said, Experience teaches us, That when Light passes out of a thinner
Medium into a thicker (as out of Air into Water) if it fall obliquely upon that
thicker Medium, it is broken or refracted: But if it pass quite through such
denser Medium, so that it is broken as well at its going out as at its entrance
(especially if the refraction in these two places be great enough) then this
Light is turned into Colors. This Natural Effect is a Principle of the
Optics, and is observed not only in the Rainbow, but also in triangular
Crystals, and Glasses filled with clear Water, and exposed to the Sun; provided
the Glass be of a conical Figure reversed; that is, narrower at the bottom,
and wider toward the top. This being premised, the Production of the Rainbow
seems to be thus: When a Cloud, already wholly turned into Water, and actually
falling down in drops of Rain (which reach from the top of the Cloud to the
Earth) is shined upon by the opposite Sun, and the Spectator is placed between
the Sun and the Rain, then the Sunbeams passing through those drops, are
reflected, as by a Mirror, back again, by those which are more remote; and
passing by the sides of those which are nearest (because from one and the same
part but one perpendicular Ray can fall upon a round Figure, as that of drops
of Water is, all the other Rays being oblique) they must of necessity be twice
broken: First, as they are reflected by the remoter drops, and pass out of the
Air comprehended between those remoter, into the other drops nearer us: And
secondly, as they issue out of these nearer drops, into the Air which is
between them and us. And thus from this different fraction caused by the
various rarity and density of the Air and Water, the diversity of Colors in
the Rainbow arises. For, Water being not altogether diaphanous, but somewhat
of a middle nature, between perfectly Transparent and Opake, reflects part of
the Rays which fall upon its surface, and lets the other part pass through; as
it is observed in Rivers and Ponds, upon which we see the Suns Image by
reflection, but Diverse and Fish behold it by refraction. So it is with drops of
Water; those nearest us reflect part of the Sunbeams toward the Sun himself,
without forming an Iris, because these reflected Rays meet not other drops to
refract them; but when part of those Rays, which passed through the small
intervals of the first drops, are reflected by the other remoter from us, then
these reflected Rays lighting by the way upon the first drops between which
they had passed, they are broken thereby both at their going in and coming out,
where they represent the Iris, which consequently is formed by Reflection and
Refraction; reflection, by all the drops which receive Light, remitting the
same toward the Sun; and refraction of the same Light so reflected, when by
the way as it returns it meets those other drops of Water, which refract it
twice, and give it the diversity of Colors, which arises from the diverse
reception of the Light into those parts of Water, more or less dense and rare.
But now to give account of the circular Figure of this Meteor, which is not
only in appearance circular (as square Towers seem round at a distance) but is
so really; it is requisite to take a certain position of the Sun; and by one
example 'twill be easy to judge of others. Let us suppose then that the Sun is
at the Horizon, and consequently that all the Rays he sends directly upon the
drops of Rain, as well the highest as the lowest, are parallel between
themselves, and to the Horizon, (for the elevation of a Cloud, how great
soever, being inconsiderable in respect of the Sun's distance from the Earth,
hinders not but that all his Rays are always parallel between themselves) which
being reflected, as has been said, the reflection of them will be also
parallel to the Horizon, or very near so; for here we consider only that which
is made by the middle of the drop, which is the strongest by reason of its
round figure; and this reflection being received by the superior part of some
other drop which it finds in its way, and there twice broken, to wit, at its
going in and coming forth; the two Refractions joined together distort the Ray
about 45 degrees; that is to say, the Ray thus twice broken will make with the
lines parallel to the Horizon an Angle of 45. degrees, a (...) from on high
downwards, and falling upon the Earth. And because all the drops make such a
Refraction as we have mentioned, therefore all such Persons as shall be between
the Sun and the drops of Rain, shall see the Iris of the same height, namely,
of 45 degrees (although from several stations); some in the lower drops,
namely, such Persons as are nearest the Cloud; others, to wit, such as are more
remote, in the higher drops; because they all see it by Rays parallel between
themselves, and consequently by equal Angles. Now the drops make refraction not
only by their superior parts, but also by their sides and lower parts; whence
those on either side of the Spectator, distant by an Angle of 45 degrees, will
make him see their refraction, and consequently the Iris on either side under
equal Angles; which being made on all sides about a right line drawn from the
Sun to the Spectators eye, which may be called the Axis of the Iris, it
necessarily follows, That the Iris must appear perfectly round about this Axis:
So that the drops elevated above this Axis 45 degrees, will make the upper part
of the Iris by the refraction of their superior parts. Those on either side,
distant likewise 45 degrees, will make the sides of the Iris by refraction of
their parts which are at the remoter sides; and so of all the drops which shall
be about the Axis, under equal Angles of 45 degrees. As for other drops nearer
or further from the Axis and the Spectator, they will represent an Iris to
others who are not in the same Axis, but nearer or remoter from the Cloud, and
situate in such place that those drops appear distant from the Axis by Angles
of 45 degrees. So that as many Spectators as there are between the Sun and the
Cloud, and not in the same Axis; so many Axes must be imagined, about which
there are different Arches and Rainbows. Now in this Horizontal Position the
Bow appears a perfect Semicircle, whose Center is in the Horizon, at the Point
where the Axis terminates. But when the Sun is in another Position, as elevated
some degrees yet fewer than 45, then the Axis of the Iris coming from the Sun
through the Spectator's eye, penetrates the Earth; and so the Center (which is
always at the end of the Axis) is below the Horizon; and the portion of the
Iris which we behold is less than a Semicircle, greater than which it never
appears, as Aristotle has well observed. For since the Bow is always less than
a Semicircle whilst the Sun is elevated above the Horizon, it must be a
Semicircle when he is in the Horizon, and none at all when he is below the
Horizon, because he does not then illuminate the Cloud: Hence it is seldom
produced in Winter, because when it rains in that Season the whole Heaven is
cloudy, and covers the Sunbeams; as neither in the Summer and Spring at noon,
when the Sun is higher than 45 degrees, but only at Morning and Evening.

The Fourth said, That if Aristotle's definition of the Rainbow be true, who
defines it, An Arch consisting of diverse colors, which the reflection of the
Sunbeams represents upon a hollow Cloud ready to dissolve into Rain, we need
not seek much for Material, Formal, and Efficient Causes (for he assigns no
Final of it; but the Scripture does, namely, to be a moral sign of the Covenant
between God and Men.) Of the first there is no doubt, unless amongst blind men,
to whom only God can make a demonstration of it; but the rest are very obscure:
To judge of which we must observe, That the Angle of Reflection is equal to that
of Incidence; so that a right perpendicular Line, erected at the common point
of Incidence and Reflection, will equally bisect the Angle comprehended by the
Ray of Incidence and that of Reflection; which is not true, unless when the Ray
of Incidence is terminated by a very smooth and opake Body, as that of a
Mirror: Whence it is inferred, That a Cloud not having such evenness or
smoothness will not reflect the Light or Ray at an equal Angle, but will
dissipate and remit it elsewhere: So that if one part of a Cloud, which is
directly opposite to the Sun and smooth, reflect the Ray directly; and another
obliquely opposite to him, dis^ort and reflect it elsewhere (as it is much more
probable, than always to imagine Clouds exactly smooth, polished, and even) it
appears, That there will not be formed a Figure of an Arch uniformly colored,
but rather a confused medley of colors. Besides, if Reflection represent any
thing, it is the same thing that is opposite, not another: But it is not the Sun
that we behold in the Cloud, but a mixture of Colors, no wise like, nor so
much as an imperfect representation of him, as some have pleased to affirm: For
Reflection would show us either the Sun, or an imperfect representation of him;
not in the Cloud, but as far beyond it as the Object (the Sun) is from it. So
that we shall explicate Aristotle better if we say, That those Colors appear
by irradiation; and, that the Light diversely received, and not reflected, makes
the variety of this goodly Spectacle: For they who say it is Refraction, are
mistaken; for Refraction only alters the place of the Object represented by the
Species, which is broken by the occurse of a Medium of unequal opacity; but
does not produce diverse colors, such as those of the Iris, which I conceive we
may more safely admire, with many other of God's Works (indisputable
testimonies of his Power and our Weakness) than vainly seek their Causes.

The Fifth said, He conceived no demonstration more manifest to prove the
manner of the Rain-bows production than the experiment of a Phial of Water,
which, exposed to the Sun upon some solid Body, represents the same Colors
with those of the Rainbow: So that the same thing is done in the Sky when the
Sunbeams pass cross an aqueous and diaphanous Cloud, and are reflected to the
other side by another Cloud, whose thickness has some resemblance of solidity;
and so it is not sufficient that such aqueous Cloud be interposed between the
Sun and the Eye, but there must be also another opposite Cloud, dense enough to
reflect those Rays of the Sun, who being hollow according to the figure of the
Sky, imprints that lucid circular Figure, and gives it the name of a Bow.

The Sixth said, That a Rainbow may be foretold some time before it happens,
when the Wind comes from that Quarter where the Sun is, and a Cloud coming from
the same Quarter pass over our heads, and shed Rain as it passes: For if the
Sun appears at the same time, you will see an Iris as soon as the Cloud becomes
opposite to him; which Iris will be the more lively and colored, according as
the falling Rain was greater, and the Sun happens to be clear; as also so much
more elevated as the Sun is depressed. But if the Sun be 45 degrees high, you
will see no Iris, the Refraction not being then proper to produce it. If it
happens after Rain, it signifies fair weather, and the Sky clears up, in that
Quarter whence the Wind blows. But if the Wind blow from the Quarter opposite
to the Sun, and drive a Cloud and Rain before it; and if the Sun also appear at
the same time, then you will see the Iris before the Rain, which we may foretell
will fall upon the place whence the Iris is beheld, provided the Cloud can
subsist any while, and be not too speedily resolved all into Rain at the place
where it is seen; for where ever an Iris is seen, there it rains.

Upon the Second Point it was said, That the Eye and the Ear Species of things
which it knows; the former is proper for Invention; Whether the Reading of
Books is a fitter way for Learning than Vocal Instruction?
and the latter, called the Sense of Discipline, chiefly for Learning. For the
Voice, as the Proverb says, is more powerful than dumb Masters; because being
animated with the gesture and motion of the Eyes, Mouth, Hands, and whole Body,
it makes more impression upon the Mind than the dead style of Books; which
besides, being Instructors whom we cannot interrogate concerning our doubts, as
we may the living, they leave more scruples in the Readers mind than they
resolve: For our cognition depending on the Species and Animal Spirits, these
follow the drift and motion of the Voice, whose accents consequently being
joyful, sad, amorous, warlike, or furious, according to the variety of the
subject, imprint like affections in the Soul; and this through the near
communication there is between the Air and those Spirits of the Body, which are
also aerious, and of great mobility. And since Writing is only the sign of
Speech, as this is of the Minds conception, it less perfectly expresses its
Author's thought than the Voice, the perfect Image of his Conception, which is
called the Internal Speech, as the voice is the External; and being the
Original from which Writing is drawn, represents our Conceptions better than
the Copy; as all Exemplars degenerat proportionably to their remoteness from
their Prototype.

The Second said, That written Discourses are better digested, and sustain
themselves better by their own weight, than words disguised by the manner of
expression, or cadence, gestures, and other sleights, which corrupt the
simplicity of things; whence the Comedian that comforted Demosthenes, and
revived his lost desire of haranguing, made him confess, That one and the same
verse of Homer was another thing when well and when ill pronounced: And bad
Poets fear nothing so much as that others should read their Works; the Name
which themselves give them causing others to judge them different from what they
are; and the suddenness of pronuntiation not allowing the mind sufficient time
to reflect upon them. Moreover, Books flatter much less, and have more
universal Precepts than Speech, which commonly affects complaisance, and the
gaining of the hearers good will: Particularly in morality, Great Persons are
better instructed and more plainly reprehended for their faults by Books than
by Discourses, which seldom tell them the truth freely, every one fearing the
effects of hatred ensuing it, which Books care not for. Besides, No discipline
is harder than Politics; which being the Mistress of all others, may justly
give Law to them. And were the way of learning the Sciences by Books longer
than that by the Voice, yet it is the safer, yea, almost that alone by which we
reap benefit; all those that are Learned, having learned more by the Reading
and Meditation of Books, than by having heard the Voice of their Masters in
Schools, where oftentimes the noise is greater than the fruit. For, our
Memories being treacherous, we never repeat things so well as we write them;
and in case of mistakes or omissions, we are ashamed to acknowledge our faults,
but defend them with obstinacy; whereas we scruple not to correct a Writing, to
view and review it, and, according to Horace's counsel, keep it nine years
before publishing. But Words are uttered as soon as thought; and hence when we
see those fine Discourses in Writing, which ravished all the World in the Chair
and at the Bar, we are oftentimes ashamed of having admired them: Which perhaps
as much or more kept Cicero from letting his Orations be read in his youth, as
his pretended excuse of reserving to himself the liberty of contradicting
himself. Wherefore there being more to be learned in a well-digested and exact
Piece, Writing (which is ordinarily such) must also be more proper for
Instruction: Which is so true in the Mathematics, to which alone the name of
Discipline belongs, that none ever presumed either to teach or learn them by
Speech alone.

The Third said, That a good Comparison must be of things alike; and so if we
compare Speech and Writing, it must be in respect of two things equally perfect
in their kind; as an exact Discourse, and an exact Writing. You must also bring
two capacities of the same pitch, and they must have equal time to learn the
same thing; in which case, the circumstances being the same, there is no doubt
but Speech is more advantageous thereunto than Writing, which is not absolutely
necessary, as the Voice is, without which the latter is unserviceable; he who
reads being unable to understand any thing, unless he has already heard it
spoken of. Hence one naturally deaf is incapable not only of the Sciences, but
also of the use of Reason, yea, of Speech too: Whereas, on the contrary, some
born blind, and who consequently never read, have nevertheless proved very
learned. And this prae-eminence of Speech above Writing, appears especially in
that the latter cannot be expressed without the former. Whence some justly
doubt whether dead Languages, even such as are most familiar to us, as Greek
and Latin, are not lost as to their best part, their pronunciation: So that
the Greeks and Latins of Demosthenes and Cicero's time, would possibly no more
understand us speaking Greek and Latin, than those of the present Age: Whence
'twould not be knowing of things, to know them only by Books, by which also
none ever learned Languages, but only by Speech.

The Fourth said, That this Question admits not of an absolute determination,
in regard of the different capacities of Teachers and Learners, as also of the
Arts or Disciplines which are learned: For nimble Heads, and impatient of
Labor, such as the Choleric and Sanguine commonly are, suit better with Vocal
Instructions than with Reading; which, on the contrary is more pleasing and
profitable to the Melancholy and Phlegmatic, who take more time for reflection
and meditation upon what they read. Again, Such Disciplines as consist chiefly
in Contemplation, as Divinity, Natural Philosophy; the pure Mathematics;
together with those which require great Memory, as History and Law, have more
need of Reading. But those that consist in Action are better learned by Speech,
which has more affinity with action, and sets it out better; Such is Oratory,
the practical part of Physic and Law, Mechanic Arts, and Handicrafts, which
it is impossible to learn by Books, although one may be rendered more perfect
therein by them.

CONFERENCE CXIIII. I. Of the Milky-Way. II. Which is most powerful, Gold or
Iron?
THis Tract of the Sky is called the Milky-way from its whiteness; and having
breadth, Of the Milky-way.
is rather a Superficies Taurus and beginning of Gemini; and the other opposite
to it, at the end of Scorpio and beginning of Sagittary; at which place it is
narrower by about two degrees than at Gemini, where it has ten degrees of
breadth, wherein it differs in several places, making such windings as Rivers
have, and contracting or enlarging, and dividing it self in some places; as
particularly near Cygnus, beyond the Tropic of Cancer, where it makes two
Branches, one of which ends near the Equator, by the side of Serpentarius; the
other passing between Sagittary and Scorpio, by the feet of the Centaure, cross
the Ship Argo (where it is broadest) goes by the Unicorn, over the head of Leo,
to the feet of Gemini; from whence crossing Boots, Perseus, and Cassiopaea, it
returns to Cygnus. To speak nothing of the Poets Fables, who say, That when
Juno suckled Hercules, and discovered who 'twas, she spilt her Milk here; or,
That it is the space of Heaven which the Sun's Chariot burnt by the ill driving
of Phaeton; That it is the place where Apollo fought with the Giants, or by
which he returned toward the East, to avoid seeing the crime of Thyestes; or
else, the Road of the Gods, leading to Jupiter's Palace; the Residence of
Heroes; the Mansion of the Virtues; the Highway of Souls; and such other
Fables: Such as have thought it the Light of the Stars, whose Splendor the Sun
cannot Eclipse, by reason of the Earths interposition in the nightime, were
greatly mistaken; For there are no Stars but what are enlightened by the Sun,
who being 166 times bigger than the Earth, it is demonstrated by the Optics,
That when an opake Body is placed before a luminous Body greater than it, the
Rays of the luminous Body are united beyond the shadow which was made by the
opake Body; as the Sun's Rays meet again beyond the Earth's shadow, which
reaches no further than the sphere of Mercury, much less to the Starry Heaven,
to hinder the Sun's Light from passing thither; this Sphere being distant 2081
Semidiameters, each of which makes 860 German Leagues. Those who say, It Is the
place where the Element of Fire transpires and purges its fuliginosities; or
else, a sort of Fire denser than the Elementary; are as little credible as
those others who think the Sun sometimes made his course in this Milky-way, as
he does now in the Zodiac, in which nevertheless he leaves no print of
combustion or light: Much less Theophrastus, who said, 'Twas the conglutination
and soader of the two Hemispheres; and that at the place where they are united
and soader'd together, this brightness appears different from the rest of
Heaven. But I conceive it to be nothing else but a part of Heaven, more dense,
and consequently more luminous than the others. For Heaven having a radical
Light, the denser and closer its parts are, they are the more luminous; as
appears by the Stars, which are the denser parts of their Orb, not visible in
regard of its rarity; and by Water, part of which condensed by cold, reflects
the Light, and appears white, the remainder of liquid Water abiding transparent.

The Second said, He judged no Opinion more ridiculous than Aristotle's, who
held this Milky-way to be a Meteor shining not in Heaven, but in the Air, where
it is fed by Exhalations plentifully supplied from the Earth, whence they are
attracted, and fired by the Stars in this place. For if this Milky-way were of
the nature of Comets or other lucid Meteors, it could not always subsist, but
only while its matter lasted; which, besides, would be more copious in some
seasons then in others, (as in Spring and Autumn, then in the droughts of
Summer or frosts of Winter, which closes the pores of the earth); and so it
would not have the same permanent position and figure, no more then density,
rarity, latitude and equality of its parts, so constant that on the side of
Cassiopaea it always appears alike winding, and likewise in other places:
though we should grant the earth capable to supply fumes enough for feeding
this so spacious circle; which yet the disproportion of this point of the
World, compared to the vast extent of that circumference, palpably proved to be
in the Firmament, allows not. For (besides that the diversity of Parallaxes
would represent it under several Stars to the Inhabitants of several places, if
it were in the air; as it happens to Comets and other aerious impressions; and
yet it is always seen in the same place and equally distant from the fixed
Stars) its proper motion from West to East, whereby it moves one degree in a
hundred years demonstrats that it is in the eighth Sphere, whose particular
motion is the same. And Galileo's Glasses, which have discovered abundance of
Stars in this part, convincingly manifest that it is nothing but an assembly of
almost innumerable small Stars, which not being great enough to transmit their
light to us distinctly, the same is confounded and united together (as it is
proper to all qualities, and so of Light, to associate it self to other light)
and thus produces that whiteness which is a weak and imperfect light. For it is
not enough that an object be luminous; it must be great and large, or else near
the eye, to be visible: the Stars, as well as all other natural agents, having
a sphere of activity, beyond which their action is not sensible: hence the
Planets, and of them the Moon, as nearest us, seem greater than the fixed
Stars; whose rays being weakened by their distance, cannot come directly to us,
as those of the Planets do, but twinkle and sparkle.

Now though Astrologers make but six sorts of fixed Stars, according to their
six different magnitudes; (those of the first being 170 times greater then the
Earth, and those of the last and sixth, 18 times) yet Tycho Brahe, Americus
Vesputius, and diverse others, have discovered some much less, and less
luminous, then these last. Nor are they to be credited who have limited their
number to 1022, which the Scripture says is infinite and known to God alone,
to whom the Prophet attributes it as a prerogative, to number them and call
them by their names.

The Third said, There are two sorts of Milky-ways; one in the Air, and the
other in the Heaven. The first, of which alone Aristotle spoke, is a light
produced by exhalations either fired or irradiated, as in Comets: from which
this milky way differs only upon account of its great extent caused by the
plenty of Exhalations attracted by a great number of Stars which are near
Cassiopaea and the Poles, where also this Way is brighter then in other places.
The other Milky Way is part of the Heaven or Firmament, equally dividing the
same in two, as other Circles do; although it is rather a Zone or Space then a
Circle, as well as the Zodiac, with whom it agrees in that it has breadth as
that has, and is oblique to the Aequinoctial, having other Poles than those of
the World: but differs in that it is not so broad, the Zodiac having sixteen
degrees, and this commonly between eight and ten; for it is neither equally
broad, nor luminous in all its parts; and its obliquity is much greater than
that of the Zodiac, the middle of which recedes not from the Aequinoctial
above 23 degrees and a half; but this about 56 degrees and a half toward the
North, and near 63 degrees toward the South. It differs also from all the
great Circles, in that it changes position according to the motion of the
Firmament; so that it is moved with two Motions, namely, that of the First
Mover, from East to West, upon the Poles of the World, making an entire
revolution in one day; and another proper to it self, from West to East, upon
the Poles of the Ecliptic, in the same time with the Firmament; which motion
the other Circles have not, being either not moved at all, as the Horizon and
Meridian; or only by the motion of the First Mover, as the Aequinoctial,
Ecliptic, Tropicks, and Colures.

Which is most powerful, Gold or Iron?
Upon the Second Point it was said, That the Earth produces Metals to be
employed for several uses, in order to humane Commerce and Society; which being
founded upon Hope and Fear, Reward and Punishment, Gold and Iron, the two most
powerful Metals, are highly instrumental to the establishing of the same. Gold,
which an Ancient called the Sun of the Earth, being the Star which gives light
to our hope, and the sweet influences of Reward: And Iron, by its obscure and
livid color being the dark Star of our fear and of death, whereof it is the
most usual Instrument: But as Fear is without comparison stronger than Hope
(for the one tends to the preservation of Being, the other only to Well-being)
so Iron, the Instrument of Terror, must likewise have more powerful effects
than Gold, which is only the object of Hope. Moreover, the Law relieves such as
the Just Fear of Iron may have constrained to any thing, as being the greatest
violence in the World; but not those whom the desire of Gold or hope of Gain
has engaged to any Affair. And indeed, all Earthly Powers are measured only by
the point of the Sword: Arms and Iron seem to be the share of Kings and all the
Nobility, as Gold that of Merchants and the Vulgar, from whom all Sovereigns
know how to get it when they think fit. Besides, since Gold has need of Iron,
not only for the digging of it out of the entrails of the Earth, but also for
defending and preserving it (an evidence of its weakness) it may be said the
prey of him who knows how to manage Iron best. And Solon had reason to contemn
the vanity of Croesus, who made a show of his riches as of his greatest power;
foretelling him that it would become the booty of him that should have a
sharper sword. And Philip of Macedon never conquered so many places by trucket
with Mules laden with Gold, as his Son did whole Kingdoms by the Sword. But
what power can we give to Gold, which weakens and enervates its possessors; as
appears by the Lacedaemonians, who were masters of Greece whilst Iron alone was
in use with them, and were corrupted by the Gold which Lysander brought
thither. The Captain in Tacitus had reason to believe the Gauls of his time
weak in war because they were rich. For what is commonly said, That Gold is the
sinew of War, is true as to the power of levying and maintaining of men, but
not as to the performing of great exploits and enterprises. Mercenary Soldiers
and Venal Souls being ordinarily base and of ill qualities; if they do any
thing, it is forced and of little duration, nor do they continue longer then the
Gold lasts. Iron, on the contrary, is maintained by it self and its own power.
Every one fears to offend such as have only Iron by their side, as those by
whom nothing is to be gotten, but much may be lost. For to use Gold for
repelling enemies and diverting them elsewhere, constant experience manifests
it a very dangerous remedy; since besides the ignominy of becoming, as it were,
tributaries, they are never driven so far but they soon return, more irritated
with the thirst of this Gold then they were before with the honor of Victory.
In fine, since men yield sooner to violence then to gentleness, Iron which
constrains and forces is much more powerful then Gold which persuades, but
chiefly in War, where the bravest and most generous exploits are performed by
open force and not by surprises and treacheries; he not being properly overcome
who was willing to be so, and suffered him self to be corrupted: but a Victory
gotten by pure Valor, ordinarily takes from the enemies the desire of
returning.

The Second said, That Victory being the end of War, it matters not by what
means that end is obtained, the easiest and least bloody of which are
stratagems and surprises; which, besides being the effects of Wit and Prudence,
seem more proper to man then downright force, wherein beasts surpass us, and
which is oftimes accompanied with injustice. Wherefore Gold, whereby all secret
intelligences are contrived, seems to have the advantage of Iron; as slights in
War are more efficacious then open force. As also it makes less noise and has
more fruit; whereas Iron oftentimes equally subdues and weakens both parties.
And Victory, the thing aimed at by War, cannot be called such, unless it be
entire. Iron indeed subdues bodies, not hearts; but Gold wins both together.

The Third said, That Gold and Iron may be considered either simply as Metals,
or else as Instruments of civil life. In the former consideration Gold being of
a more perfect nature, has also more power then Iron the most imperfect and
terrene of all; besides, its ductility makes it more capable of extension then
any other; which is an evidence of its perfection. If they be considered as
means and instruments destinated to the use of life, which is the noblest end
whereunto they can be employed; Gold will still have the advantage over Iron;
since, if we credit the Chemists, potable Gold is profitably employed for
health and the prorogation of life; and the same Metal is also the bond of
humane society, which cannot subsist without commerce, nor this without money,
for which Gold is the most proper, as containing in small bulk the value of all
other Metals of lower alloy. Hence we see the people commonly raise the price
of it beyond what the Prince sets upon it; and it is as much desired by all the
world, as Iron is abhorred; all Professions and Trades aiming at the enjoyment
of gold, which seems to be the ultimate end of all humane actions in this life,
whatever disguises men assume under the pretexts of honor and virtue, whose
luster is also set off by that of Gold, employed for this purpose to crown the
heads of Monarchs, and to render divine worship more magnificent.

The Fourth said, That as Iron makes Hammers and Anvils which serve to give
Gold what form we please; so it is every where the master of gold, and
consequently more powerful in Peace and War, affording Grates, Locks and Keys
for securing Gold in the former, and Swords for defending it in the latter. For
Gold serves only to make the possessor envied, and inflame the desires of such
as want it. 'Twas with Iron that the Romans became masters of the Gold of other
Nations, and the Portugals conquered that of Peru, and the Swisses overcame the
Duke of Burgundy; the History observing that all their wealth was not worth the
Gold wherewith the Burgundians had enriched their horses bridles.

The Fifth said, That the end being not only more noble but also more powerful
then the means, Iron, which is commonly employed for the getting of Gold must
be also inferior to it. And it is universally acknowledged that Gold is the
sinew of War; it levies and keeps men together, it makes the Cannon move and
all its train. It Is with Gold that we corrupt Spies, without whose informations
all Iron and strength would be oftentimes unprofitable. Wherefore since Iron
borrows its power from Gold; by the Philosophical Maxim, it has less power
then it.

CONFERENCE CXV. I. Of the cause of Vapors. II. Which is less culpable,
Rashness or Cowardice?
THe First said, The material cause of Vapors is aqueous Of the cause of
Vapors.
rarefaction; the final, is various, according to nature's different
intentions: but commonly, the elevation of an aqueous body, which remaining in
its first consistence would weigh more then air, and consequently could not be
carried to those higher places where it is needful for the generation of Mixts,
which cannot be done without transmutation of the Elements into the places,
yea, and natures also, one of another. So Roses in an Alembick would evaporate
nothing, if they were deprived of all humidity, as appears in their dried
Cakes; nor what humidity may be in them, without heat; which humidity is
rarifi'd and carried upwards before it descends, being again condensed into the
water which resided in the Cake before its separation by heat; which
consequently is the most evident cause of Vapors.

The Second said, There are some vapors that are hot and dry, as appears not
only by the smoke exhaling from boiling Pitch and other unctuous bodies; but
also by the vapors that issue out of the earth, which would never be inflamed
some in the surface of the earth, others in the middle of the air, and others
beyond the highest region, and even in the heavens, if they were only of the
nature of water which quenches instead of conceiving fire: as, on the other
side, Rain, Hail, Snow, Dew, and other aqueous and incombustible Meteors argue
that all Vapors (of which they must be produced) are not hot and dry. Whence I
conclude that as the matter of vapors is various, so their other causes are
all different, especially the efficient. For the degree of heat that evaporates
water will not make Oil exhale; as we see a great glass will be sooner
evaporated then a spoonful of the latter; and the Chemists make use of a small
fire or even of the Sun to distill their waters, but augment their fire, to
extract Oils. Moreover (as to the material causes) the vapors of hot and dry
bodies are more gross and earthy; those of pure water more subtle; and (as to
the final) aqueons vapors serve to irrigate, unctuous to impinguate the earth.

The Third said, It Is not credible that heat is the efficient cause of vapors,
since they abound more in Winter then Summer, and in less hot Climats then in
such where heat predominates, which have none at all; as Egypt and other
places, where it never rains. If you say that there are no vapors there,
because the Suns heat dssipates as fast as it raises them, you imply heat
contrary to vapors since it dissolves them and suffers them not to gather into
one body.

The Fourth said, Copiousness of vapors in cold Seasons and Regions makes not
against their production by heat; since the heat which mounts them upwards is
not that of the Suns rays, but from within the earth, which every one
acknowledges so much hotter during Winter in its center as its surface is
colder; where the matter of vapors coming to be repercuss'd by the coldness of
the air, is thereby condensed and receives its form. On the contrary, in Summer
the earth being cold within exhales nothing; and if ought issue forth, it is
not compacted but dissipated by the heat of the outward air.

The Fifth said, That the thorough inquisition of the cause of vapors raises
no fewer clouds and obscurities in the wits of men, then their true cause
produces in the air: For if we attribute them to the Sun, whose heat
penetrating the earth or outwardly calefying it, attracts the thinner parts of
the earth and water; this is contradicted by experience which shows us more
Rain, Storms and violent Winds in the Winter when the Suns heat is weakest,
then in the Shmmer when his rays are more perpendicular, and as such ought to
penetrate deeper into the earth, and from its center or surface attract greater
plenty of vapors: the contrary whereof falls out. It follows therefore that
the Sun has no such attractive faculty. Nor is the coldness and dryness of the
earth any way proper for the production of such humid substances as Vapors and
Exhalations; the latter whereof being more subtle, and consequently more
moveable (as appears by Earthquakes, Winds and Tempests, which are made with
greater violence then Rain, Showers, or Dew) cannot be engendered of earth, much
grosser then water, which is held the material cause of vapor; otherwise, an
exhalation being earthy should be more gross then a vapor extracted out of
water; which it is not. It remains then that the cause of vapors is the
internal heat of the earth which being increased from without by the cold of
the ambient air, or exhaling all its pores opened by the heat of the Sun,
produces the diversity of Meteors. And this internal heat of the earth appears
in Winter by the reaking of Springs, and the warmth of Caves and subterraneous
places; yea the Sea it self, said to supply the principle matter to these
vapors, is affirmed hotter at the bottom, whither therefore the Fishes retire;
and indeed it is so in its substance, as appears by its salt, bitterness and
motion, whence it is called by the Latins Aestus. And as in the bodies of
Animals, vapors issuing by the pores opened by heat cause sweat, and when
those passages are stopped by the coldness of the outward air, their subtler
parts are resolved into flatuosities, and the more gross and humid are carried
up to the Brain, by whose coldness being condensed they fall down upon other
parts, and produce defluxions: so in the world, which, like us, consists of
solid parts (earth and stones) of fluid (the waters) and of rapid (which are
the most subtle and tenuious parts of the Mass) when these last happen to be
associated with others more gross they carry them up on high with themselves,
where they meet with other natural causes of Cold and Heat which rarefies or
condenses, and redouble their impetuosity by the occurrence of some obstacle in
their way: these Spirits being incapable of confinement, because it is proper to
them to wander freely through the World. Elementary qualities are indeed found
joined with these vapors and exhalations; but are no more the causes of them
then of our animal vital or natural spirits, which are likewise imbued with the
same.

The Sixth said, That the general cause of vapors is Heaven; which by its
motion, light, and influences, heating and penetrating the Elements, subtilises
them and extracts their purest parts: as appears by the Sea whose saltness
proceeds from the Suns having drawn away the lighter and fresher parts, and
left the grosser and bitter in the surface, cold and heat condense and rarefie
other, and by this Reciprocation the harmonious proportion of the four Elements
is continued; sometimes tempering the Earths excessive dryness by gentle Dews
or fruitful Rains, and sometimes correcting the too great humidity and impurity
of the air by winds and igneous impressions, some of which serve also to adorn
the World and instruct Men. And as these vapors are for the common good of the
Universe, in which they maintain Generations, and for preservation of the
Elements, who by this means purge their impurities; so they all contribute to
the matter of them. Fire forms most igneous and luminous impressions; Air
rarefi'd supplies matter for winds, as is seen in the Aeolipila; and condensed
is turned into rain. But especially water and earth (the grossest Elements, and
consequently, most subject to the impressions of outward agents) continually
emit fumes or steams out of their bosom, which are always observed in the
surface of the Terraqueous Globe, even in the clearest days of the year, and
form the diversity of parallaxes. These fumes are either dry or moist; the dry
arise out of the earth, and are called Exhalations; the moist are Vapors and
issue from the water: yet both are endu'd with an adventitious heat either from
subterranean fires or the heat of Heaven, or the mixture of fire. A Vapor is
less hot then an Exhalation, because its aqueous humidity abates its heat;
whereas that of the latter is promoted by its dryness; which yet must be a
little seasoned with humidity, the sole aliment and mansion of heat, which has
no operation upon bodies totally dry; whence ashes remain incorruptible in the
midst of flames and evaporate nothing. But whatever be the cause of these
vapors, they are not only more tenuious under that form, but also after the
reassumption of their own. So Dew is a more potent dissolver and penetrates
more then common water; which some attribute to the Nitre wherewith the earth
abounds.

Which is less culpable, Rashness or Cowardice?
and so admired by all men, that 'twas it alone that deifi'd the Heroes of
Antiquity: For Nature having given Man a desire of Self-preservation, the
Virtue which makes him despise the apprehension of such dangers as may destroy
him, is undoubtedly the most eminent of all other moral virtues, which serve
only as ornaments to his Being. But as every virtue consists in a mediocrity,
and so has two vicious extremities, Excess and Defect; so this is placed
between two vices which may be said equally blamable, since between the two
extremities and the middle the distance is equal (otherwise it were not the
middle, that is, not a virtue) and a point in which this virtue consists has
no latitude. And, though rashness, which oftimes borrows the mask of generosity
and valor, seems to approach nearer it then Cowardice; since being only an
excess of Valor, it may be more easily reduced to mediocrity then the other
which partakes not thereof at all; as diseases arising from repletion are
easier to be cured then those which proceed from inanition. Nevertheless to
speak absolutely, Cowardice is not so vicious as Temerity; for if the one has
a false appearance of Valor, the other has a semblance of prudence and wisdom
which is the rule and measure of all virtues. And indeed, we see most wise men
are a little cowardly; either their knowledge of things rendering them
circumspect:, or experience of Fortune's blindness and inconstancy making them
more distrustful of her dealing, which they know is commonly unkindest to
persons of merit; or else the value they put upon Being increasing their fear
of Annihilation; although this fear is common to all Animals, and has its
foundation in Nature, and so is more excusable then the madness of Temerity,
the usual vice of fools and lunaticks, directly repugnant to our natural
sentiments. In a political consideration though both are punishable, yet
Cowardice least of the two, and is most commonly excused, as in Demosthenes;
yea sometimes recompensed, as in that Roman Consul to whom the Senate gave
public thanks for having fled at the defeat of Cannae: Where the temerity of
young Manlius, though successful, cost him his head by the sentence of his own
Father.

The Second said, That Cowardice and Temerity must not be compared together if
we would judge which is worse; for on the one side the rash person compared to
the poltron seems courageous, and on the other the poltron appears prudent and
well advised. But they must be compared with Valor, of which that of the two
which partakes least is the most vicious. Now, Valor consists in two points,
to attempt and endure. The rash person is bold in the onset, but gives ground
at the brunt. The poltron does neither. He dares neither attempt nor bear up,
and so is further from true fortitude then the Rash; and though they seem
totally opposite, yet the rash is oftentimes timorous, and Necessity or Despair
sometimes renders the veryest coward bold.

The Third said, If the Stoics say true, that Nature is the surest guide we
can follow in all our actions, and that to live well and virtuously is to live
conformably to Nature; then Temerity which subverts the sentiments of Nature,
by whom nothing is sought so much as self-preservation, seems much more vicious
then Cowardice, whose fault is only too much indulgence and inclining to
natural sentiments, in preference of self-preservation above all honors
invented by men as incitements to contempt of death, and the means leading
thereunto.

The Fourth said. As right Reason is the square of Prudence, Equity of Justice,
and Moderation of Temperance; so firmness and constancy of mind in attempting
and enduring, is the sign of Fortitude and Courage, which is a virtue residing
in the Irascible appetite, moderating fear and rashness, and consisting chiefly
in not fearing dangers more then is fit, especially those of War or which
happen unexpectedly. For two kinds of things cause fear: some are above us and
inevitable; as Tempests, Thunders, Earthquakes which a man may and ought to
fear sometimes, unless we be insensible or senseless; others are ordinary,
vincible, and not to be feared by the courageous. To whom three sorts of people
are contrary; namely, the furious, who fear nothing at all; the rash who
venture at all, casting themselves inconsiderately into all dangers; and the
poltrons who never venture upon any. These tremble before and in the danger;
those seem at first to have a good heart, but when the danger appears begin to
tremble and bleed at the nose: whereas he who is truly courageous attempts no
danger inconsiderately, but avoids it as much as he can handsomely; but once
engaged, loses his life therein if he cannot come out of it with his honor.
And though this virtue be generally esteemed by all men, because most
serviceable for defense of States, and has more splendour and show then any
other; yet it is less known and the rarest of all; not many possessing it free
from the interest of gain or vanity, anger, fear of infamy, constraint and
other considerations besides that of honesty, which alone gives name and value
to all virtuous actions. Rashness passes among the vulgar for true Valor,
though it is further from it then Cowardice; which being the daughter of
knowledge and prudence, (as rashness is of ignorance and brutality, and
oftentimes of vanity) seems to come nearer that virtue then Temerity, which
otherwise is incompatible with all other virtues, as being destitute of
Prudence, which alone makes them what they are.

The Fifth said, It Is impossible to determine of these two Vices; which are
equally opposite to their middle virtue, whatever false appearance Temerity may
have of the contrary. But the praise and blame of men proceeding commonly,
though unjustly, from Success; it is that also which makes our actions approved
and discommended. So that the same action will be accounted courageous, and as
such applauded in a young stout Captain who gets the better of his enemies,
(prosperous Rashness being rarely punished); and again termed temerarious in
the same person, if he happens to be worsted. Yea men esteem and admire that
most which they least expected, as most remote from reason without which the
Virtuous acts nothing. Which teaches him to be contented with himself, and not
to make much account of blame and praise, which are not integral parts of
virtue, but only serve to its ornament, as our Hair and Nails do to our persons.

CONFERENCE CXVI. Which Climate is most proper for Long-life? (The second
Question is remitted to the next Conference; and it is Resolved for diverse
Reasons, that hereafter but one be handled at a time.)
BEcause amongst all Phenomenon or Apparences caused by the Celestial Bodies,
the diversity of artificial Days is most sensible and known to the most
ignorant; therefore Astronomers make use thereof to distinguish the several
habitations of Mankind. This diversity of Days depends upon two Causes; the
obliquity of the Ecliptic to the Equator, and the inclination of the Horizon
or the Sphere to the same Equator. For the obliquity of the Ecliptic makes the
diurnal Parallels, which are Circles parallel to the Equinoctial, described by
the Sun as he is carried about the Earth by the motion of the First Mover; the
number of which is equal to that of the Days comprehended in half a year. And
the obliquity of the Horizon is the cause that these parallels are cut by it
unequally. Otherwise if these parallels were not different from the Equator, or
(although different) if they were cut equally by the Horizon (as it happens in
a Right Sphere) the Horizon which is a great Circle passing by the Poles of
these parallels, (which are the same with those of the World) both the Days and
Nights would be equal: so that where the Sphere is not inclined, as in the
Right and Parallel Spheres, there is no inequality of Days, nor consequently of
Climate (so called from its Inclination) but only in the oblique Sphere. It Is
defined, a Region of Earth comprehended between two circles parallel to the
Equator; in which there is the difference of half an hour in the longest days
of the year. It encompasses the Terrestrial Globe from East to West, as a Zone
does, which differs from it only as the Zone is broader; whence there are many
Climats in the same Zone. The Ancients having regard only to so much of the
Earth as they believed inhabited, made but seven Climats, which they extended
not beyond the places where the longest days are 16 hours, and denominated from
the most remarkable places by which they made them pass; as, the first Northern
Climat was called Dia Meroes, hy Meroe, which they began at 12 degrees. 43 min.
from the Aequinoctial, where the longest day has 12 hours three quarters, and
which at present is the end of our first Climat and beginning of the second.
This first Climat passes by Malaca a City of the East Indies, and begins at 4
degrees. 18 min. Its middle, from which all Climats are reckoned, has 8 degrees. 34
min. and its end, 12 degrees. 43 min. The other six Climats of the Ancients passed
by Siene, Alexandria, Rhodes, Rome, Pontus Euxinus, and the River Boristhenes.
Ptolomy reckons twenty one, as far as the Island Thule which lies in 63 degrees. of
Northern Latitude. Our modern Astronomers make twenty four, from the
Aequinoctial to the Polar Circles; in each of which Climats the longest day of
Summer increases half an hour above twelve, according as they approach nearer
those Circles: beyond which to the Poles of the World they place six more, not
distinguished by the variation of half an hour but of 30 days. So that there is
in all, sixty Climats, 30 Northern and as many Southern, each comprehended by
two Parallels: which Climats are easily found by doubling the excess whereby
the longest day surpasses twelve hours; the Product being the Climat of the
place. As if you know the longest Summer day at Paris to be 16 hours, double 4,
the excess above 12, and you will have 8, which is the Climat of Paris; and so
of others. And though there be the same reason of Seasons and other variations
in the Southern and Northern Climats, yet since experience shows us that those
of the South are not inhabited beyond the 8th, which is about the Cape of Good
Hope, at the farthest point of Africa, (beyond which no Inhabitants are as yet
discovered, it may seem that the diversity of Climats is not alone sufficient
for long or short life, but there are other causes concurring thereunto.

The Second said, That since a thing is preserved by that which produces it,
the Sun and Stars, which concur to the generation of all living Creatures, must
also contribute to their preservation and continuance in life; which being
maintained by use of the same things (variety and change, though delightful,
yet being the most manifest cause of brevity of life) that Climat which is most
constant and least variable will be the properest for longaevity, and so much
the more if it suits with our nature; such is the first Climat next the
Aequinoctial, where things being almost always alike, bodies accustomed
thereunto receive less inconvenience thereby then under others, whose
inequalities and irregularities produce most diseases. The natural purity of
the Air, promoted by the breath of a gentle East Wind there reigning
continually; and the want of vapors and humidities, which commonly infect our
Air, conduce greatly to the health of the Inhabitants; also when the dryness
and coldness of their temper makes longer-liv'd, as appears by Ravens and
Elephants, the most melancholy of all Animals, which are common in these parts
where they live above 300 years. Moreover, Homer testifies that Memnon King of
Aethiopia lived 500 years; which (by the report of Xenophon) was the common age
of most men of the same Country, where Francis Alvarez affirms in our time that
he saw lusty men at 150 years of age; and that in Egypt which lies near it,
there are more old men then in any place of the World; and that women are so
fruitful there that they bring forth three or four children at a time, rather
through the goodness of the Climat then any nitrous virtue that is in the
waters of Nilus. Hence possibly most Doctors place the Terrestial Paradise
under the Aequinoctial, and the cause of our first Fathers longaevity, who
having been created under this Climat seem to have lost of its duration
proportionably as they removed from the same Northwards (whence all evil comes)
and toward the Zones wrongfully called Temperate, since more subject to
alteration then that called Torrid by the Ancients, who thought it unhabitable
by reason of extreme heat; although the continual Flowers and Fruits wherewith
the always verdant Trees are laden testify the contrary.

The Third said, Since Heaven is immutable and always like to it self, the
Earth and Elements alone subject to change; the length and shortness of Life
seems not to depend on Heaven but on Earth and the several dispositions of our
Bodies: and the whole World being Man's Country, there is no place in it but is
equally proper for his habitation, provided he be born there; because the Air
he breathes and the Food he eats from his Nativity, altering his Body, at
length make his temper suitable to that of the place of his Education; which
therefore he loves above any other.

The Fourth said, That Heaven remaining it self immutable, is nevertheless the
cause of motions and mutations here below; its light producing different
effects in the Earth according as it is received, the most sensible whereof are
heat, dryness, and other qualities which diversifie the Seasons and Zones; of
which the two temperate, especially the Northern seems most habitable and
proper for longaevity. It Is also the most populous, and its Natives are not
only the most healthy and lusty, but also the most refined and civilized of all
others. Now of the Climats of this Zone, the eighth, wherein Paris lies, seems
to me the healthiest of all, as well for pureness of Air as all other Causes.

The Fifth said, That the goodness of Climats depends not so much upon Heaven
as the situation of each place in reference to the Winds, of which the Southern
being the most unhealthy, therefore Towns defended by Mountains on the South
are very healthy, especially if they lie toward the East, the Winds whereof
are most healthy. And this is the cause of the diversity observed in Countries
lying in the same Climat, which experience not the same changes: as the Isle of
France is very temperate, and yet lies in the same Climat with Podolia (a part
of Poland) where the cold is extremely rigorous: and in the Islands Bornaio and
Sumatra men live commonly 130 years and are not black, as the Africans, whose
life is very short, and yet they lie in the same Climat, namely, under the
Aequinoctial Line.

The Sixth said, That Life being the continuance of the radical heat in
Humidity, that Climat must be properest for Longaevity which will longest
preserve that conjunction. The violent heat of the Climats near the Equator
consumes the radical moisture and makes the natural heat languish; although
under the Line the coolness of the nights twelve hours long, renders it more
supportable: whereas in our longest Summer-days when the Sun is in Cancer, he
is no more then 18 degrees from the Horizon and so diffuses his rays upon the
vapors hovering about the Earth, which reflecting the same after a refraction
make the nights almost always light, and consequently hot; there being no light
without heat. On the contrary, the Northern parts toward the Pole, receiving
the Suns rays only obliquely are very cold and unfit for long-life, combating
the heat and desiccating the radical moisture. But the temperately hot are the
most healthy, especially if the air (of greatest necessity to Life) be pure and
not corrupted by vapors.

CONFERENCE CXVII. Which is most necessary to a State, and most noble, Physic
or Law?
THese two Professions are not absolutely necessary to the subsistence of a
State, but only suppose some evil which they undertake to amend; Physic the
disorder of the humors in Man's body; and Law, that of Manners in the body of
the State. So that if all people were healthy and good, both would be useless,
But the misery of our Nature having made us slaves to our Appetite, and
tributaries to Death and Diseases which lead thereto; this adventitious
necessity has given rise to two powerful remedies against those two evils;
Physic to oppose the diseases of the Body, and Law to repress the disorders of
our Passions: which being the sources of all mischiefs, Law which restrains
their course, seems to have as much pre-eminence above Physic, as the Body,
which the latter governs, is inferior to the Mind, which the former regulates.
Moreover Health, the end of Physic, is common both to Men and Beasts, who have
a better share thereof, and have taught us the best secrets of Physic: but to
live according to right reason, (which is the aim of Law) is peculiar to man;
although oftentimes neither the one nor the other obtain its end.

The Second said, These Disciplines are to be considered either according to
their right use, or as they are practiced. Physic, considered in its right
administration, is the art of curing Diseases and preserving Health, without
which there is no pleasure in the World. Law, taken also according to its
institution is that Tree of the Garden of Eden, which bears the knowledge of
Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, as Physic is the Tree of Life. Now if we
compare them together, the latter which maintains the precious treasure of
Health, is as the foundation upon which Law builds its excellent. Ordinances;
for without Health, not only the administrations of Justice but all employments
of Arts and Exercises cease. And though Laws and Justice serve for the ornament
of a State, yet they are not absolutely necessary to its conservation, there
being society among Robbers; and many States having begun and subsisted by
Rapines, Violences and other injustices, but none without Health, which is the
foundation of all goods, preserving the absolute Being of every thing, and by
that means maintaining all the faculties of Body and Mind. Wherefore Physic is
profitable not only to the Body but also to the Soul, whose nature, faculties,
and actions it contemplates. But if these Arts be considered as they are
practiced now a days, it is certain that if there are Mountebanks, Ignorants,
and Cheats who practice Physic amongst a good number of good Physicians; there
are also, Champertors, Forgers, and other such black souls, who live by fraud,
which they exercise under the mask of justice. We must likewise distinguish the
bad judgments of certain Nations from the truth. For if the Romans sometimes
banished their Physicians and Chirurgians; this might be done out of ignorance,
as when they saw the Gangrened Leg of one of their Citizens cut off. And though
they were for some time without Physicians, yet they were never without
Physic, at least natural.

The Third said, Law has the pre-eminence above Physic upon account of the
great benefits it brings to a State, by delivering the same from greater, more
troublesome, and more incurable evils. And good (according to the Moral axiom)
being the more divine by how much it is more common and diffused, it follows
that Law is more divine then Physic. For by checking our passions and
obstructing the career of illegal Ambitions and Usurpations, it does good not
only to private persons, as Physic does, but also to the whole Public, which
is engaged by particular passions, whence Law-sutes, Seditions, Wars, and other
evils arise; which being public are of more importance then those to which
Physic is designed, whose whole business is about the four humors, either to
keep them in a just temper, or reduce them to their natural state, from which
Diseases debauch them. Besides, Physic only cures the Body, whereas Law
represses the mind's disorders, and even the intentions. Lastly, the evils
Physic defends us from, are of easy cure, having all sensible indications;
but Law remedies such as depend upon the thoughts and counsels of men,
impenetrable by sense. Moreover, Physic regards only particular persons; but
Law maintains a moral union and good intelligence between all the parts of a
Commonwealth, namely, men of several conditions, and keeps every one within the
bounds of his own quality and station; and so is like a Universal Spirit or
Intelligence presiding over all our motions, hindering ruptures and dissensions
(the bane of a State) as that does vacuity, which tends to the destruction of
the World.

The Fourth said, That as the multitude of Physicians in a City is a sign of a
multitude of diseases reigning therein; so the multitude of Laws and Judges
argues corruption of manners. Wherefore both these Professions may seem equally
useless to a State free from wicked and miserable persons. And indeed we see
many Nations have wanted both: at Rome Physicians were unknown for diverse ages,
and are so still in some Countries: and most States of the World dispense very
well with the want of Lawyers, whose contrary opinions are as destructive to
the State, and particular persons, as the number of Physicians is to the Sick.
And as they are most healthful who use these least; so the most flourishing
States have fewest Lawyers; Wrangling, which is the daughter of Law, being the
most apparent cause of the diminution of the strength of Christendom, where for
some Ages it has reigned; either by diverting the greatest number of its
Ministers from the exercise of War, the principal means of amplifying a State,
or by unprofitably taking up the people in Suits. And therefore the Spaniards
found no safer course to preserve the new World to themselves, then by
debarring all Lawyers entrance into it.

The Fifth said, That this made for the Physicians. For the Spaniards sent many
of them to the new World, to discover the simples there and bring them into
Europe. Moreover, as it is more necessary to live and to live in health, then to
live in society or riches (which are the things Law takes care of) so much does
Law yield to Physic in this point, which Gods Word, who commands to honor the
Physician, says was created for necessity. Which as plainly decides the
Question as that Resolution was worthy of the Fool of Fracesco Sforza Duke of
Milan, which he gave in the like Dispute of preference between the Physicians
and Advocates; That at Executions the Thief marches before the Hangman.
Moreover Kings, who are above Laws, subject themselves to those of Physicians,
whom Julius Caesar honored with the right of Incorporation into the City.
Whereunto add the certainty of this Art (which is the true note of the
excellence of a Discipline) being founded upon natural Agents, whose effects
are infallible; whereas Law has no other foundation but the will and fancy
of Men, which changes with Times, Places, and Persons.

CONFERENCE CXVIII. Of Sea-sickness.
NAture has furnished Things with two ways of preserving the Being she has
given them, namely, to seek their good and flee their evil. Both which, Animals
do by attracting what is proper to their nature by right fibers, and rejecting
what is otherwise by transverse fibers, of which the Expulsive Faculty makes
use. So when the Stomach is surcharged with too great a quantity of matter, or
goaded by its acrimony, the expulsive Faculty of this part being irritated by
what is contrary to it, casts it forth by yexing, belching, and vomiting.
Yexing is a depraved motion of the upper Orifice of the Stomach which dilates
and opens it self to expel some thing adhering to its Tunicles or orbicular
Muscles; which being commonly a sharp and pungent vapor, we see this Hickcock
is removed by a cup of cold water, or else by holding the breath; for the
coldness of the water represses the acrimony of the vapour'd, and the
restrained Spirits by heat cause it to resolve and evaporate. Vomiting is also
a depraved motion of the Stomach, which contracts it self at the bottom to
drive out some troublesome matter; which, if it adhere too fast, or Nature be
not strong enough, causes Nauseousness or a vain desire to vomit. Belching is
caused when the said matter is flatuous and meets no obstacle. These motions
are either through the proper vice of the Stomach, or through sympathy with
some other part. The former proceeds sometimes from a cold and moist
intemperies. Whence man, the moistest of all Animals, is alone subject to
Vomiting, except Dogs and Cats; but he only has the Hickcock; and Children, as
being very humid vomit frequently. Sometimes it is from a faulty conformation of
the Stomach, as when it is too straight, or from some troublesome matter, either
internal or external. The internal is a pungent humor, and sometimes Worms. In
short, every thing that any way irritates the Expulsive and weakens the
Retentive Faculty: So, oily, fat, and sweet things floating upon the Stomach,
provoke to vomit by relaxing the fibers which serve for retention. External
causes are all such, as either irritate or relax the Stomach; as, stinking
Smells, and the sole imagination of displeasing things, violent winds;
exercise, especially such wherein the Body is moved by something else, and
contributes not it self to the motion, as going in a Coach or a Ship; for here
the Body rests and also the parts are relaxed, only the Spirits agitated by
this motion act more strongly upon the humors, and these are here more easily
evacuated by reason of the relaxation of the fibers then in other exercises,
wherein the Body stirs it self; as riding-post, or a troat, in which the Nerves
are bent, and consequently, all the parts more vigorous, and hence vomiting is
not so easy. It Is also the equality of the motion which makes persons, unused
to go in a Coach, vomit sooner when the Coach goes in a smooth and even field
then upon rough ways. The same happening upon the Sea, it is no wonder if people
be so apt to vomit there.

The Second said, That neither the agitation of the Air, nor the motion of the
Body can be the sole cause of Vomiting, and other Sea-maladies; since the like
and more violent at Land, as Swings, Charets, and Posts, produce not the same
effects. For we consider the agitation of the Stomach as the cause of vomiting,
that of the Feet and Legs being but accidental; and experience testifies, that
it is not the lifting up but the falling down of the Ship that causes the rising
of the Stomach. Wherefore I should rather pitch upon the salt-air of the Sea,
abounding with sharp and mordicant Vapors: which being attracted by
respiration trouble the Stomach, especially its superior orifice, the seat of
the sensitive Appetite by reason of the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation: thus
the door being open, the matter contained in the Stomach, which is also
infected with the malignity of these vapors, is voided by the ordinary ways:
as happens sometimes to such who only come near the Sea. Indeed the bitterness
and saltness of the humor in the Mouth, which is the forerunner of Vomiting,
together with the quivering of the nether Lip, proceeding from the continuity
of the inward membrane of the Stomach with that of the Gullet and Mouth,
manifests the vapors which excite it to be salt and nitrous. Whence also plain
water drunk with a little salt, causes Vomit. Now if this malady happens sooner
in a Tempest, it is because those nitrous spirits are more stirred in the
tossing of the Sea than in a Calm: as they say, it is more frequent in the
Torrid Zone, because there is a greater attraction of the said Spirits by the
heat of the Climate, which on the other is an enemy to the Stomach, extremely
weakening it, as cold much helps its functions. Such as go into deep Mines, are
seized with the like disturbance to this of the Sea, by respiration of the
nitrous Spirits which issue out of the entrails of the Earth and are the cause
of its fecundity.

The Third said, That Cato (who repented of three things, (1.) Of having told a
Secret to his Wife, (2.) Of having spent a day without doing something, And (3.)
of having gone by Sea when he might have gone by Land) had no doubt experienced
the michiefs of that unfaithful Element: the cruellest whereof is the Scurvy, a
Disease complicated with several others, and whose chief symptoms, are the
ulceration and swelling of the Gums and Legs, with pains over all the Body,
caused by the impurity and malignity of the Air. But the most frequent is
vomiting, caused by the sole agitation and violence of the Air. For our aerious
Spirits not only receive the qualities of the air we breathe, but also follow
its temper and motion, as is seen by the Headache, seizing those that are
beaten by winds in the Country; and by the seeming turning of their heads who
attentively behold the circumgyration of a Wheel or some other Body. So the Air
at Sea being much agitated puts in motion the Spirits which are of the same
nature, and these being stirred set the humors on work, which incommoding the
parts are by them driven out by vomits and other ejections, according to every
one's temper and propensity. For the choleric and broad-breasted, vomit more
easily and successfully then the phlegmatic and narrow-breasted, whose Organs
of respiration are not sufficiently free. Whereunto also the season of the year
contributes; for Summer provokes vomit more then Winter, when the humors being
more heavy, rather tend downwards. But especially Custom is considerable
herein, which renders those that go frequently to Sea not obnoxious to its
inconveniences.

The Fourth said, That the Earth consists of three substances; one Unctuous,
which is the inflammable moisture, called by the Chemists Sulphur; another
Cinereou^, which they call the Faeces or Caput mortuum; the third humid and
incombustible, which they divide into Mercury and Salt; this latter again into
Salt-nitre and Vitriol, of which the Sea being full, the same is communicated
to the first Region of the Air contiguous to the Waters; and, insinuating it
self into our Bodies by inspiration; produces the same effects therein, that it
does taken in substance; four Grains of which is a sufficient Vomit. Whereto
also helps the gentle agitation of the waves, which makes it penetrate; the
examples of others vomiting, and especially the fear commonly incident to such
as were never upon the Sea before, who are most obnoxious to this trouble. For
that Passion so constringes the whole Body, especially the inward parts, that
it weakens and relaxes the Nerves, especially the Fibers which keep the parts
in a just tenor; and so the oblique Fibers and orbicular Muscles (which serve
to retain them) being languid, suffer the juices and humors to pass out. The
same fear which causes relaxation of the Sphincter Any and Vesicae, relaxing
the Muscles which serve to open and close the upper Orifice of the Ventricle:
Hence fear is commonly accompanied with the pain of this part; whose sense
being very exquisite is the cause that the Vulgar call it, The pain of the
Heart; which also for the same reason happens to such as look down upon low
places.

CONFERENCE CXIX. Of Love by Inclination, or Sympathy.
It Is not only amongst the Poets that Love is blind, the obscurity of this
causes evidencing him no less so amongst the Philosophers, who assign two sorts
of it; one of Knowledge, which tends to a good known; the other of Inclination,
whereby we love without knowing why. Indeed there is no love without ground,
and some sort of knowledge; but yet, when the cause obliging us to love is
manifest, it makes the former kind of love; when obscure, the latter: whereof
we have many examples in nature, not only in the Symbolical qualities of the
Elements, Electrical and Magnetical attractions of Stones, particular alliances
of Metals, and all the amities of Plants and Trees, as of the female Palm which
is said to lean toward the male, and those which are found amongst Animals;
but especially in the particular inclinations of some Persons to others unknown
and void of all recommendations to qualify them for the same, and the emotions
some have felt both in Soul and Body at the first sight of their unknown
Parents: as also of a contrary effect, when a dead body bleeds upon the
presence of its Murderer; which is a testimony of an antipathetical hatred
contrary to the abovesaid Love, which we find in our selves almost upon all
occurrences; as when two equally strangers play at Tennis, we wish that one may
win and the other lose. For the first motions of Love, as well as of all other
Passions, are not in our power, and afford not the Mind time to deliberate and
make reflection upon them. Hence oftentimes, Anger, Sadness, Panick fright, and
such other Passions seize upon us without cause; and Love does the like
frequently, without any apparent reason. Yea, we may say, there is no Love of
Knowledge but what took its first rise from that of Inclination, which presently
makes us enamored of the proportions of a Face, which displeases another that
understands the same as well as we, but without being any way affected
therewith, because he finds not in it that correspondence and sympathetical
resemblance that produces a Love of Inclination, which may also arise without
any knowledge, as in that blind man who loved a Lass whom he had never seen; as
also in Petrarch who made so many Verses upon his Lawra, whom he could never
behold; The cause whereof I should attribute to the power of the Imagination,
which fancies something of loveliness where there is none; or else to the sole
action of the Will, which not able to remain neuter between love and hatred
(since its action is to will, and to will is to love) when it meets no cause of
hatred in an object, loves it; and hates it, when it finds nothing amiable
therein. For if you assign the reason of this love to the transpiration of
Spirits issuing out of the loved person's body, their substance is too volatile
to act so far off; and their issuing being never alike, (because the pores of
the skin are more stopped at one time then at another) this love would be
remarkably altered every moment. Besides, we many times love by an inclination
an absent person for his merit; and many have been enamored of Beauties at the
first sight of their Pictures; but love was never produced between two blind
persons, notwithstanding any emission of sympathetical Spirits. Moreover, it is
the Species and not the Spirits that are received by our Senses; and so none
should ever love those they had not seen, but by a Prospective-glass.

The Second said, That it imports not much to the causing of love, whether the
object be really or only imaginarily good; and indeed our minds seem to
interess themselves more in the pursuit and preservation of the latter then the
former, which maintains it self by its proper worth. Wherefore if Love of
Inclination presuppose goodness in the object, the same must be apprehended
either by the Imagination or by some other Faculty, to which it must therefore
be approximated either immediately by it self, or by it self. So the sweetness
of Honey makes it self perceptible to the Tongue by it self: but the proportion
of a fair countenance cannot make it self known but by its species, which is
the picture and representation of it. This way, is produced the Love of
Inclination as well as that of Knowledge; only with this difference, that the
Species which produce the former, act imperceptibly, and more suddenly then
those that produce the latter, which is more deliberate and rational.

The Third said, There are but two sorts of Love; one, improper and
Metaphorical; the other, proper and formal. That precedes Knowledge, and is an
Instinct inclining natural things to their proper good: This follows Knowledge
as its guide, and is the first Expansion of the Heart, pleasing it self with
the good it likes. And as that is diffused over all Creatures, so this is
restrained only to the sensible and rational. The Appetite, whence the former
proceeds, is immersed and incorporated in the nature of every thing, and not
distinguished from the faculties and powers they have to act. But the latter,
arises from the Appetite properly so called, whose functions or motions are
the eleven Passions, to which as many acts correspond in the Rational Appetite.
The Question cannot be concerning that improper Appetite; for then Stones
should have Love, as well as Instinct, toward their Center; but of the true
and proper Love subsequent to Knowledge, which gives Amability to good, as Light
does Visibility to colors. Wherefore they who talk of certain Spirits issuing
out of the loved person's body into the eyes of the Lover, and seizing upon the
heart, without falling under knowledge, seem ignorant of the nature of Love.
For should such spirits arrive at the heart without being observed; yet they
must come out thence again to be known before they can cause Love; as we cannot
know any thing that is in the soul, unless it come first out thence and become
sensible; since nothing is in the Understanding but what passed through the
Sense. So a man cannot know his own face but by reflection from a Looking-glass
without him. For the Soul at our Nativity is like a smooth table or white-sheet
of Paper, and thence its primitive notions during this present state is by
Phantasms supplied to us by our Senses. Now the essential reason of this
dependence which keeps Love subject to Knowledge, is, that the Appetite, which
is the Principle of Love, is only a Passion or Propriety of the thing wherein
it is; but the Principle of Knowledge is an essential degree of Nature. Hence,
Souls are distinguished by Cognition, not by Appetite: we call the Sensitive
Soul, so, from the knowledge of Sense, which constitutes its essential
difference; and the Rational Soul so, because Reason, the principle of Knowledge
is a degree of Nature: but Appetite is a propriety which follows it. And being
there is the same reason of Actions and their Principles; as the Appetite
supposes a principle of Knowledge, so Love, which is the action of the Appetite,
supposes actual and clear Knowledge. Hence, there is no love without knowledge.
For that we have more fancy to the one of two persons playing then to the
other, it is because we discern something in his face, gestures, or motion that
pleases us better. Sympathy (pretended the cause of this love) may indeed be
the foundation of it; inasmuch as we naturally love those like our selves; but
it can never make us love till we have found in the thing some Je-ne-scay-quoy
of lovely. It cannot be the sole cause of our love, since it is of it self
imperceptible to our knowledge, and consequently cannot produce love till the
effects of such sympathy, to wit, such an Air, such a Motion, and such a
Deportment have pleased us. And whereas it is said that from eyes which behold
us attentively we perceive something come forth that animates us; I answer,
that oftentimes quick fixed and sweet intuitions are tokens of love, from which
it is no wonder if ours take rise and growth, as from its proper cause; since
Love begets Love.

CONFERENCE CXX. How the Understanding moves the Will.
It Is proper to the Understanding not only to conjoyn things wholly different,
but oftentimes to abstract and separate such as are perfectly united in one and
the same substance, and differ only in accidents, which it severs from their
subjects. Hence reflecting upon it self, it distinguishes in its operation two
Faculties, to wit, its Cognition and the Reasonable Appetite or Will, although
they are one and the same thing, not only in the Soul, whose essence is simple,
but also in the Intellect; nor are their objects different, Truth, the object
of the Understanding, being convertible and all one with Good, the object of
the Will. Hence Civilians acknowledge no Will in those that want Understanding,
as Idiots and Children. And as the same Sunbeam that produces light, causes
heat too by the continuation of its action, or by its reunion in a
Burning-glass: so an object long considered or strongly apprehended by the
Understanding as good, immediately incites and inflames the same to seek and
desire it. So that the cognition of a thing in the Understanding is only
Theory, which the Will, applying it self thereunto by desire, reduces into
Practice. As the Theorical habit of an Art differs not from the Practical, and
the conclusion of a Syllogism is only a dependence upon its two Premises.
Wherefore the Will, which is the practice of the Understandings speculation,
and a result of its ratiocination, is not distinguished from the Understanding;
and to know good, to desire and seek means to possess it, are operations
continued by one sole motion. Besides, to separate the actions of the Souls
faculties, and make them independent one of another, would infer a kind of
divisibility in the Soul: but the Will being only a desire, every desire a
species of motion, and motion an accident; it is separable from its subject,
the Understanding, whereof it is only an affection and propiety. So that the
Intellect and the Will being the same thing, when the former is carried toward
an apprehended good, we say it moves the Will, as it does the other powers
which it employs in quest of that good, when the same is external and it cannot
attain to it by it self.

The Second said, That to know, to will, and to be able, although of the same
extent in things purely natural (as in a Stone, whose knowledge, desire, and
power to tend to its center are the same thing) yet are different actions in
rational agents. For oftentimes we know without willing, and will what we
cannot do; and sometimes we know not that which we would: Oftentimes we will
things not only without, but even against Reason; witness the irregular
Appetite of breeding Women and Green Sickness Maids. Wherefore these actions
being different, the Faculties from which they proceed, the Intellect, Will and
Motive Faculty, must be wholly distinct; seeing their two adequate Objects,
which specify Faculties, are considered under diverse formal Reasons, which are
the sole Causes of the distinction of Faculties. For Entity immaterial and
spiritual, is, as true and intelligible, the object of the Understanding; but,
as good and desirable, it is the object of the Will: which are two wholly
different formal Reasons. Now though the Intellect and the Will are two
different Faculties, yet there is such a dependence between them that the one
can do nothing without the other, and they communicate mutual assistance: the
Understanding supplies Reasons and Counsels, which the Will causes the Powers
under its dominion to execute: for it is a blind Queen, having no knowledge of
her own but only what light she receives from the Intellect. But how can it see
the same, if blind, as it is fancied? We answer, that as all things have a bent
and natural inclination to their proper good, though they know it not (as even
the Intellect assents to a truth known by ratiocination, but knows not why it
assents to a first Principle, as, That the whole is greater then its part, and
that 2 and 1 make 3; these being connate Notions) so the Will is carried to the
Good proposed to it by the Understanding, because the goodness and sutableness
thereof engage it to endeavors of enjoying it, wherein its supreme Felicity
lies.

The Third said, Since the Will is a desire, every desire a motion, and every
motion from some other (nothing moving it self); the Will cannot desire unless
moved by some superior power and knowledge: For as there is no desire without
knowledge, so, to the end this may not be idle and unprofitable, Nature has
joined an Appetite to it; to wit, a Sensitive Appetite to the knowledge of a
Sensible Good apprehended such by the Imagination, which is common to Men and
Brutes; and a Rational Appetite (the Will) to the knowledge of an honest Good
apprehended such by the Understanding. And whereas immaterial things cannot be
known by themselves but by such as are sensible and corporeal, we cannot better
judge of the manner whereby the Intellect moves the Will, then by that whereby
the Imagination moves the Sensitive Appetite; which is the sweetness of the
Object, whose Species being received by some one of the outward Senses, and
carried from the Common sense to the Fancy which relishes the same to the
full, is then proposed to the Sensitive Appetite, which presently flies to it,
oftentimes so impetuously as that it hurries the Reason and the Will along with
it self, and constrains them to yield to the violence of those Passions which
it excites to join with it in pursuit of that good, and which itre doubles upon
the occurrence of any obstacle to its designs. In like sort the Will is carried
of it self to a virtuous action, when the Understanding represents the honesty
of the same to it; provided it be not otherwise prepossessed, and the said
action be not accompanied with difficulties and thorns, as commonly happens;
for then that Sensitive Appetite oftentimes gets the better of Reason; the
Flesh, of the Spirit. There is this difference between the motions of the Will
and the Appetite, that the latter necessarily follows the duct of the
Imagination, by which it is inclined inspite of it self toward a Delectable
Good; but the Will (common to us with Angels) is so moved by the Intellect,
that nevertheless it always remains mistress of its own actions, and can do
either good or evil by virtue of its liberty, which alone discriminates Man
from Beast, and gives him right of empire and command, (which the Civilians
define, a power of making use of any thing at one's pleasure;) and without
which not only Judgments, Virtues, Vices, Rewards and Punishments, Praises and
Dispraises, Consultations and Deliberations would be useless; but also all Laws
would be to no purpose, Man would be in worse condition then Brutes, over whom
he has no other advantage but that of Reason; which would serve for nothing if
he acted things necessarily, as other Agents do, and not freely and voluntarily.

The Fourth said, He had always accounted it a vain enquiry, how the
Understanding moves the Will; and the Senses, the Sensitive Appetite toward
their Objects; because the Cognoscitive Faculty, and these Appetites being
really distinct and having nothing common, there cannot intervene any commerce
between them. They are Officers that have severed charges, without having any
thing to share or dispatch together. Nevertheless it being true that we love
nothing but what is first apprehended and judged amiable, we must seek this
dependence somewhat higher. Now all actions are of the whole Compositum; and
consequently Man, who is the whole, is he who by his knowledge either of Sense
or of the Intellect, judges what both the one and the other Appetite ought to
embrace or reject. Then after he has passed his judgment by his Cognoscitive
Faculty, he determines himself to follow by his Appetite what he has judged
fit to be done; in consequence whereof he applies his Motive Faculty to the
execution of his Resolution. So that it is Man that moves himself by his Will
toward Good or Evil, to pursue or avoid, after he has considered what he
ought to will, how, and in what sort to comport himself. By this means we
obviate a world of difficulties arising from this Question, and resolve many;
as, amongst others, How the Understanding comes to illuminate corporeal
phantasms, without establishing an Intellectus Agens for that purpose, whose
office is pretended to sublime those phantasms by denudating them of their
singularity and materiality, that so they may become actually intelligible and
proportionate to the Intellect. For, besides that it is impossible to conceive
how any spiritual light can fall from the Intellect upon a corporeal phantasm;
(that which is corporeal being incapable of receiving any thing spiritual, and
the Intellect of producing any thing out of it self, since all its actions are
immanent:) we are delivered from all this trouble by saying, that in the state
of this present life Man by his outward and inward Senses takes in as much
knowledge of things as they can give him, and afterward by his Understanding
deduces and infers things which the phantasms alone could not acquaint him
with. Thus when a phantasm represents to him a thing which his eye beholds afar
off, he by his Understanding judges the same a Substance, because the phantasm
shows him that it subsists of it self; if he see it walk, he judges it alive;
So that it is sufficient to the drawing of all his Consequences that he infer
from the phantasms what they are capable to represent to him, without need of
spiritualizing them, or of commerce between them and the Intellect. In like
manner, it is not needful that the Intellect show the Will its Object; but the
man's seeing it, is sufficient to cause him to move himself by his Will toward
the Good which he apprehends. For as a King has his Scouts to discover the
state of his Enemies, upon whose report he holds a Council of War, wherein he
resolves what is to be done. So Man by his Senses discovers the nature of
Objects, as by so many Spies, which make their report to the Imagination; after
which the Understanding judges of the same; and lastly, the Man resolves and
determines by his Will. Thus it is the Man that makes all this progress,
employing all his Faculties diversely for that purpose. And as 'twere
impertinent to ask how the Scouts and Council of War acted and moved the Troops
which execute the General's resolution to make them fight; but it suffices to
say, That it is his Order: So it is absurd to inquire how the Senses or
Understanding move the Appetite or the Will; it is sufficient to say, That a Man
resolves to will* after cognizance of the matter.

The Fifth said, That that which moves the Will, is something divine and more
excellent then Reason, namely, that part of the Intellect, which is the
knowledge of First Principles, and is to the Soul what she is to the Body which
she informs. This appears in all the Will's actions; whereof those that tend to
the End are, to Will, to Desire, to Enjoy, when the said End is a Good, and is
either absent or present; not to Will, to Flee, to be Sad, when the said End is
an Evil, and that considered too either as absent or present: those which
respect the means leading to such End are, To Choose, to Consent, and to Employ
some rather then others. All which actions it cannot exert of it self, but
being moved by that divine power of the Intellect which represents to it the
goodness of the End, and the sutableness of the Means for attaining the same:
in like manner as the End moves the efficient Cause, attracting it to its
prosecution by an improper and metaphorical Motion.

The Sixth said, As the Will is moved by the Intellect, so is the Intellect
moved reciprocally by the Will, which commands it to divide, define, abstract
and perform its operations in such and such manner. Yea, there is no Faculty
but is subject to its empire. It commands the Imagination to frame Idea's and
Species; the Memory, to recall and represent them; the Motive Faculty, to
speak, walk, and the like other actions; the Sensitive Appetite, to love, hate,
be angry, to raise and appease its passions; though many times these are deaf
to its dictats.

The Seventh said, Since the Rational Soul is a simple Form, and every Form a
perfection of the subject wherein it resides; that of Man being to know Truth,
to love Good, and to be united to both by Fruition: the same Soul when it
knows, is called the Intellect; when it desires or loves the thing known, the
Will. So that there is no need for the one to be moved by the other; for it is
the Soul that moves it self, which therefore Aristotle calls Entelechia, and
the Principle of motion; the Pythagoreans, a Self-moving number.

The Eighth said, That the Will depends not any way on the Intellect, and
consequently is not moved by it. Which is proved, first, because the Will is
mutable and oftimes contrary, upon the same ratiocination; as it would not be,
if it were moved by the Understanding. For if the Will were, according to
Aristotle's definition, a desire of good with reason, the one ought always to
follow the other. But it not doing so, it is an argument, that the Will has
another principle then the ratiocination. In the second place, as it was lately
argued, there are amities of Inclination, properly so called, because not
grounded upon any Reason; and therefore the Will, which never exercises its
dominion more freely then in Love, follows not the Intellect in that kind of
amities, and consequently is not moved by it. Thirdly, whatever the Civilians
say, Fools and Children have their Wills, as well as the Wiser and Elder; yea
both the former Will, as resolvedly as the latter: and Women, who we say have
less judgment then Men, are yet more self-willed and obstinate then they. On
the contrary, the most judicious are commonly the least resolute, and find most
difficulties in willing. An Emperick and ignorant Physician will be bolder and
resolve things more pertinaciously then an old experienced Methodist. A young
and giddy Captain will sooner tell his opinion, which is the issue of his Will,
then an old beaten Soldier who doubts of every thing, and labors much to
bring himself to a resolution. But the contrary would happen, if the Will
followed the Duct of the Judgment. Wherefore I conceive rather that the Will
moves the Understanding as well as all the other Faculties; since no body can
reason inspite of himself, but he must will to set his Mind upon a thing before
the Intellect can make its reviews.

The Ninth said, The best course was, rather to salve the Opinions of the
School by some Expedient, then wholly to depart from them, as a way too
difficult to keep; and that he conceived it better to untye the Gordian knot
then to cut it; which belongs only to Alexander. It Is acknowledged that the
Intellect and the Will are two Faculties of the Rational Soul; that we will
nothing unless the judgment believe it good, whether it be really or only
apparently such. But the difficulty is concerning the means that the Intellect
employs to carry the Will to such good. Take it thus: The Will is carried of it
self to good, as a Stone to the Center; but as this Stone is sometimes hindered
from arriving thereunto by obstacles which stay it; so Ignorance puts a bar to
the Will. Hereupon the Understanding falls to work till it have removed that
obstacle by its reasoning: Which done, as there is nothing between the end of a
shadow, and the beginning of light; so there is nothing between the end of our
ignorance, and the beginning of our volition: where the operation of the
Understanding ends, there begins that of the Will, no more induced, moved, and
as little forced as the weight that tends downwards, which cannot be said
carried toward the Center, unless improperly, by him that takes away the piece
of wood or other obstacle that stopped it in the Air. Moreover, it were no
longer a Will, if moved by any other principle but it self. As is seen in those
who having a will to do something, when the same is once commanded them, change
their resolution, or do only with regret what before they desired with passion:
as the same motion which was natural to the Stone, becomes violent to it when
it is impelled, instead of being suffered to descend downwards.

CONFERENCE CXXI. Whence come the Marks or Spots wherewith Children are born?
AS the Degrees of Life have dominion over the First Qualities, so they have
authority one over another, each in his order. The Vegetative life in Man makes
use of the Elementary Qualities at pleasure, even to the prejudice of their own
Nature. So, Heat congregates things of the same, and separates those of
different Nature; but our Vegetative Soul makes it do the contrary, namely,
Unite the Four Humors in the Veins though different in nature, instead of
segregating them: for in this Case, Heat acts not with full authority but as
the Soul's Officer, following her intentions. And the reason is, because these
four Humors being ingredients into the Nativity of Man, they must necessarily
pass into his nourishment; which they cannot do without being mingled together.
But when the Blood is out of the Veins; then the Heat, disengaged from the
Soul's jurisdiction, disgregates and separates all four, making the Choler
float uppermost, the Phlegm next, then the Blood, and lowest of all,
Melancholy, as the dregs. Amongst Souls there is the same order of Superiority.
The Sensitive makes the Vegetative obey it; as appears by this, that if after
meat the Imagination attend much to an object, the Concoction of the Food is
retarded, because all the Faculties of the Soul being united in their Root and
Essence of the Soul, when she sets her self much upon one object, she leaves
the other inferior powers idle; they not being able to work but as the Soul,
(their principle) employs them. Now this premised, I say, when a breeding Woman
has a longing for any thing, this desired thing is imprinted strongly in the
Fancy; and this imprinting being made in the Brain, the Spirits which flow
from thence, carry a copy thereof with them. For as an entire Looking-glass
represents but one Image, but every piece of a broaken one has its whole
Pourtrait: because the Intentional Species or Images of things, though
divisible by reason of their subject, are yet in themselves formally
indivisible, being Forms without Matter, and consequently indivisible; Division
proceeding from Quantity, a concomitant of Matter: So those Spirits which
stream from the Brain, though they leave there the image of the desired thing,
yet withal they carry the same image with them, as being portions of the
substance wherein it is engraven; and running to the place where the Foetus is
formed, by reason of the union of its Umbilical Vessels with those of the
Mother, they arrive at the Infant and imprint the Characters, they bring, upon
it: the Vegetative and Plastic or Formative Virtue suffering it self to be
overruled by the Sensitive, as this is by the Imaginative, and this again by
the other superior powers. When the teeming Woman touching her self in any
part, the Spirits run thither from the Brain, either by reason of the touch or
the motion (both depending upon the Animal Spirits) but finding the Mother's
flesh too hard and disproportinate to their effect, and missing their blow,
they go to give it upon the tenderer flesh of the Child. And as in Generation,
the Spirits of all the parts of the Body accur to the place where the Seed is
received, there to engrave the Characters of the parts whence they flow, which
afterward serve for the Formative Virtue, every one having his task to make
the part from which it issued: so the Mother's Spirits keep the same course and
rule toward the Embryo, so that those which served to the Mother's touch, go
to find that same place in the Child's Body, there to mark the Image which they
brought from the Brain; Nature finding ways for her Intention where none appear.

The Second said, The impotence of that Sex and their weakness of Mind,
(evidenced by the violence of all their Passions, which know no mediocrity) is
one of the principal causes of the impetuosity of their desires. Now the
Species of the thing desired being in the Imagination, it excites the Appetite
which desired it; this the motive Faculty, which employs the Animal Spirits to
execute the commands of the Faculties by whom it is set on work. And as the
Virtues and Images of things generated here below by the heat and influence of
the Stars, are received in the Air which consigns them to the Earth; so those
Spirits receive the Species and Images whereof the brain is full; and being
directed by the Imagination to the Womb (which has great communication with
the Brain by means of the nerves of the sixth Pair, as appears by the effects of
Odors upon that part) there they retrace and imprint upon the Child the Images
wherewith they are laden. For, if it be true that the Imagination can act
beyond its Subject, as Estriches and Tortoises are said to hatch their Eggs
with their Eyes, and that Hens hatch Chickens of the color of such cloths as
are laid before them whilst they are sitting; much more may the Imagination of
a Woman represent upon the tender Fruit in her womb the Images of things which
she passionately desires: and this is no more strange than the common
observation, of People falling sick, and recovering again, merely by Fancy.

The Third said, That the images of things desired are, in the Spirits, just as
those of sensible objects are in the Air, which is full of them. But as these,
that they may be seen, must be terminated by a smooth and opake body; so, that
those which are in the spirits may be expressed, they must be terminated by a
soft, tender, and capable body, as a child's is in the first months of his
conformation, during which alone he is susceptible of these impressions, which
are only of things edible and potable; being the Child, then endu'd only with
sensitive Life, cannot be affected but by things serving to the Animal Life, as
aliments are, which (besides) are ordinarily and most ardently desired by
breeding Women; those that long for chalk, coals, and other impurities being
unhealthy and distempered. Now to give account why the Grapes, Mulberries,
Strawberries, Goose-berries, and other Fruits delineated upon our bodies, ripen
and change color at the same time as the true fruits upon the earth do, I
shall not recurr to the Stars, or Talismanical Figures, but more probably to
that Universal Spirit which causes the same fermentation in the spirits of our
bodies as in Wine and the Vine when it is in its sap and flower; and in Pork or
Venison when Hogs and Deer are salt, mezled, or go to rut.

The fourth said, That some of these Marks adhere to particular Families. So
the family of Seleucus had an Anchor upon the thigh; in Greece some were
distinguished by a Lance, a Crevish, a Star, etc. which marks, as Warts and
Moles, proceed from the Formative Virtue in the seed, which containing the Idea
of all the parts, expresses them to the life in the child. Other sorts of Marks
are not ordinary but fortuitous, and depend upon the Imagination alone, which
employs the spirits which are common both to the Mother and Child by the
Umbilical Vessels, and have the same motions: so that when the Woman scratches
her self in any part of her body, the spirits having a like motion are carried
toward that part, and at the same time toward that correspondent part in the
child's body, whose tenderness is alone susceptible of the image wherewith they
are impregnated, and which is never to be removed, as being from the first
conformation.

The Fifth said, That not only the desire of eating and drinking, which is
pacified by enjoyment, but any vehement passion, even a sudden fright against
which there is no remedy, sometimes leads the variable Fancy of Women to
interrupt the work of the Formative Virtue, otherwise always very regular. As a
certain Woman having seen a Criminal broken upon the Wheel, brought forth a
child that all the bones were broken. Hereunto also contribute the excess or
defect of the Matter, its evil quality, and the depraved conformation of the
Womb. But to attribute the communication required for this effect between the
Imaginative and Formative Faculties to the Umbilical Vessels, cannot hold;
there being but one Vein, two Arteries, and the Vrachus, without any nerves, by
which alone the animal spirits are transmitted from the Brain. Nor can those
Species without dissipation and confusion, separate themselves from the mass of
Blood, and pass by the circuit of the Mother's Veins into the Umbilical Vein of
the Foetus; wherefore it is more rational to ascribe this effect to the
correspondence of the Faculties, whereof the Superior indeed move the Inferior,
but by a simple and pure irradiation, without transmitting any thing to them:
There needing no other communication then that of a Lutinist's finger, or a
Dancing-master's foot with their Imagination, which yet follow one the other,
although it transmits not to the ends of their hands and feet, the notes and
cadences which they represent. Thus, for the imprinting of a Mark, the
Formative Faculty being moved by the Imagination, has no need to receive any
Species, as the Cognoscitive Faculties have, of which number the Formative is
not. Nor is it more strange, that the Foetus, indu'd with a particular soul,
yet feels the effects of its Mothers Imagination, than that Fruits receive the
changes and alterations of the Trees to which they adhere.

CONFERENCE CXXII. Of the Original of Forms.
A Form is that which gives either Being or Motion. When it gives only Motion,
it is called an Assistent Form, as that which moves the Heavens: When Being, an
Informant Form, styled also an Act, Perfection, Essence, Virtue, Beauty. For
what ever is excellent in a Subject, proceeds from the Form; which determining
the Indifferency of the matter (of it self imperfect) makes it to be one, that
is to say, not divided in it self, and divided from every thing else. Created
Forms are either spiritual or material; and both these again either substantial
or accidental. Spiritual accidental Forms are, Virtue, Science, and all Habits
of the Soul. Substantial spiritual forms are Intelligences and Rational souls.
Material accidental forms are either simple, as Heat and Whiteness; or
compounded, as Beauty and Health. Under Material substantial Forms are
comprehended Vegetative and sensitive Souls, which are the Forms of Plants and
Brutes, and the Subject now in hand; although I will not grant them to be
Substances, but only Accidents. All agree that there are Forms, because there
are Actions; which presuppose Powers. These Powers are properties flowing from
some active principle which sets them on work; which the Matter, because purely
passive, cannot do; and therefore it must be the Form. But the doubt is,
whether this Form be substantial or accidental; as, whether it be only a
certain degree of Heat, which makes Plants and Animals be nourisht, grow,
generate, and move, or else some Substance and Form more excellent that employs
Heat as its Instrument for producing those Actions. And this is most probable.
For otherwise, A Substance compounded of Matter and Form should, contrary to
the Maxim, be made of that which is not Substance, if Forms were only
accidental. They are introduced into a capable Subject by an Univocal Agent,
which by generation communicates a soul of the same Nature with its own, which
is material, and consequently divisible; yet so divisible as that it is not
diminished in the traduction, no more than the Species of a Looking-glass which
produces it self wholly and entirely in all bodies capable of it, or then the
flame of a candle wherewith a thousand others may be lighted, without any
diminution of its substance.

The second said, That Forms are primogenial Principles, no more generable than
the Matter which they always accompany, and according to whose dispositions
they only change appearance. For it is not credible that Forms, the principal
pieces of the world (without which it would be deprived of that from which it
bears its name, to wit, Ornament and Beauty) are subject to continual
corruption; otherwise the world and the natures therein contained would have
been changed in so long a time, and yet they remain still the same. Besides, if
Forms perish, they must either be annihilated (but nothing is so in nature) or
else resolved into that whereof they are composed, since they are supposed
material; and nevertheless we see no remainder of them. It Is therefore always
the same form but diversely dressed, and said to be generated when it changes
from an imperfect to a perfect state; and to be corrupted when it returns into
a worse condition then what is had before; both, according to the several
dispositions of its Subject.

The third said, That all natural Forms are nothing but Accidents, since they
are in matter as in a subject, from which they are inseparable; and not as
parts; for they are parts of the whole, but not of the Matter. The Forms of the
Elements are the first Qualities. And as all Mixts are compounded of the four
Elements, so they derive their form (as well as their matter) from them, which
follows the nature of the Element predominant in the Compound. Thus Dryness is
the Form of a stone, which has more of earth than of any other Element; Oil is
humid, because aerial; all Living Creatures are Hot, by reason of Heat, the
noblest and most active quality, which, attaining to the proportion requisite
for performing the offices of life, is called a Soul; and according as it is
more or less refined, and meets with different subjects, it is called a
Vegetative Soul in Plants, and a Sensitive soul in Brutes. I say further, that
these Forms are nothing but Modes and Fashions of Being. For as Water turned
into Air, and this into Fire by rarefaction, or into Water by condensation, are
still the same, not differing but according as their parts are more or less
close; so as well Forms purely natural as other living Forms, are nothing but
Modes and Fashions of Being of the Elements, their Qualities, and the several
Mixtures from which those Forms result.

The fourth said, according to Anaxagoras's opinion, That all things are in
all, and consequently Forms in the Matter, out of whose bosom they are educ'd
by Agents conjoyning things of the same Nature, and separating others. As Art
(which imitates Nature) makes not Wine, but only presses out that vegetal juice
which was before in the Grape; and out of Marble forms a Statue only by paring
off what was superfluous: so out of the Earth, Nature forms Plants, which are
turned into the substance of Animals, whose bodies are again reduced into Earth.

The fifth maintained the opinion of Albert the Great, who is for the
Generation of things, which the preceding opinion over throws, holding nothing
to be new generated; He said, that Forms are indeed in the Matter, yet not
entire and perfect, but only by halves and begun; according to their essence,
not according to their existence, which they acquire by the Agents which educe
things out of their causes.

The Sixth said, If it were so, then there would be no substantial Generation,
because Existence is nothing but a Manner of Being, adding nothing to Essence,
nor really distinguished from it. Wherefore I embrace Aristotle's opinion, that
Forms are in the Matter, but only potentially, and as the Matter is capable of
them; just as Wax is potentially Caesar's Statue, because capable of receiving
that form. This he calls, to be drawn and educ'd out of the power or bosom of
the Matter: which is not to be received in it, or to depend of its
dispositions, since this belongs also to the Rational soul, which is not
received in the body till the previous dispositions, necessary for its
reception, be introduced therein; but the Matter it self concurrs, though in a
passive way, not only to dispose it self, but also to produce the Form, and
consequently to preserve it. Which is not applicable to the Rational soul,
whose Being depends not anywise upon the Matter.

The Seventh said, Matter, being a Principle purely passive and incapable of
all action, cannot produce any thing, much less Forms, the noblest Entities in
the world. It Is the principle of impotence and imperfection, and consequently
the ugliness, deformity, contrary to the Form whereof it should partake, if it
contained the same in power, as Wine and Pepper do Heat, which becomes actual
and sensible when reduced into act by our Natural Heat which loosens it from
the parts which confined it. Wherefore Forms come from without, namely, from
Heaven and its noblest part the Sun, the Father of Forms, which are nothing but
Beams of light derived from him as their Fountain, whose heat and influences
give motion and life; which is the abode of Heat in Humidity: not Elementary
Heat; for then Arsenic, Sulphur, and other Mixts, abounding with this Heat,
should have life; but Serpents, Salamanders, Fishes, Hemlock, Poppies, and
other excessively cold Plants and Animals, should not. Moreover in whatever
manner the Elements and their Qualities be mixed, they are still Elements, and
can produce nothing above their own Nature, which is, to calefie, refrigerate,
attenuate, rarefie, condense; but not the internal and external senses, the
various motions and other actions of life, which can proceed only from a
Celestial Heat, such as that is which preserves a Plant amidst the rigours of
Winter; whose coldness would soon destroy the Plant's heat, if it were of the
same nature. Hence Vegetative and Sensitive Souls having no Contraries, because
Contraries are placed under the same Genus, (but the Celestial matter whereof
these souls are constituted, and the Elements are not) therefore they are not
corruptible after the manner of other Mixts; but like light, cease to exist
upon the cessation of the dispositions which maintained them. For, such is the
order of Nature, that when a Subject is possessed of all the dispositions
requisite for introduction of a Form, the Author of Nature, or (according to
Plato) the Idea, or that Soul of the World (which Avicenna held to be an
Intelligence destinated to the generation of substantial Forms) concurrs to the
production of the Form, as also this concourse ceases when those dispositions
are abolisht.

CONFERENCE CXXIII. Whether Lean people are more healthy, and long-lived then
Fat.
THe Immortality of our souls having an absolute disposition to length of Life,
it depends only upon that of the Body, that we do not live Ages as our first
Fathers did. For it is from some defect in these bodies that the differences of
life even in Animals and Plants proceed; whence some less perfect souls, (as
those of Oaks) are yet more long-lived then those of Beasts. The signs of long
and short life, are either simply such, or also causes and effects. Such is the
conformation of the parts of our body. A great number of Teeth is held a sign
of longaevity, as well because it is an effect of the strength of the Formative
Faculty and Natural Heat, as that thereby the food is better masticated and
prepared; and the other concoctions and functions more perfectly performed,
whence comes health and long life. So also the Habit of the body is not simply
a sign, but likewise an effect of health and cause of long life; namely when
the same is moderate, that is, neither fat nor lean; which two, though
comprisable within the latitude of health, which admits a a great latitude, are
yet so much less perfect as they decline from that laudable disposition which
is the rule and square of all others. Now to make a just comparison, we must
consider the Fat and the Lean in the same degree of excess or defect from this
Mediocrity, and compare Philetas the Poet (who was so dry and lean that he was
fain to fasten leaden soles to his shoos for fear the wind should carry him
away) with Dionysius of Heraclea who was choakt with fat, unless his body were
continually beset with Leeches. Or else we must observe in both an equality of
Vigor in the Principles of Life, to wit, the Radical Heat and Moisture in the
same proportion, the same age, under the same climate, regiment, and exercises;
otherwise the comparison will be unequal: and lastly, we must distinguish the
fleshy, great-limb'd, and musculous from the fat. This premised, I am of
Hippocrates's Opinion, Aph. 44. Sect. 2. that such as are gross and fat
naturally, die sooner then the lean and slender; because the Vessels of the
latter, especially the Veins, are larger, and consequently fuller of Blood and
Spirits, which are the Architects and principal Organs of Life: on the
contrary, the Fat have smaller Vessels by reason of their coldness which
constringes them; as is seen in Women, Eunuchs, and Children, whose voices are
therefore more shrill, and who have also less health and life.

The Second said, Nature has furnished Animals with Fat, to the end to preserve
them from external injuries, and therefore the Lean, who are unprovided
thereof, must be of shorter life: for not many, besides decrepit old people,
die of a natural death; that is, proceeding from causes within, whereas most
diseases arise from external causes, wherewith the Fat are less incommoded,
especially with cold, the sworn enemy of life; the smallness of their pores,
and the fat which environs them, excluding all qualities contrary to life, and
withal hindering the dissipation of the Natural Heat, which becomes more
vigorous by the confinement; just as the Bowels are hotter in Winter, because
the cold air hinders the efflux of the heat and spirits, caused in Summer, and
in lean bodies, whose pores being more open, cannot retain those volatile
substances. So that, had the Fat less heat, as they have not (for plenty of fat
argues plenty of blood, the purer and more aerie part whereof distilling like
dew through the coats of the Vessels, and passing through the Muscles, when it
comes to the Membranes, is by them condensed into that whitish substance rather
by their density and natural property then by their coldness) yet this Heat
being better dispensed, and less altered in the Fat then in the Lean, must
consequently cause fewer diseases, and last longer.

The Third said, Life is the continuance of Heat in Humidity, not aqueous and
excrementitious as that of fat people is, but oleaginous and aerial; and the
longer this Heat subsists therein, the longer does life last. Now it continues
longer in the Fat, whose more open pores let out the fuliginous excrements
raised by Heat; which in fat bodies, whose passages are stopped by the coldness
or clamminess of pituitous humors, stagnate and choke the heat, like fire that
wants free transpiration, so necessary to life that it cannot subsist a moment
without this action, whereby the soul attracts air in at all parts of the body,
especially the mouth, for refreshing and ventilating the heat, and recruiting
the spirits, and by the same passages emits the fuliginosities necessarily
following all consumption of humidity by Heat. Which causes of Death being
internal and consequently necessary and inevitable; are much more considerable
then the external, whereto lean people are subject, and which may be more
easily avoided and remedied.

The fourth said, That Fat persons have a more moderate and less consuming
heat, its activity being allayed by the humidity of their Constitution; and
therefore it is more durable than that of lean people, whose heat already
violent of it self is rendered more active by siccity, which is a spur to it.
Hence they endure fasting with more trouble than the Fat, whose moist substance
both moderates and feeds their heat, which appears to the touch very gentle and
temperate, as that of lean persons is sharp and pungent. Moreover, Diseases of
Inanition, to which the lean are subject, are more difficult to cure, than
those of Repletion incident to the Fat. And old age which continually dries us
up, is the tendency to Death, which is siccity it self.

The Fifth said, Health being a Disposition according to Nature, which renders
a man capable of performing the offices of life aright, and this disposition
consisting in a due proportion of the first qualities, which makes a harmony
and laudable temper of the four humors; the principal evidence thereof is a
good state and habit of the body called by the Physicians Euexia; and that
Extreme which comes nearest this, is the most healthy and fittest for long
life. The functions of life are Natural, Vital, and Animal; all which are
better performed by the lean than the fat. First, the Natural, which are
Nutrition, Growth, and Generation; because the hotter flesh of the lean
attracts more than that of the fat, which may indeed imbibe the nutritive
juices, but cannot perfectly concoct and assimilate the same for want of
sufficient heat; whence they produce abundance of crude phlegmatic excrements,
which render them pale and bloated. For their more fatness proceeds from want
of heat to consume superfluities. Secondly, growth being an effect of heat, the
Fat grow less, because they are less hot than the Lean. For heat rarefies,
subtilises, dilates, and make the parts mount upwards, as its defect makes the
humors settle downwards; hence women are never so tall as men, and their lower
parts are grosser; whereas the upper parts of men, as the head and breast, are
more large. Thirdly, the lean are more apt for generation, because their
spirits are more refined, and their seed more concoct and plentiful than that
of the fat; the purest portion of whose blood is turned into fat instead of
seed; whence all guelded Animals become fat; and, according to Aristotle, fat
women are for the most part barren, bear seldom; who also, as well as men of
the same habit, are more inclined to love; but we are commonly most led to that
which we perform best. Then the Vital Functions too, are more perfectly
performed in the lean; as appears by their large respiration, their strong and
great pulse, the nimbleness in their motions and passions. Lastly, so also are
the Animal, to wit, outward and inward sensation, by reason of the pureness and
subtlety of their spirits, (which likewise causes goodness of wit) and of the
disposition of their Organs, more purified, and less burdened with clouds and
excrementitious humidities, which render the fat more heavy both of mind and
body.

CONFEERNCE CXXIV. Whether we may better trust one whom we have obliged, or one
that has obliged us.
COnfidence being the fruit of Friendship, yea, the sweet bond wherewith this
Virtue unites Hearts; it may seem we ought to have most in him that loves most
perfectly, namely, he that has obliged us. For as it is harder to give then to
receive, because we cannot give without depriving our selves of what we enjoy,
(which is contrary to our natural inclination) so it is a more virtuous action,
and argues a greater kindness: the receiver of a benefit finding no difficulty
in this action of receiving it. Moreover, we cannot doubt of his good will, who
obliges us by his benefits; but we may of his, that receives. For it frequently
happens to those that do good, as it did to the Sower in the Gospel, part of
whose seed fell in stony places, part amongst thorns, part in the highway, and
was devoured by birds; and the least part upon good ground, and brings not
forth fruit but in its own time. Yea, there are many that hate nothing so much
as the remembrance of those that have done them good, as if their presence were
an Universal Reproach, notwithstanding that a second benefit revives the first,
and a third or fourth cannot but mind them of the preceding. But when you have
obtained of them to remember it, yet many regret nothing more then to pay a
debt, because constrained thereto, either by Law or Duty; and Man being of his
own Nature free, hates nothing so much as to do any thing by constraint. Hence,
if he requites an Obligation, it is not with that freeness and cheerfulness
which is requisite to good Offices, and becomes a Benefactor; in whom therefore
we have more reason to confide then in another.

The Second said, The little fidelity now in the world, even amongst nearest
Relatives, makes it reasonable to enquire, Who may be trusted. And if the fear
of Ingratitude, (the most vulgar crime, though in show much detested by all the
world) is the cause why he who has done good to another, yet dares not trust
him; the receiver thereof has oftentimes no less doubt of his Benefactor's
intention. For though he has received a seeming testimony of his kindness, yet
the motives of benefits proceeding sometimes from an other cause besides true
Friendship, suspicion may as well arise in the Receivers, as in the givers
Mind. Many give only that they may receive with Usury; others, out of vanity,
and to make Creatures and Clients: which they regarding no longer but as their
inferiors and dependents, it is as dangerous for these to confide in their
Benefactors, as for a slave to use confidence toward his Master, or a Vassal
toward his Lord; not often allowed by the respect and timerousness of the less
toward the great, as commonly those are that give: Whereas we ordinarily find
in him whom we have obliged nothing but Subjection and Humility, Virtues much
disposing the mind to Gratitude, which cannot but assure their Benefactors of
their fidelity. Nor can they easily be ungrateful if they would, your
confidence in them obliging them continually to fidelity, and, withal, giving
them occasion to requite your kindnesses by their assiduity and services. Which
was the recompense wherewith the poor amongst the Jews paid their Creditors,
by serving them for some years. So that he is scarce less blameable who
distrusts him whom he has obliged, and by this diffidence deprives him of the
means of requital, then he who having received a benefit betrays his
Benefactor; the Injustice being almost alike in both. If the first complains of
having been deceived by him whom he finds ungrateful; the second, in whom his
Benefactor puts not the confidence which he ought, will have no less cause of
complaint that on the contrary he has distrusted him, and soiled the luster of
the first Obligation by his diffidence and bad opinion of him; which is to tax
himself of impudence for having done good to one unworthy of it.

The Third said, That if Men were perfect, Communicative Justice would require
of them that the receiver of a benefit should repay the like, or at least some
acknowledgment by his endeavors: Which the Poets intimated by the Graces,
holding Hand in Hand. But the perversity of Man is such, that the more he is
obliged to this Duty, the worse he acquits himself thereof, not doing any thing
handsomely but what he does freely; and because being a vainglorious Creature,
he hates nothing so much as to be subject, and to pay homage to him that has
done him good; whose presence seems to upbraid him with his own meaness. If he
loves his Benefactor, it is with an interess'd and mercenary affection; whereas
that of the former is free from all self-respect, and proceeds merely from a
principle of Virtue, and consequently, is with more reason to be relied upon.
Moreover, a Workman loves his Production more then he is loved by it: as also
God does his Creatures; and Fathers, their Children. Now a Benefactor, who is a
kind of Workman and Artificer of our good Fortune, cherishes and loves us as
his work and creatures, because he seems concerned for our preservation; just
as Causes are for that of their Effects, in which themselves revive, and seem
to be reproduc'd.

The Fourth said, That our Natural Sentiments incline us more to rely upon
those whom we have obliged, then upon those who have obliged us; not so much by
way of challenging a requital, (for Obligations are not to be done in hope of
recompense; which would be exchange rather than kindness) as because we are apt
to trust those most, whom we love most. But we love those most, to whom we have
given greatest Testimony of our Affections. A Man may be deceived in reckoning
his benefits as causes of Amity in the receiver; but, they are certain Effects
and Signs of Affection in the bestower: So that in respect of us, it is
manifestly better to trust him whom we have obliged, than him who has obliged
us. The same is proved also in respect of him that is obliged; even the wild
beasts are tamed, and, instead of hurting, obey those that feed them; and
therefore 'twere injurious to humanity, not to judge It capable of
acknowledging a benefit which it knows how to conferr without provocation. For
upon examination, the Causes of Ingratitude will be found to arise from those
who boast of the title of Benefactors; the imprudence whereof is so great in
some, that they displease more than oblige, by Presents unseasonably given, of
no value, and (contrary to Seneca's advice) of little duration, intermixed with
ill Offices, instead of being fenced with new to keep out the rain of the
disgusts and coldnesses which destroy Friendship; with regret, and not with a
cheerful Countenance; after denials and delays, so that the thing seems
rather snatched then received; diminished by burdensome conditions; and
lastly, nullifi'd by reproaches, if not requited as soon as was expected.
Whence such pretended benefits deserve rather the name of Outrages: And
nevertheless, being there are many that are grateful, even for such benefits,
we may justly conclude that Courtesies done with their due circumstances, are
far more capable to oblige the receivers to Gratitude, which cannot consist
with Unfaithfulness.

The Fifth said, That the Decision of this, as of all other Moral Questions,
depends upon persons, times, places, and other circumstances whereupon Prudence
is founded, which teaches when, how, and whom we are to trust. Yet, supposing
circumstances alike, and two persons equally virtuous, one of which has done
me good, and the other received good from me; the contrary Reason of the Law,
which presumes him always bad who has been once bad, makes me judge, That he
who has once done me good, will sooner do me good again then another; and
therefore that I ought rather to trust him.

CONFERENCE CXXV. Of the Causes of Freezing and Thawing.
AS Heat and Cold are the Efficient Causes of all Meteors, so Dryness and
Moisture supply Matter for them, sublimed and made volatile by extraneous Heat.
Vapors which make Aqueous Meteors, are of two sorts; some ascend to the Middle
Region of the Air, whose coldness condenses them into a Cloud, which afterward
turns into Rain, Snow, or Hail: Others, through the weakness of Heat, or
tenuity of their Matter unable to ascend, turn into Mists and Dew, and the
Serene which preceedes it, and Frost. For the Matter both of Frost and Dew, is
a subtle thin Vapor, which when spread equally and uniformly about the Earth,
hinders not the Air's transparency, which therefore in time of Frost is always
clear and serene. But their Efficient is distinct; that of Dew is the moderate
Coldness of the Night, whence it is most frequent in temperate Seasons; that of
a Frost is Vehement Cold, whereby being first condensed, it falls down in form
of Crystal: Yet Cold alone suffices not to produce Frost; for then Water, which
is cold in an eminent degree, should be always frozen. But some terrene and
gross parts must serve for an uniting medium to compact the moist parts of the
Water or Vapor, which being naturally fluid, cannot be linked together but by
means of some dry parts fixing and restraining their fluidity. Hence the
impurest and most compounded Liquors are soonest frozen; distilled Waters,
difficultly, by reason of their simplicity; Vinegar (though cold) never, by
reason of the tenuity of its parts. But the surface of waters being full of
earthy and gross parts, which could not accompany the Vapors or Exhalations,
drawn up by the Sun's heat, is therefore first frozen; even that of running
waters, though not so easily, by reason of their motion makes a divulsion of
their parts; as neither Oil very easily, (by reason of its aerious and
unctuous humidity) the Sea, and Hot Spirits; which yet Experience shows are
sometimes frozen by Vehement Cold; the Poet in his description of the sharpness
of Winter, in his Georgicks, saying, that they cleav'd Wine with hatchets; and
the Northern Navigations of the Hollanders, relating that they were detained
three months under the seventy fourth Degree, where their Ships were frozen in
the main sea.

The Second said, That Heat and Cold are the immediate Causes of Freezing and
Thawing, but it is hard to know, Whence that Heat and Cold comes? Now because
Cold is only the Privation of Heat, as Darkness is of Light; we shall
sufficiently understand the Causes of Cold and of Freezing, if we know those of
Heat which causes Thawing. The truth is, the Sun, whose approach and remoteness
makes the diversities of Seasons according to the different mutations which he
causes in the qualities of the Air, contribute thereunto, but the Earth helps
too; he cannot do it alone; for we see that the Snow on the Mountains which
approach nearest Heaven, is last melted. But the Sun's Rays piercing into the
bosom of the Earth, draw out that Fire which is enclosed in its entralls; and
because the Sun removes but a very little from the Aequinoctial Line, therefore
that part of the Earth which answers to that of Heaven where the Sun
continually resides, is always Hot; and by a contrary Reason, that under the
Poles is always extremely cold: And even Country People observe winds to be
the Cause of these Effects; for those that blow from the North quarter, bring
with them an extreme cold Air, which is the cause of Freezing; and those from
the South bring on us an Air extremely heated by the continual action of the
Sun, and so are the cause of Thawing.

The Third said, That Winds being continual, because their matter never fails,
it happens that the strongest gets the better of the weakest, and they chase
one another; whence Virgil calls them Wrestlers. When the South Winds blow,
(which are more frequent, and more gross then the Northern or Eastern, by
reason of the Sun's strength in the South, which opens the Pores of the Earth
more:) the copious Exhalations which issue out of it, are hotter than those
which come out of the Pores of the Northern Earth, which are closed up by Cold,
whence the Winds blowing from thence are colder and thinner; just as our breath
is cold when we contract our Mouths, and hot when we dilate them. In like
manner, the Exhalations issuing out of the Earth's Pores, are hotter or colder,
according as the passages out of which they proceed are more or less dilated,
and consequently, cause Freezing or Thawing.

The Fourth said, That the Sun or other Stars are only remote Causes of
Freezing and Thawing; namely, by their Heat which serves to raise the Vapors,
which are the next causes thereof, according as they partake more or less of
that external Heat; or, (as the Chemists say) as they are full either of
certain nitrous and dissolving Spirits which cause Thawing, or of coagulating
ones which cause Freezing; such as those are, harden Plants into Stones, which
so presently congeal drops of water in Caves and Water-droppings, and form the
Crystals of the Rock. Moreover, just before it freezes, Sinks, and other
stinking places smell more strong, by reason that the Spirits and Vapors of the
Earth are complicated with those stinks as they issue forth.

The Fifth said, That the Cause of Thawing is to be attributed to the Heat of
the Earth, which exhaling warm Vapors, first heats the bottom of the Water,
(for which reason Fish retire thither) then they mollify and moisten the
surface of the Water, or the Earth hardened by Cold. Moreover, that Heat which
is found in the deepest Mines where the Laborers work naked, and most
ordinarily in the Water without enduring any Cold; the veins of Sulphur,
Bitumen, Vitriol, and Arsenick, which are found in the entralls of the Earth;
the Hot Springs, and the Volcanoes in its surface, sufficiently argue, That if
there be not a Central Fire, (as the Pythagoreans held) yet there is a great
Heat there, like that of Living Bodies, which concocts Metals, and makes Plants
grow. Hence the changes of Air are first discovered in Mines by the Vapors
arising from beneath, which hinder Respiration, and make the Lamps burn dim, or
go quite out. Whereby it is evident that they are exhaled by the Heat of the
earth, and not attracted by that of the Sun and Stars, which penetrate but a
very little way into the earth. Now as our bodies are inwardly hotter in
Winter; so this heat of the earth being concentred in it self, (as appears by
Springs which smoke in that season, and by the heat of subterraneous places)
raises greater plenty of warm Vapors, which in Winte render the Weather moist
and rainy: but when rain or the coldness of the air stops those pores, then
those Exhalations being shut up, the Air remains cold, and it freezes; which
frost is again dissolved by their eruption. For the natural heat of the Earth,
being constring'd and rendered stronger by the ambient Cold, drives out hotter
and more copious exhalations, which consist either of the rainwater wherewith
it is moistened, or of other humidities; and which arriving at the surface of
the Earth which is frozen, soften it and fill the air with clouds, which always
accompany a Thaw, as Serenity does a Frost.

The Sixth said, That as Hail is nothing but Rain congealed, so Frost is
nothing but Dew condensed by the vehemence of Cold, and in the Water it is
called Ice: which coldness condensing the Water, (which is a diaphanous body,
and consequently has an internal and radical light) is the cause of its
whiteness, which is the beginning of light, as the Stars are the condensed
parts of their Orbs. Unless you had rather ascribe that whiteness to the Air
included in the Ice, which also makes the same swim upon the water. An Evidence
that Cold alone is not the cause of Freezing; (for Cold alone render bodies
more ponderous by condensing their parts, whence Ice should be heavier then
Water) but there is required, besides, some hot and dry exhalation, which
insinuating into the Water, gives it levity.

The Seventh said, That such bodies as are frozen, are so far from receiving
augmentation of parts, that they lose the thinnest of their own; hence a bottle
so close stopped that the air cannot get in to supply the place of the thinner
parts which transspire and perish upon freezing, breaks in pieces for avoiding
of vacuity. And Wine and Fruits lose their taste upon the loss of their spirits,
when they are frozen: which spirits not being able to transpire in Cabbages and
other Viscous Plants digest their crudities, and by that means render the same
Plants more tender.

CONFERENCE CXXVI. Of the Causes of the Small Pox.
THe variety wherewith this Malady afflicts, or that which it causes in the
body, has given it the name of Variolae (Variolles or Vairolles) as its
resemblance to the blisters, and to the manner wherewith the Venereous Disease
invades the Indians (to whom the same is Epidemical, being caused by the
corruption of the air) causes it to be called the Small Pox. These are
efflorescences or pustules appearing upon the body, especially those of
Children by reason of the softness of their skin, with a Fever, pain,
scabbiness, and purulent matter. This malady comprizes three sorts of Diseases;
Namely, Intemperature, in its fever and inflammation; Bad conformation, in the
little Eminencies; and solution of continuity, in the Ulcers. Its precedent
signs are commonly, hoarsness of the voice, pain of the head, inflammation of
the whole face, yawnings, distentions, trembling of the whole body, sneezings,
and stitches. Its concomitant, essential, and pathognomonical signs are,
Deliration, frightful Dreams, pains of the Breast and Throat, difficulty of
Respiration, and a Continual Fever, which is sometimes putrid, sometimes not.
All which signs proceed from the violent ebulition and agitation of the
humors, the conjunct cause of this Malady an effect of the natural heat; which
being irritated by their Malignity, drives them outward to the surface where
they raise those little Tumors; which, if red and less high, make the Meazles;
and when more eminent, the Small Pox: the Pimples whereof at first appear very
small, afterward in time wax red, and grow bigger from day to day till they
become white; then they suppurate and dry, and lastly, falling off commonly
leave marks behind them, not to be got away, because they have consumed the
skin which is never generated anew.

The second said, A common effect must have a common cause. Now the Small Pox
and Meazles (which differ only, in that the former is produced of thinner, and
the latter of thicker blood) are diseases not only common to many; but so few
escape them that a general rule here scarce admits any exceptions. Two Causes
there are, the Material, or the Efficient. The former is the impurity of the
Menstrual blood which serves for nourishing the foetus in the womb; where at
first it attracts the purest and sweetest blood, but when grown bigger the
gross together with the thin. So that as Horses once in their lives cast the
Strangles, so men must also once purge and void that menstrual impurity, which
being equally dispersed over all the body and in small quantity, hinders not
its functions. The efficient Cause, common likewise to all men, is the Natural
Heat, which drives these impurities outward, and so they come to appear upon
the skin, (which is the Universal Emunctory of the whole body) but especially
upon the face by reason of its tenderness, and because being the place where
all the Organs of Sense terminate, it is fuller of spirits then any other, and
consequently there is a greater attraction thither of those malignant Vapors.
Now that it seizes some in their childhood, others in their youth, some very
few in old age, and all after a different manner; this depends upon our
particular Constitutions, either natural or acquisititious by custom, and a
long use of the things not natural. For, according as the humors reign in the
body, they give occasion to the eruption of that Venomous quality which before
lay hid; as Madness and Leprosy sometimes appear not till after diverse years.
Our diet also contributes thereunto; for when it symboliseth with that
malignant humor, it increases the quantity thereof; as on the contrary, it
corrects the same, and retards its motion, if it be of a laudable temper, or
exceed in contrary qualities.

The Third said, What Original Sin is to the state of the Soul, that the Small
Pox seems to be to the state of the Body; for this Disease commonly invades
children, who never committed any fault in their course of living, and whose
nature should be so much healthier by how much it is more vigorous and nearer
the principles of their Nativity; wherefore it seems rather to proceed from the
vitiosity of the Parents. And as many hereditary diseases come from the bad
disposition of the seed; so from the impurity of the blood (the material
principle of our bodies) some may also arise; as Tettars, Kibes, Corns, and
other deformities of the skin, which happen to children, very like this.
Moreover, this disease usually breaks forth in the seventh and ninth, which are
the first climacterical years; when Nature endeavors the perfection of her
work by purging and cleansing it of all impurities. And as New Wine, when it
comes to work, casts forth all the heterogeneous impurities in it is body; so
does the natural heat attempt the like by causing an ebullition of the blood
and spirits: whether this Fermentation happens by the universal spirit of the
world, as those in other natural bodies; or whether (as it is most probable) it
proceeds from the very strength of nature, whose motions, although regular and
certain, are yet unknown to any other besides it self, which produces them
according to the dispositions of the Subject wherein it resides.

The Fourth said, That being our bodies were always formed of the maternal
blood, and indu'd with one and the same natural heat, (which two are held the
material and efficient causes of the Small Pox) this Disease should have been
in all times and places; and yet it was unknown before the Arabians, in whose
time it began to appear. For the little red round pustules, and those other
like flea-bitings, mentioned by Hippocrates, Aetius, and some other Ancients,
are nothing less then the Small Pox; to which not only Women during their
Suppressions, but even brute Beasts, which have also their purgations, (as
among others, the Bitch, the Mare, and the Shee-Ass) ought to be subject. On
the contrary, such as have burning Fevers should be free from it; if it be
true, that the seed and leven of this malady is dissipated by the ebullition of
the blood, which is vehement in a Fever. But it is impossible to conceive, how
a venomous and pernicious matter, (as that impure part of the blood is said to
be) can be preserved for many years in its Mass; for being the blood serves for
continual aliment to all the parts, these ought to resent something of that
malignity; yet those that are taken with this disease are usually the most
healthy, and of a sanguine constitution, which is the most laudable. For this
were to accuse Nature either of Imprudence or Weakness; but she is good, wise,
powerful, and solicitous for nothing so much as to purify the body, which she
does not only while the child is in the Womb, where she wraps it up in two
membranes, which receive the Urine, Sweat, and other Excrements of
sanguification (as the Intestines do the grosser excrements) but as soon as it
is born, she expells its immundicities by blisters, scurfs, scabs, tumors of
the head and other purgations, which Hippocrates says, preserve from diseases,
especially from the falling sickness. Nor can the Malignity of the Air be the
Cause, as Fernelius holds, alleging that the difficulty of respiration,
heaviness of the head, inflammation of the face, and such other concomitant
symptoms, seem to be caused by the viciousness of the air, which infects the
heart, and by that means hurts the other Functions. For then the Small Pox
would be as Epidemical as the Pestilence, or any other contagious maladies, and
seize upon all men indifferently, not excepting such as have once had them.
Wherefore the matter of this disease is a serosity accompanied with the
humors, which make the Pox appear of several colors, sometimes Red, Yellow,
Black, or White, according as the Blood, Choler, Melancholy, or Phlegm flow
thither; Wind or Water only cause bladders or blisters. Nevertheless it must be
confessed that this serosity acquires some particular malignity; as appears by
the deformity caused by the pustules, which not only pit the skin and flesh,
but sometimes even corrode and rot the bones.

The Fifth said, That the Small Pox is a new and hereditary disease, and that
as all other new maladies of these last ages, have always had their causes, but
only wanted fitting dispositions (without which nothing is produced) so the
causes of the Small Pox have always been existent, but the particular
dispositions of bodies not lighting upon the point requisite for its
production, it has not appeared till these late times; whether through the
influence of Heaven, or through the Malignity of the Air, or the intemperance
of men (the most apparent cause of most diseases formerly unknown) or else
through contagion and contact, by which way the great Pox is communicated. For
the Small is likewise contagious, and (which is remarkable) more amongst
Kindred than Strangers; because they, being issued of the same blood, have
greater affinity of dispositions than Strangers.

CONFERENCE CXXVII. Whether we profit best by Precepts or Examples.
AS there is nothing so hard as to judge of the worth of things, so it is the
highest point of prudence to understand the goodness of the means that may
conduce to some end. Precepts and Examples are the two Means to attain Virtue;
it is demanded which is the best and most proper. At first view, Example seems
to have the same advantage over Precept that the Whole has over the Part; for
a Good Example, besides being of its own nature a virtuous action holds the
place of a Moral Rule; but a Precept is only a General Maxim, not necessarily
followed by a particular Action: whence it follows, that Precept regards only
the Understanding, whereto it affords some light; but Example makes impression
upon both Faculties together, the Understanding and the Will, by an order
necessary in civil life, which is regulated by the example of others. Therefore
Great Persons are obliged to good Example, which derives its dignity from that
of the giver. Moreover, Moral Propositions are so reasonable and conformable to
the instinct we have of good, that all the World assents to them as considered
in the General. There is no body but acknowledges, that, what belongs to each
man ought to be rendered to him; that, we ought not to do that to another which
we would not have done to our selves: yet in the circumstances and particular
cases we do not always apply those precepts, because then they appear clogged
with difficulties, to which our passion or interest give birth. Wherefore
Example, beng Particular, is more considerable in Morality, wherein people are
governed more by opinion then reason; but Precept is Universal, and affects the
mind only at a distance, our actions being oftentimes contrary to the secret
dictates of the Understanding. In Example we feel the force and application of
a precept in a particular subject, and know not only that which ought to be
done but how it ought to be done by seeing it practiced. Experience it self
show us, that Doctrine alone is weak and little persuasive, unless it be
animated by the examples of a good life, whose silence is more eloquent than
all precepts. Moreover, we are like those with whom we live, and the maladies
of the body are not so contagious as those of the mind: which notwithstanding
may as well profit by bad examples; as good, the Understanding being able to
turn bad food into good nourishment: And as a brave Action excites good Motions
in us by its beauty, resulting from its conformity to Reason; so a bad Action,
by its deformity and contrariety to Reason, gives us aversion against it, and
an inclination to its opposite. Socrates judged no Lesson so fit to moderate
Anger, as for a Man to behold himself in a glass when he is agitated with that
Passion. Which cannot be said of a bad Precept; for this being a bad seed, can
never produce any fruit but of the same Nature. On the other side, Men are such
Lovers of Pleasures, that Virtue separated from Delight, stumbles them, and
seems too severe: But Precept is a pure Rule of Duty, without any attractive;
whereas Example, which appears to our Eyes, and is an Action clothed with
circumstances, persuades us more sweetly, because we are naturally prone to
Imitation; whence it comes to pass that Comedies are so charming: And Example
is the subject: of Imitation, but Precept cannot be so; for it is general of it
self, and all Moral Actions are singular.

The Second said. That if it be true, as the Stoics say, that Virtue is
nothing else but a Science, then Precepts must be the foundations, as of
Science, so also of Virtute; which indeed being a habit of a reasonable
Faculty, must be more promoted by Precepts, (which are infallible verities, and
supply light to that Power) than Examples which have no force to convince a
strong Mind. They who follow Virtue by Example, and not by Reason, have more of
the Ape than of the Man; and all the power Example has, is only to move the
Will to admire and desire Virtue, but not to teach the way of attaining it, as
Precept does; which, besides being invariable, and always alike to its self, is
more easy to be applied than Example, which puts on a new face, according to
the circumstances of times, places, and persons; there being no Actions, how,
contrary soever, but have Examples to countenance their goodness. Moreover,
they are either of the time past, and so move us not much; or of the present,
in which there are few of Virtue; besides that, they are of less duration than
Precepts, which are eternal. If vicious Examples attract more powerfully to
Vice than vicious Precepts, the same cannot be said of the practice of Virtues;
since these have not all the External Senses of their party, as Vices have.

The Third said, That sensible and palpable things, as examples are, have more
power upon us than bare words, which cannot so well persuade a Truth, but that
they always leave some doubting in us; whereas Examples being sensible, give
us a more entire and perfect Knowledge: yea, they have influence even upon
brute beasts, who learn not by Precepts but by Examples, which is an evidence
of their certainty; for a thing is the more certain, the more common it is to
us with more. Hence Plato affirms, That Examples are necessary to persuade
high and lofty matters. Precepts, indeed, dispose, but Examples animate the
Soul to Virtue; those admonish, these stimulate and guide, as in the resolution
of doing well: Instructions show the way, but Examples drive us with the point
of Honor, and the force of Emulation. Nor do Precepts include Examples, but
the contrary; and every Example comprehends a Document. When we see a Good Man
square his Life out to his Duty, we find I know not what satisfaction and
contentment in the admimiration of his Virtue, and this pleasure makes us
conceive, yea, strongly persuades us, that all Virtues are amiable. Even
Vicious Examples sometimes make Vice appear to us so deformed, that we detest
instead of pursuing it. Hence the Lacedaemonians setting aside the Precepts of
Temperature, were wont to make their Slaves drunk, that the ill-favored
spectacle might make their Children abhor that Vice. Lastly, Our Savior, whose
Life was a continued Example of Virtue, did more Works to teach us, then he
gave Words and Precepts, most of which are comprehended under Examples and
Parables: Yea, the Devil, well knowing that Adam's mind was too strong to be
prevailed upon by Reasons, first gained that of his Wife, which was more weak,
that he might allure him to sin by her Example.

The Fourth said, The end is not only more noble, but also more effectual than
the means; for it is to that alone that they aim and terminate. Now the end of
all Examples, is to deduce Precepts from them; which Precepts, are general
Notions grounded upon many Experiences or Examples, either of others, or our
own; but these being wholly particular, can have no power upon the
Understanding, which frames its conclusions only upon things universally true,
as Maxims and Precepts are, and that more than Examples; for these are never
perfect, but full of a thousand defects, those sure and infallible. Moreover,
Precepts move the Understanding, which is the noblest of all the Faculties;
whereas Examples make impression only upon the outward senses and dull wits.

The Fifth said, That as the Sight and the Hearing know how to put a difference
between Colors and Sounds, without Learning; and all the Faculties can
naturally discern their own Objects: So the Understanding knows naturally the
first Principles, and clearly beholds those first Verities: The Will has also
in it self the Principles and Seeds of Virtues, (as the Synteresis, and remorse
of Conscience in the most wicked, sufficiently prove) and is of it self carried
to Virtuous Actions, without needing either Preecepts or Examples, equally
unprofitable to the bad, who amend not thereby; and to the good, who want them
not.

The Sixth said, That the Question is to be decided by distinguishing of the
Minds of Men. Those that excel in Judgment attribute more to Reason than to
Examples, which being more sensible, affect the Imagination of duller heads,
who are not capable of Reasons. So that though Precepts and Arguments be
without comparison more perfect than Examples; yet because very few are capable
of them, (because the generality of the World is stupid and dull) therefore
they are not generally so proper to teach as Examples; which nevertheless being
of no power, but serving only to clear an obscure Truth, ought not to have any
ascendant over a Mind that is reasonable and furnished with Knowledge.

CONFERENCE CXXVIII. Of Incubi and Succubae; and whether Devils can generate.
TWo sorts of people err in this matter; the superstitious, and ignorant
vulgar, who attribute every thing to Miracles, and account the same done either
by Saints or Devils; and the Atheists and Libertines, who believe neither the
one nor the other. Physicians take the middle way, distinguishing what is fit
to be attributed to Nature, and her ordinary motions, from what is
supernatural; to which last Head, it is not reasonable to referr diseases and
indispositions, as the Incubus is, called by the Greeks, Ephialtes, and by the
vulgar, the Nightmare. It Is defined, An impediment of Respiration, Speech, and
Motion, with oppression of the Body, whereby we feel in our sleep as 'twere
some weight upon the Stomach. The Cause of it is a gross Vapor, obstructing
principally the hinder part of the Brain, and hindering the egress of the Animal
Spirits destinated to the motion of the parts; which Vapor is more easily
dissipable than the humor which causes the Lethargy, Apoplexy, and other
Symptoms, which are therefore of longer duration than this, which ceases as
soon as the said Vapor is dissipated. Now whereas the Passions of the Mind and
Body commonly supply the matter of Dreams; (as those that are hungry or
amorous, will think they eat or see what, they love; those that have pain in
some part, dream that some body hurts the same) hence when Respiration, (the
most necessary of all the animal functions) is impeded, we presently imagine we
have a load lying on our Breasts, and hindering the dilatation of the same. And
because the Brain is employed in the Incubus therefore all the animal functions
are hurt; the Imagination depraved, the Sensation obtunded, Motion impeded.
Hence those whom this evil seizes, endeavor to awake, but can neither move nor
speak, till after a good while. And though the Cause of this disorder be within
our selves, nevertheless the distempered person believes that some body is
going about to strangle him by outward violence, which the depraved Imagination
rather thinks upon than Internal Causes; that being more sensible and common.
This has given occasion to the error of the Vulgar, who charge these Effects
upon Evil Spirits, instead of imputing them to the Malignity of a Vapor, or
some phlegmatic and gross humor oppressing the Stomach; the coldness and
weakness whereof, arising from want of Spirits and Heat, which keeps all the
parts in due order, are the most manifest Causes. Much unlikely it is to be
caused by Generation, which being an Effect of the Natural Faculty, as this of
the Vegetative Soul, cannot belong to the Devil, who is a pure Spirit.

The Second said, As it is too gross to recurr to supernatural Causes, when
Natural are evident; so it is too sensual to seek the Reason of every thing in
Nature, and to ascribe to mere Phlegm and the distempered Phant'sie, the
Coitions of Demons with Men; which we cannot deny without giving the lie to
infinite of persons of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, to whom the same have
happened; nor without accusing the Sentences of Judicial Courts which have
condemned them. For to omit the Births of Hercules, Aemas, Alexander, Servius
Tullus, and many other Heroes begotten by the false gods of Antiquity, who were
no other than Devils, as were also the Fauni, Satyrs, and the chief of them
Pan, the prime of the Incubi, called by the Hebrews Haza, as the chief of the
Succubae was termed Libith: And to say nothing of the Giants mentioned in
Genesis, who according to some Fathers were begotten by Angels; England has
had its Merlin a great Magician* begotten by an Incubus; Poitou, Counts
begotten of a Succuba, half Woman and half Serpent, called Mellusine; Poland,
Princes of the Race of the Jagelloes, issued from another in form of a Bear;
Hungary, entire Nations called Huns, born of the Arlunes, Gothic Witches, and
Fauni. Even at this day, in the Island Hispaniola, by the Relation of Chieza,
in his History of Peru, a Demon, called by the Inhabitants Corocota, has to
do with the Women, and the Children proceeding from such Conjunction have
horns; as also among the Turks, those people whom they call Nephesolians, are
believed to be generated by the operation of Demons; whether they borrow some
humane seed which they transport almost in an instant, and so preserve its
Spirits from evaporation; or whether it be by their proper Virtue; since
whatever is naturally producible, as seed is, may be produced by Devils. For in
the order of things natural, the superior and more noble contain eminently, and
in a more perfect, degree, the powers of the inferior and less perfect. Yea,
though they were not able to make true seed, it follows not that they cannot
produce a perfect Creature; for Nature, of which the Devils have complete
Knowledge, may have diverse ways to compass the same end. But as the Devil
performs the natural actions of Animals by means supernatural; as he sees
without Eyes, moves Bodies without Contact, transports himself from one place
to another, without commensuration of the intermediate space, because he has
no quantity; so he may make a perfect Animal without observing the conditions
of ordinary Agents. Moreover, Nature her self shows us strange transformations,
as of a Woman's hair buried in a dunghill into Serpents; and of leaves falling
into the water, into Ducks; wherefore there is no doubt, but he who has
perfect Knowledge of all these secrets, can by Application of Agents to
Patients produce perfect Animals.

The Third said, That the Devil being a Spirit of uncleanness delights not only
to combat the Purity of Mankind by his illusions, but will have a hand in the
sin too. When he has to do with a Woman, he is called Incubus; when with a
Man, Succuba. As for this latter, it is certain it cannot generate in its self,
for want of place fit to receive the Seed and to reduce it from power into act,
as also of Blood wherewith to nourish the Foetus during nine months. It Is
harder to resolve, whether an Incubus can generate in another. All agree that
the Devil by Gods permission (without which he can do nothing) has power to
move all Bodies from one place to another; and can by that means form a Body of
Air, or some other gross matter; or for want thereof, take a Body lately dead,
animate it with an adventitious heat, and give such motions as he pleases to
all its parts. But because Generation requires three things; Distinction of
Sex, Copulation of Male and Female, and emission of some prolifick matter
containing in its self a virtue to form all the parts from whence it issued;
the Devil may indeed make the two first conditions meet, but never the latter,
namely a fit and convenient seed, endued with spirits and vital heat, without
which it is unfruitful and barren. For he has no such seed of his own, because
it is the result of the last concoction, which cannot be made but in a body
actually alive, as that which he has is supposed not to be; nor can he borrow
such seed elsewhere, because it becomes unfruitful when once shed out of the
Vessels of Nature by reason of the evaporation of its spirits.

The Fourth said, There is nothing supernatural in the Incubus; for it is only a
symptom of the Animal Faculty accompanied with three circumstances, namely,
Respiration hindered, Motion hurt, and a fancy depraved. The first proceeds
from a phlegmatic, raw, and cold matter, which coming to lie heavy in the
bottom of the Stomach, pulls down the Diaphragm (whereto the Ventricle is
annexed by its upper part) which being laden and wanting its free Motion;
Respiration, whereof it is the principal Organ, is consequently hindered. As
also it is by gross fumes elevated from the Hypochondres and Mesaraical Veins;
(which being the first ways of Food, abound with impurities and gross vapors)
which coming to the hinder part of the Brain, obstruct the commerce of the
Spirits, dedicated to the motion of all the parts; but particularly that of the
Diaphragm, by obstructing the two couple of Nerves which issue out of the
fourth and fifth Vertebrae, and communicate motion to it; just as, in sleep,
Sensation is stopped by more tenuious vapors possessing the forepart of the
Brain, which is more soft. Hence such as sleep upon the back part of head are
more subject to this Disease then those that sleep on one side. Lastly, the
voluptuous fancy, which accompanies this accident, though very rarely,
proceeds either from the abundance, or quality of the Seed; which sending its
Species into the fancy, this Faculty frames to its self a delightful object
and stirs up the Motive Power, as this does the Expulsive Faculty of the
Spermatick Vessels, which discharge that excrementitious matter, whilst the
lascivious Imagination fancies to it self the conjunction of unclean Spirits.

CONFERENCE CXXIX. Which Animal is happiest, according to Nature.
WHereas a man cannot so well speak of others as of himself, it were to be
wished that every thing, which is naturally capable of felicity, came hither to
give its suffrage. I believe the Birds would not be the last to testify to us
by their singing and agreeable warbling, the most certain indication of joy and
contentment; as cries are of the contrary, grief and sadness. Indeed, if there
be any pleasure in the World, I think Birds have it; for they go not only to
seek their food in the bottom of the water, as Waterfowl do (to whom that
Element is common with Fishes); they have not only the same share in the
benefits of the land with four-footed Animals, and both together with
amphibious creatures; but moreover they fly in the Air, approaching Heaven
nearer then we can, and cleaving that Element with an innocent pleasure not to
be understood but by the action it self; whence Angels are painted with wings.
And as of all Animals the most imperfect and least capable of felicity are the
Reptile, such as Earthworms, little differing from this very Element; so those
are the happiest which remove themselves furthest from it, as Birds do. Amongst
which I shall leave it to the Voluptuous to say, whether it be the Cock, the
Sparrow, or the amorous Dove; those that love Music, to determine whether it is
the Nightingal, and to those that esteem the sight the most ravishing of all
the Senses, whether it be the Eagle, whose eye discovers the remotest objects
and turns not aside even from the beams of the Sun.

The Second said, That since nothing is entirely happy in the World, the
Question should rather be put, Which is the least unhappy of all Animals. Man,
the only competent judge, acknowledges it is not himself, for he seems to be the
Butt of all the miseries in the World; of which also he is so much more
sensible then Beasts by how much he has a mind more qualified to apprehend and
resent them. For whereas they say, he alone is capable of felicity; it is true
indeed in reference to the future not the present life, no age whereof is
capable of relishing an entire contentment: and if one drop of Gall mingled
with a good quantity of Milk denominates the same bitter, certainly we cannot
term man's life pleasant whilst it has abundantly more pain then delight. He
comes into the World weeping, and naked without any Arms or defense; wherein he
is more unhappy then Beasts whom nature has guarded with covertures against
the injuries of the air. His first Childhood is not yet capable of any sort of
pleasure. Adolescence would taste thereof indeed, but is denied liberty by its
Pedagogues. Youth precipitates it self into more kind of evils then it tastes
of good: besides that, it sees most pleasures forbidden by Divines, Physicians,
and Civilians, who seem to have endeavored to take from us all contentment in
this World; which if old age makes us the less loath to part with, yet there is
no so great resignation of spirit but is thwarted by temptations of the flesh,
nor security so carnal but is startled with the records of conscience.
Moreover, the true mark of felicity being the satisfaction and contentment of
him that possesses it, no person can be happy in this world since none is
contented. For man being designed to a more perfect life then this, naturally
desires the Supreme Good, and all that is below it displeases him, as incapable
to satisfy him; and because he cannot find it here, therefore neither can he
find contentment, which consists in satisfying the Appetite. Beasts, on the
contrary, having no other knowledge but that of Sensual and Delectable Good,
desire no other, but are fully satisfied and contented therewith, and
consequently more happy in this World then men.

The Third said, If Felicity consist in action, that Animal must be most happy
which acts most perfectly. So does man, whether you consider him as to the Body
or the Soul. For to say nothing of the divine functions of his Understanding
and Will; the sole structure of his Body, which was made erect that he might
behold Heaven (whereof he is capable) and which alone is indu'd with beauty,
one of the effects of Health, sufficiently proves it: For though some Animals
possibly surpass him in some one sense, yet he alone excells equally in all,
and knows the differences of colors, sounds, odours, sapours, and tactile
qualities, in the participation of which he finds pleasure whereof beasts are
incapable.

The Fourth said, That to believe Man can be happy here, is to contradict the
opinion of all the Sages of Antiquity, who have acknowledged Man the weakest
and pitifullest of all Creatures; and the Scripture it self, which terms his
life full of sorrows, and this World his banishment. And indeed if we place
Felicity in the knowledge of possessing it, Misery must also consist in the
knowledge or opinion we have of being miserable; of which reflection Man alone
being capable, he must be also more too of unhappiness then felicity; and the
more, inasmuch as there are more things that can afflict then content him; some
always bringing present inconvenience with them, others leaving somewhat to be
desired after them, and never satiating our Appetite. For the Reasonable Soul,
which is held the subject of Man's happiness, is the principal obstacle to
attaining it: since having for its object a more perfect and absolute Good then
it can possess in this life, it cannot establish a true Felicity (which of its
own nature must be as lasting as the Existence of him who enjoys it) upon
things acknowledged frail and perishing, as Natural and Sensible goods are;
which being suitable to the duration and appetite of other Animals, their
enjoyment thereof fills them with perfect happiness. But amongst these, Fishes
seem to me most happy; whether you measure their happiness by the largeness of
their habitation which is the vast Ocean, of far greater extent then the Earth,
from which being more severed then Birds, who are forced to descend thither for
their food and rest, they are also less subject to the ambushes of men, and in
this regard more happy; or whether you consider corporal health (the foundation
of all felicity) of which Fishes are so well provided that it has occasioned
the Proverb, As sound as a Fish; or lastly, whether you place felicity in the
privation of pain, which resides chiefly in the sense of Touching; which being
more dull in them then in other Animals, they are also less sensible of
inconveniences; and for this reason were made mute by nature which has given a
voice to Animals chiefly to testify thereby the grief which they resent.

The Fifth said, If there be so great a number of opinions wherein the felicity
of one single Animal, Man, consists; there may justly be great variety of
judgments, concerning which is the happiest of all Animals. To determine which,
we must imitate Painters, who before they couch their Colors propose a perfect
Idea of their work; which the nearer it approaches, the more excellent it is
reputed. In like manner, we must first form an Idea of this felicity, and then
see which Animal comes nearest it; whether the Servant or the Master, the brute
Beast or Man; whose mind, whereby he infinitely surpasses all the rest of the
Creatures, seems to be ingenious to its own loss; not employing it self, but to
find out reasons to prove him unhappy: since in favor of other Animals we lay
aside that ambition which is so natural to us, and are willing to yield to the
vilest of them, what we would dispute with the most perfect of men. Now that
which makes most people mistaken in their judgment, is, that being no person
injoys an entire felicity, they imagine that all happiness lies in that thing
which is wanting, and so esteem him alone happy that possesses it. Thus a poor
spirit persuaded that all happiness consists in strength and courage, will say
that the Lion is the happiest of all Animals, since his courage gives him
empire over all those of his condition. The sick person accounting health (the
most desirable of all goods, prefers Beasts before Man, whom his exact tempers
renders more obnoxious to external causes which produce diseases. On the other
side, if Animals are happy, it is as Fools are, whose minds are quiet, by reason
of their ignorance and insensibility. But as it is better to be sensible then
insensible even upon the condition of enduring pain sometimes; so it is more
happy to have a rational mind, though it causes troubles to us sometimes, then
to have none. Moreover we cannot avoid the strokes of fortune, otherwise then
those of Thunder, namely by being very high or very low; but it is better to be
above tempests then below them, and to be incapable of them by reason as a wise
man, then by stupidity as a beast.

CONFERENCE CXXX. Whether is better, that Men have many Wives, or Women many
Husbands.
THough plurality of Wives or Husbands be disallowed by the Christian Law, yet
not being contrary to the Law of Nations (for many admit it), nor of nature
(during which it was in use); we may be permitted to doubt whether, supposing
Polygamy, it were better one Husband should have many Wives, or one Wife many
Husbands. There are examples of both. Plurality of Wives was practiced by
Lamech, who first had two; by Abraham, Jacob, and the Patriarchs, for
multiplying of their Lineage; afterward by David and Solomon who had 700 Wives
and 300 Concubins; and at present it is in use among the Turks who are permitted
to have as many Wives as they can keep. As for plurality of Husbands, though it
be not now in use, yet it was sometimes amongst the Amazons who made use of Men
only as Stallions; as also amongst the Medes and Persians, where it was a shame
for a Woman to have less then five Husbands. And by the report of Caesar in his
Commentaries, the Women of great Britain had no less then ten or twelve
Husbands a piece. Nevertheless this plurality of Husbands is something against
the Law of Nature, according to which the Male as the most perfect is the head
and master of the Woman: and as it is a monstrous thing for a body to have many
heads, so it is for a Woman to have many Husbands; besides that they hinder
production of Children; (for we see public Women are barren) and on the
contrary, plurality of Wives is the cause of much issue. Wherefore it is more
expedient in a State, whose chief strength consists in the number of men, that
one Husband have many Wives, then one Wife many Husbands.

The second said, Though men, abusing the power and authority of Laws to their
own advantage, have oftener married more Wives then they have permitted them to
have more Husbands; yet the women have as much reason of complaint in this
point, as in any other established to their prejudice, without their being
heard or summoned. Their vehement and irregular appetite after man (of which
the irregular motions of that Animal in Animali are most certain evidences)
seems to conclude in their favor. For Woman alone of all Animals desires the
Male at all times, even after conception; She, the Fire, the Sea, and Death,
never say it is enough; as the matter has a continual appetite of Forms, so
has she of the Male: which desire being natural, ought to be satisfied;
otherwise it were in vain: but nothing is so in Nature, and therefore she ought
to be permitted more Husbands; since one alone is more apt to irritate then
satiate her. She is able and has wherewith to satisfy them; but if one man
cannot suffice one woman, how can he acquit himself toward a dozen; Especially
in this age, wherein, no doubt, women would appeal from the constitution of
Solon, who would have men live with their wives only thrice a month; as well
as from that foolish custom of Cato, who never visited his but when it rained.
Lycurgus was much better advised, when he permitted old or otherwise impotent
persons to choose out the handsomest young men to lie with their wives. This
Sage Legislator well judging that they would of themselves take this liberty;
and therefore 'twas better to grant it them, that so they might be quit of the
vice and blame attending this action when prohibited.

The Third said, That the decision of this Question (the very report of which
sometimes put the Roman Dames into an aproar) being of very great consequence
to both parties, it is requisite to observe so much equity therein, that the
Women have no ground of exception; though, to speak truth, I know not which
would be most to their advantage, whether to have more Husbands (who would be
so many Masters and Tyrants) or to share with other Women the Caresses of one
alone; the first being contrary to their haughty humor. and the second to
their jealousy. Besides, the plurality of Husbands would hinder not only the
propagation, but also the education of Children; for none would take care of
the Children which were not his own; and though they were, he would not believe
they belonged to him. It would be impossible for a Father to know his own
Child; the term of Childbearing being no more certain testimony, then the
resemblance of Physiognomy. Moreover, whether the Wife were hated or loved by
her Husbands, she would be displeased to see all her Rivals in bad
intelligence, or the effects of their common hatred: However, being unable to
please all, by reason of the diversity of their humors, she could not avoid
the disgust of some of them. As for that impure pleasure, it is too shameful to
be brought into the account; besides that the frequency of it would take away
its sweetness; no pleasures of life being such, but upon the score of their
rarity.

The Fourth said, They that fear the multitude of Husbands would hinder
conception, and consequently generation, by the confusion of several Seeds,
know not how either is effected; since Physicians affirm with Hippocrates, That
the Womb no sooner receives the fruitful Seed, but it shuts it self up to
embrace the same straightly (as the Stomach does the Meat) and that so exactly as
not to admit a needles point; so that it cannot open again to receive new Seed
in a second Coition. And though superfoetation happen sometimes, yet it is very
rare, and is incident to a Woman that lies with the same Man several times, as
well as to one that lies with many. The other Inconvenience, of the incertainty
of Issues, and consequently of Successions, is as little considerable; for Man
being not born for himself, but for the State whereof he is a Member; and
Children less belonging to their Parents then to the Commonwealth, whereof they
are the Nursery; 'twere more expedient that they were bred and instructed like
those brave Lacedaemonians, at the public charge, than of their Parents, whose
tenderness and too great indulgence is oft-times the cause of their evil
education. Moreover, this was the design of that Divine Commonwealth of Plato,
who would have not only other Goods, but Wives and Children also common; that
so those ungrateful words of Mine and Thine, which are the cause of all
Mischiefs, might be taken away. For by this means that importunate solicitude
of Appropriation and Jealousy, which oftentimes afflicts both parties, would
be no longer any thing but a phantasm: Women would find their satisfaction in
the plurality of Husbands; these, how many soever to one woman, having always
enough and more then they needed; and the woman being cunning enough to divide
her favors so that all her Husbands might be contented; who, besides dividing
the burden of domestic cares, would have an easier task by having the more
Associates. But especially 'twould be much for the woman's interest; for if she
be beloved by all her Husbands, 'twill be unspeakable happiness to her; if
hated by any, the caresses of some will make her amends for the bad usage of
others: whereas finding no remedy in that Gordian knot which ties her to one
person, she abandons her self to despair: insomuch that in the time of Spurius
Carvilius, seventy women accused one another to the Senate of having poisoned
their Husbands. But if she be constrained to share the caresses of one Husband
with a douzen rivals, there will be nothing but perpetual feuds, envies, and
jealousies. Witness Leah and Rachel; who, though holy women, yet daily
contested for the possession of their common Husband Jacob. And the Scripture
observes that Leah, who was blear-eyed, was constrained to purchase of the fair
Rachel with mandrakes the liberty of lying one night with Jacob.

The 5th said, That seeing a Woman is a hagger'd and indocible animal,
(Experience showing us, that one single man is not capable to reduce her to
reason) 'twere more expedient to allow her many Husbands; the reverence and aw
of whom (and in defect thereof, their force) might tame her pride and
insolence; which is risen to the highest pitch, since the time that Justinian's
Wife got the Law of Divorce repealed, which ever before had been a Bridle upon
them.

CONFERENCE CXXXI. Of the manner of Accretion.
MOtion, which is the mutation from one state to another, is either simple or
compound: Simple is either of Quality, and is termed Alteration; or of Place,
and is called Lation or Motion Local Compound is either to Substance, and is
named Generation, which includes alteration and formation; or to a greater
Quantity, which comprehends Local Motion with Accretion or Augmentation, which
cannot be made unless the parts extended change place. This Accretion is an
effect of one of the Faculties subservient to the Vegetative or Natural, which
are three, the Generative, the Auctive or Accretive and the Nutritive;
according to the three operations observed in living bodies which have parts
generated, nourishing, and increasing; for a thing must be generated before it
can grow and acquire the perfection wherein it is maintained by Nutrition. The
Generative Faculty, which is compounded of the Alterative and Formative,
regards the foetus in the womb. The Auctive governs it from its birth till the
twentieth or one and twentieth year, which is the term of Accretion. The
Nutritive continues all the time of life, which cannot subsist without
nourishment; because this repairs the continual dissipation of our substance
caused by the action of heat upon humidity; in which action, Life it self
consists. Now though the body may be nourisht without growing, yet it cannot
grow unless it be nourisht. For Accretion being an Extension of the parts in
length and breadth, new substance must be supplied to fill up the place of that
which is extended: otherwise, a living body should grow no more then a bladder
does when it is blown, or a piece of leather when it is stretched; in the
former, what is gotten in capacity, is lost in thickness; and in the latter,
what is gotten in length is impaired in breadth: so that the augmentation of
parts would be rather imaginary than real, without supply of new matter to
succeed that which is equally extended in all its dimensions: amongst which,
nevertheless that of stature, and of the solid parts, (as the bones) is called
Growth, and not that which is made in thickness and the fleshy parts, which are
enlarged manytimes after the time of full growth.

The second said, That all things being finite, must have bounds of magnitude
suitable to the use whereunto they are appointed; which bounds are not
determinate in inanimate bodies, as Stones, Metals, Hair, and Nails; whose
accretion being made by the bare apposition of matter, they are augmented
continually, so long as there is accession of new matter to the former. But in
living bodies the same are regular; for the accretion of these being internal,
and the work of the soul, continues till the body has attained the proportion
and stature requisite to its functions. To compass which, Nature employs Heat
as the Efficient Cause, and Humidity as the Material. Hence children grow most
in their infancy, because they are then most moist; and men to a larger size
then women, because they have more heat. Young men indeed have a more pungent
and vigorous heat then Children, but these are better stored; (as being nearer
the principles of their generation); and though it be not so active, yet it is
more proper for the growth of the solid parts, which being desiccated by a
violent heat are not so extensible as when they are full of a fat and unctuous
humidity. But as for the manner of Accretion, it is almost the same with that of
Nutrition: The Aliment having been prepared in the Stomach and Liver, and by
this latter transmitted by the veins into all the parts of the body, the purer
particles of it, sweat through the coats of the Vessels, and fall like a gentle
dew upon the parts, which first imbibe, then agglutinate, and lastly,
assimilate the same. So that Nutrition is nothing but Assimilation of the
substance of the food to that of the living body; and as Aliments nourish by
resemblance of their Substance, and by virtue of their Form, so they cause
augmentation by their Quantity, and Matter, which arriving at the solid parts,
as the Bones, Cartilages, and Ligaments, causes the same to extend and grow in
all dimensions; but especially in height, by reason that it is proper to Heat to
drive Humidity upwards. And as when the Nutrition is equal to the Dissipation,
the body is only nourisht (as in the Age of Consistence) so when the Income of
matter is greater than the Expense, the surplusage meeting with a due heat
causes augmentation; if it be less, there follows wasting or diminution, as is
seen Old Age.

The Third said, As Animals are indu'd with a nobler degree of life than
Plants, so they vegetate after a more sublime manner, and not only by bare heat
and moisture. For amongst Animals, the Elephant a melancholy, and consequently,
cold and dry beast, is yet the greatest of the field; the Crocodile, though
cold, grows all its life; and some Serpents have by long age attained to the
length of sixty foot. So amongst Trees, Oaks, though the dryest, are the
largest. Of Bones, the Malleus, Incus, and Stapes in the Ear, which serve to
reproduce sounds, grow not at all, though they be full of mucosity and
humidity: on the contrary, the Teeth, the dryest of all parts (as is manifested
by their rotting last) yet grow all the life long. But if Heat and Moisture
were the causes of Accretion, then the Sanguine, who are hot and moist, should
be of the largest size, as they are not, but commonly grow as well as the
Phlegmatic more in thickness than height, augmenting their flesh and fat more
then their solid parts. On the contrary, the tallest men are commonly cold,
dry, and lean, the lowest, generally hotter; and people grow upon recovery
after fevers which dry the body. Wherefore it is more probable that the Growth
of Animals is an effect of the Spirits, which insinuating into the Vessels
extend the same, and withal the membranes, muscles, and other parts
encompassing them proportionably.

The Fourth said, That the Spirits are indeed the Soul's Organs and Instruments
whereby she performs her functions; but being of so volatile and fluid a
nature, as not to be reckoned in the number of the parts of Man's Body, they
cannot of themselves cause Accretion, which requires Apposition of new matter,
which insinuates it self equally into all the parts just as the nourishment
does; both without penetration of dimensions, or admission of vacuity. This
matter must be humid, because, of all Bodies; the moist are most pliant and
extensible: Whence the Sea by reason of its humidity, produces Monsters of
strange bulk. Yet this humidity, as well as the heat must be in due degree; for
a great heat consumes instead of increasing; whence the Males of Birds of prey
are lesser than the Females, because they are hotter; but if it be too weak,
then the moisture, instead of ascending, falls downward by its proper gravity;
which is the cause that Women, who have less heat, are also of lesser stature
than Men, and larger downwards as Men are upwards. According to the various
marriage of this heat with moisture, bodies grow variously; some more slowly;
others, more speedily; some are little and dwarfish; others, Giants; according
to the defect or abundance of the matter serving to their first Formation. But
as for the rest of Mankind, Wise Nature has set her self such bounds as she
has judged convenient, beyond which the most part grow not; which are between
six and seven foot: Not the Accretive Faculty is then lost or corrupted, (for
it is that power of the Soul, and consequently, incorruptible and inseparable,
from her) but it cannot act longer for want of fitting dispositions, to wit,
the softness and moistness of the solid parts. As a Mule has a Sensitive Soul,
but not the virtue of generating, which is one of the Faculties of that Soul;
and a Lodestone rubbed with Garlic, has still the virtue of attracting Iron,
but cannot employ the same, by reason that its Pores are stopped, no more then
the Eye can see in a Suffusion.

CONFERENCE CXXXII. Whether the Dinner or Supper ought to be largest.
DIet, or the Regiment of Living, (which is the first and most general part of
Physic, because it concerns both the healthy and the sick) consists in
regulating the quantity and quality of Aliments, and the order and time wherein
they are to be taken. The Quantity must be proportional to the nature of the
Person, so that his strength may be repaired and not oppressed thereby. As for
the Quality, they must be of good juice, and as pleasing and agreeable as may
be. The Order of taking them is to be this; such as are moist, soft, laxative,
and of soonest Digestion or Corruption, must precede such as are dry, hard,
astringent, and of more difficult Concoction. The Time, in general, ought to be
so regulated that the interval of Meals be sufficient for digesting the
nourishment last foregoing. The Custom of most Nations has made two, Dinner,
and Supper; Breakfast, and Afternoon-collations, being but Diminutives, or
parts of them two, and the overplus of notorious excesses. Now if we compare
Dinner and Supper together, it seems requisite that the latter be more
plentiful, because the Time ensuing, it is most proper for Digestion, in regard
of the intro-recession of the natural heat during sleep, which becoming by that
means more united and vigorous, performs the natural functions, to wit,
Concoction, Distribution, Apposition, and Assimilation, more perfectly then
after Dinner, when it is diverted otherwise, to the Senses and Operations both
of Body and Mind: Besides that, the coldness and darkness of the night,
contributes not a little to the same effect upon the account of Antiperistasis.
Unless we had rather, with some, establish a new power of the Soul, governing
and disposing the Spirits according to necessity; sometimes giving them the
bridle, and causing them to move outward, as in Anger, Shame, and Indignation;
sometimes summoning them inwards, as in Fear, Sadness, and Sleep, which for
this reason renders the Countenance pale, and all the extreme parts cold;
whereas in the time of waking, the external parts being hotter, leave the
Internal more cold.

The Second said, That he agreed with the Church, which enjoynes Fasting in the
Evening but allows Dinners; which it does not without mature consideration,
drawn as well from Nature as from Grace. For it thereby designs the eschewing
those Illusions and Temptations attending good Cheer taken before going to bed;
and conceives, a light Supper fittest for meditation and serenity of Mind. The
reparation of our dissipated Spirits by Food, causes the same disorder in the
Body that happens in a Town or Village upon the entrance of strangers to people
it, after its desolation by some accident; and therefore it is better that this
trouble arrive in the day, when our waking senses are able to secure themselves
from the Commotions caused by this change, than in the night, whose darkness
helps to multiply the Phantasms which are in the Imagination, pestered with the
vapors and gross fumes of Meats, the Digestion whereof is then but begun.
Whereas in the day time, such vapors transpire more freely by the Pores which
are opened by the heat of the Sun, and by the Exercises which are used in the
Afternoon. Besides, Meats being only to fill emptiness, the time of the
greatest inanition is the fittest for repletion; which certainly Noon must be,
after the Evacuations of the foregoing Night and Morning.

The Third said, There are four manners of taking Repasts: First, Some eat
often, and very much at each time; so did the Athletae of old, and so do those
Gourmandizers who are always hungry, and whose Stomachs have been found after
their death of unusual capacity: This way is altogether opposite to Health.
Secondly, Some eat little and seldom: which course befits acute Diseases; those
that are judged the fourth day, requiring sometimes a total abstinence, in case
the Patient's strength can bear it; those that reach to the seventh or
fourteenth, very little Food and seldom. Thirdly, Such as must eat little but
often; as little Children and Old people, whose heat being weak and easily
dissipated, they must be often nourished; but by a little at a time, for fear
of overcharging their too weak Stomachs. The last and commonest way, is, to eat
plentifully but seldom, which is the manner of middle-ag'd people, who usually
eat twice a day, and more at one Meal than at the other: it being hard for a
Man to satiate himself both at Dinner and Supper without indammaging his
Health. Which made Plato wonder when he heard that the Sicilians filled
themselves with Meat twice a day, and obliged the Romans to make a light repast
about Noon, and a splendid Supper; which I am for. Upon this account the Church
has, to macerate us, forbidden Suppers on Fasting days; which is an Argument
that they are more agreeable and more conducing to Health than Dinners. For
such quantity of Food is to be taken as answers to the natural heat; which
being not only more vigorous, but also of longer duration between Supper and
Dinner, than between Dinner and Supper, (the interval whereof is seldom above
six or seven hours, whereas that between Supper and Dinner is about seventeen)
it is more reasonable to sup more largely than dine. For if the Dinner be
largest, we shall eat either as much as the heat is able to digest by
Supper-time, or more. If we eat more, and go to Supper before the digestion of
the Dinner is wholly finished, we shall beget crudities, which are the seed of
most diseases. If we eat as much as the heat can digest, and the Supper be less
then the Dinner; then the heat which follows the Supper being stronger and more
active, will soon concoct the meat taken at Supper; and (because it is a natural
agent, not acting from a principle of liberty but of necessity, and cannot
remain idle) having no extraventitious matter to work upon, it will necessarily
consume the laudable juices of the body, drying up the same during sleep. For
whereas sleep is said to moisten, whence arose the Proverb, Qui dort mange; He
that sleeps, eats; it is true, when the stomach and entrals being filled with
sufficient nourishment, the Heat raises and disperses to all the parts the
purest of the juices and vapors like gentle dews; which it cannot do when the
Stomach is empty.

The fourth said, Nature having given us an Appetite to advertise us of the
need of all parts, there is no certainer rule of the time of Repast than this
Appetite, which for this reason is seated in the upper Orifice of the Stomach,
rendered sensible by the Nerves of the sixth Pair terminating therein. For
there is a continual dissipation of our substance in all the parts, which being
exhausted attract from their neighbors wherewith to fill their own emptiness:
these solicit the Liver, for supply; that, the Guts by the Mesaraick Veins:
these the Stomach, at the top whereof this suction terminates, the sense or
perception whereof is called Appetite; which, if of hot and dry, is called
Hunger; if of cold and moist, Thirst. So that Nutrition being only to recruit
and repair the loss of our Substance, there is no more assured sign of the
fitting time to eat, then when the said Appetite is most eager, at what hour
soever it be.

The fifth said, That this might have place in well tempered bodies which
desire only so much as they are able to digest, but not in those whose
Appetite is greater than their Digestion, as cold and melancholy Stomachs; or
who desire less, as the hot and bilious, whose heat melting the juices, abates
the Appetite; as on the contrary, Coldness contracting the membranes of the
Stomach, augments it: So that it is most expedient for every one to consult his
own Temper, Age, Nature, and Custom of living; Old people, little Children,
such as are subject to Defluxions, or have weak Stomachs, must sup sparingly;
on the other side, the Choleric, and such as are subject to the Headache, must
eat a larger Supper than Dinner: But above all, the Custom of every particular
person is most considerable herein.

CONFERENCE CXXIII. Which of the Humane Passions is most excusable.
MAn being composed of two Pieces, Body and Soul, and upon that account styled
by Trismegistus, The Horizon of the Universe, because he unites in himself the
spiritual nature with the Corporeal, the Inclinations whereof are different; he
has also need of two guides to conduct those two Parts (the Rational and the
Animal) and make them know the Good toward which they are carried of their own
Nature. The Intellect makes him see the Honest and Spiritual Good; the
Imagination enables him to conceive a sensible and corporeal Good. And as the
Rational Appetite (which is the Will) follows the light afforded to it by the
Intellect in pursuit of Honest Good, whence Virtue arises; so the sensitive
Appetite is carried to the enjoyment of sensible Good which the Imagination
makes it conceive as profitable and pleasant, and that by motions commonly so
disorderly and violent that they make impression not only upon the Mind, but
upon the Body, whose Economy they discompose; and for this reason they are
called Passions or Perturbations, and Affections of the Mind. These Passions
either are carried toward Good and Evil simply, as Love and Hatred; the first
inclining us to Good which is the Parent of Beauty, the latter averting us from
Evil: or else they consider both Good and Evil Absent, as Desire and Flight: or
Lastly, they consider them being present, and cause Pleasure and Grief; which,
if of longer duration, produce Joy and Sadness. Now because difficulties
frequently occurr in the pursuit of Cood and flight of Evil, therefore Nature
not contented to have indu'd Animals with a Concupiscible Appetite, which by
means of the six abovementioned Passions might be carried toward Good, and
avoid Evil; has also given them another Appetite called Irascible, to surmount
the Obstacles occurring in the pursuit of Good or flight of Evil; whence arise
five other Passions, Hope, Despair, Boldness, Fear, and Anger. Hope excites the
soul to the prosecution of a difficult but obtainable good. Despair checks the
motions of the soul toward the pursuit of a Good no longer obtainable.
Boldness regards an absent Evil, which assures it self able to surmount. Fear
considers the same absent Evil without any means of being able to avoid it.
Lastly, the violence of Anger is bent against a present Evil, whereof it
believes a possibility to be revenged. And because a present and enjoyed Good
cannot be accompanied with difficulty; hence there is no Passion in the
Irascible Appetite answering to Anger, as there is in the other Passions: which
again are divided according to the several objects about which they are
exercised. The desire of Honors is called Ambition; that of Riches,
Covetousness; that of fleshly Pleasures, Concupiscence; that of Meats,
Gourmandise or Gluttony. The Hatred of Vice causes Zeal; that of a Rival,
Jealousy. The sorrow arising upon the sight of Evil suffered by an undeserving
person, causes Compassion; Indignation proceeds from the happening of Good to
one that merits it not. Now, among all these Passions, Ambition, which aims at
a general superiority, seems to me the first; and since it has served to
excuse Parricides and Violators of the public faith, whom it has caused to
say, that for the sake of command nothing is unjust, it may very well be
excused every where else; besides that, it has been the instigator to the most
glorious Actions, the source whereof is that laudable Ambition which every one
has to outvie his companion.

The second said, If the Passions are Diseases of the Soul, as the Stoics
held, and the Question seems to presuppose; I conceive none more agreeable and
excusable than Love; whose sweet violence insinuating into the severest breasts,
finds nothing capable to resist it. Hence those that are taken with it, wish
nothing less than a cure, which cannot proceed but from oblivion of the thing
beloved, wherein they live more than in themselves: the soul being more where
it loves than in the body wherein it lives. Moreover, this Passion is the most
natural and common of all, and consequently, the most excusable; being found
not only in all men, but also in all Animals, who feel the assaults of Love,
which makes them naturally tend toward Good. And as Love is the most common,
so it is likewise the source and principle of all the Passions: for we neither
hate nor fear any thing, we have neither joy, sadness, desire, fear, nor anger,
but because we love something: the true course to become exempt from these
Passions, being, To love Nothing.

The third said, That the most violent Passions being the most excusable
because the hardest to subdue, those of the Irascible Appetite (particularly
Anger) being more vehement than those of the Concupiscible Appetite, are also
the most worthy of excuse. The former possess the noblest part of Man, the
Heart, which is the source of Anger; the latter, the Liver which is the seat of
Love; whose weakness the Poets have sufficiently demonstrated by representing
it to us under the form of a Child, which has no power over us but what we
suffer it to take. But Anger which is proper to the Generous, as Love is to the
weak and effeminate, makes it self master of the Soul; and by its sudden and
impetuous motions obscuring the light of reason, makes us the more excusable in
that we are no longer masters of our own actions. And as Madness excuses the
Frantic from blame and punishment, so Anger which is a short Madness, as the
Poet says, deserves the same excuse; its violence being so much above that of
all other Passions, that it is the most quick and passes like Lightning: for
when it takes root in the soul, it loses its name, and degenerates into Hatred.

The Fourth said, That he was for Joy, because all the other Passions
acknowledge its power such, that they are contented to be its servants; Love and
Desire are only in order to some hoped Joy; Hatred and Flight, only to remove
all objects that may trouble it. Despair then only seizes us, when we can no
longer hope for Joy; Hope is for it alone; Fear is only of what is contrary to
it; Boldness, to break through all Obstacles opposing our contentment; and
Anger serves to express the displeasure we resent for its delay or
interruption. If a man injure us in his anger, or in his sadness, yea, or in
his despair; we will not excuse him: but be we never so displeased, we not only
excuse the joy of others, but take pleasure in it. And whereas Contraries are
known by their Contraries, since nothing displeases us so much as Sadness,
nothing pleases us so much as Joy; whose violence is manifested by some that
have died of it, as none ever did of Anger. In fine, we cannot better prove and
approve the power and empire of any one than by becoming his subjects, as we
all are of Joy; to which the greatest part not only give part of their time,
but also quit the most important affairs to seek it in places destinated to the
god of Laughter; whose Festivals are now more frequen then in in the days of
Apuleius. And what makes us in youth bear and endure all the pains of study;
Apprentices of each Trade, the hardships which they undergo; Soldiers, the
danger of Death, but a pre-conceived hope of Joy? which he that possesses,
becomes so mastered by it, that he forgets all his past evils: The Mariner no
longer remembers the perils of the sea, nor the sick person his pains; In
short, every one suffers himself to be possessed and governed by this Passion,
which is therefore the most excusable.

The fifth said, That Grief brings greater Evil than Joy does Good; because
Evil wholly destroys the Nature of a thing, which Good only renders more
complete; whence it follows that the former is much more just and excusable
than the latter which gives only Well-being, but Evil destroys Being it self;
to the preservation whereof all Creatures being naturally inclined, more
carefully eschew such things as may hurt them, then they pursue those that may
procure joy and contentment. Moreover the accents of the Voice which testify
Grief or Sadness are much more violent than those of Joy; which being nothing
else but a bare complacency received in the enjoyment of Good, consists rather
in rest then in motion, whereof Grief partakes more largely by the endeavors
which it causes the soul to put forth for removing of what torments it.

The sixth said, That the Passions being Appurtenances of our Nature, and part
of our Selves, are all excusable in themselves, because natural and inevitable;
but especially those whereto we are particularly most inclined by Temper: so
Love and Joy are most excusable in the sanguine; Choler and Despair in the
Bilious; Hatred and Sadness in the Melancholic; Hope and Boldness in Youth;
and Bashfulness is excusable in a Child, but culpable in an old man. Yet Hope,
which accompanies Man not only while breath lasts, but extends even beyond
death, seems by that duration to plead, that as it is the least separable, so
it is the most excusable.

CONFERENCE CXXXIV. Which is the most laudable Temperament.
TEmperament is the Harmony and Proportion of the four first Qualities,
resulting from the mixture of the Elements, whereof all sublunary Bodies are
compounded; which being destinated to several ends, required therefore
different Tempers and Qualifications. Now although the diversity herein be
almost infinite, yet it may be reduced to three Supreme Heads. For either the
four Qualities are so mixed that they remain in an equal proportion; or one of
them excels the rest; or else two together have the advantage. The first makes
the Temperament equal; the two latter make it unequal. The equal Temperament is
twofold; one called Temperament by Weight (ad Pondus, as they speak) when the
qualities are so perfectly proportionate, that, could they be weighed in a
balance, not one would preponderate above another: (Understand this Equalness,
only of Qualities, not of Elements; for were there as much Fire as Water, as
much Air as Earth, the more active fire would consume the rest and reduce into
ashes all living things; whose dissolution shows us that they consist more of
Earth and Water then of the other Elements. The other, called Temperament
according to Justice, is found in every sort of compound-substances; amongst
which there is one that serves for the rule or standard to all individuals
comprised under it, and possesses in perfection the temper require requisite to
the functions of its nature. Thus amongst Animals the Lion is hot, the Swine
moist, the Salamander cold, the Be dry: but Man is temperate, and amongst his
parts the Bones, Cartilages, and Ligaments are cold and dry; the Blood,
Spirits, Muscles, Heart and Liver are hot and moist; the Brain, Phlegm and Fat
are cold and moist; each of them being tempered according to Justice. The Skin
alone, especially that in the Palm of a well-tempered man's hand, being moderate
in all the Qualities and seeming a texture of the Flesh and Nerves, is equally
cold and hot, soft and hard, and consequently the prime Organ of Touch, and the
judge of all other Temperaments. The unequal Temperament, (which nevertheless
lies within the latitude of Health) is either simple or compound. The former
(wherein one of the four Qualities prevails over its contrary, while the other
two remain in a mediocrity) is of four sorts, Hot, Cold, Dry, and Moist. The
second, (wherein two excel) is likewise of four sorts according to the four
combinations which the qualities admit; viz. Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold
and Moist, Cold and Dry: for Hot and Cold, Dry and Moist, cannot subsist in one
and the same subject. And though the heat incessantly consuming the moisture,
and the cold collecting plenty of humid excrements, hinder the hot and moist,
and cold and dry tempers from subsisting long in the same state; yet they may
continue therein for some time, though they become changed by succession of
ages. Now of the nine sorts of Tempers, to wit, the four simple, four compound,
and one perfectly temperate, this last seems to me the most laudable and
perfect; a body thus tempered being neither fat nor lean, hot nor cold, dry nor
moist, but of a square and indifferently fleshy constitution, not inclining to
one extreme more then another, being in an exquisite mediocrity, and
consequently more laudable then any of those which approach nearer the (always
vicious) extremes.

The Second said, If there be such an exquisite Temperament as reason seems to
demonstrate, then since there is no passing from one extreme to another but by
the middle; when a Child changes the heat and moisture of his infancy into the
cold and dryness of old age, that middle equal Temper must pass away as swift
as lightning, and it is duration will be almost insensible. Wherefore though it
be the most perfect and desirable, yet since it is only the standard and rule of
all others, I am for Hot and Moist, as most suitable to life, which consists in
those two qualities; as Death, and its forerunner Old Age, are cold and dry.
This is the Temperament of Childhood, allotted to us by Nature at the
beginning of our life; and therefore the most perfect, answering to the Spring
(the most temperate of Seasons) and to Blood (the most temperate humor) whence
it is called Sanguine; as the cold and dry, is Melancholic; the hot and dry,
Bilious; the cold and moist, Phlegmatic. Which is not to be understood of the
excrementitious but of the natural humors contained in the mass of Blood,
which follow the principles of our Generation. Moreover, it is proper not only
for the functions of life, whereof health is the foundation, and joy the most
sweet support, which the Blood produces, (as Melancholy does sadness, Phlegm
slothfulness; Bile, fury and anger) but also for those of the Mind, which
depending upon the pureness of the Animal Spirits, (as these do upon that of
the Vital and Natural) which are more benign in the Sanguine, their
conceptions must be likewise more clear and refined.

The Third said, If Heat and Moisture are suitable to the actions of the
Vegetative Soul, (Generation, Accretion, and Nutrition) they are no less
prejudicial to those of the Rational, the seat whereof is therefore remote from
the two Organs of Concoction, the Ventricle and the Liver; lest the fumes of
the Food coming to be mixed with the Animal Spirits might offuscate and cloud
the phantasms and ideas wherewith those Spirits are charged, and consequently
hinder the operations of the Understanding, which depend upon those phantasms
so long as it is linked to the Body. For all Souls being alike, their
operations differ only according to the diverse temper of the Brain, which
causes that of the Animal Spirits, which must be subtle and luminous, but not
so far as to be igneous (like those of the choleric and frantic, whose
motions are precipitate and impetuous) but in the just proportion observed in
the Melancholic temper, which being cold and dry (that is to say, less hot and
moist) is most proper for Prudence and Wisdom, which require a settled composed
Spirit, like that of old men, who owe not their Wisdom so much to the
experience of many years, as to the coldness and dryness of their Brains, which
makes men grave and sedate. All brave men have been of this temper, which gives
patience and constancy, without which nothing grand and considerable can ever
be performed. And as the hot and moist temper is most subject to corruption, so
by the reason of contraries the cold and moist must be least obnoxious to
diseases (as amongst Trees and Animals, the dryest and hardest are least
offended by external injuries) upon which account the Melancholy is not only
most desirable, but also because it most contents the mind of him that
possesses it, who being at his ease makes more reflection upon the benefit he
injoys, unless otherwise diverted by contemplation.

The Fourth said, That that is the most laudable temper which is most adapted
to the functions both of body and mind; between which there is so great a
disproportion, that what agrees well with the one, seems prejudicial to the
other. The Sanguine is the most excellent for the operations of life and good
habit of Body, but incommodious for those of the Mind; partly through the
softness and mildness of that humor which cannot suffer strong attention, and
partly through its excessive humidity, which filling the Imagination with
vapors cannot supply fit matter to the Animal Spirits, whose temper must be
dry for producing Wisdom, whereunto Melancholy is by some judged conducible;
but were it so, it is too contrary to the health and good constitution of the
body to be desirable. The phlegmatic temper is proper neither for the health
of the Body nor the goodness of Wit. But the Bilious is for both; being less
repleat then the Sanguine, and less attenuated and dried then the melancholic,
besides very nimble and dextrous through the plenty of spirits; and as it is
easily disordered, so likewise it is restored in a little time; its maladies
being the shortest. Moreover, its vivacity is much more desirable then the
heaviness and lumpishness attending the Melancholy and making the Vulgar think
them Sage and prudent though they are only so in appearance: whereas the
Choleric are Industrious and Courageous, accomplishing whatever they attempt;
and as amongst Beasts and Birds the noble Lion and Eagle are of this
complexion, and according to some our first Parent Adam (which signifies Red)
was in hair and temper bilious; whence perhaps also Man is called in the same
language Ish, which signifies Fire, whereof choler partakes.

The Fifth said, That indeed his readiness to obey his Wife was an effect of
that Temper, of which he seems rather to have been then of that laudable and
perfectly temperate one which our Savior enjoyed. But indeed, Tempers being
the principles of all our functions, which must be different in every
individual, are desirable according to the Places, Seasons, Employments, Age,
Sex, and Inclinations of every one in particular.

CONFERENCE CXXXV. Of Happiness and Unhappiness; and whether men are Happy or
Unhappy, because they really are so, or because they think themselves so.
THree sorts of effects are observed in Nature. Some arise always necessarily,
as the vicissitudes of Days, Nights and Seasons, which depend upon the motion
of the Stars, no more alterable without a miracle then the other effects of
Universal Nature. Others come to pass often but not always; the particular
nature which produces them being sometimes hindered by some accident, which
makes it bring forth Monsters. The last happen neither always nor often but
seldom; as all those which depend upon contingent causes, which are of two
sorts. The first act by a necessity of nature, without any election: The second
by a principle of liberty without choice or deliberation. Both, when they
produce an effect contrary to their intention and primary design, are called
fortuitous causes. And as those which act by natural necessity produce a
casualty, as when a Stone falls upon the head of any one; so when those which
operate by election and design, produce another thing then what they had
propounded to themselves, they make fortune, or good and ill-luck, according to
the good or evil arising thence by ways and springs, by us unforeseen: for in
case the cause or motives be known, the effects are no longer fortuitous and
contingent, because they have their manifest and certain cause. So when
industry, labor, favor or friendship procure Riches, the effect is not to be
ascribed to Fortune, no more then the losses which follow upon the luxury and
profusions of a disorderly life: but Riches and Honors are fortuitous when
they happen to persons altogether incapable thereof; as also poverty, infamy,
and contempt also to brave men, whose constancy and resolution in undergoing
all those disgraces has made it be commonly said, That a wise man is above
fortune, because he slights her strokes by the strength of his reason; which
being alone capable to render us happy, since Beasts destitute thereof have
neither any share in good-luck or bad-luck, I conceive that both the one and
the other depends entirely upon our fancy, and the reflection we make upon the
condition of the thing possessed; which appearing sometimes good and sometimes
bad, makes us accordingly judge our selves happy or unhappy.

The Second said, Diversity is no where more apparent than in humane Actions,
the incertainty and inconstancy whereof is such, that men rarely arrive at
their proposed end, but oftentimes behold themselves either exalted to an
unhoped degree of Felicity, or overwhelmed with the Misery which there was no
ground to apprehend. Which diversity of accidents, induced Superstitious
Antiquity, to set up a blind and flitting Deity, constant only in her
inconstancy, whom they held the cause of all such effects; thus betaking
themselves to an imaginary canse, in regard they could not, or would not
acknowledge the true; which I attribute to every ones temperament, by means of
which is produced in the Soul a certain natural motion and impetuosity for
obtaining some particular thing, without Reasons contributing thereunto; and
according as a Man follows or resists these instincts and inclinations, so he
proves either happy or unhappy. Thus he who finds himself disposed to Arms, if
he embrace them, thrives better than in a soft and sedentary life, whereunto
the Melaneholly person is more addicted, and prospers better herein. Now
because dull spirits, fools, and thick-skull'd fellows, easily suffer
themselves to be guided by those motions; therefore they commonly prove more
fortunate than the wise, whose Prudence and Discretion causing them to make
abundance of reflections upon what they undertake, causes them also to lose
opportunities which never return. For I am not of their Opinion, who hold, That
as there are Spirits which make the Celestial Orbs move, and, according to
Averroes, an Intelligence presiding over natural Generations; so there is a
particular one for the various events of life, which it makes to happen
according to the different intentions of the First Mover: Since without
recurring to such obscure and remote causes, we carry in our selves those of
our Felicity and Infelicity, whereof we are the true Artificers; which to place
in the Fancy alone, and not in reality, is to say, good is not Good; since
goodness being an essential affection of real entity, is inseparable from it,
and consequently true, not barely imaginary.

The Third said, That Good being such only upon account of its convenience or
sutableness to the Possessor, there is not in this world any Absolute Good or
Happiness, but only Relative and by Comparison, seeing what suits well with
one, does not so with another. Riches, wherein most Men place their Felicity,
were cast into the Sea by a Philosopher, that he might the better attend
Contemplation. Honors and Pleasures, (charms, which most powerfully inveigle
most of Mankind) are crosses and torments to some others. Imprisonment, one of
the hardest trials of Patience, is nevertheless sought by some, who prefer
Solitude and perpetual Restraint, before the vanities of the world. To have no
Friends is the greatest of infelicities; yet Timon made it his prime Pleasure.
Life, the foundation of all goods, has been so tedious to some, that to be
delivered from it they have killed themselves; and the pains, afflictions, and
diseases leading to death, are, in the Stoics account, but imaginary Evils,
making no impression upon the wise.

The Fourth said, Since Happiness and Unhappiness seem to be the Elements,
composing the Political Life of Men, and the two Poles of that Globe upon which
the Ancients placed Fortune, their Consideration may be taken two ways, either
in their Cause, or in their Effect. As for the first, the Stoics, who
established a Fate governing All by a Series of necessary and determinate
Events, were as impious as Democritus and Leucippus, who, on the contrary,
maintained that all things were done by Chance in the Universe, which, they
said, it self was made by the casual occourse of their Atoms; these denying the
Providence of God, those his Power, by subjecting and tying him to the
immutable Laws of Fatality. But without considering things in reference to God,
to whom every thing is present and certain, we may distinguish them into two
sorts. Some acting necessarily, have always their necessary effects: others,
which depend absolutely upon Man's Will, which is free and indifferent, have
accordingly Effects uncertain and contingent. Thus the accidents of the Sea,
(where the vulgar believes is the chief Empire of Fortune), natural deaths, the
births of poor and rich, have regular and necessary Causes. On the contrary,
Goods freely given, or acquired with little industry, or found, have contingent
Causes; which being almost infinite, (for there is no Cause by it self, but may
be a Cause by accident, by producing another thing than what was intended) they
cannot fall within the knowledge of Humane Wit, which knows only what is
finite and terminate. Other Events have Causes mixed of Chance and Necessity, as
the death of the Poet Aeschylus, happening by a Tortoise which an Eagle let fall
upon his bald Head. As for the second manner wherein Happiness may be
considered, namely, Whether it render us happy in Reality or in Imagination;
it is an accusing all Men of folly, to say that Felicity is imaginary and
fantastical; since Nature, which has given no Desire in vain, (as she should
have done, if she had caused us to desire a thing that exists not) makes all
Men aspire to the one, and fear the other. There must be an Absolute Happiness
as well as an Absolute Good, namely, the possession of this Good, as that of
Existence is, which being the foundation of all Goods, must be a Real and
Absolute Good. Virtue and, the Honor attending it, being likewise true and
solid Goods, their possession must adferr a semblable Felicity; the verity and
reality is no more changed by not being equally gusted by all, than the savor
of Meat, or the Beauty of Light, would be by not being perceived by a sick or a
blind person: Yea, as he that has a rough Diamond is not less the possessor,
or less rich for not knowing the value of it; so he that possesses some Good
ought not to be accounted less happy, though he think not himself so. Moreover,
'twould be as absurd to call a Man happy or unhappy because he thinks himself
so; as to believe a fool is a King, or Rich, because he phansies himself to
have Empires and Riches.

The Fifth said, That Happiness, which is rather an Effect of our Genius, (as
the examples of Socrates and Simonides prove) than of our Temperament, much
less of the Stars and their influences, depends not only upon the possession
of some Good, or the belief a Man has that he possesses it, but upon both
together; namely, upon the reflection he makes upon the Good which he really
possesses; for want of which, Children, Fools, Drunkards, and even the Wise
themselves, whilst they are a sleep cannot be called Happy.

CONFERENCE CXXXVI. Of the Original of Precious Stones.
A Stone, which is defined a Fossile, hard, dry, and frangible body, is either
common or precious. Both are compounded of the Four Elements, chiefly of Water
and Earth, but diversely proportioned and elaborated. Coarse Stones are made
with less preparation, their proximate matter being only much Earth and little
Water, whereof is made a sort of Clay, which being dried by Nature, is hardened
into a Stone. Precious Stones have more of Water, and less of Earth, both very
pure and simple, (whence proceeds their Luster, which attends the simplicity of
the Elements) and exactly mixed by Heat, which concocting the aqueous humidity,
purifies and sublimes the same to a most perfect degree by help of that
Universal Spirit, wherewith the Earth and whole world is filled, on which
account the Pythagoreans esteemed it a great Animal.

The Second said, Three things are to be considered in reference to the
original of Stones; their matter, their efficient cause, and the place of their
generation. Their remote matter is Earth and Water, which two Elements alone
give bulk and consistence: but their next matter, (concerned in the Question)
is a certain lapidifick juice, supplying the place of Seed, and often observed
dropping down from rocks; which, if thick and viscous, makes common stones; if
subtle and pure, the precious. Now this juice not only is turned it self into
stone, but likewise turns almost all other Bodies, as Wood, Fruits, Fishes, the
Flesh of Animals, and such other things, which are petrifi'd in certain Waters
and Caves. Their remote efficient cause is Heat, which severing heterogeneous
bodies unites those of the same nature, whereof it makes the said homogeneous
juice, which is condensed by cold; which giving the last form and perfection to
the stone is its proximate efficient cause. Lastly, their place is every where;
in the middle region of the Air, which produces Thunderbolts; in the Sea,
which affords Coral, (of a middle nature between Stone and Plant) and Pearls in
their shells which are their wombs, by means of the Dew of Heaven; in Animals,
in Plants and above all in the Earth and its Mines or Matrices which are close
spaces exempt from the injuries of Air, Water, or other external Agents, which
might hinder their production either by intermixtion of some extraneous body,
or by suffering the Mineral Spirits serving to the elaboration of the Stones to
transpire.

The Third said, Precious Stones, produced for Ornament, (as Metals are for Use
of life), are of three sorts; namely, either bright and resplendent, as the
Diamond, Ruby, Crystal, Amethyst; or a little obscure, as the Turquois, Jasper,
and other middle ones without perfect luster, as the Opal and all Pearls. And
as the matter of common Stones is Earth the principle of Darkness; so that of
the precious is an aqueous diaphanous humor, congealed by the coldness of
water or earth, or by the vicinity of Ice and Snow which inviron Mountains and
Rocks, where commonly their Mines are found; and amongst others, Crystal which
is (as 'twere) the first matter of other precious Stones, and the first essay
of Nature (when she designs to enclose her Majesty in the luster of the most
glittering Jewels) is nothing else but humidity condensed by cold. Whence a
violent heat, such as that of Furnaces, resolves and melts it. Moreover, the
effects attributed to these Stones, as to stop blood, allay the fumes of wine,
and resist hot poisons, argue them caused only by cold, which also gives them
weight by condensation of their parts.

The Fourth said, If Crystals and Stones were produced only by cold, they could
not be generated in the Isles of Cyprus, the red Sea and other Southern parts,
but only in the Northern, where nevertheless they are most rare, there being
Mountains where cold has preserved Ice for diverse Ages without ever being
converted into Crystal; which (besides) should swim upon the water as well as
Ice does, and not be more heavy and transparent: which cannot be attributed to
their greater density, caused by a more vehement cold; since water inspissated
into Ice becomes less transparent, and Crystals are not so cold to the touch as
Ice. But above all, their Calcination evidently shows that there is something
else in them besides Water; for finding out of which, we must examine the
principles of Bodies nearest akin to them; as Alom and Glass, which by their
splendour and consistence, much resemble precious Stones, being (like them)
Mineral Juices hardened and mixed by a proportionate quantity of Salts and
violent Spirits, which joined together, lose their Acrimony to embrace one
another more closely: These Principles are very viscous, capable of great
solidity, and being of themselves transparent, are proper to preserve all the
brightness and light, which their specific forms can add to them. This
resemblance being supposed, we are obliged to discover the same Principles of
Composition in Jewels; since things agreeing generically, and having
resemblance of qualities, agree also as to matters, and have nothing to
distinguish them but that unknown Form which determines the Species. But the
truth is, little brightness and hardness proceed not from their Form alone,
which is incapable of so close connection, but from much dark Earth, and a very
impure Phlegm; which is not found in precious Stones, or in the Glass
wherewith in the Indies they make Emeralds. Moreover, it is this body that most
resembles those Stones, which has no other Principles but a Spirit mingled
amongst much Salt, and some little of Earth; which are united by the activity
of heat, and condensed by their natural inclination to inspissation, (cold
contributing but very little thereunto, since they acquire their solidity and
consistence whilst yet very hot.) The Artifice of counterfeiting Rubies and
Diamonds, with the same Principles of Glass, greatly confirms this Opinion;
only for avoiding brittleness, they mix less terrestreity, and consume not the
moisture, (which causes Concretion) with so much violence. The Calcination of
Crystals, whereby much Salt is extracted from them, and the easiness of making
Glass therewith, in like manner shows what are the Material Principles of
these Stones. Which Principles being contained, or generated in the bosom of
the Earth, certain Juices are formed of their several mixtures, which unite to
the first body which happens to impress its Virtues upon them; then the purest
part of these Salts and Earths, is volatilized by the Spirit mixed therewith,
and circulated by Heat, which always perfects it by further Concoction, till
it have rendered it Homogeneous. These Juices commonly stick in superficial
parts of the Earth, where a moderate heat finishes their Concoction,
evaporating, the too great humidity which hindered the induration natural to
such substances; Diverse species are made according to the different impressions
of Heaven, or the place of their Generation, or other dispositions; to which I
also refer the diversity of their Colors, and not (as most Chemists do) to
Sulphur, which is never found in these Stones; which Colors, they ought to
attribute rather to Salt, their principal matter, since by several degrees of
Coction or Calcination, it acquires almost all the Colors of these Stones;
being first white, then blew, and lastly, reddish.

The Fifth said, It Is most probable that in the beginning there were Species of
Stones of all sorts, disposed in places most proper for their Conservation,
which have continually generated the like, determining fit matter by the
Emission of a certain Vapor or Spirit, impregnated with the Character of their
Species during its union with their substance, before a perfect, induration
pressed it forth; which Spirit lighting upon, and uniting to fit Matter, fixes
and determines the same to be of the same Species, with the Mass from which it
issued. For the common Opinion, That these Stones are produced of a certain
slime, compounded of Earth and Water, concocted and hardened by the action of
Heat, is groundless; since how temperate soever that Heat were, it would at
length dissipate all the moisture, and leave nothing but the Earth, the darkest
and most friable of all the Elements; besides that, Water and Earth, having no
viscosity, are incapable of any continuity and hardness, which arises from
Salt, which indu'd with a Principle of Coagulation, perfectly unites the Water
with the Earth, so as not to be afterward dissolvable by any Water, but such
as is mixed with much Salt. Lastly, the Cement they make with Lime, Water, and
Sand, petrifying in time, shows the necessity of the fixed Salt of Lime, (which
gives the coherence of all) in the generation of Stones. Wherefore I conclude,
that as in common and opake Stones, there is a little Salt amongst much Earth;
so in those which are precious, there is much Salt amongst a very small
quantity of Earth.

CONFERENCE CXXXVII. Of the Generation of Metals.
MEtal, which is a Mineral, solid, opake, heavy, malleable, ductile, and
sounding body, is compounded either by Nature, Art, or Chance, as, Latin,
Electrum, and Corinthian Brass; or else it is simple, and divided into seven
Species, according to the number of Planets, whereunto each of them is
referred, as precious Stones are to the Fixed Stars; namely, Gold, Silver,
Lead, Copper, Iron, Tinn; and Quicksilver, which others reject, from the
number of Metals, because not malleable; as also Tinn, because compounded of
Lead and Silver. Their remote Matter is much Water with little Earth; their
next, according to Aristotle, a vaporous exhalation. Their general Efficient
Cause is Heaven, by its Motion and Influencess producing Heat, which attenuates
and concocts the said Exhalation, which is afterward condensed by Cold: Hence
all Metals are melted by violent Fire, which evaporates Quicksilver, and
softens that sort of Iron which is not fusible. The place where they are
generated is the bosom of the Earth; the Metals found in Waters, as Gold in
Tagus and Pactolus, having been carried from the Earth by the Waters; which
washing and purifying them, render them more perfect than those of the Mines.

The Second said, Although Metals were generated at the beginning of the world
in their Mines, whence they were first extracted and wrought by Tubalcain, who
is the fabulous Vulcan of Paganism; yet they cease not to be generated anew by
the afflux of suitable Matter, which is a metallic Juice formed of humidity,
not simply aqueous, (for then Heat should evaporate instead of concocting it)
but viscous, unctuous, and somewhat terrestrial, which for a long time holds
out against whatever violent Heat, as appears by the Fires of Volcanoes, which
are maintained by Bitumen alone, and other sulphurous Earths. This also is the
Opinion of the Chemists, when they compound them of Sulphur and Mercury;
Sulphur holding the place of the Male Seed, and Mercury, which is more crude
and aqueous, that of the maternal blood. And as the Salt or Earth predominating
in Stones is the cause of their friability; so Sulphur and Mercury, which is
unctuous moisture, renders them malleable and capable of extension; which is an
Argument of their perfection, as well as color, sound, and fixation, or
enduring Fire without alteration, but not weight; for then as Gold, the
perfectest Metal, is the heaviest, so Silver should be next to it in weight,
which is not; Quicksilver being much more ponderous; next, Lead; after which
follow Silver, Copper, Tinn, Iron, and Stones, whose weight is very different.
Whence it appears, that Gravity is not an Effect of the condensation of Matter;
otherwise the Stars being the denser parts of their Orbs should be heavy, as
they are not; but it proceeds from the Form, whereunto also the many wonderful
Effects observed in Metals must be referred; as that Gold discovers Poisons,
attracts Quicksilver, and is attracted by the Foot of a Spar-hawk, and loved
by Gryphons, as Iron is by Estriches, who digest it; that Tinn makes all Metals
brittle wherewith it is mixed, Copper sinks not in the water of the Island
Demonesus, near Carthage; and that Quicksilver, though humid, and always
fluid, moistens not; which some attribute to the equal mixture of siccity and
humidity.

The Third said, If ever the Opinion of Anaxagoras (who held, Omnia in omnibus)
was well grounded, it was chiefly in reference to Metals, whose Etymology,
together with the Chemists operations, speak the easy transmutation of one
into another; imperfect Metals differing only in certain accidental degrees
from Gold and Silver, which they may be turned into after purifying from their
Leprosy, and refining by Nature or Art. And thus according to the opinion of
some Moderns, it may be said, that, supposing the earth a great Magnet, it has
also in it self a commencement toward such metallic mutation, since the
Loadstone is in a manner the principle of Iron, the most terrestrial of all
Metals; whence it is that they attract one another, as do Mercury and Gold,
which is composed thereof. And thus by the power of heat in the bowels of the
Earth, Iron the most imperfect and lightest of all Metals is turned into Steel
and Copper, afterward into Tin, and lastly, being more depurated into Silver
and Gold. And since Art imitates Nature as in the fabricating of Artificial
Gold you must first resolve a solid matter, then volatilize, and again fix and
return into a solid substance; so the generation of Metals may be conceived to
be effected by evaporation of the thinner parts of Earth and Water, which being
volatilized by the subterranean heat, and lighting upon Rocks and hard Stones,
are there fixed and condensed into Metals differing according to the purity and
concoction of their matter, and the places it lights upon, which are ordinarily
Mountains.

The Fourth said, That the different properties of Metals plainly argue the
diversity of their Species; since Properties presuppose specificating Forms.
Besides, the World would have been very defective, if Nature had made only
Gold, which may be better spared than Iron and Steel, and is less hard for uses
of Life. Nor is it likely that Nature ever intended to reduce all Metals to
Gold; which then should be more plentiful than Iron and Lead; since wise and
potent Nature seldom fails of her intentions: As for the alleged transmutation
of Metals, were it possible, yet it proves them not all of the same Species,
change of Species being very ordinary, and as easy to be made in Crucibles as
in Mines; nothing else being necessary thereunto but to open the bodies of the
Metals, and set at liberty what in some is most active, and in others more
susceptible of the Forms you would introduce. Nature indeed always intends what
is most perfect, but not to reduce every thing to one most perfect Species, as
all Metals to Gold; but to make a most perfect individual in every Species;
laboring with no less satisfaction for production of Iron and Flints then of
Gold and precious Stones. As for the principles of Metals, all compound them of
Mercury and Sulphur, joining Vitriols thereunto instead of salt to give Body to
the said Ingredients; but some will have Mercury to be the sole matter, and
understand by sulphur an internal and central heat in the Mercury concocting
its crudity, and by Mercury the cruder portion of its self; their Salt being
only the consistence whereof the Mercury is capable after Coction. Others
distinguish what is metallic in metals (as only Mercury is) from the
impurities mixed therewith, as earths, sulphurs, and Vitriols; and make the
perfect metals so homogeneous that it is impossible to separate any thing from
them; which is a proof (they say) of the unity of their matter and conformity
with Mercury, which always retains its own nature, though preparations make it
appear in several shapes. Moreover, they infer from the great ponderosity of
Gold, that it is only Mercury; otherwise the less heavy bodies pretended to be
mixed therewith, should diminish its weight; and Fusion, which seems to reduce
all metals into their most natural state, makes them perfectly resemble
Mercury, in which alone the Chemists for that reason seek their Great Work.
Nevertheless seeing Experience teaches us, that Mercurie's sulphurs and
vitriols are found in all metals except Gold, it must be confessed that these
three bodies are their immediate principles. Nor does it follow that they are
not in Gold too, though the Chemists have not yet been able to find them, but
so closely united as to be inseparable; Coction having such power upon matters
that have affinity, as to unite them beyond possibility of separation; as
appears in Glass, of which nothing else can be made but Glass, though it be
composed of different principles, and in Mercury it self, which is a Mixed, but
reduced to such homogeneity that nothing can be extracted out of it but
Mercury. Indeed Gold could not be so malleable us it is, if it were all
Mercury; and they that know Mercury, and the impossibility of depriving it of
the proneness to revive, will not easily believe it can, without mixture of
some other body, acquire the form of Gold; whose gravity proceeds from its
proper Form, and not from Mercury which can give it no more weight then it self
has; Gold by being more dense, not acquiring more gravity, any more then Ice
does which swims upon the water.

CONFERENCE CXXXVIII. Whether there be an Elementary Fire, other than the Sun.
AS there are three simple bodies in the world, possessing, by right of
Sovereignty, Dryness, Cold, and Moisture; so there must be one primely Hot,
which they call Fire. The diversities of Motion, the four first Qualities, and
their possible Combinations, the Humors, Temperaments, Ages, and Seasons, the
Composition and Resolution of all Mixts, are powerful inductions for that
quaternary number of Elements. Amongst which there is none controverted but
Fire; the variety of fires found in the world rendering it dubious which of them
ought to be acknowledged the Element, that is, the natural, simple, first hot
and dry body, wherewith, together with the other, three all Mixts are
compounded. The Sun indeed is the Efficient Cause of all productions here
below; but being a celestial and incorruptible body cannot enter into the
composition of any thing as a Material Cause. Much less can our common Fire
which devours every thing, and continually destroys its Subject. But it must
be that Elementary Fire, which is every where potentially and actually in its
own Sphere, which is above that of the Air, and below that of the Moon.
Moreover, being the lightest or least heavy of all the Elements, the Harmony of
the Universe which consists chiefly in their situation; requires that it be in
the highest place, toward which therefore all other Fires which are of the
same Nature, ascend in a point with the same violence that a stone descends
toward its Center; those remaining here below, being detained by some Matter
whereof they have need, by reason of the contraries environing them; from which
that Sublunary Fire being exempt, has nothing to do with Matter or
nourishment; and by reason of its great rarity and tenuity, can neither burn
nor heat, any more then it can be perceived by us.

The Second said, That subtlety, one of the principal conditions requisite to
the conversion of Matter into Fire, is so far from hindering, that it increases
the violence and activity of Fire, making it penetrate even the solidest
bodies; whence that pretended Fire, not being mixed with extraneous things to
allay its heat, as that of Aqua Vitae is tempered by its Phlegm or aqueous
humidity, but being all Fire in its own Sphere and natural (place, which
heightens the Virtue and qualities of all Agents) must there also heat, shine,
burn, and produce all its Actions, which depend not upon density or rarity, or
such other accidents of Matter purely passive, but upon its whole Form; which
constituting it what it is, must also make it produce Effects suitable to its
Nature. Wherefore as Water condensed into Ice or Crystal, is no longer Water,
because it has ceased to refrigerate and moisten; so the Fire pretended to be
above the Air, invisible and insensible, by reason of its rarity, is not Fire
but subtle Air. They who say its natural inclination to heat and burn, is
restrained by the Influences of the Heavens, particularly, of the cold Stars,
as Saturn and the Moon, speak with as little ground; since the circular motion
of the Heavens, whereby this Fire is turned about, should rather increase than
diminish its heat; And besides, Fire being a necessary Agent, its action can no
more be hindered by such Influences, than the descent of a stone downwards.
Whereunto add, that the beams of all Stars have heat; and were any cold, yet
those of Saturn are too remote, and those of the Moon too weak in comparison of
this Fire, the extent whereof is about 90000. Leagues, for the distance between
the Earth and the Moon is almost as much, namely, 56. Semidiameters of the
Earth, from which substracting between 25. and 30. Leagues, which they allot to
the three Regions of the Air, the rest must be occupy'd by the Fire, which they
make to extend from the Concave surface of the Moon, to the unequal surface of
the Air; which it would consume in less than a moment, considering the great
disproportion between them. Moreover, were there such a Fire, it could not be
owned an Element, because its levity would keep it from descending and entering
into the Composition of mixts; and, were it not leight, yet it would be hindered
from descending by the extreme coldness of the Middle Region of the Air,
accounted by some, a barrier to the violence of that Chymerical Fire, which
ought rather to be reckoned amongst their Entia Rationis, than the Natural
Elements, whereunto Corporeity and Palpability are requisite. For these
Reasons, I conceive, with Pythagoras, that the Sun is the true Elementary Fire,
placed for that purpose in the middle of the World, whose Light and Heat enter
into the Composition not only of all living things, but also of Stones and
Metals; all other Heat besides that of the Sun, being destructive, and
consequently, no-wise fit for Generation.

The Third said, He confounds Heaven with Earth, and destroys the Nature of
the Sun, who takes it for an Element, that is to say, a thing alterable and
corruptible by its contraries, which it must have if it be an Element. The Heat
of his beams proves it not the Elementary Fire, seeing commonly the nearer we
are to Fire, the more we feel the Heat of it; but the Supreme and Middle
Regions of the Air, are colder than ours. Besides, were our common fire derived
from the Sun, it would not languish, as it does, when the Sun shines upon it;
nor would the heat of dunghils and caves be greater in Winter than in Summer.
Wherefore I rather embrace the common Opinion, which holds, That the heaviest
Element is in the lowest place, and the leightest in the highest, whose Action
is hindered by the proportion requisite to the quantity of each Element.

The Fourth said, That the qualities of Fire, viz. Heat, Dryness, and Light,
concurring in the Sun in a supreme degree, argue it the Elementary Fire; for
Light being the Cause of Heat, the Sun (which is the prime Luminous Body) must
also be the prime Hot, that is to say, Fire. For as the pretended one above the
Air, was never yet discovered; so it is repugnant to the Order of the Universe,
for the leightest of Elements to be shut up in the Center of the Earth, where
some place it. We have but two ways to know things, Sense, and Reason; the
latter of which, is founded either upon Causes or Effects: Now we know nothing
of the Sun, or any other Celestial Bodies, otherwise then by its Effects and
sensible qualities, which being united in Spherical Burning-glasses, (as they
are in the body of the Sun) notify to us by their Effects the Nature of their
Cause.

The Fifth said. That Fire being to the World what the Soul is to the Body, as
Life is in all the parts of the Body; so also is Fire equally diffused
throughout the whole World. In the Air it makes Comets, and other Igneous
Meteors: In the Earth it concocts Metals, and appears plentifully in Volcanoes,
whose Fires would not continue always, if they were violently detained in
those Concavities; yea, it is in the Waters too, whose saltness and production
of Monsters, cannot be without Heat. Yet being the most active of all Elements,
it is therefore distributed in much less quantity than the rest; Nature having
observed the same proportion both in the greater and lesser World, Man's Body;
in which there is less of Fire than of the other Elements: Otherwise, had the
Fire been equal to the rest, it would consume all living things to ashes.
Nevertheless as the fixed Heat of Animals requires reparation by the Influent
Heat from the Heart, the Soul's principal seat; in like manner the Elementary
Fire, dispersed in all part of this great body of the World, needs the
Influence of the Sun's Rays, which produce and conserve it.

CONFERENCE CXXXIX. Which is most desirable, long or short Life.
NAture, not contented to produce all things, has given them a desire of
Self-preservation. Even Inanimate Bodies redouble their activity at the
approach of their destructive contraries; whence proceeds Antiperistasis. But
this desire appears chiefly in Animals, and above all in Man, being grounded
upon the Love he bears to himself: Which extreme Love, instigating him to seek
all good things contributary to his contentment, makes him likewise desire long
Life, whereby he may continue his other enjoyments, and, consequently, avoid
all occasions of Death, as that which interrupts the course of this Life, and
makes him cease to be. Hence, as by general consent Death is the most terrible
of terribles; so, by the reason of Contraries, Life is the most agreeable, and
consequently, most desirable and best thing in the World; and not desirable
only by all Men who are endued with Knowledge, but also by all living things,
each after its mode, and according as they are capable of desiring; Plants
attracting their nourishment, and Animals seeking their Food with difficulty,
and carefully avoiding all dangers that lead to Death. For though Nature loves
change, (whereof she is the Principle) yet it is only that of Generation, or of
a less into a more noble substance; that of Corruption and Death she abhorrs,
being not further pleased in the vicissitudes of mutations, than she gains by
the change; but she is a loser by Death, which separates the Body from the
Soul, in the union whereof, she has all that she can wish. She may disguise
her self, and changing of shape and countenance, but can never light upon any
more agreeable, than that which she makes appear in the Marriage of a Body with
a Soul; which are so perfectly united, that, after their dissolution, our Souls
always retain an Inclination toward their ancient Mates which they once
animated.

The Second said, If the sentiment of Nature makes us conceive long Life
desirable; Reason, which evinceth it full of Miseries and Calamities, teaches
us that the shortest is best, and that we may justly wish, either never to have
been, or to have died as soon as we came into the World. This was the Judgment
not only of the greatest Sages of Pagan Antiquity, many of whom cheerfully
quitted Life to escape its Miseries; but the sometimes famous Republic of
Marseilles, gave License to the miserable to take Poison, which was kept in a
public Store. Yea, even the holiest Personages have been of the same Advice;
as Job amongst others, who calls Man's Life a warfare upon Earth, and curses
the day of his Birth; Moses and Elias, who prayed to God they might dye; and
Saint Paul, who desires nothing so much as to be loosed from this miserable
Body; in which, as in a dark prison, the Reasonable Soul is enclosed, and
remains against, its will; since being of a Celestial Nature, and so
continually longing after the place of its extraction, Death, which delivers it
from its fetters, must be as desirable to it as contrary to the Body, which
having naught to hope for after this Life, but to be the food of worms and
corruption, has all reason to dread it, and avoid the occasions of it; as
accordingly all such do who live only for the Body, resenting no other motions
in themselves but of desire to live long. Whereas Reason instructs us, that
here we never possess the Good whereof the Immortal Soul is capable by its two
Powers, the Understanding and the Will, which never find any Truth or Goodness
in the things of this World but what is sophisticate; it makes us also conceive
Life as a violent state, and contrary to the Felicity of our better part.

The Third said, Since Life is the duration of Being, which undoubtedly is the
greatest of all Goods, (Entity and Good being convertible) that must be the
most desirable which is of greatest continuance, because it comes nearest
infinity and eternity, under which all Perfection is comprised, and which being
therefore passionately desired by all Men, but not attainable by any, they
endeavor to partake as much of it as they can by prolongation of Life, which is
the foundation not only of the Goods of the Body and Fortune, (whose sweetness
makes amends for some Evils of Life) but also of the Mind, in which Natural
Felicity consists; whereunto amongst other conditions, long Life is requisite
both for attaining of Knowledge and Virtue, not to be gotten without long time,
(which renders Men knowing and prudent) as for making others taste the fruits
of an exemplary Life.

The Fourth said, That Beasts and even Stones having the good of Existence as
well as we, that alone is not sufficient to render Life desirable, in regard
Nonexistence is much rather to be wished than a Being always miserable, what
ever some say to the contrary; since even our Savior says, It had been better
for Judas never to have been born, then to have fallen into the crime of
Treason. Moreover, Seneca says, No person would accept of Life, if he knew how
dear it must cost him. Hence we enter into the World weeping, as if it were
against our consent; and as our Lives begin with tears, so they are continued
with labor, and ended with pain. Nor have we more reason to desire long Life
for the Goods of the Mind, which consist in Virtue alone. For if we be vicious,
it is expedient both for our selves and the Public, that we live but little,
for fear of corrupting others by our evil Examples, If virtuous, it is much to
be feared lest we be corrupted by the converse of the wicked, who are very
numerous; which was the cause why God by a special favor took away Enoch in
the midst of the course of his Life, and transported him into the Terrestrial
Paradise.

The fifth said, If a long Life were less desirable than a short, God should
have deceived those that honor their Parents, by promising them a bad salary
in recompense of a good Action: Nor ought Physic to trouble it self and those
that use it, by so many Rules and Receipts, were a short Life (that is to say,
a speedy death) so desirable; nor would the Laws punish Criminals with Death,
if what they give them were better than what they take from them. Moreover, as
the long-lived Oak and Palm Tree are more excellent than the Mushrome, Hysop,
and the Rose; Stags, Elephants, Eagles, Ravens, and the Phoenix more perfect
than Butterflies, and those Insects which they call Ephemera, because they live
but one day; so amongst Men, those that live long, seem to have some advantage
above those that are of a short Life, having the Principles of their Generation
more vigorous: wherein nevertheless the Sex, Temperament, Climate, Habitation,
and manner of living, make a notable difference; Sanguine Men, and the
Inhabitants of Temperate Regions, commonly living longer than Women, choleric
Persons, and such as live under intemperate Climates.

The Sixth said, Reason having been given Man to correct the Inclinations of
the Sensitive Appetite, it is that alone must judge whether it be expedient for
him to live long; not Sense, which makes us judge like beasts, That nothing is
dearer than Life. But Reason, illuminated either by Faith or by Philosophy,
teaches us that this World is the place of our banishment, the Body the Soul's
Prison which she always carries about with her, Life a continual suffering and
War; and therefore he fights against Natural Light who maintains it expedient
to prolong so miserable a State. For, besides the incommodities attending a
long Life, which after 70. years, as David testifies, is only labor and
sorrow, long Life is equally unprofitable toward attaining Knowledge and
Virtue. He that lives long can learn nothing new in the World, which is but a
Revolution and Repetition of the same Effects produced always by the same
Causes; not only in Nature, whose course and changes may be seen in the
Revolution of the Four Seasons of the Year, but even in Affairs of State and
Private Matters, wherein nothing is said or done, but what has been practiced
before. And as for Virtue, the further we are from Childhod, the less Innocence
and Sanctity we have, and Vices ordinarily increase with years. The long Life
of the first Men having according to some been the probable Cause of the
depravation of those Ages.

CONFERENCE CXL. Of the Lethargy.
AS the Brain is the most eminent and noble of all the parts, being the Seat of
the Understanding, and the Throne of the Reasonable Soul, so its diseases are
very considerable; and the more, in that they do not attaque that alone, but
are communicated to all the other parts, which have a notable interest in the
offense of their Chief, ceasing to diffuse its Animal Spirits destinated to
Motion, Sense, and the Function of the Inferior Members. Which Functions are
hurt by the Lethargy, which deprives a Man of every other Inclination but that
to sleep, and renders him so forgetful and slothful, (whence it took its Greek
name, which signifies sluggish oblivion) that he remembers nothing at all,
being possessed with such contumacious sleepiness that she shuts his Eyes as
soon as he has opened them; besides that, his Fancy and Reasoning is hurt
with a continual gentle Fever. Which differences this Symptom from both the
sleeping and waking Coma, called, Typhomania: the former of which commonly
begins in the Fits of Fevers, and ends or diminishes at their declination, but
the Lethargick sleeps soundly, and being waked by force, presently falls a
sleep again: The latter makes the Patient inclined to sleep, but he cannot, by
reason of the variety of Species represented to him in his Fancy. The signs
of this Malady are deliration, heaviness of the Head, and pain of the Neck
after waking, (the Matter taking its course along the spine of the back),
frequent oscitation, trembling of the Hands and Head, a palish Complexion, Eyes
and Face pufft up, sweatings, troubled Urine, like that of Cattle, a great
Pulse, languishing and fluctuating, Respiration rare with sighing, and so great
forgetfulness, as sometimes not to remember to shut their Mouths after they
have opened, nor even to take breath, were they not forced to it by the danger
of suffocation. The Conjunct and next Cause of this Malady is a putrid Phlegm,
whose natural coldness moistens and refrigerates the Brain, whilst its put
refactive heat kindles a Fever by the vapors carried from the Brain to the
Heart, and from thence about the whole. Now this Phlegmatic Humor is not
detained in the Ventricles of the Brain; for then it would cause an Apoplexy if
the obstruction were total, and if partial an Epilepsie, wherein the Nerves
contract themselves toward their original for discharging of that Matter: But
it is only in the sinuosities and folds of the Brain, which imbibing that
excessive humidity, acquires a cold and moist intemperature; from whence
proceeds dullness and listelesness to all Actions. For as Heat is the Principle
of Motion, especially when quickened by Dryness; so is Cold the Cause of
stupidity and sluggishness, especially when accompanied with humidity, which
relaxes the parts, and chills their Action. In like manner, Heat or Dryness
inflaming our Spirits the Tunicles of the Brain, produce the irregular Motions
of Frenzy, which is quite contrary to the Lethargy; although it produce the
same sometimes, namely, when the Brain after great evacuations acquires a cold
and moist intemperature; in which case the Lethargy is incurable, because it
testifies Lesion of the Faculty, and abolition of strength: But on the
contrary, a Frenzy after a Lethargy is a good sign, resolving by its Heat, and
dissipating the cold humors which produce the same.

The Second said, That coldness being contrary to put refaction, Phlegm the
coldest of all humors, cannot easily putrify in the Brain, (which is cold too
of its own nature) much less acquire a Heat sufficient to communicate it self
to the Heart, and there excite a Fever; it being more likely for such
adventitious Heat to cause in the Brain rather the impetuous motions of a
Frenzy, than the dullness and languor of a Lethargy. Nor is it less then absurd,
to place two enemy-qualities in the same Subject, to wit, Cold and Heat,
whereof the one causes sleep, the other a Fever; which, I conceive, to precede
not to follow the Lethargy, and which having raised from the Hypochondres to
the Brain, a Phlegmatic blood mixed with gross vapors, there causes that
obscuration of Reason, and sluggishness of the whole Body, but especially the
abolition of the Memory, the suitable temperament for which is totally destroyed
by excessive humidity. Indeed the troubled Urine, liquid Digestions, Tumors and
pains of the Neck, bloated Flesh, and other such signs accompanying this
disease, argue that its matter is more in the rest of the Body than in the
Brain, which suffers only by Sympathy.

The Third said, If it be true that sleep is the Brother of Death, then the
Lethargy, which is a continual drowsiness, with a Fever and Delirium, seems to
be a middle Estate between Life and Death which is known by the cessation of
Actions, most of which fail in those afflicted with this Evil, which
nevertheless is less then the Carus, wherein the sleep is so profound, that the
Patient feels not when he is pricked, or called by name; but is deprived of all
Sense and Motion, saving that of Respiration, which scarce appears in the
Catoche, or Catalepsie, (a stranger symptom than any of the former) wherein the
Eyes remain wide open, the whole Body stiff, and in the same state and posture
wherein it happened to be when it first seized the same. The Cause whereof, most
say, is a cold and moist humor, obstructing the hinder part of the Brain; but I
rather ascribe it to a sudden Congelation of the Animal Spirits, as I do the
Lethargy to narcotick and somniferous vapors, which are the sole Causes of
Inclination to sleep; which cannot be produced by simple, cold, and aqueous
humidity, (for then Water should do it sooner than Wine, whose very smell in
Presses and Cellars causes sleep, and oftentimes inebriates) but by a fat and
oleaginous humidity, such as is found in all Hypnoticks; some whereof are hot,
as Anise and Opium; others Cold, as Lettice, Poppy, and Henbane.

The Fourth said, That the Brain being the Principal of Sense and Arbitrary
Motion, which it derives into all the parts, both the one and the other are
offended by the maladies of that part; some whereof are without, others, are
necessarily accompanied with a Fever: which is either Acute or Gentle,
according to the diversity of the humor producing it, the former commonly
proceeding from Choler or Blood, the latter from Phlegm or Melancholy. Amongst
these Diseases, those which invade suddenly, as the Apoplexy and Convulsions,
are caused by the obstruction of the Ventricles, Constriction, or Division of
the Nerves, which hinders the Flux of the Animal Spirits: but those which
arruire in some space of time, as the Coma, Lethargy, and Carus, proceed either
from a simple intempeires, ordinarily Cold and Moist, or else joined with some
Matter, which is oftentimes a Cold Phlegm, whereof the Brain is fruitful: Which
coming to be inflamed, by reason of its putrefaction caused by defect of
Transpiration, and the Heat of the Brain (which though Cold by its first
Temper, is yet hot, inasmuch as animated, and more burning than the Air of
Summer) that Extraneous Heat begets a Fever, which yet is but little violent,
and so hinders not the Natural Coldness of the humor from producing the sleep
and sluggishness apparent in the Lethargy; which nevertheless by is,
Hippocrates, placed amongst Acute Diseases terminated on the seventh day; which
time if it exceeds, the Patient recovers, especially if the Matter happen to be
discharged into the Breast, and cause an Empyema there, or, in some others, the
Parotides.

The Fifth said, That the Internal Maladies of the Head are of three forts:
Some attaque the Membranes, and cause the Cephallagy, Megrim, and other pains
of the Head, being very dolorous, by reason of the exquisite sensibility of
those Membranes, which are either pricked, pressed, or too much extended by
vapors, wind, or humors, for the most part acrimonious and serous. Others are
in the Cavities and Passages of the Animal Spirits, whose Influence being stopped
by some Matter that obstruct the Passages, they cause the symptoms of the
Lesion of Motion and Sense in the Vertigo, Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie,
Incubus, Convulsions, Trembling, and Catarrhs or Defluxions, to which Man alone
of all Animals is subject, by reason of the quantity of excrements wherewith
his larger and more elevated Brain abounds: The third sort which possess the
whole substance of the Brain, and either only deprave the functions of the
three Prime Faculties, Reason, Imagination and Memory, are the simple Delirium,
the Frenzy, Melancholy, Madness, and Lycanthropy; or else wholly abolish them,
as in Folly, Stupidity, Forgetfulness, the Catoche, Carus, and Lethargy, which
is caused not only by a Cold Aqueous Phlegm, wherewith the Brain is soaked,
but also by such as is rendered viscous, thick, and tough, by the substance of
the strange and some extraneous heat, which causes the Putrefaction and Fever.

CONFERENCE CXLI. Whether it be better to marry, or not to marry.
IF Nature made the Crystalline humor of the Eye without color, the Tongue
without savor, the Ear without sound, to the end they might impartially judge
of all Objects offered to those Senses; I know not to whose judgment we must
referr the Decision of this Question: Virgins, married people, and those that
are not married, being equally interessed, and consequently, liable to
exception. The first, professing Hatred of Marriage; The second, unwilling to
blame it, for fear of affronting their passed Judgment; And the Third, being
unfit to judge thereof for want of Experience. If we will credit Cato, who had
tried it, and who being one day solicited by his Friends to second Nuptials,
told them, He had once been delivered from Shipwreck, and therefore cared not
for venturing to Sea again; those that never embarque in Marriage will gain the
Cause, it being the highest point of Humane Prudence to be wise at the expense
of others, whose example makes them justly fear the inconvenienes of a
Contract, so disadvantageous to the freedom of Man, as that of Marriage is,
wherein there is this peculiarity, that in all other Contracts, ever one party
is a gainer; but here both are oftentimes cheated, almost always discontented
with the bargain, and willing to retract, if they had liberty, which has been
retrencht eversince the Law of Divorce was abrogated by that of Grace, for the
greater mortifying of Men, and teaching them to suffer and sigh, in
satisfaction for their sins, under the heavy yoke of Marriage. Besides that,
the Friendship so much boasted therein, is so rare, as to be almost imposble;
partly, because the Will is never carried to love an Object but by its full
Liberty, and loves less upon never so little constraint; and partly, because
Converse shows the Married Couple one another's defects, which being always
more then their Virtues, it is no wonder if Hatred arise thereupon more
frequently than Amity, whatever artifice be used to make show of the contrary.

The Second said, He must be a Misanthropus, and have wholly renounced all
Humane Sentiments that can blame Marriage, the most honorable and ancient
Society of the World, founded not only upon the Divine Law, (which makes it a
Sacrament, and a very great Mystery) and upon that of Nations, by whose
universal Consent, it has been honored with great Privileges and Immunities;
as on the contrary, Celibacy has been publicly discountenanced and punished:
but also upon that of Nature, who has inspired into all Animals a desire of
joining and coupling together for Generation of their like; which desire is
greater in Men, inasmuch as he aspires to Immortality, no otherwise attainable
in this World but by Marriage, which revives him in his Children. And the
pleasure of them too is so great, that he must first be a Father that would
conceive what it is; nor is the yoke of Marriage insupportable, except to such
as desire to live dissolutely. The Amity arising thereupon, if founded upon
Virtue and Honor, not upon Beauty, or such other profitable or delightful Good,
differs as much from Love, as the continual temperate heat of the Blood and
Spirits does from its ebullition and distemper; being always augmented by
mutual Offices of either party, rendered with a frankness and confidence not
found in any other condition whatsoever, where there is nothing else but
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy. It Is in Marriage alone that there is any treating
with Liberty and Ingenuity; and therefore that State is to be desired, not
only by the miserable for Consolation of their Afflictions, but also by those
who are happy for communicating their Felicity, which is tedious when it has
no partakers.

The Third said, Our Life is full enough of miseries, without needing addition
of those that commonly attend Marriage; which a Philosopher, who had triy'd it,
said, has but two good days; the first, when there is nothing but laughing;
and the last, which delivers us from that sad slavery; perfectly contrary both
to liberty and quiet, (the two greatest Goods a wise Man can enjoy in this
Life) which are inconsistent with the turmoil of Houswifrie, and the Cares of
Marriage, from which therefore the Brachmans, Gymnosophists, Galli, and
Vestals, and at this day, such as are devoted to God's Service, have been
exempted, to the end the better to mind Contemplation and Virtuous Exercises;
both hard to be done in Marriage, wherein scarce any other Virtue is practiced
but Patience, (whereof it is the true School) which Socrates said, He had learnt
better by the scolding of his Wife, than by all the Precepts of the
Philosophers.

The Fourth said, Men would be Vagrants and Stragglers like wild Beasts, were
it not for Marriage, which is the foundation of the State; for it makes
Families, and Families make Commonwealths; which, consequently, owe their
Nativity and increase to married people, who have a much greater interest in
the Conservation of the State, than those that have neither House nor Home, as
unmarry'd Men seldom have. But as there is no complete Good in this World; so
Marriage, though a most holy and good thing in it self, instituted by God in
Paradise, and during the state of Innocence, has nevertheless its
incommodities, not so much from it self, as from the fault of the persons who
know not how to use it as they ought.

The Fifth said, It Is peculiar to Marriage to have nothing small or moderate;
every thing in it is extreme. It Is either full of sweetness and Affection, or
of Hatred and bitterness; it is either a Paradise, or a Hell. When it is suited
with all Conditions requisite, there is no state happier; but when any is
wanting, no Infelicity equals it. And because Good requires the integrity of
all its constituent parts, but Evil comes from the least defect; it is no wonder
that few or no Marriages are happy, since there is none wherein there is not
something to be wished for, especially when the match is made, (as most commonly
it is) by another's Hand; though it is strange, that Men who are so circumspect
and wary in other bargains, searching, examining, and taking Essay of what they
buy, should have so little Prudence in an Affair of such Consequence and
Danger. There is nothing but a Wife that a Man is obliged to keep as long as he
lives; but they have been taken at a venture, since, at the instance of the
Roman Dames, the Law of Ancus Martius was abolisht, who had purposely built a
Temple to Male-Fortune near the Tyber, where Women were carefully examined. And
as it is an intolerable madness to engage voluntarily into fetters and a
perpetual Prison, by subjecting one's self to the Caprichio of a Woman; so it is
great simplicity in a Man to entrust his Honor, the chiefest of all Goods, to
her inconstant humor, who may render us infamous when the Fancy takes her. I
think therefore, every one ought to consult himself, Whether it be fit for him
to marry or not, that is, Whether he believes he has Virtue and Constancy
enough to suffer the defects of a Woman, who may be commendable in some Point,
but at the bottom is always a Woman.

CONFERENCE CXLII. At what time the Rational Soul is infused.
AS Religion obliges us to believe, that the Soul, which is of an Immortal
Nature, comes immediately from God, who drawing it out of the Abyss of
Nothing, at the same time creates it in the Infusing, and infuses it in the
Creating; so nothing is determined absolutely touching the time in which that
infusion is made. For knowing which, we must observe that the whole time of the
Child's residing in the Womb, is divided into four parts; namely, the
Conception, Conformation, Motion, and Parturition; so distinguished between
themselves, that the time of Motion, is about treble to that of Conformation;
and the time of Parturition, double to that of Motion. The whole work of
Conformation is divided again into four times, according to which the Matter
contained is diversely fashioned and wrought, and is called Geniture, or
Coagulated Milk, Foetus, Embryo; and an Infant when the Conformation of the
parts is finished, which is at the thirtieth day for Boys, and at the forty
second for Girls; whose less Heat and more waterish materials, require a
longer time for Conformation of their Spermatick parts: After which the Blood
arriving, fills the void spaces of the Muscles, Fibers, and other carnous
parts, which are not perfectly shaped till toward the time of Motion, which is
the third month for Males, and the fourth for Females; at which time the Second
Conformation ends, and the whole organization is completed. At first, the
Infant has only a Vegetative Life, by means of which, his parts are generated
by the Alteration and Conformation of the Matter, and are nourished, and take
their growth not only by their Attraction from all parts of the Matrix, but
also by an Internal Vital Principle, which is the Vegetative Soul, residing in
all fruitful seed, and being the same with the Formative Faculty. Now because
the Vegetative or Sensitive Soul is but an accident, namely a certain Harmony
of the Four Qualities, therefore they easily give place upon the arrival of the
reasonable soul, which I think happens when the organization of the parts is
perfected, to wit, about the third or fourth month; before which time, the Body
not being organized, cannot receive the Soul, (which is the act of an Organical
Body) which also she forsakes, when, upon any notable solution of continuity,
the Organs are destroyed and abolished oftentimes, though the Temper of the
similary parts be not hurt; which consequently, is not the sole requisite for
the Infusion of the Soul, but also the convenient Fabric of the Organs.

The Second said, That the opinion, which introduces the Rational Soul in the
first days of Conception as soon as the matter necessary for receiving it,
begins to put on the diversity of Organs, is the most probable; since by this
means this soul differs from others in that it proceeds and makes the
dispositions, whereas others follow the same and absolutely depend thereupon.
And the same reason which obliges us to acknowledge the Reasonable Soul after
motion, constrains us to admit it before; which nothing hinders us from
attributing to some other cause, (as to the Sensitive Soul introduced before
the Rational) saving that causes are not to be multiplied without necessity,
and one Soul alone may suffice for Sense, whilst yet the defect of Organs allow
not the exercise of Reason. The same reason shows how absurd it is to assign
any other cause, in the first days, of the Vegetative Actions; it being as
easy to infer the presence of the Reasonable Soul by this sort of actions as
by the Sensitive Actions, which may also have another cause. For the infusion
of the Reasonable Soul after forty days cannot be proved by actions proper to
it (for it reasons not till long after) nor by the actions of a Soul simply;
for then you must grant that it is there before Organization, which is an
action proper to animated things. Moreover, the Soul must be admitted in the
Body as soon as it may be there, which is at the beginning of conception;
because even then there wants no fit disposition to this Soul, which needs not
any different Organs for the barely Vegetative Actions which she then performs,
no more then Plants do; nor are different Organs necessary to her absolute
exsisting, since God has created her immaterial and without any dependence:
and we see the similary parts of the Body are animated; so that the
dispositions wherewith the Soul can subsist, and which suffice to retain her in
the Body, are also sufficient to introduce her thereinto. Now these
dispositions are no other then the same which are requisite for the actions of
the Vegetative Soul. For whatever indisposition happen to the Organs of Sense
and Motion, the Soul abides in the Body till the heat be dissipated or
extinguished; the Organs of Sense and Motion being not necessary to retain the
Soul in the Body saving in as much as they contribute to respiration. Even the
Apoplexy which abolishes all the noble dispositions which the Philosophers
hold necessary to the Soul, never drives her away unless it be by accident;
since a Child in his Mothers belly may have that disease without incommodity,
saving when it comes to need respiration. Now though Organization be not a
disposition requisite to the introduction of the Soul, yet she requires certain
others, some whereof we know not, as that unexplicable character imprinted in
the Seed, besides the temperament which suffices perfectly to determine the
matter for introdudion of this form and exclusion of all other. The
conformation of Organs being not a disposition which determines necessarily
(seeing amongst humane bodies some differ more from the generality of men in
respect of the principal parts then they do from certain other Animals) but
it is the temperament alone, which arising in the first days after the mixture
of the two seeds, and according to Hippocrates, the foetus having in the first
seven days all that he ought to have, this opinion is more pious and expedient
for repressing the criminal license of those who without scruple procure
abortion within the first forty days.

The Third said, Though the Reasonable Soul be of a much sublimer nature then
the souls of other Creatures; yet being created with reference to the Body it is
not introduced thereinto till the same be fitted for its reception; as no other
natural form is ever received into a subject not previously fitted with all due
dispositions. And since the Soul is the principle of all actions, hence she
needs Organs and Instruments for performing them; and the more sublime she is,
the greater preparation does she require then the Sensitive Soul, as this also
does then the Vegetative, which demands only a certain mixture of the first
qualities, besides which the sensitive requires a more exquisite temperament of
the two Principles of Generation, Seed and Blood, endued with a vital Spirit,
capable of producing Sense and Motion. So that the Reasonable Soul ought not to
be infused, till after the conformation is in all points completed.

The Fourth said, Since there is no proportion but between things of the same
nature, the Immortal Reasonable Soul cannot have any with the corruptible Body,
and so not depend more on the matter in its infusion then in its creation,
which is probably the third day after conception; at which time the actions of
life appear in nutrition, growth, alteration, and configuration of the parts.
Which actions must proceed from some internal and animated principle; which
cannot be the Soul either of Father or Mother, since they act not where they
are not inherently; nor yet the spirit of the Seed which is not a principal
agent but only the instrument of a Soul; nor the formative virtue, which is
only an accident or temper of qualities, and in like manner the instrument of
some more noble agent. It Is therefore the Soul contained in the bosom of the
matter, which produces all these actions therein. They who hold the Reasonable
Soul not introduced till after the two others, consider not that Forms
receiving no degrees of more or less cannot be perfected or changed one into
another, much less annihilated; seeing corruption is caused only by contraries,
and Forms have none. It follows therefore that the Reasonable Soul is the
principle of all these functions; which she performs according to the
dispositions she meets with; and that she is the architect of her own
habitation.

CONFERENCE CXLIII. Of Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of Souls.
THough Metemphychosis, or the Transmigration of Souls, be rather imaginary
then true; yet because there is nothing which more inriches the Field of
Philosophy then liberty of reasoning, we shall here inquire whether the
Heathen, guided only by the light of Nature had any reason to maintain this
extravagance; which was first taught in Greece by Pythagoras who had learned it
of the Egyptians; by whom and most other Nations of antiquity it was believed
not only that souls departed out of some bodies re-entered and animated others,
but also that all things after a certain revolution of Ages should resume the
same state wherein they had formerly been. This was also the opinion of Plato,
saving that he was more rational then Pythagoras, who making three Souls of the
same quality, said that those of men after death went to animate the bodies of
Men, Beasts, or Plants; for which reason he abstained from the flesh of
Animals, and could hardly resolve to eat Beans for fear of biting his Fathers
head. But Plato held the Transmigration of Rational Souls only into humane
Bodies. Which opinion though less absurd then the former (which destroys it
self by the confusion it introduces amongst all natural beings) yet it has its
inconveniences too; since the Soul being an incomplete form, making one whole
with its other half the Body, it can never meet with one in all points like the
first; besides that, were it in another, it would have an inclination toward
the first, and so would not be in such body in quality of a form, but in a
state of constraint and violence.

The Second said, That the Pythagorical Metemphychosis is not more absurd (in
regard that being the form gives a determinate and specifical being to every
thing, if humane souls past into the bodies of Beasts or Plants, these
Creatures would be Men;) then that of Plato seems probable: nothing hindering
but that a humane soul may enter into another humane body after the dissolution
and ruin of the former. For if there be any thing to hinder it, it must be
because there is no return from privation to habit, That which has sometimes
been, can no more be such as it was, and it is impossible for a soul which has
once informed a body to re-enter it again and there exercise the functions of
life after having been once totally thence expelled. But these Reasons hinder
not, seeing the soul may be introduced anew into some body wherein it is not
now, but has been formerly; as Gangraenous and wholly mortified members may be
again vivified by a powerful effect of the soul and the goodness of
temperament. Moreover, it is not less possible for that which never was to
begin to be, then for that which has formerly been to exsist again in nature;
seeing both being equally pure nothing, they are objects sufficient to be
created by God; as the first matter (which is almost nothing) is the object of
Nature, his inferior; and natural bodies are the objects of Art which is below
Nature. So that not only souls, after having informed one body, may pass into
an another by Metempsychosis, but (which seems more difficult) the same soul
may again inform the same body.

The Third said, It Is impossible for one and the same thing which has been to
be a new; for then it should be twice and have two durations, and consequently
two existences, and so not be one and the same thing; seeing singularity
depends upon existence. So neither can the same soul return into the totally
deserted body, although it may re-animate some parcels of it, nor yet into
other bodies. For in the first place, as for the souls of Plants and Beasts,
there is no more reason to believe that these forms disappearing upon
destruction of the Organs whereby they exercise their functions, go to animate
other bodies of the same species, then that, when my wood is burnt, the same
form of fire goes to seek another faggot and kindle the same as soon as fit
dispositions thereunto arise; if it were so, the Woodmongers should have a very
dangerous Trade. Moreover this transmigration of souls is either absolutely
necessary (that is, bodies are animated no other way but this) and so there
will be no other new generation, but the supernumerary souls must wait till
their turn come, (according as the Platonic poet Virgil represents them in the
sixth Book of his Aeneis) for if there be more bodies then souls, there will be
no production, whatever disposition be found in the matter; and then though we
sow the Ground never so much with Corn, nothing will come of it, in case more
be sown then there are Vegetative Souls to animate it; whence we should be in
great danger of Famine. As for the Reasonable Soul, since there is no animated
body whose outward figure is not an Index of its inward form, were there such a
thing as Metempsychosis, the soul of a Horse should be under the outward form
of a Man, and so all knowledge from external shape should be deceit and
delusions, far from serving for Physiogmony. Moreover the Ancients introduced
this Opinion, partly to frighten the wicked, by making them believe that after
death their souls should do penance in the bodies of Beasts whose manners they
had imitated (Cowards becoming Hares, and cruel persons Wolves,) till after
repurgation by the River Lethe they should again become men; and partly to
excite the good with hopes that their souls should be received into the bodies
of Heroes and Demigods; such fabulous stories serving to keep the more
ignorant sort within their duty.

The Fourth said, That the separated soul carries along with her, only three
powers, the Understanding, Will, and the Motive Faculty; by means whereof she
is carried toward what she desires by a real local-motion, whereof she is as
well capable without as within the body. Now she desires nothing so much as to
be united to the body with whom she has formerly been conjoined. And
consequently she cannot but return thither of her own accord; seeing when the
desire and power meet the effect must necessarily follow, especially when the
desiring is in a violent state, contrary to its own Nature, as that of the
separated Soul is; and therefore since nothing violent is of long duration, the
Soul's separation from her Body cannot be perpetual.

The Fifth said, If it be true that nothing is made which has not already
been, and that, according to Origin, there was a certain number of Souls
produced in the beginning of the Creation, after which it is said, That God
rested from all his Works, and that he creates nothing since he put the last
hand to the perfection of the World, (which it borrows from the forms or
beauties which it contains) it may seem consentaneous to the ornament of the
Universe, to say that it was at first stored with all the forms, wherewith the
Matter is informed, according as it comes to have fit dispositions thereunto.
And that these forms having no contraries, and consequently being
incorruptible, upon forsaking their first Subject, (through default of fit
dispositions to maintain them) are received into other Subjects, like the
first, and consequently, as capable of receiving such form, which of it self is
indifferent to one Subject as well as to another; but since the Rational Soul
cannot have any particular Inclination toward the Body it formerly animated,
which after Death being no longer Organical, nor capable of being so, but only
Dust and Ashes; it is more probable, that when separated, it resents motions (if
it have any) toward some Body duly organized, and not yet furnished with a
form; there being (besides) less incovenience in saying that one and the same
Soul, can animate diverse Bodies one after another, than that it can animate
diverse at the same time, and in diverse places, which nevertheless is the
Opinion of most Philosophers. For when it is separated, it remains still an Act
and a Form, capable of informing any sort of well disposed Body, without
affecting any in particular; into which it enters not ignorant, since Knowledge
follows Immaterality, and the Species and Notions being to the Soul, what
accidents are to their Subjects from which they are inseparable, they must
accompany her wherever she goes; although by reason of the Clouds, and
humidities of the Body which she informs, she is not actually knowing in
Infancy, but only proportionably, as in time the Body comes to be dried, and
the humidities absumed, the Species which were engraven in the Soul begin to
appear, and as it were to be produced a new by Reminiscence, which necessarily
follows Metempsychosis.

CONFERENCE CXLIV. Whether there were braver Men in any preceding Age, than in
the present.
ALthough this Question, being rather of Fact than of Right, might best be
discussed, by comparing all the great Men of every Age between themselves, or
those of each Age with ours; yet that way would be too long, by reason of the
great number of Illustrious Men who have flourished downwards to our Age, which
is the fifty seventh since the Creation of the World, (the duration whereof
amounts to 5920. years, according to the most probable Opinion, which reckons
3683. years and three months to the Nativity of our Lord) the Matter may also
be decided by Reason, provided we lay aside two powerful Passions; the one
proper to young Men, who always value themselves above their Predecessors,
and, like Rehoboam, think their own little finger stronger than the whole Body
of their Fathers; the other ordinary to old Men, who always extol the time
past above the present, because the infirmities of their Bodies and Minds, no
longer allowing them the contentment they formerly enjoyed, they know not where
to charge the fault but upon Time, though, in truth, it lies upon Themselves.
For Nature being still as Wise and Powerful as heretofore, and the Universal
Causes the same, their Operations must be likewise as perfect, and their
Effects as excellent in these days, as they have been in any. Then, as for our
Minds, they are so far from being impaired, that they improve more and more in
acuteness; and being of the same Nature with those of the Ancients, have such
an advantage beyond them, as a Pigmy has upon the shoulders of a Giant; from
whence he beholds not only as much, but more than his supporter does.

The Second said, As a Stone has more force by how much it is less from the
hand that flings it; and generally all Causes act more powerful upon their
next, than upon their distant Effects: so also Men are less perfect
proportionally to their remoteness from their Source and Original, from whence
they derive all their perfection. This decay is chiefly observed in our bodies,
which are not so sound and well-constituted, as those of our Ancestors; and
therefore it is no wonder if the Souls wherewith they are informed, have less
Vigor though the same Nature. For although, in order to judge aright of the
Excellence of the Souls of one Age compared with another, we ought to wave that
advantage which the later have over the preceding, by enjoying the benefit of
their inventions; whereunto it is as easy to add, as it is to build upon a good
foundation, whereof others have firmly laid the first stones and Pillars. Yet,
for all those great advantages, there has not in these last Ages, appeared any
one equal to those grand Personages of Antiquity, who have had the vogue in
each Art and Science. Moreover, want of things made them more ingenious, and
the Experience of many years rendered them capable of every thing; whereas now
we cease to live, when we but begin to know our selves. Indeed they had the
true Disciplines and Sciences, whereof we have no more but the shadows; and
instead of real and solid Philosophy, such as that of the First Ages was,
nothing remains to us but an useless Scholastic Gibberish, which having been
banished the Company of all discreet people, is shamefully confined to the
enclosure of Colleges, where I am confident the Professors will readily yield
to Socrates, Plato, Lycurgus, Solon, and the Seven Sages of Greece, to whose
Age, which was the year of the World, 3400. I clearly give the prize; there
being no indowment of the Mind preferrable to that of Wisdom.

The Third said, If Wisdom must carry it, there is no Age to be compared to
that of Solomon: but because one Swallow makes not a Spring, I should prefer
before it that of Augustus and Tiberius, when the Roman Empire was in its
greatest Glory; the rather because our Savior, the Paragon of all great Men
lived in it, and Virgil, Ovid, Cicero, Cato, besides many others, flourisht at
the same time. Not to speak of the rare Inventions which also then appeared; as
Malleable Glass, and Perpetual Lights, both now unknown.

The Fourth said, If the complaint of the decay of Wits were true and new, the
World must be very old, since Seneca, who lived 1500. years ago, made the same
in his time: But if the present Wits are not inferior to those of Seneca's
time, it will follow, either that the world grows not worse, as is commonly
said, or that long Series of years, which makes above a quarter of the whole
Age the world, is taken but for one and the same time: In which Case, the world
must be older than religion and truth teach us, before it fell into that decay,
wherein we see it continue for so many Ages. But indeed, it is a weakness to
imagine that Wits diminish; our Natural Inclination to despise what we
possess, and to regret what is passed, making us judge to our own disadvantage,
that we are less perfect than our Ancestors, and that our Nephews must be worse
than our selves; whence arose that Fiction of Four Ages, differing according to
so many Metals; the Golden one, by reason of its excellence; that of Silver,
Brass and Iron, proportionably, as Men fell from the former Perfection of Soul,
and Innocence of Manners. But all this while, it is in the beginning of the
World that the weakness of Man appeared by suffering himself to be governed by
his Wife, and the damnable Resolution of a Fratricide. Moreover, the Mind of
Man being a Power of well Conceiving, Reasoning, Inventing, and doing other
Functions, whereof he is capable, he may arrive to a Supreme Degree of
Excellence, either by the pure and liberal Will of his Maker, or by the
disposition and concurrence of Natural Causes, or by Humane Industry. So that
God, Nature, and Art, the three sole Agents of this World, being the same as
heretofore, they must produce the same Effects. For God creates not Souls now
with less advantages and grace than formerly; he is as liberal of his favors
as ever, especially in the Ages of Grace. Nor does Nature and other Second
Causes contribute less to the perfection of Souls than heretofore. And the
Humane Soul, however independent of Matter as to its Essence, yet is so linked
to the Organs of the Body, that it operates well or ill according as those are
diversely affected, which is, what we call Good or Bad Wit, whilst we judge
thereof by the Actions, and not by the Essence. For those Organs and
Dispositions depend of the Elements and Superior Bodies, which are always the
same, and consequently, must produce the same Effects; and hence, the equal
Dispositions of Bodies, will infer equal perfection of Minds. But as for the
difference of Souls arising from Art and Instruction, undoubtedly, those of our
Age are better cultivated than any ever have been in times passed.

The Fifth said, When I consider the high pitch whereunto so many great Men
have carried the Glory of these last Ages, I find more wonders than in the
preceding; but it pertains only to the Ages ensuing to make their Elogiums;
Great Men, whilst living, being kept down by Envy or Contempt. One Age must be
let pass, before we begin to judge of the worth of it; then the following
begins to regret what it slighted, it being natural to us to seek only what
is wanting, and to be disgusted with plenty. And truly, I think it is the
multitude of persons excelling in all sort of Arts, and especially in the
Sciences, (whereof never were so many Doctors, Regents, and Professors, seen in
one single Age as in this) that makes us less esteem the ingenious that are now
living; for it is only rarity that gives price to things, and that made him
pass for a great Clerk a few Ages ago, who could but write and read; he that
spoke Latin was a Prodigy, though now it is a Tongue almost as universal, and
common as the Native. Now Admiration being the Daughter of Ignorance, the
esteem had of most of the admired in former Ages, is rather an Argument of the
Rudeness and Ignorance of the Times, than of the excellence of their Wits. Nor
were they better than we in their Manners, but only more simple, and yet
culpable of as many Crimes. But were we the more wicked, this were no Argument
of want of Wit, which is the matter in question. And if there have been
sometimes a Ceres, a Bacchus, a Pallas, a Vulcan, and others, advanced to
Deities for finding out the way to sow Wheat, plant Vine-yards, spin Wool, and
forge Iron; we have had in these last Ages the Inventors of the Compass, the
Gun, Printing, the Tubes of Galileo, and a thousand other Inventions both more
difficult and excellent; the easiest having been first discovered. The Modesty
of those that govern us, (who no less hate the vanity of praise, than they know
how to exercise Actions deserving it) permits me not to show you, that all
passed Ages have nothing that comes near the grandeur of their Souls, and that
their conduct is the more to be admired, in that their business is both to keep
themselves up with Friends, and give reason to Enemies, who also help to
verify, that there are greater Statesmen and Captains in this Age, than in
any of the preceding.

CONFERENCE CXLV. Of the Serene, which is a hurtful Dew falling in Summer
Evenings.
AS Painters find it harder to represent a calm smooth Sea, than the rampant
foaming billows of a storm, which require more variety of Colors, and afford
the Pencil more liberty; and as a History of Peace is harder to write, and less
pleasant to read, than the Troubles and Commotions of War: So I think it less
difficult to describe the several impressions of Tempests, than those of a calm
Air, which nevertheless at certain times, produces pernicious Effects; so much
more remarkable, in that they proceed from a very simple Cause, no-wise
malignant of it self, to wit, from a clear and serene Air, free from Clouds and
Vapors, which in the Evening being cooled by the reason of the Sun's
Elongation, acquires a certain Refrigerating and Catarrhous quality, called by
the vulgar, The Serene: because it happens either in the Evening, or more
commonly in fair weather, when the Air is serene, than when it is pluvious and
full of Vapors. Which quality, some ascribe to the Influence of the Stars,
especially to the Moon, termed for that reason by the Psalmist, Infrigidans;
which has indeed a notable dominion over all Humid Bodies, particularly, those
of Men, who find sensible alterations in themselves, according to the several
faces of that Planet. But because the Heavens diffuse their Influences upon
those that are under covert, as well as upon those that are in the open Air,
where only the Serene is felt; I should rather pitch upon the alterations of
the refrigerated Air, which acts but so far as it is near us; and it is always
more proper to attribute Effects here below to proximate Causes, than to recur
to the Heaven, which is but an equivocal Cause thereof.

The Second said. If Cold were the Cause of the Serene, the same should happen
wherever it were cold, and be more hurtful according to the vehemence of that
quality, as toward Midnight or Morning, and likewise in Winter: Yet the Serene
is never spoken of but in the temperate Seasons of Spring and Autumn, and some
little portion of the Seasons bordering upon them. Besides, in Summer the air
of our cold Caves should be capable of producing it at mid-noon. Wherefore I
cannot think the Serene an effect of bare cold, but of the vapors wherewith the
air, howsoever apparently pure, is always charged (whence proceeds the
diversity of refractions In the Planets, especially at Sunrise and Sunset,
which is never without some clouds) which vapors being destitute of the
diurnal heat and so coming to be condensed, fall down upon our heads just as
Dew does, which is produced after the same manner but of a matter somewhat
thicker and more copious. And as there is no Dew so there is no Serene but in
temperate Seasons, and Regions; never in Winter or the midst of Summer: for
violent cold congeals these vapors into Frost and Ice, and vehement heat
dissipates and consumes them. The practice of our Ladies (who use to remain in
the Serene, thereby to whiten their complexion and soften their flesh) shows
that this evening-air having a cleansing and levigating virtue must be
impregnated with a quality like Dew, which is detersive by reason of the salt
which it drew from the earth; by means whereof it not only whitens Linen and
Wax but also purges Animals, as appears by the fluxes happening to Sheep driven
out to grass before the Sun has consumed the Dew; and by Manna, which is
nothing but a condensed dew, and has a purgative virtue.

The Third said, Man's body being subject to the injuries of all external
Agents, receives so much greater from the impressions of the Air, as the same
is more necessary to life; capable of subsisting for some time without other
things, but not a moment without Air, which is continually attracted into our
Bodies not only by respiration, but also by insensible transpiration through
the Pores of the Body, which is pierced with holes like a Sieve for admission
of air which is taken in by the Arteries in their motion of Diastole or
Dilatation. And being most agile and subtle, it easily penetrates our Bodies,
altering them by the four first qualities wherewith it is variously impregnated
according to the vicinity of the Bodies environing it, which make the four
Seasons of the Year, wherein it variously disposes the bodies upon which it
acts, changing even their natural temperament. And because the parts of a
natural day have some proportion with those of a year, upon account of the
several changes caused by the common and proper revolutions of the Sun; hence
the Morning is like the Spring hot and moist, or rather temperate, and the
Blood then predominates: Noon resembles Summer, hot and dry, at which time
Choler is in motion: the following part is cold and dry, Melancholy and
correspondent to Autumn: the Evening and whole Night, by its coldness and
humidity which puts Phlegm in motion, is a little Winter, the coldness whereof
proceeds not from the vapors (which are always accompanied with some extraneous
heat, whereby they are retained in the Air and kept from falling) but from the
bare privation of the heat of the Sun, who, as by his presence he actually
causes heat in the Air, so by his absence he causes coldness in the same; which
penetrating our Bodies calefi'd by the diurnal heat, easily therein condenses
the vapors which are not yet settled or laid, and squeesing them out of the
Brain and all the parts (just as we do water out of a wet sponge) they fall
upon the weakest parts, where they cause a fluxion and pain.

The Fourth said, That the Air being of it self very temperate, can never do
any mischief, unless it be mixed with some extraneous substances, as Vapors and
Exhalations which continually infect the first Region wherein we reside. And
because those subtle parts of Earth and Water exhaled into it are
imperceptible, it is not strange if they produce such sudden and unexpected
effects, as we see the Serene does; which is caused by vapors raised after
Sunset by the force of the heat remaining upon the surface of the Earth, like
those arising from heated water after it is taken off the fire: So that the
Serene is that vapor whilst it mounts upwards, not when it falls downwards;
for it cannot descend till it be rendered heavier by condensation into Water,
Clouds or Mists, which make the Air nubilous and not serene, as in this effect
it uses to be. But at their first elevation, they are more volatile, rare,
subtle, and invisible.

The Fifth said, That the chief cause of this hurtful accident, is the change
of one contrary into another without medium, which is always incommodious to
Nature; who for that reason conjoyns all extremes by some mediums, which serve
for dispositions to pass from the one to the other without difficulty. And as
the alteration of the body from cold to hot is painful, (witness those who hold
their cold hands to the fire after handling of Ice) in like sort that from hot
to cold is very incommodious; whence the hotter the preceding day has been,
the more dangerous is the serene; because the pores of the Body being opened,
and all the humors disordered and moved, by the diurnal heat, the cold
insinuates into and works upon the same with more liberty; just as heated water
is soonest frozen by reason its parts are more opened by the heat, and
consequently more capable of receiving the impressions of Agents. Which is also
the reason why the first cold hurts us rather then the greatest frosts, namely,
because it finds the body more open, then ensuing hard weather does. So though
in Winter the air be colder, yet because it is almost continually the same, it
makes less impression in the evening upon our bodies already accustomed to its
rigor: and though the air is colder at midnight then at Sunset, yet the serene
is only at the beginning of the night, when our bodies more sensibly receive
alteration from the same. Wherefore it is only the sudden change of the air
which makes the serene, whereof our bodies are the more sensible according to
the openness of the pores and of the futures of the head, and the softness of
the flesh, which renders the body obnoxious to external causes, as hardness
(which secures it from them) makes it subject to internal causes, through want
of transpiration. Hence Peasants, Soldiers and all such as are hardened by
labor and are of a firm and constant constitution, feel no inconvenience from
the Serene, although they breathe an air more subtle, and consequently more
capable of being impregnated in the evening with qualities noxious to the body.

CONFERENCE CXLVI. Whether the French are Light and Inconstant; and why?
THere is no more perfect Mirror of Inconstancy, then Man; as appears by the
pleasure his body takes in the change of Pasture, his mind in that of Objects,
and both in that of Condition. Hence men look not upon present honors but as
so many steps whereby to ascend to new; the possession of present goods
bringing no other satisfaction then that of their Stomach, that is, till a
second Appetite be excited by new Meats. Whereunto the nimbleness of their
volatile Spirits, the fluidity and mobility, of their humors which constitute
the temperament, too notoriously furnish the efficient and material cause to
inquire elsewhere for them; for which reason the melancholic are less subject
to this defect; this earthy humor being less susceptible of change, whence
they prove more wise. But amongst all Nations there is none to whom the vice of
Levity is more imputed then to the French. Caesar who had long conversed with
them, frequently objects the same to them, and experience sufficiently shows by
what is passed that they are very far from the constancy of other Nations, as
not only their Statutes and Edicts which they cannot long observe, but all
their Modes and Customs, and their desire of novelty abundantly testify. The
causes whereof are either from the Climate or the Soil. For it is observed that
where the Heaven is always in the same posture, as toward the Poles; or where
the Sun heats almost in the same degree as near the Equator (which makes the
days and nights equal), the Manners and Inclinations of the People are also
equal: on the contrary, those that by the several remotions and approaches of
the Sun have different constitutions of Air, receive suitable impressions from
the same, which are afterward manifested in their actions. And because what is
below is the same with what is on high, the Earth consequently partakes of the
same alterations which the Heaven produces in the Air, and retains them longer:
Thus our Soul being heated and cooled, moistened and dried in one and the same
day, suffering contrary changes in a very little time; it is no wonder if the
Aliments it affords make the parts, humors, and spirits, like it self, that is
to say, flitting, inconstant, and mutable; which parts being communicated from
Father to Son, can no more be changed by us, even by Travels and Alteration of
Soil, than the Moor can change his skin which the temper of his native climate
has in like manner given him. Add hereunto, that the French Courtesy,
receiving all strangers more civilly than any Nation of the World, is also more
easily lead by their persuasions and examples: And whereas the roughness and
rusticity of many other people thinks shame and scorn to change, (as implying
preceding Ignorance) the sincerity and frankness of the French is such, that he
easily alters his Mind and way as soon as another seems better to him than his
own: other Nations, (whatever Pride they take in being always constant and
equal to themselves, and especially more patient than we in our Adversities)
surpassing us only in this particular, that they better know how to dissemble
their discontents.

The Second said, Lightness of Minds is, like that of Bodies, respective only,
not absolute. And as Air is termed Light, in respect of Water and Earth; so
dull people, those of the North, and such others as would have gravity alone in
words, gestures, and actions, pass for Wisdom, call the French light, because
they are more nimble and active then themselves; and being really what others
are only in appearance, affect not that false mask of Wisdom, whereof they
possess the solidity and Body, whilst these content themselves with enjoying
its shadow and ghost. For it is not the change of habits or modes that argues
that of the Mind, but in great Matters, as Religion and State, in maintaining
whereof, the French may be affirmed more constant than any Nation. It Is not an
Age yet, since France bad reason to glory, (as well as in Saint Jerome's time)
of never having produced Monsters, but of planting the Faith well amongst all
its Neighbors, whose rigorous Inquisition is less a testimony of the Constancy,
than of the lightness or baseness of their Spirits, since they are kept in
their Religion by fear of the Wheel and the Gallows. Then as for the State, the
French Monarchy is the ancientest in the world, and has been always maintained
amidst the ruins and downfalls of other States, by the exact observation of
its fundamental Laws; which is an eminent Argument of the Constancy of the
French; the Nations who have most charged them with this Vice, showing
themselves the most inconstant, whilst this puissant body of France remains
always like it self; which it could not do, if the members which compose it
were light and inconstant, the greatest Vice wherewith they can asperse us.
For since, according to Seneca, Wisdom is always to will and not-will the same
things; Inconstance and Irresolution, in willing sometimes one thing, sometimes
another, is a certain testimony of Folly, Imprudence, and weakness of Mind;
which coming to change, intimates either that it took not its measures aright,
nor apprehended the fit means of attaining to the proposed end, or that it had
not Courage and Resolution enough to go through with its designs. And not
only he who has an inconstant and flitting Spirit is incapable of Wisdom,
which requires a settled Mind, not mutable like that of the Fool, (who, as the
Scripture says, changes like the Moon) but also of all sort of Virtue, which
consisting in a mediocrity, is not attainable but by Prudence which prescribes
its Bounds and Rules, and by Stability and Constance which arms the Mind
against all difficulties occurring in the way of Virtue; in which, as well as
in the Sciences and Arts, the French having more share than any other Nation,
it is injurious to accuse them of Inconstancy.

The Third said, It Is not more vanity to believe one's self perfect in all
things, than temerity in going about (upon blind passion for his Country) to
exempt it from a Vice, whereof all strangers, who know us better than we do our
selves, are universally agreed. Let us confess therefore that we are
inconstant, since, in comparison of the Vices of other Neighboring Nations,
this will not only appear light, but make it doubtful, whether it be a Vice,
since it is grounded upon Nature, which is in perpetual change; whereby she
appears more beautiful and agreeable than in identity and rest, which, is not
found even in the prime Bodies and universal Causes, which as well as others,
are in a continual mobility and change, which is no-wise contrary to Wisdom,
which requires that we accommodate our selves to the circumstances of places,
persons, and times, which alter incessantly, and that we consequently alter our
Conclusions according thereunto; besides that, change of Opinion is a testimony
of a free and ingenuous Spirit, as that of the French is; and it may be
attributed to the power of example, in a people environed with sundry Nations
extremely different, and consisting of Spirits which are imbued with the
qualities of them all. For this Country lying under the forty third degree, and
the forty eighth, the mixture of these people, which partake a little of the
Southern, and a little of the Northern Neighbors; sometimes conforms to the
modes of one, sometimes to those of the other: And as in the change of Colors,
the difference is not seen but in the two extreamities, those of the middle
appearing changeable and diversifi'd; so France situated between the Germans,
Italians, and Spaniards, mixing and tempering in it self the qualities of those
Nations which are in its extreamities, appears to them changeable and uncertain.

The Fourth said, Though the French are not more inconstant than others, yet
their boiling and impetuous humor, and the quickness of all their Actions
having made them be esteemed such by all their Neighbors, I shall rather refer
the Cause thereof to their abundance of Spirits, which are the sole Motors and
Principles of all Actions, (produced by the purity of their Air, and the
variety of their Aliments) than to the Aspects of Heaven, or such other Causes;
since Nations under the same parallel, with France, as Podolia, Hungary,
Tartary, and many others, should be subject to the same Vice, which was
sometimes imputed to the Grecians, the most fickle and inconstant of all
people; without referring the Cause to the Winds, as Cardan held, that such as
are most exposed thereunto, to have volatile Spirits; otherwise the French, and
other Nations, subject to Winds, should quit their levity when they came into
Climates less windy.

CONFERENCE CXLVII. Of the sundry Motions of the Sea and Rivers.
NOthing ravishes us more than the Motion of Inanimate Bodies; Automata, or
Bodies moving by Artifice, having in the beginning made Idolaters, who were
undeceived when they came to know the Springs of them. But above all, the
Motions of the Sea seem the more mavelous, in that they are very different
and contrary. And they are of two sorts; One Internal, and common to all heavy
Bodies, whereby the Water descends downwards, the agitated Sea becomes calm by
returning to its level, and Rivers follow the declivity of the Lands through
which they pass: The other, violent, which is either irregular, (rendered so by
the irregularity of the Winds) or regular; which again is of two sorts, namely,
that of reciprocation in the flux and reflux of the Sea, and that which depends
upon the several parts of the World, being either from East to West, or from
North to South. It Is true, Water being naturally fluid and moveable, and not to
be contained within its own bounds, it were more strange if this great Body
were immovable, than to see it move, as it was necessary it should for
Navigation, and to avoid corruption. The wonder only is, to see in one sole
Body so great a diversity of Motions, whereof only the first is natural to it;
the others arise from some extrinsick Causes; amongst which, none acting more
sensibly upon the Elements than the Celestial Bodies, it is to the diversity of
their Motions, that those of the Sea must be imputed, but particularly, that of
its flux and reflux, which being regular, and always alike in one and the same
Sea, cannot proceed but from as regular a Cause, such as the Heaven is, and
chiefly the Moon, which manifestly exercises its empire over all Humid Bodies,
the flux and reflux following the Lunar Periods and Motions, not only every
six months, to wit, during the two Aequinoxes when their Tides are very high,
but also every month in the Conjunction and Opposition of the Moon, and also
every six hours of the day, almost all Seas have their flux and reflux, except
some which make the same in more or less time, and are longer in their reflux
than their flux; or on the contrary, according to the declivity and various
winding of the Lands, the greatness or smallness of Creeks, the Streights of
the Seas, narrowness of banks, and other differences of situation.

The Second said, That the Sea, being a simple body, can have but one natural
Motion, viz. that of its own weight, which makes it flow into places lower than
its source, which it can never surmount. Amongst the other three Motions
proceeding from without, that from East to West is discerned by the time spent
in Voyages at Sea, which is much longer from West to East, than from East to
West: because in the first, they move contrary to the Motion of the Sea, and in
the second with it. Now the cause hereof is the impression of the First Mover
upon all the Orbs and Inferior Bodies, which follow the rapidity of its daily
Motion from East to West upon the Poles of the World. That from North to South,
is likewise seen in most Seas, and chiefly in the Euxine, which being filled by
the Palus Maeotis, and the Tanais, discharges it self by the Aegaean, into the
Mediterranean Sea; which, were it not for the high sluices of Africa, would
continue the same Motion Southwards: Which sometimes hindered Darius and
Sesostris from digging that space of Land which is between the Red Sea and the
Mediterranean, for fear lest this latter should overflow those Southern
Countries. The Cause of this Motion, is the multitude of Waters toward that
Pole, whose coldness not raising so great a quantity of Vapors and Rains as
toward the South, the Waters come to be greater there, and so are forced to
fall toward the lower places. Or rather, (since there is the same cold under
the Antarctick Pole, and consequently, the same quantity of Waters and Rains)
this descent of the Waters Southwards, must be attributed to the Elevation of
the Earth in the North, or to the narrow mouths or gulphs of those Seas which
make the waters descend out of them more easily than they enter into them. As
to the flux and reflux, which is a Compounded, but regular Motion, it cannot
proceed from Vapors, or from inconstant and irregular Winds, but from the
Motion, Light, and particular Influence of the Moon; which attracting the Sea
in the same manner that the Lodestone does the Iron, is the Cause of its
accumulation, or swelling and increase, which makes the flux: And then her
Virtue abating by her elongation, the Waters by their proper weight resume
their level, and so make the reflux. And because all Seas are continuous, the
Moon when under our Horizon, ceases not to cause the same Motions in our Seas,
as when she is above it; the Waters necessarily following the motion of those
which are next them, which would be alike in all did not some variation arise
from the different situations of Lands, which is the cause that the flux and
reflux of the Ocean is more sensible then the Mediterranean, and in this the
Adriatic, then the Tuscan, by reason that Sicily and the point of Italy makes
the Sea enter impetuously into the Gulf of Venice; wherein is observed another
particular motion called Circulation, whereby the Mediterranean flowing by its
proper motion from East to West, and meeting immediately at the entrance of
that Gulf the Coast of Macedonia, discharges it self impetuously thereinto and
continues its motion to the bottom of the Gulf, whence being repercuss'd it
returns by the opposite Coast of Calabria to the other point of the Gulf by
which it enters into the Tuscan Sea. Hence, to go from Venice to Otranto they
take the Coast of Galabria; and to return back, that of Macedonia.

The Third said, Nothing so strongly argues the mobility of the Earth as the
motions of the Sea and Rivers: for what else were it but a miracle if water
contained in an immovable vessel should agitate and move it self. That of
Rivers proceeds not from their weight, which makes them fall into a place
nearer their Center; seeing that in a declivity requisite to the course of a
River for 200 leagues, there must then be a depression more sensible then the
altitude of the highest Mountains of the Earth, nor could the Sea remit the
waters to their Springs (as the holy Scripture says it does) if those Springs
were higher then it. But supposing the motion of the Earth, it is easy to
render a reason of that of the Water. As for Rivers, (almost all which run
westward) the Earth having its Diurnal Motion from West to East (according to
the Hypothesis of Copernicus) may cause this their contrary motion by
subtracting it self from the fluidity of the waters (liquid bodies not exactly
following the motion of solid) as the water in a Tub rises in the side opposite
to that toward which you sway the Vessel. By the same reason also the Sea
shall have its course from East to West, which is therefore very sensible
between the two Tropicks where the rapidity of the Earths motion is greater
then under the Poles. Hence upon this account Navigation is very easy
Westward, the Currents very violent, the Tides great toward the Coast of
America: as is observed chiefly in Magellan's Straight, where the refluxes of
the Northern and Eastern Sea are advanced above 70 leagues; and the Mar del Sur
scarce goes to 25, and that weakly: but about the Poles the Sea has no other
motion but that which is caused by Winds and Tempests. As for the flux and
reflux of the Sea, according to the same supposition, of its motion compounded
of the annual in the Ecliptic (where others make the Sun circulate) and the
Diurnal upon its own Axis and proper Center there arises a certain irregular
motion, sometimes slower and sometimes swifter, which is the cause of that flux
and reflux: for as in a Boat moved at first swiftly and then caused to move
somewhat slower, the water contained therein swells in its extremities till by
continuation of that motion it recover its level; and the Boat being again
driven with the same velocity, the water swells again upon the change of the
motion: the same comes to pass upon the unequal motion of the Earth mixed of the
annual and diurnal. But because the Moon being annexed to the Earth exactly
follows its motions; therefore most Philosophers have taken the Moon for the
cause of the flux and reflux, although she be only the sign of it.

The Fourth said, That according to this Hypothesis it is easy to render a
reason of two things very remarkable in Danubius and Nilus. The first which
runs from West to East, is observed in Hungary to move slower about Noon then
at other hours of the day, as appears by the Water-mills which grind less at
that time: because the motion of the Earth being then contrary to that of the
Ecliptic, it consequently appears more slow. And as for the other effect,
namely, the increase and inundation of Nilus, which begins at the Summer
Solstice, this River running directly from South to North from, one Tropic to
another, which is just the middle part of the Earth, when it comes to incline
its Axis and return the Antarctick part to the Sun, the stream of this River,
which is contrary to that motion, waxes slower; and being besides augmented by
the continual Rains of Summer, swells and overflows the Plains of Egypt. Which
made some Ancients imagine that the North Winds blew again the stream at that
time and forced the water back upon themselves.

CONFERENCE CXLVIII. Whether is better, to Love, or to be Loved.
THe same Nature, which by an instinct common to us withal things in the
world, causes us to seek our own good, obliges us likewise to Love, when we
meet Goodness or Beauty in an object capable to render us happy by its
possession; which consisting in being united to the thing loved, it is in this
union that the Lover places his greatest felicity, and accordingly goes out of
himself to join himself to what he loves; the motions of the will (of whose
number Love is) differing in this point from the actions of the Understanding,
that these are performed by the Species received by mediation of the Senses
into the Intellect, which cannot know any thing but what comes home to it; but
the Will when it Loves, must go out of it self and become united to the thing
it Loves, to the end to beget something for Eternity. And because things are not
known by the Understanding till they have been first purified from the
grossness of their matter by the illustration and abctraction which the Agent
Intellect makes of their Phantasms or Species, hence the notions of the foulest
and most dishonest things are always fair and laudable, being spiritualis'd and
made like the Faculty which knows them. On the contrary, the Will in loving
renders it self like the object which it Loves, is turned into its nature, and
receives its qualities; if the object be unlawful and dishonest, it becomes
vicious and its love is criminal. Which seems to argue that the Lover is less
perfect then the Loved, into which he is transformed; as food is less perfect
then the body, into which it is converted. And as that which attracts is more
excellent then what is attracted, because the stronger draws the weaker; so the
thing Loved must be more excellent and noble then the Lover, whom it attracts
to it self. Moreover, Love, according to Plato, is a desire of Pulchritude,
which desire implies want; and therefore he that Loves shows thereby that he
wants some perfection, which renders the thing Loved amiable: since the Will is
never carried to any object but what has some goodness either apparent or
real. Only God loves not his Creatures for their goodness, since they have none
of themselves; but his will being the cause of all things, he renders them good
by loving them and willing good to them.

The Second said, Since friendship consists in the union of two, or at most, of
three Wills, whose mutual correspondence makes that agreeable harmony and those
sweet accords, which make ravishing Lovers dye in themselves to live in what
they love; there is no true love but what is reciprocal; which is the reason
why none can be contracted with inanimate things, no more then with Beasts or
Fools. And Justice commanding us to render as much as is given us; it is a great
injustice not to love those that love us; yea, if we may believe the
Platonists, it is a kind of homicide of the Soul; since he that loves, being
dead in himself and having no more life but in the thing loved, if that refuses
his love, by means whereof it should live also in him as he in it, he is
constrained either to dye or languish miserably. And whereas he that loves is
no longer his own but belongs to the thing loved to whom he has given himself,
this thing is obliged to love him by the same reason that obliges it to love
it is self and all that pertains thereunto. But though perfect love be composed
of these two pieces, to love and to be loved; yet the one is often found
without the other, there being many Lovers wounded with the Poets leaden
Arrows, who instead of seeing their love requited with love, have for all
recompense nothing but contempts and, refusals. It Is true, that it being harder
to love without being loved, then to be loved without loving, there is no body
but would choose rather to be loved then to love upon those terms, because
nothing flatters our ambition so much as to see our selves sought unto. Yet
loving is a nobler thing then to be loved; since honor being more in the
honorer then the honored, the honor received by the loved thing reflects upon
him that loves; who for that reason being commended by every one that esteems a
good friend as a good treasure, and not he that is loved, is also more
excellent and has more virtue, inasmuch as he has more honor and praise which
are the attendants of virtue. Moreover, the Lover acts freely, and therefore
more to be valued then the loved person, who is forced to suffer himself to be
loved. For though desire commonly follow Sensual Love, yet Love is not a
desire, nor consequently a sign of Indigence; otherwise, it should cease with
the desire, and expire after enjoyment; which is false: for Mothers love their
dead Children, and even before they came into the world, not by a desire but by
a motion of Nature, which causes us to love what appertains to us, and the more
if it cost much pain; which is the reason why Mothers, who contribute more to
the birth of their Children, and have better assurance that they are their own,
love them also more tenderly then Fathers do.

The Third said, That to compare the loved person with the Lover, is to equal
the Master with the Servant; for the amorous assuming to themselves the quality
of Servants of the Ladies whom they call their Mistresses, manifest
sufficiently thereby that they yield them the pre-eminence. And although they
be the most interessed in this cause; yet they will never have the vanity to
prize themselves above what they love; which would be to condemn their own
choice and their love of defect of judgment, which making them sigh after the
enjoyment of the object they adore, argues their want and indigence, not to be
supplied by possession of the good they expect from it; which herein like the
Intelligences which move without being moved themselves, excites passions and
motions in the Lover's breast, it self oftentimes remaining immovable. And as
he acts in a more noble way that moves without being moved, because he
resembles the end, which is the noblest of all the Causes; so he that loves
resembles Matter which Desires all Forms, expecting its perfection from them;
and consequently is inferior to the person that is loved, as from whom he
expects his felicity. Even in Mutual Love, he that begins is less perfect, as
confessing by that address some inviting accomplishments in the other, who
finds not any obligation to love him again but the consideration of gratitude:
For inferring the advantage of those that love from the nobleness of their
subject, as in Gods love to his Creatures, and that of Parents to their
Children; I answer, that it is rather an effect of passion then of true love.

The Fourth said, That Love is according to the variety of its Object, (Good),
threefold; considering either Profit, or Pleasure, or Virtue. In the two
former, it is better to be loved then to love, but they are of no long duration;
those friends being wont to break as soon as they cease to find their market or
the contentments which they receive from those to whom they pretended kindness.
In honest friendship (which alone deserves that name, being founded only upon
virtue, which makes it durable) though it is not possible to love without being
loved, because virtuous persons being alike mutually love and agree well
together; yet since this Amity, before it can become such must be cemented by
frequentation, without which they cannot understand, nor consequently love one
another, because love arises from knowledge, it may be demanded whether the
active love of him that loves first be better then the passive of the other who
is loved. Which Question I determine for the former, because he contributes
most to the ensuing friendship, by laying the foundations of it. For
friendship, as well as other things, is preserved by the same means that
produce it, namely, by loving. And as the Agent is nobler then the Patient, as
concurring more considerably to the perfection of the work; so he that loves
being the Agent is more perfect then the Person loved, who is the Patient. Also
to love is to wish and do good; to be loved, is to receive it: But it is more
honorable and virtuous to give then to receive; which is a shameful action: and
therefore he that receives never desires witnesses. Hence, as he that does a
benefit loves more then he that receives it, as the Artificer loves his work
more then his work loves him, and a Creditor desires his Debtor's safety more
then on the contrary; in like manner he that loves is more excellent then he
that is loved, Love being not so much a testimony of indigence as abundance,
because it is a desire of communicating; and the more goodness a Being has, the
more it is communicative and diffusive.

CONFERENCE CXLIX. Of Hair.
OF the different parts of Man's Body some are absolutely necessary, others
only for convenience or ornament, as the Hair, wherewith wise Nature has
adorned the Head (his noblest part) whose nudity would have been indecorous;
whence people are ashamed of baldness, which is also threatened by God as a
curse to the Daughters of Sion. The good man Elisha had sufficient patience to
endure Jezabel's persecutions for a long time, but not to support the affront
of the little Children of Bethel who called him bald-pate; and upon his curse
forty two of them were torn in pieces by two Bears which came out of the
neighboring Woods; God by that means avenging the injury done to the noblest
part of this Prophet, namely the Head; upon which it is also the custom to place
Crowns: and because it is the Mansion of the Rational Soul, our Lord forbids
swearing by it The Superincumbent Hair receives by that vicinity some
particular and mysterious dignity, which has made it so esteemed, that not
only the Ancients offered it in sacrifice to their Deities, especially when
they were tossed by Tempests of Sea, and burnt it upon the death of Friends;
but also the Nazarens who were the Religious, or Monasticks among the Jews,
were particularly prohibited by God to cut it; wherein likewise Sampson's
strength, Absolom's Beauty, and, according to the Poets, Nisus's happiness
consisted. But above all, there is a certain Majesty in the Beard, which is
reserved only to Man, as best suting with the gravity of his manners. A large
Beard was ever counted the character of Wisdom, and as such chosen by
Philosophers as a badge of their profession. Hence Diogenes to one that asked
him, Why he wore so long a Beard, answered, To the end, that beholding it, I may
remember that I am a Man, not a Woman. For though Wisdom and Folly be found in
all Ages, and there be as many old fools as young hair-brains, yet the Beard is
a sign of Experience, which principally renders Men wise. Natural Reason seems
also to prove, that those that have Beards are wiser, and less impetuous than
those that have not yet put them forth; inasmuch as the fumes and
fuliginosities, which are the matter of Hair, being still enclosed in the
latter, make them more inconsiderate and rash. Yea, were it only for show, I
should conclude in favor of great Beards, which at least have this good that
they make Men appear wise, though they be not so. And as Lycurgus said of long
Hair, that it adds handsomness to them that are handsome, and covers the
deformities of them that are not, whom also it renders terrible to their
Enemies; so large Beards serve for Ornament to those that are already wise, and
make them considerable that are not so overmuch.

The Second said, Hair is the Symbol of Thought, derived from the same Brain,
and as various in conceit and fashion; Nations having changed modes for Hair
and Clothes accordingly, as they have fancied more becommingness and
sutableness in one fashion than in another. Four hundred years together there
was no Barber at Rome, the first being carried thither from Sicily by Ticinius
Menas, Anno V. C. 454; and after that time 'twas accounted with them a note of
barbarity and extreme desolation to let their Hair and Beards grow, as Augustus
did after the defeat of Varus. The French have been as mutable in this matter
as in any other; Their Kings of the two first Races, wearing long bushes of
Hair, in token of liberty. And since Francis the First, who shaved his Hair
upon occasion of a wound in his Head, and let his Beard grow to hide the
deformity of scarrs remaining in his Face after other wounds; short Hair and
long Beards began to be in request, and continued so till our Age, wherein
Periwigs are more the mode than ever; which being to be grounded upon
convenience or seemliness, I see nothing that can justify the great bush but
Caprichio and Example. For Hair being a superfluous Excrement, its exorbitant
greatness cannot but be incommodious and prejudicial to Health, and the good
Constitution of the Brain; the fuliginous vapors whereof, being repercuss'd by
the abundance of Hair, cause Vertigoes and pains of the Head, not more
certainly cured than by shaving the Head. As for seemliness, much Hair is
rather frightful than handsome, and our Ancestors were no less comely persons
than we, though they wore short Hair; as at this day also do many warlike
Nations Enemies of softness and delicacy, whereof great Hair is a most certain
token, being proper to Women, as on the contrary, the long Beard is a note of
Virility. For inasmuch as he that loves, conformes as much as possible to what
he loves, we may judge of the softness and dissoluteness of the manners of this
time, by the desire Men have to render themselves as like Women as they can, by
wearing (like them) much Hair and little Beard: For when Men wore shorter Hair,
long Beards were in request; and when the Hair has been long, the Beards have
almost ever been short; the length of the one recompencing the brevity of the
other, which would otherwise render Men hideous.

The Third said. If ever 'twas true that Custom is a Tyrant, it is in this Case,
no variation having been so much as in matter of Hair. The Scythians and
Parthians wore both Hair and Beard long, thereby to terrify their Enemies. The
Greeks, whose Hair is much commended by Homer, kept it long, to distinguish
themselves from their slaves, who were shorn, as at present are Galley-slaves,
Artizans, and Monasticks for Humility; whom also Peter Lombard, Bishop of
Paris, caused to shave their Hair and Beard in the year 1160, according to the
44th Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage, which forbids Clerks to wear
either Locks or Beards. The Egyptians wear their Hair long, and shave off
their Beards. The Maxii, a people of Africa, are shorn on one side of the Head,
and let the Hair grow on the other. The Abaudi, had the forepart only shaven,
the Antii contrary. The Arabians shave even their Daughters round about,
leaving a Lock on the top. The Armenians shave their Hair into the form of a
Cross; but there is something more majestical in the Beard than in the Hair,
and even Animals furnished therewith, seem to have some sort of gravity more
than others. Hence such as have affected the title of Wise, have likewise
suffered their Beards to grow; but the Ephori made the Lacedaemonians cut
theirs, as also Alexander and many Captains did their Soldiers, lest their
Enemies might catch hold of them. But as the caprichio of persons of authority,
especially Courtiers, gives the first model of fashions, particularly, as to
Hair and Beard; so to wear short Hair now every one's reaches to his waste; or
a magisterial spade Beard, now all are close shaven, (except such whose Age and
Condition exempts them from this Rule) were for a Man to make himself taken
notice of, for things which bring no commendation: which has no place in
discreet Minds, but argues a fantastical and humorsome person, who is commonly
appointed contrary to the Modes; whereof the present continually outvie the
Ancient.

The Fourth said, Hair, which is rather the leaves and boughs, than (as Plato
held) the roots of Man's Body, (which he terms a Tree reversed) having been
chiefly designed for preservation of the Brain from External Injuries; they who
would have care of their Health, must consult the Constitution of their Brain
before they determine either for long or short Hair. Cold and Moist Brains,
need store of Hair to fence off the cold Air; Hot and Dry, the contrary. As for
the Hair of the Chin, it was designed only for Ornament, and a Testimony of
the Authority which the Male has above the Female; whence that part seems
somewhat sacred, it being an Injury to touch one's Beard, of which the Emperor
Otho made such account, that according to Cuspinian, he was wont to swear by
his own. The proportion of it ought to follow the model of others of like
condition; Wise Men following the advice of the greatest number in matters
indifferent, provided they be not contrary to Honesty and Health.

CONFERENCE CL. Whether Alterations of States have natural Causes.
STates being composed of Realms or Provinces, these of Cities and Towns, these
of Families, these of particular Persons, and each Person having Natural
Causes; it is clear that the Alteration of the Whole is to be attributed to the
same Causes which make the change of its parts. Thus when all the Houses of a
Town are afflicted with Pestilence, or consumed by Fire, (which Accidents are
capable of producing great Mutations in a Commonwealth) it cannot be otherwise
expressed, but by saying, that the Town is burnt or wasted by the Plague. And
as when the particular suffrages of each Counselor tend to the absolution or
condemnation of a Criminal, 'twere senseless to say, that the Sentence of the
Court were other than that of the President and Counselors; so also it is
ridiculous to say, that the Causes of personal mutations are Natural, but not
those of Political. As therefore it is almost the sole demonstration we have in
Physics, that our Bodies are changed and corrupted, because they are composed
of the four Elements; in like sort, I conceive, the Cause of alteration
befalling the body of a State, is to be sought in the Collection of the several
members that compose it; which coming to lose the harmony, proportion, and
respect which made them subsist, they are dissolved and corrupted; which is a
mutation, purely natural, and of absolute necessity.

The Second said, If God has reserved any thing to his own disposal, it is that
of Crowns and the preservation of States, which are the first and universal
Causes of the safety of every particular person. Whence the transferring of
those Crowns, from one State to another, which is a greater mystery, is a
mutation purely supernatural; as not only God himself has manifested, when he
subjected the State of the Israelites first to Judges and Captains, which was a
kind of Aristocracy, and afterward to Kings reducing them to a Monarchy; but
also all such as have wrought great changes in States of the World: And
Legislators knowing this belief imprinted in all Men's Minds, have affected the
Reputation of being descended from, or favored by some Deity, as did Alexander
the Great, and Numa Pompilius. Moreover, the Holy Scripture attributes to God
the changing of Scepters, and frequently styles him the God of Battles, the
winning and losing whereof, are the most common and manifest Causes of the
change of States. And it is a pure effect of the Divine Will, that Men born
free, subject themselves to the Will of one sole or few persons; so the
changing of that Inclination, cannot proceed but from Him who is the searcher
of Hearts, and gives us both to will and to do. If Natural Causes had their
effects, as certain in Politics as in Physics, States should have their
limited durations, as Plants and Animals have: and yet there is such a
disproportion in the duration of all States, past and present, that one has
lasted above 1200. years, (as the French Monarchy, whose flourishing State
promises as many more Ages, if the World continue so long) and another has
changed its Form several times in one yeat, as Florence. Upon which
consideration, the greatest Politicians have put their States under the Divine
Protection, and caused all their Subjects to venerate some particular Angel or
tutelar Saint. Thus France acknowledges Saint Michael for its Protector; Spain,
Saint James; Venice, Saint Mark; and even the Ethnicks thought that a City,
(much less a State) could not be destroyed till the Deity presiding over it
were removed. Whence Homer makes the Palladium of Troy, carried away by
Ulysses, before the Greeks could become Masters of it.

The Third said, The Supreme Cause exercises its Omnipotence in the Rise,
Conservation, and Destruction of States, as well as every where else; yet
hinders not subordinate Causes from producing their certain Effects, natural in
things natural, (as in the Life and Death of Men, which though one of the most
notorious Effects of God's Power, and attributed to him by the Scripture and
all the World, yet cease not to have its infallible and natural
demonstrations.) Inlike manner, subordinate Moral Causes, produce their Moral
and contingent Effects in Moral Things, such as that in Question is which
Causes, depending upon Humane Actions which arise from our Will, no-wise
necessitated but free, cannot be termed natural and constrained, unless either
by those that subject all things here below to Destiny, which subverts the
liberty of the Will (that is, makes it no longer a Will) or those who will have
not only the manners of the Soul, but also the actions always to follow the
temperament of the Body; which were hard to conceive, and yet would not infer a
necessity in the alteration of States, since the effects of Love and Hatred,
and other passions which give inclination or aversion are oftentimes prevented
by thwarting causes. When the Lacedaemonians changed the popular State of Athens
into an Aristocracy of thirty Lords, whom they called afterward the thirty
Tyrants, no other cause can be assigned thereof but the chance of War, which
subjected the will of the Athenians to that of the Lacedaemonians: And the same
may be said of all other ancient and modern Revolutions. Indeed, if the causes
in Policy had regular effects, or States were subject to natural declinations.
Prudence, which is conversant about contingent things to manage them freely and
alter its course according to occasion, should signify nothing. It Is more
credible that as in the state of Grace God has left our actions to the
disposal of Free Will, that we may work out our Salvation our selves; so in the
administration of Republics he has left most things to chance, for employing
men's industry according to their will, whose motions being free and
contingent, are diametrically opposite to the necessity of natural causes.

The Fourth said, That these alterations may be, though voluntary, yet natural,
yea necessary too; our Will being as inclined to apprehended good, as our
Intellect is to Truth. As therefore knowing this truth that 2 and 2 are 4, it is
impossible but I must believe it; so, knowing that such an action will bring me
good, I shall do it: so that the causes of humane actions have something of
necessity, and (besides) having their foundation in nature may in some sort be
termed natural. Moreover, since things are preserved by their like and
destroyed by their contraries (which contraries are under the same genus) it
follows that all sublunary things having had a natural beginning must also have
a like end. Desire of self-preservation, which is natural, gave birth to
States; but if, instead of this desire which renders Servants obedient to their
Masters, these to the Magistrate, and him to the Sovereign, Rebellion and
Treason deprive their Chiefs of the succor they expect from them, and by this
means exposes the State in prey to the Enemies, it cannot but fall to ruin;
unless that some other natural cause, Persuasion (as that of Menenius Agrippa
taken from the humane body, upon a Secession of the Mechanics of Rome from the
Senate) or an exemplary punishment reduce the Subjects to their forsaken duty.
Whereby it appears that the State resumes its first vigor by as sensible and
natural causes, as it is to be persuaded, or become wise by others harm. Amongst
many examples, the ruins of Troy and Thebes were caused by the rape of Helene
whom the injustice of the Trojans denied to restore to her Husband, and the
feud of two. Brothers aspiring to the same Royalty: then which no causes can be
assigned more natural and more necessarily inferring the loss of a State.

CONFERENCE CLI. Which is more healthful, to become warm by the Fire or by
Exercise.
THey who question the necessity of Fire for recalefying our Bodies chilled by
cold the enemy of our natural heat, deserve the rude treatment of the ancient
Romans to their banished persons, whom they expelled no otherwise from their
City but by interdicting them the use of Fire and Water; knowing that to want
either was equally impossible. Without Fire our Bodies would be soon deprived
of life which resides in heat, as cold is the effect and sign of death. And as
Aristotle says, those that deny Virtue would not be otherwise disputed with
but by casting them into the fire; so would not I otherwise punish those that
decry it, but by exposing them to freez in midwinter, instead of burning a
faggot for them. What could little Children and old people do without it? For
though the natural heat be of another kind then that of our material fire, yet
this sometimes assists that in such sort that those who digest ill are much
comforted by it, not to mention weak persons and those that are subject to
swoonings. Moreover, the external cold must be removed by an external heat, as
Fire is, which heats only what part and to what degree you please; but motion
heats all alike. As the Sun (which some Philosophers take to be the
Elemental-fire) contributes to the Generation, so does Fire concur to the
conservation of Man; not by immediate contact, but by the heat which it
communicates to the Air and the Air to our Body, which by approaching or
receding from it, tempers its excess in discretion, and thereby renders it
suitable to our natural heat, not destroying Bodies but in its highest degree;
as also the Sun offends those at Noon whom it refreshes at rising and setting.

The Second said, That the violent action of Fire which destroys all sublunary
Bodies, argues its disproportion with our natural heat; which disproportion
renders the Stoves and places heated artificially by Fire so noxious, and makes
such as love the Chimney-corner almost always tender, scabby, and impatient of
the least inclemency of the Air; that heat against nature not only destroying
the natural but corrupting the humors and exsiccating the parts. But the bodies
of Plants and Animals inured only to natural heat are far more vigorous,
whilst the same is secured against external cold by Bark, Hair and Skin, and
those defensive Arms which Instinct taught our Forefathers so long as they
were guided by Nature, in Caves of the Earth which moderate the injuries of the
Air much better then humane Art can do; or else by thick clothing which
reflects the fumes incessantly issuing out of the pores of the Body; from which
repercussion, proceeds the warmth of our Garments. If cold happen at any time
to over-master the natural heat in the external parts, the same is presently
revived (but dissipated by fire, before which infirm persons frequently fall
into fainting fits) by motion and exercise which heats all Bodies, and much
more such as are animated, driving the Spirits and Blood (and with them heat)
into the agitated part. Of the benefit of which motion we cannot judge more
certainly then by its effects. For as Fire takes away the Appetite and dulls
the Senses of those that sit at it, so Exercise increases it and renders the
Body and Mind much more lively. Wherefore I conclude for Exercise against Fire,
without which a late Physician lived twenty years, seeing no other but that of
his Candle, and without employing his Wood, as Sylvius did who run up and down
Stairs laden with two or three Fagots, more or less according as he was cold,
till he was warm, and then he laid them up till another time.

The Third said, Exercise is not more profitable to such as are accustomed to
it, then hurtful to others. Which Sedentary persons find true when they play at
Tennis, or Hunt, or use such other violent motion. For every sort of motion is
not Exercise, but only that which is performed with some streining, whereby
respiration is rendered more frequent, the Arteries dilated, the Spirits and
blood chafed, whence oftentimes they break their vessels, and beget Fevers,
Pleurises, Fluxes, Headaches and Catarrhs: which is a manifest proof that it is
better to leave the Humors and Spirits in their natural temper. For Health
consists in a just proportion of the Humors, which are generated by the
Concoction of temperate and moderate Food; which Concoction is performed better
during rest then during motion, and in the sleep of the night then in the
labor of the day. So also are excrements better expelled when the Body is
quiet then when it is in motion, which brings a confusion of pure with impure;
Insensible transpiration is sufficiently effected only by the internal motion
of Nature without the help of external, which Nature has not prescribed
Animals, although they have no need of Fire, being naturally Furred, Feathered,
and otherwise guarded against the injuries of weather, and yet their age is
almost as regular as that of immovable Plants. Man, on the contrary, by reason
chiefly of his several violent exercises has no prefixed time of life, which
labor (inseparable from exercise) wears and consumes more then his years, and
makes him old before his time, depriving him also of that contentment and
pleasure which makes us live. Moreover, since things are preserved and acquired
by the same causes, lost health which is recovered by rest and the bed, cannot
be preserved by travel; which, besides consuming our radical moisture swifter
then the natural heat does alone, has the same effect that motion has in a
lighted Candle which is sooner spent when stirred then when at quiet.

The Fourth said, That since Fire introduces into us a foreign and
contranatural heat, as besides the inconveniences already alleged, the
sweating of the head testifies, it is more hurtful then Exercise, which only
rouses up the natural heat enfeebled by the apertion of the pores caused by the
Fire in Winter and the Sun in Summer, when for that reason Exercise ought to be
less. The incommodity Exercise brings to unaccustomed Bodies ought not to
hinder their being formed thereto by little and little, and by the degrees
recommended by Hippocrates in all changes. For if Physicians contribute all
their skill to correct distempers drawn from the birth, much rather may they
endeavor to turn bad customs into good; as being an easier task. Thus Galen
was not accustomed to cleave wood, nor Pittacus King of the Mytelenians to
grind corn, yet they exercised themselves in these labors for their health.
And indeed some Maladies, as those which proceed from a cold and moist
distemper, are cured by exercise; especially if they come from repletion. Thus
Nicomachus of Smyrna was so monstrously fat that he could not put his hand
behind him, yet was brought to a moderate bulk by Exercise. On the contrary,
Germanicus whose legs were somewhat too slender brought them to a competent
proportion by Riding; the concussions whereof shake the Stone out of the
Kidneys. Recovering persons need Exercise so much, according to their strength
that it is the most safe means of restoring it, and old men are chiefly
preserved by it. Antiochus the Physician and Spurnia, both of them 80 years
old, preserved their Senses and strength, entire by walking a great way every
day on foot. And yet Fire is less hurtful in that age by reason of the coldness
and thickness of the skin which gives not its heat so free entrance, nor so
easy an issue to that within.

CONFERENCE CLII. Whether Wine helps or hinders Digestion, and why?
THis Question will seem frivolous to the vulgar, who are no sooner debarred
Wine by the Physician, but they complain of Indigestion and weakness of
Stomach. But our free Philosophy shall use its own rights, and inquire, whether
the common Opinion in this Point be the best. Now if Wine, which is hot, and
acknowledged such by all Physicians, be received into a temperate Stomach, it
brings it into a distemper, whence Saint Paul enjoined it not to Timothy, but
in regard of the coldness or weakness of his Stomach, in which case a due
temper results from the one cold, and the other hot. But temperate persons must
avoid it is use, which was a just cause of Divorce to the Roman Dames, capital
in the Camp of the Carthaginians, and still in diverse parts of Asia; whereunto
if you add, all those that are deprived of it, because they have none produced
amongst them, Children and sick persons, it will appear that (to say nothing of
Beasts, which drink only water, and are more healthy than we) there are a
hundred live without it for one that drinks it. Moreover, they who are troubled
with Indigestions, find and make others sufficiently understand, that Wine is
last digested; otherwise it would not keep its first color, savor, and smell,
after all other food, or at least only altered by the acidity into which it is
easily corrupted. Besides, Water-drinkers have a better Appetite than
Wine-drinkers, which is an Argument that Wine helps Concoction less then Water;
and no wonder, since, as Galen says, it increases Thirst instead of quenching
it as Water does. For Thirst, which is the Appetite of Cold and Moist, cannot
be extinguished by Wine, which is Hot, and so more apt to inflame it. The Life
of the first Patriarch, before the use of Wine, namely, before the Deluge, was
much longer than it has been since; and, no doubt, the principal defect in
Man, and the Cause of most Diseases, is bad Digestion.

The Second said, That Digestion being performed by the conflux of Spirits
elaborated in the Spleen, and Wine which is more spirituous, and consequently,
furnishes more matter for our Spirits than any other Aliment, cannot but
powerfully promote the same. Which clearly appears by old men, in whom Wine
has the same Effect that Milk has in Children, and preserves these latter
from Worms. Whence possibly Hippocates gave it not only in Quotidian, but also
in Continual Fevers; the hurtfulness to be feared from its heat, were it
conjoined with dryness, being secured by its humidity, which makes it symbolize
with blood. Yet all Wines are not hot; small green Wines, especially the White
and Sharp, have more of coldness than of heat; and other Wines drunk in small
quantity with much water, refresh more than water alone, because opening the
Pores, they insinuate into the remote parts, which plain water presently
closes. Yea, Wine, as hot, is a friend to the Stomach and Bowels, whose
membranous substance being cold and dry, needs the contrary qualities of Wine;
wherefore Wine helps Digestion, which water hinders, being indigestible it
self, and so unable to give what it has not. God's discovering Wine to Men
after the Flood, as a remedy to the defect, left thereby in all Creatures
serving for their food, being rather an evidence of its utility than
hurtfulness. And there is as little reason to accuse it of shortning our days,
as Guaicum of causing the Pox, upon pretense that the use thereof was not known
till that Malady appearing, needed it for its Cure.

The Third said, That the sole reason of the difficulty we find in digesting
Wine, is the great resemblance of its qualities with those of Blood, both being
Hot and Moist. But there can be no proper Physical Action without contrariety.
For since every principal Agent induces Alteration in the subject which
receives its Action, this change cannot be effected, but by depriving it of its
former State, and the qualities which maintained the same. Which cannot be
done, but by contesting with, and destroying them by contrary qualities; and so
according to more or less contrariety, the Action is stronger or weaker. Hence
in the Digestion of Aliment, which is a proper Physical Action, wherein the
Natural Heat destroys the Food, in order to turn it into another Form, there
must be contrariety; and such Food as has least, gives the Heat least hold to
work against it; it not being easy for the Natural Heat and Moisture to act
against an Aliment Hot and Moist, by reason of the resemblance between them; as
a Friend hardly combats and destroys his Friend. Wherefore Wine being of the
same quality, our Heat becoms idle in order to its Concoction. Possibly too,
its abundance of Spirits make it hard to be digested, stifling the Spirits
employed for Concoction, by reason of the too great resemblance between those
of the one and the other.

The Fourth said, That only a disproportionate quantity of Wine is of
difficult Digestion, a small quantity promoting it. Which holds good in all
repletions, but, particularly, of Wine; which relaxing the Fibers and Tunicles
of the Stomach, weakens the Retentive Faculty, provokes the Expulsive by its
Acrimony, either in the Superior Orifice, whence arise Hick-cocks; or in the
Inferior, whence proceed loathings and vomitings. Therefore the Apostle says,
Drink a little (not drink much) Wine. Nor would the inconvenience be less, if
the best Aliments in the World were taken in Excess. For when their mass is too
great to be constring'd and embraced by the Stomach, the Natural Heat is it
self altered instead of over-mastering that, in order to Assimilation.

The Fifth said, That the Question is to be determined by the difference of
Wines and Stomachs. Strong Wines, such as are sweet and piquant, are improper
for Hot and Choleric Stomachs which must have only small green Wines, or other
beverages of near quality to common water. On the contrary, Phlegmatic and
Cold Stomachs, and Melancholy Tempers, are strengthened by Wine, but prejudiced
by water and other cold drinks; not that Heat is the cause of Digestion, (for
the hotter a Fever is, the more it hinders the same) but because it is a Medium,
whereof our Natural Heat serves it self.

The Sixth said. That indeed the diversity of Subjects makes some change in the
Hypothesis, yet hinders not but we may pronounce upon the Thesis; whether Wine
helps or hurts Digestion. I believe the latter; because Digestion cannot be
performed, unless all the Meats of one meal be digested at the same time; else
the Chyle will be, part well elaborated (namely, that made of the Food which
has had a convenient stay in the Stomach) and part too much concoct and adust,
made of that which stayed in the Stomach too long and after Digestion; and part
also too little, proceeding from Meats requiring more Concoction, and yet
hurried away with the rest. Now it is certain, that Wine being sooner digested
than other Aliments, by the authority of Hippocrates and Galen, (who hold, that
it asswages Thirst, and is distributed sooner than they) it will produce a
confusion and hotch-potch in the nature of the Chyle, which should be uniform.
But Water serving only for a Vehicle, agrees better with variety of Meats,
being like the Menstruum of the Chemists, and the Uniting Medium of the
Lullists, which serves to reunite all different Bodies into one alone,
patiently attending their disposition without corrupting, (as Wine and Vinegar
does) and without leaving behind in the Kidneys the tartar, or lee of Wine,
which is the seed of the Stone, wherewith Water-drinkers are not so commonly
troubled; partly, for the abovesaid reason, and partly, because that tartar is
not dried in them, as having less Heat than others.

CONFERENCE CLIII. Why it is colder at Daybreak than at any other time of the
Night or Day.
IF Cold be a real quality, then the greater distance there happens to be
between it and the Source of Heat and Light, (the Sun) the greater must the
Cold be. And if it be only a privation of Heat, then midnight is darker then
either the Evening or Morning, because opposed directly to the Light of the
Sun, it may seem that the Cold ought be greater likewise at that time, because
the same is opposite to Noon, when the Sun's Heat is greatest; yet the cool of
the Morning argues the contrary, being so ordinary that it fore-tells Daybreak
more certainly, than the crowing of the Cock. Unless you will attribute the
cause to this, that at Morning before Sunrise it is longer since the Sun
enlightened the Horizon, than at midnight; at which time the Air and other
Elements, still retain some of the preceding Day's Heat, which tempering the
Cold, occasioned by the Sun's absence, renders the same less perceptible during
the thickness of the Nocturnal Air, less subtle than that of the Day; when the
Light coming to dissipate those Clouds, subtilizes the Air by its insinuating
beams; whence the Cold thereof more easily insinuates into our Pores by the
help of that weak Light, which is not strong enough to heat the Air. Just as
Vinegar, though hot and biting of its own Nature, yet mixed with much water,
cooles the part whereunto it is applied more than water alone does.

The Second said, That possibly the comparison of the Heat of our beds, (out of
which we arise in the Morning) with the cold of the outward Air, makes us
guilty of a mistake; unless you had rather refer this Effect to the Oblique
Aspect wherewith the other Celestial Bodies of our Hemisphere are regarded by
the Sun at his rising. For at midnight when he is directly under the Horizon,
the little bulk of the Earth hinders not, but he directly darts his Rays upon
those Stars which are above us, the Pyramid of the Earth's shadow not passing
beyond the Moon; so that then the vast and incredible magnitude of all those
Celestial Bodies perpendicularly reflects upon us the Heat and Light of the
Sun, which thus reflected may calefie the Air, as the Sun does in the same
posture; but not at all at Sunrise in their Oblique Aspects: Whence though the
Sun be nearer us in Winter, yet he warms us less. If it be excepted, that the
Evening, when the same Oblique Aspects return, is not so cold as the Night;
it is answered, that this difference proceeds from the Heat of the foregoing
Day, remaining in the Earth, Water, and Air, which conserve the same, till by
the absence of the Sun the supervening Night wholly dissipate them.

The Third said, That the Matutinal coolness proceeded from the approaching
Suns driving the Clouds before him, which agitation raises a wind (as there is
always one at daybreak) whereby the same coolness is effected in the Air that
a Fan causes to a Lady. For all things here below having their motion from
East to West, it is reasonable that the Air be so moved too, and acquire the
consequent of its agitation, namely, coldness. That all things come from the
East, sundry instances manifest; Mankind was from thence diffused into the
other Quarters of the World; Rivers run generally Eastward; And the greater
speed of Navigation from East to West, than contrarily, argnes the Sea to have
the same motion; as is chiefly observed under the Equinoctial, the greatness of
which Circle renders that motion more manifest. This rule the Winds keep, when
not diverted to a contrary course by Exhalations: And as for the Heavens,
experience shows us, that their ordinary and best-known course is from East to
West: So that it is no wonder if they hurry the neighboring Air with them, and
by a Mathematical contact and natural consecution, all the other Elements. I
speak not of Sciences, Arts, Policy, and other things which the more curious
may find to have been derived from the East. It suffices that the Sun taking
this road drives the Air before him; the wind proceeding from which motion,
causes the coolness we feel chiefly at daybreak; when the vapors between us
and the Sun being by his heat violently driven (as the water of the Aeolipila
is turned into wind and driven forth by the subjacent fire) the coolness is
more unacceptable, in that it succeeds and multiplies (instead of diminishing)
that of the night, as the diurnal heat in likelihood ought to do.

The Fourth said, He attributed the increase of cold at daybreak to the
ordinary action of all natural Agents, which is strongest when they arrive at
the period or utmost point of their declination. So a Candle just upon
extinguishing casts forth a smarter flame; the violence of a Disease is
greatest at its crisis, when it is toward ending; a Stone moves swiftest as it
approaches its Center. And to compare the Year to the Day, the cold is
commonly greater and more insupportable in February, the last Month of Winter,
than in the beginning thereof; though in reason it might seem rather to be so
at the end of December, when the Sun is further from us, and that the custom of
the two first months cold should render this last more tolerable; as on the
contrary, the heat is greater also in the dog days, and afterward, than at the
Summer Solstice, when the Sun is elevated highest above our heads. So also in
Summer it is hotter two hours after noon, than at noon it self; not so much
through any disposition already received in the Air and Earth, as by reason of
that Rule, That Natural Actions are stronger at the end than the beginning;
whereas violent actions, as the motion of a Stone upwards, is swifter in the
beginning than the end.

The Fifth referred this effect to the Antiperistasis of heat and cold. For as
fire seems more scorching upon the approach of a great frost, so by a contrary
reason cold must become more vehement at the approach of the Sun's heat.
Moreover, the like combat is observed between the thickness of the darkness of
the night, and the rarity of the day, when the Sun's light rendering the
illuminated Air more subtle, what was gross in the dark Air cannot be expelled
in an instant without some conflict and motion of the part condensed by
darkness with the rarefi'd by light; from which agitation arises a wind
commonly at daybreak, which is probably the cause of the cold at that time.
Now of that tenebrous part condensed is made the Dew and Frost in our Climate,
and the Manna in Southern Countries; as the cold which we feel redoubled in
Winter in the space between a neighboring fire (but out of its Sphere of
Activity) and the rest of the Air, is a familiar example of this Antiperistasis
of heat and cold redoubled upon the approach one of the other. For as it is much
colder then elsewhere, between that fire which is too distant to warm us, and
the Air left in its natural frigidity; so at daybreak our Air being too far
off from the Sun to be heated by it, augments its coldness upon his approach.

The Sixth said, Air has no natural quality but supreme humidity, whereby it is
supple, movable, and pliant; heat and cold being impressed upon it by outward
agents: Otherwise being the general medium and mediator of motions local,
natural, vital and animal (for the Spirits are of an aerious nature) and the
Factor of all Agents by whose intervention they communicate their influences,
it would act against the qualities impressed upon it, sometimes hot and
sometimes cold, and destroy them by its own. Which indeed its humidity does,
but to the profit of animated bodies; dryness being their enemy. Hence cold and
dry Saturn has under him, hot and moist Jupiter, who tempers his hurtfulness
and suits him to living things. Now the Sun having at the declining of the day
raised many aqueous, and consequently supreamly cold, and the heat whereby they
were raised abandoning them upon his absence, the natural cold of those vapors
becomes predominant, and returns them by degrees into their first state. Which
refrigerating the Air makes the night the colder, the further the vapors are
from their extraneous heat, that is to say, the nearer day approaches.

CONFERENCE CLIV. Whence the whiteness of Snow proceeds.
THe first attributed the cause thereof to the desiccation of water; for
experience shows in all sublunary Bodies that dryness whitens, as Seawater
becomes white when dried to Salt, the stalks of Corn, Pulse and the leaves of
all other Plants wax white as they wither and dry. The same happens to the
Bones of Animals, and gray Hairs, on no other cause but siccity, since the
extremity exposed to the Air is white, but not the root. Hence water by its
transparence already partaking much of light (but which its rarity reflects not
to our view) is no sooner desiccated into Ice, Hail, or Snow, but it acquires
this pure whiteness, which humidity again destroys. So the high ways white with
dust grow black upon rain; a wet cloth appears darker then a dry; and that some
things become black by drying (as Coal) is because there was heat enough to
draw the humidity, which was at its Center, to the Circumference, but not
enough wholly to dry it up, as appears in that the same heat continued reduces
the coal to white ashes which would be as perfectly white as Snow, did not the
Tincture imprinted thereon by the Salts withstand it; for if you urge them
further by fire, you will make them of a perfect whiteness; as appears in
Chalks, which are made not only of gray and black stones, but even of Metals,
as Ceruse is made of Lead.

The Second said, Whiteness is not a real Color, since it appears in all
bodies deprived of preceding Colors, of all which it is indifferently
susceptible. But it is otherwise with real Colors, a subject imbued with one of
which is not apt to receive all others but some only; as Nature has framed the
Organs of Sense naked of all sensible objects, to the end they might be
susceptible of the same. Wool died into a sadder color cannot receive a
lighter, and black Wool admits none at all; but white, being natural to every
subject that has no color, is capable of receiving all: So when you wash off
the blew or dirty color of a Band, it becomes white. Whereby it appears, that
Whiteness has the same reference to Colors that Unity has to Numbers whereof
it is the beginning, but is none it self. And as it is the Emblem of Innocence
and Purity, so also it proceeds from them. The Air, which is the purest of our
Elements (for Fire is only in Mixts) and water refined into vapors, which
follows the Air in purity, happening to acquire visibility by condensation into
Snow, cannot represent the same under any other outside but Whiteness. Now
that Whiteness is an effect of purity, is manifest by the Stars, which are
represented to us only under the species of Whiteness, and cannot be painted
but with white in their light, which de-albating what it irradiates, and
leaving the same elsewhere black, shows that it is as the purest, so also the
whitest thing in the world. Likewise Metals are whiter according to their
purity; Lead is worse then Tin, and this then Silver only upon account of their
impurity; the sole perfect mixture of the yellow incombustible Sulphur of Gold
not permitting it to be altered and spoiled of its yellow color which nearest
approaches whiteness. Wherefore Snow being a most pure Body, compounded only
of two colour-less elements, namely, Air and Water, 'twas necessary either that
it should have no color, or if any (whereby to become visible) the principle
and origin of all Colors, namely White, in the perfection with which Nature
makes all her Works.

The Third said, That the same difference which appears between the Stars and
their Orbs, is found between Water and Snow, arising only from Density and
Rarity. As the Star appears white, and the rest of the Heaven darker by reason
of its rarity; so likewise Water seems obscure upon account of its rarity, and
Snow white upon that of its density.

The Fourth said, If that reason were good, then Ice should be whiter then
Snow, because it is more solid; and yet the contrary appears. Besides Snow is so
far from being more dense and solid then Water, that on the contrary, there is
less Air in Water then in Ice, which is more close and compact then Snow; the
swimming of Ice upon the Water arguing some aerious parts included in it at the
time of its congelation, which is not and cannot be made without air, Wherefore
Snow differs from Water only by its figure or accidental form, which reduces
it into flocks congealed by cold in a cloud (not as it is resolved into Rain,
for then 'twould prove Hail) but whilst yet a vapor in the region of the Air.
So then in this figure alone is the reason of the whiteness of Snow to be
sought; which is not found in water, partly by reason of its transparence, and
partly because its smooth surface gives no hold to the visual ray. Which is the
reason why Water is pictured with a blew and darkish color. Thus burnished
Silver as that of Looking-glasses seems dark if compared to rough Silver, which
does not dissipate our visual Spirits as that former does. Hence Ice is much
whiter then water, as being less smooth.

The Fifth said, That it is proper to cold to whiten, as it is to heat to
blacken. Thus Southern People are either black, or tawney; Northern, white: and
the Hair of both grows white with old age by reason of the coldness thereof.
All the cold parts of our Body are white; as the Brain, Bones, Cartilages,
Membranes, Fat and Skin. Linen and Wax are whitened by the coldness of the
night. For the same reason, not only Snow but Hail, Frost, Ice, Rhyme, and all
other cold Meteors are of the same color.

The Sixth said, That though the whiteness of Snow was disputed by Anaxagoras,
and Armenia produces red by mixture of the exhalations of Vermillion with the
ordinary vapors which the Sun raises from the water; yet this whiteness is as
manifest as the causes are hid, no less then those of light, which is the
color of Celestial Bodies, as colors are the light of Terrestrial. However,
this whiteness seems to proceed from a mixture of Air and Water, as appears in
froth, whose consistence is like that of Snow, the whiteness whereof, possibly,
is increased by the Spirits wherewith Snow abounds, which are luminous Bodies,
whereof the fertility caused by Snow is an Argument; to which Spirits, (which
Frost has not) may be ascribed what Galen affirms, namely, that Fish covered
with Snow become more delicious; for to the Moon it can with no more reason be
referred than to the Sun.

The Seventh said, That an univocal and certain cause of whiteness cannot be
found in the first or second Qualities: Not in Heat or Cold; since Snow, Sugar,
and Salt are equally white, though the first is cold, the second temperate, and
the third hot: Nor in Siccity or Humidity; since humid Milk is no less white
than dry Chalk and Plaster. The density and weight of Silver, the rarity and
levity of Snow, the sweetness of Sugar, and the acrimony of Salt; in short, the
examen of all other Second Qualities of white things, shows that it depends not
on them. Nor yet on the third: for white Agarick is purgative; white Starch,
and flowr of Beans, astringent. Lastly, what some call Fourth Qualities, or
Properties of the whole Substance, depend as little upon Colors, since the
same whiteness which is in the Meal that nourishes us, is also in the Sublimate
that kills us. It remains to inquire the reason of Colors, and consequently,
of Whiteness in the proportion between the Sight and the Surface of the
colored body. When therefore it happens that the Visual Ray, which issues
forth pure and white, that is to say, colour-less, finds no Color in a
Surface; if the same be Diaphanous, it takes it for a Medium not an Object; (as
is seen in Glass, Crystal, Air, and Water); if opake, it stops at the said
Surface; and finding no Color thereon, returns with the Species of the Object
to make its report to the Common Sense that it saw nothing; and this is what
they call Whiteness. Hence, White so little delights the Sight, that it
disgregates and wearies it; as a false stroke does that brings nothing. Now to
apply this to Snow, the Visual Ray is indeed stopped by its condensed Surface;
but whence should it have Color, since it is composed of Air and Water, both
colorless? The Truth is, sutably to its Principles, it must necessarily remain
without Color, that is, White, whereby it so disgregates the Visual Rays that
sometimes it blinded a whole Army.

CONFERENCE CLV. Whether Courage be natural or acquired.
COurage being the Contempt of Danger, which we naturally fear, we cannot be
naturally courageous; for then two contrary Effects should proceed from the
same Cause. But the Truth is, our Nature is indifferent to every thing
whereunto it is lead and fashioned. Thus, skittish Horses are made sober by
inuring to the noise of Muskets, which before they could not endure. On the
contrary, brave Coursers kept in a dark Stable and unemploy'd, become resty and
jadish. Moreover, since there is no true Courage without Knowledge of the
Danger, (whence Fools and Drunkards cannot be styled courageous) this argues
that this Virtue has need of Rules and Precepts, as without which, our
Knowledge cannot but be very imperfect. Nor did any thing render the Romans
more valiant than the Nations they subdued, but Military Discipline; wherein
the Roman Legionary under-went his Apprentisage, as other Artificers do in
their Trades: Which Instruction, some of their Descendents despising, have
shown thereby what difference there is between themselves and their Ancestors,
and determined this Question to the advantage of Industry. At this day our
Soldiers are not more strong and courageous than Town-people; and the Officers
whom alone we see perform all the brave Actions, surpass not in Courage
ordinary Soldiers, saving that these have not been so well instructed as they,
and reflect not so much upon the shame and loss which they incurr by Cowardice.
And because that Courage is greatest, which makes us contemn the greatest
dangers; hence that which leads us to the Contempt of Death, the most terrible
of all things, is, undoubtedly, the greatest. But the History of the Milesian
Virgins is remarkable, who, upon the persuasions of a certain Orator, were,
contrary to the natural timidity of their Sex, carried to so great a Contempt
of Death, that nothing could restrain them from killing themselves, but the
example of their Self-murder'd Companions drawn forthwith naked about the
streets. Whereby it may be judged, how powerful Persuasion is to encourage us:
Which Captains and Generals of Armies are not ignorant of, who employ all their
Rhetoric to impress Audacity in their Soldiers breasts, upon an assault or a
battle; and those that have been in such encounters, affirm, that nothing
conduces more either to inflame the Courage of Brave Men, or infuse it into
such as have none, than an Exhortation well applied and suited to the Minds of
those that are to be encouraged; sometimes by the Memory of their former
Gallant Actions; sometimes by those of their Enemies Cowardice; sometimes by
the greatness of the Danger, and the inevitable ruin they incurr in case of
turning their backs; but commonly, by the salvation of their Souls, and the
good of their Country; and always by the fair spur of Honor and Glory:
Considerations directly opposite to those dictated to us by Nature, which tend
only to preservation of the Individual.

The Second said, If Instruction made Men valiant and courageous, than all that
receive the same Education, learn in the same Academy, and fight under the same
Captain, should be equally courageous. Yet there is so notable a difference
between them, that it cannot be imputed to any but Natural Causes; such as are
the structure of the parts of the Body, the temper of the humors, the
nimbleness or heaviness of the Spirits, and especially the diversity of Souls
which inform our Bodies; which diversity is apparent even in Infancy, before
the Corporeal Organs can be suspected to be the Cause thereof. One Child is
more timorous than another, and no sooner begins to go, but he beats his
Companions, who suffer themselves to be beaten by one weaker than themselves;
the first, not quitting his hold for the rod, for which another will do more
than you would have him. The truth is, if the Soul be the Architect of her
habitation, to her must be imputed the Principal Cause of the variety found
therein, upon that of our Actions visibly depends. For as every one readily
addicts himself to those employments and exercises of body and mind whereunto
he is most fit, and which he performs with most ease; so he is more easily lead
to Actions of Courage, whose Organs are best disposed for the same. And because
Children commonly have somewhat of the Habit of Body, and Temper of their
Parents, hence Courage seems to come by Descent; which possibly renders our
Gentry so jealous of the Antiquity of their Families, in which they had rather
find a Man beheaded for an Action that speaks Courage, than a Burgess who had
not lived in a noble way. Moreover, to judge well of Courage, we must not
consider it solely in Man, since it is found so resplendent in Animals incapable
of Discipline and Instruction, that the certainest Physiognomical Rule whereby
to judge of a Valiant Man, is taken from the similitude or resemblance he has
with the Lion, Bear, or other Beasts of Courage. Which shows that the true and
original Valor being in Animals, Precepts rather alter and pervert, than
produce it in us. Hence the most learned are oftimes the greatest Pultrons. For
which reasons the Romans caused the warlike people whom they had subdued, to
descend from the Mountains into the Valleys, that by that means they might
change their Nature. Indeed, these Romans were better disciplined than the
Nations whom they called barbarous, and by that means more easily overcame
them; but they were not the more courageous for that, he who is vanquished
abating nothing of his Courage thereby: witness King Porus, whose Courage
Alexander more admired for his refusing to eat, that so he might by dying avoid
the shame of being overcome, than for the single fight to which he had
challenged him. Officers outdo common Soldiers, because they have more to
lose than they, and their Pusillanimity would be more taken notice of. And the
Speeches of Generals in a day of battle are not for the truly courageous, who
need them not, but for the Cowards, who are encouraged against the fear of
Death, by false suggestions of the Enemies paucity, and their own number.
Whereas true Courage, as Socrates says in Xenophon, is not in those that fear
not, because they ignore the danger, but in those who beholding it great, yet
judge their own strength greater and thereupon presume of surmounting it; which
Resolution is never learnt by Books or Precepts, but is inherent in the Mind.

The Third said, That he was of the Opinion of Socrates, in the same Xenophon,
namely, that as some Bodies are more robust, so also some Souls are better to
undergo dangers. That nevertheless Instruction serves greatly to perfect
Nature: Whence certain Nations cannot sustain the assaults of others better
trained and accustomed to manage some sort of Arms. All the kinds whereof, both
offensive and defensive, proceeding from Humane Industry, Nature alone must not
arrogate the advantage we have over other Animals; whose Courage being by the
help of Art surmounted by that of Man, as Art can do nothing without Nature; so
the Courage which leads us to attaque and vanquish them, must be ascribed to
Art, without which, Man durst not attaque them.

The Fourth said, We must distinguish Courages according to the diversities of
Subjects whereon they are employed. The highest Class is that of persons, who
freely offer themselves to certain death for their Religion, whether true or
false. So did amongst the Romans, Q. Curtius, who threw himself into a Gulf to
appease the anger of the Gods; Metellus, who ran into the fire to fetch out the
Statue of Minerva; and of Heretics a great number, of whom Books are full. But
this Martyrology shows us a greater number in the true Church; yet the Courage
of so many Martyrs cannot be ascribed to Nature alone, but to Persuasion, and
to Faith. Next comes the Courage of those great Heroes, and illustrious Men of
Antiquity, as David and his nine Worthies, Alexander the Great, the three
Horatii and Curiatii, Caesar, Cato, and many others, whom none can say would
have done those brave Actions, unless they had been lead thereunto by a noble
desire of Glory, to which our Minds are carried only by Reasons, Precepts, and
Examples; and consequently, their Courage may be judged rather acquired than
natural. Lastly, Courage is found in all Callings and Employments. A Minister,
or Counselor of State, a Divine, and a Judge, acquire the Title of Courageous,
when they resolutely perform the Office whereto they are called. This is not
taught any person by Nature, and therefore I find more effects of acquired than
of Natural Courage, which (besides) how great soever, is perfected by Industry.

CONFERENCE CLVI. Whether Men, not having learn' d of others, would would frame
Language to themselves.
NAture having given Animals a Voice for mutual communication at distance, and
that distinguished into as many several Tones and Accents as they have
different Passions and necessities; it is not credible that she has provided
worse for Man, as to what was more necessary to him, as being subject to more
passions and necessities than any other Animal, which oblige to a Society,
no-wise imaginable without Speech; which consequently, two Children would frame
to themselves, as soon as the moisture of their Brain and Organs serving to
Speech, being dried by Age, permitted free motion to their Tongue; beginning by
imitation of voices or sounds which they hear, and giving names to things
suitable to the voices or sounds they rendered. In defect whereof they would
frame other articulate words, first Monosyllables and Simple, as those of the
Chinese are, and afterward compounded: by which they would express all their
other conceptions, if not with such facility as other Languages, which time
has enriched, yet at least after their own Mode, using the most conformity
they could to the nature and property of each thing. And where reason failed
them, they would be helped by hazard; our Nature being so strongly carried to
imitation, that he of the two, who first applied a word to some thing, would be
followed by the other without contradiction. For the mind of Man being an Act,
incessantly conceives; his greatest pleasure is in communicating those
conceptions; and as a Torrent or River without shore, take their course every
way, so Man's conception being destitute of terms to imitate, would frame new
according to his fancy, which coming to be received by others, would acquire
the same perfection whereunto other Languages arrive in time. Yea when the
Organs of Speech fail, dumb persons move their members a thousand ways to make
themselves understood; and that so happily, that when Monsieur de Sancy was
Ambassador in Turkey, he happened to see two Mutes, the one a Turk and the other
a Persian, who not understanding one another because they had different signs,
there was found a third Mute who served them for an Interpreter. Which being
harder then to articulate a voice, argues, that Nature would much sooner teach
Speech then expression by gestures. For no body is ignorant that it is easier
to speak then to do.

The Second said, That Speech being only an imitation, he that should never
hear another speak could never speak himself. Hence persons born deaf are
always dumb, though they have all the Organs fit for formation of Speech: and
yet none will imagine that they have not all the same faculties and necessities
of expressing themselves that other men have, yea and greater too, being
deprived of all instructions which are aquir'd by the ear, and other benefits
proceeding from the same. Which is further verified by the examples of all
savage Men that have been found; even by that of the Satyr, who by the report
of S. Jerome in his Epistles appeared to S. Anthony in the Desert; all which
instead of words pronounced only inarticulate voices, liker sounds and
bellowings then words; these men being like one ignorant of playing on the
Lute, who though he has fingers yet cannot make it speak as he can who is
skilled in that Instrument.

The Third said, That the Reason why persons born deaf are also mute, is, that
he who speaks must first hear himself speak before he be heard by others;
otherwise he knows not whether himself has spoken or no, much less can others
know: and as little does he remember the voice which he made use of to express
this thing or another: which is absolutely necessary to being able to employ
the same voice when he would signify the same thing. But the case is not the
same with him that having a good ear and intending to cause himself to be
understood endeavors to express his conceptions of things by his voice which
he articulates by the judgment of his ear, as a Lutinist does the strings of
his Instrument, which indeed is more artificially touched by a skillful then by
an ignorant person, yet cease not to strike the Ear, as the Language invented
by such men without Precepts will not be less audible though more disagreeable
then another. Moreover, Speech being as proper to man as Reason (whereof it is
the Image, whence possibly the Greeks denote both by the same word) it may
seem, that one remote from all commerce would not cease as to reason so neither
to speak; but might as well do the one as the other. If there be any obstacle,
it must proceed from some cause: not from the material, to wit, the species of
things, which it imports not whether they be introduced by one sense or
another; Nor from the efficient, the Organs of Speech being supposed entire;
nor from the Formal, which cannot fail, since it is necessary for Speech to
follow as often as the breath is strongly driven out of the Lungs through the
sharp Artery into the Mouth, organized by the Epiglottis, modifi'd by the
Tongue, minced by the Teeth, and formed by the Lips. As for the final, which is
Communication, it is not less beneficial to one then to another. Wherefore all
the causes of Speech concurring and being supplied to man by nature, the effect
must necessarily follow. And if Beggars, particularly those called Gypsies,
make to themselves a particular jargon, which they call Blesche or Narquois, it
will not be harder for those we speak of to do as much. Yea they will not find
more difficulty therein, then occurs in the inventing of new Characters by such
as write in Ciphers: which is also confirmed by the judgment of the Fathers who
hold that the alteration of Tongues at the building of Babel, was nothing but
the total abolition in each man's memory of the species of his maternal
Language; which Memory being thereupon become a rased table and like a white
paper, it concerned men to agree together about new terms significative of
their conceptions. Otherwise (they say) if God had then infused an actual
knowledge and habit of several Languages in all those Workmen, this had not been
a punishment but a reward of their arrogance, and in some sort parallel to that
famous gift of Tongues by the Holy Ghost at Pentecost.

The Fourth said, That since nothing can be in the Intellect which was not
before in the Sense, the Species of Voice cannot be introduced into the
Understanding but by some outward sense: Not by the Hearing, which is the right
sense of Discipline, since none speaks to the Children of whom the question is:
Nor by the Eyes, whose sole object is the visible Species: nor by the other
Senses, whose objects are also different from those of the Hearing. Moreover, a
Language being comprehended under Grammar, which is a Science, it cannot be
understood much less practiced without either Precepts or Examples. For want of
which the memory of Children (of whom, we now speak) not being furnished with
any Idea, can dictate nothing to the Muscles and Nerves, the instruments of
voluntary motion, which therefore can form no Speech; just as he that is not
accustomed to other exercises of the body no more then to those of the mind,
produces them not. That God created Adam and Eve with Speech, and that (as it is
reported) some Children have spoken at their birth, yea some in their Mothers
bellies; these are things purely supernatural, and from which nothing can be
inferred.

The Fifth said, That Women have such a facility of speaking, that if two
Children especially of different sexes were bred up together, it is likely the
female would speak first, not only as the more forward but as the greater
tatler. Which was the reason of the miscarriage of the King of Egypts trial,
which he made only with Boys. And yet this habit of Speech is such in men that
in our age the Constable of Castile's Brother being born deaf crossed the Rule,
that persons deaf by birth are always dumb; (as also happened to many of the same
Family of Velasco). For he was taught to Speak, Write, Read and Understand
Authors, by putting a cord about his neck and straitning or loosning the same
to advertise him, when to open or shut his mouth by the example of his Teacher,
that so he might ^xpress the things which were represented to him at the same
time: nor was there other difference found between his speech and that of other
men, but only that he did not regulate his voice, speaking commonly too high:
which has also sometimes been done by making the deaf man bite the Instrument
upon which the sound they would have him hear was formed, because the
impression which the Brain receives thereby answers in some sort to the Sense
of Hearing.

CONFERENCE CLVII. Whether is better, to guard the Frontier, or carry the War
into the Enemies Country.
PEace being the end of War, he manages War best that soonest attains that end.
Now Peace is attained two ways; either by quelling the Enemies force; which
seldom happens and is of long discussion between parties almost equal (as those
that go to war commonly are, too great inequality presently subduing the weak
to the strong) or else by rendering all his attempts ineffectual; and this is
more easily done by expecting him firmly and resolutely, then by assaulting him
at his own home, withal the inconveniences and incertainties that occur in
remote expeditions. Moreover, every design ought to be rendered as infallible
as is possible; yet so many unexpected difficulties arise in things which
appear most easy, that we find by daily experience the Theory much different
from the Practice. Which being presumed certain, as indeed it is, none doubts
but a Minister of State may better lay the platform of a design in a Country
which is accessible to him and at his disposal; as also that both the Leaders
and Soldiers may better give and execute Orders in a place where the
Inhabitants are obedient and ready to contribute their care, pains, and money
for promoting the projects which serve to the advancement of their party; then
in places where they must depend upon the honesty of Guides, who are frequently
deceivers or apt to be deceived, and where all things are contrary. Besides,
every one is more ardent and zealous for the preservation of his own Land, Wife
and Children, yea and his own Life too, then for making designs upon the Life
and Goods of others; in which case, besides the dubiousness of the event, the
Soldiers are not sure that what they shall conquer shall remain their own; but
they are certain that what they defend well will remain so, since it belongs to
them already. Moreover, Histories inform us that of ten Enterprises made in an
Enemies Country scarce one has happily succeed^^, nor one of ten Conquests
been kept. Witness the late Invasions of the English and Spaniards in the Isles
of Rhee, S. Honorat, and S. Marguerite, and more lately at Leucate. Add
hereunto, that it is less chargeable to keep at home; and what is observed in
private Duels is appliable to public Wars: for oftentimes the more unskillful
Combatant keeping his ground and expecting his Enemy, kills him. Besides,
Defense carrying more justice with it then Invasion does, it must also beget
more confidence and boldness in the Defenders, and more diffidence and fear in
the Invaders, who cannot fight with so good a Conscience for what is possessed
by, and therefore justly presumed to belong to others, whatever subtilty may be
used to set up and color a false title.

The Second compared him that invades an Enemies Country, and him that expects
him in his own, to two Gamesters, one whereof having begun to win will no
longer venture any thing of his own, and the other begins the Game with his own
money. For the Assailant hazards nothing of his own, since he makes his Enemies
Country the seat of the War and of the hazard which follows it. And whether you
place the benefit and end of this War in the conquest of the Enemies Country,
or in a just defense only, it is always more commodious, profitable, and
glorious to attaque him at home, then to expect him at your own doors. For, if
you design to conquer, you must necessarily enter into his country to get
possession; if only to defend your self, then (as wise men choose rather to
divert and prevent diseases then to repel them already formed, and as a Fire is
more easily quenched in its first flame than when it has seized the roof and
walls, so) it is easier to defend your own country by making a diversion upon
that of the enemy than to expel in your own all the desolations that attend
war, which you must suffer at home unless you remove it further. Besides, in
foreign Counties the war almost pays its self, the Soldier lives as he list,
enriches himself with the pillage of taken Towns, and so is less charge to his
Prince. Yea, he becomes more valorous there too. For, as Antiperistasis
redoubles the force of Natural Agents, so the approach of an enemie's country
gives heart to the most cowardly, and renders others more disciplinable, as
well knowing that they must look for help only from themselves. Hence Armies
have prosper'd better in a strange Country than in their own. The Romans were
always victorious out of Italy, but often beaten at home, and reduced to great
extremities by the Gauls and Carthaginians; who likewise were always overcome
in their own Country. Hence Alexander conquered more Kingdoms and Provinces by
carrying his Arms into Asia, then his Father and all his Lieutenants won Towns
in Greece; the English have been more fortunate in France then at home; and the
Turks almost ever gain upon the Christians by assaulting Christendom. Yea
Reputation, by which Kings reign, and Terror which half gets a victory, are
always on the Aggressor's side, whereas on the contrary nothing abates the
courage more then to suffer the invaders to come to our houses, because the
alacrity and promptitude of Soldiers is usually greatest when acccompani'd with
great hopes.

The third said, It Is impossible to determine any thing in this or any other
political Questions, which are variable accordding to diversity of
Circumstances; The frontier of one State may be so safe that there is nothing
to be feared at home from the enemy, against whom therefore all the seditious
and turbulent persons may be safely sent: Foreign War serving as a Sanctuary
to bad Citizens, who fear the punishment of their crimes; in which respect it
serves for a purgation and bleeding to the body Politic. Other States, there
are which (like Recovering Persons, whose bodies are strong enough to support
themselves, but not to assail other) no sooner take the field but discord and
division arises at home, and so they incurr the reproach of the Astrologer who
fell into a ditch whilst he was gazing on the sky. Wherefore it is not more
easy to resolve whether it is best to make war, neer-hand or afar off, without
saying in what time, in what place, with what means and against what enemies,
than to counsel a Tradesman whether he should keep or get, without knowing why
and whether he has money in his purse or no. The Examples alleged on either
side resemble the sound of those bells which accord with all Notes. Those that
have prosper'd in conquering would possibly have got more if they had put
themselves only upon the Defensive; and those that have been worsted in
defending their own, perhaps did it too late, and (as it most frequently
happens) when their forces were impaired. But it may be said of the French and
all other warlike Nations that they are much fitter to attaque their enemy afar
off then to support his irruptions in their own country; because the first
requires such an ardor and impetuosity as is natural to them; and the second
has need of much patience, in which we have always been surmounted by
Strangers, till that grand Genius of the State which animates it at this day
manifested that Conduct does all both in war and peace.

CONFERENCE CLVIII. Whence diversity of Opinion proceeds.
It Is no wonder if every cause produces a different effect, and that there is
diversity not only between things of different kind and species, but also
between each individual, so that two eyes are not perfectly alike. Which
variety, had we ways of distinguishing, would appear to us everywhere else, as
it does (for example) to the Dog, who, of two Hares which we judge alike, knows
which he started first. But that one and the same thing appears diverse
according to the diversity of those that judge of it, this seems as strange in
the inquisition of its cause as it is common in practice. For since that the
Intellect judges of things according to the report of the outward senses,
without whose ministry nothing is introduced into it; and that these senses and
their mediums being well-dispos'd agree all in their reports, the whiteness of
this paper, the blackness of this ink, and the truth of all other objects being
faithfully represented to us; Why should not all men, that hear one and the
same proposition, and the reasons whereby it is backed and opposed, make the
same judgment for, or against it, without being divided, as they are, into
several opinions. The cause hereof I ascribe to the several disposition and
habitude of the Organs which render the soul's operations different. A sucking
child being at a Sermon, understands nothing at all of it; one six or seven
years old carries away a confused knowledge of it, and thinks it enough to say
that the Preacher spoke of God; the young man and the old man judge thereof
according to their inclination, the choleric hastily, the melancholy with more
circumspection, and almost all severally. Again, if the matter be scholastical,
the Peasant who understands it not, judges thereof with admiration, the Scholar
esteems it, the illiterate Tradesman blames it, and preferrs a point of
morality* in brief every one judges of it after his own way. In the mean time
it is one and the same Sermon, as one and the same liquor poured into different
vessels, which give it the taste wherewith they are already imbrued.

The second said, It Is true, Nothing is in the Intellect but what was before in
the Senses, yet many times the Intellect is so prepossessed with prejudice that
all supervening reasons signify nothing; and when some Passion, as Love or
Hatred, biasseth it, there is no room for equal consideration. Hence condemned
persons commonly accuse their Judges unjustly; though indeed a friend's
recommendation makes them look upon causes with other eyes then they should do.

The third said, This variety of judgments proceeds not only from the diversity
of the species introduced by the common sense into the Intellect, but from the
different conjunction which the Intellect makes of those species; just as the
same alphabet is written and read variously by several Writers, and though many
speak the same language, yet both their pronunciation and phrase is different.
Whence their expressions being so different, it is no wonder if the conclusions
of their reasonings prove not the same.

The fourth said, He conceived that there are some qualities in the soul which
she derives not from the body. Otherwise we should not see some people
extremely opinionative and obstinate, whose temper has nothing of melancholy;
nor others so light and mutable, though their constitution be not choleric;
and yet these two humors are commonly reputed the causes of stubbornness and
inconstancy. But to what shall we ascribe it except to the soul alone that some
men are naturally so given to devotion, that in an affair wherein religion is
never so little concerned they account nothing equitable against Ecclesiasts;
and in the mean time there are others to whom what ever this sort of people
propose is suspected. And who can think that the resolution of those that have
been burnt for Heresy proceeded from the temperament of the body.

The fifth said, That Opinions are to be distinguished into Practical and
Speculative. The first whereof, wherein we find our selves interessed, and
which we promote upon that account, it is probable follow the temper and
conformation of the Organs. Thus the melancholy man, who fears even imaginary
dangers, cannot be persuaded to prefer trading at sea before that at land, but
is alwavs fixed to hazard nothing. If he must choose a profession, he takes the
Gown before the Sword, and then too he had rather be silent then advance any
new proposition liable to rejection. But if his birth or fortune command him to
the war; he is rather for corrupting the enemies forces then fighting them, and
in case of the latter he chooses an ambuscade before a pitched battle. On the
contrary, the hot choleric person preferrs a course, whereby he may soonest
compass his design, though with the hazard of his Life, (which he will not
believe, or at least not fear) before the tedious progresses of other
Employments, which afford not their prosecutor meat till his teeth be out. And
the Sanguine easily agrees to this Advice, provided it requires no pains, or be
sweetened with some pastime; but the Phlegmatic cares neither for one nor the
other. On the other side, in things consisting only in Contemplation, I see
not why I should be rather of the Opinion, that the flux and reflux of the Sea
is caused by the Moon than by the Sun. And hence it is that persons of
different Tempers, Sexes, Climats, and Ages, agree more readily in a point of
Philosophy, than in their particular Inclinations and kind of Life. Indeed the
main Source of this Diversity of Opinion, is, the Vanity and Ambition of the
Humane Mind, which judging it self as well stocked with Capacity and
sufficiency as any other, and above all things, loving Liberty, which seems
disparaged by consenting to an Opinion advanced by another; this Conceit,
together with the dubiousness of all things not demonstrable, carries us to
seek some new Light, which cannot be so small, but we love it more than that of
another; as people commonly do their own Children. Hence arise the so different
Opinions of the Ancients, about all matters of Philosophy and other Sciences,
not excepting Divinity it self even amongst Catholics; amongst whom we see
Scotus, disagreeing with Saint Thomas, as Paracelsus does in Physic with
Galen, Copernicus with Ptolomy in Mathematics, Raymond Lully and Ramus in
Scholastic Philosophy with Aristotle, and in Civil Law Cassius, with Labeo,
and the Sabinians with the Proculeians.

The Sixth said, 'Twere a greater wonder if all Men were of one Opinion, than
that they imitate in this diversity all other things of the world: At least
it is harder to assign the cause why one and the same Man is to day of one
judgment, and to morrow of another, then to see as many several Sentences as
Heads. But to me this variety seems to arise from the various conception of
things. As appears by the example of Julius Caesar, who being purposed to
destroy King Deiotarus, no sooner heard Cicero speak in his defense but he
pardoned him; not to speak of many other Effects, both of his and Demosthenes's
Eloquence. Whence it comes to pass, that though the same Fact be related with
the same Reasons, yet the Diversities found in the manner, and in all the
senses, imprint in us different species; upon the report whereof we also make a
different judgment.

The Seventh said, This Variety proceeds from the Principles of Knowledge, as
appears in those of Mathematics., which being certain and known to all, cause
every one to assent to their infallible Consequences. And so in a person seen
at a distance, of whom having a confused Knowledge, one says, It Is a Tree,
another, a Beast or a Man; but when his nearer approach makes him better known,
all agree that it is Peter or James.

CONFERENCE CLIX. Why there is more Wind at Sea than at Land.
THe experience of less Wind and more Rain on Land than at Sea, makes their
Opinion questionable, who hold, Exhalations to be the matter of the former, and
Vapors of the latter: unless we will say, that Winds, to whom the Poets
rightly attribute the Empire of the Sea, drive the Clouds over the Land, where
being less agitated, they resolve into Rain. But to continue my reasoning with
the same Poets, I shall say, that having placed Aeolus's Palace in the caverns
near the sea, they have sufficiently proved, why the Sea is more troubled with
them than the Land. For these Winds visibly issue from deep Caverns frequent on
the Coasts of the Sea, whose continually agitated waves incessantly stir them
up. It Is no wonder then if they display their violences on that side which is
freest to them: Which is experienced in great Lakes adjacent to high Mountains;
as in that of Comum, and de la Guard in Italy, whose waves and roarings
resemble those of the Sea; and also in that of Geneva, which is troubled
extraordinarily. Not but that Winds are generated in other Subterraneous places
too, none of which is exempt from them; as appears in Wells and the mouths of
Caves. But the openings of such places being commonly strait upwards, the Wind
that come out of them is not so perceptible as that which issues out laterally
from high Caverns upon the Seashore; and they differ, in that the Sea Wind is
dryer and less corrupting, possibly by reason of the saltness of the water,
upon which it passes.

The Second said. That the difference in Question proceeds from the vast extent
of the Sea, which gives the Air once agitated, more liberty to continue its
motion; which, on the contrary, is straightened and repressed on Land by the
occurse of Mountains, Trees, Houses, and other obstacles: By the same reason
that the waves of a Pool or little Lake, are much less than those of the Ocean,
besides, that one and the same Wind has much greater effect in a smooth and
liquid plain, which yields to it, than upon a rough solid Body, upon which
burdens are not moved but with more force than there needs upon the water; as
they experience who endeavor to draw a stranded Ship on the Land, which they
saw move almost of it self whilst it was upon the water. The Mechanical Reason
whereof is, that the water breaking into infinite points, scarce makes any
resistance to its Agent; but the Earth pressed with the same load, resists it
in infinite points.

The Third said. He that defined Wind to be Agitated Air, rather spoke its
Effect than Cause, which is some middle thing between a Vapor and an
Exhalation, driven violently according to all the differences of place. For an
Exhalation, which always mounts upwards, and the Vapor which refrigerated
descends downwards, cannot separately be the matter of Wind. Hence as soon as
the Vapor of a Cloud is resolved into Rain, the Wind cease; the Exhalations
not being sufficient to produce it alone, as neither the Vapor is. Otherwise,
Winds should be greatest in hot weather, when Exhalations are most plentiful.
Wherefore the Sea having in its Four Qualities the materials of these two
Meteors, and being otherwise more capable of emitting them through its liquid
substance, than the Earth is through its hard and solid surface, though both be
equally heated as well by the Sun, as by Subterraneous Fires, Evaporations and
Exhalations, are sooner and oftener made at Sea than at Land.

The Fourth said, That the thickest Air being oftimes the calmest, and the
clearest the most windy, it is doubtful whether Vapors and Exhalations produce
Winds; which, besides, presupposes actual heat in the Sea, which yet is never
felt there, but only on Land. It seems therefore that the Element of Air being
very symbolical to that of the Air by their agreement and moisture, they follow
the motions one of the other. Hence the Air contiguous to the Sea, is agitated
by it; whence arises a Wind, which again agitates the Sea; it being well
known, that when there are no Waves there is no Wind. On the contrary, when the
Wind is to change, the billows turn first. And ordinarily, the Winds change
with the Tides.

The Fifth said. There are two sorts of Winds upon the Sea; Particular, which
reign in our Seas, blowing indifferently from all Coasts; and General, which
blow continually from the same quarter, without giving place to their
Contraries. Such is the Oriental Wind in the Torrid Zone, which was called by
the Latins, Subsolanus, and by Mariners at this day, South-East. For it
conducts Ships so constantly over the whole extent of Mer du Nord, and du Sud,
that without discontinuing Day or Night, it exempts the Seamen from touching
their sails, especially when they are near the Aequinoctial. Indeed in the East
Indies, this Rule alters, for this Wind holds there but six months, leaving
the other six free to its Antagonist. The Cause whereof, is ascribed to the
repercussion of the capes and coasts of those Seas, as that first Wind is to
the motion of the Primum Mobile, which, together with the inferior Spheres,
draws the Air along with it in this place, where the circumference of its
motion is largest. There is another general Wind, which blows between the
Tropic, or twenty fourth Degree on this side the Line, and the thirty fifth
becoming Occidental with the like constancy that the abovesaid Oriental does.
This some attribute to a contrary motion, which all things have when those
nearest them are hurried violently; as the stream of water running impetuously
in the midst, makes that near the shores recoil backwards.

The Sixth said, That as Vapors make Mists and Fogs, and Sulphurous
Exhalations make igneous Meteors; so the Nitrous make Wind, which keeps the air
from corruption as the Earth is kept from it by Nitre, and the Sea by Salt.
Moreover, both the Wind and Nitre dry, and are the causes of fecundity; as is
proved (on the behalf of Nitre) by the Nitrous sand of Nilus, whose greater or
lesser overflow promises to the Egyptians a year proportionably fruitful; which
is also said of the Rhosne abounding with Nitre. And as for the Wind, besides
that all flatuous Meats provoke lust, it is said that the Mares of Andalusia
conceive by the West-wind alone which also is styled the Father of Flowers. In
Brief, if Wind be impetuous, the effects of Nitre in Gunpowder and Aurum
fulminans, manifest that Nitre is no less. Now Nitre being mixed with the Air,
where it is volatile; with the Earth, where it is fixed; and with the Sea,
where it is barely dissolved; no wonder if it exhale more easily from the Sea
then from the Land, and consequently if more winds be there. Whence the reason
may be drawn not only of the Sea-winds but also of the tempests and commotions
of that vast Element; a Tempest being nothing but the rarefaction of the Sea;
Nitre, and the inflation of the Waters at Full Moon in March and September,
only the fermentation of the same Nitre in the season proper for generation. As
for that inflation happening at the time of the Dog Star, when the Etesian winds
reign, it proceeds from the heat of the Air then inflamed by the rays of the
Sun, like the ebullition of Honey and Syrups impregnated with much Salt, as
appears by their dissolution and the bitterness they acquire over the Fire.

The Seventh said, That the coldness of Vapors arising from waters giving more
body and consistence to winds, makes them strike a more sensible blow then when
they are destitute thereof; whence they are greater in Winter then in Summer,
and in the Morning then at Noon. Thus the same quantity of water will cause
more alteration in the body being drunk cold then warm, because the impression
of the latter is much less upon our bodies. And the Providence of the Author of
Winds is remarkable too, in that they are mischievous at Land but useful at
Sea; hurtful things being by a secret of his power as much diminished, as
profitable are augmented.

The Eighth said, That not only Wind-mills but also the Wind-wagons invented
lately in Holland, show that wind well managed is no less profitable at Land
then at Sea. Therefore I should refer the cause to the porosities, overtures,
and caverns of the Earth, into which the wind entering is by that means less at
Land; whereas the surface of the Sea giving it no such admission, it is left to
its freer course upon the same; whence when those pores of the Earth are shut
up by frost, the wind becomes more impetuous then it is in Summer when they are
open.

CONFERENCE CLIX. Whether it be easier to procure obedience by Gentleness then
by Terror.
THe most plausible virtues are not always the noblest: as they depend upon
external things which increase or diminish their value, so oftentimes they
yield to those obscure and private virtues, whose beauty being only internal,
without borrowing any recommendation from abroad, they are therefore the more
to be esteemed. Gentleness or Mansuetude is of this nature, though it make not
so great a noise as Fortitude, which is irresistible by the terror it impresses
upon the opposers of its designs, yet oft-times it accomplishes its enterprises
with the more facility in that it makes not use of any extraneous help, but
only of what this virtue it self affords; which insinuating sweetly into their
minds whom it would lead by the consideration of their own good, more easily
procures obedience then fear does; which indeed may constrain them to do what
they would not voluntarily assent to, but is a violent motion, and so harder to
be impressed then that which is voluntary. For when once the reason is
persuaded of the justice of the things enjoined, there is no more obstacle in
the Will, which then resigns it self to be lead by that light of the
Understanding; much less in the inferior Powers, which move only by the orders
of those upon which they totally depend.

The Second said, Did men leave themselves to the guidance of Reason more then
of their Passions, it would be easier to procure obedience by Gentleness then
by Terror, which then would be useless; seeing it is not necessary to oblige
such men by denunciation of penalties to their duty, who addict themselves to
it voluntarily upon the knowledge they have of right Reason. But since very few
follow this Rule, in comparison of those that have none but that of their
disorderly Appetites, therefore severity is more expedient then mildness for
reducing them at any rate whatever to their duty. For their obedience though
constrained is nevertheless exemplary, and draws others to do the like, and so
maintains that mutual correspondence which gives subsistence not only to States
but also to all other civil Societies, and which consists chiefly in a certain
dependence between the parties destinated to obey and to command. So that as
the latter ought to study to maintain the Authority and Superiority which they
have, whether by Nature (as Fathers over their Children) or by Love (as Kings
and Magistrates over their Subjects, and Masters over their Domestics) so when
those under them fail of what they are obliged to render to them, there is no
surer nor easier way to bring them to it then Terror, which proposing a
sensible penalty to them in case of miscarriage is incomparably more powerful
to make them obey, then sweetness; which indeed has some charms to win more
rational spirits, but being accompany'ed with softness and indulgence, becomes
at length odious and contemptible by the disorder and confusion which follow
impunity of crimes. Moreover, it is certain that as States are maintained by the
exact observance of Laws, so their destruction ordinarily happens only by the
relaxation which Superiors suffer of the punishments due to such as transgress
them.

The Third said, That the Poets who feign men formerly dispersed in diverse
parts of the Earth without Religion, Laws or Discipline, to have been gathered
together by the melodious consort of musical Instruments, with which Orpheus,
(as they relate) attracted even Beasts and Rocks, seem to conclude rather for
Gentleness then Terror, this latter causing those that use it to be hated as
much as the former does to be loved. But setting aside fabulous authorities,
the most sedulous inquirers into the causes of the foundation of States
attribute the same to the charms of their Eloquence of these men, who being
found fittest to insinuate to them the advantages of living in society, reduced
them thereunto by imposing Laws upon them, the dispensing wherewith they
reserved themselves as well as the conduct of those that voluntarily submitted
to their Government; which having taken its rise from Gentleness cannot better
be preserved then by the same, if the Philosophers Maxim be true, That things
are preserved by the same principles which served to their establishment. And
so it is easier to procure obedience by Gentleness then by Terror.

CONFERENCE CLX. Whether Trading derogate from Gentility.
It Is the part of the slothful and such as live by the sweat of others to blame
Industry. 'Twere tolerable indeed to reject out of the rank of liberal Arts
such as have any thing of baseness or sordidness, but to do the like by an
Employment capable alone to enrich States, furnish them with all necessaries,
and maintain them in Amity and good Intelligence with their Neighbors, is too
great a piece of Niceness, the result whereof is that then the Gentry must
either remain poor or else live by robberies and other unlawful courses. For
notwithstanding the precaution of most places in adjudging almost the whole
estate to the eldest sons of Gentlemen, (which would not be necessary if they
were left in a condition of getting, as all other sorts of persons are) yet the
cadets of either Sex cannot have so small a portion, but the succession which
before was able to support the dignity of the name, at length either comes to
nothing or so small that the principal Heirs are forced either to dye of
hunger, or to sustain their lives by some exercise, the choice whereof is not
so freely left to them as to their Predecessors. For the benefit alliances
bring them is oftentimes not very considerable; the Daughters being by the same
customs very ill provided, and that benefit commonly accompanied with new
expenses. Indeed some Legislators have absolutely forbidden Trafick, as
Lycurgus; others have only permitted it to the inferior people, as Romulus,
which induced Plato to found his Commonwealth far from the Seaports, for fear
it should be corrupted by the delights ordinarily introduced by strangers, and
his Citizens getting their livelihood by Merchandise should learn to lie and
deceive, the common vices of Merchants, which Cicero says likewise of the
Carthaginians, that being good of their own nature, they learned by the
converse of Merchants to addict themselves to frauds and lies, out of their
great desire of getting. But as Trading begets dissimulation, so it makes men
more prudent by the knowledge of several persons manners. Whence Homer in the
beginning of his Odysseus makes this remark of Ulysses, that he had seen many
Cities, which is proper to Merchants: but every body knows that one may lie,
dissemble, and deceive without being a Merchant, nor ought the abuse of some
hinder all from the use.

The Second said, That the reason why Trading is interdicted to Gentry, is,
lest the sweetness of gain should retard them from the Wars for the service of
the King and defense of the State, whereof they are the support and the right
hand. And Gentlemen having no other exercise but Arms must needs be better
skilled therein then if their Minds and Bodies were shared amongst several
Occupations, and upon occasion they are more ready and free from other
employment to execute the orders they receive, then if they were in some long
Voyage, or busied about examining an Account-Book; an error wherein, sometimes
imports their whole estate. Besides, Soldiers more cheerfully obey him who
they see leads a life far from all Trading. This was the practice of the
Romans, among whom 'twas not lawful for a Citizen to exercise Merchandise; but
only for freed Servants, or others of the low vulgar. Much more was it
forbidden to the Senators, who for that reason had the Port of their Ship
limited, lest they should Trafick under pretext of transporting their Fruits
and Rents; all profit seeming to them dishonest. And the Thebans admitted no
man to any Magistracy, unless he had discontinu'd Trading at least ten years
before. The reason is given by Aristotle; because Merchandise is an enemy to
Virtue. Hence all access to Honors has been by the Laws interdicted to
Merchants, or so much as to bear Arms; so that Gentility and Merchandise seem
inconsistent. Add hereunto, that God forbids his people to have any Merchant
amongst them; because, says the Wise man, the Merchant can hardly have his
hands clean from sin: And so Chrysostom adventures to say, that a Merchant
cannot please God, by reason of his perjuries and frauds; qualities directly
contrary to true Gentility.

The Third said, That seeing this life needs Action more then Contemplation;
therefore good Politicians invite, by all sorts of Honors and Privileges,
those that are able to contribute most to the benefit, quiet, and increase of
the State. But, so are Merchants; who bring plenty of all kinds of Goods to the
most desolate places, and enrich the more fruitful by distributing their
commodities, which otherwise would be poor amidst their abundance. Nor are they
obliged to Trade in Person, so that they are not hindered from paying the
personal Service they owe to their King and Country; for whose good they are
oft-times best advertised by their Foreign Correspondences, and give the
certainest Intelligence of an Enemies Designs: besides that, having traveled
into his Country in time of Peace, they the better know what way to manage a
War against him; and the money wherewith they abound more then Gentlemen, gives
them large Credit amongst the Soldiers. The Roman Law that forbad Senators to
Traffic, was extinct in the days of Hortensius, as he complains: whereby it
appears to have been lawful not only for them, but also for the Equites, or
Knights to negotiate either by themselves or by others; as at this day the
Nobles of Spain, England, Venice, and especially those of Florence do. Thus
Cicero speaks of Lucius Pretius an illustrious Roman Knight that Traffickt at
Panormus, and of Q. Mutius of the same quality at Syracuse. That God forbad his
people Traffic, 'twas probably to keep them from being corrupted by the
Idolatry of other Nations; and it is no more to be drawn into consequence for us
then abstinence from Swines Flesh and their other Ceremonies: But should all
that has been said against Merchants be admitted for good, it must be only
against Merchants by Retail, not against those that Trade in Gross, who have
always been excepted from the rank of others.

The Fourth said, That Utility is not more incompatible with Honesty then Trade
is with Nobility, which nevertheless is different, according to the several
sentiments of Nations, being rated by extraction amongst Christians by warlike
exercises amongst the Turks, by learning amongst the Chinese; as also the
Nobles live in the Country in France and England, but in Cities in Spain and
Italy; from which circumstances Nobility receives several Estimations,
according to the several opinions of Nations. But in general, Commerce, as it is
the exercise of the people, so it has been more honored in popular States then
in Monarchies, where the power of Sovereigns shines brightest in War (which is
opposite to Merchandise) and the fear of Monopolies (which would easily prevail
here) renders odious the trading of Grandees, who incur the peoples envy as
soon as they undertake the employments belonging to them. Moreover, the gain of
Merchants is contrary to the liberality of a Gentleman, whose donations are
interpreted in Law more extensively, when there is question about them, then
those of Yeomen. And our Savior, so gentle toward other sinners, whipped the
Tradesmen out of the Temple, calling them Robbers, and their Shops Dens of
Thieves. As accordingly, Pagan Antiquity assigned them for their Patron
Mercury, the Patron of Thieves, and the most infamous of the Gods. And the
Emperors forbad Merchandise, not only to Senators by the Lex Clodia, but also
to Nobles by extraction, L. Nobiliores. C. De Comerciis and Market. to Officers
Leg. Ne quis C. de dignit. and even to Soldiers, L. Milites C. Loca, and L.
eos C. ne milites negotientur. And if some Nations, confounding Utility with
Honesty, have authorized the Trading of Nobles, it is but as base Money is, upon
some necessity, allowed current in one Country, and rejected in all others.
And their own Doctors agree, that the Splendour of such Nobility is much
diminisht by negotiation; the distinction of Gross and Retail, not changing the
Species of the Question, any more then more and less do in all others. Nor is
it material whether they negotiate by the intervention of others, since it is
not lawful to do by another what we may not do our selves; besides, that such
intervention draws in the Honor of a Gentleman to vouch another Fact. Lastly,
the poverty intended to be avoided thereby, is oftentimes met with instead of
Riches; and were it otherwise, yet Poverty commonly serves for a spur to
Virtue. Hence ordinarily Cadets are more courageous then Elder Brothers; and
the poor Epaminondas and Phocion were the more Warlike; but Crassus the Rich
was overcome and slain by the Parthians.

CONFERENCE CLXI. Why the French are so much incensed with the Lie.
TRue and Good being reciprocal; hence to call a man Liar, is as much as to
say, that he is of no Value; and because the paltery Fellow is unworthy of
Honor, whereof the French is more covetous then any other Nation (as appears
by the courage wherewith he runs upon hazard to the danger of his Life,
testifying thereby that he prises Life less then Honor, to which most other
Nations need to be incited by infinite Artifices) hence it comes to pass that
the French are more sensible of the Lie than they.

The second said, That all Mankind make esteem of Piety toward God, and
Courage toward men: the former having been a means used by the greatest
Princes and Legislators to gain the minds of their people; so powerful, that
some even with the appearance of it alone have produced strange effects,
(witness the dotages of Mahomet in the East, and many others elsewhere.) The
other, namely Courage, being the virtue most revered amongst men, and esteemed
by women, who commonly favor the most valiant. Now Lying is a Vice opposite to
both these Virtues, implying Impiety toward God, and Cowardice toward men.
For he that lies cannot be ignorant, that God the Father of Truth knows, and
will sooner or later punish his Crime, if he have power to do it, (as cannot be
denied without manifest irreligion.) And since Truth comes of it self to the
Tongues end, unless it be detained Captive by Fear, or some other servile
consideration; hence a Lie presupposes Cowardice and Fear of him before whom it
is spoken. So that it is no wonder if the reproach of these two crimes trouble
us so much, the French Nation being the most glorious of the World.

The third said, That the Lie cannot but have something in it more heinous then
the reproach of Coward and Impious, since these are repayed only with the Lie,
but the Lie it self with blows; probably because Lying is a servile Vice, and
the French are very jealous of preserving their Liberty. But we must
distinguish between lying and telling a Lie; for in this latter case people are
not readily offended, as in the former. Thus an Advocate pleading upon a
Breviate, the matter whereof is fictitious, takes it not for an injury if the
Adversaries Advocate is false; but replies only, that he will justify it. The
Philosopher maintaining an erroneous opinion, which he believes good, will not
be angry at its being impugned of falsehood. But when one is surprised in a Lie,
which seems invented purposely to impose upon the Company, the discoverer of
the falsehood seems to reproach him not only of knavery but also of sottishness,
in that he could not utter it dexterously enough to make it believed. As
therefore Theft was not punished, but esteemed among the Lacedaemonians, when it
was well concealed, and received not chastisement except the Thief were taken
in the fact; so a Lie seems to offend only when it is discovered; but if
handsomely told, instead of being blamed, is authorized by Rhetoric and Poetry,
(which are arts of handsomely feigning things that are not) by Complements,
which are fair Disguisements; by dissimulations, common enough everywhere; by
stratagems of War. Hence when we give the Lie to any one, we add, saving the
respect of the Company; intimating thereby, that we intend not to reproach them
of little judgment in letting pass so gross a falsehood for a truth. For I see
not that the French are greater Liars then other Nations, unless you will bring
under Lying their reservedness and modesty in not telling their designs to all
the world.

The Fourth said, That the French being the most civilized of the world, have
reason to take for the greatest affront the Vice which most destroys civil
Life and Conversation; which being founded upon Communication, whereof Speech
is the Interpreter: if there be no assurance in this, then Humane Society is
destroyed. All other things are known for what they are by the species which
they send to our senses (as the species of a Dog and a Horse never fail to
represent them to us such as they are) our intentions and thoughts alone are
committed to speech; which, if it ill represent them, is no more to be esteemed
then a false Looking-glass which represents objects quite other then what they
are; or then a copy not at all resembling its original; or lastly, then a thing
which is nothing less then what it is taken to be. Hence a Liar seeing himself
dis-believed, and every one upon their guard when he speaks or negotiates; he
has reason to be sharply offended with him that gives him such a repute: and
because being accounted a Liar, he that accuses him would not believe his bare
affirming the contrary; therefore he gives him a box on the ear, as the most
suitable reply that can be made to the Lie; which being the highest affront,
the blow is the first revenge of it, which the uncovered parts of the body
(namely the hand and face) present to the offended person; which blow is
esteemed the greater outrage, in that it testifies the highest contempt of the
receiver, and is only meant to provoke him to resentment: Therefore a thrust
with a Sword at an enemy purposely to deliver ones self from the fear of him by
killing him, is accounted much less injurious then an affront done purposely
for the affronts sake. But, besides the foregoing reasons, custom (which
oftentimes has none) in France authorizes the greatness of the injury of the
Lie.

The Fifth said, That the refiners of Honor are like those that sharpen the
points of Needles so much till they break. The French, instead of interessing
their Honor (as most other Nations do) only in things of importance, and of
fairly maintaining that they speak true when they are told that they Lie, are
as much incensed upon the sole pronunciation of these words, as if they were so
many magical terms forcing the hand to give a blow, or draw the sword; and,
which is strange, it is not inquired whether the thing be true or false, the Lie
being judged alike offensive in both: yea, ordinarily they are the greatest
Liars that are most offended with the Lie: the reason whereof may be, That the
reproach of true Vices offends us more then that of false and suppositious, and
those of the mind more then those of the body, as being more reprehensible in
us, in that it is our own fault that they are not amended: for a reproach made
to one for a Vice he cannot remedy, serves more to show the malice of the
Reproacher than the fault of him that is blamed But it is not so with a Lie,
which presupposes either ignorance or malice. Whence the terms of Sot and
Ignorant are also most cutting even to those that are not so. Besides, a Liar
(unless he repel the injury; a vowing himself the Disciple of the Father of
Lies, this Reproach is very odious to good men, especially to the French, who
so affect that Title from all Antiquity, that our Ancestors have transferred it
to Valor, (which they esteemed the chief of the Virtues) saying, that such as
have defended themselves well, have done en gens de bien, like good men.

The Sixth said, That the Lie is offensive only upon account of the intention;
since most of our Discourses, Answers, and Replies (wherein consists one of the
greatest pleasures of life, and without which our Converse would have no
agreeableness, as appears by those that speak not to one another, or agree in
every thing) are no other but fair givings of the Lie; yet are so far from
being offensive, that they cause us to desire the company of such as know how
to make handsome Reparties. Thus many of our Generals, whose venturousness upon
the greatest hazards sufficiently testifies their desire of Praise, yet show
displeasure at the hearing of their own Commendations; a Dissimulation, which
carries them sometimes so far, that when any History of these times publishes
some brave Action performed by them, they scruple not to blame the Historian,
who by concealing the like another time, may secure himself from such
Complements, if he take them not in the right sense.

CONFERENCE CLXII. Why every one thinks himself well enough provided with Wit;
and some, better than others.
AS the Eye sees it not it self, so the Intellect, understands not it self;
but judging only of the parts of all others finds something in them to
discommend; and having a better conceit of its self, arrogates the preeminence
in the comparison. For the reflection of the Intellect upon it self is never
sincere, but disguised and falsifi'd by the false reports and prejudices of
Self-love, which makes us think our selves better then our Neighbors. Hence
those that take not pains to consider their own Wit, care not to make a just
comparison of it with that of others; since a right Comparison is between two
things known; and those that can do it, do it through the clouds of Interest,
which like Optical Glasses magnify Objects, and make an Elephant of a Fly.

The second said, It Is not universally true that every one is contented with
his own wit; for there are many no less diffident then others are confident of
themselves. Hence some eloquent Tongues, fit either for the Chair, or the Bar,
are kept from both by timidity and distrust of their own abilities, and (as
some great animals suffer themselves to be lead and governed by a Child) so
their good wits, not understanding their own strength, permit themselves to be
ruled by those that have worse. Thus we see there are Apprentices in all Trades
and Professions more knowing then their Masters; and many times in that of War,
a brave experienced Soldier obeyes a cowardly and ignorant Captain: And in
Religious Houses, some excellent Spirits glorying not to repute themselves
such, suffer themselves to be guided and ruled by those of an inferior Degree.
Yea, the most presumptuous are seldom satisfied with their own first
conceptions, as appears by the frequent connexions and expunctions in the
originals of their Writings, to which even after publishing they never cease to
add or diminish. Of which number are many, who making a review of their
precedent actions, always find something therein to dislike. But as for
others who have a better opinion of their own wit then that of others, this
defect seems to proceed from the want of knowledge of themselves, so much
recommended by the Delphian Oracle; such people resembling the old Hag who put
her eyes up in a Box when she came home, and took them out only when she went
abroad; or those that have a Wallet upon their necks, whereof they never see
but the forepart into which they put the affairs of their Neighbors; the other
being behind, into which they put all that concerns themselves. Which our
Savior also reproved in Hypocrites, who see not the beam in their own eyes,
yet spy a mote in that of their Neighbor.

The Third said, That there being three sorts of Goods, namely, of the Mind,
the Body, and Fortune; the two latter are so exposed to the eyes of every one,
it is impossible to deceive the Spectators in the judgment thereof. But it is
not so with those of the mind, which not appearing to all are like secret
Records of a Law Suit, the extract or copy whereof depends upon the honesty or
dishonesty of the reporter; who being both Judge and Party, it is no wonder if
he award the Cause to himself; as those that give their Voices to themselves
excuse it by saying, That having sworn to choose the most capable, they judged
themselves such: Whereunto the evil custom of commending one's self much
contributes, by turning into Nature, and so persuading us of what we would make
others believe. So also do flatterers, whom all the world delights to hear
(whatever is pretended to the contrary) and who may speak more boldly of the
gifts of the mind, because they are not perceptible of themselves, and so less
subject to contradiction.

The Fourth said, That it is so far from being true, that every one esteems his
own genius because he sees it not; that on the contrary he esteems it more then
others, because commonly he sees none but it; not in its substance, but in its
effects. For if we value a Friend whose presents we frequently behold before
our eyes, how great reason must every one find to prize his own spirit,
whereof all the actions are in a manner present to him? He beholds himself in
himself morning and evening, sleeping and waking; and finding not external
objects enough to compare with the multitude of internal species which his
passed actions furnish to him, he makes the conclusion to his own advantage. If
he be a Poet, all his Senses are filled with his Rhimes; or with his square
Periods, if an Orator. The memory of his exploits incessantly returns to him,
if he be a Soldier; and perhaps being revived by some Sore or old Hurt, makes
him easily presume that he is as good as a Captain; or if he be a Captain that
he could better perform the office of Field-Marshal then he that has it. In
brief, there is no profession wherein the mind finds not wherewith to
content, yea, to admire it self, and withal to abate the value of others;
comparison being like a balance, one scale whereof cannot be raised without
depressing the other.

The Fifth said, That the reason why every one is contented with his own Wit,
is because we are never brought to acknowledge our own errors, unless by
constraint or conviction. And the mind never fails of a subterfuge and a
pretense to lay the fault other-where then upon it self. If happily some one
acknowledges that he wanted foresight, judgment, and good mannagement in his
affairs; yet he will always turn the fault from himself, and rather recurre to
causes that are not, saying, That he was bewitched, or at least deceived, even
so far as to accuse the truth of the most general Maxims, when they prove not
to agree with his own false Principles. Whereas we are forward enough to
condemn others magisterially both in presence and absence.

The Sixth said, That what is received, being according to the form and
capacity of the recipient, it is impossible for the mind to conceive any thing
greater then it self: if it do, it is by negation, as the Eye sees night when it
sees nothing, and as the most perfect Souls conceive the Deity, namely by
conceiving that they cannot conceive it, which is no knowledge at all. Hence
the Sky, Houses, Trees, and other great visible Objects enter into the Eye
only by a visual species proportional to the bigness of the pupil which
diminishes them. So likewise the understanding or mind of Man, being to judge
of that of another, abstracts such intentional species thereof as are
correspondent to its own capacity, and such alone as it is able to comprehend.
And as the continent is bigger then the thing contained; so this intentional
Species, which represents the image of another mind, being less then the
mind which conceives it; it is no wonder if that which is conceived appears
less then that which conceives it. For otherwise, since the understanding is
conformed to the thing which it understands, if it should conceive an Idea of a
mind greater then it self is, it should become greater then it self, which is
absurd. Besides, as things nearest us appear greatest, and nothing is nearer us
then our selves, it is not to be marvell'd at if we pass judgment to our own
advantage.

The Seventh said, That the reason of this difference is because the species
which concern others are not so deeply engraven as those which the
understanding incessantly traces in it self; whence it is that the dispositions
of that first rank are not so well imprinted as the habits of the second. Now
that the Species relating to others are more lightly engraven than those that
concern our selves, appears by the example of the Graver, which passing but
lightly over the Copper makes a little stroke almost imperceptible; whereas by
its repassing several times upon the same place, (as is done by the frequent
repetition of the same thoughts upon what regards our selves) it makes more
remarkable lines. Perhaps also this pleasing Error is left to Man, to comfort
him for the unequal share of all other Goods; which otherwise would bring him
into Despair, or at least very much increase the unhappiness of his Life.

CONFERENCE CLXIII. How Animals are bred of Putrefaction.
THe Vicissitude of finite things requiring their being in perpetual motion,
the same is fourfold; namely, (1.) To Quantity, which is termed Augmentation
and Diminution; (2.) To Quality, which is called Alteration; (3.) To Place,
which is styled Local Motion; (4.) To Substance, which is named Generation and
Corruption. This last is the drawing forth of the Natural by some Extraneous
Heat, as that of the moist Ambient Air, which insinuating into the corrupting
body, plays the part of an Agent therein; and not only alters its qualities,
but also either increases or diminishes its quantity; as is seen in the
Fermentation of Medicaments, and in Leven which makes paste rise, in which
motion the Local is likewise observed. Thus the matter being wrought and
agitated by all sorts of motions, is disposed in a manner suitable for
receiving some form, which necessarily ensues upon such disposition.

The Second said, That in Equivocal Generation; (which the Question relates to)
Salt holds the place of the Masculine Seed; and the Humidity, it corrects that
of the Feminine; as appears by a pot filled with common earth, which moistened
only with Rain produces Stones, Plants, and Snails: But after you have
deprived it of its Salt, by washing it with hot water, (as the Saltpeter-men
do) it remains barren: Nature employing its fixed Salt for the Formation of
Stones; the volatile with its Mercury, for Plants; and the same with its
Sulphur for Animals, whose diversity, possibly, comes from that of these Salts;
amongst which, Nitre contributes marvellously to Fecundity. Hence Excrements,
being almost wholly nitrous, so soon produce Beetles, Flies, Worms, and other
Insects: Sweat, beings of the same Nature, makes Lice; and Urine, Fleas; the
slime of Marshes, which is nitrous, (as the turfs we use for fuel manifest)
produces Frogs; Boats of Salt swarm with Rats, who conceive others by licking
the Salt: Wheat also, being very nitrous, generates Field-mice, and other
Insects: And all this in the unctuous moisture of its self, or which it renders
such by its Heat, which reduces the same to a viscousness fit for retaining the
form to be introduced; and as the Ebullition of Syrrops and Must, is a
spontaneous Motion proceeding from their salts, so the same being raised by the
heat without to a more eminent degree causes the progressive Motion in an
Animal. The outward formal Cause is the Disposition of the Matter, which that
double heat finding disposed for a certain Form, fashions and extends for that
purpose. Thus the marrow of the Backbone being near the Reins, which are full
of Salt, may become a Serpent; a Woman's Hair laid in a Dunghill produces Worms
or little Serpents; Caterpillars retain the color of the sap of the Tree
through which the Humor that produces them passed, and imitate the several
colors of the Flowers about which they are bred; as is seen in the mothy
colors of the same Caterpillars especially when they become Butter-flies. The
internal, formal, or formative Cause is an invisible Character graven in the
said Salts, which determines every thing to its Species, answerable to that
which is found in the Seed of each Plant and Animal, and which the Chemists
hold cannot be extinguished in the salts of some Plants, affirming, that the
ashes of Sage or Rosemary sown bring forth Sage and Rosemary. The Final Cause
is the Perfection of the Compound; whereunto Nature always aspires; it being
certain, that an Animal is more noble than a Body inanimate, whence some prefer
a Fly above the Sun. Upon which account she changes Mixts into Plants, and
these into Animals.

The 3d said, That the Universal Spirit of the World acts in this case like a
General of an Army, who, seeeing an Enemy ready to fly, and none of his own
party present to seize upon him, though his Employment be not to take
Prisoners, but only to give Orders, yet for this time he condescends to play
the part of a common Soldier: so the abovesaid Universal Spirit not seeing any
Form disposed to keeps its rank in the Order of Nature, and finding the matter
fit to receive the form of a Rat, Mouse or Frog, presently supplies the same to
it by its own sole approach. Hence such Insects as need fewest parts, are
soonest and most easily generated of Putrefaction, perfecter Animals never.

The Fourth said, That Nothing being made of Nothing, some Matter is required
to every Generation, which being barely altered in Animals which produce their
like, is corrupted in those which are generated of themselves; the internal
Humidity which served to conjoyn the dry parts together, being drawn out;
whence Carcases become dust. And because Nature is never idle, therefore when
She finds part of that Humidity full of a seminal Virtue and a Vital Spirit,
and cannot make a Plant or an Animal of it like what it was before, then she
forms imperfect Creatures. Which effect is not to be attributed to the Elements
being full of souls, nor to that particular Intelligence which Avicenna says
is destinated to the introduction of Forms, nor to Heaven, called by some, The
Parent Forms; but to the established order of Nature, That when Matter is
indu'd with all the Dispositions requisite to such or such a Form, the same
must be introduced into it; which constitutes not a different Species from the
Animals generated of Seed; though the particular end of those bred of
corruption seems to be the purgation of the Elements, all whose impurities they
attract, and are nourisht therewith.

The fifth said, That these Generations must be attributed to the Sun, who
transmits not only his Influence upon the surface of our Elements, but also his
Influence and Virtue to the Center of the Earth, where it concocts, digests,
prepares, and vivifies Metals, and makes mineral Waters boil. For, besides that
such Generations happen chiefly when he approaches or makes himself most fell
upon our Horizon; some have observ^d, That Rats, begotten of Corruption without
the help of Male and Female, are distinguished from others; in that, being
exposed to the Sun after death, they have little or no bad smell, but are
consumed and become in a manner nothing; that Planet resuming what it had
contributed to them: whereas the smell of other produced by ordinary generation
is intolerable.

The Sixth said, That both in Univocal Generation (which is compared to one
fire kindling another) and in that by Corruption (which has some Analogy with
fire excited by a Steel) the same difficulty occurrs; namely, What
imperceptible Chain and Link attracts Forms, and makes them necessarily descend
into the Compound, to give it Being so soon as fit Dispositions concur therein;
whether these Dispositions are awakened by the Seed, as when you sow a Plant in
well-prepared ground, or whether they spring out of the earth without sowing,
as many Plants do, which are more vigorous, and less need cultivation than
others: by the Gardener's reason, that Mothers have more care of their own
Children than Nurses have of those of others. Hence Rats bred of Corruption,
are more sprightly, and long-lived, and multiply more than others. As for the
manner of their Generation, it must have some proportion with that of perfect
Animals, which are as little understood; there being no Philosophy that can
tell why a Horse begets rather a Colt than a Calf; nor why a Pear Tree rather
produces a Pear than a Plum.

CONFERENCE CLXIIII. Of Zoophytes or Plant-Animals.
THe comprehensiveness of this Universe appears in that in the division of
Entity and Substance, not only each Member answers to as many things as are in
Nature, but there are as many others as there can be several combinations made
of the Members of this division. Thus in the division of Souls into vegetative,
sensitive, and rational, there are found middle ones not only between sense
and reason, but also between Vegetation and Sense: Examples whereof may be seen
in the Families of Animals and Vegetables. Some Plants have no Root as Misleto
and Mushrooms; others nothing but Root, as Trubs and Truffles: some have only
leaves, as Duckmeat; others neither flowers nor seed, as Fern; some want
leaves, as Venus-Navil; others commonly put forth the Fruit before the Leaf, as
the Fig Tree; and lastly, some Flower without bearing Fruit, as the
Flower-Cherry-Tree: Of Animals, some are bred of putrefaction, and of others,
some remain a while without motion or life (to appearance) as the Silkworm in
its bag, and Snails in Winter; others remain always immovable, as Oysters:
And because this manner of being nourished and growing without any progressive
motion is proper to Plants, and yet by opening and shutting their Shells they
testify some sense; therefore they are called Plant-animals, in which the Soul
seems to be compounded, and to resemble changeable colors, which consist of
two extremes, as Gray does of White and Black, being wholly neither, but both
together. So also a Zoophyte is something less then an Animal, and more then a
Plant.

The Second said, That Forms and particularly Souls are indivisible. Indeed one
may be comprehended in another, as the Vegetative is in the Sensitive, and this
in the Rational (which comprehends all eminently) but it cannot enter into the
composition of another, much less be divided, informing a body that is half
Plant and half Animal; otherwise by the same reason there might be others half
Men and half Beasts, which is not imaginable, but under the form of a Monster.
Moreover, such division would proceed to infinity, there being a Latitude and
Degrees without end between one extreme and another; of one whereof that which
partakes most, would constitute a new Species, or rather a new genius, which is
absurd, and contrary to Philosophy; which admits not multiplication of things
without nec^ssity.

The Third said, That by the same reason Plants and Animals being of the same
species there can be no doubt but these two attributes might be found in the
same Subject. For Vegetation and Sense being only several operations of the
same Soul, which acts differently, according as it finds the Organs of its
Subject disposed; hence the multiplication of Souls is unnecessary, seeing they
are all but one. And as in Brutes the sensitive faculty supervening to the
vegetative in their generation, adds no new form to the former; so the
vegetation of Plants is nothing less then the sensitive: the dispositions of
the matter being the sole causes of this diversity. An Animal deprived of the
use of some senses, is no less an Animal then another that has all: why then
is a Tree less an Animal, because it exercises fewer operations of its soul
then Animals do? Nor is it a conclusive reason that Plants are wholly destitute
of the faculties of sense, because the same are not perceptible to our Senses,
which yet find something to satisfy themselves in the sensitive Plant,
growing (as Scaliger and others relate in Zanolha, a part of Tartary, where the
Inhabitants sow a Grain like that of our Melons, but somewhat longer; from
which grows an Herb which they call Borrametz, that is, a Lamb, whereof it has
the whole figure, especially the Feet, Hoofs, and Ears, yea, all the Head
excepting the Horns; instead whereof it has a tuft of Hair upon the Forehead.
It Is covered with very soft Hair, employed by the Natives to make Caps of. Its
Flesh resembles that of Crevices, and being wounded, sends forth blood, being
also of a very sweet taste: It adheres to the earth by its root, which sends
forth a Stem or Stalk which is inserted into its Navil. To all which wonders
they add, That it lives as long as there is any green Grass about it, and dies
when the same is withered either by time or purposely. And to make the
comparison full, they say that of all devouring Animals Wolves alone desire to
feed of it, We find also some example of this double Life in the Wood of
Scotland, which being humected in water is turned into Ducks: as also in the
Leaves of another Tree like that of the Mulberry, which Anthony Pigafet reports
to have two little feet, on which they run away as soon as one touches them,
and live only of Air. Such likewise are the Mandrakes of upper Hungary, which
grow in the axact shapes of Men and Women; The Baraas mentioned by Josephus,
which shines in the night, and whose flight cannot be stopped but by the
menstrual blood of a woman. The Balsam-Tree which Pliny affirms to tremble at
the approach of the Iron that is to make incision in it; and that other Tree
which Scaliger says grows about eight foot high in the Province Pudiferam, and
upon the approach of a man or other Animal contracts its boughs, and extends
the same again upon their departure, whence it took the name of Arbor Pudica:
which constriction and dilatation is also attributed to the Sponge. In all
which effects we observe powers and faculties near of kin to those of Animals.
The same uniformity of nature between Plants and Animals is proved also, in
that, both the one and the other live and dye, have their nutrition,
augmentation, and generation. If Animals have their time of being salacious,
Plants have theirs of being in Sap. They have dictinction of Sex, as appears
particularly in the Cypress, Hemp, and the Palm, which bears not fruit unless
planted near the Male, or at least some branch thereof be fastened to it. They
seem too to have some kind of respiration; for besides that they love the free
Air, toward which they incline when planted near a high Wall, or under great
Trees; their Root, which is their mouth, has some discernment of taste,
eschewing hurtful soils, and spreading freely into good ground, and not
imbibing all sorts of liquors indifferently, but only such as are convenient
for them. Hence their parts have names common to those of Animals; as the
Marrow, Flesh, Veins, Skin: In a word, they seem to want only local-motion,
which yet, besides the foregoing examples, is found in the Herba Viva of Acosta
which folds up it leaves and flowers when it is touched; as likewise Tulips do
in the evening, and open the same again in the morning; Marigolds follow the
Sun, and thence have gotten the Latin name Solsequia; but more manifestly the
Sun-flower, and the white Carline Thistle, called the Almanac of Peasants, who
therefore hang it at their doors, because it folds up its flowers when a
Tempest is at hand. It Is notorious that the Bon-Chretien Pear Tree, and the
Mulberry-Tree languish in places not frequented by men; and on the contrary,
testify by their vigor and fertility that they delight in their conversation.
Hereunto might be added the experience of Wood-Cleavers who find that a wedge
enters further at the first blow then for many following; as if the substance
of the Tree closed it self upon the first feeling it has of its enemy. But the
bending of Hazle-rods toward Mines of Gold and Silver, seems to denote
something more in them then in Animals themselves. In brief, the motion of
creeping Herbs may be called progressive: amongst others, that of the Gourd and
Cucumber which follow the neighboring water, and shape their fruit in length
to reach it.

CONFERENCE CLXV. Of Trubbs or Truffs, and Mushroms.
AS there is some middle nature between a Plant and an Animal, partaking of
both so; there is also between a plain Mixed Body and a Plant, to wit, those
Exuberances which grow sometimes on Trees, as Agarick; sometimes only out of
the Earth, as Mushroms and other such fungous Productions, which are driven
forth by the inward heat of the earth helped by that of the Sun. The matter of
them is a slime, or unctuous or viscous moisture fit to receive a suitable Form,
which is various according to the strength of Nature, and the Disposition of
the places through which it is driven; as the Water of our Artificial Fountains
puts on the shape of the pipe through which it passes. And as for Trubbs, it is
Cardan's Opinion, That melted Snow sinking into the surface of the Earth, and
finding fit matter there, produces this Plant. Which the plenty of Spirits
found in Snow, makes me willing to assent to; because they may serve for Seed
to its Production.

The second said, That he liked the common Opinion, that Trubbs proceed from
Thunder; whose agitation of the Air, and so of the Earth, awakens the hidden
Seed of this Plant, as well of many others that grow of themselves; or else
perhaps the Rain that follows Thunder being full of Celestial Virtue, proper
for this Production, is the Seed thereof. For the Providence of Nature
sometimes supplies by an Universal Efficient the Defect of particular Causes
destinated to the production of other Plants, which in most Trees and Herbs is
the Seed, which this wants, as also all the ordinary parts of other Plants;
because it is of the Nature of those Animals who have not their parts distinct
one from another, having neither stalk, nor leaves, nor flower, nor root,
unless you will call it all root; because it has more appearance of than of
any other part of a Plant: which perhaps is the cause of its excellent taste,
which is neither sweet as most roots are, nor sour as most leaves are, nor of
any other kind of taste observed in the other parts of Plants, but mixed of all
tastes together, being very pleasant, after coction has matur'd what was
terrestrial and aqueous in it. As for Mushroms, both their Nature and Cause is
different; but all proceed from an excrement which the Earth casts forth of it
self, and which was bred therein by the perpetual transcolation of the
Humidities of the earth; whence they are more or less hurtful according to the
greater or less malignity of such Humors, but always of bad juice suitable to
its Source and Material Cause.

The Third said, It Is the Rain of Autumn that makes the Mushrom; the too great
cold of Winter, and that which yet remains in the Spring not permitting that
Excrement to come forth, but shutting it up (as it is the property of Cold) and
the heat and drought of Summer consuming the Matter that produces them as fast
as it comes out of the Earth. But in Autumn, when the Earth is cleft and chopped
in many places by the foregoing heat of Summer, the Showers and rainy Season
supply excrementitious matter proper for this Production. The same might be
said of Trubs, if we saw not their generation to be made as 'twere in the
turning of a hand, immediately after Thunder: whereof the clefts of the upper
crust of the Earth are a manifest evidence; not in all soils, but only in
barren and less cultivated; in which, culture would dissipate the matter before
it could acquire the preparations requisite to this generation.

The Fourth said, That the story of Martius Licinius sometimes Praetor of Rome
and Governor of Spain, who in Carthago Nova, biting a Trub or Tuber found in
it a Roman penny of the value of seven English, shows that this lump is made of
earth hardened together, as Stones and other mixed Bodies are, which grow
naturally by the sole apposition of matter without being either sown or
planted. For it is found in the earth without either root or fibers: yea it may
be called an imperfection of the earth, because it is never found in good ground
but only in gravelly places near woods and bushes, and has no certain bigness;
some being very small, and others of the bigness of the fist and of a pound
weight; some, full of sand; others not, which are the best. They are also of
diverse colors, according to that of the Soil, namely Red, Black and White, of
a very savory relish, but hard of digestion, and windy. Their common shape is
round, but Pliny mentions some horned ones brought from Thrace, which therefore
he calls Ceraunia; he also adds, that in some places (as particularly at
Mitylene) the torrents produce them, and carry them along with their streams;
that they last but a year, and are more tender in the Spring then at any other
season. Some hold that they grow not at all, but are produced in an instant of
their full bigness; and their reason is, because they have no organs of
Nutrition, without which they cannot grow; and indeed they do not generate.
This opinion would be the more probable, if what Pliny says were true, namely,
that there is no sign of cleft or chink in the earth which covers them. But
experience shows the contrary, Swine (who are greedy of them) being lead by the
smell they exhale through those clefts, to find them and root them out of the
ground.

The Fifth said, That Mushroms are to Plants, as Insects are to Animals; for
both are generated of corruption, and that suddenly; both want distinct parts,
and have somewhat of a hurtful or venomous quality (for the most part). But
Mushroms are either Medicinal, as Agarick; or Alimental; or absolutely
poisonous; which two latter species oftentimes differ only according to the
soil. For such as grow in Meadows are the safest, and the Orange-colour'd are
as good and delicious in Provence and Languedoc, as they are poisonous in
France, Germany and Hungary, where they are ordinarily employed to kill Flies,
and where they cause visions. Such were those which killed the Emperor
Claudius Father-in-law to Nero, who therefore termed them the food of the Gods,
because the Roman Emperors were deifi'd after their death. They are also
sometimes discernable by the color and smell: The blackish or livid, whose
juice is yellowish and which smell like Copper, being deadly; but the white,
the greyish, and those that are red underneath with a black juice and a
pleasing smell, being alimental. The least to be suspected are those which grow
by Art in dunged places, or Melon-beds enriched with Hogs-dung rotted for the
space of two years. It Is said also that the good have a thicker stem then the
bad, and also a circle or crown on the top. If any malignity remain in them,
Cato advises to correct the same by setting a Colewort near them, which (he
says) draws to it self all the impurity of the earth; wherein, if soft, are
bred Mushroms; if hard, Trubs; but both without seed: just as
Yellow-Gilly-flower and Pellitory grow spontaneously upon walls made with Lime
and Sand; Silver-weed, in Brooks; Cresses, in Springs; the Earth containing in
it self the imperceptible seeds of many animated bodies. To the Production
whereof Nitre alone (by its above mentioned fecundity) suffices; for finding no
seed to determine it to any other production, it spends it self in generating
of Trubs. For besides their taste and most usual inward color, (which is white
or greyish) their flatuosity and aptness to provoke Lust (which two qualities
are proper to Nitre) testify the same; as also does their Nativity during the
Thunder or Rain of Autumn, and of the end of the Spring; which seasons are full
of Nitrous exhalations. The same may be said of Mushroms, which commonly spring
out of Nitrous substances, as dung and earth where Saltpeter grows.

CONFERENCE CLXVI. Which is to be preferred, Company or Solitude?
It Is hence forward lawful to doubt of every thing, since a Problem is made of
an Axiom. For Man being a sociable Creature, renounces that quality when he
seeks Solitude; in which not only Speech, Courtesy, and Civility, but all
Sciences and Arts, yea almost all Virtues become useless to him, and leave him
by little and little to put on Beast and beastial properties, to wit Silence,
Rudeness, Ignorance, and in one word Brutality it self; (though there is some
society even amongst many irrational Creatures, as Cranes, Bees, Ants, and
diverse others.) Consider one of those solitary dumpish persons rightly styled
by the Vulgar Loups-garoux (or Men-wolves) enemies of mankind; they are
commonly of extravagant minds, whose dotages pass in their own weak judgment
for divine thoughts beyond those of the rest of men; but when brought forth
they serve for nothing but laughter, which is oftentimes the reason why their
Authors keep them so very secret. Examples whereof are seen in all those
melancholy Doters who build Castles in the Air. If they make profession of
Arms, they are mere Don Quixots; if of Divinity, Heresiarchs; if of Physic,
Empericks and people void of other skill saving that they have some
incommunicable secret. On the other side, consider sociable humors, and you
will find nothing in them but what is agreeable and pleasing. If they have any
business in hand, they advise with others about it, and knowing that two eyes
see not so many things at once as four may do, they pollish their resolutions
by the mutual collision of their own Opinions with those of others; and
considering that the way to do well is to be reprehended by many, they submit
themselves to their judgment. Moreover, make an induction of all good things,
and you will find them all in Society; without it the World would be
depopulated in less then one Age, whereas it is perpetuated by propagation of
the Species. There is nothing to be got in solitude, though one should imitate
the humor of an indefatigable Gamester of these times, who finding no body to
keep him company, plays at Cards and Dice all alone in his Closet, which he
says is some divertisement to him: but the Tradesmen, Labourer and Merchant
gain nothing without Commerce, which cannot be but between many persons.
Pleasure is not so much as imaginable, whilst. a man is alone by himself. Your
Hypochondriacks and other fools cannot conceive any delight but by their
fancying themselves conversing with others. Then for Honor, it supposes one
person honored and another honoring; so it consists not with solitude, which
consequently is an enemy to all sorts of Good. But to pursue the induction on
the other side; we see that Balls, Comedies, Revels, Feasts, and all Ceremonies
both Civil and Ecclesiastical are performed in company; which, the greater it
is, adds the more splendour thereunto. Wherefore if you take away company, you
at the same time deprive men of all the means of employing the Goods which they
have gotten by their labors, and also of the honor they aimed at in enjoying
the same, the hopes whereof was the only thing that sweetened their pains. Let
a man be alone, and he needs no clothes but to cover his nakedness, or keep off
the cold; whereas the magnificence of Courts is the most glorious token of the
splendour of a State.

The Second said, Though it be hard to praise solitude in so good company, yet
it has three sorts of goods in it, which are endeavored to be ascribed to
Society: For, in case it had no other benefit but silence, of the observing
whereof none ever repented (but of speaking often) the perfection of a
Christian is found in it. For of the three manners of sinning, Solitude has
none to avoid but thoughts; and thoughts themselves arise only from the former
frequentation of company: upon which account, those that have most sought
Innocence, have retired from Companies and Towns. Thus did the Prophets in the
old Law, and afterward Hermites inhabited the Deserts of Thebes, and always
the strictest Religions have lived the most solitary. Then for the delight it
affords, there is no pleasure like that of Reading, Meditation, and
Contemplation, which are not consistent with Company: and man being more
essentially reasonable than sociable, who doubts but a man reasons better in
solitude then in the turmoil of company? Nay, not only the speculative Sciences
are best polisht by it, but also the civil and popular, as Eloquence and
Poetry; the one was learnt by Demosthenes in his Closet, and on the Sea shores;
the other is a great friend of solitude, and makes its followers seek it. On
this account the Greeks built the Temples of the Muses in Woods and places
remote from Towns; and night, the mother and companion of solitude, was by them
styled Eufrone, Wise. This was also the reason why the Pythagoreans enjoined
five years silence before the hearing of their Philosophy: yea, those that have
received most honor and contentment in conversation have most loved
Retirement; witness Augustus, who longed to disengage himself one day from
public affairs; Dioclesian and Maximian who went to seek it in Slavonia; and
in the last age Charles the Fifth in Portugal. 'Twas not therefore without
reason that the Roman people cried that only Vatias alone knew how to live,
because he retired from the City into a solitary and desert place. For though
the Proscriptions and public Calamities had occasioned his retreat at that
time; yet the contagion of company, the common depravation of manners, and the
contentments attending peaceful solitude, are charms strong enough to attract
any considering man; besides, that honor too follows it, being compared to the
shadow, which flies its pursuers, and follows those that avoid it. Accordingly,
all those that have affected solitude, as amongst the Pagans Empedocles,
Apollonius, Number, the Gymnosophists, and our Druydes, have been most esteemed by
men for so doing. And they are weak minds which cannot support themselves, but
want the conversation of others; herein resembling Ivy and other climing
Plants, which only creep upon the ground, if they be not propt up by some
other; whereas great Oaks and Elmes maintain themselves alone against the
outrages of the winds. So also the most generous Beasts are solitary, as the
Lion and Elephant in Deserts; the Eagle in Rocks and high Mountains; contrary
to Pullen and other timid Animals, which are called Gregarious. Hence it may be
inferred, that Fear caused men to build Towns; and that (as Aristotle says)
only the multitude of several faces deserves not the name of a company, which
made Diogenes go about at noon in the Market with a Lantern to find a man;
and makes me conclude, that as the wise Man should take contentment only in
himself, so he ought to seek only his own company. For being never less alone
then when he is so, solitude indeed has its society, but society is
in^onsistent with solitude.

The Third said, That indifferent things are distinguished from good and bad, in
that they are sometimes good and profitable, sometimes not; but the two latter
are always determined to one end. Now no body will maintain that company is
either always good or always bad. It must therefore be indifferent, and like
the water of rivulets in Gardens, which is converted into the nature of the
Plants it irrigates. For, is there any Society more authorized by God then
Marriage? and yet 'twere a bold proposition to prefer it before the contentment
of a Religious life, but because this is not always solitary, after the mode
of Carthusians and Hermites, company is to be preferred or postpon'd to
solitude, according to the several circumstances of the one and the other.

The Fourth said, That according to Aristotle's saying, There are two sorts of
solitary persons; the first, above the rest of mankind, as the Heroes and
Demigods of Antiquity, who frequented not men because they found them unworthy
of their conversation: the other sort are below men, and avoid converse, as
incapable thereof, like those Peasants whom their rusticity keeps from
appearing or speaking in company. But because the former are fewer then the
latter, hence solitude is more commonly a sign of a man's defect then
excellency, and consequently company is to be preferred before it.

CONFERENCE CLXVII. Whether Birds, or four-footed Animals, or Fishes be most
Intelligent.
THe Air, having most affinity with the Spirits whereby all the functions of
the soul and body are exercised, and both are conjoined; it may seem sufficient
to give the advantage to its Inhabitants the Birds, though they had not the
testimonies upon which men value themselves above their fellows, to wit, more
advantages of nature, and a greater apitude to disciplines then others. For
they have the same privileges of walking upon the earth that other
Land-Animals have; yea, some of them, as the Plongeon or Ducker go upon the
waters; and besides, they have this particular Gift of Nature, that they cleave
the Air with a motion so swift, that the Holy Scripture has expressed the
speed of Angels by assigning them wings. Nor can you imagine any action,
without excepting even virtuous ones, which is not found in a Bird. The Swallow
is skilled in Architecture; the Halcyon is able to divine how far the Nile will
overflow, and knows that out of Nature's respect to her, there will be no
Tempest at Sea while she is building her Nest; the Goose is so safe a Guard,
that it sometimes saved the Capitol to the shame of the Sentinels; the Wren
serves for a guide and a scout to the Crocodile; the Crow and the Turtle are
patterns of conjugal amity; so are the Storks of piety; and even the swarms of
Bees, are models of Commonwealths; and the Pismires, when Age and Experience
has rendered them more advised, acquire wings. The Silkworm is nothing but a
Caterpiller till its wings appear; and then fluttering about it, perpetuates
its species with such prudence, that it does not lay its Eggs in heaps, which
would hinder their hatching, but disperses them in several places, in order to
being more commodiously animated by the heat of the Sun. Then, as for Art, we
see no Animals besides Men capable of speech (the first of Disciplines) but
Birds. And the particular Examples of the Elephant, and a few other Beasts that
have shown some shadow of Judgment, are outdone by the Eagle which flew into
the fire, wherein her Mistresses Body was burning, and many other Instances too
numerous to be mentioned.

The Second said, That the little head of Birds, in comparison of the rest of
their Body, their dryness and abounding Choler permit them not to be so
intelligent as other Animals; their chattering jargon as little deserving the
name of a Language, as their other actions do that of Virtue. Moreover, their
sleep being not so sound and deep, as that of Terrestrial Animals, which by
sucking their Dams are more humid; and sleep being the restorer of Spirits,
Birds cannot have such plenty as other Creatures. Whence they suffer themselves
to be more easily taken than Land-Animals, whose Bodies being more symbolical
with ours, they must also have greater aptitude for exercising some functions
correspondent to those of our Mind. For the cavities of their head and brains
more resemble ours, than those either of Birds or Fishes; particularly, that of
the Ape, which consequently is the most intelligent of all Animals next Man;
with whom all will agree, that no other Animal can dispute the preeminence of
Judgment with the least show of Reason; if any should, it would never gain the
Cause, in regard Man must be the Judge.

The Third said, Man has no more reason to award this Cause to himself, than
to pretend to the advantage of flying better than Birds, or swimming better
than Fishes, who exceed all Creatures in point of Health, even to a Proverb,
which is a thing altogether necessary to the functions of the Soul. Moreover,
they are of a very long Life, which begets Experience, as that does
Understanding. Their Health is manifested by their Fecundity; and since
coldness is the Complexion of the wife, and Salt is reckoned the Symbol of
Wisdom, Fishes, the inhabitants of the Sea, and the coldest of all Creatures,
must have a share thereof. Besides, if softness of Flesh be a sign of goodness
of Wit every where else as it is in Man, (and Physiognomy teaches us to draw
consequence from other Creatures to him) Fishes have this advantage above all
the Inhabitants either of the Air or Earth; both which, were indeed made for
Man, but the Sea was primarily made for Fishes; its other conveniences being
only accidental. Silence, the common distinction between the wise and the
foolish, is natural to them; whereas the voices and chantings of Birds and
other Animals, is oftentimes the occasion of their ruin. Yea, they are so
subtle, that Fishermen cannot take them but with a white line, of the color
of the water; otherwise, if it be gross and visible, they will not come near
it. Diffidence, the Parent of safety, is more common to them than to all other
Animals, and their vigilance is greater. Land-Animals have no slight equal to
that imperceptible charm, whereby the Torpedo chills the arm of the Fisherman;
or to that of the Cuttle-fish, which when she is in danger of being taken,
moils the water with her Ink to keep her self from being seen; or to that of
the Polypus, who becomes of the Color of the Rock upon which it holds, to void
being perceived. And though the Element of Water so separates us from the
commerce of its Inhabitants, that the hundredth part of what concerns them is
unknown to us; yet there is none but observes, that Fishes need more sleights
to secure themselves from the ambushes and hostilities of others, than the
beasts of the field have, which are also more easily taken. The Fish called the
Mullet, strikes off the bait of the hook with her tail, instead of being taken
by it; and if she cannot do so, she is contented to bite it round about; and
the Sea-wolf finding her self taken, shakes her head this way and that way with
much pain, till she have cast out the hook again; and for the same purpose, the
Sea-fox turns her inside outward. The Loubine and Sea-dog finding themselves
surrounded with the Net, make a hole in the ground and sculk therein, till the
Net be drawn over them; but the Dolphin rejoices in the Net, because he may
with ease fill himself with his fellow prisoners; yet when he perceives he is
drawing near the shore, he bites the Net; which if he cannot do quick enough,
the Fishermen knowing him a Friend to Man, pardon him the first time, and only
thrusting a bul-rush through his skin let him go; if he be taken again (which
seldom happens, as Plutarch says, out of whom most of these Relations are
taken) he is beaten. Yea, they are ingenious not only for themselves, but for
others; for when the Gilt-head has swallowed the hook, his companions bite the
line, and if one of them fall into one of the Meshes, they lend him their tails
to bite and draw him through; and when the Barbles see one of their companions
caught they get upon him and with the indented spine they have upon their backs
cut it asunder. Crassus's Lamprey would take bread out of his hand, and was
bewailed by him when it died: The story of Arion, and that of the Fish called
Manaro in the Island of Hispaniola, which was delighted with praises and Music
carried nine or ten persons upon his back, and having been wounded by a
Spaniard disappeared; the Raye which Olaus writes defended a man from Dogs upon
the shore of Denmark; and the Sea-Eele which the Indians carry behind their
Boats to let him play about the Tortoises and other Fishes which they take; are
abundant instances that Fishes are both sociable and docible. This also is
justified by the Pinatere, which pricks the Oyster to advertise it when its
prey is within; by the Spongothere, which performs the same office for the
Sponge; and by the Whale's guide whom she suffers to sleep in her throat, and
without whom she would dash against the shore; by the Pike, which keeps company
with the Tench, whose sliminess serves to close his wounds; by the Tunnies, who
always set their good eye toward the shore, and move well ordered in a cubick
squadron; by the Sea-Urchins, which presaging a tempest, lade themselves with
stones for fear of being carried away by the waves; and by all Fishes in
general, which swim against the wind, lest it should open their scales,
excepting one whose scales are set the contrary way.

CONFERENCE CLXVIII. What is the cause of the Crisis of Diseases.
CRisis (if you consider its derivation from a word which signifies either to
judge or to separate or to encounter) agrees in some sort to every of those
significations; for a Disease is judged by it, it separates the good humors
from the bad, and that after a combat between Nature and the Disease. But it is
commonly defined a mutation of a Disease either to Health or Death, for better
or for worse. We must first consider in it, the term of its commencement, which
is the Augmentation of the Malady, whence acute ones have their Crisis sooner
then Chronical; the very acute being sometimes judged in four days, in which
time very malignant Fevers sweep men away, but commonly within seven days;
acute Diseases are judged by the 14th or 20th day, and sometimes not before the
40th. Chronical Diseases extend to the 120th; after which term they count no
longer by days but by months and years. The term it ends at, is either Health
or Death, or the change of one Disease into another. The term through which it
passes is the space of time employed by Nature in the coction, separation and
excretion of the peccant Humors. The Agent or Motor is Nature, which must be
assisted in imperfect Crises, not in such as are perfectly made. Lastly, we
must consider what is moved, namely the Humors; for Crisis has place only in
humoral Diseases. A perfect Crisis judges the Malady perfect either to Health
or Death, and has had its indices of coction the fourth day for the Crisis on
the seventh, the eleventh for that on the fourteenth, and the seventeenth for
that on the twentieth; it must also be manifest either by evacuation or abscess
(for those that mend without apparent cause relapse) and fall upon critical
days, without any dangerous symptom: and after such evacuation the Patient must
be manifestly better, especially if it be universal and suitable to his Nature,
Age, and Malady. Long Diseases are judged by Abscesses; acute, by Evacuation.
In young persons Fevers are judged commonly by Haemorrhage or some flux of
blood; in old men, by that of the belly. Now besides those Critical and
Indicative days there are others called Intercidents which judge imperfectly,
and others also Medicinal, because in them purgatives may be adminished; which
days are sometimes Critical, but always unfaithful, and commonly mischievous;
which will better appear by this general application. The first day is reckoned
from the hour of the first invasion felt by the Patient in acute Diseases, and
from the time of his decumbiture in Chronical. Yet in women newly delivered we
begin not to reckon from the time of parturition, unless it were precipitated,
but from the time of the Fever; and this first day judges no other Disease but
a Febris Ephemera, or one-day Fever. The second day is vacant and without
effect. The third is Intercident, called by some Provocant, because it
irritates and provokes Nature to make excretions before the time; for being
odd, it causes some motion in the morbifick matter, but imperfectly, as not
following the order of Nature mentioned hereafter; neverthess it is Critical in
very acute Maladies, and such as disorder the Laws of Nature. The fourth is an
index of the seventh, and shows what is to be expected that day by either the
Concoction or Crudity of the Urin and other excrements; no laudable Crisis
happening without Concoction precedent. Which holds good not only in continual
Fevers, but also in the fits or accessions of Intermitting ones: for the fourth
day being the middlemost between the first and the seventh, it foreshews the
design and strength or weakness of Nature, and what she is able to do on the
seventh. The fifth resembles the third, being likewise provocatory in Diseases
wherein Nature has made an unprofitable attempt on the third, which she then
endeavors to repair; but unsuccessfully too, this Crisis being most commonly
imperfect. The sixth is also Intercident but ordinarily very badly critical:
Whence Galen compares it to a cruel and faithless tyrant, which precipitates
the Patient into evident danger of life, if it do not kill him. It has place
chiefly in choleric Diseases, for in sanguine ones salutiferous Crises happen
on this day, which is even; the Blood being observed to move on even days. On
the contrary, the seventh resembles a just and gentle King or Magistrate; for
neither precipitating nor deferring too long the judgment of the Patient, it
gives him time of consideration, judging him after its Indices fully and
perfectly, safely, manifestly and without danger. It Is called Radical, as being
the root and foundation of all the other Critical Days, and the end of the
first week. The eighth is of kin to the sixth, but not quite so dangerous. The
ninth is the greatest Intercident and comes nearest to the nature of the
Critical, though it be not of their number. The cause whereof is, its being
composed of odd numbers, wherein we have said that morbifick humors are
commonly moved; or else because it is equally distant from 7 and 11. The tenth
resembles the eighth in danger and other circumstances. The eleventh is an
index of the fourteenth, to which it has the same reference that the fourth
has to the seventh; saving that the second week is less active then the first,
and the third then the second. The twelfth is not of any consideration: and
Galen says, he never observed any Crisis, good or bad, on it. The like of the
thirteenth. The fourteenth follows the seventh in dignity, and judges those
Diseases which the seventh did not, being the end of the second week, and in
this consideration, odd. The fifteenth and sixteenth are not anywise
remarkable. The seventeenth is an index of the twentieth, till which the
intervening are insignificant, and this twentieth is taken by Physicians for
the end of the third week, because they make the same begin from the fourteenth
inclusively. From the 20th to the 40th, (which is the end of Crisis in acute
diseases) every seventh day is critical. But after the 40th, Diseases are
called Chronical, and have their Crisis every 20th day to 120, so much the more
obscure as they are distant from the beginning. Of all which changes the Moon
seems rather to be the cause then the other Planets, or the virtue of Numbers,
as being more active by reason of her proximity and various apparitions.

The Second said, That the reason upon which Astrologers attribute Crisis to
the Moon, viz. her moving by quaternaries and septenaries, (her notablest
changes happening every seventh day) is too general. For though she rules over
Moistures or Humidities, and a Crisis is only in Humoral Diseases; yet she
cannot introduce any change in the abovementioned Critical Days rather then in
others; because then she must have this power either from her self or from some
other, and the several Aspects of the Sun. Not from her self; for then no
change would happen in the Moon her self, nor consequently in us by her means,
since things which are of themselves in some subject continue always the same.
Not from the Sun; for then these alterations in Diseases should happen only at
certain postures of the Moon and not in all. Now, suppose Alexander fall sick
to day, and Aristotle to morrow, yet neither of them shall have a Crisis but on
the seventh day. Besides, the opposition of the Moon being less at the seventh
then at the thirteenth day; the Crisis should be rather on the latter then on
the former. And the same effect of the Septenary in the Conception, Life,
Nutrition, and Actions of Animals, which is not observed hitherto; the stomach
digesting not better on the seventh day, and the seed not being stronger that
day in the matrix then on any other: and the eighth day wherein the Moon is
further from the first then she was on the seventh, should cause the Crisis,
and not the seventh. In brief, the septenaries of diseases rarely agree with
the Septenaries of the Quarters of the Moon; whose motions being unequal
according to the different elevation of her Epicicle, would render Crisis
uncertain. Wherefore Galen not finding his reckoning hit with the Lunar Motion,
feigned a Medicinal Month consisting of six and twenty days and some hours;
but he has had no followers therein. Fracastorius went a better way,
attributing the cause of Crises to the motion of Melancholy, which is on the
fourth day: but as the bilious humor moving alone on the third day without
melancholy, does nothing, so melancholy alone produces not any Crisis on the
fourth day. The fifth has also the motion of Bile alone, and consequently is
without effect. The sixth is quiet in reference to these humors, being the day
of neithers motion: but on the seventh, these two Biles concurring together
make a great critical agitation. But if the matter be not then sufficiently
fermented and concocted, the Crisis will not come till the fourteenth, when the
same motion of those two humors is again repeated.

The Third said, That this opinion of Fracastorius makes Crises fall upon days
not critical, as the tenth, thirteenth, sixteenth, ninteenth, and two and
twentieth, contrary to all antiquity and daily experience: and is founded in an
error, namely, that one humor cannot putrify in the body whilst the rest
remain pure; seeing Quotidian Fevers are caused by Phlegm alone, Tertians by
Choler alone, and Quartans by Melancholy alone; and that no other reason can
be given of the regular motion of Crisis, but that of the motion of the Heavens.

CONFERENCE CLXIX. What Bodily Exercise is the most healthful.
WHat motion is to the Air and Water, yea, and to Fire too (which it
maintains) that is it to our Bodies; Ease makes them heavy, and of the nature
of the Earth, which of all the Elements alone delights therein: For the Body
consisting of the Elements, it necessarily without motion falls into the
corruption which Rest introduces into them: and the excrements remaining after
nutrition, either recoile back into the mass of Blood, or else resting in that
part of the body which is satiated with them, overcharge the same, and cause
that plenitude which is so much suspected by Hippocrates. On the contrary,
Motion awakens the natural heat, drives out the excrements collected by ease,
strengthens the Members, and renders all the Faculties more vigorous; provided
only that it be used after evacuation of the grosser Excrements, and before
meat, because then rest is necessary; otherwise the food in the Stomach will be
subverted, and the motion of the outward parts will too soon attract from the
inward the food undigested; whence many diseases arise. And this right use of
Exercise is so necessary to health, that the Athenians purposely dedicated a
place for exercises, called Gymnasiun, to Apollo the God of Physic; for which
word the Art which treats of exercises is called Gymnastica; and the Sorceries
of Medea may be better understood of Exercises, which make young, and
strengthen bodies formerly soft and effeminate, than of Herbs wherewith she
stuffed the bodies of old men whom she had jugulated; an Art, without which
Plato and Aristotle thought a Commonwealth could not be good, and to which
chiefly is to be attributed the difference found between our modern Soldiers,
and the Roman Legionaries; yea, between the good habitude of their bodies, and
the weakness of ours, who have so intermitted their exercises that only the
names of many are left. Now, since motion, which to deserve the name of
exercise must alter the respiration of the Animal, is violent to it, and of
violent things we cannot take too little; I conceive that such exercise as
holds the mean between rest and extreme motions, is the best. As Riding, or
going on Horseback, which giving us motion, diminishes the labor thereof, and
stirs all the parts of the body; which happens not when only one part of the
same body is exercised, and the rest remain unmoved.

The Second said, That Exercise, which is a voluntary motion and agitation of
the Body with respiration increased (whereby it is distinguished from the labor
of Artisans and Laborers, and from Actions accompanied with no striving, as
playing on Instruments) was transferred to the use of Physic by one Herodicus
according to Plato in the third Book of his Republic, and it is taken two
ways, either for that which is made by the proper motion of the Body, or for
such motion as is external to it, as Swinging (the Petaurum of the Latins)
Navigation; going in a Coach, or Litter: As for those made by the Body alone,
they are of three sorts; Athletical, Military, and Ludicrous or Passtimes. The
Athletick, though the ancientest, yet to me seem the most unprofitable, serving
only to harden the surface of the body and the extreme parts, as the Arms and
Legs: such were Wrestling, (which is still in use among our Britains, and at
Constantinople before the Grand Seignior's Gate amongst some Tartars whom they
call Pluyanders) Acrochirism, which consisted only in keeping the fingers
interlac'd one within the other; Fifty-cuffs, called anciently Pugilatus, and
imitated at this day by the Gondoliers at Venice; Cae'stus, wherein the hands
were armed with plates of Copper; and Pancratia, which was compounded of
Wrestling and Pugilate. Of this sort were also, Running, commended by Seneca in
his fifteenth Epistle for the Chief of Exercises, and by Plato in the eighth
Book of his Republic; Leaping on high and in length, either on both Feet, or
on one (as that of the Aleman) the hand and body being void, or else laden with
counterpoises of Lead which they called Halteres (as our Morris Dancers
oftentimes wear leaden Pumps, that they may be the more nimble when the same
are laid off) or with a Pole to balance themselves in leaping: whereunto may
be added the Art of Vaulting. Military exercises belonging either to the
ancient or modern way of Militating, and are performed either on foot or on
horseback. To the former belongs Fencing, anciently the Art of the Gladiators,
and at this day much practiced with Sword and Dagger: to which may be added
managing the Pike, Halbard, and Quarter-staff, casting of Bullets, the Spanish
sport of running at Bulls, and the hurling of the Zagaye or Lance in Turkey,
and shooting with a Bow or a Gun at a Mark. Military Exercises on Horseback
are fighting at Barriers, running at the Ring and Quintin: to which may be
referred all sorts of hunting. The last kind of Exercises which relate to
sport are Dancing, the dangerous Tricks of Tumblers, who seems to practice the
Cubistick Art of the Ancients; the Disk or Coiting, which seems common to them
with us; and the Ball, of which among the Greeks there were four sorts,
differing according to the greatness or smallness of the Ball and the
Instruments wherewith they struck. Add to these our modern pastimes of
Pail-Mail, Tennis, etc. Next to which you may reckon Shouting, or the exercise
of the Voice, which opens the Breast, excites Heat, and cured the infirmity of
Demosthenes's tongue; whence Aristotle allows Children to cry, because it
purges the Humidities of their Brains. But of all Exercises I think none equal
to Walking; as that which comes nearest natural motions, is easy, consumes
superfluities, helps respiration, strengthens the stomach, recreates the Senses
and Spirits, and appeases the commotions of the Soul: upon which the
Peripatetick Philosophers chose it as an exercise serviceable to the mind and
body both together.

The Third said, That he was of Galens opinion, who composed a Book concerning
the Exercise of the little Ball, which he preferrs before all other for six
principal reasons. First, Because it exercises and delights the mind as well
as the body; which pleasure is the greater in that it is not dishonest; this
kind of play being of the rank of the honorable. Secondly, Because Hunting,
which may be alleged to be of that rank, needs a great train of nets or hays,
horses, dogs, birds, and other such equipage; whereas the Game of Ball, even as
it was practiced in Galen's time, when they played with the palm of the Hand
without stick or racket, may be exercised by all sorts of persons; and this
every one knows, that a Good is the better for being the more common. Thirdly,
Because Hunting requires much leisure, of which only rich and idle persons are
capable; whereas a Scholar or Tradesman may, without much prejudice to their
ordinary Employment, divert themselves at this play: Which (in the Fourth
place) exercises all the parts of the Body almost equally; which most other
motions do not, some exercising only the upper, some only the lower parts, and
that to excess: Which (in the Fifth place) happens not so commonly in this,
wherein you may play as fast or as slow as you please; the excess which some
commit therein, proceeding only from the irregularity of their Mind, from which
the more discreet are free, retiring upon the first sweat, if they have no
other intention. In the Sixth place, it has no danger as Hunting has, where
the Boar's tooth, the Stag's horn, and the casualties of falling from the
Horse, at least excessive toil and weariness, are more certain oftentimes than
the pleasure expected from it; as Running also causes breaking of the Veins;
and Wrestling. dislocation of Members. Whereto it may be added, that the Body
acquires dexterity by the Game of Ball.

The Fourth said, That that Exercise seems most healthful, which is suitable to
every one's Nature. Walking is not for the lame, nor running for the
Phthisical. Above all, every one's Custom is considerable, in which regard the
Exercise of our profession leaves us less Exercise than those of others.
Wherefore I conclude, for Exercises which besides the motion of the Body, and
the divertisement of the Mind, leave some profit behind them; as when a Man of
Affairs gives his dispatches and resolutions as, he is walking, and the
Vine-dresser by exercising himself in digging his Vineyard, finds in the
Evening, besides the good Stomach he has gotten, the end of the task which he
had proposed to himself.

CONFERENCE CLXX. Whether Virtue consist in Mediocrity.
It Is the property of every thing destitute of Reason, to be carried to
Extremities; the Stone to the Center; Fire to the Circumference; the Earth
imbibes as much water, and an Animal eats as much food as it can; the Spider
weaves as long as it has where-withall, the Nightingale sings oftentimes till
she bursts; every Passion guided by it self alone, is carried to the utmost
point. It Is reason alone that prescribes bounds to these Extremities, which are
every where found vicious. On this account, Daedalus in the Fable enjoined his
Son Icarus not to take his flight neither too high, for fear lest the wax of
his wings should melt at the approach of the fire, which he conceived was in
the Sphere of the Sun; nor yet too near the Sea, for fear of wetting them: But
to take the middle way in the Air, which course all have held that have been
happy. And as that Man is insupportable, whose Avarice spares his Wine at the
first pint; so Thrift is too late, when you are come to the bottom of the
vessel. The Prodigal by doing good to others, does hurt to himself; the Miser
does no good to others, and much less to himself; he alone that keeps a measure
in his Gifts, deserves the name of Virtuous, and makes his Liberality esteemed.
Rashness does oftentimes as much, and more mischief as Cowardice; but Valor,
holding a mean between both, prevents it. The same may be shown by Induction in
all the Virtues, which have therefore been conceived to consist in the middle.
In consideration whereof, the Wiseman prays for neither plenty nor want, that
he may eschew the inconveniences of both; but for a Mediocrity, to which the
Ancients, to show their esteem thereof, gave the attribute of Golden.

The Second said, That Mediocrity is an Invention of mean and irresolute Souls,
who in expectation what side to take, would keep themselves indifferent to any
choice; and so long as they do so, they show their want of Masculine Virtue,
which alone accomplishes great designs, though with great pains, which are the
rate for which in old time the Gods sold every thing; nor is there a clearer
market now-a-dayes, wherein we see none thrive that are neither Fish nor Flesh,
and are always to seek for a Master, but only such as have found a good one.
Ask those who so much extol Mediocrity, Whether they would make choice of an
indifferent Friend, and do not esteem a zealous one above a lukewarm one; so
hated both by God and Men, that the Scripture says, God will spew the
lukewarm out of his month, they being, in truth, no better than Hypocrites.
Moreover, Charity, the sublimest Virtue, and which must survive Faith and Hope,
(perfect Fruition admitting only Love) ought to be so extreme, that it can
never be too much; since we are obliged to endanger our selves for others, and
to love God more than our selves, and our neighbors as much as our selves,
whom we always love too much. Let us see now, whether Justice loves Extremities
best; concerning which matter, we find it said, that the highest Justice is the
highest Injustice. Then for Chastity, Is it fit for a Woman (think you) to lend
one port of her honor to a Friend, and to keep the other? In brief, Do we not
see that a too circumspect Captain deserves not the Name of valiant, but quits
it for that of prudent? And in the practice of Prudence, he who balances too
long, and takes not a speedy Resolution to pursue the same yet more
courageously, is abandoned by all the World. Moreover, the Laws of the
Athenians punished those that would swim between two waters, taking no side in
a public Sedition; as judging it better to fail in the choice of the one or
the other of such parties, than to take none at all. If you have to do with a
Priest about a Case of Conscience, is any thing more insupportable than to find
an unresolved Mind? The same may be said of an Ambiguous Lawyer and Physician,
who send back their Clients and Patients more dissatisfied than they came. He
that seeks Employment under Grandees, must not boast of Mediocrity in his
abilities to serve; Diligence will not admit division, much less fidelity;
nothing pleases but what is extreme: Which possibly has brought Hyperboles
into such credit at Court, and made nothing more usual in commendations, than
the word Extremely.

The Third said. That since a Defect and an Excess is incident to all Humane
Actions, Reason requires that we assign the middle place to Virtue, which is
defined by Aristotle, An Elective Habit consisting in a Rational Mediocrity:
And if any be found that seem to be only in Excess, as Humidity in an extreme
Abasing of of our selves; Magnanimity in Courage raised above the greatest
things; yet their several circumstances, especially those of their End, serve
to qualify and determine them. This Chastity which seems incapable in excess
(since a Virgin cannot be too chaste) yet was vicious in the Vestals, because
they had an Evil End in Paganism, as it is virtuous in our Nunns.

The Fourth said. That Virtue being high and sublime, this argues that it
consists in extremity; as also do all the Theological Virtues; Charity, as is
above declared; Faith, the least doubtings wherein are criminal; and Hope,
which never wavers. So likewise do the Cardinal Virtues, amongst which the
inflexible Justice of Cato and Aristides, far surpasses in dignity the
accommodements and ways of Accord of Arbitrators, which always need a supreme
Authority to be authorized and executed. Hence a severe Judge of these times
having remitted a little of his ordinary severity, to comply with the Humors of
the Age, was said, To have become a Man; as if he had been Divine before. As
for Temperance, Chastity which is a Species thereof, is more laudable and
better merits the name of Virtue in a Virgin then in a Wife; and the abstinence
of S. Nicholas, who is said to have fasted from the Nurse's Breast, or that of
S. Simon Stylites was much more virtuous than ordinary Fastings. In brief,
Prudence, though it teach us to keep the middle every where, yet is despised
when accounted indifferent. Moreover, by the Reason of Contraries, Virtue must
consist in extremities, because Vice does so; and if Virtue should consist in
the middle (which partakes of the nature of the extremes) it should be composed
of two extreme Vices; which is absurd. So the Earth, the vilest part of the
World, is in the midst; and Heaven, the noblest, at the extremities, which are
the circumferences. Otherwise we might with some probability render the same
reason that a Satyr of these times did, why there are so few virtuous persons
nowadays; Because, says he, Envious Antiquity placed Virtue in the middle
which is a point, and a point is impossible to be found.

The Fifth said; That we must distinguish Moral virtues from Theological. The
former consist in mediocrity, but not the later; and are therefore called
supernatural as not only attaining but surpassing the bounds of Nature; yet
every moderate moral action is not virtuous, nor every extreme vicious. For
some are always Vice how little sover you take of them; as Adultery, Homicide,
and Theft; others, always Virtue in whatever extremity they be found; as
Temperance and Fortitude. And because Action, wherein Virtue consists, is of
particular things, this is best verified by examples. Thus Liberality is a mean
between Avarice and Prodigality; the Avarous being excessive in receiving and
defective in giving; the Prodigal, on the contrary, excessive in giving and
defective in receiving. Magnificence has the same respest to great expenses
that Liberality has to less. The regular desire of moderate Honors has for
its extremes. Contempt of Honor and Ambition; Magnificence has the like, in
reference to great honors. Mansuetude or Clemency is between Choler which is
offended with every thing, and Stupidity which is offended with nothing:
Veracity, between Boasting and Dissimulation; Facetiousness, between Bouffonry
and Rusticity; Amity, between Flattery, Morosity and Prattling; Modesty between
Fear and Impudence. Indignation to see the wicked abuse Fortune, between Envy
which is troubled at the prosperity both of good and bad, and Malevolence which
rejoices at the harm of both; Sufferance, between Softness and Insensibility;
Prudence, between Stupidity and Craft. In short, all Virtues will be found
thus, and have their extremes, although their names are not always easy to
express.

CONFERENCE CLXXI. Whether the Imagination be able to produce and cure Diseases.
AS Health is a natural Disposition fit for performing the several operations
of the Body's Organs, and consisting in the due temper of the Similar parts,
the Symmetry of the Organical, and the union of both together; so a Disease is
a disposition contrary to nature, hindering the same Functions by destroying
the Temperament of the first Qualities, the proportion and laudable
conformation of the Organs; and the Union of both; whence arise three sorts of
Diseases, viz. Intemperies, ill Conformation, and Solution of Continuity. Now
the Question is, Whether the Imagination can of it self hinder the ordinary
Functions of the Similar parts, by destroying the harmony and temper of the
four first Qualities, which is the principle of their actions; as also those of
the Organical parts, by changing the natural Figure, Magnitude, Number and
Situation of these Parts, and the action of both by the dissolution and divorce
of them asunder. Diseases of bare Intemperature, which is either simple or with
matter, the Imagination may produce by moving the Spirits and Humors; which it
has power to do. For the Spirits being aerious and naturally very hot, when
they are sent by a strong Imagination into some part, they may so heat it as by
the excess of their heat to destroy the temper of such part; as Anger sometimes
heats the Body into a Fever. And as the too great concourse of these Spirits
makes hot intemperatures, so their absence from other parts causes cold
Diseases; as crudities and indigestions, familiar to such as addict themselves
to Study and Meditation after Meat; the Spirits which should serve for
Concoction being carried from the Stomach to the Brain. In like manner, the
Imagination having dominion over the Humors, which it moves by mediation of the
Spirits; as Joy, Shame, and Anger bring blood and heat into the Face and
outward parts; and Fear and Sadness give them a contrary motion; it appears
that it has power to produce Maladies of Intemperies with matter by the
fluxion or congestion of the Humors into some part, and out of their natural
seat. But if the Fancy can disorder the work of Conformation in another body
then its own (as that of an Infant, whose marks and defects wherewith he is
born, are effects of his Mothers Fancy) much more may it cause the same
disorder in its own Body, whereunto it is more nearly conjoined. Wherefore,
since it can destroy the temper of the Similar parts and the harmony of the
Organs, it may also cause Diseases, and by the same means cure them too: for if
contraries be cured by their contraries, then it may cure a cold distemper by
producing a hot one; and if it has power to cause by motion of the humors an
obstruction in some part, it may by the same means return them to their natural
place, and cure such obstruction. 'Twas to the Fancy that the cure of those
Splenetick persons is to be attributed, who were cured by the touch of the
great Toe of Pyrrhus's left Foot; and we see many Cures wrought by Amulets,
Periapts, and other like Remedies; which having no virtue in themselves to
produce such an effect, the same must be referred to some other cause. Now none
has more empire then the Imagination over the Spirits and other Humors,
wherein almost all Diseases consist.

The Second said, That the Imagination being a simple Cognoscitive Power cannot
of it self produce the effects that are ascribed to it. For all Cognition is
Passion, and to know is to suffer and receive the Species of the thing that is
to be known, whose impression made upon the Organs of Sense is by them carried
to the Imagination, which judges thereof upon their report. Moreover, there is
this notable difference between the Sensitive or Cognoscitive Powers, and the
Vegetative or Motive which are destitute of all Cognition, that the latter are
active out of themselves and operate upon the Members, which the Motive Faculty
moves with full power, and upon the aliments which the Vegetative Faculties (as
the Nutritive and Auctive) alter and turn into the nature of the parts. But the
Sensitive Faculties and all other Cogniscitive Powers have no real sensible
action. They are active indeed so far as they are powers issuing from very
perfect Forms, but their actions are immanent and produce nothing beyond
themselves, and consequently can have no influence abroad. So that the
Imagination cannot immediately and of its own nature produce either a Disease
or Health in the Body, but only by means of the Motive Power or Sensitive
Appetite, the Passions whereof are acknowledged by Physicians to be the
external causes of Diseases. If the Fancy could produce any thing, it should
be by help of the Species it is impregnated withal; which being extracted from
things, some think that they eminently contain the virtues of the objects from
whence they issue and whereof they are Pictures, and that hence it is that the
Teeth are set on edge upon the hearing of grating sounds, that the sight of a
Potion purges many, and that of salt things makes the Stomach rise in others,
and that the thought of the Plague oftentimes propagates it more then the
corruption of the Air. Nevertheless these effects proceed only from the various
motion of Heat and the Spirits caused by the Appetite and the Motive Power,
which are distinct from the Imagination. For if the Species had the same power
with the objects from which they issue, they would not be perfective but
destructive of their Organs; the Species of Heat would burn the Brain, that of
Cold would cool it, both would destroy it, which is contrary to experience. For
though Heat and Cold are contraries in Nature, yet they are not so in the
Understanding, but rather friendly; the one contributing to the knowledge of the
other; and the end of Intentional Species is not to alter, but only to
represent the objects whereof they are copies.

The Third said, That Aristotle has built his Physiognomy upon the great
connection and sympathy of the Soul with the Body, which is such, that the one
causes considerable changes in the other: To which purpose the Soul employes
no other more effectual instrument then the Imagination. Which power of the
Soul upon the Body is evinced by the mighty effects of the Passions, especially
of Fear, Love, and Anger; Fear having killed many, as particularly St. Valier
before the stroke of the Executioner: On which account it is also that Mirth is
commended for one of the best preservatives from the Plague. And we see that
Fear and Sadness are no less the causes then the infallible signs of the
Disease called Melancholy. The same is further verified by the strange
Histories of those, who being become sick by Fancy, could not be cured but by
curing the Fancy first; the Remedy being to be of the same kind with the
Disease. Thus he who fancied he had no head, could not be restored to his right
sense till the Physician clapping a leaden Cap upon him, left him to complain a
while of the Headache. And another, who having studied Physic a little, and
took up a conceit that he had a prodigious excrescence in his Intestinum
Rectum, could not be cured till the Surgeon had made semblance of
cauterizing it. Another Gentleman who durst not piss for fear of causing an
universal Deluge, was cured of his conceit by the Country peoples crying out,
Fire, and desiring him to quench it. In like manner another believing himself
dead would not eat, and had died in good earnest, had not his Nephew (who was
reported dead) come into his Chamber in a winding Sheet, and fallen to eat
before his Uncle, who thereupon did the like. And to go no further, the tying
of the Codpiece-point is accounted an effect of the Fancy, and is cured by
curing the Fancy alone. So likewise a Lord of Quality falling sick accidentally
in a poor Village, and complaining less of his Malady then that he should dye
without a Physician: no other expedient was found but to cloth his Cook in the
Curates Gown; upon which he presently became half cured: but causing the
Curtains to be undrawn that he might the better see to thank his Doctor, he
discovered the deceit, and fell sick again more dangerously then before: his
imagination thus producing the effects both of sickness and recovery.

CONFERENCE CLXXII. Of Fascination, or Bewitching.
FAscination or Bewitching is the doing of hurt to one by sight, without
Contact mediate or immediate; to deny which, is to deny common experience, the
verdict of all Antiquity, of the Learned, and of the Holy Scripture it self.
The manner of it is vulgarly thought to be this, namely, when one, maliciously,
and with a dangerous eye beholding some fair Child, (whose tenderness of body
makes it more subject to hurt then a stronger person) hurts it by commending
it; which Sorcery is thought to be rendered ineffectual by making Children wear
about their Necks some preservatives, ridiculous indeed, yet much in use,
particularly amongst the Spaniards; such as the figure of a thumb between the
two fore-fingers in the form observed in making a fig for one; it is also a
practice to make such a fig when they rise in the morning, and to spit three
times in the bosom. Now this kind of Fascination the Poet extends even to
Beasts, in the common Verse, Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.
Some refer it to Antipathy, as they do the Basilisk's killing at a distance,
and the hoarseness caused by sight of a Wolf. Plutarch in the fifth Book of his
Symposiacks says, That some hurt their Parents and Friends with their Eyes
alone; and he relates a story of one Entelidas, who (like a second Narcissus)
perceiving himself handsome in a Fountain, thereupon lost both his health and
his beauty: whence he concludes, that such Fascination proceeds not always
from Envy, but he refers the cause to the perverse custom some get of doing
mischief, which being turned into nature, becomes as necessary to them as it is
to a bowl to roll. Others think it an effect purely natural; as a Blear Eye
infects the beholder with the same evil; and Plutarch says, He saw certain
ancient people called Thibii, who by their aspect hurt not only Children, but
perfect men: the visual rays being rendered more active by the evil habit of
those that have intention to hurt out of envy, which is discerned commonly by
frequent beholding the prosperity of a hated person; whence comes the word
Invidere. An example whereof is seen in the little Bird called a Witwal, which
becomes sick by the sight of one that has the Jaundies; whereof the Bird being
presently conscious shuts its eyes upon such a persons approach. For the poison
is communicated only to such as are fit to receive it, even at further
distance then fire reaches Babylonian Naptha. And they hold that Envy, or some
other passion, increases its activity, the soul promoting the operations of the
body; as the imagination excites love, and eager Dogs sometimes become blind
through the violence wherewith they pursue their Game. This opinion is backed by
the observation of menstrous women, whose aspect alone taints a Looking-glass;
and also by the effects proceeding from the passion of Love, the cause whereof
is attributed to the Eyes, which are sometimes so disordered by erotical Folly,
that they see not the objects before them, which cannot be attributed to beauty
alone, considering that the fairest women have oftentimes least power to
attract Lovers by their looks; whence some are found more dangerous to behold
then others. Besides, Plutarch, Aristotle, and Heliodorus, who confirm this
Fascination, (which is derived from the word (...) to Envy) in Deuteronomy. 28.56.
This word is used and translated by St. Austin, Fascination; and the Chaldeans
called it an evil-Eye, as elsewhere that Eye of the envious Hireling is so
termed. But St. Paul speaks plainly of it, Gal. 3.1. asking the Galatians, Who
has bewitched or fascinated you not to obey the Truth? Which St. Anselm
interprets thus, Who has hurt you by a livid and envious beholding of your
perfection, or (like Enchanters) has deluded you and made you see one thing
for another? And Tertullian says, That Fascination, which so follows Praise,
that the one is taken for the other, is a work of the Devil, and sometimes also
a punishment of God upon such as forget themselves through vanity.

The Second said, That Fascination in the vulgar sense, is not only possible
but natural, though the cause be occult; as also are magnetical and electrical
attractions. Thus maleficiated persons infect by insensible transpiration what
they wear about themselves: whereunto the eye's structure and temper renders it
the fittest part of the body; whence, besides Diseases of the eyes, we see
Tears easily draw others from those that behold them shed. Pliny relates that
the Tribalians and Illyrians when angry, killed people by their aspect alone.
And Olaus, That the same is done at this day in some Northern Nations. It Is
read of Tiberius that his eyes sparkled in the night, insomuch that a Soldier
died by beholding him. And Pyrrhus so terrified another, who came to dispatch
him, that only by looking upon him, he rendered him unable to touch him: For,
whether vision be by Emission (as the Platonists hold) the Rays will carry
with them the qualities of the Eye that emits them; or by Reception (as
Aristotle will have it) the colors resulting from the impression of the
qualities of a visible object will not be destitute of the same qualities; or
partly by emission, and partly by reception (according to Galen) the rencontre
of both sorts of Rays cannot but be of great efficacy, especially when
animated by the Passions of Choler, which enflames them, or of Envy, which
envenoms them.

The Third said, That there are two sorts of Fascination, the one natural,
performed by natural means, as venomous and malignant qualities, which are sent
from one body to another, and infect the same by their malignity; the other
supernatural and diabolical, performed by secret means, whereby the vulgar
believe that Witches can make sick whom they please by touching, beholding, and
speaking to them; which three ways they employ to bewitch those to whom they
desire mischief. The first sort of Fascination is possible, and is founded upon
the Antipapathy and Contrariety which is found between almost all Bodies; so
that even the shadows of some Trees are noxious to some Animals, as that of the
Yew to Man, and that of the Ash to Serpents. The Fig Tree appeases the madness
of the Bull when he is tied to it, by emission of certain vaporous spirits,
which entering into him temper and reduce him to moderation: and from the same
reason meat hanged on a Fig Tree becomes more tender and delicate, to wit, by
attenuating its grosser parts. For the heat of every living body incessantly
raising, and sending forth vapors and spirits, when these spirits meet others
like themselves, they serve them instead of a recruit, and increase the good
disposition of the body wherein they are. And it is this way that old women
prejudice the health of Children, whilst their vapid spirits are imbibed by the
tender skin of the Infants, and so corrupting the humors, disorder their
natural functions. Hence also consumptive persons give their disease to such as
breathe near them; and so likewise all contagious and occult maladies are
communicated by one morbid subject, to another disposed to receive the same
affection. But the latter sort of Fascination, whereby common people think that
not only men and Animals may be killed, but also plants dried up, streams
stopped, stones broken in pieces, and the like; is no-wise in the power of
nature, whatever the Arabians say, who ascribe all these effects to
imagination, whose power they equal to that of Intelligences, who are able to
move the whole Universe. For if it does nothing of it self in its proper body,
where it simply receives the species of things, it must do less without its
precinct. Moreover, it is impossible for a sound man to make another sick,
because he cannot give what himself has not; they, in whom by an extraordinary
corruption the blood, seed, or other humors have acquired a venomous quality,
being necessarily sick. So that it is a pure work of Devils; who knowing the
properties of things, apply the same really to the parts of the body without
our privity, whilst they amuze our senses with other objects, as the aspect of
another person, or some such insignificant thing. Besides that, children being
apt to lose their flesh upon unapparent causes, such a change may be purely
natural, whilst it is by mistake charged upon a strangers praises of the
Infant, who must necessarily grow worse, because it cannot become better.

CONFERENCE CLXXIII. Of Amulets; and whether Diseases are curable by Words,
Tickets, or other things hanged at the Neck, or applied to the body of the
Diseased.
THis Question depends upon the Precedent; for if it is possible to make a
person sick by the Aspect alone, it may seem also possible to cure him by
Contact alone. In the examining of the matter, we must distinguish, as
elsewhere also, supernatural cures from those which come to pass according to
the course of nature. Of the former sort are all the Miracles of the Holy
Scripture, and Ecclesiastical History, those which Gods power manifests in all
times by his Saints, and the cure which he has reserved to our Kings by their
sole Touch. Some cure may likewise happen naturally by the pronouncing of
words, when the Patients Fancy is so strong that it has power enough over his
body to introduce some notable change therein; whence that Physician cures
most, in whom most confide. Thus I have seen some persons eased of the
Toothache, upon sticking a knife in a Tree, and pronouncing some barbarous
words. But it falls out oftentimes, that the effect of one cause is attributed
to another. Such was the cure of a Gentleman of the Ligue, whom the late King
Henry the IV. surprised in the Town of Loges as he was shivering with a
Quartain Ague, and the King in Railery sent him a Receipt against his Ague; the
sight whereof presently cured him, through the fear he had of that unexpected
approach. So also many remedies act by some occult property, as Paeony hung
about Childrens necks against the Epilepsy; and Quicksilver applied upon the
Breast, or hung in a Quill, is believed a preservative against the Pestilence:
all precious stones are thought to have some virtue against some indisposition
of the body or mind: The Eagle-stone applied to the Arm retains the child in
the Womb; and to the knee, facilitates Delivery: Coral and the Jasper stop
Blood: the Nephitick Stone is conceived to void the Gravel of the Kidneyes; the
hinder foot of a Hare carried in the Pocket cures the Sciatica of the same side
from which it was taken. For, Remedies whose sole application cures by their
penetrating and sensible virtue are not of this rank. Thus, if Quicksilver
applied cures the Pox by causing a Flux at the mouth, it must not be termed an
Amulet; nor Cantharides, when applied, as a vesicatory, they cause Urine; nor
Epithemes applied to the Heart or Liver: but herbs and other things laid to the
Patients wrist may be so styled, when they have no manifest qualities proper
against an Ague. The Question therefore is, Whether such Applications,
Suspensions, and Wearings, have any Natural Effect; I conceive, they have not.
For a Natural Action requires not only some Mathematical or Physical Contact,
but also a proportion between the Cause and its Effect. Now what proportion can
there be between a Prayer or other Speech (most commonly insignificative) and
the Cure of a Disease, much less between a little Ticket, or other suspended
Body; and an Ague? what is said of the weaponsalve, being either fabulous or
diabolical, and always superstitious; as the Phylacteries of the Jews were.
Although this Error is so ancient that the Greek Athletae were wont to arm
themselves with such things against sluggishness, of which trifles, their
Adversaries also made use to overcome them in Wrestling; and at this day, some
wear certain Chracters about them, that they may win at play. In like manner,
the Romans hung Amulets about their Children's necks, which they called
Praefifcini, and Fascini, and made of Jet; as the Spaniards make them at
present. To which, to attribute any power upon the account of their Form,
Number, or other regard beside their Matter, is an Error as great in
Philosophy, as it would be impiety and contempt of the Church to extend his
conclusion to Agnus Dei's, Relics, and other sacred things, whose so
continual Effect cannot be questioned but by the profane and heretical.

The Second said, That by the Doctrine lately published in the Treatise of
Talismans, it appears, that not only Matter, but also Figure, Number, and other
correspondences with the Celestial Bodies have some efficacy; which to
question, because we know not the manifest Cause, would be too great
presumption. Yea, I would not call all such Effects Supernatural, since there
are so many things feasible, whereof we know not the Cause. And as to the
Supernatural Effects of Amulets, they are of two sorts: For either they are
performed by the favor and blessing of God, who redoubles, yea, heightens to a
seemingly unpossible degree, the Effects of Natural Causes, or else changes
them: Or they are effected by help of the Evil Spirit, who is the Ape of Divine
Actions. As then, in consequence of the Sacraments, God's Graces are conferred
upon Christians, so the Devil agrees with the Sorcerer or Magician, that as
often as he shall make such a sign, or speak such a word, such an Effect shall
follow; whence it is no wonder if the Devil, though inclined solely to Evil,
sometimes does good, as healing a Disease by applying true Natural Agents to
Patients, thereby to accustom the Sorcerer to give credit to his words. Thus an
Italian having sold a familiar Spirit, bethought himself to put a great Spider
in a box, and yet he that bought it found the same use and benefit of it which
he desired.

The Third said, That without recurring to good or bad Angels, whose powerful
Effects cannot be questioned but by Miscreants, we find something in the
ordinary course of natural things that makes for Amulets, the Antiquity whereof
is testified by that saying of a Roman, who being sick, and asked how he did,
answered his Friend, thus: You may see how ill I am by this Ticket, which I
have suffered to be put about my Neck: intimating that he must needs be very
sick to suffer it, since he gave no credit to it. And yet Confidence is a
necessary condition for the making Amulets efficacious. For as the belief of
sickness oftentimes makes people sick indeed; so an Opinion that they shall be
cured by such an Action, Writing, or Word, is capable to work a Cure in those
whose Minds have great power over their Bodies: Which Opinion, being founded
only upon the Word, Writing, or the applying of an Herb to the Patient's Wrist,
or other such Conceit, the same cannot be termed other than an Amulet.
Besides, 'twere a great rashness to conclude, that there is no Connection or
necessary Consequence between Words and Effects; since the same is found by
Experience: And Words are the signs and images of things, and consequently,
have some proportion between them. Whence possibly, they that hunt the Hyaena
cry continually, I do not see her, till she be entered into the toil, which she
does boldly upon Confidence of that Speech; and when they cry, I do see her,
she endeavors to fly and get out of the Net, but intangles her self further
therein: And in old time Gardners cursed Parsley as they sowed it, to make it
spring up the sooner. Hence also the very naming of filthy things, especially
when we are eating, turns our Stomachs; and the mention of heinous Crimes makes
us frown. And lest this should be attributed to Fancy alone, which is proved
before not to be active, but only cognoscitive, we find that Serpents are
charmed by words; and Hesiod has a Verse to drive away Cantharides; and
Shepherds affirm, that according to the diversity of certain Words, breeding
Mares bring forth either Males or Females.

CONFERENCE CLXXIV. Whether Fruition diminishes Love.
THe Ignorance of the Definition of Love, seems to have occasioned this
Question. For since the Passions are distinguished only by the various
apprehension of Good and Evil; Hope, respecting good absent; Love, that which
is present; (whence it is seldom without some inward joy, and Lovers would not
be freed from their Passion, though they complain of it) to question, Whether
we love what we possess, is to question, Whether Love be Love. Besides, Love
being not of things unknown, it follows that the more we know, the more we love
that which is amiable (as we do by possessing it) for we cannot judge of that
which we possess not, but by the report of others, which is commonly liable to
fallacy, according to the several interests of the Reporters: Which will appear
better by the comparison of one that prefers a Picture before what it
represents. For what proportion there is between the Picture of a Mistress, and
the Mistress her self; the same is found between such Mistress whilst she
permits her Servant no privacy, and her self when she is married to him; the
Actions of the one being but the shadow and Picture of those of the other,
which are discovered in their simplicity by fruition. We may say therefore,
that the Passion before Enjoyment, is Desire; but Possession alone is capable
to produce true Love. Besides, the perfection of each thing compleats it, and
places it in its highest point, instead of destroying it; so likewise
Enjoyment, which is the perfection of Love, and the sole Butt it aims at, does
not extinguish it. As one delightful meal may appease present hunger, but
with-all it incites us rather to desire another than to disgust it.

The Second said, Did we not converse with things altogether imperfect,
Possession would increase Love, because it would see new perfections in the
thing beloved: But on the contrary, common Experience teaches us the
imperfection of what, before Enjoyment, we accounted highly of; and so our Love
of it comes to be diminished. Besides, difficult things being the fairest, and
contrarily brave things, whose acquisition is easy, contemned, (witness the
Orders of Knighthood and other Honors, which have been made rare, only that
they might be the more amiable) it follows that we less love what we have in
our power, than what we have not; Humane weakness being soon weary of every
thing, and naturally carried to change: But we cannot be weary of things not in
our power, and, consequently, we must esteem them more than what we possess,
the familiarness whereof, is apt to breed Contempt of it in us: Besides that,
the Mind is prone to seek what it wants, and to esteem the condition of another
above its own. Thus the Ox would fain gallop like the Horse, who on the other
side envies his labor at the Plough; and every one takes more pleasure in
speaking of what he least understands, and about the profession of others, than
about his own. Yea, Experience shows us, that Lovers relinquish both the thing
and name of Servants, as soon as they are married. Whence a late Poet speaking
of his Mistress, said, He knew no way to moderate the excessive Love he had for
her, but by marrying her.

The Third said, That true Love must be distinguished from false; this latter
decresing by fruition, whereas the former is increased by it; as also we must
distinguish of Subjects that are loved. Those that deserve not to be so, are
like coarse Pictures which require to be beheld at a distance and in a certain
station, because neerness discovers their defects; whereas the nearer an
excellent and well drawn piece is beheld, the more it is esteemed. Besides, a
difference must be made between what is practiced and what ought to be
practiced. The defects of the person loving are not to be imputed to the thing
loved; and therefore the Question should not be whether Enjoyment diminishes,
but whether it ought to diminish Love; as indeed it neither ought nor does in
things truly amiable; for the more they are known, the more they endear
themselves. As therefore the more the Sun ripens a Grape, the sweeter it is:
and yet one in a Fever thinks it bitter and prefers Verjuice before it; which
nevertheless, makes us not conclude Verjuice the sweeter of the two: So the
disgust of a Lover is not to be imputed to the thing loved, but is indeed an
argument of his own imperfection.

The Fourth said, If the diminution of Love upon enjoyment were a sign of
weakness of judgment, Women would not be (as they are) more constant then Men
after the same: as we see, more Men desert the Love of Women, then on the
contrary. Witness the story of Demophoon after enjoyment of the King of
Thrace's Daughter, who fell into despair upon his departure, as Medea did upon
that of Jason, and Dido upon that of her Aeneas. The cause whereof seems not
imputable to feminine Pudor, as if having yielded themselves to one man they
could not keep their honor unless they keep their affection: but the reason
is, because Men are more perfect then Women and find more causes in them for
change. Yet I conceive that the augmentation or diminution of Love arises not
from enjoyment; as appears by Friendship, which is contracted only after long
converse, and the eating of many bushels of Salt together (as the Proverb
speaks) so far is a thorough knowledge, such as Enjoyment gives us, from
diminishing it. Not to mention the examples of many married couples, who if
occasion were offered, would not stick to imitate the noble contention of
Gracchus and Cornelia, and choose to dye one for the other.

The Fifth said, That if Fruition diminishes Love, it must be the fault either
of the Lover, or the thing loved. Not the first; for he is always the same
person, and fruition renders his object more sensible, and consequently more
amiable to him. Nor the latter; since the very imperfections of the thing loved
seem so many perfections to him that loves it, Balbinumque suae delectat
polypus Agnae. Thus also the imperfections of Children diminish not their
Parents love, but by the help of compassion augment the same; Grandfathers
commonly love their Childrens Children more tenderly then their own; and
amongst their own, the youngest. Which holds not only in this kind of work, but
in all others; bad Painters having no less kindness for their own pieces then
Apelles could have for his.

The Sixth said, That the Question may be determined by distinguishing the
sorts of Love. Impetuous Love, such as is found in Youth and the Poets
describe, swells (like Torrents) by resistance, and languishes by liberty.
Regular and sober Love, such as is found in ripe years, toward deserving
subjects, and especially divine things, increases (like Rivers) by the
accession of new Notions, as so many new Springs, till it end in a boundless
Ocean. Either sort receives augmentation or diminution according to the
diversity of the minds affected therewith; the weak, as less capable of
understanding the inconveniences of this impetuous passion, (which mastering
all the rest, deprives them of the use of Reason, and renders them unprofitable
to other actions of life) continue longer before they come to themselves and
quit this trouble. Hence Women, and of them the least judicious, are conceived
to retain this passion longest, even after possession of what they loved. The
contrary happens in the other love, wherein the more we enjoy, the more we are
enflamed to further pursutes of knowledge.

CONFERENCE CLXXV. Whether 'twere better to know all that men now know, or all
that they ignore.
NOne doubts but there are still things to be known, and consequently Sciences
to be attained. But if we will stand to the wiseman's sentence, That all known
Sciences are vanity (that is to say, Nothing), the Question will soon be
voided, there being no comparison between Nothing and Something. Moreover,
there being no Science without Demonstration, and very few or no Demonstrations
in any Discipline, which themselves are founded upon Principles not
demonstrable, which nevertheless ought to be known; it follows that there is no
Science, and that we know but one thing with Pythagoras, to wit, That we know
nothing. And Pyrrho went further; not allowing that men know themselves
ignorant, but that they must be contented to doubt of it, yea and to doubt of
their very doubting. Accordingly we see that no reason is ever so strong but
some other may be found that thwarts it; and in all Disciplines the most
skillful are the most unresolved and furthest from that Scholastic temerity;
which boasts of knowing every thing, and never doubts of any thing; like those
young Captains that make head upon every occasion, whereas your veterans are
more sober. So likewise the most skillful Physicians are always least hasty in
their Judgments and Prescriptions; and Lawyers the more practice and experience
they have, the more contrary presidents they find in the same case. If you
ascend to Divinity there you will find more ignorance than any where else; yea
Ignorance is the first degree, and one of the conditions required to it, which
was the reason why S. Paul so much blames Philosophy, and our Lord chose the
simplest and most ignorant, such as poor Fishers, not Doctors of the Law nor
Scribes and Pharisees, who were the most learned of his Country. And at this
day when matters of Religion seem most refined, there is none so rash but
acknowledges that one single moment of the Vision of God gives more knowledge
then the whole Sorbonne has, and that there is no more comparison between what
all the men of the world together know of God, and what Beatitude will teach of
him, then there is between finite and infinite, that is, none at all. Whereby
it appears that the knowledge of men is infinitely exceeded by what they ignore.
I shall instance further in the Mechanic Arts, wherein if you compare the
things our Artificers are ignorant of with those they know, the most excellent
amongst them will confess himself very unskilful and ignorant; whereof the sole
ancient Inventions now lost may serve for a proof. For in some Roman Monuments
lately discovered there have been found Lamps which burnt twelve or fifteen
hundred years, and were not extinguished but upon letting in of the Air;
particularly in the Tomb of Tullia Cicero's Daughter at Padua. The invention of
a perpetual Motion which animated Archimedes Sphere, died with him; that of
malleable Glass, with its Inventor, who was wretchedly slain by Tiberius; that
of melting Stones or making artificial ones, or at least of transporting and
managing them, whereby the Romans built those great Piles of Amphitheaters, and
other Works inimitable by us, is not known at this day; yea, to go no further,
the goodness of building with most of the materials of the Ancients is perished
with them. So that it is no wonder that at this day many of their Histories are
accounted Fables; such as the teaching of an Elephant to Dance upon the Rope,
which Suetonius affirms was seen in a Spectacle given to the Roman People; the
care and industry of Men being much diminished in this lee of times, wherein
they desire to obtain every thing without pains. For the new Inventions of
later Ages, as the Compass, Guns, Printing, Telescopes, and some others, were
before Chance produced them, or at least gave some hints to their Inventors, in
respect of us in the same Nothing wherein are all other possible things not yet
effected. So that it is easy to conceive that there are infinite such secrets,
or more excellent (as the Philosopher's Stone, the Quadrature of the Circle,
the Fountain without end, and many other things whereof we have only confused
notions) which he that should know would be as much higher then all other men,
as the Intelligences are above them. For Demons, whether good or bad produce
none of their Marvels but by this Science of things to us unknown; whence we
oft-times term that miraculous which is purely natural. As may appear by the
few Secrets found in the hands of men, which make them admired by all others,
and anciently advanced them to the rank of Gods.

The Second said, This Opinion (that what we ignore is better then what we
know) is founded upon the malign envious nature of some who slight what is
their own, and esteem only what is another, merely because they want it: as
those that ascend up a Ladder, trample on the step that upholds them, still
aspiring to that which is above them, but only to trample on it also next. So
he that knows not some new thing, despises all he knows already, to learn it;
and having learned it, despises it also. For it is likely our first Parents who
had knowledge of all things, preserved the memory of what deserved it best;
yea, that for so many Ages as the World has lasted, men have retained the most
profitable Sciences and Inventions that Art or Chance has taught them. If they
have let some be lost, it is because they found them unprofitable. And as
Solomon says, we shall see nothing in the future but what has been already:
Should the World last as long again as it has done, it would be but a
continual repetition of the same things. Nothing is spoken, but it has been
spoken formerly. The terms of all Sciences have been so often mixed, that as few
or no new words are produced in any Language, so there cannot be many
productions of Wit but what are repetitions of old ones, clothed in a new mode.
For, to instance in the Liberal Sciences; is it possible to Read, Write, and
Speak either in Prose or Verse better then men do at present? Can the
Demonstrations of the Mathematics become more certain by time then they are
now? Will it be more true to morrow then it is to day, that the whole is bigger
then its part? Have the Chemists and other pretended reformers of Physic,
succeeded better then others? Can the Laws be better understood then they are?
And for Divinity; is it possible to know more of it in this world then is known
at present? whilst experience teaches us that the multitude of Books does not
less perplex then profit us, both in this and all other Sciences? But, suppose
this old Error had some likelihood, to examine the certainty of it we must
compare what we know with what we ignore; because both the terms of the
Proportion sought, ought to be known. Now we are conscious indeed of what we
know, but it implies a contradiction that we should know what we know not.
Wherefore if we should quit the Sciences and Arts known and practiced by men
for what we know not, we should have the same fortune with Aesop's Dog, who let
go his morsel of flesh for the shadow of it which appeared greater in the
water, where indeed there was nothing at all. The truth is, those that have
employed most time, labor, and money in the search of Secrets, confess that
they have met with nothing but smoke. Whence if there be any curious Artificer,
he is always unprosperous, because he never attains his purpose.

The Third said, That from what has been said of the difference of the
knowledge of Demons and ours, the resolution of the question is apparent. For
since our knowledge is much short of theirs, it follows that we have more
things to learn then we know; the having a habit, not being necessary for
knowing its privation. Thus one born deaf and blind, yet knows that he wants
more knowledge through his defect of Hearing and Sight, then he has by his
remaining senses: and though I see not Night because it is not visible,
nevertheless I consider by it the beauty of the absent day. Yea, he that has
no Science, commonly values it higher then the Learned themselves do.

CONFERENCE CLXXVI. Whether Music does more hurt or good.
OUr Soul being a proportion, loves what partakes thereof; whence the Rules of
Architecture ill-observ'd, and the Gestures of Clowns displease the Eye, and
disorderly sounds hurt the Ear. For though there is proportion in the Senses of
Touching, Smelling, and Tasting (which is the reason why cold hands are so
pained upon immediately approaching a hot Fire; and moderate smells and
rellishes please us better then excessive) yet only two senses are well
capable of judging of this proportion; namely, the sight, and the hearing. And
the same respect that there is between Beauty and Deformity, in reference to
the Sight, is found also between Harmony and Discord in regard of the Hearing.
Wherefore Music being the Art of Harmony, they who love it not, are as
extravagant as they that make no difference between a fair and an ugly face,
proportion being the chief difference of both. Hence some are not contented to
account this Art as a Rule and Touchstone whereby to discern well tempered
spirits from others, but have ventured to assert the hatred thereof a mark of
reprobation. Moreover, the most ancient Contests, were about the prerogative of
Music, every one pretending to be master thereof. Witness that of the Muses
with the Sirens, of these with Thamyris, of Apollo with Marsyas, Linus, and
Pan, (who punished Midas's in judiciousness with Asses Ears) and that of Nero
with all the Musicians of his time. Yea, it cures some Diseases, (as the biting
of the Tarantula and Melancholy) and asswages the raving of Daemoniacks, (as
we read in the story of Saul.) The crying of newborn Children is quieted by
the jingling of Keys or a Basin, and when they are become bigger they are
diverted with the singing of their Nurses. Youth particularly delights in
Music; whence the Cretians made their Laws to be more easily learnt by their
young people by causing them to sing them; and we see the Rules of Grammar are
for the same reason contrived into Verse. Caius Gracchus, when a man made use
thereof to regulate the tone of his voice, never making an Oration but with his
Servant behind him; who twanging a Musical Instrument, took him down when he
was too high, and raised him when he was too low. And Achilles in Homer
diverted himself with his Harp when he was at leisure from his Military
Employments. Artificers sweeten the tediousness of their labor with Songs.
Shepherds cheer themselves with it, and it makes Maids spin more nimbly.
Theodulphus the Bishop redeemed himself out of prison with a Hymn which he
composed, beginning Gloria, laus, and honor. The story is known of Arion cast
into the Sea by Pirates, and carried safely to shore by a Dolphin, whom he
ravished with his Voice and Harp, which was first instituted to honor the
Gods. The Indians performed their Worship by Dancing to Songs, Cybele's Priests
with Cymbals, the Curetes with Drums and Trumpets; the Romans sung Spondaick
Verses, whilst they offered their Sacrifices; and David danced before the Ark,
all his Psalms being fitted to the Harp, and other harmonious Instruments of
that time. And in this, see what power Organs have to inflame the zeal of the
devout, and how melodious voices are with it; so that the chief difference of
Divine Service is in the Singing. And as for public or private Feasts and
Ceremonies, nothing renders them more complete then Music; whence the Verse,
Convivii citharam quam Dii fecere sodalem. 'Twas the custom to present a Lute
to the Guests; and to him that could not play, a branch of Bays, which obliged
him to a Song. But above all, the use of Music is effectual in War, whence the
Spartans marched to the sound of Flutes in a kind of Dance, to the end that by
the motion of their Soldiers they might discern the valiant from the poltrons.
The Pythagoreans themselves were lulled asleep with the Harp, to appease the
troubles of their mind. In short, Music accompanies us to the Graves, where
people sing Elegies for the deceased. Thus the Phoenicians added Flutes to
their mournings, and the Romans had their Siticines who sung at their Funerals.
For Music excites both sadness and mirth. And just as Physic either quiets or
purges the humors of our bodies, so does Music the Passions of the mind.
Plato conceiving that it was given to man not only to tickle his ears, but also
to maintain the Harmony of the Soul with the Body, and to awake our sleeping
virtues. Thus of diverse modes, the Dorick makes prudent and chaste, the
Phrygian excites to War and Religion, the Lydian abates pride and turns it into
lamentations, the Ionick excites to honest pleasures and recreations. Hence
Aegysthus could never corrupt the chastity of Clytemnestra, Agamemnons Wife,
till he used the help of the Poet and Musician Demodocus; and the Emperor
Theodosius being ready to destroy the City of Antioch was diverted and wrought
to mercy by the melodious Sonnets of little Children, instructed thereunto by
Flavianus their Bishop. Yea, the Prophet Elisha recommended this Art, when he
commanded a Harp to be played on before him, and then Prophesi'd to Joram the
overthrow of the Moabites. And Michaia did the like in the presence of Ahab
King of Samaria, refusing to prophecy till one had played before him upon a
Musical Instrument. The relation of Saxo Grammaticus in the 12th. Book of his
Danish History, concerning Henry the 2d. King of Denmark, who being told of the
excellent Music of the Violin, desired to see the effects of it; which were
such, that at first it put him into a deep melancholy, and afterward chearing
him up again, raised his spirit to such a degree of rage, that he slew four of
his Guard, and at last it returned him to his first temper; serving only to
show the excellence of Music when it is rightly used.

The Second said, That Music effeminates men's courage, whilst it sweetens;
like that of Wine taken to excess, intoxicates them, and transports them out of
themselves: which hurtful effect gave just cause to the fable of the Syrenes,
who allured Pilots by their melodious voices, to split against the Rocks. But
above all, it excites to filthy pleasures, and blindes the eyes of the
Understanding, as Mercury did those of Argus. And its great delectation,
through the dissipation of the Animal spirits which the sweetness of the sound
attracts by the ear, leaves us less refresht then wearied, and incapable of
setting about any serious matter. Its easing the Sciatica (as it is reported) is
common to it with every thing that causes great attention, whereby the spirits,
and with them the humors being suspended, the fluxion must consequently cease;
and the Rabbis attribute the driving away Readiness evil spirit, not to the
Harmony alone of David's Harp, but to the virtue of the Characters of the Divine
Name written upon it. What did the Sybarites get by training their Horses to
the Pipe, but this, that the Crotonians causing Minstrels to play at the
joining of a Battle, rendered their Horses useless to the Fight, because they
did nothing but Dance. Moreover, Orpheus one of the most ancient Musicians was
torn to pieces by women, because he debauched their Husbands. Whence also
Antisthenes said that Ismenias was either a Fool, or a bad Citizen, because he
could play so well upon the Flute; and Philip was angry with Alexander for
singing too well; and Antigonns his Governor broke his Harp. Therefore the
Egyptians banished Musicians as corrupters of Youth, and the Lacedaemonians were
so afraid lest they should grow into credit amongst them that they expelled
Timotheus out of their City for adding a string to his Lute. Aristotle also
places this Art amongst the Ludicrous, and blames Painters for representing the
gods singing and playing upon Instruments; whose goodliest effect is to break
silence, and waste time, leaving no permanent action after it, more then the
play of Cards, Dice, and Tennis does; which last is much more profitable for
health, and is accounted as honorable to be perfectly skilled in by persons of
quality, as it is shameful to be an excellent Musician. In fine, we read not
that our Lord ever Sung, nor yet Adam in the state of Original Righteousness;
but one Jubal, the first Bigamer and second Murderer of the world, is said to
have been the inventer of it.

CONFERENCE CLXXVII. Whether Barrenness is most commonly tht fault of Husbands
or of Wives.
AS Fruitfulness is a power whereby every living thing is able to produce its
like, so Barrenness is an impotence in it to re-produce is self by the way of
Generation; by means whereof mortal individuals acquire immortality in their
Species: to which purpose nature has furnished every one with necessary
Organs. The generation of perfect Animals requires three things; diversity of
Sex; matter or seed, which flows from both Male and Female, and contains in it
self the Idea and Character of the parts from which it issues; and lastly,
conjunction of both together, without which nothing is produced. And though the
defect of Generation may be sometimes on the man's part as well as on the
woman's; yet she is more subject to sterility, which is an impotence proper to a
woman, who, after the knowledge of a man in an age and time convenient, cannot
conceive. For those that conceive not after the 50th. year, or before the 12th.
are not termed barren: Conceptions beyond the former, or before the latter
term, being supernatural or extraordinary; as those of the Manandri and
Calingi, and that of one mentioned by Savonarola, whom he saw big with Child
at nine years of Age; as also the miraculous conception of Elizabeth after she
was seventy years old. The cause of Barrenness is ascribed by some to the
disproportion between the seeds; whence she that is barren with her first
Husband, is fruitful with her second. Those of the woman are either internal or
external. The internal depend partly upon the seed and menstrual Blood, and
partly upon the temper of the Womb, and the habit of the body. The seed of a
woman, as well as that of man, must be of a laudable temper, quantity, and
consistence, and provided of spirits enough. If the maternal blood, which
concurs likewise to generation, be too plentiful or too little, no effect
follows, any more then if it were corrupted or wanted other requisite
conditions, The Womb (which is like the soil to corn) may be hurt either in its
temper, or its conformation, or in the solution of continuity; all which
disorders hinder gravidation. As for the habit of body, we observe that fat
women are barren, either because the matter of Seed, which is the purer portion
of the Blood, is turned into fat; or because the Epiploon of fat Women pressing
upon the Orifice of the Womb, hinders the Seed from entering into the bottom of
it. Nor are Women too lean fit for Children, by reason of their dryness, and
the tenuity of their Womb, although they are far more fit than fat Women; but
this leanness is to be understood of so great an extenuation, that it leaves the
parts dedicated to Generation, destitute of their vigor and due temperature.
Neither are the very tall, or very low much fitter; but those that are of a
moderate Corpulency and Stature, whose Breasts are firm, and their lower parts
larger than their upper. Now since Conception is an Action proper to the Womb,
which quickens the Genitures, the Woman ought rather to be said the Cause
thereof than the Man, and (by the reason of contraries) the Defect thereof must
likewise be charged upon her.

The Second said, That to blame Women for being more frequently barren than
Men, is to deprive them of their chief Glory, which is Fruitfulness. For Nature
formed them chiefly for propagation, as the Conformation of their Bodies seems
to prove, in which the parts serving to that purpose, as the Womb and Breasts,
have direct communications not only between themselves, but also with the
noblest parts of the Body. Whence the Civilians reckon not Praegnation amongst
Diseases, (notwithstanding all its inconveniences) but, with Physicians, as a
sign of health and good disposition. Whereof Vlpian l. 14. ff. de aedilit.
edicto, gives this Reason, Because their greatest and peculiar Office is to
receive and preserve the fruit. And therefore Woman, having been in Nature's
first intention designed for Generation, she must be also much more fit for it,
(because Nature never fails of her end) than Man, who being born for Command,
Labor, Contemplation, and other more sublime Employments, is designed for
Generation, but in the more remote intention of Nature. For not to speak of the
desire of Coition, which might renew the old quarrel that cost Tiresias his
Eyes, Women seem far more desirous to be Mothers, than Men do to be Fathers;
and Nature gives no desires in vain. Besides, Man is naturally Hot and Dry; a
Temper less proper for Generation; and he inoreases the same by Hunting, War,
Exercises, and other violent Labors; not to speak of business and study; On
the contrary, Women living always at ease, have a Constitution both of Body
and Mind more calm, and, consequently, more fit for this Action, or rather
Passion. As therefore it is more easy to suffer than than to act; so Women must
find less difficulty in Generation; and, consequently, have less impediment to
propagate than Men. I say nothing of Excesses in Diet, wherein Men are always
more licentious; yet it is the Excess of Wine that some allege as the chief
Cause, why some Northern Countries are at this day almost desert, whereas
anciently they were so populous, that Historians called the North the Shop of
Men, and the Magazine of Nations. Witness the frequent Colonies issued from
thence, and the great inundations they have upon other parts of the world. And
possibly, the reason why the Hebrew Law obliged a Man to marry the Relict of
his issuless Brother, was, because it supposed the defect to proceed from the
Husband, and not from the Wife; otherwise, why should the Sister of a Wife
deceased with issue succeed in her stead too? But this Sex is reckoned always
fit for ingendring, and, indeed, is ever ready for it (as the other is not);
which is the reason (as a late Lady said) why Men make suit to Women, rather
than these to them. Perhaps also upon the same account, barrenness under the
Old Law was accounted by Women so great a reproach; because being very rare,
it is a kind of a monstrous thing in their Sex to be barren. Moreover, we hear
many Women complain to the Judges, which is one of the principal Causes of
unfruitfulness. But Histories afford scarce above three or four Women, of whose
inability their Husbands complained. And to speak truth, as fertility is
imputed to the field, and not to the grain, so it must also be to the Woman
alone, who is the field of Nature, and not to the Man.

The Third said, That besides the Internal Causes of fruitfulness and
barrenness, there are also External ones which depend upon the Air, Diet,
Exercises, Passions, and the abuse of the other things called Not-natural. The
Air by the continual alteration it causes in the Body, (which attracts the
same by Respiration and Transpiration) sometimes occasioneth either
fruitfulness or sterility, according to the variety of its Substance, Temper,
and Qualities; two whereof, viz. Excessive Heat, and Cold, are great Enemies to
Generation; the one melting; the other congealing the Humors; but the excess of
Heat least hinders it, especially in Women; the coldness of whose Temper, is
corrected by the warmth, and increased by the coldness of the Air; whence they
are more amorous in Summer than in Winter: Whereas the greater heat of Men is
weakened by that of Summer, and augmented by the coldness of Winter; during
which, therefore they are more prone to Love. So Diet too, contributes much to
render our Bodies fruitful or barren, not only altering, but making them of the
same Temper with it self. Thus the waters of Nilus are so fertile, that they
make the Egyptian Women bring forth three or four Children at once, by reason
of the Salt-Nitre wherewith that River is impregnated; and, wherein Chemists
place the principle of Fecundity, because Ashes and Earth deprived of their
Nitre, produce nothing. But cold waters, even such as have the Virtue to
petrifie, render Women (especially) barren, as most Women in Spain are, through
their frequent use of Ice and cold waters; though some lay the fault upon the
rarity and tenuity of their Bodies, and the excess of Heat; which also is the
reason why the African and Southern people are not so fruitful as those of the
North. Diet, hot and moist, easy of digestion, nutritive and full of good
juice, conduces much to render Women fruitful. On the contrary, the frequent
use of food hot and dry, gross, and of bad juice, may render them barren, as
Leeks and Garlic do; and amongst other Plants, Mint, which was therefore
forbidden to be eaten, or planted in time of war; wherein it is needful to
repair by Fecundity, the loss of Men it causes. In like manner, want of
Exercise, by the heaping up of superfluous Humors, and too violent and
continual Exercises, by desiccating the parts, oftentimes occasion sterility.
Amongst the Passions, Sadness is the greatest Enemy to Generation; whence
Hesiod forbids married people to see one another after a Funeral, but only at
their coming from a Bath, or from places of Mirth. In fine, what ever is
capable to impair the goodness of the Temper, is contrary to Fruitfulness and
Generation, which above all other Natural Actions requires an exact harmony of
the qualities, and a perfect disposition of the noble parts, which supply
Matter and Spirits fit for this Action. And although Men and Women are alike
exposed to External Causes, yet Women being less vigorous, are sooner wrought
upon by them. For, to Internal Causes, which are the most considerable, Women
are, undoubtedly, more subject; since beside Seed, which they supply as well as
Man, (who to deserve the name of fruitful, ought only to supply the same in
requisite quantity, quality, and consistence, and place it in convenient
Recepticles) the Woman must also afford Blood, and also a place for receiving
and preserving both the Seeds and Blood, namely, her Womb, the least disorder
whereof, is sufficient to mar the whole work of Generation. Wherefore since
she contributes most to Generation, and there are more Causes in her concurring
thereunto; if it take not Effect, she is more in fault than the Man, who has
not so many several concurrences in the business.

The Fourth said, That the Causes of sterility being either Natural or
Adventitious, and equal in the Man and the Woman, nothing can be determined
upon this Question. For in either Sex, there are both universal and particular
deficiences of right Temper, and as many Effeminate Men as Viragoes, (the one
not less unfit for Generation than the other, as Aristotle says) Castration is
practiced in both, and disorderly living is equal as well in Male as Female in
these days. For if Men exceed in drinking, Maids and Women are as bad in
Gluttony and Lickerishness. If there be any difference, it is from the diversity
of Climate; Women being found more fruitful in hot Countries, and less in cold,
but Men contrarily; the intemperies of either Sex being corrected by an
opposite constitution of Air. Hence such Women as have been long barren,
sometimes become fruitful by change of Air, Places, manner of Life, and
especially of Age, by which the temperament of the Body being sensibly altered,
it acquires the Fruitfulness it wanted, by acquiring the Qualities and
Conditions necessary to Generation. Many likewise upon the same reason, become
fuitful after the use of Mineral Waters or Baths, and being thereby delivered
from several Diseases, to which barren Women are more subject than such as have
Children, whom Parturition rids of abundance of Excrements peculiar to that
Sex, and occasioning many disorders in the barren.

The Fifth said, That the observation made by Bodin in his Republic, and
several other famous Authors, [that the number of Women much exceeds that of
Men] seems to void the Question; Nature having thereby sufficiently given us to
understand, That fewer men are as fruitful as more women. Which observation is
verified, not only in the East and other Countries, where plurality of Wives
has places; but also in France, where there is no Province wherein Virgins
remain not unmarry'd for want of Husbands. Moreover, one man may beget
abundance of Children in the space of nine months, during which a woman breeds
but one or two; and therefore Man seems more fruitful then Woman, who beginning
to be capable of Generation but two years before Man does ( viz. at 12 years
old at the soonest) ends 23 years sooner then he; for men generate at 70 years
of age and more, but women end at 50. During which time also they are subject
to far more infirmities and maladies than men; who have not above four or five,
whereof women are not capable; but women have fifty or threescore peculiar to
themselves.

CONFERENCE CLXXVIII. Whether Complaisance proceeds from Magnanimity or
Poorness of Spirit.
COmplaisance is a habit opposite to Roughness; the first being a Species of
Civility, the latter of Rusticity. Now since we are complaisant either in good
or bad things, to be so must be commendable or blameable according to the
nature of the object. But because no body doubts that we ought to be
complaisant in virtuous actions, and that they are as culpable who connive at
vice as they that commit it; It remains to consider of Complaisance in
indifferent things, as it is in common practice amongst men; and as Juvenal
represents it in a person that falls a weeping as soon as he sees his friends
tears, and when he smiles laughs aloud; and if you say, you are very hot, he
sweats; if cold, he runs to his Fur-gown. Now the Question is, whether such a
man has more of courage or baseness, I conceive he shows himself a very
pitiful fellow. For this deportment differs not from that servile Vice,
Flattery, which is near akin to Lying, and easily turns from an indifferent to
a vicious action. Thus Courtiers varnish vices with the name of such virtues as
have most conformity therewith, calling Avarice, Frugality; Lasciviousness,
Love; Obstinacy, Constancy; and so in other cases, till they render themselves
ridiculous even to those they praise; who how vain soever they may be, yet
cannot hear their own praises without blushing at them, being conscious that
they displease all the hearers. Indeed when I am complaisant to any one, it is
for fear to offend him; and fear was never an effect of Magnanimity. To which
all that can be excepted, is that it belongs also to Prudence to fear
formidable things. But Fortitude and Courage are never employed in the practice
of this virtue, which therefore is very much suspected, and oft-times serves
for an excuse of cowardice. Hence old men, whom their cold blood makes less
courageous, are esteemed the most prudent; and if they be not the most
complaisant, it is to be imputed to the sullenness attending that age, as
jollity does youth. Moreover, as Courage leads us to act without fear of danger
what we conceive good and just; so it teaches us to call things by their proper
names, as Philip's Soldiers did. On the contrary, Complaisance teaches people
to admire beauty in a deformed woman, to commend a bad Poets Verses, and desire
a copy of them from him; to give fair words to such as we will not or cannot do
any kindness to; in brief, to dissemble all things and to disguise our words,
contrary to the frequent express prohibition of God in holy Scripture, which
calls it having a heart and a heart: so that no person of sound judgment can
think such demeanor consistent with true Courage.

The Second said, That there is as much difference between Rusticity and
Complaisance or Civility, as between a Beast and a Man; the former leaving us
to the guidance of our Appetites and Senses, and to say and do whatever they
dictate to us; the latter overruling them by that power of Reason, which after
the contest remains victorious over the body and sensuality. A choleric man
suffering himself to be transported by his Passion, utters whatever the
violence thereof suggests to him; whereas one of a more sedate temper masters
his anger, although he have as good reason for it, and by this prudent action
he reduces his friend strayed out of the rode of reason; as he that instead of
retorting the ill language his friend gave him, asked him what the Diamond upon
his finger cost him. Which put the other into such confusion, that having
answered the question, he ran to embrace him and asked his pardon. Whereby it
appears how much more courage is requisite to surmount ones self thus, (which
is an effect of Complaisance) then to obey the swing of choler, as vulgar
people do: For Complaisance forces our nature and constrains us to speak, and
do things contrary to our first inclinations, and consequently is of more
difficulty then it is to obey them. Plutarch relates how one Telerus answered
his brother, who asked him how it came pass that he was less beloved then
himself, who had been made one of the Lacedemonian Ephori, whereas he was
treated with great contempt? The reason is (said he) because you are not
complaisant, and cannot bear any injury. As therefore it requires greater
courage to bear then to revenge an injury (as it is observed in the life of
Socrates, who hindered his Scholars from revenging an affront which was done to
him) so it is more difficult to be complaisant then rude. And as the same Author
says, Complaisance consists in speaking pleasing things, and in doing good
offices; both which require a good resolute Spirit, for our Gallants falsely
account it courage to run into the Field upon the least slip of an ambiguous
word: Which perverse phantastry has cost many a brave man's life, who for want
of not having attained to that high point of Magnanimity which teaches us not
to place the point of Honor in every triflle, but only where it ought to be,
have really lost the life both of body and soul for an imaginary folly which
carried them away with the torrent of the popular error of this Age.

The Third said, That we may as well place Continence in infamous places, as
reckon Complaisance an effect of Courage; the respect being alike of both. For
all the actions of a complaisant person are so many marks not only of respect,
but also of a servile fear, such as was that of Alexander's Courtiers, who held
their necks awry and hung down their heads in imitation of their Master, who
was forced to do so by reason of a wound; and those of Dionysius, who stumbled
at every step, because this Tyrant was pur-blind. So when some person begins a
tedious old story, I pray, who shows most courage, he that tells the relator
it is an old one, or he that suffers himself to be tired with it? Besides, that
there is nothing more dangerous then this Complaisance. Certainly a Confessor
that is complaisant to his Penitents, and a Preacher that is so to his
Auditory, will damn both; and so also a General that yields to every advice,
and resists not such as deserve it, will infallibly ruin his Army. A Physician
of this temper, that to comply with his Patient neither bleeds nor purges him
because of his unwillingness thereunto, will be the cause of his death; as the
Apothecary diminishes the virtue of the Medicine whilst he strives to make it
agreeable to the taste, and a pitiful Surgeon makes the sore. A Lawyer that
uses the same course with his Client, thrusts him into many needless and
unhappy Suits. In brief there is nothing so dangerous, nor which argues more
weakness then Complaisance, which like too sweet Sauces makes us nauseate it,
and leaves us as far to seek for Counsel as before: Whereas plain and vigorous
Counsel oftentimes saves the State from shipwreck.

The Fourth said, If you consider all the kinds of Complaisance, they have need
of constraint, which employs more force and courage then is requisite for
following ones inclination. Thus, he that is more thirsty then his neighbor
and yet tenders the first glass to him, does this violence to himself out of
complaisance, which likewise obliges him to put his hand last to the dish
though his Stomach be never so sharp; if he meet with an occasion of anger, he
only smiles to himself, and with dissimulation gives the upper hand to his
inferior. On the contrary, a rough-hewn person had rather go to the Galleys
then commend Verses which to him seem not good, and (as Plato said to Diogenes)
eat nothing ever but Coleworts, than comply with the Ceremonies and Modes of
great persons. Thus he that spares his disarmed enemy, shows greater courage
then if, leaving himself to be guided of his hatred, he should slay him, which
yet is no more then a testimony of his having overcome him; whereas in sparing
him he overcomes himself, which is the greatest victory a man can obtain. To
conclude, Praise is the reward of Virtue, and because it follows complaisence,
as scorn and contempt does rustic opinionastry: this is an evident sign that
the latter is less virtuous because less commendable then the other.

CONFERENCE CLXXIX. Touching the means of re-establing Commerce.
MAn being born sociable, and society not possible without Commerce, the same
seems one of the main Concernments of mankind, who are generally troubled,
when the same is either interrupted by War with strangers, or extinguished by
the negligence of Natives; whereby it appears to be of two sorts in general,
viz. between those of one State, and with Strangers. Now this difference is so
essential, that each of them has its contrary Maxims. Foreign Trade is
exercised commonly by the truck or exchange of one Merchandise for another,
(the transportation of Gold and Silver being prohibited by the Laws of the
State, as also some Merchandises, called Contre-band are) or in case the
Foreign Merchants like not the permutation of commodities, they make their
payment by Letters of Exchange, which was come to be taken up upon the
prohibition of transporting money. On the contrary, Natives of the same Country
commonly make all their Bargains for money, either ready or upon Credit till a
set time. And as the Prince endeavors to promote and facilitate Trade amongst
his Subjects for their accommodation, so he ought to be circumspect to hinder
Strangers from carrying away the Materials, and (especially unwrought)
Commodities about which his own Subjects should be employed.

The Second said, That the dignity of Merchandise is proved from its Antiquity
and Utility. As to the former, we read in Holy Writ of Ismaelite Merchants, who
bought Joseph as they were going from Galaad into Egypt to Trade; and in the
Poets of Jason, whom they feign to have voyag'd with his Ship Argos for
conquest of the Golden Fleece, insinuating thereby that Traveling and Trading
by Sea and Land is the way to grow rich. As to the latter, all Arts would be
unprofitable to men without distribution of their works, which is done by
Merchandise, whereby that becomes useful and known in one place, which was
useless and unknown elsewhere; and the Proverb is confuted, that every Land
bears not all things; since a Country of Trade abounds with every thing, and
the four parts of the world are brought together by Commerce. It Is Merchandise
that enricheth States, all which acknowledge Money; which arises by it, the
sinew of War, and the key of all political Enterprises. It Is that which
supplies Princes with Metals, Jewels, Marble, and other magnificences, whereby
the splendour of their Persons, Courts, and Palaces is advanced; and both in
Peace and War it is the surest foundation for Impositions, which maintain the
expense of either. It Is that which supports the necessities of Soldiers, and
supplies them with provisions both for war and sustenance; whence among the
Eastern Nations, the Pedlers and Victuallers are the most considerable Officers
of their numerous Armies. In short, Commerce affords Lawyers the subjects of
their Pleadings, Sentences, and Arrests; and not only Sugar, Cinnamon, Cloves,
and other Spices for our Tables, but also most Drugs for Physic, as Rhubarb,
Agarick, Sena, Cassia, Tamarinds, Guaiacum, Musk, Ambergreece, and whatever is
rare; besides, Books to all these Professions; and to God himself, Incense to
perfume his Altars. Nor is this employment more profitable then delightful in
reference to the variety of places, persons, and things; a divertisement which
alone suffices to induce Travelers to adventure the dangers which accompany
them. As for the dignity of it, I shall only add to what has been said in a
former Conference concerning the same, That they, who despise Merchandising as
if it had something of base and abject in it, are more worthy of pity for their
gross error, then of an answer. Do they know better wherein Dignity consists
then those ancient Roman Senators, who fraighted and maintained Trading Ships;
the gain whereof was their best revenue? and are so many other States and
Republic ever the less noble for Trading? Is there more honor in the idleness
of a half Gentleman, who for want of other employment uses no other Trade in
time of Peace but to assist one of his Neighbors against another in a quarrel
of his own making, then in the care and vigilance of a good Merchant which
redounds to the benefit both of the public and himself. Besides, the diligent
Merchant raises his Family, whereas the idle Gentleman destroys his; being
driven at last either to go in a pitiful garb, or else to be clothed upon the
credit the Merchant gives him. Since therefore it is the duty of good
Legislators to countenance what is most profitable to the State, and on the
contrary to depress and expel whatever brings damage to the same. Methinks
'twere fit some new marks of esteem were added to the essential honor of
Merchandising; as either Titles of Honor or Privileges, which would invite
the minds of our youth to that good employment, who are otherwise apt to be
drawn aside by popular error to looseness and debauchery, and thereby commonly
deviate from the way their predecessors traced out to them. Whence a Merchant
that has got a good estate, instead of leaving his Son to succeed his Credit,
lets it fall, and puts him to some new profession, to which he was not born, as
to the former.

The Third alleged as an argument of the utility of Commerce, that Cities
destitute of it can neither increase nor grow rich; whence the sub-division
made of the estates of families soon impoverishes the Citizens, unless they
supply that defect by their industry, as many rich Nations do. Thus England was
for a long time enriched by the free trade it enjoyed with all the neighboring
States, who were at Wars one with another. Thus most States of Italy,
especially Venice, Genua, and Florence have been augmented by Traffic. But no
place more evidently sets forth the excellent profit of Commerce then Holland,
where, as their best Authors acknowledge, and experience shows the country,
which almost their industry alone has made habitable, has nothing but Trade
and Commerce, whereby they have enricht it. For the Soil is not only bad, as
being almost all Sandy; or all Marshy, especially at Amsterdam; the water is
unwholesome, and the Air thick and noxious; not to mention their Turffe firing,
which fills the head with vapors. So that though they have all the elements
contrary to them, yet they scruple not to dispute the Sovereignty with the King
of Spain, having made War upon him for four and twenty years together with more
gain then loss: which they could not have done without the great treasures they
draw from Commerce.

The Fourth said, That since Trade consists in Negotiations, things sold or
exchanged, and their value, the persons must be honest that exercise it, the
Commodity understood, and the price certain; otherwise it is not Trafficking,
but mere cheating; whence of all forms of Justice, none ought to be more
compendious, and equitable, and conscientious then that concerning
Merchandising, which would be no less ruined by false judicatures, and long
suits then by injury and open force. The way therefore to re-establish Commerce
is to re-establish fair dealing, to remove frauds and sophistication of
commodities, whereby he, that thinks he buys one thing, buys another of worse
value; and above all, to fix and make immovable the standard of current money;
for want whereof no man knows what he has.

The Fifth said, That the first condition requisite to Traffic, is the safety
of ways. The second, that of payment, which is remitted to a set term. The
Third, The capacity of the Merchant, which keeps him both from being deceived
in the worth of Commodities, and in the sorts of ready payment, though this
kind of payment be less used amongst whole sale Merchants, which is the true
way of Merchandising, that of Retail deserving the name less, and being always
accounted more sordid. Moreover, it is the former that enricheth States,
supplying what they want, and carrying abroad what they abound with. It Is the
nurse of Arts and Manufactures, as appears in the Cities of Lions, Tours, and
diverse others, where some one Merchant employes three or four hundred
Artificers in Silk, Wool, and other such works. Amongst which Merchants those
that best know how to practice the Maxims of buying and selling cheaper then
others, that is, who content themselves with least profit both in buying and
selling, drive the greatest trade, and consequently thrive most: whereas they
that endeavor to grow rich in a day, discredit themselves for the rest of
their lives. I think also 'twere fit to remedy the evil custom of some who set
so high a rate upon their Commodities, that they frighten those that otherwise
resolved to buy, or else affront them with half the just price. And if after
the manner of some Countries, the prices of all wares were regulated, much more
would be vented, and the time taken up in bargaining would be employed in other
parts of Traffic, besides that, by this means we might send even any child
for any commodity whatever; in the consideration of the set price and the
assurance of not overbuying would make make customers buy the sooner, their
first consultation being concerning what money the thing will cost them:
whereas now many forbear merely out of shame to higgle and beat the bargain.

The Sixth said, That indeed the sole wealth of a State is Traffic, there
being only two sorts of goods, moveable and immovable. The latter increase
and diminish only by War, which is troublesome means and a kind of game,
wherein he that wins one time loses another: whereas movables are used and
consumed though they be of Iron: whence only Traffic remains for increase:
but it is not sufficient to know the dignity and profit a thing brings; to put
it well in practice, all its obstacles must be removed; as in the first place
the idleness of the Inhabitants, which is natural to such as live in a good
Soil; whence the Proverb, Bona terra, Mala Gens. Yea, in some people, as in the
Irish, it is contradicted by ill custom; for that people being nourisht in
sloathfulness, chose rather to cover their whole Bodies with a Mantle, then
take the pains to cut it into Clothes. Secondly, the want of Materials and
Instruments proper for Trade, as Merchandises, Ships, and other means: besides
the defect of safe Ports. Thirdly, The danger of transportation by reason of
Thieves at Land, and Pirates at Sea. Fourthly, the want of Companies, both for
undertaking great negotiations, and for assurances, as it is in Holland and
elsewhere, where they have found ways to assure even the lives of persons
under good cautions. Fifthly, the false dealing of this age, directly opposite
to the fair dealing of Merchants, which is incompatible with brangling. Lastly,
that great process not yet ended between the King of Poland and the
Dantsickers, about the impost he would lay upon the Baltic Sea, shows
apparently that impositions also are a notable hinderance of Trade: All which
obstacles and inconveniences may be thus remedied in France. The first needs
not much to be spoken of, more French living by their industry in Foreign
Countries then Foreigners here, which is a certain evidence that our Nation is
none of the sloathfullest. But 'twere to be wished that the Youth designed to
the honest exercise of Merchandise were not less careful to learn the Map and
the Country, then our Gentry is so for the war. Nor do I think the Tongues,
especially the Latin, less necessary for them then for Lawyers and Physicians;
since these may in case of necessity learn their Art in their own mother
Tongue: But Merchants cannot make themselves understood in strange Countries
but by the Latin Tongue, which serves to interpret all others; and for want of
which it is in the power of an Interpreter to deceive them. Neither do we want
wares that are both as common and as good as elsewhere, as Wheat, Wool, Hemp,
and what ever is made thereof, as Cordage and Linen; Salt, Wood, and other such
things; much less materials to build and equippe Ships: and we have the best
Havens of the world. The inconvenience of Robbers and Pirates is much more
considerable; but the former may be remedied in Cities, by an exact knowledge of
all the Houses in each Street; by many clear lights set together, which will
cost less then Lanthorns, whereof there is seldom any benefit; by a Night-Watch
placed in each Street, and by other means to be mentioned in due place. In the
Country it may be redressed, if Merchants Travel together in Caravans, and get
the assistance of the Provosts or Sheriffs, who are bound to secure the
Highways, and as well by Land as by Sea, by the erection of Companies.

The seventh said, That the only way indeed of improving Commerce, is to
establish Companies. For both Nature and Art teach us, that as heavy burdens
cannot be moved by little strength; so Affairs of great importance, which need
a great stock and attendance in several places, cannot be managed by one single
person; who also suffices not alone to remedy soon enough the inconveniences
foreseen and unforeseen, which necessarily happen in all enterprises. Whence
the first loss that befalls a solitary Merchant, dejects, and almost breaks
him, because he has not wherewith to recover himself; whereas in Companies, a
loss is equally distributed, and more easily supported by all the Associates;
amongst whom, if the timorousness of one proposes the safest means, the Courage
and Experience brings a Temperament thereunto; and seeing every one contributes
his counsel no less than his endeavors in the common cause, it is in the less
danger by reason of the many that mind it. Moreover, Companies are best able to
solicit and procure the recovery of prizes unjustly taken at Sea, obtain
Letters of Mart, and put them in execution. But as these Companies are
absolutely necessary, and neighboring States furnish us Examples thereof; so
care must be taken that they do not degenerate into Monopolies, and set
excessive prizes upon Commodities.

The Eighth said, That beside what has been remarked, the conjunction of
Rivers so frequently proposed and not yet executed, (through want of Spirits
constant enough to accomplish their designs) would much facilitate Commerce;
the transporting of Commodities sucking up the main of the profit, by reason of
the Exactions of Inns, which laugh at the regulated Rates of Provisions, for
want of an Eye to keep them up. All which might be remedied by an able Company,
by appointing places of baiting and lodging for their Factors, to be kept by
some of the Associates, who being thereby interessed in some portion of the
profit, would look more narrowly to the security of the Highways; for want of
which care, the most famous Messengers are often robbed. It would be of great
use also to have good and certain Intelligence of the Affairs of the world in
general, especially of the inclining to ruin, delays and failings of
Bankrupts, who oftentimes break in one place whilst their Factors are taking up
Commodities in others; as also of the besieging and taking of Cities by an
Enemy, or their danger of being so; in which Case the Merchant will hasten to
withdraw his stock from thence, and hinder others from sending thither to
trade; there being no Sympathy between War and Merchandise. But above all, in
this Occurrence it is necessary for him to know the certain prizes of the
Commodity he intends to deal in: Which has gained great Credit to this
Assembly, by the printed Bills it has sometimes sent abroad, containing the
current prizes of all Wares for every week, in imitation of the City of
Amsterdam. For by this means, the Merchant needs only discount the charges of
transportation, and make a Reduction of Weights and Measures, to see his
evident profit; yet always carefully observing to draw a line with some
imaginary sum for hazards and contingences which may happen unexpectedly; it
being impossible, whatever care be used, to regulate exactly the gain of
Merchandise, as depending, partly, on Chance, and, partly, on the Will and
Fancy of Men; so that a Commodity, which, for being to day in fashion, or
otherwise in credit, would yield twenty in the hundred profit to the Owner,
sometimes leaves him a loser, or he is forced to keep it long in his Warehouse.

CONFERENCE CLXXIX. What are the most common Causes of Lawsuits; and why they
are more now than heretofore.
PLato designing a Commonwealth, whose Citizens might live in good
intelligence, justly excludes out of it the words of Mine and Thine;
conceiving, that so long as there was any thing to be divided, there would ever
be Malcontents; because Self-love (the root from whence the too great desire
of keeping and acquiring arises) acts variously in Men; by main force and
strong hand in time of War, and in Peace by Lawsuits. Now the desire of
Getting, having never been so great as at this day, nor so much countenanced
and rewarded, (since in consideration of wealth most Offices are disposed of)
it is no wonder if Lawsuits be more numerous at this day than in times past.

The Second said, That Community of Goods, feigned by the Poets, and
exemplifi'd in the Primitive Church, (bating the Charity which produced it)
would cause as many mischiefs, and, consequently, Lawsuits, as there are at
present. For every one would endeavor to appropriate what should be common,
and despise it if not able to compass it; as we see common Causes are
neglected, and commonly lost, for private interest. Whence appears the
impertinence of some Legislators, and of the Nicolaitans, who, that the
Children might be loved the more, would have Wives common; for common Wives and
Children would be owned by no Body; and if such Women as belong but to two or
three, keep them always in jealousy, and many times engage them in a
Lawsuit, what would those do that belonged to all the world? Wherefore, I
conceive, that if contrary Effects have contrary Causes, it is Plenty, and its
Daughter, Pride, that causes Lawsuits; and Poverty and Humility makes Peace
and Agreements. Which the French Democritus intimates, where he introduces an
old man reconciling two Adversaries, but it is after they are both undone. Thus
also the Circle of Humane Life represents Labor holding Wealth by the Hand,
Wealth holding Pride, Pride holding Contention, which causes Poverty; this,
Humility; which again produces Labor; that, Wealth; and so round again. For of
fifty Lawsuits, not one would begin between the parties, (or at least it would
soon be determined) if either would humble themselves as much one to the other,
as they do to their Judges; yea, oftentimes to their Council. Wherefore Vanity
being greater in this Age than ever it was, (although with less reason in most)
it is no wonder if our times abound more with Lawsuits than the former.

The Third said, That such as are at their ease have no mind to Lawsuits; and
therefore it is not Plenty that begets them, but Necessity, yet not an absolute
one; for he that has nothing cannot go to Law; but such, that the one cannot
pay what he owes, and the other cannot be without it: In every other Case,
Accommodements are possible. It Is from this Source that so many Seisures and
Sentences proceed, which the indebted would never suffer, had they wherewithal
to pay, considering that the whole charges must fall upon themselves. Now as
there were never so many rich, so there were never so many poor, as there are
at this day in France; because every body labors out of the vanity
abovementioned, to disable themselves every day more and more, laughing at the
Constitutions which are made to reduce us to frugality, and ascribing all
inconveniences both public and private to any other Cause but themselves.

The Fourth said, That though the Ages past having had the same vicissitudes of
Peace and War, and of Poverty and Riches, yet had they not so many Lawsuits as
there are at present; and therefore some other Cause thereof must be sought,
which possibly is this; That the Spirits of Men are become more refined and
subtle in the several Ages of the world, and consequently, advanced to a higher
pitch of maliciousness, whence many difficulties and contest arise in such
matters, wherein the goodness and simplicity of our Ancestors found none at
all. Nor has the multitude and diversity of Laws been a small occasion of this
bad event. For (besides the Roman Laws which lay long in oblivion, and were
restored to light by Veruher, in the year 1127. and the Canons compiled by
Gratian, (whence came the judicial formalities) our Customs and our Ordinances;
and amongst others, those made since Charles VIII. with long preambles and
reasonings in imitation of Justinian, have stirred up more Lawsuits, than
there were in a thousand years before. So that has been good work for such as
were minded to draw profit thereby, to make so confused and intricate an Art of
the Law, that there is almost no Case wherein they cannot find some trick to
multiply a Suit, and render it immortal) Moral Reason (the foundation of the
Law) admits a thousand different faces, not only in circumstances of Fact, but
also in matter of Law; whence there are few Laws but have their contraries.

The Fifth said, That the multiplicity of our Lawsuits is to be attributed to
the humor of the French Nation, which is desirous of change, and naturally
subtle and eloquent. Whence a Latin Poet stills France the Nurse of Lawyers.
Likewise the improvement of Learning in this last Age, has contributed much
thereunto: And the sight of great Estates gotten by the Law, has induced many
Parents to put their Children to that profession, as the readiest way to
advancement. Such as could not be Counselors, have been made Attorneys,
Solliciters, Sergeants, and this great number of people employ their inventions
to get a livelihood, which they cannot do without Lawsuits. And therefore it is
no wonder if they advise, continue, multiply, and eternise them as much as they
can; egging on the Plaintiff by the motive of Profit, and the Defendant by that
of Self-preservation; and refusing to the more simple their writings and other
such helps as might bring them to accord.

The Sixth said, That Lawsuits increase or diminish according to the
diversities of proportions kept in the Administration of Justice. For some
measure them by the Law of Nature, (whereby all Men are born equal) and proceed
by Arithmetical Proportion. Thus the Medes turned Justice into Equality;
whereas (as Xenophon told Cyrus, reproving him for awarding the coats to his
Companions, according to their stature, and not according to the right and
propriety) the Persians made Justice equal. This Arithmetical Proportion was
observed by Draco, Solon, Lycurgus, and all popular States; where every thing
was put to the balance. Such also was the Law of Retaliation among the Jews;
Eye for Eye, and Tooth for Tooth. But this equality having so many
inconveniences, that many times the highest Justice is the highest Injustice;
Plato made Justice arbitrary without any other Laws but those drawn from the
proportion of the great to the small, and other circumstances, which he called
Equity, or Geometrical Proportion. Yet this Justice being also too vagous, and
left to the discretion of Magistrates, who are subject to corruption; therefore
Aristotle chose a middle way between those two Extremes, regulating Commutative
Justice, which judges of the right of private Men by Arithmetical Proportion;
and Distributive, which is for public Affairs, by Geometrical Proportion. And
our usage has approved an Harmonical proportion; the Supreme Magistrate using
both Law and Equity, and tempering the too great strictness of the former, and
the much liberty of the other; which course is observed in good Monarchies,
where the Chief Courts being above the Law, and yet having Equity in their
Power, make an agreeable Temperament of Justice with Reason, being empowered to
reverse the Sentences of Subordinate Judges, who are tied to the Letter of the
Law; as the Royal Authority is above both. Whence it results, that there are
few Lawsuits where Arithmetical Justice, that is, the inflexible rigor of the
Law is exercised; somewhat more, where Geometrical Proportion has place,
because it is requisite to use Reasons; which being always the same, cannot be
altered, as it happens in Harmonical Proportion, in which the point of right
(which is indivisible in it self) being variously balanced between Law and
Equity, and drawn from each side according to the interest of the parties, the
Decisions of some Cases cannot be wholly suited to others, by reason of the
diversity of circumstances. But as Diametrical Proportions having no connection
of their quantities together, though they quiet private Contests, yet they
cause a dangerous reflux into the body of the State, by the indignation of the
Nobles against the Commonalty, and the People's Envy against the Nobility; so
Harmonical Proportion, such as ours, is much more prejudicial to private
persons, which it entertains in Suits, than to the State, wherein it employes
turbulent Spirits to discharge their Choler upon paper against their
Adversaries. But in Answer to the Question, Why we have more Lawsuits
nowadays than formerly, I believe the Reason is, because the common people
have got too much Knowledge of the Laws and Statutes, and Legal Pleadings; for
whilst these remained in Latin and were not understood, Men were not so apt to
commence Litigious Suits one against another.

CONFERENCE CLXXX. Whether more hurt or good has proceeded from sharing the
parts of Physic between Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chirurgions.
THis Question being of the greatest moment of any that has been discussed in
this Company, requires also most caution; because there is none of us knows
how soon he may come to be at the Mercy of some one of that Profession which
his Sentence shall disoblige. Now all the parts of Physic were practiced of
old by one person; yea, in Egypt it was no set Profession, but the Priests of
Memphis were bound to write in the Temples of Vulcan and Isis such Remedies as
any Man came and declared to them, that himself had found benefit by; to the
end others might use the same. So likewise the Greeks writ in Parchment, and
hung at the Porch of the Temples of Apollo and Aesculapius, those Receipts that
had cured them; which the Priests took from thence to pronounce to others, as
if they had been Oracles; authorizing Medicine by Religion. Afterward, this
Science augmenting by degrees, (as all things do) some were found that reduced
those Experiences to an Art; the ancientest of whom was Aesculapius the Son of
Apollo and Ariadne, to whom in time suceeded another Aesculapius, the third of
that name; who (as Cicero, Lib. 3. de Nature. Deor.) was the first Tooth-drawer,
and undertook first to loosen the belly, leaving for his Successors his
Children, Podalirius and Machaon, who were at the siege of Troy, the former of
whom professed the curing of Inward Diseases, the other of Outward by manual
operation; from which time, the Art of Physic began to be divided into
Pharmacy and Surgery, which were practiced jointly by Chiron, who took his
Name from the dexterity of his hand in operations, and was feigned a Centaure,
because he was always on Horseback to relieve remote Patients. And for that
the operations of Surgery are more apparent than those of the other parts of
Physic; Plato says, that the ancient Physic was only Surgery.
Hippocrates, who first spoke worthily of Medicinal Matters, exercised the three
parts of Physic conjunctly; and so it was practiced till Galen's time, to wit,
600. years after. Moreover, It Is an Argument, That Surgery was exercised by
the Physicians, That they were expelled Rome, because one of them had cut off a
Roman Citizen's leg with bad success. So also Darius's foot dislocated by a
fall from his Horse, and restored by Democedes a Crotonian Physician, then his
Prisoner at Sardis, (after the vain attempts of his Egyptian Physician) and is
an evidence that he was both a Surgeon and a Physician. But since,
Physicians have done like the heirs of Merchants, they have thought fit to
avoid the pains, and enjoy both the honor and the profit; they have reserved
solely to themselves the authority and power of prescribing, and left to the
Apothecarie's honesty and skill, the choice, dispensation, preparation, and
composition of medicaments; and to the Surgeon, all manual operations: Nay,
many of these too, out of heedlesness, have left to Barbers and Stews-keepers
the Art of triming the Hair; to others, the dexterity of drawing Teeth; and
again, to others the Reduction of Luxations and Fractures; all Appendances of
Physic. Now to determine, Whether this Division has done more good or hurt,
seems to me to depend upon the capacity of those employed in this Art.. For if
the Physician has not skill enough, or strength of Body to attend all those
functions, he ought not to undertake them. But he that judges himself able to
discharge them all, will be very heedfull, when he sees the whole honor or
blame must fall to himself alone; whereas the division of success amongst many,
makes each person more negligent: Besides that, every one can answer better for
his own deed, than for another's; and agrees better with himself, than with a
second or third; between whom it is seldom but some Clash happens, and that to
the detriment of the Patient. Lastly, the Physician represents the Intellectual
Faculty, the Surgeon the Animal, and the Apothecary the tal; so that to
divide them, is as much as to separate the Liver, Heart, and Brain of one and
the same Man; and Theory being never well understood without practice, it is no
wonder if their disunion has occasioned the setting up many Ignorants and
Empericks.

The Second said, If Man's Life be short, in respect of the Art of Physic
(according to the saying of Hippocrates the Prince thereof) then it is the way
to shorten it more, even by two thirds, to assign it three Arts and Exercises,
each of which requires the whole Man. The Egyptians were of another Judgment,
not only distinguishing Physicians from Operators and Preparers of Medicaments,
but also having particular Physicians for each considerable part of Man; as for
the Eye, Ear, etc. which render them more expert; because we do nothing well,
but what we do often; and what difference there is between one that exercises
more Arts, and him that is contented with one, appears by comparing
Country-Apothecaries and Chirurgians, who practice all three parts of Physic,
and those of great Cities. Moreover the alliance between the Body and the Soul
is such, that while the one is employed about some work, the other cannot
intend its cogitations elsewhere, as it ought to do in this Case. And
therefore to require a Physician to let blood, set a bone, or prepare a
medicine, is all one as to expect that a General should both give Orders, and
perform the Office of a common Soldier. For if the Mind that is at rest be
esteemed the more wise and capable of reasoning, (whence our Judges sit,
Physicians consult, and the Greeks would have adoration performed in that
posture) what good advice can be expected from a Physician who is always out of
breath with his preparations and operations? Besides, it is not seemly for a
Physician to visit his Patient with his Hands smelling and died with drugs, and
the confidence of the Patient in him being much conducive to the Cure, it
cannot but be better trusting to three persons than to one. And indeed,
supposing a Physician were so wicked as to have ill intentions against his
Patient's Life, (which yet is hard to imagine, and there are very few Examples
of such) it would be harder for him to execute them when others prepare his
remedies, than when he prepares them himself. As likewise the Apothecary may
play the Villain more securely, when he has not the inspection of the
Physician over him. Wherefore it is best that Physic remain distributed into
three Professions, which, like an Harmonious Trade, assist and uphold each
other; the Physician being as the Head, and the other two as his two Hands. All
the business, is, that this Harmony and Proportion be so well observed, that
the Hands think not themselves to be the Head; which happens but too
frequently, to the great dishonor of Physic, and damage of the sick.

CONFERENCE CLXXXI. Whether there be any Real Evil besides Pain.
THings have either an absolute Essence, or a Relative; the former are Real, as
to be a Man; the latter which have no Being but from the Respect they have to
our Fancy, depend upon the same, as to be glad or troubled at certain News.
These two Heads contain all Entities; but because the weakness of Humane
Judgment often confounds them, taking an imaginary thing for a real, hence the
inquisition of their difference has furnished the Schools with various
Questions. That of the Stoics was so far from admitting any other Real Evil
besides Pain, that it allowed not Pain it self to be an Evil. On the contrary,
Epicurus held, there was no other Evil but Pain; nor any other Good but
Pleasure, its opposite. Indeed by adjoining Virtue to that Pleasure, and
assigning the pre-eminence to the pleasure of the Mind, it will be easy to
make Good and Pleasure convertible: whence it will also follow that Evil and
Pain must be reciprocal.

The Third said, That Evil being the Privation of Good, and Privation no real
Entity; to enquire whether there be any real Evil, is the same as to ask
whether a Privation be a Habit. But to comply with the terms of the Question,
which seems to be, Whether there be any other sufferings of that kind which the
Vulgar calls Evils, causing sensible displeasure in us as necessarily as bodily
Pain does? In answer whereunto, I say; First that there is both a spiritual and
a corporeal grief or pain; of either of which some persons are more or less
sensible then others. Secondly, That all people desire pleasure as a good, and
shun pain as an evil (for even the inflictions of some Religious persons upon
themselves, are done in hope of a future good) and lastly, that both the one
and the other are excited by several and oft-times contrary ways and means. For
as the bitterness of Succhory, hurts and displeases some but is agreeable to
others; so also the same accident may cause pleasure in some minds and sadness
in others; this variety proceeding from the different temper of Minds. Besides,
corporeal and spiritual pain differ, in that every one is a capable judge of
the former, but not of the latter; whence, as Aristotle says, all run after
pleasures of the Body, because they ignore those of the Soul; and so likewise
most only reckon their bodily pains true Evils, because they have no experience
of griefs of the Mind. But he that well weighs how infinitely the Intellect
excels the Body, easily finds that the evils that attaque the same are also far
greater; since it is that by which the Body is rendered susceptible both of pain
and pleasure, and receives impressions of both upon the countenance; wherein
particularly the Eye is termed the Mirror of the Soul, for no other reason but
because it represents her Passions and Affections. And to show how much grief
and displeasure of Mind surpasses that of the Body, we see some redeem the
loss of their Honor with that of their Lives, which cannot be without
suffering the pain of death.

The Third said, It Is not the Question, whether the griefs of the Body or the
Mind be greatest since every one judges variously thereof according to his
humor. As the Miser prefers his profit before the pains of Hunger and Thirst;
and the Ambitious person ventures his life in the Field rather than endure the
Lie. But the Question is, Whether there be any reality in the Evils which the
Mind of man undergoes besides Pain, of which alone we see all other Animals are
sensible, Nature teaching Man thereby that she has left it to his own conduct,
how much his natural condition is worse then theirs, whilst he is not only
liable to the same bodily evils, but becomes ingenious to his own hurt, and an
expert Artificer of his own bad fortune. An instance whereof we have in the
Swine that was eating his food peaceably in a Tempest, whilst all the
Passengers fearing every moment to split against the Rocks, died as often of
apprehension as they thought of that sad fate. Which fear ended with the
Swine's meat, and the Ship's arrival at a safe Port; where it appeared that
that vile Animal had felt none of that trouble which the Tempest had caused in
the more unhappy men; and consequently that their Imagination was the sole
cause of it. The like may be said of all other afflictions which men give
themselves, called therefore deservedly by the Wiseman, Vanity and vexations
of spirit. For most of the inductions and consequences which the Mind draws
from events prove false, and nevertheless they give us real sorrows; we see
frequently that a great Estate left by a Father to his Children makes them
debauched and worthless, and degenerate from the virtue of their Parent, who
having received no inheritance from his own was constrained to labor, and by
that means attained Riches and Honor: Whence it appears that the trouble of a
Father leaving a small Estate to his Children at his death has no foundation
in the thing but only in his abused Imagination, and consequently cannot be a
real Evil, and yet this is the most general Evil of all with the Vulgar. Thus
two men, lodging under the same roof lost both their Wives not long ago: one of
them was so afflicted therewith that he died of sorrow; the other receiving the
consolatory visits of his friends, could not so well dissemble his joy but that
it was perceived; and yet their loss was equal. So that the sadness of the one,
and the joy of the other depended only upon the different reflection they made
upon this accident. Thus also the same affront that made one of Socrates's
Disciples draw his sword, made the Philosopher himself laugh at the sottishness
of his enemy: and every thing which the Vulgar calls Good or Evil, (Pain
excepted) is a Medal, which has its right side and its reverse.

CONFERENCE CLXXXII. Whether Man be the most diseased of all Creatures, and why?
A Disease being a preternatural disposition hurting the Functions, every
living Body capable of action may become sick by some cause impeding its
actions. Hence not only Men but also Animals, and even Plants have their
Diseases, which Theophrastus diligently describes. Amongst Beasts, though some
are subject to particular Diseases, as the Dog to Madness, the Swine to
Leprosy, the Goat and Lion to Fevers; yet there is none so invaded with all
sorts of Maladies as Man, who is not exempt from any; the least of his similary
parts that is nourished being subject to twelve sorts of Diseases, namely, when
they attract their aliment, either not at all, or but weakly, or otherwise then
they should, or when they are defective either in retaining or concocting it,
or in voiding superfluities. But if such part have sense too, it may have
fifteen; if motion also, eighteen: And if it not only be nourished it self but
labors also for the public, it is liable to twelve more, according to the
three ways that its Functions may be offended, in attraction, retention,
concoction and expulsion. The Eye alone is subject to almost 200 infirmities;
and, as if there were not ancient Diseases enough, we see daily new ones
unknown to former Ages. Now the reason hereof lies in the nature of Man, who
being the most perfectly tempered and best compounded of all Animals (because
designed to the greatest actions) is therefore apt upon the least occasion to
lose that evenness of proportion, which as it requires a great train and
concurrence of many things, so also there needs but a little thing to subvert
it by defect of the least of those requisites. Indeed, there are but two causes
of Diseases, to wit, Internal and External; and man is alike subject to both;
to the former, by reason of his hot and moist temper which is prone to
putrefaction, and the more upon account of his variety of Food; whereas other
Animals never change their Diet; which is the most probable cause of their
health and good constitution: For diversity of aliments incommodes Nature,
weakens the natural heat, produces Crudities, the Sources of most Diseases;
which also are frequently caused in Men by the internal Passions of Anger,
Fear, and Joy. The most ordinary external causes are the evil qualities of the
Air, pestilential vapors and malignant influences, whereof Man's body is the
more susceptible, by reason of the tenderness of his Flesh, and the porosity of
his skin; which on the contrary, in other Animals, is hard and covered with
Hair, Feathers and Scales, and renders them less subject to the impressions of
external bodies, as also to Wounds, Contusions, Fractures, and other solutions
of continuity.

The Second said, That such perfections or defects of things as we know most
exactly, seem to us the greatest; as the excellences and defects of Pictures
are not well observed but by those that are skilled therein; and he that is
unacquainted with some certain Nation cannot know its Vices so as they that
converse with it do. Now Beasts being unable to signify to us the differences
of their pains and the other circumstances of their diseases, hence we judge
them to have fewer, although the contrary appears in the Horse, in whom
observant Farriers remark a great number of Diseases, to which we are not
subject. So that other Animals may have as many, or more than Men, who being
less concerned therein, less understand them. It Is true, the parts of Animals
resemble ours, saving what serve to distinguish their outward shape; as appears
by the Dissection of Apes, whereby Galen learnt Anatomy; and no difference is
found between the Ventricles of a Man's and a Calfe's brain. If their blood and
other humors differ, so do those of one Man from those of another. Moreover,
Beasts have the same inward Causes, Fear, Anger, and the other Passions; in
short, all the other Non-natural things, and not at their discretion as Man
has. If a Dog has the harder skin, yet man is less liable to blows, and the
injury of the Air. In fine, who knows but it may be with these Animals as it is
with rusticks, who, though Men as well as we, and subject to the same
inconveniences, yet all their Diseases are reduced to a few Heads; since the
true and spurious Pleurisy, the Asthma, the Cough, the Palsy, and other
Maladies, whereof we make so many branches, are all reckoned by them only for a
hot or a cold Rheum.

The Third said, The nearer Nature promotes Bodies to their utmost perfection,
the more frail she renders them. And as in Mixts, Glass, which is her utmost
achievement, is weaker and brittler than Stones; so in Animals, Man the most
excellent and perfect, is the most frail and weak, by reason of the part
wherein he abounds more than they, and which advances him, to wit, the Brain,
the root of most Diseases. And as the most noxious Meteors, are formed in the
coldest Region of the Air, so those that have a moist Brain are soft and less
vigorous, as Women and Children; whence amongst the old Spartans, and at this
day amongst the Aethiopians, (as Alvarez reports) it is a shame to blow the Nose
or spit, because it signifies Effeminacy; and the Thracians, (as Pliny records)
freed themselves from many Diseases, by cutting the Nerves behind the Ear,
whereby all fluxions from the Brain were stopped. On the contrary, Animals having
a dry and less Brain, sleep in the open Air without inconvenience.

The Fourth said, That as Man exercises the greatest variety of Actions, so he
is liable to most Diseases. Animals which reason not, have no Delirium; those
that speak not, are not subject to be dumb. But the truth is, Men consider not
remote things further than their interest reaches. Hence more Diseases are
observed in the Be and Silkworm, than in the Elephant. Unless we had rather
say, that there being so great a variety of dispositions and tempers required
to the Health of all the parts, humors, and faculties of a humane body, it
happens very rarely that they are all as they should be. As it is harder to make
good Music with a Lute, or other many string'd Instruments, than with one that
has fewer strings and accords, as Animals have in respect of Man.

CONFERENCE CLXXXIII. Of the Greenness of Plants.
Colors being the illuminated surface of Mixed Bodies, alter according to their
various mixture; and because the less a body is distant from its simplicity, it
partakes the more of light; hence as soon as water becomes consistent and
solid, it puts on Whiteness, which is so near akin to Light, that the latter
cannot be painted but with the former. For this reason new-sprung Plants,
issuing out of the Womb of their Elements, retain a White Color; till having
thrust their stem out of the Earth, the nourishment they attract adding to
their composition, they assume a new Color, which sutably to the Temper of the
Compound, (whose upper part is heated by the Sun-beans, and lower part
nourished with the juice and vapors of the Earth) becomes Green, upon the same
reason that Blew and Yellow make a Green; the Blew proceeding from condensed
Moisture, (as appears in deep Seas) and the Yellow from the Sunbeams. Hence a
Plant deprived of the Sun's aspect, loses its verdure, and remaining
Colour-less by the privation, which is always Harbinger to some ensuing
Generation, it appears white; as we use to make Succhory and Thistles white by
burying them, or covering them in a Vessel whereinto no Air can enter.
Greenness therefore is the first mixture of the Sunbeams with corrupted
humidity, (as putrid waters wax green) and the first assay of the Vegetative
Soul, and consequently, an evidence of their Life; as, on the contrary,
Yellowness shows that the Sun has dried up the humidity wherein the life
resided, and left only the Color of Feuille-morte. But when this humidity is
so unctuous and adherent to the compact and solid body of a Plant that it
cannot be exhaled, (as Oil is not evaporated by the Sun) than the outward Cold
shutting the Pores, retains the Greenness longer and brighter, whilst other
Herbs and Trees are despoiled of their verdure. And therefore it is no wonder if
the leaves of such Plants, as the Laurel, Holly, Box, Ivy, and many others, feel
no injury from great Cold and great Heat.

The Second said, That the production of Vegetables proceeding from the
resolution of Minerals, (as appears, not only in the order of Generations,
which proceed from simple to organick bodies, but also in the sympathy of the
Oak with Copper, of the Beech with the Lodestone, of the Hazel with Gold and
Silver) it is probable that Vitriol, (the commonest of Minerals, and found in
most grounds) gives Plants their Verdure; which many of them also testify by
their acidity. For I cannot attribute the Cause to Light, which is indifferent
to all Colors, and has none in it self; the Gold Color of the Sun not
inhereing in him, but proceeding from the reflection of bodies he irradiates.
But if we are to find some mixture of Yellow and Blew to make this Green, I
should rather assign the Yellow to the Earth, which is most commonly of that
Color; as the Air and Heaven are Blew. And perhaps too, this Greenness is but
a sign of imperfect Generation, since it is lost when Plants are mature; and we
find it again in moldy Bread, which is in a tendency to corruption.

The Third said, That all Bodies must have some Color or other, and a Plant
being the first living thing, ought to have the most agreeable, as being
equally tempered of the two Extremes, Black and White; for at its first issuing
out of the Earth, whilst it is yet full of earthy humidity, it is of a dark
Green, which becomes lighter as the Plant shoots higher; till at length the
more volatile particles are excluded in a Flower which borrows its Color from
the various qualities of the sap; then comes out the fruit, which keeps its
verdure till the Sun have fully concocted its juice.

The Fourth said, That it is not possible to give the reason of Colors, since
we see Tulips change theirs almost every year; and there are Black, White, Red,
and other colored grapes, equally sweet, and good for Wine; as also Apples,
Pears, and other fruit. Nor is Greenness inseparable from the leaves of Plants;
for we have not only red Coleworts, but also Roots, and some leaves of Rapes,
Purple, Violet, and of other Colors. All that can be said in this matter, is,
That Color is nothing but a resultance of the External Light from the Surface,
whose Particles are so, or so modifi'd and posited. Hence Blew appears Green by
Candlelight; the necks of Doves seem of diverse Colors by diversity of
situation; and Wool appears whiter when compacted together, than whilst it was
in flocks; whereas Water, which has no Color, shows white when Particles are
divided by Air, and reduced into Snow. So also when Humidity is digested by
Heat, (which is inseparable from Light) it puts on the first of Colors, which
is Blew; (of which Color thickened Air appears to us) and the prodominant
earthiness of Plants, makes that Blew incline to a darker degree, thence
arises Green; which is the general Color of all Plants. The Temperament
contributes least to this Color; for we see Sempervivum, which is cold, of the
same Color with Leeks and the Aloe-Plant, which are Hot. Just as Sugar and
Salt are both White, and yet differ much in Taste and other qualities; so are
Chalk and Snow; Honey and Gall are Yellow, the juice of Aloes and that of
Liquerice black. Yea, in Animals too, the diversity of their Color, Hair, and
Plumes is deceitful; whence came the Proverb, Of every Hair a good Greyhound.
And whereas Physicians reckon the Color of the Hair a sign of the Temper, it is
not always true; since we see persons of the same Hair totally different in
Manners and Humors; and others of different Hair, perfectly agreeing in temper;
wherein consequently we must not seek the reason of colors.

CONFERENCE CLXXXIV. Of the Cold of the middle Region of the Air.
THe common Opinion attributes the coldness of the middle Region to the
Antiperistasis of the heat of the upper and lower Regions, which streightning
the cold on either side leave it no other place but the middle, whither the
vapors raised by the Sunbeams ascending, and no higher by reason of their
weight and the thinness of the air there; it comes to pass that the
neighborhood of these vapors returning to their natural cold, increases that
of the middle Region. But many inconveniences invalidate this Opinion. First,
if this Element were hot and moist, as is supposed, it would show some effects
thereof; but it is quite contrary. For he were a fool that should go into the
Air to warm himself; and the Air has so little humidity, that it dries all
Bodies. Secondly, many Mountains surpassing the middle Region of the Air, and
retaining figures described in the ashes of a Sacrifice for a whole year, which
show that in all that time no Wind or Rain was raised there to deface them; it
would follow that such Mountains reflecting the Sunbeams by their solidity,
should cause heat in the middle Region of the Air, and yet they are commonly
covered with Snow. Lastly, this Antiperistasis being only in Summer, not in
Winter when the cold of the lower Region symbolises with that of the middle,
this reason should then cease; and yet it is in Wintertime that cold Meteors
manifest themselves. Wherefore we must recur to some other cause; which Cardan
takes to be the natural coldness of the Air, not regarding the combination of
the four first qualities. For if cold be natural to the Air, it will be easy
to conclude, that it must be coldest in the middle, which is less altered by
the contrary quality of heat; being most distant from the Element of Fire (if
there be any) and from the heat which necessarily follows the motion of the
heavenly Spears.

The Second said, That Cold being no positive Quality, but a bare negation, it
follows that Bodies destitute of Heat are necessarily cold. Now the Air cannot
have heat or any other quality, because it is to serve for a medium not only to
all sublunary Bodies, but also to the heavenly influences, whose nature would
be perverted and altered by the qualities of the Air; as a colored medium
imparts its colors to objects. It happens therefore that vapors cool not but
are cooled by the Air, so that they become colder in the middle Region then
whilst they were in their natural seats. Yea they are so far from rendering the
Air cold that they abate its sharpness, which is never greater then in clear
weather; cloudy and misty weather being always more warm and accompanied with
less piercing cold. For being raised rather by the subterraneous heat then by
that of the Sun, they warm our air (which reaches not above a league from the
Earth); then being gradually deserted by the heat which carried them up they
meet in those higher spaces which are void of all heat, and begin immediately
to condense and congeal them. What people talk of the higher Region of the Air
is very doubtful, because the Element of Fire being but an Opinion cannot
counter-balance the report of Acosta, who affirms that diverse Spaniards were
killed by the cold in their passage upon the Mountains of Peru which he judges
the highest of the World and within the upper region.

The Third said, That if we were to be tried by experience alone, the Earth
(which in Winter is hot at the Center, and in Summer on its Surface) would not
be judged cold and dry (as it is) no more then the Water always cold and moist,
since the Sun's heat warms it, and the saltness of the Sea renders it heating
and drying. But accidental qualities must be carefully distinguished from
essential; because these latter are hard to be discerned when any impediment
interposes. As the sight cannot judge of the straitness of the stick in the
water but by having recourse to reason; which teaches us that all light
Elements are also hot. Now the lightness of the air is indisputable; and its
heat is proved by its subtlety, whereby it penetrates bodies unpassable by
light it self. Yet this heat is easily turned into cold; because the air being
a tenuious body and not compact, retains its qualities no longer then they are
maintained therein by their ordinary causes. So that it is no wonder if not
being hot in the highest degree (as Fire is) but in a remiss and inferior
degree, it easily becomes susceptible of a more powerful contrary quality. For
the Sunbeams, which some hold to be the true Element of Fire, heat not unless
they be united by reflection; and this reflection being limited cannot reach
beyond our first Region; the higher Regions must necessarily remain cold;
unless upon further inquiry it be thought that the motion of the air carried
about with the Sphere of the Moon and the Element of Fire placed under the
same, are capable to heat it.

The Fourth said, That if we may judge of those higher Regions of the Air by
those of the Earth and Water which we frequent, each of these Elements has
three sensible differences; its Surface, Middle and Center. Those that frequent
Mines, tell us that the heat which succeeds the exterior cold of our earth
penetrates not above a quarter of a league in depth; about the end of which
space, cold begins to be felt again, and increases more and more toward the
Center. In like manner it is probable that the Water follows the qualities as
well as the declivity of the Earth. That it is hot at the bottom (whither
therefore the Fish retire in Winter) proceeds from the nearness of that middle
Region of the Earth. So that it being proper to these Elements to have
different qualities in their middle from those of their extremities, the same
may be true also of the Air; possibly because a perfect identity of temperature
would not have been convenient for the generation of Mixts, to which end all
the Elements were destinated. And it being the property of cold to close and
reunite the looseness and dissipation of the Air, it was therefore highly
necessary to be predominant in the middle Region thereof.

CONFERENCE CLXXXV. Of the Generation of Males and Females.
DIstinction of Sex is not essential, but consists only in the parts serving to
Generation; Nevertheless Aristotle makes Male and Female differ, as Perfect and
Imperfect; and says, That Nature's intention is always to make a Male; and
that only upon the default of some requisite condition she produces a Female,
whom therefore he calls a Mistake of Nature, or a Monster. Galen likewise
acknowledging no other difference styles Man a Woman turned outward, because
Woman has the same Organs with Man, only wants heat and strength to put them
forth. Now indeed this heat and strength is manifestly greater in Males then
Females even from the first conception; for the former are completely formed by
the 30th day, the latter not before the 40th; the former move in the third
month, the latter not till the fourth; those are born in the ninth month,
these some days after; and besides live not if born in the seventh month, as
Males do, whose periods are therefore reckoned by Septenaries, and those of
Females by Novenaries. After birth, we see the actions of Males are performed
with more strength and vigor then those of Females, who are actually colder and
suffer more inconveniences from cold. They are never ambidexters, because they
have not heat enough to supply agility to both sides; and their right side is
peculiarly destinated to the Generation of Females, because the Spermatick
Vessel on that side derives blood from the hollow Vein which is hottest by
reason of the proximity of that Vein to the Liver; whereas the left Spermatick
draws from the Emulgent, which carrying Serose humors together with the Blood,
it is no wonder if the Seed of that side be crude and cold, and consequently
fitter for generating Femals then Males: Hence Hippocrates says, that if as
Peasants tie a Bull's left Testicle when they desire a Bull-calf, and the right
when a Cow-calf, the same be practiced by Man, the like effect will follow.
Whereby it is manifest that whatever makes the Seed more hot and vigorous both
in Male and Female, furthers the Generation of Males, and contrarily; and
consequently that the Morning, when it is best concocted, is more proper then
the Evening, for begetting Boys; and the Winter then the Summer (at least on
the man's part.)

The Second said, That as to the production of Males rather then Females, or on
the contrary, no certain cause has hitherto been assigned thereof; since we
see that the same man, in all likelihood without alteration of his temper, has
only Girls by his first Wife, and only Boys by the second, and on the
contrary; and some that could get no Children at all in their youth have had
only Boys in their old Age. Others have Males first, others Females, and others
have them alternatively. Whereof no other reason can be assigned by Chance, or
rather the Divine Pleasure alone, in the impenetrable Secrets whereof to seek
for a cause, were high temerity. If heat and strength caused the difference,
young married people would not have Girls first, as it happens most often; and
decrepit old men should never get Boys, as daily experience shows they do.
Moreover, some men deprived of one of their Testicles, have nevertheless
begotten both Sons and Daughters; which could not be, if the faculty of
begetting Children of one determinate Sex were affixed to either of those
parts. And as from a false Principle nothing can be drawn but false
Consequences, so also is it in the opinion of Aristotle, That Woman is but an
occasional Creature. For then Nature should produce far greater abundance of
Males then of Females, or else she would err oftener then hit right (which is
inconsistent with her wisdom), and yet in all places more Girls and Women are
found then Men; as appears in that we every where see plenty of Maids that want
Husbands, and in Countries wherein Polygamy is lawful, there are Women enough
to supply ten or a dozen Wives to each Man. And indeed, Nature's design is
mainly for preserving the Species; as that of every individual is to preserve
it self; and the bare degree of heat or cold in the Seed being but an accident
of an accident cannot effect a formal change in the substance. Only defective
heat may occasion an effeminate man, and abundant heat a Virago. Besides this
Opinion destroys the common and true one, viz. That Generation is one of those
actions which proceeds from a just proportion and temperature of the humors;
whence excessive or feverish heat destroys the Seed in stead of furthering
Generation, and is an enemy to all the other functions. Wherefore it is best to
say that the same difference which is observed between the Seeds of Plants, is
also found in that of Animals, though not discernable therein but by the
effects: and as the exactest prying cannot observe in the kernel of an Almond
or Pine any difference of the Trunk, Leaves and Fruit of those Trees, although
these parts be potentially contained therein, so also the Seed of an Animal
contains in it self even the least differences of Sex, albeit imperceptibly to
the eye. Which the Rabbis being unable otherwise to comprehend, conceived that
our first Parent was created an Hermaphrodite, because both Sexes came from
him, his own and that of Eve.

The Third said, That the sole ignorance of things occasions the ascribing of
them to Chance, which has no power over the wise, because they understand the
reasons thereof. As for universal causes, as the Divine is, they concur indeed
with particular ones; but as they are becoming in the mouths of Divines and of
the Vulgar, so Naturalists must not stop there, since by the right use of
external causes the internal may be corrected; by which correction not only
Seeds formerly barren, or which fell in an ungrateful soil, are reduced to a
better temper and rendered prolifick, but such as were destinated to a female
production through defect of heat, are rendered more vigorous and fit to
generate Males. Now that young married people hit not sometimes upon this
latter Sex, it is because of their frequent debauchery, which cools the Brain,
and consequently the whole habit of the Body. Which happens not so frequently
to men of more advanced age, who use all things more moderately.

The Fourth attributed the cause to the Constellations and Influences of the
Stars which reign at the time of Conception; Males being generated under
Masculine, and Females under Feminine Signs.

CONFERENCE CLXXXVI. Whether the French Tongue be sufficient for learning all
the Sciences.
A Language is a Multitude or Mass of Nouns and Verbs which are signs of Things
and Times, destinated to the explication of our thoughts. There are two sorts;
the one perfect, called Mother-Languages, the other imperfect. The
Mother-Languages are the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; the imperfect those which
depend upon them. Now the French being of this latter sort, we cannot learn the
Sciences by it alone, because being particular, and the Sciences general, the
less is not capable to comprehend the greater. Moreover, our Language being not
certain in its Phrases, nor yet in its Words (not only Ages, but also a few
Years changing both) whereas the Sciences are certain and immutable, it will
follow that they cannot be taught by it. Besides, there may be Inventions for
which our Language has no expression, or at least not so good as others; and
to busy our minds in the search of words is more likely to retard the mind in
the acquisition of Sciences then to further it. The truth is, 'twere well if
things were generally expressed by the most proper and significant words, but
they are not so in any Language much less in the French, which is so far from
being rich enough of its self that it borrows from the Greek and Latin to
express the most common things, and consequently is not sufficient to teach all
the Sciences.

The Second said, The French Tongue is derived from the Greek, Latin, and
Gothic, which are Languages much more copious then it; and therefore they that
will recur to originals will find those Tongues more adapted for teaching the
Sciences then the French, and yet not any single one of them sufficient for it;
since the Romans, to become and deserve the name of Learned, were obliged to
learn Greek. Moreover, since Books are the chief instruments for attaining the
Sciences, the ancient Latin and Greek ones (which yet were not sufficient for
it) are much more numerous than the French, and by consequence the French
Tongue is not capable to teach every Science: and had it more Translations then
it has, yet these are but small Rivulets derived from that grand Source of
Sciences which is found in the original Languages.

The Third said, If we regard the order of times and particularly that of the
Creation when all things were in their perfection and purity; it is most likely
that, that Language which took birth with Adam, and all the Sciences, is more
fit to teach them then the much more Novel French, and since there must be a
proportion between Instruments and the Matters upon which they act; and this
proportion is not found between the French Tongue lately invented and the
Sciences which are as ancient as the World, who can think it sufficient to
teach them? and the Cabalists hold that the Language fit to teach the Sciences
perfectly, must have words adapted to signify the Virtues and Properties of
things, which ours has not.

The Fourth said, That all the Language of Adam, who gave names suitable to the
nature of every thing being lost except the the name of God (for that reason so
much esteemed by the Jews); The Cabalists in imitation of that Tongue, invented
one whereof I shall give you a taste. It has five Vowels E, A, V, I, O, which
answer to the Elements and the Heaven; E, to Earth; A, to the Water; V, to the
Air; I, to the Fire; and O, to Heaven. E, produces in pronunciation c, d, f,
g, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, z; forasmuch as these Consonants cannot be produced
without it; A, produces h, and k; v, produces q; I, produces nothing,
because pure and single Fire does not. O, likewise produces nothing, because
the Heaven only moves and excites Generations: whereas E produces abundance of
Letters, resembling the Earth which produces every thing in its bosom, being
the Center of Heaven and the Matrix of the Elements. Now, to form words
according to the Elementary Qualities, they will have the Vowels which compose
such a word answer to the Elements which compose such a mixed body. And to
specify degrees, because the Vowels, whereby they are denoted meeting together
would spoil the pronunciation, therefore they make four orders of the sixteen
Consonants, viz. b, c, d, f, denote the four degrees of Fire; g, l, m, n, those
of Air; p, r, s, t, those of Water; x, z, ss, st, those of Earth. Upon this
foundation they build the composition of all their Words, which they compose of
Vowels according to the Elements predominant in things, and of Consonants
according to their degree. But who sees not the absurdity of this invention,
which by this means would extend only to corporeal mixts, whereof the quality
and very degree is known: Concerning which Naturalists are so far from being
agreed, that many attribute most natural effects to other causes, as to Occult
Properties, so called in opposition to the Elementary. It Is best therefore not
to rove from the common tract which teaches us the Sciences by real Languages;
amongst which those called Dead ones, to wit, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
and others now disused, suffice not for teaching the Sciences, because they are
not pronounced well, and the learned agree not about the importance of many
Letters and Syllables. Besides, the most eloquent express not themselves so
naturally in those antic obsolete Tongues as in their own. And all confess
that in order to obtain the perfection of a Science, too much plainness cannot
be used, either on the Teacher's part in establishing their Rules and Precepts,
or on the Learner's in propounding their difficulties for resolution.

CONFERENCE CLXXXVII. Of diversity of Colors in one and the same subject.
THe diversity of Colors is commonly deduced from the mixtion and proportion
of the Elements; but more truly from the several degrees of Sulphur, which
produces them, as Salt does Sapors, the most certain indications what degree
the quality of a Plant is of: For if Colors had relation to the Elements, then
all red things should be hot, and white things cold; which is not true in
Poppy, and Roses, on the one side, nor Orange-flowers and Jasmin on the other.
So also green things should be always moist, because this color proceeds from
an indigested humidity mixed with a part of putrifi'd earth; as appears in
standing waters; and yet the greenness of Laurel and Mint hinders them not from
being hot and dry, nor that of Ranunculus from burning. But Colors are either
natural, or artificial; which latter as we find it in Stuffs and Silks, is
neither the cause nor the effect of their temperament. But natural color, such
as that in the parts of living Animals, is an effect of their Life, and
alterable after their death. Wherefore I conclude, that color and its
varieties proceeds from the different degrees of Sulphur in the subject; but
that one and the same subject is of several colors, the causes may be: First,
for that some of its parts are more compact; others, more loose, and so
differently receive the impression of the Sulphur and the Internal Fire.
Secondly, the Sun shining more upon one part than another, draws the internal
color from the Center to the Circumference; as Apples are colored on the side
next the Sun. Thirdly, the same difference which is found between the Root,
Trunk, Leaves, Flower, Fruit, and other parts of Plants and Animals, is also
found in each portion of those parts; as the lower part of the Rose is green,
the middle part whitish, and the top red; and the Tulip variegated, is
compounded of as many several particles; which variety of places and matrices,
serves to determine the color which Sulphur paints thereon, being guided by
the pencil of Nature.

The Second said, That this diversity of colors proceeds only from the diverse
aspect of light which varies the colors of certain Bodies to our Eye, as in
the Rainbow, the Camelion, and the necks of Pigeons, in things exposed to the
Sun, which seem far brighter than before: To which you must add the distance
and station of the beholders; so water seems black or blew afar off, but near
hand colorless; Turpentine, Crystal, and the whites of Eggs in several
situations do the like.

The Third said, That there are four colors answering to the Elements, viz.
Black to Earth, White to Water, Yellow to Air, and Red to Fire. For discovering
the Causes of whose diversities, the ancient Philosophers prepared a Matter,
which by the degrees of fire, they passed through all the colors of Nature,
and perceived sometimes in their vessel what they called the Peacock's tail,
representing all colors in one single Matter; whence they concluded the
variety of colors to proceed from that of External Fire, moving the Matter
less in one part than in another. Thus Antimony, which is at first Black, is
raised into White, Yellow, Red, and mixed Flowers, according as they are
sublimed more or less. But you can draw no consequence from hence to the
Colors of Plants, since redness, which, in works of Art, argues perfect
Digestion, and Fire predominant, does not so in Simples.

CONFERENCE CLXXXVIII. Whether we are more perspicacious in the Affairs of
others, or our own, and why?
IT may seem superfluous to make this a Question, since by the enumeration of
all sorts of Affairs, it appears that we are Moles, yea, perfectly blind in the
Judgment we make of our selves, and more clear-sighted than the Lynx in those
we make of others. Which also the Gospel testifies, by the comparison of a mote
which we espy in the Eye of a Neighbor, not seeing the beam which is in our
own; for, (according to the direction of the Lawyers, who are to be believed in
point of affairs) in the first place in reference to persons, every one
understands himself much less either in Mind or Body than he does another; most
esteeming themselves more capable and worthy of praise for Wit than they are;
and (as the Eye sees not it self, but every other visible thing so,) he that
has any perfection or imperfection, cannot consider the same in its true
Latitude, but easily adds something to the first, or diminishes from the
second; whilst the various bent of our Passions always exalts and depresses the
balance, and keeps it from that aequilibrium which is necessary to a right
Judgment. Hence Physicians, although they ought to know themselves better than
they can be known by others, yet, when sick, permit themselves to be treated by
their Companions; and never succeed so well in the Cure of themselves or their
domestics, as they do abroad elsewhere. In the second place, we are less
quick-sighted in things that concern our selves, than in those of others:
whence commonly the greatest Lawyers leave the affairs of their own Houses more
imbroiled than others. Which was the cause that the Wife of Pacius, the famous
Lawyer of our time, sent to him to ask his Advice concerning his own affairs
under fancied names, making him pay a Solicitor with his own Money. In the
third place, Actions are in a very evil hand when they are to be managed or
defended by their Authors; either Modesty on the one hand extenuating them, or
Thrasonical pride dilating them, and adding thereunto more than is fit. Lastly,
the Laws show sufficiently what has been the opinion of Legislators upon this
matter, when they forbid Advocates and Procurators to plead and practice in
their own Cause; and when they enjoin Judges to forbear, not only their own,
but also from all those wherein their kindred or alliances may have any
interest. Thus much for the first Head of the Question. The Reason, which is
the second, arises hence; That the Eye as well as all other Organs of External
and Internal Senses (such as the Judgment is) must be serene, and not
prepossessed by any tincture or Prejudice. Now to require this serenity and
indifferency in our own affairs, is to demand an impossibility. The Cause
whereof may come from the pureness and subtilty of the Humane Spirit, above
that of other Animals, compared to the Elements of Earth and Water, which
contracting themselves round about their own Center, move not but in quest of
their food; others more ayerious, rise a little higher, but yet have a bounded
Region; such are the spirits of Women, whose Knowledge and Curiosity is limited
to the affairs of their houswifrie, or at most to those of their neighborhood.
But the Mind of Man resembling Fire, which has no other bound but Heaven,
penetrates even to the Center of the Earth, carries its point every where, and
is like flame in a perpetual agitation, oftentimes resembling our natural heat
in Summer, which abandons the Internal parts to carry it self to the
extremities.

The Second said, There is as great diversity of Judgments and Wits, as there
is of Eyes amongst Men. As there are some blind; other Eyes from which the
Objects must be set at distance to become visible; some also to which they must
be approached; and, lastly, others which require a moderate distance between
the Visible Object and the Organ: Iin like manner, there are some Judgments
absolutely blind; others, which judge not things too near, but require to have
them removed, or set at a middle distance; there are others also, which judge
them better near hand than a far off; and this truly is the custom of the best
Judgments, and of such as least suffer themselves to be prepossessed. Indeed,
what is more absurd than for us to remove far from Objects in order to judging
of them, after the manner of old men, and of those that are short-sighted; and
if the saying of Aristotle be true, The Species of the thing to be known must
be not only introduced into, but also made like the Mind; Is the divesting our
selves of it away to know it well? By this reckoning we shall never see clear
in any affair: not in our own, because it is ours; nor in those others, in
regard of the Envy Men bear to the prosperity of their Neighbors, which makes
them think that their Vines are more fruitful, and their afflictions less
severe. If some Physicians resign themselves to the cure of others of the same
profession, it is because they believe them as able as themselves, or, perhaps,
because their own Judgment is disturbed by the disease; otherwise, since the
particular Knowledge of every one's Temper is the condition most requisite to a
good Physician for curing his Patient, and every one knowing his own better
than another can in along time, none can be a better Physician of another than
of himself; and if domestic cures be effected with less notice, yet they are
not less sure and remarkable to him that would consider them. That Lawyers are
not admitted to plead in their own Case, is rather from their too much, than
too little Knowledge; the Court foreseeing that they would be too prolix and
hot in the prosecution thereof, besides the greater temptation to dishonesty in
disguising their own actions. Nor is exception against Judges in the case of
their kindred allowed, because they see not clear enough into the affair in
question; but because interest, which is inseparably fixed in humane minds,
might lead them to relieve their Relations to the prejudice of a third. Which
yet has not place in all, there being found good Judges who would condemn
their own Child if he had a bad Cause. But to attribute to self-love, the
defect of clear-sightedness, is to speak too Poetically; since the Prince of
Poets believes it not possible to deceive a Lover; and the knowledge we have of
others affairs, has no other foundation but that which we have of our own,
just as self-love is given us for a rule of that of our Neighbor.

The Third said, That which happens most frequently being the rule, and the
rest the exception; and the greatest part of Men resembling that Lamia, who
being blind at home, put on her Eyes when she went abroad; it must be agreed,
that we are less clear-sighted in our own than in others affairs: Which is the
meaning of the Proverb of the wallet, in the forepart of which the bearer puts
other Men's matters, casting his own into the part behind upon his back.
Moreover, to see clear, is to see without clouds or mists, such as are those of
the Passions, Fear, Hope, Avarice, Revenge, Ambition, Anger, and all the rest
which suffer not the Species to be calmly represented to the Intellect, which
receives the same as untowardly as stirred water, or a Looking-glass sullied
with incessant clouds, or vapors receive an Image objected to them; it is true,
the Passions have some effect upon it in affairs without; but as themselves, so
their trouble is less, and he is the best Judge who gives them no admittance at
all; which cannot be in our own affairs, where, consequently, we are no less
clear than in those of others.

CONFERENCE CLXXXIX. Of the Original of Mountains.
GOD having created the world in perfection, it was requisite there should be
Plains, Mountains, and Valleys upon the Earth, without which agreeable variety,
there would be no proportion in its parts, wherein nevertheless consists its
principal ornament, which has given it the name of world; no other beginning
of Mountains seems assignable but that of the world. Nor is there any
possibility in attributing another Cause to those great Mountains, which
separate not only Provinces and States, but the parts of the world; all the
Causes that can be assigned thereof, being unequal to such an Effect: Which the
discovery of the inequalities of the Celestial Bodies, observed in our days by
Galileo's Tubes in some sort confirmed; for by them Mountains are discerned in
some Planets, especially an eminent one in the Orb of Mars; which Mountain
cannot reasonably be attributed to any cause but his primary construction. The
same may likewise be said of the Mountains of the Earth, which besides having
necessarily its slopenesses and declivities which are followed by Rivers and
Torrents, there is no more difficulty to conceive a Mountain then an elevated
place in the Earth; so that to say, that from the beginning there was no place
higher in one part of the earth then in another is to gainsay Scripture which
says that there were four Rivers in Eden, each whereof had its current; which
could not be, unless the place of their rise were higher then that whereunto
they tended.

The Second said, That the proportion from which the ornament of the World
results is sufficiently manifested in the correspondence of the four Elements
with the Heavens, and of the Heavens with themselves, yea in all compounds
which result from those Elements moved by heat and the Celestial influences,
without fancying a craggy Earth from the beginning, to the prejudice of the
perfection which is found in the Spherical Figure, which God has also
portrayed in all his works, which observe the same exactly or come as near it
as their use will permit; as is seen particularly in the fabric of Man's Body,
his masterpiece, whereof all the original parts have somewhat of the Spherical
or Cylindrical Figure, which is the production of a Circle. And if the other
Elements of Fire, Air, and Water, are absolutely round and cannot be otherwise
conceived, though their consistence be fluid, and as such more easily mutable
in figure; it is much more likely that the earth had that exactly round figure
at the beginning; otherwise the Waters could not have covered it as they did,
since not being diminished from the beginning of the World till this time, they
are not at this day capable of covering it. It Is certain then that God gave the
Earth that Spherical form, it being to serve for the bulk and Center to all the
other Elements, by means of which roundness the Water covered it equally, but
when it was time to render the Earth habitable to Animals, and for that end to
discover a part of it, it was to be rendered more hollow in some places and
more elevated in others, since there is no Mountain without a Valley, nor on
the contrary. Afterward it came to pass that the Rain washed away whatsoever
was fat, and unctuous in those higher places, and carrying it into Brooks and
Rivers, and thence into the Sea, this Sea by the impetuosity of his waves makes
great abyffes in some places and banks of sand in others; but the great and
notable change happened in the universal Deluge when the many Gulfs below and
Windows on high, as the Scripture speaks, overflowed the whole Earth for forty
days and forty nights together; the Earth being thus become a Sea was in a
manner new shaped by the torrents of the waters, and the violence of the same
waves, which made Abysses in some places and Mountains in others, according as
the Earth happened to be more or less compact, and apt for resistance. Which is
yet easier to be conceived of Rocks which being unapt to be mollified by either
that universal rovage of waters, or torrents superven'd in four thousand years
since, they remain entire and appear at this day as supercilious as ever over
the more depressed parts round about.

The Third said, That some Mountains were produced at the Creation, others
since, partly by Rains and Torrents, partly by Winds and Earthquakes, which
have also sometimes levelled Hills and reduced them into Valleys; so that you
cannot assign one certain or general cause of all. For there is no more reason
to believe that the ravages of waters have produced Mountains, then that they
have levelled and filled Valleys with their soil; as it is ordinarily seen that
the fattest portion of Mountainous places is washed away by Rain into Valleys,
and fertilizes the same. And the smallness of the Earth compared to the rest of
the world permits not its inequalities to make any notable disproportion in it,
or hinder it from being called Round; as appears in Eclipses caused by the
shadow of the Earth, which she sends as regularly toward Heaven as if she were
perfectly round.

The Fourth said, That the waters of the Sea, from which, according to the
Scripture, all waters issue and return thither, impetuously entering into the
caverns of the Earth go winding along there till they find resistance, whereby
their violence redoubled makes the Earth rise in some places and so forms
Mountains; which therefore are more frequent on the Seacoasts then elsewhere,
and seldom further from the same then a hundred and fifty Leagues. Now that the
Sea is higher then the Earth the Scripture notes, and those that travel upon
the Sea observe the truth of Genesis which says that the waters were gathered
together on a heap. For being remote from a Port at such distance as would
otherwise suffer the same to be seen, the rising of the interposed waters
intercepts the view thereof.

The Fifth said, It Is easy to conceive how waters running underground make
breaches and abysses, such as that at Rome, into which Q. Curtius cast himself,
and also in many other places even in our time wherein a Town of the Grisons
was totally involved in the ruins of a neighboring Mountain, whose
foundations the torrents had undermined. And what is found in digging up the
ruins of Buildings, paved streets, and other footsteps of men's habitations so
deep that the cause thereof cannot be attributed to a bare raising of the
ground in building by some humane artifice, shows that these changes happened
by the depression and sinking of the ground whereon such Towns stood, and by
the overturning of neighboring Mountains, which in this case turn Plains into
Valleys and Valleys into Plains or else into Mountains, as also these Mountains
into Levels: all these changes which to us seem prodigious, being no more so to
Nature, whose agents are proportional to their effect, then when we cover an
Ant-hill with a clod of Earth. But it is not likely that subterranean waters,
whose violence is broken by their windings can raise Mountains, or so much as
ordinarily Hills; much less can they raise higher the cavities of Rocks which
are the ordinary Basis of such Mountains; since our Vaults are ruined by the
sole defect of one cliff or stone which joins and knits the rest together; the
sand Hills which the winds heap up in Lybia, as the waves do the banks in the
Sea, pertaining as little to the Question as they deserve the name of
Mountains. Wherefore it is probable that Mountains are as old as the Earth,
which was formed uneven by Gods command, that so its declivities might serve
for assembling the waters together; for to say that the situation of the Sea is
higher then the Earth, is not only contrary to the experience of Dreiners who
find the declivity of the Land by no more certain way then by the inclination
of the waters, but also to the belief and manner of speech of all the world,
who use the term of going downwards when people pass along with the stream of
Rivers, which run all into the Sea whose surface must therefore necessarily be
lower then that of the earth. Whereas it is said that all waters come from the
Sea, this is meant of vapors exhaled from it and converted into Rain and
Springs, from whence arise Rivulets, Brooks, and at length Rivers, which
terminate again in the Sea.

The Sixth said, In pursuance of Copernicus's opinion which makes the earth
turn about the Sun, that the several concussions it receives from that motion
may possibly elevate one place and debase another.

CONFERENCE CXC. Whence proceed good and bad Gestures, Gracefulness and ill
Aspects.
THe Soul being the principle of all the actions, we need go no further to find
the cause of Gestures, and Postures. It Is true, that as this Soul is but a
general cause, being according to the opinion of most Divines, alike in all
men, it must like melted Metal borrow its form from the Mould whereinto it is
infused; so the Soul follows the model of the Body and as she formed it, so in
some sort be modified by it exercising her functions variously according to the
diversity of its Organs. Whereunto also the humors and their mixture or
temperament contributes very much. Hence a man of small stature and choleric
has quick and hasty motions; the tall and phlegmatic, more heavy and slow;
the Sanguine and middle-sized, between both. Nevertheless the principal reason
is drawn from the conformation of the parts; whence, the Lame halts; he who
has the Muscles and Ligaments of the hinder part of the Neck too short, holds
his Head too upright; He who has a great Mouth and a large Breast is a great
talker; and so of all the other parts, from the diversity whereof even that of
Languages is said to have come. These Gestures are either universal, as we see
some gesticulate with the whole body; or particular, one contracting his
Forehead, another shrugging his Shoulders, beating of measures with his Foot
like a good Horse, rubbing his Hands as if they were scabby or to be washed,
not being able to speak to any one without touching him, pulling his Button, or
pushing him upon the Arm or Breast. Where also is but too observable the
troublesome way of some, who never end their discourse but by an Interrogatory,
whether you hear them? or at least by an hem! which they continue till you
answer them; yea, others interlard their speech with some word so impertinent
that it takes away the grace from all the rest: all Gestures words and vicious
accents, to which may be opposed others not affected or repeated too often,
because it is chiefly their frequent repetition which renders them tedious and
as blamable as the saying over and over the same word: as on the contrary,
their seldomness serves for an excuse to those who have no other. Above all it
must be endeavored that the Gestures suit, or at least be not wholly opposite
to that discourse which they accompany; as that ignorant Comedian did who
pronouncing these words, O Heaven! O Earth! looked downward at the first, and
cast up his Eyes at the last. Whence one and the same Gesture may be good or
bad in respect of the subject whereunto it is applied, and according to its
seldomness or frequency. As for ill looks, they are always disagreeable,
disfiguring the proportion of the countenance and proceeding also from the
first conformation of the parts, For as the Arm is bowed only at the Shoulder,
Cubit and Wrist, and the Leg at the Knee and Ancle, though the Soul which makes
the flection be alike in all other parts, but the articulation is only in those
parts: so the motion is carried alike to all the Muscles; but only those
disposed by their conformation to receive the figure of such grimaces, are
susceptible thereof. They likewise sometimes happen upon Convulsion of the
parts, which cause the strange bendings we observe therein, though never
without a precedent disposition which may be called their antecedent cause.

The Second said, That we ought to ascribe to the Imagination all the Motions
and Gestures of the Body, which are agreeable or displeasing according as they
suit with that of the beholder. Hence Fools and Children whose judgment is
irregular, are pleased with seeing such gesticulations and the grimacies of
Jack-puddings, which displease the more judicious. So that as there is one
beauty absolutely such and another respective and in comparison of those who
judge differently thereof according as they find it in themselves (whence the
Africans paint the Devil white because themselves are black, and the Northern
people paint him black because themselves are white:) so there are Gestures and
Motions purely and simply becoming, honest and agreeable; others such only by
opinion of the beholders, as are the Modes of Salutation; and lastly, others
absolutely bad as Frowning, Winking, biting the Lip, putting out the Tongue,
holding the Head too upright or crooked, beating of measures with the Fingers;
in short, making any other disorderly Gesture. All which defects (as they are
opposite to perfections which consist in a right situation of all the parts
without affectation) proceed from the Fancy either sound or depraved. Which
happens either naturally or through imitation. The first case has place in
Children who from their birth are inclined to some motions and distortions of
their Muscles; which being double, if one become weaker and its Antagonist too
short it draws the part whereto it gives motion out of its natural seat, as is
seen in those that squint. The second is observed in Children somewhat bigger,
who beholding some Gesture repeated, render the same so familiar to themselves,
that at length it becomes natural to them. Hence the prohibition of Mothers
give their Children not to counterfeit the vices their companions bodies, is
not void even of natural reason; because the Fancy is stronger in a weak
Mind, and when the Memory is unfurnished or other species; whence the Phansies
of Women are more powerful then those of Men. The Minds of Children being weak,
and residing in soft pliant Bodies, more easily admit any idea's once
conceived: And as a Language is more easily learned by Use then by Precepts, so
example is Extremely prevalent, and sweetly insinuating into the Fancy by the
Senses diffuses its influence over the whole Body.

The Third said, That if the Soul be an harmony as the pleasure it takes
therein seems to intimate, we need seek no other cause of the several motions
and cadences of the Body which it animates. It Is the Soul which moves all the
Nerves of the Body and carries to all the parts such portion as she pleases of
Spirits proper to move them, whereby like a player upon a Lute or some other
Instrument she makes what string sound she pleases, stretching one and
loosening another. And as Music is such as the Quirrester pleases to make it,
delighting the Ear if it be proportionate thereunto and procuring the Musician
the repute of skilfulness; if not, the contrary happens: so the Soul imprints
upon the Body one figure or another which make a good or bad grace, insomuch
that oftentimes gracefulness is more esteemed than Beauty, unless it may be
better said to be part thereof; for want of which, beautiful persons resemble
inanimate Statues or Pictures. But as true Beauty is wholly natural, and an
Enemy to Artifice, so the Soul ows to its original and first temper, the good
or posture which it gives its Body; and there is as much difference between
natural gracefulness and affected postures, as between the Life and the
Picture, truth and appearance; yea, the sole suspicion of affectation offends
us. Moreover, a Clown seldom becomes Courtly, and whatever pains be bestowed in
teaching him good Carriage, yet still his defects appear through his
constraint; as on the contrary, amongst Shepherds most remote from the
civilities of the Court, we see gentileness and dexterities; which manifest
that good carriage, or Gestures are purely natural.

The Fourth said, That in the Gestures and Motions of the Body, two principles
must be acknowledged, one natural and the other accidental. The former is
founded in the structure and composition of every one's Body, the diversity
whereof produces, with that of the spirits, humors, and manners, all the
Actions and Passions which depend thereon, the true motive causes of our
Gestures and Carriages. Hence he that suffers pain frowns, he that repents
bites his Lip or Fingers; he that admires something, and dares not express it,
shrugs his shoulders; he that muses deeply turns his Eyes inward, and bites the
end of his Pen or Nails. The accidental principle is imitation, which, next to
Nature, is the most efficacious cause, and acts most in us; Man being born for
imitation more than any other Creatures, as appears in that scarce five or six
Species of Birds imitate our Language, the Ape alone our Gestures; we, on the
contrary, imitate not only the voices of all Animals, but also all their
Actions: And therefore as it cannot be denied that Nature contributes to our
Gestures, so neither can it be doubted that Imitation has a power therein.

CONFERENCE CXCI. Which is most proper for Study, the Evening or the Morning.
IF Antiquity had not had Errors, the cause of those who prefer the study of
the Evening before that of the Morning, would be very desperate. But Reasons
having more force here than the Authorities of Pedagogues, who hold Aurora the
friend of the Muses, only to the end that their Scholars rising betimes in the
Morning, themselves may have the more time left after their exercises; I
conceive the Evening much more fit for any Employment of the Mind, than any
other part of the day; the Morning leaving not only the first and more common
ways full of Excrements, but also all the Ventricles of the Brain wherein the
Spirits are elaborated, and also the Arteries and Interstices of the Muscles
full of vapors; whence proceed the frequent oscitations, contortions, and
extension of the members upon our awaking, to force out the vapors which
incommode them. On the contrary, the Evening even after repast, finds those
first ways full of good Aliments, which send up benign and laudable vapors
which allay and temper the acrimony of other more sharp and biting, found by
experience in Men fasting, who for that reason are more prone to Choler.
Moreover, Study consisting in Meditation, and this in reflection upon the
Species received into the Fancy, it is certain that the report of these
introduced all the day long, serves for an efficacious Lesson to the Mind, when
it comes to make review of the things offered to the Intellect, for it to draw
consequences from the same, and make a convenient choice: but in the Morning
all the species of the preceding day, are either totally effaced, or greatly
decayed. Moreover, the melancholy humor, which is most proper for Study,
requires constancy and assiduity, which ordinarily accompanies this humor; and
it is predominant in the Evening as Blood is in the Morning, according as
Physicians allot the four humors to the four parts of the natural day; as
therefore the Sanguine are less proper for Study than the Melancholy, so is the
Morning than the Evening. Hence the good Father Ennius never versified so well
as after he had drunk, which seldom happens in the Morning; and the conceptions
of fasting persons are commonly more empty, and less agreeable than those of
Authors well fed. For the Spirits repaired by Food are carried much further, as
being more vigorous when their continual flux and deperdition finds matter
proper for their restoration, as they do after Supper, having then the same
advantage that an Army has, which sees at its back another Auxiliary one ready
to recruit it. On the contrary, in the Morning nothing remains in the Body of
all the Aliments of the foregoing day, but only a mass of liquid blood, which
is presently distributed into all the parts, having its self need of
restoration: Whence the other animal-functions are performed less vigorously in
the Morning than in the Evening, especially after Supper; Which is justified
also by the experience of those who when they would learn any thing by heart,
study it in the Evening and sleep upon it, committing the same to those
vigorous Spirits newly produced by the food, to be more deeply engraven in the
Memory. And your nightly Students sleep commonly in the Morning, which is the
fittest time for it, and best refreshes the forces both of Body and Mind;
whereas Evening sleep is liable to musings and tumults. Which also is confirmed
by the practice of Courtiers, who best of all Men understand the delights of
Life; especially Ladies, who by long sleeping in the Morning, preserve
themselves fair and in good plight; which is an infallible sign of health,
without which, the functions of the Mind cannot be rightly performed.

The Second said, That a vessel which is to be filled, must first be emptied,
and the Organs of Sense must be free from all Species, that they may be
susceptible of those whereof we desire to inform them. For which purpose, the
Morning is far fitter than the Evening, when all the Idea's of the day past,
throng into the Fancy, and shut the door to new Objects. The Spirits likewise
are then more pure from the vapors, which arise from meats while undigested;
which vapors are very prejudicial to the Spirits, as appears in those that have
drunk too much, who reason but very ill; and they that apply themselves to
study after Supper, find a manifest difference in themselves from what they
were before it; their Animal Spirits being clouded by multitude of vapors which
fill their Heads, and leave no longer free passage to the Spirits: Besides
that, Attention hurts Digestion, calling the Spirits to the Brain from the
Stomach, where they should be to concoct the food; whence follows imperfect
sanguification, testified by paleness of Complexion of hard Students. Moreover,
the Soul being Light, delights more to exercise its functions in the day than
in the night, whose darkness saddens it, and represses its beams; whence our
conceptions are much more dull in the night, whose coldness is an Enemy to all
Actions, as heat (which is greater in the day) is a friend to them. And the
Custom of the most studious is backed with Reason, which requires that the
Soul, Man's chief part, begin to take its food of Knowledge at the chief and
first part of the day. And our ancient Laws seem to favor this Opinion, whilst
they prohibit the judgment of Criminal Causes after dinner, as requiring more
attention than Men are commonly capable of at that time; and certainly they
must be much less capable thereof after Supper.

The Third said, That the Question cannot be determined but by distinguishing
of Complexions, Ages, Customs, and different Studies. The Choleric commonly
find themselves fittest for study in the Evening, when the Acrimony of their
predominant humor is allayed by the recent vapors of meat. On the contrary, the
Phlegmatic must not sleep much, and to be early is both most healthful for
him, and the fittest time for his study; but the Sanguine requires more sleep.
And for Customs, though bad ought to be reformed, yet if an Evening Student
changes for the Morning, or on the contrary, it will be with less success. If
it be asked, What Custom then is best to be contracted, we must come to the
consideration of Ages; wherein, Children after seven years old, when they begin
to be capable of regular discipline, must not be confined to less than eight or
nine hours sleep; after the Age of Puberty, Morning Studies are most profitable
for them. The Evening is fittest for the Studies of Youth and Manhood, in whom
Choler predominates, as less disturbing their Morning repose, which is
necessary to repress the boylings of their hot Blood; whence if they rise too
early, they are commonly troubled with the Headache. Lastly, Old Age being more
phlegmatic, and its humors sharper, it is good for them to go to bed betimes,
to the end to temper that Acrimony by the gentleness of the vapors rising from
the lately taken Supper; and also it is most profitable for them to rise early,
whereunto they are guided by Nature, awaking sooner than any other Age.

CONFERENCE CXCII. Who are the most Ingenious of the World.
BY Ingenious are meant inventive, subtle or acute persons; He that
understands, discourses and exercises the functions of the Soul more subtly
then another is styled Ingenious. Thus Apelles when disguised was discovered by
a third line which he drew upon two others, so small, that none but he could
have drawn it: And in a dispute, he that best distinguishes a term confounded
by the Antagonist, passes for the most subtle and ingenious; so also does an
Artificer that makes the most subtle pieces of work, as chains for Fleas,
Nine-pins with a Bowl extremely small, Knives and other Instruments, not
weighing above a grain of Wheat. For as they that can perceive the least
objects are the most clear-sighted, so minds not contented to conceive common
and gross things, are the most ingenious. This being premised, I conceive that
the Choleric are such; and for the same reason Southern people, whose Climate
produces that humor most. Hence those that govern people in those parts trouble
not themselves to reason with them, because having to do with refined spirits,
it were to no purpose; there being no reason so good but a contrary one might
be invented amongst them: But they rely upon nothing more then Faith and
Religion, whereby they accomplish their ends upon their people, who elsewhere
are governed by force of Reason.

The Second said, That if Ingenuity consisted only in subtlety, there would be
none in making Colossus's and great Piles of Buildings, wherein nevertheless
there is far more then in little Trinkets, which like some Iron
mechanick-Instruments are useless by being too fine. And as he that
distinguishes pertinently in a Dispute is reputed ingenious, so is he no less
who entangles the respondent by confounding things which ought to be separated.
In the practice of Affairs, things too subtle pass for Chimera's, and are never
put in execution; nor is he accounted the best Painter that draws the finest
strokes. Moreover, the Eyes that discern the least object are not always the
best; but it is a sign of weakness of sight to see things out of their
proportionate distance. Much less probable is it that the Choleric are more
ingenious then the Melancholy, since reflection is necessary to the making of a
solid conclusion, which the impatience of Choler cannot endure; and indeed,
never was there seen a man of great parts who was not pensive. And accordingly,
Northern people, being more cold and reserved, will carry it above other hotter
Nations.

The Third said, That as to Nations, he conceived that as not only the Plants,
but also the Pearls and Jewels of the East, are more excellent and purer than
those of other parts of the world, so also are their Wits: The Reason whereof,
is, That the Sun coming from the East bestows the First Fruits of his own and
other Celestial Influences upon the Orientals; which Influences, like the
impression of Perfumes, are most vigorous in their beginning. Moreover, we see
that God made use of the excellence of the spirits of those people to make the
first and greatest Lawgivers and Sages. If Authors of new and untrue Religions
have been found there, this fortifies rather then destroys this Opinion, more
Wit being requisite to maintain a bad than a good cause. As for Temperaments,
the Sanguine has the advantage. First, because it is the most healthful
Complexion, and Health is the principal condition of a good Wit, which cannot
display it self perfectly in a sick body. Secondly, because Blood is the
proximate matter of spirits, and he that has good Blood must have plenty of
spirits. Thirdly, because this is the Complexion of the amorous, who are the
most ingenious people of the world. Whence the Poet said, Quis fallere possit
amantem? But if the Question be, What Exercise or Employment has the most
ingenious people, it is harder to be detemin'd; so great Wits being found at
this day of all sorts of professions, that it is difficult to judge, of which
there are most. Some will prefer the Scholastic Devines for their subtle
disputes and nice distinctions; others, the Rational Physicians, for their
discourses and conjectures upon the causes of hidden diseases, others, the
Mathematicians for their curious searches into Heaven it self; or the Lawyers
who manage their affairs so advantageously above others.

The Fourth said, That, absolutely speaking, there is no quarter of the world
more Oriental or Occidental than another; these words having been invented only
in respect to Men themselves, to some of whom one and the same people is
Oriental, and yet Occidental to others; since the world is round, and all the
parts of a Sphere are of the same Nature. What differences there are, must be
taken from something else than the four parts of the world, and, particularly,
from Cold and Heat. Thus those that live under the Poles, are of a different
Complexion both of Body and Mind, from those that are between the Tropicks.
According to which difference, the Inhabitants of the temperate Zones must be
the most ingenious: Cold being too much an Enemy to Life, to advance the Wit;
and excessive Heat burning the Humors no less within than without, as the
woolly hair and black skin of the Nations exposed to it, manifest. So that it is
no presumption in the French and other Nations under the same Climate, to award
the pre-eminence to themselves in this matter. For the operations of the Mind,
as well as the digestions and other natural operations of the Body, require a
temperate, not an excessive Heat. And the levity imputed to our Nation is a
proof of it, since commonly the most ingenious are least steadfast in executing
the things they have devised. But amongst the French, I account none more
ingenious than the Lawyers, who confute the Philosophical Maxim, which says,
That whatever has a beginning has also an end, since they render Suits
immortal. Instead of the four causes taught by Naturalists, they create others
without number; and in spite of the Maxim, which says, There is no Vacuum,
they make one at length in the purses of their Clients.

The Fifth said, That since there are good and bad, ingenious and sots in all
Lands, to be the one or the other, depends not upon the Climate; Heaven, from
whence the Soul descends, being alike in all places. Nor is it likely that
professions render Men more or less ingenious, since those to which people are
lead by natural inclination, are rather Effects than Causes of good or bad
parts. As for those to which we are persuaded or forced, nothing can be
inferred from them, having no affinity with our Nature. Lastly, nor does Temper
always contribute to render Men ingenious, since there are some so of all
Tempers, Ages, and Sexes. The true Cause is the proportion which happens to be
between the Soul and the Body at the first conformation. Whence the surest
signs of good parts, are taken from the figure of the Body, and chiefly of the
Head, which if sharp, never makes a wise man; as on the contrary, great Heads,
and broad Foreheads, are always ingenious, of whatever Country, Vocation, and
Temper they be.

CONFERENCE CXCIII. Of the Fraternity of the Rosie-Cross.
I Find that these Brethren being associated in Germany two or three hundred
years ago, swear mutual Fidelity to observe the Laws of their Fraternity; the
chief of which was Secrecy, never to speak or write but in the Allegories of
their Cabal, whose pretension is to re-establish all Discipilines and Sciences,
especially Physic, which, they say, is ignor'd and ill practiced by all
others; themselves alone having the Knowledge of so many Secrets that they hold
the Philosopers Stone for one of the least, and professing to imitate sundry
other Societies of ancient time; as first, that of the Kings, Priests, and
Philosophers of Egypt, under the names of Isis, Osiris, Apis, Anubis, and
Mercury, the mysteries whereof they hid under their Hieroglyphical Letters,
leaving the use of the common way of writing to the vulgar: For proof whereof
they allege, that the first Priest of this Fraternity being urged by Alexander
to discover to him the Secret of Isis and Osiris, told him for the whole
Secret, that they were not gods but men whom they worshipped. With which Answer,
Alexander was so well satisfied, that he writ word thereof to his Mother
Olympias, desiring her to burn his Letter as soon as she had read it, for fear
of Scandal. The second Society which they allege, is, the College of the
Eumolpides, so called from Eumolpus its Author, an Eleusinian Priest at Eleusis
in Athens, in imitation of that instituted in Greece by Orpheus, to the honor
of Baochus; of which Eumolpides, the supreme Sacrificer carried a golden key in
his mouth to mind him of keeping the Secret, which was not communicated to all
the initiated in this Order, but only to such as were of approved discretion.
The Third (they say) was that of the Samothracians, who were never troubled
with sickness or poverty, the two grand scourges of Life; maintaining
themselves in perpetual Health by repairing the radical humidity, and by
Astrological Application of Specifical Remedies derived to them from their
Predecessors; and having by their great work secret means of supplying the
common necessities of their Confreres and Associates. Then follow the Magi of
Persia, where, Cicero says, it was required as a Condition of admitting any to
be King, that he were skilled in natural Magic, that is, in the most profound
and admirable secrets of Nature; to learn which, Empedocles and Plato,
purposely sailed into Persia. Of this Magic they make Zoroaster the Author,
who lived six hundred years before Moses, and spent twenty years in a Desert in
studying the works of Nature, trying the Effects ensuing upon the Application
of Actives to Passives; whence he got the name of Necromancer, as if he invoked
Devils. Next they quote the Chaldaeans in Babylon, and the Brachmans in India;
both sorts visited by Apollonius, to whom Hyarchas the Moderator of the East
showed a Well four paces broad, by which they swore, having near it a Cup full
of fire, which perpetually burning, never surmounted the brims of the Vessel,
and two Hogsheads, the one of wind, the other of rain, both which infallibly
followed upon opening the same. They bring in likewise the Gymnosophists of
Aethiopia, who assembled under an Elm, and saluted the same Apollonius by his
name, without having ever known him. Pythagoras also, they say, professed the
Secret, trying his Disciples taciturnity by five years silence, and hiding his
mysteries under Numbers. They tell further of one Aucarsus who did many
wonders, appearing in several places at the same time, killing with one word a
Serpent that destroyed a whole a Country; and lastly, they mention a College
of Arabians in the City of Damcar, where the Author of this Brotherhood of the
Rosie-Cross had his Academy, after the establishment whereof he went to Fez to
instruct the Moors, where his progress was such, that the Society came to be
diffused into Germany, Poland, and Hungary.

The Second said, That the rise of this Fraternity is by Mayerus referred to
the year 1378, when a German Gentleman (the initial Letters of whose name were
A.C.) of the Age of fifteen years, was shut up in a monastery, where having
learnt Latin and Greek, in his seventh year he began to journey to the Holy
Land; but falling sick at Damas, he heard so much talk of the Sages of Arabia,
that recovering, he went to Damcar the City of these Sages, who saluted him by
his proper name, and telling him that they waited for him a long time,
discovered to him many Secrets; after he had learnt their Language and the
Mathematics, he traveled into Egypt and Spain; then returned into Germany,
defraying his expenses by the invention he had of making Gold, with which he
built and lived magnificently for five years; afterward be thinking himself of
reforming the Sciences, which he had designed from the beginning, he associated
to himself three Brothers to whom he communicated his Secrets. These four not
sufficing for the great number of Patients which flockt to them from all parts
to be cured, they took four more who enacted among themselves these Rules of
their Society. I. None shall make other Profession but of curing the sick
gratis. II. None shall be tied to any particular Habit, but left to conform
therein to place and time. III. Every Brother shall assemble once a year on a
set day, in their House called the House of the H. Ghost, or signify the cause
of his absence. IV. He shall choose a worthy and fit person to succeed him
after his death. V. These two Letters R. C. shall be their Symbol, Signet, and
Character. VI. The Fraternity shall be kept secret for a 100. years. These
Articles being sworn to, he retained two of the Brothers with him, and sent
the rest about the world. This founder, they say, lived 106. years, was buried
secretly by his Confreres in the year 1484; after which time, these Brothers
succeeded one another, every one of them living no less than a 100. years; and
in the year 1604. one of them finding a stone in a wall pierced through with a
nail, which denoted something more than ordinary, pulled it out with great
difficulty, and discovered a Vault; wherein, amongst other strange things, he
found the Sepulcher of this Founder with this inscription in Latin, I shall be
manifested after six score years: And at the bottom, A, C, R, C, In my life
time I made this Abridgment of the Universe for my Sepulcher, with many
devises, one a side, and four in circles. The Body held in its Hand a
parchment-book written with Golden Letters, at the end of which was his
Elogium, containing among other things, that after having heaped up more riches
than a King or Emperor, of which he judged his own Age unworthy, he left them
to be sought for by posterity, and built a little world answering to the great
one in all its motions, by which he had compendiously acquired the Knowledge of
all things past, present, and to come; and after he had lived above a 100.
years, he rendered his Soul to his Creator amidst the embraces and last kisses
of his Brethren, not by reason of any disease, (which his own Body never felt,
and he permitted not others to suffer) but God withdrew from his Body the
illuminated Soul of this most beloved Father, most agreeable Brother, most
faithful Master, and entire Friend. The same Mayerus says, that the place of
these Rosie-Crucians College is still unknown, but yet they repair to it from
all the parts of the world. In the year 1613. News came that one of these
Brethren named Mulley om Hamet, having assaulted Mulley Sidan King of Fez, and
Marocco strongly armed, defeated him with a handful of unarmed men, and seized
his throne; from whence these Conquerors were to go into Spain, where at the
same time some Spaniards taking upon them the title of Illuminati, fell into
the hands of the Inquisition. This report obliged the Society to publish two
Books, intitul'd, Fama and Confessio, wherein, after refutation of wrongful
reputations, they set down their Maxims, and say, That the great Knowledge of
their Founder is not to be wondered at, since he was instructed in the Book M,
which some interpret the Book of the World; others, the Book of Natural Magic,
which he translated out of Arabic into Latin: out of which, they affirm, that
Paracelsus afterward learnt all his Knowledge; which being new, it is no
wonder, they say, that both he and they be derided and hated by the rest of
men. And that the abovesaid Founder caused to be collected into another Book
for his Disciples all that man can desire or hope, to wit, both Celestial and
Earthly Goods; these last consisting chiefly in Health, Wisdom, Riches, to
acquire all which, they show the means. In brief, that their main end is, by
Travells and Conferences with the Learned, to obtain the Knowledge of all the
Secrets in the World, and relate them to their Society, and to none else.

The Third said, That there have ever been spirits extravagant, irregular, and
incapable of all Discipline both Political and Ecclesiastical. Hence have risen
in the Church Heresiarchs and Schismatics; in the State, Rebels and Mutineers;
in the Sciences, Innovators and presumptuous persons, who wanting Ability and
Constancy to undergo the pains of Study necessary for obtaining the skill
requisite to the right exercise of the least Disciplines and Professions, take
upon them to blame what they understand not; and as the vulgar easily close
with Calumnies, to which the faults of the Professors, not the Professions,
give but too much occasion; so they readily prepossess the Understanding of
their Hearers. For which there is more matter in Physic than there is in any
other Profession, because the vulgar, who judge thereof, consider only events,
which are not in our power but only the application of causes; the rest being
the work of Nature. Hence Paracelsus, and others of that gang, started up in
the world, establishing new Principles, and vaunting themselves upon the
authority of imaginary antiquity. And as no Opinion is so erroneous but has
its followers; so there have been found people enough of that sort to make a
College, who forgetting that one of the faults they charged upon the Rational
Physicians, was, that in their prescriptions they made use of a strange
Language and Ciphers unknown to the vulgar, have imitated those abovementioned
Priests of Egypt, who made an outside show of brave Ornaments, which being
lifted up, you see nothing but a Cat, or an Ox at the stall. Thus all their
discourse is only of Aurum Potabile, Mercurius Vitae, Magistery of Pearls,
Quintessences, Spirits, Extracts, which they denote by Ciphers invented at
pleasure, and apply (as they say) only according to the mind of Heaven, all the
cadences whereof they observe and measure for that purpose: But if you look to
the bottom of all, you will see their Hands foul'd with coals or dung, their
Faces discolored by the Arsenical Exhalations of the Minerals they prepare in
their furnaces; and yet the most pitiful wretch of them all will swear that he
knows the great work. Indeed, this were no great matter, if the success of
their Practice made amends for the defects of their Theory. But seeing chief
remedies consist in vomiting or purging violently, whereof few Bodies are
capable; no wonder if people use them only in desperate cases. Nor is their
impertinence sufferable, whilst, to credit themselves, they pretend to be
descended from the Gymnosophists, from whom, it is to be feared, they inherit at
last nothing else but their nakedness. For what better title have they for
their succeeding to all those ancient Societies, (I mean such as were
commendable and worthy of imitation) than our Faculties have, which are
authorized by the Laws of the Prince, by possession immemorial, and a
conformity of all Nations, which renders their right as strong as that of
Nations. Wherefore I advise these Brethren, if they will not betake themselves
to study as as others do, to render themselves altogether Invisible, (as they
pretend to be) withdrawing from the Commerce of the rest of Mankind.

The Fourth said, Who openly professed himself one of this Fraternity, said
that Doctor Flud of England had ingeniously interpreted these three Letters; F.
fide, R. religione, C. charitate, though the common opinion prevails, which
will have them signify, Fratres Roseae Crucis. But neither of these
interpretations can pass for a great Secret; wherefore it appears upon further
search, that the Cross is truly significative there, but in another sense,
which is, that in this the word LVX is included, whence some think that these
Brothers took in Spain the title of Illuminati: I shall venture further, and
add that Ros (Dew) which is the most powerful dissolver of Gold amongst natural
and not corrosive Bodies, is nothing else but Light condensed and rendered
corporeal, which being concocted and digested artificially in convenient time
in its proper vessel, is the true Menstruum of the Red Dragon, i. e. of Gold,
the true matter of Philsophers. Of which Secret, this Society desiring to leave
Posterity intimation in their Name, styll'd themselves Brethren of the Rosy
Cross. Thus Jacob's blessing upon Esau, contained only these two matters, De
Rore Coeli, and pinguedine Terrae det tibi Deus. Whereas this Society is
charged with pretenses of being invisible, they mean only that it has no
visible marks to distinguish it from others, as other Societies have, namely,
several colors and fashions of habits, but it is known and visible only to
those of the Society it self.

CONFERENCE CXCIV. What Paracelsus meant by the Book M.
I Shall not stand to consider whether it be true, as some say, that more
persons besides Theophrastus ab Ohenheim bore the name of Paracelsus; my
present purpose is only to consider a passage lately recited here out of his
Archidoxa; Atque haec omnia (says he there) parum vulgaria de Medicina
supernaturali and Magica, ex libro secreto ex Arabico idiomate in Latinum verso
qui pro titulo habet Literam M. In which words we may observe how remote this
Author's manner of Writing is from that of the Doctors of these times; yea, and
of former too, (if you except the Chemists) who mainly aim to speak clearly,
and to render themselves intelligible, many of them professing to wish that
things themselves could speak. From which practice this Author is so far, that
he conceals even the Book's name wherein he studied, by a kind of Plagium,
hiding his Theft, lest others should trap him; and the same Jealousy runs
through all his Works. However, for Curiositie's sake, let us consider what
Titles will suit to this Letter. Methinks the fittest is Mundus, that great
Book, open to all that are minded to read in it; that to which Job, David, and
many other Authors sacred and profane so frequently refer us; each Element
whereof is a Tome, every Compound a Book, and every part thereof a Letter. All
other Books are only Copies of this Original, to which if they happen to have
conformity, they pass for good; if not, they are mere Chimera's, having no
foundation in the thing. Hence arises that so remarkable difference between
the Theory and the Practice of Arts; for almost all Books being false Copies of
this of the World, no wonder if Book-doctors are most commonly ignorant of
Things, whose solid Contemplation produces other satisfaction in the informed
Intellect, than do the empty Phansies of those who either never understood what
they writ, or had not the gift of right expressing it. And certainly we may
have more exact and natural information from the species of things themselves,
than either the Writing or Speech of another person can give us.

The Second said, That this Book M. is the Book of Magic; whence many have
believed Paracelsus a Magician, and the rather in that they find him teaching
in many places of his Books to cure diseases by words, and to produce men by
enchantment in a great bottle, with other such abominable proposals, not to be
accomplished but by Diabolical assistance. Moreover, we seldom see any persons
so bold as to attempt to overthrow so ancient an Institution as Physic, both
in Theory and Practice, but who are led to that enterprise either by God or the
Devil: And the continual calumnies and detractions, whereof this evil spirit is
the Author, and for which Paracelsus and his followers so signalize themselves,
give far more probability of the latter than of the former. Whence, possibly,
to disguise the matter, most Magicians pretend to have learnt their Characters
out of some Book, as, particularly, that which they call Clavicula Solomonis.

The Third said, That it may be Magic, and yet lawful, to wit, true and
Natural Magic, such as was professed by the Indian Magi, three of whom having
discovered our Savior's Birth, came to worship him; the other black and
infamous Magic, no more deserving that name, than Empiricks and Mountebanks do
that of Physicians. Now Natural Magic is the knowledge of the nature and
properties of all things hidden to the vulgar, who take notice only of manifest
qualities, and reduce all to generalities, to avoid the pains of seeking the
particular virtues of each thing; and therefore it is no wonder if they see only
common effects and successes from them. Thus Plants bearing the signature or
resemblance of a disease, or the part diseased, as Lungwort, Liverwort,
Pepperwort, cure by a property independent on the first qualities, though few
understand so much. Of this kind are many excellent Secrets, whose effects seem
miraculous, and as much surpass those of ordinary remedies, whose virtues are
collected only from their appearing qualities, as the Soul does the Body, and
Heaven Earth.

The Fourth said, That by the Book M. cannot be meant Mundus, since the World
cannot be turned into Arabic and Latin; and it is not a Secret but a Figure
and Metaphor to call the World a Book. If it be lawful to admit a Figure in it,
I think it is more likely that this Book is nothing else but a Talismanical
Figure, or Character engraven in a Seal, and employed by the Rosie-Crucians to
understand one another; and called the Book M, because it represents an M
crossed by some other Letters, from whose combination results the mystery of
the Great Work, designing its matter, vessel, fire, and other Circumstances;
the first whereof is Dew, the true Menstruum or Dissolver of the Red Dragon or
Gold. In brief, so many things are comprised in this figure, by the various
combination of the Letters represented therein, that it deserves well to be
termed a Book.

The Fifth said, If this be the Secret of the Brethren of the Rosie-Cross, they
are Invisible in all their proceedings; because no Secret is seen in it, but
only many absurdities. As, amongst others, to call that a Book, which is
neither Paper, nor Parchment, nor Leaf, but a Figure; in which it is no wonder
if they find what they please, since in these three Letters Sic, variously
interlac'd one with another, you may find not only all the Letters, but also by
their combination all the Books and all the things which are in the World; and
it requires no more industry than to found all sorts of notes upon a Flageolet.
Let us therefore rather say, That Authors who puzzle their Readers minds with
such Figures, are as culpable as those are commendable, who feed them with true
and solid demonstrations; and whereas we thought that this M signified Mons, we
now see that it signifies no more than Mus; according to the ancient Fable of
the laboring Mountains, out of which upon the concourse of people to the
spectacle, issued forth nothing but a Mouse.

The Sixth said, That high Mysteries have always been veiled under
contemptible, and oftentimes ridiculous Figures; as if the wisdom of the
sublimer Spirits meant to mock those of the vulgar, who judge of things only by
appearance. Which may have place in common effects; but as for extraordinary
things, their causes are so too, whereof we have experiences in Nature
sufficiently manifest. There is no affinity between a word and the death it
gives to a Serpent; yet the Poet attests the thing in this Verse, Frigidus in
pratis cantando rumpitur Anguis; between the sight of a little bird called a
Wit-wall, and the Jaundies, which it cures; between the Figure called Abacus
Lunae, and the Meagrim, which is also cured thereby; between a point tied, and
the Generative Power which it hinders. In brief, the most excellent effects are
of this kind, and deserve not the name of admirable, unless when our mind finds
no connection between the effect and the cause that produces it. Why then may
not the same reality be admitted between this Character and the effects
pretended by those Brothers of the Rosie-Cross?

CONFERENCE CXCV. Of the Art of Raimond Lully.
SOme Wits are fitter for Invention than Imitation, and so was that of Raimond
Lully, who invented an Art how to find many Attributes, Propositions,
Questions, and Means of speaking to any Subject propounded, to the end to be
never surpised, but to be and always appear ready. By this Art, which upon
account of its use, and because it pretends to shorten vulgar studies he styles
Great, he endeavors to outdo Aristotle, who having reduced all Logic to
Definitio, Proprium. Genus, and Accidens; and in his Books of Topics, set down
some few places out of which to draw Mediums for arguing; Lully has proposed
others, not only drawn from all the preceding, but increased with many others
invented by himself. This Art he divides into two parts. The first treats of
simple terms, which he calls Principles, whereunto he has joined general
Questions; and this part he calls the Alphabet, because it comprizes each of
those terms, reduced to nine by as many Letters of the Alphabet. The second
treats of the connection of these Principles, and makes Propositions and
Syllogisms of them: this part he intitles De Figuris, either because, it is
illustrated by Tables or Figures representing the combination of those
Principles, or because Arguments are composed of them as the Celestial Figures
are of Stars. His Alphabet is thus delineated by Pacius.

b Goodness. Difference whether it be? 1 c Greatness. Concordance what it is? 2
d Dura^tion. Contrariety whence and from who^? 3 e Power. Principle or
beginning why? 4 f Wisdom. Middle how much? 5 g Appetite. End of what quality?
6 h Virtue. Majority when? 7 i Truth. Equality where? 8 k Glory. Minority how?
9

This Table, as you see, contains three Columns, each of which has Nine
Squares, and every one of these a word. The first Column contains Absolute or
Transcendent Principles; the second, Relative Principles; the third, Questions.
On the side of these Squares are set the nine first Letters of the Alphabet,
namely, from b to k, because Lully reserved a to denote the first Figure or
Connection of these Squares; and he employed these Letters alone instead of
Words, which they denote, for brevitie's sake. Thus bb signifies the goodness
of the difference, or the difference of good things; bc the goodness of
greatness, or the goodness of Concord; bd, the goodness of contrarieties, or
things contrary, and so of the rest; for he ties not himself solely to the word
of each Square, but extends it to all its Conjugata, or Derivatives, Species,
and Contraries. As the Conjugata of Goodness are Well, Good, Bonificative, (or,
that is able to make something good) Bonificent, (that makes a thing actually
good) Bonificable (that may be made good) Bonified, (that has been or is made
good) to Bonifie, (to make good) and Bonification (the action whereby a thing
is made good.) The Species of Goodness are, 1, Permanent Good, as To be;
Transient Good, as To act. 2. Honest, Profitable, and Delightful: the Contrary
of Good is Evil; of Honest, Base; of Profitable, Damageable; of Delightful,
Troublesome. -- Greatness transcendent and not categorical is that, by reason
whereof it is termed great, and acts very much; its Conjugates are Great,
Grandifying, or Magnifying, Magnificative, Magnification, and to Magnify,
whose definitions may be understood by what is said of Goodness; its Species
are Finiteness and Infinity, length, breadth, height, multitude, production,
dilatation, multiplication, and their conjugates; its contraries, smallness,
shortness, narrowness, and their Conjugates. -- Duration is that, by reason
whereof a thing endures and is permanent. Its Conjugates, are enduring,
durable, etc. its Species, Eternity, Time, and their Conjugates; its
contraries, Change, Privation, etc. with their Conjugates. -- Power is that
whereby a thing can exist and act; its Conjugates are potent, possible, to be
able; its Species, Omnipotence, (which is in God alone) simple power, (which is
in Creatures) strength, masterdom, authority, jurisdiction, empire; its
contraries, impotence, imbecility, impossibility, and their Conjugates. --
Wisdom is that by reason whereof any one is wise; its Species are Science,
Intelligence, Prudence, Art, Prophecy, Conscience, and their Conjugates; its
contraries, Ignorance, Imprudence, Error. -- Appetite, is that by reason
whereof a thing is desirable; its Species are Instinct, Cupidity, and Will; its
contraries, Hatred, Malevolence, Horror, etc. -- Virtue is here that which
unites and contains a thing; its Species are, Perfect (in God) imperfect (in
Man) its contrary. Vice, etc. -- Truth, is that by reason whereof things are
true; its speech are verity of the thing, (so God is Truth it self) Verity of
the Intellect (as when we conceive that Man is an Animal) and Verity of Speech
(as in this Proposition, Homo est Animal) its contrary is Falsity; its Species,
those opposite to the former. Truth is again divided into Necessary and
Contingent, Simple and Conjunct. -- Glory is the supreme and utmost perfection
of a thing in the enjoyment whereof it acquiesces, being unable to wish ought
more; such will be the Glory of the Blessed; its Species are Honor considered
in it self and called by the Latins, Decus; and Honor received from others,
which they properly call Honor. Thus much for the first Column.

The Second is of Relative Terms, which agree not to all things in general as
the former do, but are three Ternaries, one of the three whereof necessarily
agrees; for every thing either differs, or agrees, or is contrary to another;
is at its beginning, middle, or end; is greater, equal, or less; and is
extended likewise to its Conjugates, and divided into its Species: but they
have no other contrary but themselves considered one in respect of another.

The Third Column is of Questions, whereof the first is, Whether the thing
simply exist, as, Whether there be a Phoenix; or, Whether it be some other
thing; as, Whether the Moon be greater than the Earth. The second is, What the
thing is? To which it is answered by the Genus or Difference, and consequently,
by a Definition or Description; or else, What the word signifies? The third
has two branches; the former demands, Whence a thing took its Rise, as in this
Question, Whence comes Original sin? From that of our first Parents. The latter
asks, To whom the thing belongs, as, Whose book is this? The fourth Question
inquires the Cause; as, Why a stone always tends toward the Center? The fifth
concerns either continued Quantity; as, What magnitude the Sun is of? or
disjoynted Quantity; as, How many several magnitudes of stars there are in
Heaven? The sixth is concerning Quality; as, Whether Opium be hot or cold? The
seventh is of Time; as, When is there an Eclipse of the Moon? The eighth is of
the means by which one thing is in an other? as, The Earth in its Center, the
Part in its Whole, the Accident in its Subject, Wine in its Cask. The ninth
asks; How any thing is done? As, How do the Intellectual Species act upon the
Intellect? How do the Sensible Species act upon the Senses?

The Use of this Art, (styled also by its Author Cabalistica, because it is
learnt better by Cabal, or Tradition, than by Rules) consists in Terms,
Questions of the Alphabet, and Figures, which are Combinations or Conjunctions
of two or three of those Terms; to the end it may be easy for any one to
examine the Question proposed by all the ways resulting from these
Combinations or Conjunctions of Terms. For Example, if you desire to prove that
the Intellect is immortal, you must run over the Terms by themselves, and
examine the goodness of the Intellect, its Greatness, Duration, Power, and
other following Terms; first, each apart, and afterward joining two or three
together. And if you would not forget any Medium of proving, carry the Question
through all the squares resulting from the Combinations of these Terms, which,
indeed, are so numerous, that the most judicious restrain themselves only to
the principal and most suitable to the Subject; it being not the multitude but
the goodness of proofs that persuades.

CONFERENCE CXCVI. Why a Needle touched by a Loadstone turns toward the North?
TO omit Preface in this Question, There are two sorts of Load-stones; the
black, distinguished with little lines, which draws flesh; and that which is of
the color of Iron. This latter is called Lapis Herculeus, perhaps, upon
account of its great virtue; and Sideritis, from Iron which it attracts. Cardan
mentions a third sort, with which a Needle being rubbed, enters into the flesh
without being felt. We here consider the second sort, which turns it self
toward the tail of the lesser Bear. And since nothing is done in vain, the
Loadstone must be moved thither by some Cause, which also must be either in
Heaven or on Earth, the Poles of both which are fixed. I am of their opinion,
who say, that under the Northern Pole there is an Island called Ilva, wherein
there are high Mountains of Loadstone, toward which, (the stronger prevailing
over the weaker) both our lesser Loadstones and Needles touched therewith turn;
because those vast heaps of Loadstone diffuse their virtue over the whole
Earth, and so draw all Loadstones, and whatever Iron is rubbed with them
toward themselves.

The Second said, That the Cause of this Motion ought rather to be ascribed to
some thing in Heaven, because in Ships that approach that Island of Loadstone,
the Needle still tends toward the North, and not toward that Island. The
truth is, there is a Sympathy between some parts and things of the world; the
Female Palm bends toward the Male, Straw moves to Amber, all Flowers, and,
particularly, the Marigold and Sun-flower incline toward the Sun, the
Loadstone toward the Iron and the tail of the little Bear, which if we
conceive to be of the Nature of Iron, there is no more inconvenience therein
than in the other Properties attributed to the rest of the Stars and Planets.

The Third said, That (to wave what other Authors have said) this inclination
of the Loadstone proceeds from the great humidity of the North, which is the
Center of all waters, toward which they tend. For the Loadstone being
extremely dry, and obliged to tend some way, when it is in aequilibrio it veers
toward that quarter to seek the moisture which is wanting to it; as also does
Steel heated red hot, and suffered to cool of it self, if it be laid upon a
piece of the wood floating gently in water.

The Fourth was of Cardan's Opinion, who conceives, that stones are animated,
and, consequently, that the soul of the Loadstone carries it to the search of
its food and its good; as the the Eye affects Light, a Whelp is carried to his
Dam's teat, and a Sheep naturally eschews a Wolf. For it matters not whether we
hold, That the touched Lodestone moves toward the tail of the little Bear,
which is distant five degrees from the Arctick Pole; or, Whether it fly and
recoil from the part of Heaven diametrically opposite thereunto? Now that the
Loadstone is animated, appears by its being nourisht with, and kept in the
filings of Steel, by its growing old, and by the diminishing of its attractive
virtue with age; just as the virtues of other bodies do. Wherefore, it is
probable, that the Loadstone's soul either with-draws it from that part which
is contrary to it, or else leads it toward its good. Indeed two different
inclinations are observed in this Stone, depending upon the situation it had in
the Mine; one Northwards, whither it turns the part that once lay that way;
the other Southwards, whither it turns its opposite part. But the Experiment of
Iron loosing its attraction by being rubbed on the Loadstone the contrary way to
which it was rubbed at first, is an evident sign of such a soul in it, which
makes it thus vary its actions.

The Fifth said, That all these accounts leave many difficulties to be
resolved; for if the Loadstone moved toward those great Adamantine Mountains
of Ilva, then they would draw only that and not Iron; if Iron too, why not
before it is rubbed with a Loadstone? Nor does this inclination of the Loadstone
proceed from its dryness, for then plain Iron, (which is as dry) Pumice, Lime,
and Plaster, (which are dryer) should have the same effect: Besides that, there
is not such want of humidity as that this stone should seek it Northwards, the
Mediterranean and the Main Ocean being nearer hand. As for Heaven, the Cause is
no less obscure there, and the terms of Sympathy and Antipathy differ not much
from those which profess naked Ignorance. The second Opinion has most
probability; for since the two pieces of a Loadstone cut parallel to the Axis,
have so great a community of inclinations, that a Needle touched with one
piece, is moved at any distance whatsoever, according to the motion of another
touched with the other piece; why may we not admit that the tail of the little
Bear, or its neighboring parts, are of a Magnetical Nature; and have the same
community with our Terrestrial Loadstone; according to that Maxim in
Trismegistus's Smaragdine-Table, That which is above, is as that which is below.

CONFERENCE CXCVII. What Sect of Philosophers is most to be followed.
ALl the Sciences confess Obligations to Philosophy. Divinity draws
Ratiocinations from it; Eloquence is diffuse Logic; and Rhetoric is not to be
learnt but after Philosophy. Civil Law, being wholly founded upon Morality, is
nothing but an effect of it, whilst it teaches us to do voluntarily what the
Laws makes us practice by force. Physic supposes excellent skill in
Philosophy, since the Physician begins where the Naturalist ends. Now there are
so many Sects of Philosophers, that to follow them all, is to fall into
manifest contradictions; and to adhere to one alone, is to be in great danger
of mistaking the worst. That which keeps us from being able to make a good
choice, is the little knowledge we have of these Sects, and the Probability
each seems to have; and therefore it is requisite to examine them in general, in
order to drawing a general conclusion. And because Saint Augustine cites almost
three hundred Opinions touching the Supreme Good, and as many may be brought
touching other points of the Sciences; I shall only take notice of the
famousest Sects, as seeming the most rational, and most followed. And let us
compare the always contentious Peripatericks, and the Stoics together: The end
of the former was to contemplate and understand things; the latter, aimed more
to do good than to know it; their design was Speculation, the scope of these
Practici. I side with the former, because that Science which embellisheth Man's
noblest part, his Understanding, is the most sublime, and consequently, the
most considerable. And as the Understanding is more excellent than the Will, so
is Theory in matter Science than Exercise, Acts of Virtue depending on the Acts
of Reason, and those of Reason not depending on those of Liberty. Besides, that
is most to be esteemed, which must render us blessed; and that is the knowledge
of God, and of the Creatures in God and in themselves, which is to constitute
the Beatifick Vision.

The Second said, That Men ought not to get knowledge only to know, but to
operate comformably to their knowledge. Truth would be either useless or
dangerous, if it lead us not to practice. And though the Will is one Sense
subordinate to the Understanding, yet it commands the same in another. To know
how to do well, and yet to do ill, is a double crime. And if knowledge alone
could make happy, the Devils would be soon in Heaven; since Divines tell us,
the least of them, has more natural knowledge than all Mankind together. Now
the Opinion of the Stoics regulating the Acts of our Wills, and composing our
Manners suitable to Reason, seems to place the steps which must raise us to the
highest pitch of Felicity. Wherefore I conclude, that the Curious may follow
the first Sect of these, namely, the Peripateticks; but good men must
necessarily adhere to that of the Stoics.

The Third said, That there are three other Sects which seem to comprize all
the rest, and therefore not to be omitted in this important choice: First, the
Pyrrhonians, who doubt of all things, and say, There is no knowledge of any
thing. Secondly, Those that doubt of nothing, but think they know every thing.
Thirdly, Those who are neither in doubt, nor in perfect certainty, but in
search of Truth. The first do found their Opinion upon this received Maxim,
That there is nothing in the Understanding but what passed through the Senses;
and these being fallacious, our Notions must be so too; That being we perceive
not the essence of things, we cannot say that we know any thing. But these
people may be answered, That since they have not so much as a knowledge of
their doubts, they cannot make the same pass for a demonstrative maxim; if they
think they have such a knowledge, they must grant that there is knowledge of
some thing; and if of doubts, why not of certainties. Moreover, if the Senses
be always fallacious, it will follow that there are Powers, which acting
without impediment, never attain their end; and if our Understanding be always
abused, it is in worse case than the faculties of Brutes, who acquiesce in
embracing their Objects. In brief, these dreamers cannot be ignorant that
themselves exist, because they act, and that existence is the foundation of all
action. Nor are those that think they know every thing much more intelligent;
the former offend against Truth, by denying it; these, by thinking it their
sole Mistress. They argue, that since the Understanding is the Subject of the
Intelligible Species, which contain (they say) either actually or potentially
the impressions of all Objects, it follows that as soon as we frame a Notion,
we know all things. But I ask these Knowing Men, What Truths they know so
easily, which other Wits hold so difficult to be known, Whether created or
uncreated Verity? The former is knowable only to it self; we may demonstrate,
That it is, but not What it is in its own Nature. And how many errors have
there been concerning the Nature of that Sole, Necessary, and true Being? And
as for the latter, we know not the Truth of Essences, but by their Accidents;
and these by Species which are very often perverted, either in the Medium, or
the Organ. But how can we know other things perfectly, whereas we know not our
Selves? We know that we act, but we know not how; so that the Opinion of those
that profess only to seek Truth, is the best and surest, though it ingageth us
to continual labor; and be the punishment said by the Holy Scripture to be
inflicted upon Men, both to satisfy and chastise their Curiosity. Now Action
is the Life of the Soul, and that Science which keeps the Mind always awake, is
justly preferrable before that which renders so good an Agent idle, and
impoverishes it by persuading it that it has riches enough already. Besides,
all Men are of this Opinion, either directly or indirectly: And Dissenters
themselves, seek Reasons every day to maintain it. Astrologers still endeavor
to discover new Stars, Chemists new Secrets, Physicians new Remedies, and
Philosophers new Opinions.

CONFERENCE CXCVIII. Why Mules breed not.
THe First said, That Mules are barren, because every perfect Animal can
produce only its own like by univocal Generation, defined, The production of a
Living Thing descending from another Living Thing by a conjoined Principle, in
order to similitude of Species. But Mules cannot generate thus, because being
produced by a Horse and an Ass, they are neither the one nor the other, nor yet
both together; but a third Species retaining something of both. So that after
whatever manner they join together, they cannot make their like, that is,
produce an Animal part Horse, and part Ass; If a Mule could generate, it must
be by coupling with a Species different from its own, as with a Horse or an
Ass; whence infinite several Species, partaking more or less of the nature of
Horse or Ass would arise, and so Forms being increased or diminished, Substance
should receive degrees of More and Less, contrary to the Maxim of Philosophers.
And in this matter, Nature's Wisdom and Providence is observable, who rather
suspends her Action, than suffers any inconvenience to come by it.

The Second said, That there are particular as well as general causes of the
Sterility of Mules. As first, they want distinction of Sex, that between them
being only similitudinary, and the parts they have answering to the genitals of
other Animals, having only the outward figure, not the internal form and energy
thereof: Just as the Teats in Men, Dogs, Swine, etc. signify nothing as to any
use, but serve only for correspondence with the Female and Ornament.

The Third said, That the Sterility of Mules cannot be designed by Nature only
to avoid multiplication of Species in infinitum; since this consideration
hinders not but that Leopards and other Mixed Animals generate, and Plants
ingrafted upon others of different Species bear fruit. But the cause hereof
must be sought in the diverse Temperature and Complexion of the Ass and Horse;
the former being very melancholy, that is, Cold and Dry, as appears by his
slowness; the other Hot and Dry, as he testifies by his nimbleness; their two
seeds mingled together compose a third, which indeed, has Natural Heat and
Radical Moisture enough for making an Animal: but Nature having brought her
work to this point, can go no further; because she spent all the Radical
Moisture and Natural Heat she had in the first production; whereby Mules have
the Courage of the Horse, and the Laboriousness of the Ass. But the Mule having
only Heat and Radical Moisture enough for it self, and not enough for the
production of another, the same cannot be produced.

The Fourth said, That the Number of Forms and Species of things being
limited, it is not in the power of Art and Nature to multiply them. And though
it be easy to multiply them in the family of Plants, which are but of one Sex,
(though some are distinguished into Male and Female, upon account of some small
differences); Yet it is not in the Gardener's power to ingraft all sorts of
Fruits one upon another. For (excepting the Colewort, in whose foot, when it is
become hard and ligneous, one may ingraft some shrubs) Plants of diverse kinds
mingle not one with another, as trees with herbs or shrubs, and herbs with
trees. Nor will the Pepin admit insition into the Nut-tree, or on the contrary:
Nature differs from Art in this chiefly, that she has her work bounded and
determined; but Art counterfeits what the Artist pleases. Whence Painters
oftentimes draw fine Pictures, and beget deformed Children. Every mixture of
Perfumes is not pleasant, nor of Medicaments effectual; nor do our Sawces admit
of any ingredients, but only of some that are suitable and proper. So also two
several grains mixed together produce nothing, because Nature has tempered
seeds in such degree, that nothing can be added or diminisht from them, but
deprives them of their efficacy. If such unnatural Mixture make any
productions, the same is prodigious, and amongst Animals is called a Monster:
But being an Error of Nature, she returns to her old way as soon as she can,
and rather ceases to generate, than produces second Monsters of those first.
And this in Mules rather than other Species, because the Equine and Asinine
Natures are no less contrary than Fire and Water. So that if they happen to be
conjoined, and make one Compositum, the Generative Virtues then existent in
their seeds make an Animal indeed; but, in producing the same, they extinguish
one another, as Fire does Water; and so what is generated of them, has no
power of Generation.

The Fifth said, That this Sterility being supposed, (although Aristotle
relates, that in Syria-Mules commonly generate; and Theophrastus, Varro, and
others affirm the like of those in Cappadocia and Africa) Democritus in Aelian,
attributes the cause thereof to the ill conformation of their genitals,
particularly, of the womb, which is unapt to retain and quicken the seed,
because through the excessive heat derived from the Horse, the passages serving
to those parts in either sex are too much dilated; besides that, the same are
very laxe in the Shee-Ass; whence Naturalists and Experience tells us, that she
conceives not, unless after covering she be well cudgel'd, that so the pain
thereof may make her constringe her womb, and retain the seed which otherwise
would slide out again. Now this over great dilatation of the genitals appears
by dissection; and it is found by Experience, that the Beasts themselves are
unwilling to such an unnatural copulation; so that in some Countries people are
fain to feed Asses with Mare's milk, and cover the Mares sometimes with Clothes
of the color of an Ass, to beguile them into the same. Add hereunto that both
the Species, of which Mules are generated, are very subject to Sterility. For
the Ass is of a cold temper, and particularly, its seed is so cold, that unless
it begins to generate at the first casting of its Teeth, it remains barren for
ever. Yea, if an Ass couple with a pregnant Mare, the coldness of his seed
makes her cast her Foal. The Horse likewise, by Ar^stotle's report, is very
little fruitful; whence his seed being further refrigerated by that of the Ass,
they produce an Animal indeed, but altogether improlifick.

CONFERENCE CXCIX. Of the Mandrake.
SInce of the three Conditions of Curing, to wit, pleasantly, speedily, and
safely, this latter pertains chiefly to Plants; it were good that a little more
curious search were made into the treasures hid in the Plantal Family of
Remedies, whereof Nature has provided above three thousand several Species,
which are many more than are in those of Animals and Minerals. And as Nature
has (instead of the Instinct bestowed on other Animals to guide them to their
good) given Man Reason, whereby he may proceed from things known to things
unknown; so, besides the manifest and occult qualities of Plants, from whence
their uses may be inferred, she has marked those which are most useful to us
with certain Signs and Characters: Amongst these, Mandrake is the most famous,
representing not the Eye as Eyebright does; nor the Lungs, as Lungwort; nor
the Liver, as Liverwort; nor the Rupture, as Solomon's Seal; nor the
Hemorrhoids, or Orpment; nor an Ulcer as spotted, as spotted Arsmart; but the
Figure of an entire Man: And as the eminent Virtues of Ancient Heroes being too
great to be comprehended by the Wits of these Ages, gave occasion to fabulous
Romances; so the Wits of Botanists that have been capable to write the Virtues
of other Simples, have not been sufficient to speak of these of Mandrakes,
leaving the vulgar the liberty to attribute Supernatural Virtues to them. Which
made some Rabbis say, that the Teraphins of Laban, Jacob's Father-in-law, were
the roots of Mandrake, which rendered him Answers; and for the loss of which he
fell into such Passion; and Pliny ascribes to the Mandrake the name of Osiris,
which was that of an Egyptian Idol. Our Histories report, that in the year
1420. a certain Cordelier, named Friar Richard, was so persuasive in his
Serm^ns, that in two days the Parisians publicly burnt all the instruments of
voluptuousness and debauchery, and, particularly, the Women their Images; and
Mandrakes which they kept wrapped up in their attires, upon a belief that as long
as they had Mandrakes, they should never fail to become rich: which Mandrakes,
gave them Answers by shaking the head, or else by speech. And there are not
only true, but also counterfeit ones, such as were made by an Italian
Mountebank, (as Matthiolus relates) who carved the root of Pyony, or of a great
Reed in the shape of a Man, and sticking Millet or Flax seed in the places
where hair should grow, buried the same for twenty days; at the end whereof,
fine small threads appeared in those places, and a skin over all the rest,
which represented and passed for a true Mandrake. Belleforest also relates,
that the Maid of Orleans was calumniated for having acquired the valor she
testified against the English by the Magical Virtue of a Mandrake. And Henry
Bouquet, a modern Author, affirms, that Thieves steal the Goods out of Houses,
and Children from their Mothers Breasts by help of it; those that behold them
being unable to defend themselves, because this Plant stupifies their Hands. So
likewise Levinus Lemnius tell us, that it is employed with great effect in
Philtres and Amorous Potions: Upon which account, Natalis Comes, thinks it was
an ingredient in that which Circe gave Scylla, whereby she became so
desperately in Love with Glaucus, that, being unable to enjoy him, she cast her
self headlong into the straight of Messina. Some think, it is the same Plant
that Josephus lib. 7. cap. 25. de bello Judaico, calls Baaras, from the valley
wherein it grows; which, he says, shines in the night like fire, and is plucked
up by a hungry Dog tied to the top of the root, after the same has been
softened with the Urine of a Woman; because upon its plucking up, it is said to
send forth a shreek which is mortal to the hearer, and so the Dog dies after
his work is done. Others conceive, that this root cannot be found except a
little before the rising of the Pleiades, which is about the beginning of
September. Which is no more incredible, than that the seed of Fearn springs but
at a certain prefixed time, before and after which, it appears not. It Is
likewise thought particular to Upper Hungary, and to be plucked up only by
certain Sorceresses, and that in the night; whence also they sell the same
secretly, for fear of being punished by Justice; as it happened Anno 1630. at
Hamburg, where the Senate caused three Women who exercised this trade to be
whipped. Moreover, they hold that this Plant, (called Mandrake from a German word
which signifies to bear the figure of a Man; for Man has the same sense in
that Language as in ours; and Dragen, is to bear or carry) comes from the seed
of Men hanged on Gibbets, or broken on the Wheel, which dropping upon the
ground, already fat and unctuous by the multitude of hanged Bodies, produces
this Anthropomorphite-Plant, so termed by Pythagoras, and alleged as an
Instance to prove his Metempsychosis. Which Conceit is also strengthened by the
production of Beans, which the same Pythagoras and many others hold, to be
produced of dead Bodies; for which reason he not only abstained from eating
them, but had them in such reverence that he suffered himself to be killed in a
field of Beans, through which he might, have escaped, but would not, for fear
of hurting them. So likewise of the Urine of a Dog is produced the Herb Orrach;
of an Elephant's Blood, sucked and vomited by a Dragon, Sanguis Draconis; of the
Bodies of Serpents, Serpentana; and of the seed of Stags, the Mushroms, called
Boleti Cervini. So that though this Plant be not seen, it does not follow that
there is no such thing; it being no more absurd to credit the voice of the
vulgar in this matter, than in many others.

The Second said, There are three sorts of Plants that bear the name of
Mandrake, the Etymology whereof may be taken from the Latin word Mandra, which
signifies a Cave or a shady place; because this Plant loves to grow in the
shadow, and cannot long endure the heat of the Sun. The first sort is called
Mandragoras mas, or white Mandrake; has on the top of its Root great leaves,
spread on the ground like those of broad-leav'd Lettice, but somewhat long,
shining and smooth, in color resembling those of Beat, to wit, of a pale
green; the Flower is likewise pale, whereunto is annexed a round Apple of the
bigness of a small Lemon, of a pale Saffron color, and full of a succulent
pulp, wherein are pale or blew kernels, like those of a Pear, saving that they
are not pointed, but flat like a kidney. Its root is lasting, and dies not
yearly as most others do; long, and so thick, that it can scarce be grasped
with one Hand. It Is usually divided into two; of color outwardly, between
white and red; within, white; carnose, juicy, and of taste between sweet and
bitter. The whole Plant sends forth a strong smell, especially the Apples,
whose juice is some what vinous, but bitterish; and burdens the Head both smelt
and tasted. The second sort called Mandragoras niger, or Female Mandrake, has
leaves like the Male, but less and straiter, like those of small-leav'd Lettice,
of a dark green, bearing Apples as big as our little Medlars: Its root is less,
but otherwise in smell, taste, and figure, like the former; only it is black
without, and white within, and sometimes divided into three. The third kind is
called by some Herbarists, Morion, or Mandrake of Theophrastus; touching which,
though all agree not, yet the opinion of Codrus, whom we follow here, is, that
it has great roots, a high stalk, and leaves of a middle size between Solanum
and Female Mandrake; its Flower is black, and so also is its Fruit; equal to a
big Grape, and of a vinous juice: which Plant some call Solanum Mortiferum, the
Italians Bella Donna, which grows likewise in shadowy places (as the former
also do) in many parts of Italy, especially in Apulia, and sometimes is set in
Gardens: the Apples are ripe in August. Galen accounts them cold in the third
degree, and all Authors agree that they are very moist. All their parts are
somniferous, and of great use in Physic, according to Dioscorides. The most
active is the bark of the Root: The ancient way was to peel the root, press out
the juice, and thicken it in the Sun; or else to boil the root in new Wine till
a third part were consumed, or to infuse it without coction: of this liquor
they administered one or two glasses to such as could not sleep, and three to
such as were to have a limb cut off. They used it likewise in inflammations of
the eyes, some feminine diseases, and to suppurate Phlegmons; having such a
mollifying faculty, that in six hours boiling the Root with Ivory, (they say)
the same becomes pliable, and apt to take any impression. At this day scarce
ought but the leaves and roots are in use, (except that the apples are
sometimes boiled in oil) but all externally, not by the mouth. It Is also
thought alexipharmacal against Serpents, and good to cure Tetters, being
bruised and applied with vinegar. All which effects have made it admired; but
(as humane Nature is prone to Superstition) though this Plant be indu'd only
with Virtues common to other Plants, (the soporiferous Quality being found in
Lettice, Poppy, Henbane, and more eminently in Opium; and that of being proper
to Women, in the Aristoloches) yet because its root resembles a man's legs, and
its trunk in some sort his body without arms; hence Mountebanks have by their
frauds and tricks brought people to believe their strange Stories of it, even
that it eats like a man, and performs his other natural functions. Which
imposture, though less prevalent upon strong minds, becomes less credible by
the prodigious manner they relate it to be produced: for it is impossible to
imagine that any generation can proceed from sperm destitute of spirits, and
out of the proper natural subject destinated to its reception.

The Third said, That indeed no Univocal Generation can be made after the loss
of the spirits of Sperm; but equivocal, such as this is, may: whereunto Nitre
contributes very much; which salt not being lost by death, nothing hinders but,
a fertile soil being determined by some form or other, a Plant may arise out of
it; to which production fewer conditions are requisite than to that of an
Animal. And it is the less incredible, if the Experiment delivered by some
Authors be true; That the salts of Rosemary, Sage, Mint, and some other
strong-sented herbs, being extracted according to Art, and frozen in a Glass,
exhibit the image of those Plants, therein; and, if sown in well-prepared
earth, produce the Plants of same Species.

The Fourth said, That not only the means of the production of this imaginary
Plant are so too, but also the supernatural virtues ascribed to it are
ridiculous; yea, those said to be natural to it are very hard to be justified:
for to be soporiferous, and to promote Procreation in Men and Women of several
tempers is inconsistent, because these things require Simples of very different
Qualities; and also are the causes of Sterility. This error of its being
prolifick,, proceeds from a false supposition taken out of Genesis, where it is
said, that Reuben, the Son of Leah, one of Jacob's Wives, having brought
Mandrakes to his Mother, her Sister Rachel could not obtain them of her but
upon condition that Jacob (who despised her for Rachel the fairer of the two
but barren) should lie with her that night: which bargain was made between
them. Now because Rachel had Children afterward, hence some Interpreters
infer, that she eat those Mandrakes, and that they rendered her fruitful: which
is not at all in the Text; and her Fruitfulness might proceed from the favor
of God, or some more fit means than that Herb. Nor is it an edible fruit,
neither did all the Women in the Scripture, who of barren became fruitful, eat
Mandrakes. It Is therefore probable, that this Plant has neither the Form, nor
the Properties which vulgar and vain Antiquity attributes to it.

The fifth said, It Is easier to overthrow, then to establish a Truth, when the
question is about things apparently repugnant to Reason, which many times
agrees not with our own experience, whereby we see several contrary effects of
one and the same Plant. As the pulp of an Orange cools, the peel heats, and oil
of the seeds is temperate: The like may be said of Mandrake, which according to
the diversity of its Species and Parts may produce the different effects, which
are attested by Antiquity; Apuleius, in his Metamorphosis relating, That a
Physician deluded the malice of a Servant and a Stepmother, by giving them the
juice of Mandrake instead of poison (which they desired of him to kill a young
man) which caused them to think him dead when he was only in a deep sleep: and
Columella speaking of the soil where it grows; Quamvis semihominis vesano
gramine foeta,
Mandragorae pariat flores.
Moreover since there are middle Natures composed of two extremes, as your
Zoophytes between Plants and Animals, to wit, Spunges and Coral; between Brute
and Man, the Ape; between the soul and body of Man, his Spirits: why may there
not be something of a middle Nature between Man and Plant, to wit, the
Mandrake, a Man in external Shape, and a Plant in Effect and internal Form. In
brief, we believe there is an Unicorn, though no man of this age has seen it;
why therefore may we not believe, that there is such a Mandrake as most
describe, who affirm that they have seen one, as I my self have also, though I
cannot affirm whether it were a true or false one.

CONFERENCE CC. Of Panick Fear.
THe Species conceived in the Fantasy representing to the Intellect some
future Good, they beget Hope; when Evil, Fear. It Is not very hard to comprehend
the way, nor how he, that sees himself pursued by a potent enemy, betakes
himself to flight, by the Instinct of Nature, which avoids what ever is
destructive to her: But the Mind is puzzled to find the cause it sees not, as of
groundless Fear; which nevertheless sometimes befalls the most resolute, yea
whole Armies, which fly without any pursuer. The Vulgar of the Ancients, (who
made Deities of every thing, especially of what they understood not) thought
Pan the God of Shepherds put this sudden Passion into the minds of men; because
oftentimes it happens to flocks of Sheep, over which he is said to preside;
though there be no appearance of any Wolf to fright them: whence they called it
a Panick Terror. Unless you had rather interpret Pan to be the Universal and
Supreme Deity, who giving the success of Battles, sometimes immits such a fear
into the hearts of those men whom he intends to deliver into the power of their
Enemies.

The second said, That Pan was an ancient Warrior, who invented the ranging of
Soldiers in order of Battle, and distinguished them into Wings, called by the
Latins, Cornua; whence he was pictured with Horns. He also first devised
Strategems; so that one day, having sent out his Scowts, and understood that
the Enemies were lodged in a desert place full of resounding caverns, he
ordered his Soldiers, that as soon as they approached the Enemy, they should
make a great shout; which, multiplied by the Echo of those neighboring
caverns, so frighted them, that before they could understand what it was, they
betook themselves to flight, conceiving they had to do with a far greater
multitude of Enemies than there was: Whence the Fable of this God Pan adds,
that the Goddess Echo was his Mistress. From this, Groundless Fear, as others
of the like nature, came to be called Panick Terrors. Such was that which
seized the Soldiers of Marc Antony in the War against Mithridates; that of the
Gauls under Brennus, when they were ready to sack the Temple of Delphos; that
of Hannibal, when he approacht the walls of Rome to besiege it; and that of
Macedonians under their King Perseus, who so lost their courage upon sight of
an Eclipse of the Moon, that it was easy for the Romans to overcome them.

The Third said, That Plutarch, in his Treatise of Isis and O^^ris, relates
another cause of this Appellation; namely, That when the latter of them reigned
in Egypt, Typhon surprised him by a wile, and cast him in a chest into Nilus;
which News arriving amongst the Pans and Satyrs, it put them into an
astonishment; from which all other sudden frights took their name. But leaving
apart conjectures of words, let us consider the thing, and examine, Whether it
be not a mistake, to think that there can be terrors without any cause? I
think, There cannot; because it is as true in Moral as in Natural Philosophy,
That nothing produces nothing. But as an even balance is swayed either way by
the least blast, and (the cause being imperceptible) seems to incline of it
self; so when Men are ready for a battle, and every one thinks of the doubtful
event thereof to himself, the least external cause happening to make never so
little impression upon their Spirits whilst they are in this balance, is enough
to move them either way; the first object that occurs, yea, the least word,
being of great efficacy. And because Fear is found more universally imprinted
in Men's minds than Courage; hence there needs less subject to produce it, than
to animate them. Thus at the battle of Montcontour, this single word, Save the
Princes, spoken either accidentally, or by design, made them lose the day.
Thistles being mistaken for Lances, gave a great terror to a whole Army; and an
Ass or a Cow in the Trenches, has sometimes given an Alarm to considerable
Garrisons.

The Fourth said, That Fear caused in an Enemy being one of the surest means to
conquer him, Generals have not been more careful to animate their own
Soldiers, than to terrify their Enemies even by vain affrightments; as
showts, extravagant arms, and habits. For this reason the Germans were wont to
paint their Faces with several colors, that they might seem terrible; some
think our Poictevins had their name of Pictons from this custom: So Gideon by
Gods command employed Trumpets and earthen Pitchers with fire in them to
terrify the Amalekites. Yet none of these Inventions, no more than that of
Elephants, Chariots of fire, and other Machins, can cause a Panick Terror,
because it ceases to bear that name when it is found to have some manifest
cause. So that to ask, Whence Panick Fear proceeds? is to ask, What is the
cause of that which has none? If there be any, I think it is from some hideous
Phantasms irregularly conceived in the Brain as a Mola, or a Monster is in the
womb; which Phantasms arising from a black humor, cause Sadness and Fear; a
Passion easily communicable, because conformable to the Nature of Man; who
consisting of a material and heavy Body, has more affinity with the Passions
that deject him, as Fear does, than with those which elevate him, as Hope and
Ambition do. The moral cause of Panick Terror is Ignorance, which clouds and
darkens the light of the Soul; whence the most ignorant, as Children and Women,
are most subject to this Fear; and Soldiers, who are the more ignorant sort,
being taken out of the Country, and from the dregs of the people, become easily
surpised with it; and by the proneness of Men to imitation, upon the least
beginning it finds a great accession and familiarity in Humane Nature.

The Fifth said, That the cause of this Terror may be a natural prescience our
Souls have of the evil which is to befall us; which is more manifest in some
than in others; as appeared in Socrates, who was advertised of whatever
important thing was to befall him by his familiar Spirit, or good Angel. Now if
there be any time wherein those Spirits have liberty to do this, it is when we
are near our End, our Souls being then half unloos'd from the Body, as it comes
to pass also at the commencement of a battle, through the transport every one
suffers when he sees himself ready either to die or overcome.

CONFERENCE CCI. Of the Water-drinker of S. Germain's Fair.
THis Person is of a middle Stature; has a large Breast, as also a Face,
especially his Forehead; very great Eyes, and is said to be sixty years old,
though he appears to be but about forty. He was born in the Town of Nota, in
the Island of Maltha, and is named Blaise Manfrede, They that have observed him
in private Houses, and upon the Theater, relate that he makes his experiment
not only every day, but oftentimes twice in one afternoon. Moreover, vomiting
so freely as he does, he is always hungry when he pleases. His Practice is very
disagreeing from his published Tickets, wherein he promises to drink a hundred
quarts of water; but he never drinks four, without returning it up again. His
manner is thus: He causes a pail full of warm water, and fifteen or twenty
little glasses, with very large mouths to be brought to him; then he drinks two
or three of these glasses full of water, having first washed his mouth, to show
that there is nothing between his teeth: Afterward, for about half a quarter
of an hour, he talks in Italian; which time being passed, he drinks three or
four and twenty more of the said glasses, and thereupon spouts forth of his
mouth with violence a red water, which seems to be wine, but has only the
color of it. This water appears red as it comes out of his mouth, and yet when
it is spouted into two of his glasses, it becomes of a deep red in one, and of
a pale red in the other; and changing the situation of his glasses, on the left
side of his mouth to the right, and of those on the right to the left, these
colors always appear different in the same glass; namely, the one of a deep
red, and the other yellow, or Citron-color. Some of the water is of the color
of palled wine; and the more he vomits, the clearer, and less colored the
water is. He has often promised to bring up Oil and Milk; but I never saw nor
heard that he did it. This done, he sets his glasses to the number of fifteen
or sixteen upon a form or bench, to be seen by every one. After which, he
drinks more water in other glasses, and brings it up again either clear water,
or Orange flower water, or Rose Water; and lastly, Aqua Vitae, (which are
manifest by the smell, and by the burning of the Aqua Vitae) having been
observed to keep this order always in the ejection of his liquors, that red
water comes up first, and Aqua Vitae last. He performs this Trick with thirty
or forty half glasses of water, which cannot amount to above four quarts at
most; then having signified to the people that his Stomach, although no Muscle,
(which is the instrument of voluntary motion) obeys him, he casts the same
water up into the Air with its natural color so impetuously, that it imitates
the Casts of water in Gardens, to the great admiration of the Spectators, who
for six we^ks together, were seldom fewer than three hundred daily. For my
part, I find much to admire in this action. For though men's Stomachs be of
different capacities, and some one person can eat and drink as much as four
others; yet I see not, possibly, where this fellow should lodge so much water.
And again, he seems rather to power water into a Tun than to swallow it, though
the conformation of the Gullet does not consist with such deglutition. Besides,
vomiting is a violent action, and yet most facile in this Drinker. And as to
the order of this Evacuation, it is certain, that all things put into the
Stomach are confounded together therein, so that Concoction begins by Mixtion;
and yet this fellow brings up whatever he pleases, as 'twere out of several
vessels; so that he undertakes to eat a Sallad of several sorts of Herbs and
Flowers, and to bring them up all again in order. Moreover, what can be more
prodigious, than this mutation of Colors, Smells, and Substances? And, indeed,
they say, he has sometimes feared to be questioned for Sorcery. But the
greatest wonder is that smartness and violence wherewith he spouts out water
from his Stomach, not laterally, which is the ordinary manner of vomiting; but
upwards, which is a motion contrary to heavy bodies, as water is. Some
speculative person that had read in Saint Augustine, that a Man's being turned
into a Horse by the power of Imagination, might refer the cause of all these
wonders to that faculty; which daily producing new shapes upon the Bodies of
Children in their Mothers womb, may with less strangeness, produce in this Man
the abovementioned alteration of one color into another. And as for his
facility of bringing up whatever he has swallowed, I can find no better
Reason for it than Custom, which in him is turned into Nature.

The Second said, That Ignorance being the Mother of Admiration, we begin less
to admire as we proceed to more Knowledge. Now if this Maltese were a Magician,
he would do more mavelous things, and of more than one sort; whereas all his
power is confined only to the vomiting up of liquors which he drunk before; and
the faculty of his Stomach being determined to this single kind of action, the
same must be natural; because that is the definition of natural powers.
Moreover, no action ought to be accused of Magic, till good Reasons have
evinced it to surpass all the powers of Nature; which is very hard to prove,
because we know not how far they may reach: And should we accuse of Magic
every thing when we understand not the Causes, almost all Natural Philosophy
would be turned into superstition. Again, a Man that promises more than he can
perform, drinking but the twentieth part of what he boasts of, and who can make
but one sort of color issue out of his mouth, though he exposes several others
to the Spectator's Eyes, cannot pass for a great Sorcerer, or refined Magician.
As for the easiness and violence wherewith he casts water out of his Stomach
at pleasure, it cannot be either from Artifice or Custom alone, which cannot
put free and voluntary motions into parts wherein there is none, nor procure
new Organs necessary to this action; and no Man being able to accustom himself
to move his Ears at his pleasure, unless the same be naturally disposed
thereunto, as Manfrede's Stomach is. Now natural dispositions are only of two
sorts; some depend upon the Temperament, which is incapable of this effect;
others, belong to the Stomach, as it is an Organical part; namely, a particular
Conformation, which may be easily conjectured from the example of ruminating
Animals, who when they list, bring up their food out of their Stomach into
their mouth: An action not impossible to Men; since Nature oftentimes by error
gives one Species such a Conformation in some parts, as is of right peculiar to
another; and accordingly the faculty of ruminating is found in diverse Men.
Aquapendens saw two to whom this action was more voluntary than that whereby we
void our excrements, when they importunately solicit us; observing expressly
that they were not constrained to it, but by the pleasure which they took in
it. And the same Author likewise records, that opening the Body of one that
ruminated, he found one Membrane of his Stomach more fibrous and strong than
ordinary. And the same is probably so in that of this Maltese, since this
voluntary motion can proceed only from such a Conformation. In like manner
these persons that have been able to move their Ears, have been observed to
have the Muscles behind them more fleshy than other Men. And our Conjecture is
further confirmed by the Instance of the Bladder, whose Excretion is performed
by the Pyramidal Muscles, which oftentimes are deficient; and in that case
their office is supplied by the carnous Membrane of the Bladder which is valid,
and performs the motions of a Muscle, according to the opinion of the greatest
Anatomists of this Age. So that what is so ordinary in the Bladder, is not to
be admired in the Stomach: Besides that, Custom may have much increased the
strength and dexterity of this faculty; and although it have not otherwise
conduced in the least to the effect, but only as founded upon a natural
Disposition. That all ruminating have not been able to do the like, is, because
they neglected to increase the natural Disposition by use and practice; and as
to the diversity of color and smells, there is nothing therein but artifice
and fallacy.

The Third said, That what is here thought most admirable, the drinking of a
great quantity of Water, is seen every day at Pougues and Forges, where you
shall have one Person drink sixty glasses: and those that have seen the
Stomach, that hangs up in the Anatomical Theater of Leyden, and is capable of
seven quarts, will not think it strange, that this Maltese drinks much less: As
for the diversity of Liquors, which he brings up, discerned by their several
colors, smells, and the inflammability of the Aqua vitae, I attribute it to
the perfection of the reasonable soul, which, as well as all other forms,
imprints Dispositions in the matter; this being universal, that, besides the
Properties common to the whole Species, there is a particular one in every
Individual which distinguishes the same from others, and comes from the last
Character of the form. That of the Maltese, is to turn common Water into Wine,
Orenge-flower-water, Rose Water, and Aqua vitae. For the diversity of matter,
and its dispositions, signifies nothing as to the mutations introduced therein
by the Forms; though one may say, that in common Water, especially that of the
Well, all the Elements, and the three Principles of Chemistry are found, having
its Salt from the Earth, its Sulphur from the Bitumen and Naphtha, wherewith
the Caverns of the Earth, and especially Wells abound; and, as for Mercury,
it is nothing but water it self. No wonder then, if since every thing may be
made of every thing, by the Maxim of the most ancient Philosophers, our Maltese
fetches what he pleases out of his Stomach.

The Fourth wondered, if this Maxim were true, That every thing is made of
every thing in the Maltese's Belly, even without any distinction or preparation
of the matter, why this Water-drinker fetched so great a circuit to get money,
since 'twould be a shorter way for him to make it, and even Gold it self by the
same reason; or at least he would make sale of his sweet Waters, and not suffer
the Perfumers to be at such charge in fetching them from far. If he make it his
excuse, that he would not get vent for such an abundance, why, if there be no
cheat in the thing, has he not taken occasion of the dearness of Wine in
France this year, to sell the Wine he makes in Paris? But Experience renders it
manifest, that the Wine he promises is nothing but water, and consequently, he
is less able to make Aqua vitae, into which water cannot be turned but by first
taking the nature of Wine; and indeed there needs more wine to yield the
quantity of Aqua vitae he pretends to bring up, then he drinks water before he
ejects it. Besides, Chemistry manifests, that Aqua vitae is not made, but only
separated. Nor can this change be a Property in the Malteses Stomach, because
all Properties are specifical, and belong to all the Individuals of the same
Species, there being nothing peculiar in any man, but a certain degree of
indivisible temperament, called Idio-syncrasie. And, if his temper be so hot as
to turn common water in an instant into Aqua vitae, it is impossible to be cold
enough to make Rose Water at the same time: if it have any transmuting virtue,
it ought to turn all into one sort of Liquor; because the same Agent never
makes but the same Effect, unless the Subject be diversifi'd by diversity of
matter; whereas here it is all water from the same Spring. Neither could this
Drinker drink Well-water without intoxication, because, being turned into Aqua
vitae, the vapors thereof would mount up into his brain; and so to prescribe
him water in a Fever, would be no more refreshment to him then if one gave him
Aqua vitae.

The fifth said, That the diversity of colors and odors of the Liquor he
ejects, proceeds from the tincture of some mass of Essence extracted from the
same materials, which those Liquors represent; which Masses he holds between
his teeth incorporated with some gum which fastens them there; so that, as the
Water he drinks, passes impetuously between his teeth, it derives colors and
odors from the same: Which is the reason why the water he first casts forth, is
most colored; whereas, if the Dye proceeded from his Stomach, it would be
deeper at last of all, as having acquired more digestion by a longer infusion.

The Sixth said, That Histories are full of several particular Constitutions of
the Natural Parts; witness the example of the Maid mentioned by Cardan, who
drinking but two pints of water a day, pissed twenty; and that of the Emperor
Maximinus, who commonly eat forty pound weight of meat, with proportionable
drink, and sweat so abundantly, that he filled -- It Is said, That Theagenes the
Thasian eat a Calf for his dinner; and Milo, the famous Wrastler of Croton,
devoured a 100. pound of Flesh, a Hogshead of Wine, and Bread proportionable.
Such was that Parasite, who one day at the Table of the Emperor Aurelius, eat a
Boar, a Sheep, a Pig, and an hundred Loaves, and drunk half a tun of Wine. All
which stories render less strange the quantity of this Maltese's Drink, whose
color possibly afterward he disguises with powders hid in his Handkerchief
which he handles so often, or by the help of a double Glass, of which his
Vessels are made, or by some other trick whereto he has inured himself for
many years.

The Seventh said, That mineral waters are usually drunk with more ease in
great quantity by half than common water can be, because their tenuity makes
them pass immediately into the habit of the Body. And if you consider that this
fellow drinks only out of small vessels, and those not always full; as also
with what nimbleness he dispatches his work, you will much abate the opinion
that he drinks so much as is generally believed. Besides, though his pail be of
a middle size, yet it is never quite full; and he spends much water in washing
his mouth and his glasses, and some too is left behind. Nor is it absurd to
think, that before his showing himself to drink, he swallows a bolus of Brazil,
or of Alkanet, or Fearn Root, or of red Sanders, or Indian Wood, or some such
other thing in powder; after which drinking two or three glasses of water, he
interposes some interval, that the same may be the better tinctured in his
Stomach; which time being passed, he drinks about two quarts of water, which
soon after he brings up red, appearing so both in the Air and in the glasses:
Which color being weak for want of time to be well imbibed by the water, is
wholly lost when the same is powered into a vessel, wherein there is a little
Verjuice, Vinegar, juice of Citron, Spirit of Vitriol, or other such acid
liquor, which is proper to consume the said color. And it is observable, that
the last water he vomits, is continually paler than the first, the tincture
being diminisht by the quantity of water. Add hereunto, that it is likely his
glasses are smeared with some essences, which seem transparent to the
Spectators; for though he makes show of washing them, he only passes the brims
dexterously over the water, and lets none of it enter into them. As for the
violence wherewith he spouts forth the water, it must be confessed, that the
fellow has a great natural propensity to vomiting, which by frequent
repetition, is become habitual to him: Custom being capable to produce such
effects, that I have seen a Beggar about fifty years old, by being exercised
thereunto, piss as high as a pike.

CONFERENCE CCII. Why dead Bodies bleed in the presence of their Murderers.
HOnest Antiquity was so desirous of knowing the Truth, that when natural and
ordinary proofs failed, they had recourse to supernatural and extraordinary.
Such was the Jews water of Jealousy, which made the otherwise undiscoverable
Adulterer burst in sunder; the innocent Vestal's Sieve, in which being accused
of Incest, she carried water without shedding. Such also were the Oaths made
upon Saint Anthonie's arm, of so great reverence, that 'twas believed the
perjured would burn a year with the fire of that Saint; and in our time the
excommunication of Saint Geneviesue, which those that incurr, are commonly
reckoned not to outlive a year. In like sort the zeal of Men against that
horrid crime of Murder, has made them cherish a persuasion, that a Carkase
will bleed before its Murderers; (though most slain Bodies bleed when they are
stirred) that so the Conscience of the Actors being disturbed, they might
either by word or gesture be brought to make discovery of themselves. For,
indeed, the Blood which was congealed in the Veins presently after death,
becomes liquid again after two or three days, when it is in its tendency to
corruption; which Liquefaction, and the Inquisition after the Murderer, happening
commonly at the same time, it is no wonder if the Body bleed in the Murderer's
presence, since it does so frequently when he is absent. Yet because this false
persuasion from the co-incidence of times, ceases not sometimes to have its
effect, and to discover Truth; therefore Legislators have thought fit to
authorize it, and to use it as an Argument at least to frighten the Murderer;
though, indeed, it is no conclusive one to condemn him.

The Second said, That it is not credible that Courts of Justice who often admit
this proof to good purpose, could so continue in ignorance of Natural Causes,
as not to discern the effusion of Blood ensuing upon its putrefaction in the
Veins, from that which happens upon confrontation of a Murderer. It Is better
therefore to seek further for the cause, than to question the effect; which
some attribute to some secret Antipathy of the murdered person's blood to that
of his Murderer; or else to their mutual emission of spirits, which still
seeking the destruction of each other's person, those of the Murderer being the
strongest, because still living, cause a commotion in the Blood of the dead,
which thereupon breaks forth at the outlet of the wound; Campanella attributes
it to the sense wherewith all things are indu'd, and which still remains in
these dead Bodies; so that having a sense of their Murderers, and perceiving
them near hand, they suffer two very different motions, Trembling and Anger,
which cause such a commotion in the Blood, that it flows forth at the wound.
For the spirits, which during life had such perceptions as were necessary for
their receiving and obeying the Soul's commands, retain somewhat thereof after
death, and are capable of discerning their friends and their enemies.

The Third said, If this opinion concerning the emanation of spirits, whether
by Sympathy or Antipathy, be true, it will follow, That one who has done a
Murder with gunshot, cannot be discovered by this sign; and that one slain in
his Wife's arms, and in a crowd of his friends that endeavored to defend his
life, will bleed rather in the presence of his friends than of his Murderer,
whose spirits are more inwardly retired through fear of punishment; whereas
those of his friends are sent outward by Anger and desire of Revenge: Yea, if
the Murderer had been wounded before, he should rather bleed than the dead,
because his Blood is more boiling, and capable of commotion by the spirits
issuing out of the Carkase. And had they any Sympathy, they could not discover
the Murderer for want of sense, which they never had; for the spirits which are
in the Blood scarce deserve that name, being purely natural, and void of all
sense even during life, and specifically different from the animal spirits. The
vital spirits which are a degree above them, vanish together with life, whence
the Arteries that used to contain them are empty. And those that serve for
Sensation cannot remain in a dead Body, because they are easily dissipable, and
need continual reparation; whence we see all the senses fail in a swoon,
because the Heart recruits them not by a continuity of their generation:
Besides, should they remain after death, they would be unactive for want of fit
dispositions in the Organs. Moreover, natural causes act necessarily when their
object is present; but sometime it is known, that Murderers have thrust
themselves more diligently into the crowd of Spectators than any other persons,
for avoiding suspicion, and no such bleeding has happened in their presence; and
that Executioners take Criminals the next day from the Gallows or the Wheel,
and not a drop of Blood issues from their wounds. And why should not a dead
Sheep as well fall a bleeding afresh in the presence of the Butcher that killed
it? Or a Man mortally wounded, when he that did it is brought unknown into his
Chamber? For it is hard to imagine that we have less sense and knowledge whilst
life remains than after death, that a wounded person must die that he may
become sensible. In short, it is easy to see that this effect is not like other
wonders which have a cause in Nature; because though we cannot assign the
particular causes of these, yet they are proved by some demonstrative, or at
least some probable reasons. And as for Antipathy, it should rather concenter
all the dead person's Blood in his Murderer's presence, and make it retire to
the inward parts. Wherefore, I conclude, that not only the causes of this
miracle are not yet found, but also that it is impossible there should be any
natural one of it at all.

The Fourth said, That according to the opinion of Avicenna, who holds, That
the Imagination acts even beyond, and out of its Subject, this faculty may
cause the effluxion of Blood; the Criminal's Fancy working mightily when the
person slain by him is objected before his Eyes; And the nitrous vapors arising
out of the Earth upon digging up the Body, together with the heat of the Air
greater than that of the Earth, and increased by the conflux of Spectators, may
in some measure contribute to the new fermentation of the Blood. But the truth
is, after all our inquiries, this extraordinary motion cannot be better
ascribed elsewhere, than to God's Providence, who sometimes performs this
miracle for the discovery of Murder, which would otherwise be unpunisht, but
not always. And it is no less impiety to deny, that Divine Justice comes
sometimes to the aid of that of Men, than it is ignorance and rusticity to be
satisfied in all cases with universal causes, without recurring to particular
ones; which God employes most ordinarily for the Production of Effects, yet
does not so tie his power to the necessity of their operations, but that he
interrupts the same when he pleases, even so far as to give clay power to open
the Eyes of the blind.

CONFERENCE CCIII. Of the Unicorn.
THere are no greater impostures in the Art of Physic than those which relate
to Antidotes and Preservatives from Poison, such as the Unicorn's Horn is held
to be: And I am mistaken, if it be not a popular error. First, because the
opinions of all Authors are so contrary concerning it. Philostratus in the life
of Apollonius says, that the Animal of this name is an Ass, and is found in
the fenns of Colchis, having one single horn in the forehead, wherewith he
fights furiously against the Elephant. Cardan, after Pliny, says it is a Horse,
as it is most commonly painted; only it has a Stag's head, a Martin's skin, a
short neck, short mane, and a cloven hoof, and is bred only in the Deserts of
Aethiopia amongst the Serpents, whose Poison its horn which is three cubits
long resists. Garsius ab Horto says, it is an Amphibious Animal, bred on Land
near the Cape of good Hope, but delighting in the Sea, having an Horses head
and mane, a horn two cubits long, which he alone of all Authors affirms to be
moveable every way. Most agree that it cannot be tamed; and yet Lewis Vartoman
says, that he saw two tame ones in Cages at Mecha, which had been sent to
Sultan Solomon. Almost all confess it very rare, and yet Marcus Sherer, a
Renegado German, afterward called Idaith Aga, and Ambassador from the same
Solomon to Maximilian the Emperor, affirms that he saw whole troops of them in
the Deserts of Arabia; And Paulus Venetus the same in the Kingdom of Basman;
where they are almost as big as Elephants, having feet like theirs, a skin like
Camels, the head of a Boar, and delighting in mire like swine. Nor are Authors
less various concerning its manner of eating; some alleging, that being unable
to feed on the ground by reason of his horn, he lives only on the boughs and
fruits of Trees, or on what is given him by the hands of Men, especially of
fair Virgins, of whom, they say, he is amorous; though others think it
fabulous. Some believe that there was once such an Animal, but not now; the
whole race perishing in the Deluge; and that the horns we find now, for the
most part in the earth, have been kept there ever since. And if there be such
variety in the description of this Animal, there is no less in the horns, which
they tell us are those of the Unicorn. That at Saint Dennis in France, is about
seven foot high, weighs thirty pound four ounces, being wreathed and terminated
in a point from a broad base. Yet this is not comparable to that Aelian
mentions, which was so thick that cups might be made of it. That at Strasburg
has some conformity with this of Saint Denis, but those of Venice differ from
both, as that described by Albertus Magnus does from all. For it is, says he,
solid like a Hearts horn, ten foot high, and very large at the base. The
Swisses have one, which was sometimes found on the bank of a River near Bruges,
two cubits long, yellow without, white within, odorous, and apt to take fire.
That at Rome is but one foot high, having been diminished by being frequently
rasp'd in order to be employed against Poison; it is also smooth and shining
like Ivory. Aldrovandus who writ a Treatise of this Subject, says, he saw one
so big at Niclasbourg, that it resembled the rib of a Whale rather than a Horn.
Becanus the Queen of Hungarie's Physician, speaks of one at Antwerp seven foot
high, so fastened to the skull of the Animal, that it was bowed backwards along
the back bone, and could not serve to trouble the water for repelling its
venenosity, (as Authors say it does) nor yet be of any defense, which is the
use of horns, except by bowing down the head between the forelegs, as Bulls do
in their fights. It was also white; and yet Aelian says, it must be black: And
Ctesias, Physician to King Artaxerxes, represents it but one cubit high, purple
toward the point, and black at the base. Which variety makes some believe,
that all these are the horns of Fishes, or Sea Monsters, there being no Element
susceptible of more varieties: Whereunto that Fish is to be referred which
Albertus Magnus calls Monoceros, from its having one horn in the Forehead; the
opinion of those that think the Unicorn was the Rhinoceros. Pliny, after
Ctesias, affirms, that some Oxen in India, have but one horn, and are not
cloven hoof'd. Aelian and Oppian report the like of others in Aonia; and Caesar
of others in the Hercinian Forest; and Lewis Barthema, that he saw such Cows in
Aethiopia. In brief, as it is agreed that there are Animals with one Horn, so
it is impossible to know which is that whereunto Antiquity gave the Appellation
of Unicorn by way of excellence; which incertainty, those Kings and States that
have them testify, by keeping them in their treasures for show only, not for
use, and not making them into drinking vessels, which (according to Aelian)
retun'd the hurtfulness of all Poisons. Add hereunto, that it is not credible
the Romans who subdued most of the accessible world, and were very careful to
delight their people with spectacles of the rarest beasts, would not have
forgot to show them Unicorns, if there had been any. But were there a Unicorn,
I should not esteem its virtues such as they are described, being countenanced
by the authority neither of Galen nor Hippocrates. So that Charles the Ninth's
Physician said, he would have taken away the custom of putting a piece of this
horn into the King's Cup, but that it was good to leave an opinion of its
virtue in the minds of the vulgar. Moreover, the marks given of it are like all
the rest, equivocal, incredible, and ridiculous. For they say, a true is
discerned from a false by the ebullition the true one causes in water when
cast thereinto; which nevertheless all porous Bodies do, as burnt bones, lime,
brick, and such other things wherein there are many cavities. Others discover
it by giving some of it in powder after a dose of Arsenick to a Cock, or a
little Dog; whom it will not only secure, but almost revive when dead, and yet
all that can be gathered upon trial, is, that we see those Animals that have
taken this antidote, die more slowly than others. Which is supposed to happen
by the astriction that all horn causes in the mouth of the Stomach, and the
other Vessels, whence the exhalation of the Spirits is retarded. The trial of
some Empericks is yet more ridiculous; they boast, that if a Circle be
described with a piece of this horn upon a Table, and an Adder or Spider laid
in the middle of it, they can never come out of it; and, that these Animals
die, if only held a quarter of an hour under the shadow of this Horn. Some add,
that this horn sweats in the presence of poison, which seems absurd: because in
this case the counter-poison suffers from the poison, which consequently, must
be strongest and most active of the two. In brief, these numerous
Contradictions, Impossibilities, and Incertainties make me conclude this Story
of the Unicorn a mere Fiction.

The Second said. If the Verity of things were shaken by the false conceits
others have of them, there would be no Physicians, because there are oftentimes
ignorant ones; no point of Right, because many know it not; no true Deluge,
because the Poets feigned that of Deucalion and Pyrrha; no true Religion,
because the Pagans and others have had false ones. On the contrary, as the
Romances, concerning Charlemagne, were built upon the truth of his admirable
exploits, so it is credible, that the mavelous effects of the Unicorn's Horn
have given both great and small occasion to speak of it, and out of ignorance
of the Truth to feign much more then the Truth concerning it. The objection
taken from the verity of descriptions of the Unicorn, and from that which is
observed in several Horns, (of about twenty whereof found in the treasures of
Princes and States of Europe there are not two altogether alike) is not
concluding; since the same may be said of most other Animals, who according to
the diversity of Climats change their color, and oftentimes shape too, yea, in
one and the same place, they differ according to their Ages. Moreover, the
Error is very excusable in Authors that have treated of the Unicorn, in taking
(as Aristotle does) the Greek name Monoceros, and the Latin Vnicornis, for a
Noun Adjective applicable to every sort of Animals that have but one Horn, as
many have not. Some indeed have confounded Rhinoceros with Monoceros through
the resemblance of their cadence, which Rhinoceros the Romans had in their
Spectacles or Shows, and is described by Martial so furious, that he threw a
Bear up into the Air, as one would do a Ball: But it follows not, that they had
no Unicorns in their Amphitheaters, because there is no mention made of any; an
Argument drawn from Negative Authority not being demonstrative: and, granting
it was unknown to them, it follows not thence that there is no such thing in
Nature; not only because they knew not the greatest part of the World, but
also, because this Animal is represented so furious, that it cannot be taken
alive; especially in its perfect Age, being fierce even to those of its own
Species of either Sex, and only accostable at the time of their Copulation.
Philo after Aelian says, That the Brachmans call it Cartazonon, that it is of
the bigness of a Horse, of a bay color, very nimble of body, especially of the
legs, though without joints; that it has the tail of a Boar, one horn between
the eyes, black, streaked like a Snail, and ending in a very sharp point, two
cubits long; that it has a hoarse voice, is less furious toward other Beasts,
than to those of its own Species, with whom it fights incessantly, unless when
they are at rut. There are also ancient Medals representing this Animal putting
his horn into a Cup; which it is thought were Alexander's. Aeneas Sylvius, and
Paulus Venetus affirm, That Unicorns are found in the Mountains of India and
Cathay; though the marks this latter give them, agree better to the Rhinoceros:
But these Authorities are not considerable in respect of that of the H.
Scripture, wherein it is said, Deuteronomy. 28. His horns shall be like that of the
Unicorn: and Psalm. 22. Deliver me, O God, from the Lion's mouth, thou have
heard me also from among the horns of the Unicorns: and Psalm. 29. He makes
Lebanon and Sirion to skip like a young Unicorn; and Psalm. 92. My horns shall
thou exalt like the horn of an Unicorn; and Isaiah 34. The Unicorns shall come
down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls. Job also speaks of it, chap.
39. Add to these Authorities the experience and example of so many Kings and
States, who would not think their treasure well furnished, unless they had an
Unicorn's horn. For, the matter that makes teeth, being transferred to the
generation of horns, and so further sublimed; it is certain, that all Horns have
an Alexiterical Virtue, by which they resist Fevers, cure Fluxes of the belly,
kill Worms, and serve for many other Remedies to Man: but when this already
great Virtue comes to be united into one single Chanel, as it happens in the
Unicorn, the same is mightily augmented. And it is too much detraction from the
power of Nature, to deny such Virtue to be found in inanimate Bodies, as in the
Serpentine Tongues found in the Caves of Malta, sealed Earths, and Minerals,
such as those they call for that reason Vnicornu minerale, not because taken
from Unicorn's buried under ground ever since the time of the Deluge, but
because of their Resemblance in Virtues, Properties, and outward Figure: and
indeed there is so much of this Mineral Unicorn's horn, and Mineral Ivory
found, that it is not credible it ever belonged to any Animal. Nor is this truth
prejudiced by [the] tricks of Impostors, who make counterfeit Unicorn's horns
of Ivory, or other horns, or the bones, of Elephants, and other Animals kept
for some time under ground, whereby they acquire more solidity, and some
transparency, by means of the salt of the Earth, which insinuates thereinto, as
it does to Porcellane, which for that reason is buried a whole Age: nor by the
ebullition that some other natural and artificial bodies cause, or by the
sweating of some Stones upon the approach of poison, which proceeds from the
poyson's inspissating the Air, which thereupon sticks to the next solid body.
Nor is the color material; since process of time may alter it; besides that,
the Ancients attribute blackness only to the horns of the Indian Ass, and the
Rhinoceros: And, as for the smell found in the Unicorn's horn in Suizzerland,
it is an argument, that the same is either adulterate, or a Mineral one; the
texture of the horns being too close to evaporate any thing; and those that
have distilled them by fires, find, that they abound with an inodorous Salt,
and a stinking Sulphur. In short, it is not credible, Clement VII. Paul III. and
diverse others, would have taken this Animal for their Arms, if there were no
such; nor do Popes so much want understanding men, that Julius III. would have
bought a fragment of it for 12000. crowns; whereof his Physician made use
successfully in the cure of Diseases that had any thing of venenosity.
Marsilius Ficinus, Brassavola, Matthiolus, Aloisius, Mundela, and many other
Physicians, recommend it in such diseases, especially in the Pestilence, the
Biting of a mad Dog, Worms, Falling Sickness, and other such hideous Maladies.
To conclude, I conceive, that effects which depend upon occult Properties, as
this does, ought not to be rashly condemned; being mindful that our knowledge is
limited, and therefore, the Authorities, Reasons, and Experiences, which
establish the Unicorn's horn, and its wonderful Effects are to be yielded to;
only with exception to Imposture.

CONFERENCE CCIV. Of Satyrs.
NOvelty and extraordinary things have such power upon our Minds, that they not
only render us attentive when they are present, but remain longer imprinted in
the Memory; as those, that teach the Art of Memory truly observe. This obliged
many Poets and Historians to speak of Hydra's, Chimaera's, Basilisks, Satyrs,
Centaurs, and other such Fictions. For those that have most exactly examined
the power of Nature, find the mixture of these Species impossible, not only on
the part of the Matter which is to receive the Soul, to which it is determined
by a certain proportion, but also in respect of the Form, which is indivisible,
especially the Rational Soul. To which purpose the Poet Lucretius speaks very
learnedly, and maintains, that there can be no Centaurs; and the reason he
alleges, holds as well against the possibility of Satyrs: Because, says he,
if this mixture of the humane and equine Nature had place, Horses being in
their full strength at three years old, at which time children scarce leave
sucking the breasts of their Nurse, how is it possible this monstrous Animal
should be in its tender age and full growth both together? And again, a Horse
growing, when the Man enters into the prime of his youth, how can the one dye,
when the other is in the state of its greatest vigor? Now Goats live less time
than Horses, and so there is less probability for an Animal compounded of the
Nature of a Goat and a Man. Hence Pliny, in the seventh book of his Natural
History, says, That a Hippocentaur being bred in Thessaly, it died the same
day, and was afterward preserved in honey, which is an excellent bawm. Virgil
places them at the entrance of Hell, because things against Nature cannot
subsist. And S. Hierom in the life of S. Paul, the Hermit, relating how a
Centaur appeard to S. Anthony, doubts whether it were a true Centaur, or the
Devil under that shape; and indeed seems to infer it an Evil Spirit, because it
was driven away by the sign of the Cross. So that Satyrs are to be attributed
only to the liberty Poets have ever taken, as well as Painters of daring and
attempting every thing, without observing the Rule Horace prescribes them not
to conjoyn Natures totally disagreeing and opposite; for, by these mixtures
they intended only to represent very nimble, lascivious, rustic, and perhaps
abusive men; (whence came their Satyrick Poems.)

The second said, That it is as dangerous to conclude all impossible that we
have not seen, as to be credulous to every thing. But when Reason, and the
authority Experience carries with it, are of a side, our incredulity, has no
excuse. Now the case of Satyrs is such; for they may be as well produced by the
mixture of the Seeds of two Species, as Mules are. Besides, were not the
Imagination of Mothers capable of imprinting this as well as any other change
of Figure in a Child's body, whereof we have daily examples; yet the wild
suckling and course of life some Children may have had amongst Goats (as
Romulus and Remus had from a Wolf) may in process of time have begot some
resemblance of shape in them. As for Lucretius's Reason, we see that Plants are
ingrafted into others, not only of the same, but also of a different Species,
as the Apple-Cyon on a Colewort; which Plants being of different durations, the
graft becomes of a middle duration between them, namely longer-liv'd then a
Colewort, and shorter then another Apple Tree. And S. Hierom is not positive,
that the Centaur, which appeared to S. Anthony, was an illusion, but doubts
whether it were a true Centaur such as Antiquity spoke of, or whether 'twas not
the Devil appearing in that shape to frighten that holy Person. And, Plato, in
convivio sapientum, relates, That a Shepherd having presented to Periander a
Foal born of a Mare of his, that had the head, neck, and hands of a Man, the
rest of an Horse; and the voice of a Child, Diocles affirmed, that this Prodigy
presaged Seditions and Divisions of Minds: But Thales replied, 'Twas a natural
thing, and, for preventing the like again, advised him to have no other
Hors-keepers but what were married. Pliny, likewise in the seventh Book of his
Natural History, says, That in the Country of the Cratadulones, amongst the
Indian Mountains, Satyrs are found; very swift Creatures, running sometimes on
two feet, sometimes on four, and having the shape of a Man. And Plutarch tells
in Sylla's life, That, as he returned into Italy, a Satyr was brought to him
like those described by ancient Authors, half-man, and half-goat; and being
asked what he was, answered nothing that resembled a humane voice, but with a
tone mixed of that of Goats, and the neighing of Horses. Whereupon, Sylla,
having compassion on him, appointed guards to carry him back. S. Hierom in the
abovementioned place describes another Satyr, which, he says, was of a middle
stature, having a crooked Nose, horned front, and Goats feet, and brought Dates
yet hanging on a Palm-branch, to S. Paul the Hermit. The Saint asked him what he
was, and he answered, that he was a Mortal, one of the Inhabitants of that
Hermitage, whom the abused Pagans adore, for Fauns, Satyrs, and Incubes; and I
come (says he) as deputed to you from our Company, to desire you to pray for
us to your and our God, whom we know to be come into the World, for the common
Salvation. After which words, this light Animal took its course and fled away.
And lest this Relation might seem strange, I shall add, That under Constantine,
a living one was brought to Alexandria, and shown there to the People;
afterward, being dead, it was called and carried to Antioch to be seen by the
Emperor. Pausanias records also, That he was informed by one Euphemius, who,
(he says) was a man worthy of credit, how that sailing into Spain, he was
driven by storm into certain Islands full of savage Men, having hairy bodies,
long tails, like those of Horses, and red hair; whom they could not keep off
from them, but by blows; and a Woman being exposed on the shore by the
Mariners, these Satyrs abused her with all outrages imaginable. So that to
doubt of the existence of Satyrs after so many Testimonies, is, to ascribe too
much to our own senses, and too little to the witness of the Ancients.

CONFERENCE CCV. Of the Phoenix.
IF ever there were cause to admire the simplicity and credulity of the
Ancients, it is the story of the Phoenix, which is feigned a Bird that lives
many ages, after which repairing to the City Heliopolis in Egypt, it builds
its nest, or rather funeral pile, there of aromatic wood, which, by reason of
its high situation being fired by the Sunbeams, she dies, and immediately
another arises out of her ashes; it being as impossible for Nature to be
without a Phoenix, as the Phoenix to have a Companion. In which Relation the
Historians have imitated the Poets, and chosen rather to tell strange things
than true. For, first, this Nativity of this imaginary Bird is a manifest
impossibility; because nothing is more abhorred by Nature than voluntary death,
and that orderly Governess would rather have given the Phoenix a Female, as
well as to all other Creatures, than have put her self thus upon the necessity
of a miracle. Nor can any thing be more contrary to the generation of Animals
than ashes, which, are dry; dryness being altogether opposite to life, and to
the corruption which is antecedent to every generation. Next, its progress is
equally absurd. For, they say, this little Bird no sooner attains its just
bigness, (which is equal to that of an Eagle, having its head cristed with
diverse colors, the neck gold-colour, the rest of the feathers purple saving
that the tail is mixed of scarlet and sky-colour) but it prepares it self to pay
the last duties to the bones of its deceased parent. (But how consistent is
this with the Bird's being reduced to ashes?) Which bones she lays upon her
back, and flies from Egypt with them to Arabia, where she places them upon an
Altar dedicated to the Sun; upon which the same Bird before her death had made
an offering of the Neast, which was to be her fatal pile. After these funerals
it flies toward Heaven, where it is fed with dew, and the fumes of Incense and
Amomum; and instead of drink, makes use of the vapors which arise from the Sea,
abhorring all kind of grain and food common to other Birds. According to
Aelian, it lives five hundred years, according to others six hundred, and
according to others more, in places apart from the commerce of Men; but so
highly reverenced by all other Birds, that they follow it with great respect
and admiration, insomuch that Birds of rapine forget their prey, and others the
fear of being taken. As many fictions as words, even if Lucretius's opinion be
true, who admits not, that any single Animal can generate. Wherefore it is not
without reason, that to avoid rendering account of the many absurdities arising
from these false suppositions, the Historians make it to be hid from our sight
so many Ages; foreseeing that if there was but one Woman found that had danced
twice at Rome in the secular Plays, there will be no witnesses found to attest
the nativity, life, and death of this Animal.

The Second said, That we ought not to condemn the absent under pretext that
they are unknown; for the Nativity of this Bird is defended by that of
Barnacle, which is bred of the putrefaction of a Ship; and of another called
Ephemeron, which by Aristotle's report, is produced of the leaf of a Tree near
the River Hippanis. If the duration of its life be uncertain, so likewise is
that of all Animals with which we converse not. And were the authority of
Betonius suspected, who confounds it with the Manucodrata, yet that of Tacitus
in the fourteenth Book of his Animals is authentic. P. Fabius, and L.
Vitellus, (says he) being Consuls. the Bird called a Phoenix after many Ages
appeared in Egypt, and gave occasion to many Greeks and other personages of
the Country to discourse of the miracle; concerning which they relate many
doubtful things, but worthy to be known. They say, this Animal is devoted to
the Sun, and that its beak and variety of plumes, is wholly different from
other Animals. Most affirm, that it lives five hundred years; others, that it
attains to one thousand four hundred sixty one: and that the first were seen
under Sesostris and Amasis, Kings of Egypt; next, under Ptolomy, who reigned
the third of the Macedonians. It came then into the City of Heliopolis,
accompanied with a great number of other Birds, who seemed as well as Men
amazed at the new spectacle. But because (says he) there were but two thousand
five hundred years from Ptolomy to Tiberius, under whom this appeared; this
made some doubt it was not the true Phoenix, and came not from Arabia, whence
it ought not to come till its life were near an end, to build its neast in
Egypt; wherein he leaves a genital virtue whereby his Successor is produced, who
as soon as come to full vigor, prepares to pay the funeral duty to its parent;
which it does not, lightly, but after it has tried by carrying an equal weight
of Myrrh, whether it be able to carry that of its parent's bones. However,
says he, it is a certain thing that this Bird is seen sometimes in Egypt. And,
indeed, its existence is proved by the Authority of Orus Apollo in his
Hieroglyphics; Manilius, Pliny, Ovid, Athenaeus, Albertus Magnus, yea, by the
public voice which uses this word, to signify a rare thing, and singular in
its Species: Which were not much indeed, if Lactantius, Tertullian, and many
other Fathers had not often employed it to convince the Pagans who questioned
the Resurrection. Moreover, Aelian in his History of Animals, presupposing this
too well known to be particularly described, only blames the broking Misers of
his time, who prefer their affairs before the wonder of this Bird, which is so
well skilled in calculation, that it fails not to repair to its fatal neast at
the prefixed time. In short, we may doubt of some circumstances, but not of the
truth of its existence; its renovation is proved possible from the re-animation
of a drowned fly by the Sun; and since hard to give a satisfactory account of
common generations, we may therefore forbear to reject this, which, though
extraordinary, may yet be maintained by Chemists, who lay the foundation of
generation in Salt, the sole permanent principle, and not volatile as the two
other are.

The Third said, That the Fathers in using Comparisons from this Bird, had
regard to the common belief, as God accommodates himself to the Language of
Men, attributing Passions to himself, though he has none. And for the Authors
that speak of it, it is always upon the credit of others. Even Herodotus and
Pliny, the first whereof, (if you will believe him) saw almost every thing
however strange and unheard of; and the second affirms almost every thing; (so
far as to say, that certain Birds lay their Eggs in a Hare's skin, which they
afterward hang upon a Tree; and that others carry theirs upon a stick laid
over the shoulders of two; besides infinite other things no less incredible and
ridiculous) yet speak but doubtfully of this Bird. So that we have great reason
to do the like, yea, to esteem it a Fiction.

CONFERENCE CCVI. Of Sensitive Plants.
SEnse and Motion are in some sort observed in all Plants, which incline
toward the Sun and Light, and attract their aliment at distance; particularly,
the Vine, which seems to act with choice, twining about the next Tree that may
support it, not once, as might be by chance, but twice or thrice. But with much
more reason may we attribute Sense to the Helitropium and Marygold; as also to
Tulips, which shut up themselves at night, and open again in the day. Pliny
attributes a yet more admirable property to the Lotus, saying, that it sinks
and hides it self totally at night in the River Euphrates near which it grows,
so that it is not to be reached by one's hand, then rises out of the water again
at Sunrise; and that, in places where it grows remote from water, in the
Evening it wraps up its Flower and Fruit in its leaves, and discovers them
afresh next Morning. The Tree called Arbor Tristis, seems also to have much
Sense, its leaves resemble those of the Sloe-Tree; its Flowers open at night,
and in the day are all languid, though of so good a smell, that the Inhabitants
of Malaca, and Goa in the East Indies, distill an odoriferous water from them,
and make use of their red stalks to color meats, as the Europaeans do of
Saffron. So likewise do those Trees of the Islands Hebrides, the wood whereof
being rotted in the Sea is turned into Birds like our Ducks; and that mentioned
by Ruellius, l. 12. chapter 38. of his History of Plants, which bears Cockles, of
which Birds are produced; and those said by Munster in his Cosmography, to grow
in Vomonia near Scotland toward the North, whose Fruit falling into the water
is turned into a Bird, called a Tree-Bird. Guadaguigna, an Italian Author,
affirms the like of the leaves of another Tree. Add to these those which Cardan
says, grow on the bank of a River in Ireland, of whose leaves those that fall
into the water become Fishes, and those that fall upon the land Birds; as also
those which Pigafetta says, he saw in the Island of Cimbubon, near Borneo in
Oriental Asia, which falling to the Earth, walked upon four sharp and short
feet, whereof he kept one eight days, which moved when it was touched, and
lived, in his judgment, of Air alone. Of this sort are likewise all Sea
Vegetables, such as the Sea-Star, Sea-Nettle, Oysters, which have a very dull
Sense, are immovable, and oftentimes fastened to the Rocks, and from the midst
of whose shells sometimes springs a shrub called Sea-Oak, which grows also upon
stones and potsheards, having no root but a thick purple leaf, as Pliny and
Theophrastus witness. But all this is nothing in comparison of what Scaliger
says of the Scythian Lamb, named Borrametz. They affirm, that in Zalvolha a
part of Tartary, the Inhabitants sow a grain like Melon-seed, saving that it is
not quite so long; from which issues a Plant about five spans high, having the
feet, hoofs, ears, and whole head of a Lamb, (saving the Horns, which are
represented by one tuft of Hair) and being covered with a hairy thin skin; its
flesh is very sweet, and like that of Crevishes; and which is more strange, it
bleeds when it is wounded, and is much desired by Wolves, but not by other
Animals that live on flesh. It adheres to the Earth by the Navil, and cannot
live unless grass be sown about it; which withering, or being purposely
destroyed, the Plant dies: Which Plant-Animal, Sigismond Liber, a Pole, says,
is also called Smarcandeos by the Musulmans, who wear the skin of it upon their
breasts and shaven heads for warmth. And there are seen at this day in the King
of France's Garden in the Fauxbourg of S. Victor at Paris, three sorts of
Plants, to which cannot be denied the name of Sensitive, since being touched,
they flag their leaves, one sooner, another more slowly, and the third very
leisurely; which leaves return to their place after the Sun has warmed them
again with his rays, Garsias ab Horto speaks as much of certain anonymous
Plants growing in the Province of Malabar, which as soon as they are touched,
shrink and contract their branches by a motion contrary to the former; and he
adds, that their leaves resemble those of Polypody, and the Flowers are yellow.
Theophrastus in Book 4. Chap. 3. of his History of Plants, attributes the same
faculty to a Spinous Plant like Fearn, (according to Gaza's Translation) or
Feathers, (according to that of Pliny) the leaves or boughs of which Plant being
touched, become arid and languid, close, and compress themselves, and after some
time turn green again, and resume their first vigor: He says, This Plant grows
at Grand Cairo, and is so big that three men can scarce fathom it. Apollodorus,
the Disciple of Democritus, ascribes the like virtue to an Herb which he calls
Aeschinomene, or Chast-Herb, because it shuns the hand of any that offers to
touch it, shrinking its leaves up into an heap. Pliny speaks of another in the
Islands of the Troglodites like Coral, called Charito-Blepharon, which seems to
be sensible of the approach of him that comes to cut it, becoming then as hard
as horn; and, if he wait some time, like a stone. The Portugals tell in their
Navigations of an Herb that grows with small roots in hot and moist places,
putting forth eight little branches two fingers long, furnished with leaves on
each side, as green as Tamarisk, but resembling those of Polypody. From the
middle of the roots arise four small stalks, each of which bears a yellow
Flower like that of Cloves, but without smell; which being never so little
touched, languish and flag, but resume their first vigor upon the removal of the
hand. Of which Marvail, a Philosopher of Malabar being unable to find the
cause, became a fool. Monardes a Physician of Sevil, having described a sort of
Barley in new Spain, called Gayatene, or Cevadilla, (which falls flat as soon as
it is touched) makes mention of another Species of the same Herb, which lying
spread upon the ground, upon touching, folds it self like crisped Colewort.
Lastly, Nicolas Conti says, that in the East Indies between the Cities of
Bisnagar and Malepur, there grows a Tree without Fruit three yards high, called
Arbor Pudica, which retracts its branches when any Man or Beast approaches it.
By all which Relations, it is manifest that there are Sensitive Plants.

The Second said, That since it is not possible to imagine Sensitive Life
without Organs, these motions must not be attributed to Sense, but to other
Causes; as to the attractive heat which is in all Plants, which makes them fold
up themselves according to the figure of the Body near which they are. Some
Animals, as Oysters, have indeed a more imperceptible degree of Sense, yet are
not they therefore Plants; those whereof that have any local motion, have it,
perhaps, from the concussion of the Earth caused by the approaching person, or
from the stirring of the Air; which though imperceptible, drives along the
Ignis Fatuus: And, perhaps, these Flowers and Herbs are of a very rare and
subtle texture. Unless you had rather recurr to the Antipathy which is found
between these Plants and Man, which causes the skin and fiddle-strings made of
Sheeps guts, to break at the noise and sound made by those of a Wolf, with
which they will never be brought to be harmonious. For this is a better way
than to multiply Species without necessity, as they do who establish a middle
Nature between a Plant and an Animal. And as for those which remove from one
place to another, they may, perhaps, find the same account of them upon inquiry
that Aeneas Sylvius did, who (as he says in his Description of Europe, Chap.
46.) asking James VI. King of Scotland, touching those Tree-Birds reported to
be bred there, learnt from the mouth of that learned King, that those famous
Trees grew not there but in the Orcades. Whereupon Aeneas truly and handsomely
replied, Miracula fugiunt.

CONFERENCE CCVII. Of the Bezoar.
THis word some think is derived from the Hebrew Bell, which signifies King, and
zaars Poisons, as if it were the King or Master of Poisons, which are subdued
more powerfully by this than any other remedy. According to Scaliger, Bezohard
is taken by the Arabians for that which preserves life, and so the Stone will
have borrowed its name from its effect. Cardan says, there is a poisonous root
of this name, which bears a fruit called Niraebri, which is an Antidote to it.
This stone is divided into Natural and Artificial. The Natural is of two sorts,
viz. Animal and Mineral; yea, Plants and every thing good against Poisons is
commonly termed Bezoardical, But the Name primarily belongs to a stone found in
an Animal, called by the Persians Pasan, or Pasar; which Animal, Monardes
says, is of the bigness, and almost of the shape of a Stag, having two Horns
large at the base, pointed at the top, and bowed over the back like those of a
Goat, which it resembles in the feet, and something too in the form: Whence
some term it Trag-elaphos, i. e. a Goat-Deer, though this be a different
Animal, having short Hair, and a skin between gray and red, and sometimes of
other colors. The Indians take them in nets for the stone's sake, which they
sell to Merchants. For though the Beast is so furious that it breaks any other
link but those of Iron, yet the price of this stone is so great that it makes
the danger despicable. He adds, that it is so nimble that it casts it self down
from an high Rock, and lights upon its horns without any hurt; and that its
pace is leaping and bounding like a football. All agree not in what part of the
Animal the stone grows. The Arabians write, that this and all other sorts of
Deer finding themselves old and sick, by their breath draw Serpents out of
their holes and devour them, that so thereby they become young and well again;
after which finding themselves heated by this food, they run into the water,
and stay there without drinking till their heat be over; during which stay in
the water, this stone is bred in the corners of their Eyes, whence it is taken
for the uses abovesaid. But Monardes more probably learnt from the Inhabitants
of the Mountains of China, that in the Indies near the River Ganges, these
Goat-Deer after their eating of Serpents go about the tops of the Mountains
feeding on such Herbs as Nature has taught them resist Poisons; of the
quintessence whereof mixed with that of the Poisons, the Bezoar is by some
particular virtue produced in some cavity of their Bodies; Garsias ab Horto,
and Acosta say, in their stomach; particularly in that reduplication by which
they ruminate: others, as Fragosus, in the kidneys, because some stones have
the figure of that part, which also is the most lapidifick of the whole Body;
and others too, as Rabbi Moses the Egyptian, in the Gall; which opinion
Monardes himself is of though he admits too that it is found in the Ventricle,
Intestines, and other cavities of the Body: As, indeed, there is no place in
the Bodies of Animals, but stones may be generated in them. However, it is
universally acknowledged so useful, that the hunters are expressly commanded to
carry them all to the King, who buys them at a great rate, and they are not
transported elsewhere but clandestinely. Amatus Lusitanus says, that one of
the richest Presents which Cochain King of the place sent in his time to the
King of Portugal, was one of these stones, a little bigger than a Hazle-nut; of
which having observed the great effects, he procured others to be brought from
that Country. These effects are the curing of Pestilential Fevers, the
Leprosy, Small Pox, Epilepsie, Worms in Children, bitings of venomous Beasts,
and generally against all Poison; particularly, it is very proper for faintings,
-- and other effects of Melancholy. Whence it is used in Quartan; Agues to
appease the Symptoms thereof, and Charles V. took it often; yea, it is observed
in some Hospitals, that the bare powder of this stone tempered in water,
communicates its virtue thereunto, so that it has cured the Purples and other
Epidemical Maladies.

The Second said, That such as designed to get themselves Reputation in
Physic, finding many Diseases unconquerable by common Remedies, that they
might not remain idle, and suffer the defect of curing incurable, and
rebellious Maladies to be imputed either to their Art or their Ignorance, have
had recourse to the Foxe's skin, proposing the use of Remedies so rare and hard
to find, that their Imposture might not be discovered. Hence, some have so
highly extolled precious Stones and Gold, which not fifty years ago the poor
were persuaded, cured them by being boiled in Restoratives, though the rich,
who made use of the traud, found their gold Chains as heavy afterward as
before, (in case they looked well to them, in the boiling) and consequently,
that no Virtue was derived from them. Of this kind is the Bezoar-stone:
touching the Original whereof we see how Authors differ, and a few months ago
an Animal was shown in this City very different from that above-describ'd,
which they termed Pucos, and affirmed to be that which bred the Bezoar.
Besides, the difficulty of discerning the true Stone from false, which probably
are the most numerous, must needs render the use of it suspicious; since even
in the time of Serap on it was sold falsifi'd, which, he says, was
unprofitable, but I think rather mischievous. And Clusius complains, That the
Merchants of Lisbon would not suffer the usual trial to be made for
distinguishing the true from the adulterate. Neither do Authors agree about
those trials; some accounting it a sign of Goodness, if the Stone has nothing
but a little dust in the Center; whereas the falsifi'd (say they) have some
Seed, or other solid body there, upon which the other Materials were
superinduced: others think, the right has always a straw in the middle.
Wherein we may observe, that the several scales or folds it has one over
another, like those of an Onion, or the Stone of a man's Bladder, which are
made by new apposition of matter, agree not with the abovementioned manner of
its being made all at once. But in whatever manner and place it be produced, I
think it can act only by its manifest Qualities which alone are active; the
Effects of occult Qualities being as hidden as themselves. Besides, how could
these Treasures and Presents of Kings to be so common at this day, in all
Shops, if they had such great Virtues too as are attributed to them. Wherefore
it is most likely, that the Avarice of Men has added this to other popular
Errors.

The Third said, That as no Sect is more easy than the Pyrrhonian or Sceptick,
which doubts of every thing; so it is a very obvious Invention for such as are
willing to decline inquiring into that vast treasure of Remedies, which are
dispersed from the Concave of the Moon to the Center of the Earth, and into the
trials which may be made by their almost infinite preparations and mixtures, to
reject all upon pretext of Incertainty in Philosophical accounts. But though
the shortest, I doubt whether it be the best way; since Experience shows us
many Effects which depend not upon Qualities; and, they that decry the Bezoar,
because it acts not by manifest Qualities, admit others which do as little,
viz. Elective Purgers, Splenetical, Hysterical, and other appropriate Remedies,
though in some cases even of a contrary temper to the parts they are applied
to. Which error happens, from our always making Qualities Causes; whereas
oftentimes they are Effects. Besides, it is great pride to deny whatever we
understand not; since the most knowing agree that they see only through a
cloud, and the chief effect of Beatitude will be, To be ignorant of nothing.
And why should the faculties of Antidotes depend more upon first Qualities than
those of poisons do? since they ought to be contraries, and contraries are
under the same Genus. Wherefore it suffices to recur to Authority and
Experiment. Indeed Hippocrates and Galen knew not Bezoar; yet neither do we
reject Sena which they knew not, and which is one of the commonest and best
Medicaments we have. But all the Arabian Physicians concur in this point, and
Serapion particularly affirms, that this Stone is a potent Antidote against all
poison in the bitings of venomous Beasts; and so efficacious, that not only
three or four grains of it held in the mouth, enervate poisons; but the powder
applied to a venomous Animal, stupefies it, and takes away its power of
hurting; so that some parts already begun to corrupt by their biting, have
presently been restored to their first estate by its single application.
Avicenna, in the fourth Chapter of his second Canon ranks it with Treacle,
amongst Alexipharmacal Remedies which preserve health, and strengthen the
Spirits. Rhasis, in his Continent, affirms, That he found more admirable
Faculties in Bezoar, than in all other Antidotes; and in his book to Almansor,
he says, That Remedies for resisting poison, that assault the heart, and
offend by their whole substance, are in vain prepared, if Bezoar be left out;
which alone, he says, resists the poison of Napellus or Monks-hood the most
pernicious of all. Avenzoar, in his Theyser, writes, that a man given over for
dead upon taking of poison, was cured by three grains of Bezoar. Peter de Abano
(called the Conciliator) affirms, That Edward I. King of England, being wounded
with a poisoned sword in the war against the Sultan, and ready to expire, was
cured by some of this stone given him by the General of the Templars: and that
the bare wearing it resists poison. Monardes affirms, That with this Stone in
less than a quarter of an hour he cured a certain Licentiate, whose body was
already all swelled by having once drunk, and another time eaten poison; and
that a poisoned Maid, after the useless trial of all other Counterpoysons, was
presently cured by this. The same Author produces a great number of Syncopes,
Pestilential Fevers, Vertigoes, Epilepsies, and other Diseases cured by this
Remedy; which is the more excellent in that it is insipid and void of all the
bad taste which accompanies most other Remedies. These Examples are further
authorized by the public voice, which cannot be easily outweigh'd by the few
persons that undertake to bid defiance to Antiquity, and to accuse it of
ignorance or fraud, though it be not wholly destitute of Reason. For since it is
granted, that Viper's flesh is necessary in Treacle to render the same
efficacious against the bitings of that Animal, (it being necessary, that
something intervene of a middle nature between ours, and that of the Viper, as
its flesh, is being void of venom, but susceptible of it) why should it be
denied, that Bezoar which is produced of something that has poison, and
something that resists it, may serve for a medium to subdue the same in our
bodies. The objections to the contrary are either general or particular. The
former concern only Mountebanks, who are left to answer them; it being
incredible that a good man, much less a Christian, would deceive in a matter so
important as Life; which yet may be as often endangered by rejecting good
remedies upon vain Argumentations, (to say no worse) as by prescribing those
that are unprofitable. The Objection against Gold and precious stones makes as
much against the Confection de Hyacinthis, and others, whereof they are
ingredients; but they that have well considered those rich Bodies, find virtues
to issue from them which impair not their weight; as is observed in
Quicksilver, the decoction whereof kills worms, though its weight remain the
same; and in the Regulus of Antimony, a cup whereof renders liquors purgative
in infinitum, without any diminution of its substance. As for the diversity of
Opinions touching the generation of this Stone, this difficulty is found almost
in all foreign remedies; and though it is not known, Whence Amber comes? yet we
find its perfume excellent, and its use profitable in Physic. Nor is
Adulteration proper only to Bezoar stones, but common to Balm, Civet, Storax,
Rhubarb, and, in a word, to all other remedies; and the abuse ought not to
prejudice the use, since the same Authors that have observed these impostures,
teach us also to avoid them. Clusius makes trial of them, by passing a poisoned
thread through a Dog's Leg, and when the Symptoms of the Poison have made him
fall down as dead, if upon taking a little of the powder of this Stone, he
revives, it is right; if not, it is falsifi'd. Monardes's trial is by breaking
the stone, which ought to appear made of several films thicker or thinner
according to its bigness, which is commonly equal to that of an Olive, and
almost of the same color, though some are found to weigh two ounces, and the
biggest are the best; but the Surfaces must be all smooth, the inward more than
the outward, in the middle of which is a powder of more efficacy than the
outside, or a straw or little piece of dried Herb, not a seed as there is in
the fictitious; those that are versed therein know how to avoid being abused,
and adjudge the Oriental better than the Occidental, which are darker and
weaker. It matters not as to the truth of the effect, in what manner this stone
is generated; though it is not impossible for several Tunicles to be produced
together, as those of the Onyon are. In fine, such may the rarity of Bezoar
have sometimes been, that only great persons made use of it; but its admirable
effects have made men curious to procure store of them, which they may the more
easily do even by their means who decry them, the Apothecaries thereby having
always some left in their shops.

The Fourth said, That in order to know well the benefits of Bezoar, it is
requisite first to be agreed What it is; which point is not yet determined.
Scribonius Largus conceives it the hardened tear of a Stag a hundred years old:
Others, think it a Mineral; others, a stone bred in an Animal, so contrary to
Nature that the Animal that breeds it is exceedingly tormented with it,
especially if be big; which the hunters guess by seeing them go with pain, as
Men do that have the stone in the Bladder. Yea, it is not agreed in what part of
the Body it is found, though this indication be necessary toward the discovery
of its virtue; since stones found in the Gall are of another Nature and
Properties, than those of the Reins or Bladder. Moreover, the color of these
stones is extremely various, not to mention the difference which proceeds from
that of Climates; the Occidental being almost without virtue in comparison of
the Oriental. Whence it follows, that no certain unquestionable property can be
assigned to this stone as to other Remedies, which act always in the same
manner; otherwise there would be no Science. But should the Bezoar have an
Alexipharmacal Virtue, yet it could be but like that of other Bodies, which act
proportionally to their bulk. Now what proportion is there between three grains
of an insipid powder which causes no evacuation, or other sensible action; and
a mortal poison, whose cruel Symptoms discover themselves as speedily as fire
does when put to matter susceptible of combustion? And I appeal to the
testimony of all those that have made use of it in our Age, whether they ever
found the effects that are attributed to it. Whence it follows, that it is
doubly to be rejected; First, because it is of great cost to the Patient;
Secondly, it takes up the place of some other good Remedy, causing loss of time
which might otherwise be profitably employed in relieving the sick.

The Fifth said, That Poisons and Epidemical Diseases hurt not by their
manifest qualities, nor by the quantity of their matter; as appears in the
biting of a Scorpion, which casts forth an imperceptible quantity of venom. And
therefore it is not to be expected that their Remedies should act either by such
qualities, or by their quantity. Nor are we to doubt of the effect of Bezoar,
under pretext that it is given in few grains, though some have given twenty and
thirty grains; and that the ordinary dose is about nine or ten grains. Neither
is it material whether it be the stone of the kidneys of a Goat, Deer, or the
tear of a Deer, provided it have the Virtues ascribed to it, which is no more
incredible than that which Scaliger affirms, himself tried in the Stag's tear,
which, he says, so melts Men's Bodies that are either poisoned or infected
with the Pestilence, that they seem turned all into water, and thereby are
cured. To which Experience, there are few well employed Physicians but can add
many more. Nor is any thing said against Bezoar, but what may be objected
against all other Antidotes, as Sealed Earth, Unicorn's Horn, and all Cordial
Remedies, whose Virtue may as well be questioned as that of Bezoar.

CONFERENCE CCVIII. Whence proceeds the sudden Death of Men and Animals upon
descending into certain Pits.
ON the sixteenth of June last, an Inhabitant of the Town of Tilliers, two
Leagues from Virruel, perceived a goodly Pigeon, which he took to be one of his
own, fall down into a Well hard by his House; whereupon he called his Son, and,
to draw it out, they let down a basket with a rope to the bottom of the Well,
into which the Pigeon presently entered; but as often as they lifted it up from
the water, it fell back again thereunto: After their design had failed, the Son
ties a cudgel to the rope, and being let down by his Father, endeavors to take
the Pigeon. The Father asked him, Whether he had her? He answered thrice, No;
and after some sighs falls, having lost both Speech and Life. The Father
troubled at so strange an accident, resolves to go down himself, and
accordingly without any help descends into the Well, where he remained as his
Son. The Neighborhood advertised of this dysaster repaired thither, and,
amongst others, one who had not long before cast the Well; He ascribing all to
the weakness of those who were dead, presently betakes himself to go down; but
he was scarce come within two foot of the water but he fell down dead without
making any complaint. A strong and vigorous young Man upon the belief that the
company conceived that those persons were not dead, but only needed help,
undertakes to go down likewise; he did so, but suddenly fell backwards with a
little Convulsive Motion which made him cast up his head. Hereupon,
notwithstanding the disswasions of the Curate of the place, who began to
suspect some mortiferous causes of this effect, a fifth descended after he had
caused the rope to be fastened to his middle; he was no sooner in the middle of
the Well but he was pulled up again upon the Gestures which he made, with a
livid Countenance, and other signs forerunners of Death, which he escaped by
being presently succored with Wine and Aqua Vitae. Being recovered, he
affirmed* that he had perceived no hurt but only a certain faintness upon him.
This last attempt cooled all assistance, so that there was no more talk of
going down, but only of getting the Bodies up; which was done: and 'twas
observed that none of them had any signs of Life saving the Son, in whom were
seen some small tokens which presently vanished. The wonderment of all this was
greatly increased, when a Gentleman of the Country, curious of seeing what was
reported, let down a Dog, who continued there a quarter of an hour, and was
pulled up again safe and sound. This Well twenty five foot deep, and of water
but two, is enclosed with a very ancient Wall at the foot of a good high Hill,
whereon stands the Castle of Tilliers: And which helped not to diminish the
wonder, it had been cleansed by two men who found no hurt, nor any thing
extraordinary in it, saving an odor stronger than elsewhere; the water being
as clear as that of the Spring, and without any sediment. Now if it was mineral
and malignant vapors that suffocated those that descended, the same might have
done the like upon those that first gave them vent.

The Second said, That this Effect cannot be attributed to vapors barely
venomous, and of the nature of ordinary Poisons, which corrupt our humors,
sometimes after Applications, as the Plague and other Epidemical Diseases do;
but this steam is so opposite to Life, that it destroys the same in an
instant; which we cannot imagine to proceed from any other cause but a mineral,
which is far more active. The escape of those that cleans'd the Well, may be
attributed to the mud which smeared the sides of the Well, and so kept the
vapor in; till growing stronger by that restraint, it made way for its self
through that remaning crust, and produced the abovementioned dismal effects;
emitting its Poison in a strait line, according to the rectitude of the Well,
which weakened the Pigeon in such sort, that it was unable to rise again; as
it is reported that Birds fall down as they fly over the Mare Mortuum, or Lake
of Sodom, in Judea.

The Third said, It Is not probable that any such slimy crust hindered this
Effect at first, since the Dog let down afterward found no hurt; unless you
think a new crust arose in that little time which passed between the death of
the Men, and the descent of the Dog. This Effect therefore may probably be
attributed to the Archaeus, or Central Fire, that Motor of Nature, which dries
all the vapors of the Elements from the Center to the Circumference, subliming
the principals of minerals, in order to make its Productions; and as the
several mixtures of these elevated vapors are in some places wholesome, to wit,
in Bathes and mineral waters; so there are others destructive of our Nature.
But because such elevation is not continual, but only at certain times,
according to the motion of that grand Motor, and, particularly, of the Sun;
hence Arsenical vapors have produced such Effects at one time, and stifled
those that descended into a Well filled with them, which they have not done to
those that cleaned it, nor to the Dog; in as much as those vapors were not
raised at this time. And, perhaps, these mineral vapors are not always sublimed
in such a degree as to be mortiferous; otherwise it would follow that none
could ever labor in mines with safety, by reason of deadly fumes.

The Fourth said, That such expellations could not extinguish the Fire of Life
in so short a time, without some fore-running signs. But it is more probable,
that this Effect proceeds from some venomous Animal infecting the Air, which
being confined in a place incapable of evaporation, and sucked by those that
descend down the Well, they can no more save themselves from Death, than in a
pestilent Air. Nor are they Fables which History records of certain Grottoes,
in which Basilisks and Serpents residing, infected not only the place, but also
the whole Country; as Philostratus relates in the Life of Apollonins, how a
Dragon carried the Plague into all places wherever he went. Now as to the
particulars of the Story, what is difficult in them I thus resolve. Those that
cleans'd the Well opened the passage to the Basilisk, who by degrees creeping
forth out of his hole into the Well, there darted forth his mortal rays upon
whatever was presented to his Eyes; which done, he retired into his hole
again; so that the Dog let down into the Well after the Basilisk's retirement,
could not be hurt: For that the spirits issuing out of the Eyes of this
mortiferous creature, are harmless to dogs, and deadly to Men, is not warranted
by any Example; Antiquity, whose Judgment is venerable even in doubtful
things, allowing this Beast capable of doing mischief only in the place where
he resides.

CONFERENCE CCIX. Whether a Dead Body can be preserved naturally many years.
THis Question is divided in two points; First, Whether a dead Body can be kept
without art; Secondly, Whether it can be so by art; Nature being here opposed
not to Art, but to what is supernatural. The first is hard, every Carkase
having in it self the principles of Coruption; because the harmony of qualities
which caused to subsist being dissolved, it advances of it self to an
annihillation: And Nature should cease her continual motion, if her subject
deprived of animal life should always remain in one and the same state. Yea, if
Nature should stop her course in dead Bodies, and not be able to resolve them
into other works, the Influences of the Heavens would be useless in respect of
them, as also their motion, which is in order to generations, which would cease
if there were no more corruption; whence the destruction of the Universe in its
parts would follow. Nor would the Elements act any more one against another,
remaining pure and simple, and incapable of any generation, since siccity could
no more act upon humidity, nor heat upon cold. It remains to enquire, Whether a
dead Body may be preserved by art; which seems possible, because we may by art
destroy the activity of the Elements, and reduce them to a just and equal
temperament capable of long preservation. For if impurities and superfluities
lead mixed Bodies to Corruption, it is easy to separate them by Chemistry;
otherwise this art would be incapable of reducing them as it does every day to
a just Temperament: Yea, if we consider the Principles of Preservation, it will
appear, that those of Art are more powerful than those of Nature, in regard of
the means and Instruments it employs to separate them which Nature cannot do,
because She mixes things without choice and depu^ation: and consequently, since
Art has so much power in so many Agen^s, it is possible to preserve a dead body
for many years. Moreover, our own Experience* and that of Antiquity teach us,
that Balms are able to preserve bodies a long time; as appears in the Mummies
of Egypt, and in some Embryo's, which ^re preserved long in spirit of Salt,
and other Liquors repugnant (...).

The second said, That a dead body may be preserved long, not only by (...),
but also naturally* as that of a Lady deceased fifty six years ago, which was
found lately entire, and gave occasion ^o this Conference; Whence it may be
presumed, That Women are not so easily corruptible, because their bodies are
made of flesh more elaborate then that of man, which was immediately taken from
the dust, and consequently is more prone to return into its first Original. Now
the way to preserve dead bodies from corruption, is, to prevent the dissolution
of their parts; which is done by maintaining the connection of humidity with
dryness; to which end all extrinsical heat and moisture must be kept from them
as much as possible. Hence it is, that dead bodies are placed in subterraneous
places, and enclosed in leaden Coffins, to the end, the cold and dry vapors
symbolizing with the qualities of Saturn, (which the Chemists make as justly
preservative as the Poets make it destructive) may withstand extrinsecal heat
and moisture, and maintain the marriage of (...) with humidity; which is also
the scope of the Gums and Spices we employ to imbalm bodies; which having some
heat with a certain Unctuousness suck up the superfluous moisture, and preserve
the Natural. Moreover, the Sex, Age, and Temperament, are considerable in this
matter. A Habit of body moderately fleshy, (which Galen accounts the most
laudable, and which denotes a good Constitution) is fittest for this purpose;
and it is probable, that the bodies of those that die of a sudden death, resist
putrefaction longer than those that have been extenuated by a longer Sickness,
or brought to the Grave by a Fever; because in these cases the body is in a
great tendency to putrefaction even before Death.

CONFERENCE CCX. Of the Remora.
It Is a small Fish, half a foot long, called by the Greeks, Echeneis, and, by
the Latins, Remora; because it is thought to stop the motion of Ships, by means
of two scales wherewith it closely embraces the keel. This common belief is
founded upon many experiences reported by Authors, worthy of Credit. Pliny
writes, That Periander, having sent a Ship to Gnidos, with orders to castrate
all the principal Children of that Island, it was stopped in the main sea so
long time as was requisite to send for other Orders contrary to the former by
another Ship; and that in remembrance of this happy retardment, the two scales
of this little fish were in his time seen hanging up near the Altar of Gnidia
and Venus. The like happened to a Pretorian Ship of Anthony at the battle of
Actium, so that he could not advance to give Orders to his Naval Army. The
Emperor Caligula, having set sail from Asturia, with a Gally of five banks, was
likewise constrained to stay by the way with his Vessel, the other Ships not
suffering the same obstruction; at which this Prince was so incensed, that he
presently commanded diverse to seek out the cause, who at length found this Fish
sticking to the helm of the Vessel which they showed him about the bigness of a
Snail; and he was more surprised when he saw that it had not the like effect
within the Ship as without; as it is said, the foot of a Tortoise being in a
Vessel, makes it move slowly. Plutarch, in the second book of his Symposiacks,
affirms, That this Fish was found sticking to the Ship which he hired, to sail
into Sicily; and Rondeletius says. That the Cardinal of Tourain being embarked
for Rome, in a Vessel of three banks was a long time stopped in a place at Sea
by this little Fish, which being taken was served up to his table; though
others write, that it is not fit to eat. But what they add, That its virtue of
retarding is such, that it is made use of to hinder the Judgment of a Lawsuit
whereof the issue is feared; and also in filtres to retain a Lover that
despises his loving Mistress, is as hard to believe, as it is to find
considerable reasons for it, without having recourse to the ancient asylum of
those who despair to find any, which is the specific form of this Fish, which
has the same faculty of stopping Ships, that a Diamond has of retaining the
Virtue of the Loadstone, and Garlic of hindering it to act: as the Ship
appeaseth the fury of the Elephant; the Fig Tree, that of the Bull; and many
other such things, which though small in bulk, are yet very great and virtuous;
as they make appear in their Qualities, which are as sensible in their Effects,
as they are occult in their Causes.

The Second said, That the Remora works the same Effect upon the Ship, that
the Torpedo does upon the hand of the Fisher, which becomes stupid, when he
touches the same with a long pole. Now of this effect of Remora is not hard to
be accounted for, if we follow the Principles of Campanella, and those who
allow sense to all, even the most gross corporeal things. But this opinion
being little received, it is better to say, that whereas all natural things
subsist only by the vicissitude of motion and rest; wise Nature, who is the
principle of both, has judiciously dispensed them that they are found
differently in some things, and in others, and that for the good and ornament
of the Universe, which requires, that as they are bodies immovable by reason
of their situation or use, to wit, the Earth, and the Poles of the Heavens;
others always in motion, to wit, the Heavens, Rivers, Air, and Fire; and
others, endued with an attractive virtue, as the Loadstone and Amber; so She
has given others a Quality contrary to this. Namely, the Remora, that of
stopping the motion of a Ship: and because motion and rest are contrary one to
the other, their principles are no less, as well those that are effective of
motion, as those which cause rest; but it is better to explicate them by their
sensible and indubitable effects, than by reasons ordinarily frivolous and
impertinent.

The Third said, It Is no rare thing for Ships to be staid in the main Sea,
whatever pains the Mariners take to make them go forward; and how favorable
soever the Wind may be, the cause whereof is no other but the contrary motion
of the waves of the Sea, especially in streights and narrow places where there
are strong Currents, which probably. stopped Caligula's Ship, and those other
mentioned in History, rather than this little Fish which it is credible can send
so strong a Virtue from its small body, as to fix and check the far greater,
and oftentimes irresistible force of the Winds and Sea. Unless you had rather
attribute this retardment to the mucosity and other foulnesses wherewith Ships
are crusted in long Voyages, which hinder their advancing; and this Fish being
sometimes found in those mucous humidities, people mistake it for the cause,
though it no wise contributed thereunto.

The Fourth maintained, according to the opinion of Francastorius, That it is
not possible for so small a Fish as the Remora, to stop a great Ship at full
sail; but that this Effect is occasioned by Rocks indu'd with a Quality like
that of the Loadstone; upon which this Fish using to reside, when a Ship passes
near them, their Adamantine Virtue attracts the same toward them; whence the
same thing happens by these two violent motions, viz. that wherewith the Vessel
is driven along in the main Sea, and the attraction of these Rocks, as when two
equal forces draw a weight two several ways, the thing remains unmoved; so that
this fish is not the cause, but only the sign of this retardment.

The fifth said, That if there were any such magnetical virtue, in this case
the nails and iron-works of the Ship so stayed, would rather be taken away,
than its course stopped, the latter being more hard to do than the former; since
a little force suffices to pull a nail out of a Ship, whose impetuous motion,
it is not possible to withhold; whence Archimedes's his drawing of a Ship out of
the Port into the Marketplace by his endless serve, passed for one of the
goodliest secrets of the Mechanics, though indeed it be nothing to the present
enquiry. And the truth is, this strange effect may best be attributed to a
hidden property, and singular quality of this Fish, which being always found
sticking to the stopped Ships, is more probably the cause of that impediment,
than any unknown Rocks, which ought to do the like to all Vessels that approach
them, if there were any such: For it is a vanity condemned by the most
intelligent in the secrets of Nature, to presume to give valid reasons thereof,
whilst we have none for the most sensible and ordinary effects, for want of
knowing the last and proximate differences which constitute every thing in its
Essence, and distinguish it from others; it being easy to know, that the
Remora, after the example of many other which act by a propriety of their form,
produces this effect, without being needful to trouble our selves to find out
the means it imploys in order thereunto.

CONFERENCE CCXI. Of Negroes.
NAture loves variety so well that she is not contented with producing a great
number of Species of all sorts of Animals differing chiefly according to the
Climates which produce them; but she has also pleased her self in an
innumerable diversity of individuals especially as to color, as cannot be
called an Accident in Blackamores, but an inseparable property, which
distinguishes them from other men, and constitutes the nature of Negroes, in
whom the Sun's heat produces an effect contrary to that of his light; this
brightning, the other obscuring the subject upon which it acts. Yet it acts
not alike upon all Subjects, since the same Star (Ethiopian) whitens linen
and wax; but this blackness happens to the Aethiopians because moisture
exceeds, and in a manner extinguisheth heat; just as we see it come to pass in
Charcoals, Gangreens, and the parts of man's body when struck with Lightning.
For, if the first Quality would take colors, no doubt cold would be white as
we may judge by Water, Ice, Snow, Gray Hairs, and the Animals that live under
the Artick Pole which are all white, though of the same Species with ours of
another color; as Bears and Hares. Which is further proved by Herbs which grow
white under ground, and lose as much of their heat and bitterness, as they
partake of such whiteness, witness the stalks of Hartichoaks and Savoury. Hot
things would be red, and of the color of Fire, which we see gives that color
to faces formerly pale, to hot Iron and burning Wood; but a superfluous
humidity supervening stifles, and extinguishes this heat, and leaves behind it
the color of corruption; as we see the whitest skin grows black by heat upon
traveling Southwards; the contrary happening to those that go Northwards.

The Second said, That, if heat alone made Blackamoors, those that are most
exposed to the Sunbeams should be the blackest; but they are not so, there
being many Nations of the New World, where it is so hot, that they go all
naked, of an olive color; whereas in Guiney, Aethiopia, and other places
inhabited by Moors, they are clothed and feel more cold. And because this
color may be ascribed to the reciprocation of heat and cold, which is more
likely to alter men's bodies in all other qualities, than in a permanent one;
there are found both black and white people under the same parallels and
elevation of the Pole; as in the Isle of Sumatra, where the Inhabitants are
white. Wherefore this color must not be attributed to the Heaven but to the
Earth, which produces all other varieties of Animals, especially of men, as is
observed in the Patagons, who are Giants: To whom are opposed the Pigmies which
their soil likewise produces. And to show that the tincture of the skin is not
the only particularity observable in Negroes, they have many other Properties
whereby they are distinguished from other Nations; as their thick lips,
saddle-noses, coarse short hair, the horny tunicle of the eye, and the teeth
whiter than the rest of men. Besides, they are not only exempted from the Pox
and other Venereous Maladies, but their Climate alone airs the same. Not to
mention the Qualities of their minds, which are so ignorant, that though they
have plenty of Flax, yet they want Cloth, because they want skill how to work
it; they abound with Sugarcanes, yet make no trade of them, and esteem Copper
more than Gold, which they barter for the like weight of Salt; and are wholly
ignorant of Laws and Physic. Which ignorance renders their spirits more base
and servile than those of other Nations; and they are so born to slavery, that
even free men among the Abyssins (the most considerable people of all
Aethiopia) when they are employed by any one, take it not ill to be lashed with
a Bull's Pizzle, provided they be paid; and when their Priests exhort the
people, they whip them till the blood comes, for the better inculcating of
their Instructions, those being held in most reverence, who whip them most
severely; though they were the first Pagans who were converted to the Faith by
Queen Candace's Eunuch, who was instructed by S. Philip. And as pusillanimous
persons are commonly the most treacherous, (these two vices having both the
same principles) and presupposing ignorance of the point wherein true Honor
consists; so the Moors are ordinarily base and unfaithful to their Masters, as
is verified by abundance of Histories; which meanness and poorness of Courage,
reaches from the second next the King's person to the most inferior amongst
them; all bowing down and touching the ground with their hand when they hear
the name of their King Prete-Jun, before whose Tent they make a Reverence
though he be not there, and flatter him so excessively that if one of their
Kings happen to lose an Eye or other member, they deprive themselves of the
same too. Moreover, they are so credulous that they persuade themselves that
this King is descended in a direct line from Solomon and the Queen of Sheba,
(who, they say, was named Maqueda) when she came to see him, as they report,
for some other cause besides admiring his Wisdom.

The Third said, That the case is the same with the Negroes, in respect of the
color of their skin, and the other abovementioned particulars, as with the
long heads of the Children of Paris, which Nature produces at this day of
herself, ever since the Midwives had formed the first after that manner, upon a
belief that this figure was more becoming and suitable to the functions of the
Soul than roundness. So likewise the heat of the Sun first blackened the skin
of the Moors of either Sex by little and little; amongst whom, the blackest
hides, the thickest lips, and most evers'd being in esteem, every Mother
endeavored to make her Childrens lips and nose of that figure; and Nature,
helped by their Imagination moved by the occurrence of like objects, has
produced such ever since. But it is no wonder if the people of some Countries,
under the same parallels and latitude indeed, but defended from the heat of the
Sun by opposite Mountains, are exempt from the effect of that heat; as there
are places in France, where upon the same reason fruits are a month or two
later in ripening than those of their Neighbors. Moreover, the frisl'd short
hair of Negroes is an effect of the same heat, as also their being exempted
from the Pox, which being a phlegmatic cold poison, as appears by its invading
the spermatick parts, and the increasing of its pains in the night more than
day, it is more reasonable that the Temperaments opposite thereunto, such as
theirs whose flesh is very dry and void of Phlegm, be free from the same. Now
that Negroes abound not in Phlegm and Moisture, appears in that they never spit
in their Churches, not only out of custom, but express Law, which would never
have been made if it had not been easy to observe. Moreover, the whiteness of
their teeth is augmented by the blackness of their faces: And as for their
wits, Scaliger thinks them not really dull, but only out of design and craft,
which always argues wit. Whence Geographers, who reckon Southern people amongst
the most ingenious, say, They could never be brought to their duty by Reason,
but suffer themselves to be ruled only by Religion: Because where Humane Reason
holds not, as in matters of Faith, there the greatest wits are obliged to
become subject to the less, when they speak to them as from God. Besides, their
Characters are handsomer and more agreeable than either the Arabic or Turkish.
They are addicted to Navigation, and have a Military Order under the protection
of Saint Anthony, to which every Gentleman is bound to design one of his three
Sons, except the eldest, which serves for their King's Guard, and amounts to
12000. Horsemen. And if there be no other reason to esteem them ignorant but
their having no wrangling Lawyers, many other Nations would be happy if they
had none neither. And though Physic be not reduced to an Art, nor taught by a
Method amongst them, (as neither was it of old amongst us) yet they want not
Remedies useful for health. Their want of Linen proceeds from their abundance
of Cotton; and the comparison of Gold and Copper depends upon Fancy: And,
lastly, the paucity of the people finding food enough at home, have less cause
to be eager upon Trade abroad.

CONFERENCE CCXII. Of Ecstacies.
THough the union between the Body and the Soul be so strict, as to serve for a
model to all other unions observable in Nature, yet is it not so strong but
that sometimes it admits of a dissolution, which the Philosophers conceived
possible, both those parts continuing entire. This separation is called an
Ecstacy, wherein the Platonists, who first brought it into Vogue, placed the
Summum Bonum, or greatest Felicity, inasmuch as they pretended, that men's minds
were thereby disengaged from all material things; nay, from their very Bodies,
by the clouds and humidities whereof they imagined, that the mind was disturbed
in its functions, which, being equally spiritual, are the more completely
performed, the more the Understanding whereby they are produced, is disengaged
from this corporeal mass. Whence it comes, that old men, especially such as are
near death, or in their sleep, have clearer visions, and more certain
predictions than young men, and those who are in perfect health, of a moist
Temperament, who are waking, and perform all their other functions. And whereas
there is no great road between the highest wisdom and the greatest
extravagance, it may be further inferred, that those who are of a more dry
Temperament, whereof it is as likely that fools as well as wise men, may be,
frequently have such visions, and fall into those Ecstacies; and upon this
account, that they mind not their own thoughts, are easily susceptible of
external impressions, and the first objects which present themselves to them.
So that we may make a distinction of Ecstacies into two kinds. The former is to
be attributed only to great and contemplative persons, and may be said to be
only a disengagement of the mind, which is so taken up with the apprehension of
an object, that it quite forgets all its other functions. For the case is the
same with the Understanding, in reference to its object, which is Truth; as it
is with the Will, in respect of its proper object, to wit, Good, which it so
passionately affects, that it is not so much where it lives, as where it loves.
In like manner, the Understanding being forcibly engaged to a taking object,
whereof it makes a particular observation of all the differences, is so
transformed into it, that it ceases to act any where else. Now the reason of
this, is, that knowledge or apprehension, as well as all the other functions,
is wrought by a concourse of spirits, which being by that means, in a manner
all employed in that transcendent action, there are not enough remaining for
the performance of other actions, the small portion that is being wholly
employed about respiration, nourishment, and the other actions necessary for
the Conservation of Life. Accordingly, this kind of Ecstacy, or cessation of
the functions is not only observed to happen in that conflict and contention of
the mind, when it is wholly bent upon the examination of some object, but also
in all the other actions which are performed with excess: such as for example,
the Passions are, the extraordinary violences whereof occasion Ecstacies, an
extreme grief casting a man down so much, that he becomes as it were stupid and
insensible. The same thing happens also through joy by a contrary effect, as
well as in Anger, Fear, Audacity, and the other perturbations of the irascible
and concupiscible Appetites, by reason of the great diffusion or concentration
of the spirits. Whence it follows, that it is not more strange to see a man
ravished and fallen into an Ecstacy as it were out of himself, in the
contemplation of some object, than to see some persons so overjoyed, as to die
out of pure joy. For Knowledge being an action of the Understanding, whereby it
raises and elevates to a spiritual and incorporeal Being things that are most
material, which are advanced in the Understanding to a new and more perfect
Being, than that which they had of their own Nature, the Understanding renders
them like it self, and is so united to them, that there cannot be a greater
conformity than what is between the object and the power whereby it is known.
When therefore that object is of its own Nature spiritual and immaterial, the
Understanding having disengaged it self from every other Subject, is so
overjoyed at its own knowledge, that it forgets all other actions of less
consequence.

The other Ecstacy is properly attributed to Lunaticks and distracted persons,
and is by Physicians placed among the highest irregularities, caused by black
Choler in the minds of such as are much inclined to Melancholy; in whom it
causes an alienation of Spirit, which inclines them to imagine, speak, or do
things that are ridiculous and extravagant; sometimes with fury and rage, when
that humor is enflamed, and converted into black Choler, and sometimes with a
stupid sadness, when it continues cold and dry.

The Second said, That the Greek word signifying an Ecstacy, is ordinarily
taken for every change of condition whatever it may be; sometimes for a
transportation and elevation of mind, whereby a man comes to know things
absent, as it was explicated in the precedent part of this discourse. Such
peradventure was the taking up of Saint Paul, even while he lived, into that
blisful Seat of the Blessed, which he calls the Third Heaven, allowing the Air
to be one, and the starry-sky to be another: And that of Saint John the
Evangelist, which he speaks of in the Revelation; Nay, before them, such were
those of the Prophets, and, after them, those of many other persons, if we may
give any credit to Historians. Such was that of the Abbot Romuald, who, finding
a great difficulty to read the Psalms of David, became, in an Ecstacy he had as
he was saying Mass, so learned, that he was able to interpret the most
intricate passages of them. Such was that of Saint Francis, the Founder of the
Order of Franciscans, who, in a ravishment, received upon his body the marks of
our Savior's Passion. Such was Saint Thomas Aquinas, who frequently fell into
such an Ecstacy, that he seemed dead to all that were about him. Such was John
Scot, commonly known by the name of the subtle Doctor, to whom the same thing
happened so often, that his most familiar friends seeing him as he sat reading
or writing, found him many times immovable and without sentiment, insomuch
that he was carried away from the place for dead; and yet these two last, were
raised up so illuminated from that Philosophical Death, that they have left but
few imitators of their great Learning. The same thing is affirmed of a certain
Virgin, named Elizabeth, whose Senses were sometimes so stupifi'd, that she
continued a long time in a manner dead; from which kind of Trance being come to
her self, she foretold some things, which afterward came to pass according to
her predictions. To be short, there are few Monasteries of either Men or Women,
but affirm as much of their Founders. And that it may not be imagined, that
such a separation of Body and Soul happened during this Life only to
Enthusiasm, or a highly-contemplative meditation of divine things, which
nevertheless must be acknowledged the common cause of it; we read of Epimenides
of Creet, and Aristeas the Proconnesian, eminent Poets and Philosophers, that
sometimes they left their Bodies without Souls; which, having taken their
progress about the world, returned after a certain time, and re-animated their
Bodies. Nay, Pliny has a pretty remarkable Story, how that the Soul of this
Aristeas was many times perceived to take her flight out of his Body, under the
form of a Crow; and that his Enemies having observed it, and on a time met with
his Body in that posture, burnt it, and by that means disappointed the Bird of
her nest. Apollonius relates a Story yet much more prodigious, of Hermotimus
the Clazomenian, to wit, that his Soul made Voyages of several years; having
left his Body, during that time, without any sentiment, while she went up and
down into diverse parts of the world, foretelling Earthquakes, great Droughts,
Deluges, and such other remarkable Accidents. And further, that this thing
having several times happened to him, he had given his wife a strict charge
that no Body should touch his Body during his Soul's being abroad upon the
account aforesaid; but some persons of his acquaintance bearing him a grudg,
having with much importunity obtained of her the favor to see his Body lying
on the ground in that immovable posture, they caused it to be burnt, to
prevent the Soul's return into it; which yet it being not in their power to do,
and the Clazomenians being informed of that injury done to Hermotimus, built
him a Temple, into which Women were forbidden to enter. And Plutarch, in his
Book of Socrates's Demon or Genius, confirming this Relation, and allowing it
to be true, affirms, that those who had committed that crime, were then
tormented in Hell for it. Saint Augustine in his Book of the City of God, Lib.
xiv. relates, that a certain Priest, named Restitutus, whenever, and as often
as, he was desired to do it, became so insensible at the mournful tone of some
lamenting voice, and lay stretched along as a dead Carkase, so as that he could
not be awaked by those who either pinched or pricked him; nay, not by the
application of fire to some part of his Body, inasmuch as he could not feel any
thing while he continued in the Ecstacy, only afterward it was perceived that
he had been burnt, by the mark which remained upon his Body after he was come
to himself; before which time be had not any respiration, and yet he would say,
that he had heard the voices of those who had cried aloud in his Ears, calling
to mind that he had heard them speaking at a great distance. The same Author in
the xix. Book of the same Work, affirms, that the Father of one Praestantius
was apt to fall into such Ecstacies, that he believed himself changed into a
Pack-Horse, and that he carried Provisions upon his back into the fields with
other Horses, when all the while his Body continued immovable in the House.
Among other Examples of this kind of Ecstacy, Bodin in his second Book of his
Daemonomania, chap. 5. relates a story of a certain Servant-maid living in the
Danphine, having been found lying all along upon a dunghill, in such a dead
sleep that all the noise made could not awake her; nay, her Master's banging
her with a switch not prevailing any thing, he ordered fire to be set to the
most sensible and tenderest parts of her Body, to try whether she were really
dead or not. Which being upon trial believed, they left her in the same place
till the morning; and then sending to look after her, she was found very well
in her bed. Whereupon the Master asking her, What she had been doing all the
night before? Ah, Master, said she, how unmercifully have you beaten me? Upon
that discovery she was accused for a Witch, and confessed it. To be short,
Cardan in his eighth Book of the Variety of Things, affirms of himself, that he
fell into an Ecstacy when he pleased; insomuch that he slightly heard the
voices of those who spoke to him, but understood them not; Nay, what is more,
was not sensible of any pinching, nor yet feeling the exquisite pain of his
Gout, whereto he was much subject; as being not sensible at that time of any
thing but that he was out of himself. He afterward explicates the manner how
that Ecstacy is wrought, affirming, that he felt it begin at the Head,
especially in the hinder part of the Brain, and thence spread it self all along
the Backbone. He affirmed further, that at the very beginning of it he was
sensible of a certain separation about the Heart, as if the Soul withdrew at a
kind of wicket, or sally-port, the whole Body concerning it self therein; and
adds, that then he sees whatever he would with his Eyes, and not by the
strength of the Understanding, and that those Images which he sees are in a
continual transiency and motion, in the resemblance of Forests, Animals, and
such other things: The Cause whereof he attributes to the strength of the
Imagination, and sharpness of the Sight. He further relates of his Father such
things as are much more miraculous, and occasioned the suspicion of his being a
Magician.

Now from all these Sacred and Profane Histories, it may be inferred that of
Ecstacies, some are miraculous, and others natural. The former not submitting
to ordinary Causes any more than all the other things do that concern Religion,
which stands much upon the pre-eminence of being above Reason. The latter
proceeding from the great disproportion there is between the Body and the Mind,
the one being extremely vigorous, the other extremely weak. Whence it follows,
that there are two sorts of persons subject to Natural Ecstacies, to wit, those
transcendent Minds which are disposed into weak Bodies, and weak Minds in
strong and robust Bodies; inasmuch as there being not a perfect connection and
correspondence between them, the Soul finds it no great difficulty to disengage
her self from the Body, or the Body from the Soul, which by that means obtains
a freedom in her operations, it being supposd that they do not all at depend
one upon another, as may be seen in the Formation of the Embryo, wherein. the
Soul making her self a place of abode plainly shows, that she is able to act
without it, as also in swoundings and faintings, during which, the Body
continues so destitute of sense, that no active faculty, at least no operation
of the Soul, is observable in it.

The Third said, That the Vegetative Soul, which is without motion, being the
first whereby we live, it is not to be much admired, if the other two Souls, to
wit, the Sensitive and the Rational do sometimes separate themselves from it;
and this is that which they call Ecstacy: whereof we have a certain instance in
all the faculties, which are in like manner separated one from another, without
the loss of their Organs. Accordingly, he who is most sharp-sighted as to the
Understanding, has commonly but a weak corporeal sight; the most robust Body
is ordinarily joined to the weakest Mind: Those persons who walk and talk in
their sleep, do also show that the Rational Soul does quit the Government of
the Body, and leaves it to the direction and disposal of the sensitive; and the
same thing may be also said of the Vegetative exclusively to the other two. To
come to Instances: we have at this day the experience of some, who continue a
long time in Ecstacies, and that not only in matters of great importance, but
also in some things of little concernment, which they are not able to
comprehend; nay, there are some have the knack of falling into Trances and
Ecstacies when they please themselves. And this has been affirmed to me of a
certain person who was able to do it, without any other trouble than this: He
caused to be painted on the wall a great Circle all white, in the Center
whereof he set a black mark, and after a long continued looking upon it, the
Visual Spirits being by degrees dissipated, brought his Soul into a Vertigo, or
Dizziness, which occasioned the Ecstacy.

The Fourth said, That the opinion of Bodin, which allows a separation between
the Souls and Bodies of Witches and Sorcerers, having been invented only to
render a reason of what they affirm they had seen, during the time their Bodies
had been immovable, is not to be believed without some further proof; since it
is impossible even by that to explicate the Relations which they make of those
places, where they say they had been, and the things they had there done;
inasmuch as they positively affirm, that they had made those progresses with
their Bodies and all their members, and that they had made use of them in
eating, drinking, and performing such other actions as are purely corporeal,
and cannot be imagined done in a state of separation, as being not compatible
to separated Spirits, which being immaterial, stand in need of Bodies to assume
corporeal affections, and perform those beastly Actions whereof Sorcerers talk
so much.

To this may be added, that this separation cannot be wrought without death,
and, that supposed, it were impossible the Souls should re-enter into their
Bodies otherwise than by a real resurrection, which is an act that God has so
reserved to himself, that the Devil is not capable of doing it: Nay, though it
were in his power, it is rather to be imagined that he would be far enough from
taking souls out of their bodies, and disrobing them of their sensual
inclinations, inasmuch as he does all lies in his power, to involve the Souls
of Men more and more* into their Bodies, and make them wallow in sensuality,
and render all their affections corporeal. Accordingly, great and generous
Souls, such as are most disengaged from the Body, are not fit for that purpose;
since Agrippa, and all the other Masters of that detestable profession, require
Simplicity in those who would be Sorcerers, as a necessary and previous
disposition. So that if the Souls of Sorcerers, which are at first engaged, and
afterward continued in the Devil's service, only in prosecution of the
concerns of the Body, came to be divested of that heavy mass whereby they are
encompassed, and stripped of the inclinations of the Body, no doubt they would
break off so disadvantagious a bargain, at least they would not find any
delight in the divertisements wherewith the Devil does amuse them. It is
therefore more probable, that the Devil should sometimes cast Sorcerers into a
certain sleep, and bind up their common sense, so as that they are rendered
incapable of receiving external impressions, and that in the mean time, he
should join together the different species of Memory, and raise in the
Imagination such representations thereof as are conformable to the truths which
are made elsewhere. So that the Understanding not receiving any thing from
without, which might undeceive it, is wholly taken up with the species it has
within; the apprehension of Sorcerers being much like those of some persons,
who having their brains either weakened by Diseases, or naturally receive such
an impression from their dreams, that when they awake, they are hardly able to
distinguish them from the things they have seen. That therefore which is
commonly called a Diabolical Ecstacy, deserves not the name, since it is only
the casting of one into a dead sleep. Those Diseases which Physicians call
Ecstacies, as Catalepsies and Madness, are only such improperly; and the same
thing is to be said of those kind of swoundings, which have frequently been
taken for Ecstacies in some persons, who having continued their Contemplations
beyond the strength of their Bodies, and thereupon swounded out of pure
weakness, have upon the recovery of themselves, imagined, that their Minds had
been transported into real Ecstacies, and yet can give no account of what had
passed during the time of their Trance. The precedent stories, and those which
may be thereto added, of Socrates, Archimedes, and some others, do not prove
that, naturally, there can be any Ecstacy; for either those stories seem to be
palpably fabulous, or only show that the Souls of those Ecstatical Persons had
not broke off all correspondence with the Body, nor quitted the assistance of
the senses and their Organs, that they might be wholly involved in themselves,
and so resign themselves to Meditations purely Intellectual. For he who shall
examine the example of Socrates, as it is related in Plato, will look upon that
action rather as a trial, which Socrates made of his own Patience, than as a
real Ecstacy, especially since Socrates is imagined standing; a posture
requiring the motion of the Muscles, which presupposes sentiment in the
exterior parts. Accordingly, dead bodies, as also those wherein the action of
the Soul is checked and hindered, are not found standing, though the Athenians
have shuffled in, among their stories, a tale of one of their men who stood
upright after he had been killed. The other Instances are of persons who
meditated with such earnestness and attention on their own thoughts, and
directed their minds with so much violence toward that sense, whereof they had
most occasion, that the other senses were destitute of Spirits and without
action, not discerning their own proper objects if they were not extremely
violent, which is no real Ecstacy, inasmuch as otherwise we must call Sleep an
Ecstacy. And, indeed, the most refined and subtilest Meditations, which we
derive from those Ecstacies, smell so strong of the Body and Matter, that it is
probable, they were not the pure productions of the Soul, no way diverted by
the disturbances of the Body and the internal senses, on which she objectively
depends, even in the inorganical actions she does; it being a thing impossible
for her to meditate alone, since that in her direct actions she stands in need
of the Imagination, and must be excited by Phantasms; but above all, she cannot
be without Memory, which always furnishes her with the matter of her
speculations, and reserves the species of them. Besides, those who are of
opinion, that all the faculties of the Soul while she is in the Body are
organical, cannot imagine any Ecstacy wherein the Soul meditates by her self,
without any commerce with the Body and its sentiments; and those, who conceive,
that the faculties of the Understanding and Will borrow nothing of the Organs
but the objects of their actions, do nevertheless infer, that the Soul stands
in need of the senses, in order to the doing of her actions, and is not
over-earnest in the doing of them, but when she is excited by the Phantasms,
for the stirring whereof the Animal Spirits are absolutely necessary, which
takes away all conceit of Ecstacies. And those who imagine, that in Ecstacies
the Soul has no correspondence with them, and makes no use of them in her
actions, do, by that means, instead of establishing destroy the Ecstacy; since
it must be inferred, that the Soul during the time of those retired
meditations, leaves the Spirits in the Organs, whose function it is in the mean
time to receive the impressions of the external objects, and convey them into
the common Sense, and thence into the Imagination and Memory; whereas it is
expected, that the Ecstacy should leave the Body without action. Whence
therefore, I conclude, that there is not any at all, in regard that an Ecstacy
signifying a state of the Soul, besides that which is natural to her, and
besides the natural consequence there is between the actions of the senses, and
those that are proper to the Rational Soul; it may be affirmed, that such a
state never happens, and that the Soul shall not be absolutely freed from the
encumbrances and distractions of the Body till after Death. And this has been
sufficiently acknowledged by Socrates in Phoedon, notwithstanding all the
Ecstacies attributed to him; and Aristotle, whose thoughts were more
abstracted, and transcended those of all others, would not by any means admit
of Ecstacies from a natural cause, but attributes them all to God. Which
procedure of his has been approved by Scaliger and many others.

CONFERENCE CCXIII. Of the Cock, and whether the Lion be frightened at his
Crowing.
THe Germans being engaged upon an expedition of War had some reason to carry a
Cock along with them, to serve them for an incitement and example of Vigilance.
Thence happily proceeded the custom, which some Mule-drivers and Waggoners still
observe of having one fastened to the leading Mule or Horse; and sometimes for
want of that, adorning them with a plume of his or some other feathers. 'Twas
upon this account, that Phidias's Minerva had a Cock upon her headpiece,
unless it be attributed to this, that the said Goddess had also the presidency
and direction of War, where there is no less need of Vigilance than Industry;
though that Bird belongs to her sufficiently upon the score of his other
qualities, as being so gallant and courageous, as many times rather to lose his
Life upon the spot, than quit the desire of victory; and when he is engaged,
fighting with such fury, that Caelius Aurelian relates that one who had been
peck'd by a Cock in the heat of fighting, grew mad upon it. For the Passion of
Anger being a short fury, it is possible it may extremely heighten the degree of
heat, in a temperament already so highly choleric, that in time the body of
the Cock becomes nitrous; and upon that consideration, is prescribed to sick
persons for the loosening the belly, and that after he has been well beaten
with a wand, and the feathers plucked while he is alive before he is boiled. It
may be further urged, that this Courage of the Cock was the motive which
inclined Artaxerxes King of Persia to grant him, who killed Prince Cyrus, the
privilege of carrying on his Javelin a little Cock of Gold, as a singular
acknowledgement of his Valor. Whereupon the Soldiers of the Province of
Caria, whereof he who had the aforesaid privilege of the Cock was a Native, in
imitation of him, instead of Corslets wore Cocks upon their head-pieces; whence
they had the name of Alectryons, or Cocks, in Latin Galli, which possibly is
the reason that gave the French that name: And whereas the Cock commonly crows
after he has beaten another, it came also to be the Hieroglyphick of Victory,
and that happily gave the Lacedaemonians occasion to sacrifice a Cock when they
had overcome their Enemies.

This Creature was also dedicated to Mars, and the Poets feign, that he had
sometime been a young Soldier, whom that God of War ordered to stand sentinel
when he went in to Venus to give him notice of Vulcan's return; but he having
slept till after the Sun was risen, and by that neglect of duty Mars being
surpised with her, he was so incensed that he metamorphos'd him into a Cock;
whence it comes, say they, that being ever since mindful of the occasion of his
transformation, he ever crows when the Sun approaches our Horizon. This fable,
how ridiculous soever it may be thought, is as supportable as that of the
Alcaron, which attributes the crowing of our Cocks to one which it says there
is in Heaven; a Cock of such a vast bulk, that having his feet on the first of
the Heavens, the head reaches to the second; and this Cock crowing above,
awakens and incites all those upon Earth to do the like, as these last set one
another a crowing, as if they all crow'd at the same instant all over the world.

The Cock was also dedicated to the Sun and Moon to the Goddess Latona, Ceres,
and Proserpina; whence it came that the Novices, and such as were initiated in
their mysteries, abstained from the eating of it. It was also the same to
Mercury, in regard that vigilance and early rising are requisite in Merchants.
And thence it came that he was painted under the form of a Man sitting, having
a Crest or Comb on his Head, Eagle's claws instead of Feet, and holding a Cock
upon his fist. But there was a particular consecration made of him to
Aesculapius, which obliged Socrates at his death to entreat his Friends to
sacrifice a Cock to him, since the Hemlock wherewith he was poisoned had
wrought well. The Inhabitants of Calecuth sacrifice him to their divinity under
the form of a he-goat: And Acosta, after Lucian, affirms, that anciently the
Cock was adored as a God; which Christianity not enduring, has ordered them to
be placed upon Churches and on the tops of steeples, and other very high
structures, that by their turning about they might tell the beholders which way
the Wind blew; unless happily some would refer it to the repentance of Saint
Peter, at the second crowing of one of them. As concerning the crowing of this
Creature, it is commonly attributed to his heat, and may be a certain discovery
of his joy at the approach of the Star of the same temperament with him. And
whereas he is more susceptible than any other of the impressions of the Air,
(whence it comes that being moistened by the vapors, he crows with a hoarser
voice, which Laborers look on as a prediction of Rain) it may be thence
consequent, that he is the first sensible of the coming of the Sun. Moreover,
whereas there is a Solar Animal, such as is also the Lion, but in a lower
degree than he, the species of Birds being hotter and dryer, as being lighter
than that of four-footed Beasts; it thence follows, that the Cock has an
ascendent over the Lion, which no sooner hears his crowing, but it awakens in
his Imagination those species which cause terror to him: Unless we would rather
affirm, that the spirits of the Cock are communicated to the Lion, by that more
than material voice; and as such more capable of acting, than the spirits
issuing out of the Eyes of sick persons, which nevertheless infect those who
are well, and look on them; nay, if we may believe the Poet, bewitch even
innocent Lambs.

The Second said, That this error of the Lyon's being terrified at the crowing
of the Cock, was to be added to the number of all those vulgar ones, which had
occasioned so much beating of the Air in the schools and pulpits about Maxims
which are discovered to be absolutely false in the Practick; it being a thing
not impossible, that some Lion which had been tamed, and by change of
nourishment become cowardly and degenerate, had been a little startled at that
shrill crowing of the Cock, grating of a sudden upon his ears. And this
conjecture will not be thought strange by those, who, about the beginning of
March last, 1659. were present at an engagement which had been appointed
between such a Lion and a Bull in a Tennis-Court at Rochel: The Lion was so
frightened at the sight of the Bull, that he got up into the Lights
precipitating the Spectators, who had planted themselves there in great
numbers, as esteeming it the safest place of all; and thence he slunk away and
hid himself, and could never afterward be gotten into the lists. It may also
be imagined, that the strangeness and novelty of that Crowing might surprise
some Lion that had never heard it before, by reason of his living at a great
distance from Cities and Villages, where those Creatures are commonly bred, and
that thence it came the Lion was startled at that first motion. Moreover, it is
possible, nay, it may be more than probably affirmed, that some have taken that
startling out of indignation, observable in the Lion when any thing displeases
him for an argument of his fear, whereas it was a discovery of his being
incensed. For to imagine a real and general fear in that generous Creature,
upon so slight an account as the crowing of a Cock, I cannot see any
probability for it, in regard that correspondence and conformity which is
attributed to them, should rather occasion a Sympathy in them, than any thing
of aversion, which being fully as great as that which the Sheep has for the
Wolf, should no more frighten the Lion, than the bleating of the Sheep does the
Wolf. Nor is it so much out of an aversion and Antipathy which the Wolf has
for the Sheep, that he devours and converts it into his substance, as out of
kindness and love to his own preservation; and there are commonly seen about
those houses, where Lions are kept, several Cocks and Hens, and yet the Lions
never make any discovery of their being frighted at their crowing or crakling.
Nay, for a further confirmation hereof, it comes into my mind, that I have seen
a young Lion devour a Cock, which, I must confess, crow'd no more than those of
Nibas, a Village of the Province of Thessalonica in Macedon, where the Cocks do
not crow at all. But if there were such an Antipathy between them, as some
would have imagined, the Lion would have thought it enough to tear him to
pieces, and not eat him as he did. And therefore it is to be conceived, that
what has given occasion to this error, is the moral sense, which some would
draw from it; to show, that the strongest are not free from a certain fear,
which they conceive of those things whence they should least expect it. So
that, to put this Question, Why the Lion is frightened at the crowing of the
Cock, is, to enquire for the cause of what is not.

The Third said, That we are not to make so slight an account of the authority
of our Ancestors, as absolutely to deny what they have affirmed to us, and
seems to be sufficiently proved by the silent acquiescence of so many Ages,
under pretense that we are not able to resolve it: Which were to imitate
Alexander, in cutting the Gordian knot, because he could not unty it. It were
much better to endeavor to find out in the nature of the Cock and in his
crowing, the cause of the Lyon's being frightened thereat. Let it then be
imagined, that the Lion being an Animal always in a Fever through an excessive
choler, whereof his hair and violence are certain marks; the same thing happens
to him as to sick and feverish persons, to whom noise is insupportable,
especially to those, in whom a choleric humor enflamed causes pains in the
Head: Nay, there are some kinds of sounds which some persons are not able to
endure, yet so as that they cannot assign any cause thereof, and so as that we
are forced to explain it by Specific Properties and Antipathies; such as we
may imagine to be between the crowing of a Cock and the ear of a Lion. And that
is much more probable then the stopping of a Ship by the Remora, when she is
under all the sail she can make, and a thousand other effects imperceptible to
reason, and such as whereof only Experience can judge; and therefore that terror
which the Lion is put into at the crowing of the Cock, is not so irrational;
that Sovereign of Animals having just cause to admire, how from so small a Body
there comes a voice so shrill and strong, as to be heard at so great a
distance, considering with himself what mischief he does with so little noise;
and this terror of the Lion is increased if the Cock be all white, inasmuch as
that color promotes the diffusion of his spirits already dispersed by the
first motion of his apprehension.

CONFERENCE CCXIV. Of the Sibyls.
THough it be generally acknowledged that there were Sibyls, yet as to their
Names, their Number, their Country, and their Works, nay, the whole story of
them, all is full of doubts and uncertainties. The Etymology of the Greek word
signifies as much as the Will or Counsel of God; the Aeolick Dialect saying
Siou instead of Theou. The Chaldeans called them Sambetes. They are cited, and
consequently acknowledged by Justin Martyr, Theophilus of Antioch, Athenagoras,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Tatian, Lactantius, and other ancient Authors. Varro, and
Diodorus Siculus, call them Women filled with divinity, foretelling things to
come, whence they came also to be called Prophetesses. Some conceive that they
were before the War of Troy, and referr all their predictions only to one of
them, imagining that the same thing happened to them as had done to Homer, who,
for his great reputation, gave occasion to several Cities of Greece, to
attribute his birth to them: in like manner as a great number of Cities and
Countries; as for instance, Erythrae, Cumae, Sardis, Troy, Rhodes, Libya,
Phrygia, Samos, and Egypt, desirous to attribute to themselves the Birth of
that Sibyl, it came to be believed, that there were many of them. Amongst whom,
Martianus Capella, grounding his assertion upon very probable conjectures,
acknowledges but two, Erophila, the Trojan Sibyl, whom he affirms to be the
same that others call the Phrygian and Cumaean, and the others Symmagia, called
also Erythraea, at the place of her birth. Pliny affirms, that there were at
Rome three Statues of the Sibyls, one erected by Pacuvius Taurus, Aedile of the
people; the other two by Marcus Valerius Messala, the Augur. The first of these
three, according to the relation of Solinus in his Polyhistor, was called
Cumana, who prophesied at Cumae in the fiftieth Olympiad, and had still her
Temple at Pouzols, about a hundred years since, but was burnt in a general
conflagration that happened there in the year MDXXXIX. under the ruins of which
it was then buried; so that there remains now only some subterraneous places,
into which a man cannot go upright, yet still express a certain divinity,
inasmuch as those relics of a vast and spacious structure, seem to be all cut
out of one stone. The second was called the Delphick Sibyl, and lived before
the Wars of Troy. The third is that Eriphyla of Erythrae, who prophesied at
Lesbos. Aelian affirms, that there were four, to wit, the Erythraean, the
Samian, the Egyptian, and that of Sardis. To that number others add two, the
Judaick and the Cumaean; but Varro, desirous to have yet more of them, adds
four, and makes them up ten; of which opinion is also Onuphrius. They are
disposed into this order.

The first and most ancient is the Delphick, of whom Chrysippus speaks in his
Book of Divination, by the Ancients called Artemis, born at Delphi, and it is
conceived that Homer inserted many verses of this Sibyl in his Works. Diodorus
Siculus calls her Daphne, and says she was the Daughter of Tiresias, of whom
she had not learnt the Art of Divination, when the Argians having taken the
City of Thebes, sent her to Delphi to pay their vows, where having learnt to
divine by the inspiration of Apollo, she spoke Oracles to those who consulted
her.

The second is the Erythraean, as is affirmed by Apollodorus, a Native of the
same Country: And yet Strabo says, that she was a Babylonian, and had only
given her self the name of the Erythraean, whom Eusebius affirms to have lived
in the time of Romulus.

The third is the Cumaean, or Cimmerian, so called from the Cimmerian Town near
the City Cumae in Italy, whom some call Deiphobe; to this Sibyl it was that
Aeneas addressed himself when he made his escape from Troy.

The fourth is the Samian, otherwise called Phyto, of whom Eratosthenes says,
that she was mentioned in the Annals of the Sam^ans. Eusebius is of opinion,
that she flourished in the time of Numa Pimpilius, and that she was called
Heriphila.

The fifth is the Cumaean, otherwise Amalthaea, or Demophila, and called by
Suidas, Hierophila. Of this Sibyl is related the story of the nine Books, and
according to others of the three, (not of the Cumaean, whom some unadvisedly
confound with this, though they were different) which she presented to
Tarquinius Superbus, as it is affirmed by Varro, Solinus, Lactantius, Servius,
Suidas, and several others. And Solinus gives this further account of her,
that, in his time, her Sepulcher was shown in Sicily.

The sixth is the Hellespontick, born in the Trojan Country, at the Town of
Marmissus, near the City of Gergithium, whom Heraclides of Pontus affirms to
have lived in the time of Solon and Cyrus, that is, in the L X. Olympiad.

The seventh is the Lybian, of whom Euripides speaks in the Prologue before
Lamia, which he writ in the LXXX. Olympiad.

The eighth is the Persian, of whom there is mention made by Nicanor, in the
History of Alexander the Great. Justin Martyr calls her also the Chaldaean, in
his Admonition to the Gentiles; and she is conceived to have been the Daughter
of the Historian Berosus, and Erimantha. She lived in the CXX. Olympiad.

The ninth is the Phrygian, who prophesied at Ancyra.

The tenth is the Tiburtine, called Albunea, who was worshipped as a Goddess on
the shores of the River Anienus, in which her Statue was found.

All these ten Sibyls are represented by a Picture hanging up as it were in the
Clouds, having their Heads encompassed with Light, as our Saints commonly have.
But the first holds a Hunter's Horn in his right Hand; the second, a Sword; the
third, a Torch; the fourth, a Cross; the fifth, a pair of Gloves in the left
Hand; the sixth, a Cradle on her right Hand; the seventh, holds a Lanthorn; the
eighth, a branch of a Rose-bush; the ninth, has a loaf of Bread on one side of
her; the tenth, has a small Wand or Rod. The Painters have presumed to add two
others, to wit, the Europaean, holding a Crown of thorns; and the Agrippinean,
who holds a banner fastened to a Cross; but they do it not by any other
Authority, than that They and the Poets assume to themselves to attempt any
thing. According to which privilege, there are yet diverse others, to wit, one
named Elissa, who prophesied in verse: Whereto may be added Cassandra, the
Daughter of Priamus, the Epirotick Sibyl, the Thessalian Manto, Carmenta the
Mother of Evander, Fatua the Wife of King Faunus, Sappho; and, upon a better
title than any of the precedent, Deborah, Miriam, the Sister of Moses, and the
Prophetess Huldah.

The most famous of all, and she to whom the Ancients gave greatest credit, was
the Cumaean, who, under the form and habit of an old woman not known to any,
came to Tarquinius Superbus, to whom she presented nine Volumes of Oracles,
which she said he should have for three hundred philippus's; whereat the King
took occasion to laugh, as if the old woman were grown a child again, to ask so
great a sum for such inconsiderable Books: Which she perceiving, went away and
burnt three of them; and coming again to make him a second proffer of the six
remaining, demanded the same price she had asked for all the nine; and the King
having laughed at her as before, and being confirmed in his conceit of her
being distracted, she burnt three more of them; but returning the third time,
and asking of him the first mentioned sum for the three that were left,
Tarquin astonished at that perseverance, consulted the Augurs what he should
do; whereto their Answer was, that, in all liklihood, they were some Counsels
sent by the Gods to the City of Rome for the welfare of it, which he should
not any longer refuse. Accordingly he ordered her to have what she demanded;
and having advised him to be very careful in the keeping of those Books, she
vanished, and was never after seen either in that King's Court, or any where
else, which much heightened the opinion already conceived of her Divinity.
Tarquin recommended these Books to the keeping of two persons of good repute,
which number was afterward mutiply'd to ten, elected one half out of the
people, the other out of the Senate: And afterward it came to fifteen, and so
increased till it rose to sixty, but still kept the name of the Quindecim viri,
which received their period with all the other heathenish ceremonies in the
time of Theodosius. Only those persons were permitted to read the Books of the
Sibyls, and their superstition came to such a pitch, that there was not any
thing so holy and sacred in Rome, as those Books; insomuch that when any thing
occurred, wherein the Roman State was highly concerned, as the Pestilence,
civil War, or when their foreign Wars were not carried on with the success
they had promised themselves; their recourse was to those books of the Sibylls,
whence they pumped out the remedies and advices which they had to give the
Senate and People. This was observed till the time of the Social War, when,
Cains Norbanus and Publius Scipio being Consuls, the Capitol was burnt, and
with it all the sacred things, and among them the Books of the Sibylls. But
soon after the reparation of the Capitol, Scribonius Curio and Cneus Octavius
being Consuls, there came out an Edict from the Senate, that three Deputies
should go, as they did, to Erythrae, and other Cities of Italy, Greece, and
Asia, whence they brought to Rome about a thousand Verses written by diverse
persons, with the names of the Sibylls to whom they were attributed. And it is
from the ignorance of so many hands, as had been employed in the writing of
those Verses, that the many faults found therein proceeded; as being such as
obliged Tiber, to correct those errors, and distinguish the supposititious
verses from the true ones, to order that every one should bring in to the
Praetor, of Rome whatever he had of them, with a prohibition that any should
retain Copies thereof save only the Quindecim viri, whose Office and Name
received its period at the last conflagration of the Sibylline Books made by
the command of Stilico, Father-in-law to the Emperor Honorius, thinking by that
means to raise a sedition against his Son-in-law, and so to transfer the Empire
to his own Son Eucherio.

And this is all we have of certainty concerning the History of the Sibylls,
who may be probably conjectured to have prophesied by a certain Enthusiasm and
divine inspiration, which was granted them according to the acknowledgment of
the Fathers, as a reward of their Virginity; it being not imaginable, that the
many noble things they have foretold, even to the highest mysteries of our
Salvation, should proceed from the evil Spirit, much less from the motion of
Nature, the strength whereof is not able to come up to Prediction.

The Second said, That the vain desire, which men of all times have been
inclined to, of knowing things to come, having put them upon an unprofitable
consultation of Heaven, Earth, and Waters, to find out whatever might bring
them any tidings thereof, they have not let slip any occasion which they
conceived might inform them; their superstition being come to that height as to
draw consequences and presages from all things, and oblige them to search into
the very entrails of Beasts, and the sepulchers of the Dead: Nay, what is yet
more, if they have derived a certain divination from the very chirping of
Birds, whence their Augurs received their name, it is not to be wondered, they
should give credit to the Discourses and Songs of young Maids and Women. For,
among those who were called Sybills, there were some married, especially she
who writ the first book of the Oracles attributed to them; which Sibyll says
she had been in Noah's Ark, with her Husband, her Father-in-law, her Mother-in
law, her Brothers-in-law, and her Sisters-in law, who consequently had not the
gift of Prophecy bestowed on them, upon the account of their Virginity: And
though, according to the testimony of Eusebius, and most of the other
Ecclesiastical Authors, there was not any Sibyll more ancient then Moses; yet
does the Sibyll beforementioned foretell the coming of Moses, and the Deluge,
at which by that means she could not have been present; for things present are
never foretold. But what brings the credit of their Works into greater
suspicion, is, that those Verses do themselves discover, that they were written
fifteen hundred years after the beginning of the Grecian Empire, and
consequently, whatever they tell us of Moses, the reign of Solomon, and the
Empire of the Lacedaemonians, all which preceded that time, are Histories,
which they obtrude upon us for Prophecyes. And all the Mysteries of our
Salvation contained in the Sibylline Verses, are, in all probability of the
same Nature. And, in the fifth Book of the Sibylline Writings, the Sibyll says,
that she had seen the second conflagration of the Vestal's Temple; which,
according to Eusebius, happened in the year of our Lord CXCIX. under the
Emperor Commodus. And then it was indeed, that those Verses first appeared in
the World, nor were they seen before, nor cited by any one, and the Prophecies
contained in them, have not ought to say of what should come to pass after that
time, inasmuch as they could not have done it with any certainty. As to her
saying, That there should be three Emperors after Adrian, to wit, the two
Antoninus's, Pius, and the Philosopher, and the Emperor Commodus, and then the
times should end, being found false in respect of what was to happen
afterward, as being things absolute besides her knowledge, it was not to be
imagined, she should set down the names of the Emperors, or given the first
Letters thereof, as she had done those of the fifteen, who preceded, of whose
History she gives as particular an account as those Authors who speak
affirmatively thereof, and with all circumstances after their death. Add to
this, the erroneous opinions of some Christians of that time, which are
inserted into their Works; as for instance, that the damned should be delivered
after certain Ages; and that Nero should remain concealed to be Antichrist in
the last times. Besides, the too exact observance of order in those Writings,
is an argument that they were not the productions of persons subject to
Fanaticism, such as some would have the Sibylls to be, who writ upon the leaves
of Trees, the Verses which their Enthusiasm dictated to them. And to conclude,
there is no probability, that the Prophet Esaias, who has spoken more clearly of
the Incarnation than any other, should think it enough to say, A Virgin should
bring forth a Son; and that the Sibyll should say, before the thing came to
pass, The Virgin Mary shall bring forth a Son named Jesus in Bethleem: there is
no probability, I say, that God should bestow greater illuminations on those
Women, whom Antiquity ranked among the Priestesses of Bacchus, than on the most
inspired among his Prophets. Whence it is to be justly imagined, that some
Christians were the Authors of those Verses, who piously thought to make some
advantages thereof against the Pagans, who gave credit to other Writings which
were then in vogue and repute under that name: as there are some in our days
who father on Nostradamus such things as he never thought of, and that after
they are come to pass; under pretense that there is some mention made thereof
in that confusion of matters, whereof he treats. This will not be thought
strange by those, who considering the multitude of accidents, which that Author
has shuffled into his Centuries, whereof the varieties are so great, that it
is no hard matter to find therein most occurrences of humane life; as we see
that in syllables diversely transposed and put together, all things in the world
may be found.

The Third said, That the Ancients are not be thought so credulous, as to
attribute such authority to the Sibylls, if there had not been some young Maids
and Women, who had effectually foretold things to them. True it is, chance may
be fortunate in one or two cases, as a blind Archer may casually hit the mark;
but it is very unlikely, that one who cannot shoot at all, should have the
reputation of a good Archer all the world over. And yet Authors are full in
asserting the authority, wherein the answers made by those women were. Virgil
grounding his discourse on that common persuasion says, Vltima Cumaei venit jam
carminis aetas: And the Satyrist confirms what he had said, with another verse,
to wit, Credit me vohis folium recitare Sibyllae. And it was ordinary to
inscribe on Monuments the names of those who were appointed for the keeping of
those books of the Sibylls and took care for the Sacrifices, which the Romans
offered up, to appease the wrath of the Gods, according to the counsel, which,
as occasion required, they took from their verses. Nay, there was such a strict
prohibition that any should have them in their private Libraries, that one of
those who were entrusted with the custody of the Sibylline Books, named Marcus
Atilius, was sown up in a bag, and cast into the Sea, for lending Petronius
Sabinus one of those Books to be transcribed, or, as some affirm, only their
simple Commentary, containing the secrets of the Sacrifices which were made
according to them. Upon the same consideration that it pleased God to sanctify
Job, though out of the Judaick Church, the only one wherein salvation was then
to be found, I may say, there is no inconvenience to imagine, that he might as
well bestow the Spirit of Prophecy, on those Virgins at least commonly
accounted such. And consequently, what is said to the contrary, deserving
rather to pass for adulterate and supposititious, then that there should be any
question made of what diverse of the holy Fathers have affirmed of them: the
gift of Prophecy having been communicated also to Balaam, and God having
miraculously opened the eyes, and unloos'd the tongue of his Ass. What remains
to this day imprinted in the minds of a great number of persons, concerning
Merluzina, and other Fairies, contributes somewhat to the proof of what has
been said; some illustrious Families deriving their origin thence. For, as to
the inserting of some supposititious verses into the body of their Works, it
should be no more prejudice to them, then it is to those of the most excellent
Authors, among which the spurious productions of others are sometimes shuffled
in. And if it be true, that Homer's Verses were at first confusedly pronounced
by him, and that it has been the employment of others, to reduce them into
that noble order, wherein we read them, Why should the same observance of order
be censured in the disposal of the Sibylline Verses? Plato, in his Theagines,
affirms, That Socrates acknowledged them to be Prophetesses; and in his
Phoedon, the same Socrates shows, by their example, That extravagance or
distraction of mind does many times bring great advantages to Mankind.
Aristotle, in the first question of the thirtieth Section of his Problems,
affirms, That Women become Sibylls, when the brain is overheated, not by
sickness, but through a natural distemper. And elsewhere he describes the
subterraneous Palace of a Sibyll, whom he affirms, according to the common
report of her, to have lived a long time, and continued a Virgin. Plutarch, in
his Treatise, Why the Prophetess Pythia renders not her Answers in verse,
affirms, that, by a particular favor of God, a Sibyll had spoken things during
the space of a thousand years; and elsewhere, that she foretold the destruction
of several Cities that were afterward swallowed up, the fire of Mount Gibel,
and diverse other things, setting down near the time when what she had said
should come to pass. Pausanias affirms, that the Sibyll Herophila, had
certainly foretold the bringing up of Helen at Sparta, and that it should
occasion the destruction of Troy. Justin, having related what account Plato
made of persons who foretold things to come who he says, deserve the name of
Divine, though they do not themselves comprehend the great and certain things
which they predict, says, That that is to be understood of the Sibylline
Verses: the Writers whereof, said he, had not the same power as the Poets have,
to wit, that of correcting and polishing their works; inasmuch as the
inspiration ceasing, they do not so much as remember what they had said, though
some have been of opinion, that the agitation of Mind, wherewith they have
prophesied, seemed to be the Effect of the evil Spirit; producing, as a
confirmation of this opinion, one of the Sibyls, who says of her self, that,
for her enormous crimes, she was condemned to the fire. Yet allowing these
Verses to be ranked among the supposititious, there is still a greater
probability inclining us to judge otherwise of them, when we consider the good
instructions given us, and the mysteries of our Salvation contained therein; it
being not the function of Devils and evil Spirits to encourage us to piety. But
however it be, this is clearly evinced, that there have been Sibyls, and that
they foretold things to come.

CONFERENCE CCXV. Whether of two Bodies of different weight, the one descends
faster than the other, and why?
OF Natural Bodies, some move from the Center to the Circumference, as Fire;
others, from the Circumference to the Center, as the Earth; others, are in the
mean between both, as Air and Water, the latter whereof inclines downwards, but
both of them are principally designed to fill the Vacuum. Whence it comes, that
the Air descends as much, nay, faster to the bottom of a Well when it is dried
up, than the Water had done before; which consideration, has given occasion to
some to attribute a mean, or circular Motion to those two Elements, as they
have done a direct Motion to the two first. And whereas these two kinds of
Local Motion, to wit, the direct and the circular, are the Principles of the
Mechanics, the most profitable parts of the Mathematics, and that among the
said Motions, that which tends downwards, which proceeds from weight, is the
most ordinary Agent, and such as is the most commonly used in Machins or
Engines, where it is the most considerable, either for the assistance it gives
to fixed and settled instruments, or for the obstruction it gives those which are
moveable; thence comes that famous dispute there is, concerning the causes of
Motion from above to beneath. Which since it must needs proceed from one of
these three, to wit, the weight of the Body descending, and lightness of the
mean through which the descent is made; or from the impulsion of the said mean:
Or, lastly, from the attraction made by the Center; the Question is, To which
of those three Causes that Motion is to be referred? If it be attributed to the
weight, it will follow, that the heaviest Body shall descend soonest; if to the
impulsion, the celerity or slowness of the Agent shall accordingly render that
Motion swift or slow; but, if only the attraction made by the Center be the
Cause of it, the lesser weight shall descend as fast, nay, faster than the
greater, upon the same account as that the same piece of Loadstone more easily
draws a small needle than it does a great key. Nor can Experience always assist
us in this case, in regard the different composure and form of heavy Bodies, as
also the diversity of the means, and the variety of the Agents, whereby they
are thrust forwards, will not permit us to make an allowable Comparison between
them. Thus a ball of Cork, which descended as fast in the Air as one of Lead,
shall not do the like in the water, to the bottom whereof the Lead shall fall,
but not the Cork. And again, the same Lead being put into the form of a
Gondola, or other hollow vessel, shall swim on the water, which it could not
before: A Cloak, folded close together into a bundle, shall have a speedy
descent in both Air and Water; but let a Man fasten the same Cloak under the
arm-pit, so as that it may spread into a circle, it shall so sustain him the
Air, that he shall fall very gently, and receive no hurt by his fall. Hence it
also comes that many Women have been saved, when, falling into the Water, their
Clothes were spread all abroad. The same thing may also be observed in those
frames beset with Feathers, or covered with Paper, which Children call Kites,
and sustain in the Air, and suffer to be carried away with the Wind, giving
them ever and anon little checks or jerks by drawing the pack-thread to them
whereby they are held, imitating in that action the beating of the wings in
Birds. In fine, the different manner of giving the first shock to weighty
Bodies, does accordingly diversifie their Motion toward the Center. For as the
impulsion made downwards hastens its bent toward the Center; so when it is
forced circularly, it is retarded. Whence it comes that a glass so cast down
that it has certain turns by the way, does sometimes fall to the ground
without breaking. But to speak absolutely, all conditions being supposed equal,
it should seem that the more weighty a Body is, the sooner it falls to the
Center: And this is made good by daily Experiences, as may be seen in the
weighing of Gold and Silver in the balance, which has a speedier and shorter
cast, when the piece is much weightier or lighter, than it has when there is
but half a grain difference between both the scales.

The Second said, That the Nature of weight or heaviness was to be numbered
among the occult things. Aristotle defines it to be a Quality inclining Bodies
downwards and toward the Center. Others would have it to be an Effect of
density, which proceeds from the great quantity of Substance and Matter,
comprehended and contracted in a small room. There are yet others, who would
have it to be an impulsion or fastening of one Body upon another, in order to
Motion downwards: But, to come nearer the business, it is only the relation or
report there is between a Body and its mean, and its comparison with another
Body. According to this account of it, the same piece of Gold is said to be
light in respect of one weight, and heavy in respect of another; Wood is heavy
in the Air, and light in the Water; Tin is light in comparison of Gold, though
very weighty in respect of Wood. Whence it follows, that weight has only a
respective being, and such as depends on some other thing, and not on it self:
The Cause of it therefore is not to be sought in it self, but elsewhere; as
must be that of the recoiling of a Tennis-ball, which is not in the Ball, nor
in the arm of him that plays, nor yet in the walls of the Tennis-Court, but
resulting from all these three* together. And whereas Experience seems to
decide the Question proposed, it is fit we should refer our selves to it. Now it
is certain, that of two Bodies of unequal weight, and of the same Figure and
Matter, equally forced, or suffered to fall, the one will as soon come to its
Center as the other; as those may see who shall let fall at the same time from
the top of a Tower, two leaden bullets, one of two pounds, and the other of a
quarter of a pound, both which will come to the ground at the same instant; the
reason whereof is, That the stronger impulsion in the bullet of two pounds,
meets with a stronger resistance of the Air to break through as it falls, than
that of quarter of a pound. Whence we are to make a distinction between the
greater impulsion which the weightier Body makes upon another Body, and the
celerity or slowness of the Motion wherewith it descends; a hundred weight
being heavier on the shoulders of a Porter, than one pound, but not coming
sooner to the ground than it. In like manner, a stone descending so much the
more swiftly the nearer it comes to its Center, clearly shows, that it derives
the force of its Motion from the Center, as its principle; as we conclude, that
the strength of a bullet is spent, and the Motion of it grows fainter, the
further it is at a distance from the arm and gun from which it came, and which
we hold to have been the cause and principle of it.

The Third said, That the weightiest Bodies make the more haste to their
Center, the nearer they approach it; for their weight is increased by their
approaching of it; gravity, in the scent of weighty Bodies, increasing by the
continuance of Motion, quite contrary to violent Motion, which admits of
remission thereby; artifice, it seems in this point giving place to Nature, so
as that the latter never grows weary, nay, is infallible in all her Motions,
and that such a propension of weight to the center, is the only certain rule to
draw direct lines to that center; and which is yet the more certain, the
greater the weight is. And whereas the Mind of Man judges the better of things
when they are opposed one to the other, behold one of those little Atoms which
dance up and down in the beams of the Sun striking in at a window, it is a Body
sustained in the Air only by its smalness, and requires a long time to make an
impression in that part of the Air which is under it, which thing cannot be
said of a Musket-bullet: It is therefore deducible thence, that the heaviest
Bodies descend fastest to the Center.

The Fourth said, That we are not to seek for any other reason for the speedier
descent of heavy Bodies, than there is in all the other Motions of Nature,
which proceed from the instinct imprinted by her in all things, of loving their
good, which is their rest and natural place, which till they have attained,
they are in perpetual disquiet; and whereas the heavier a Body is, the more
parts there are in it, concerned in the pursuance of that good, it is not to be
wondered if it happens to them as to diverse sollicitors in the same cause, who
press it more earnestly than one alone would do. We may therefore say, that the
same natural instinct that makes the Mulberry-tree expect till the cold weather
be over before it buds; and the Halcyons till the tempests be past, before they
build their nests, and makes them to secure their young ones before the Rain,
may much rather cause the most massy and weighty Bodies to make more haste.
For these, foreseeing that the Center is not able to lodge all the Bodies
tending thereto, endeavor to get to it as soon as they can, adding to their
haste the nearer they approach it. But the most certain reason of this speedier
Motion, is the general rule, that the more the Cause is increased, the more is
the Effect augmented; whence it follows, that if weight be the Cause of Motion
downwards, the greater the weight is, the more intense ought to be the Motion.

CONFERENCE CCXVI. Of the Silkworm.
THe use of Silk was brought over from the East Indies into Europe above a
thousand years since, and was particularly introduced into Italy by two
Religous Men, who brought thither the grain of it somewhat above three hundred
years since; in which Country of Italy, that commodity has been much
cultivated, and that upon several accounts; as, the preciousness of it, the
easy transportation from one place to another, by reason of its lightness:
And, lastly, for that it is one of the principal instruments of Luxury, which
never wanted Partisans and Abettors in any Age, not to mention the great
advantages and wealth attending the manufacture of it. The Latin word Sericum,
is received from that of Seres, an Oriental people, who were more sedulous in
the cultivation of it than any other: and the same thing has happened to this,
as to many other excellent productions derived from mean and despicable
Principles. For the Animal, from whose labor we have the silk, is an Insect,
as are all those which spin, to wit, the Spider and the Caterpillar, and it
differs in nothing from this latter, save that the Caterpillar has a little
hairiness, and the silk of the Silkworm is stronger than the web of the
Caterpillar, and of another color, but as to figure and bulk there is little
difference between them. Whereto may be added, that their production is much at
one, as being as it were hatched of certain eggs, living on leaves, enclosing
themselves in certain webs, out of which they make their way, after they are
become a kind of Butterflies, by a strange Metamorphosis, which forces them
from one extremity to another, that is, from the nature of Reptiles to that of
Volatiles: which transformation is such, as, were it not for the frequency of
it, might be placed among the greatest miracles of Nature, considering the
great difference there is between those two forms. And that indeed is such as
has given some occasion to doubt, whether the Silkworm becoming a Butterfly
did not change its Species, as it would be true, were it not that every thing
produces its like; and the Silkworm deriving its birth from the seed of the
Butterfly, it is an argument that both are of the same Species. Thus much as to
their progress. The Kingdom of Spain commonly furnishes us with the best grain
or seed of these worms, which are like heads of pins, but black, or resembling
Rape-seed somewhat flatted on both sides: This grain, sometime in the Month of
April, being put between two warm pillows, or exposed to the Sun, enclosed in
the linings of ones clothes, or otherwise chafed by a moderate heat, but
without any moisture, there are produced of it little certain worms of the same
color, that is, black at their first coming forth, which by reason of their
smalness, as resembling the points of needles, pass through certain little
holes made in a paper, wherewith they are covered, and fasten themselves on the
Mulbery-leaves, which are also placed on the said paper full of little holes,
upon which leaves all the best grain being hatched, within five or six days,
goes creeping after the first worm that gets out of her shell; all that is
hatched afterward never coming to any good. These worms are thence
transported, with the leaves laid upon little boards or hurdles, into a
temperate place, and disposed in a lightsom and spacious room, where they are
entertained with fresh leaves twice a day, among which those of the white
Mulbery makes finer silk than those of the black; for want whereof the leaves
of the Rose-bush, Lettice, and some others may be used: but though the Worm
makes a shift to subsist by that nourishment, yet either it will not spin at
all, or the Silk will be like the web or clue wrought by the Caterpillars. Thus
it feeds for the space of forty days, during which it becomes gray, and changes
its color four times, not eating for some days before each change, by reason
of the fullness it is then sensible of. The Worm is subject to certain diseases;
and those oblige such as have the care of them to remove them out of one room
into another, and that even when they are dying in great quantities; Perfume,
Incense, Benjamin, Vinegar, and Wine recovering and comforting them; as also
the smell of broyl'd Bacon. To prevent which Diseases, and the assaults of
Flies and Pismires, who will make havoc among them, they are very carefully to
be kept clean, the boards on which the leaves lie to be rubbed with wormwood,
or sprinkled with Wine, which must be well dried up before they come near them,
all moisture being hurtful to them, as also salt, or the hands that have
handled it. All harsh sounds, as those of the discharging of Muskets, Bells,
and Trumpets, destroys them; nay, the strong breaths of those who come near
them, especially such as have eaten or handled Garlic or Onions, are very
prejudicial to them. When their time of spinning draws nigh, which is about six
weeks after their being first alive, at which time they are about the bigness
of a man's little finger, more transparent than they use to be, and the little
snowt so lengthened as that it represents the form of a Nose, the Animal by an
extraordinary motion, expresses the inconvenience it endures by reason of its
burden: Then is it cleans'd oftener, and there is so much the less given it to
eat, and afterward they set on the boards some dried branches of Heath, Broom,
or Vines, and above all of Birch, as being the most delicate and least prickly,
least it should prick the Worm, or entangle the Silk. Then you shall see them
fasten their first threads, and casting out of their mouths a kind of coarse
sleeve silk, and afterward that which is finer and more perfect, in one
continued thread, accompanied by a gum, which makes it stick one to another, so
that the worm does encompass it self with that silk, which is commonly yellow,
very seldom greenish or white, and being come to the end of the clue, has only
so much room as it takes up. Then, for the space of fifteen days, it remains
immovable, and is covered with a skin or film like that which covers the fruit
of the Pine Tree, under it^ shell, and which appears not till after that is
broken. But these fifteen days being over (of which those will abate some, who
are desirous to make advantage of the Silk, and trouble themselves not what
becomes of the grain) the Silkworm, though it seemed to have been dead, breaks
through its web, and comes out in the form of a white and horned Butterfly,
bearing a certain image of the Resurrection; then coming together, the Male,
which is smaller coupling with the Female that is bigger, the latter sheds her
seed upon a clean paper, spread under her for the reception of it. The seed
being carefully put into a box is either kept for the next year, or sold by the
ounce; they commonly keep as much as comes from a hundred Males, and so many
Females; the grain or seed whereof before their copulation is barren. Now if
they be desirous to get silk out of it, which is the principal advantage, in
order to which the Worms are kept, about fifteen days after they are
completed, these webs are cast into water, somewhat better than lukewarm, and
the Women and Children employed about that work, stir the water with an handful
of Birch, till they have fastened on seven or eight ends of silk, which having
done, they wind it up into skains, and that is the raw silk.

The Second said, That it is to be imagined the use of Silk was absolutely
unknown to the Jews, especially when we consider, that in the works of that
magnificent Temple of Solomon, wherein they spared not any thing of what they
thought most precious, there is no mention made of Silk, instead whereof they
made use of Goats-hair, and other precious Fleeces. But it was no strange
commodity to the Greeks and Romans; not to the former, since that Parisatis,
the Mother of Cyrus, was commonly wont to say, that Kings were always to be
spoken to in silken words; nor yet to the latter, inasmuch as they had some
garments all of Silk, which they called Vestes holosericas. Which is the more
creditable, in regard that the Inhabitants of China who made use of it above a
thousand years before us, have very ancient Books, whereof the paper is made of
Silk. In the interim, through the revolution of times, which makes that unknown
in one age, which was familiar in another, it has happened, that Pliny, never
having seen any, relates strange stories of it, calling the Silkworm a Fly,
though it be not transformed into a Fly, as was said before, till after it has
finished its working of Silk. He further affirms, that this worm makes its nest
in dirt, or clay, and that so hard, that instruments of iron cannot penetrate
it; that in the said nest it makes more wax, then Bees do, and leaves in it a
Worm, bigger than the other Flies. Afterward not being satisfied with himself,
he brings in a discourse, which shows indeed that he had heard some talk of our
Silkworm, but that he had never seen any, nor met with any certain account
thereof, when he says, That Silk came from a Worm that had two horns, which
worm brings forth certain Caterpillars, which engender that which is called
Bombylius, out of which comes the Worm, which produces that, which makes the
Silk, and all these productions, and the making of the Silk performed in six
Months: the last Worms, says he, making a web of silk like that of a Spider,
and that the first who ever found out the invention of unweaving and
unravelling that web, that so some use might be made of the Silk, was Pamphila,
the Daughter of Latona, of the Island Coos. In fine, to make the story yet more
fabulous, he says, that in the Island of Lango, the Silkworms are engendered of
the Flowers, which the Rain causes to fall from Turpentine-trees, Ashes, Oaks,
and Cypress Trees, enlivened by the vapors which exhale out of the earth;
being at first little naked Butterflies, which afterward get a little
hairiness, to sesecure them from the cold, and their feet are so rough that
they fasten on all the Cotton they meet upon the leaves of Trees, and make
their silk of it; then they break it with their feet, card it with their claws,
and having reduced it to silk, hang it up between the boughs of Trees, where
they comb it, to make it the finer, and that done, they wind themselves within
it, as within a botom of silk; and then are they disposed into earthen pots to
be kept warm, and are nourished with noise, till they are renewed again, and
reassume their wings, as they were before they had done their work. So pitiful
a thing is a deviation from Truth, and so hard is it for a man to meet with
her, when he is once got out of her own path.

CONFERENCE CCXVII. Why Ice being harder than Water is yet lighter.
IN this Question, there are several others comprehended; the first, Why Ice is
harder than Water; the second, Why it is lighter, inasmuch as lightness is an
inseparable accident of softness, as this latter is an inseparable accident of
lightness. On the contrary, density, hardness, and compaction is a sign, or
rather a cause of weightiness, as it is observable in Meal, Ashes, and other
Bodies of the like Nature, which weigh heavier, when they are close thrust
together in the Bushel. Nay further, this Question comprehends in it self the
Efficient Causes of Ice, which is the coldness of the Earth, the Water, or the
Air. It is not the first, because, if it were, Rivers and Lakes would be frozen
at the botom, which, on the contrary, is most temperate, and serves for a
retreat to the Fish, while the surface of the Water is frozen up, which
freezing if it be so violent as to reach the Center, it is communicated by
degrees from the surface. Now that Rivers begin to freez on the sides, does
proceed hence, that the Water there moves more slowly; the channel, or current
of the Water, which is rougher in the midst, being interrupted by the
inequality of its course. For motion prevents congelation; not upon the account
that it warms, inasmuch as that effect happens not to it, otherwise then by the
collision of two or more solid bodies, but because there is no change made, but
upon some solid foundation, which cannot be imagined in Water, as long as it is
in motion. Nor is the Water congealed by that Cold, which is Nature to it self;
for that which is in Caves and places under ground, where it continues in its
own nature, is not frozen. Nor yet that which lies exposed to the influence of
a cold air, especially when it may easily insinuate it self into it. Whence it
comes, that to cause water to freeze in a short time, it must be warmed before
it be exposed to the Air, which, finding its pores open by the heat, so much
the more speedily insinuates it self into it. For as to what is maintained by
some Physicians, to wit, that the Air is hot and moist, seems to have been
advanced by them, rather to make a correspondence of the four possible
combinations of qualities to so many Elements, than for any convictive reason;
since the Air is never hot if it be not warmed by some other heat then it has
in it self, such as is that of Fire or the Sunbeams, and these too must be
reflected by the Earth. On the contrary, when it continues in its own nature,
as it does in the nightime, during the absence of the Sun, it is actually
cold: nay, even in the greatest heats of Summer, it keeps its coolness,
provided there be no application made to a hot body, as may be seen in our
Lady's Fanns, who forcing away the Air from their hot faces, are refreshed by
its coolness, which then cannot proceed from any other principle than the
proper nature of Air, inasmuch as motion would be more likely to imprint heat
on them, then cold. And this is further confirmed by the Air we breathe, the
reciprocation whereof cools our Lungs, whereas it should warm them, if it were
hot, as the Peripateticks would have it. It happens therefore that the Air, for
that reason called by some Philosophers primum frigidum, the first cold,
insinuating it self into the Water, produces therein the effect which Aristotle
attributes to it, to wit, that of congregating all things as well of the same
as of several kinds. And whereas our common water, what simplicity soever there
may be in it, consists of all the Elements, especially Earth and Air, the Air
joining it self to what it meets withal of its own Nature, does in the first
place render that cold; and being by that means united to the other parts, viz.
to the Earth unperceivably intermixed with the Water, and to the Water it self,
contracts and compresses them so as that they take up less space then they did
before; as may be seen in a Bottle filled with water, and frozen up, which
though it had been full, is nevertheless found to contain air in its upper
part. And yet this compression cannot be so well made, but that there remain
several particles of Air enclosed in the Spaces of the Ice, which, were it not
for that air, would be vacuous; and this, by reason the surface, as was said
before, freezing up first, it from thenceforward hinders from making their way
out, those parts of air, which either were got in before, or caused by the
avoiding of vacuity, when the Center and other parts of the Water are forced by
the Cold to take up less place then they did before. We conclude therefore, and
say, that though the Ice be dense and hard, by reason of that compression of
all its parts, yet is lighter than Water, because there is air enclosed within
it, which cannot return to its sphere, as that does which gets into the Water,
which by reason of its liquidity makes way for it. So that it is no more to be
wondered at, why Ice is lighter than Water, then that cork, being harder, is
lighter than the same water. Otherwise, had the Ice no Air enclosed within it,
as it happens to that engendered in Mines, which in process of time comes to be
Crystal, it would fall to the bottom of the water as the other does. The same
thing may be instanced in porous wood, which swims upon the water; whereas
Ebony, by reason of its solidity and want of pores, will sink.

The Second said, That whether the Air be granted to be light, or not, or that
it pass only for a body less weighty than the water, as this latter is less
heavy than the earth, certain it is, that the intermixed Air, not that
comprehended within the concavities, but that diffused through the least parts
of the Ice, is that which makes it lighter; inasmuch as it augments its
sinnuosities, as may be observed in a bottle filled with water, which breaks
when the water is congealed, in regard that being converted into Ice, the
bottle cannot contain it. So that, as Snow is lighter than Hail, so this latter
is lighter than Ice; and this last is lighter than water, in regard it contains
less matter in an equal space: Accordingly, it is the Air that freezes the
water, yet dos it not follow thence, that it should be the primum frigidum; as
the Iron which is red hot burns more vehemently than the elementary fire, yet
is not that red hot Iron the primum calidum; that distinction proceeding from
the difference of matter, which as it must be the more compact in order to a
greater burning; so the cold, for its better insinuation into all the parts of
the water, requires the conveyance of the Air. As to the lightness of Ice, it
seems to be the more strange upon this consideration, that Physicians explicate
lightness by heat, as they do heaviness by cold. But the fiery vapors which are
in the water, as may be said of that which has been warmed, contribute very
much to that lightness, it being not incompatible that these contrary qualities
should be lodged in the same Subject, considering the inequality of the one in
respect of the other; and it is not to be thought a thing more strange, that
there should be potentially hot Exhalations in the water, than that the Nile
should abound in Nitre, which is of an igneous nature. Now from what matter
soever the cold proceeds, it is evident by its action that it is not a privation
of heat, as some Philosophers would have maintained; since that which is not,
as privation, cannot have any effect. But those who have referred freezing as
well as thawing to the Constellations, seem to have come near the mark, in as
much as those making certain impressions in the Air, which serves for a mean,
to unite the Influences of the celestial bodies to the inferior, diversely
affect them, one while contracting, another, dilating them, according to the
diversity of matter; there being some not susceptible of congelation, as the
Spirit of Wine and Quintessences, either upon the account of their heat or
simplicity.

The Third said, That if the first qualities of cold and heat were the Causes
of freezing and thawing, they would always happen accordingly; the former, when
it is most cold; and the other, when the cold diminishes. Now many times we
find the contrary, there being some days without any frost, on which thaws, we
are more sensible of cold; and sometimes we perceive it yet without any
perceivable remission of the cold. Whence we may well take occasion to
attribute both to the Influences, which, coming to meet with, and possibly to
introduce also into the water the conditions requisite, such as is cold in
respect of ice, do insinuate themselves into the water. And whereas there is in
these Influences somewhat of a celestial nature, and that they are rather
spiritual than material Quintessences, the same thing happens to them as to
Spirits, which make those Bodies which they animate, lighter, than they would
be if they were inanimate.

CONFERENCE CCXVIII. Of Masks, and whether it be lawful for any to disguise
themselves.
THat the wearing of Masks, and other ways for people to disguize themselves,
is of great Antiquity, is apparent by the prohibition which God made to his own
people, that the man should not put on the habit of the woman, which is a
disguise commonly made with the Mask, in regard that otherwise the hair and
beard of the man would discover his Sex. So that the Question seems to be
already decided, and that it follows from this prohibition, that Masks are not
to be allowed. But however, we may enquire, What repute they were in among
other Nations. And we find, that they were frequently used among the Romans,
who, about the beginning of the Spring, celebrated a Feast in Honor of the
Mother of the gods; in the pomp of which solemnity, it was lawful for any one
to mask and disguise himself, and to represent what person or part he pleased,
which was done bluntly enough, as the French Comedians were heretofore content
to have only a certain powder or meal cast over their faces, as they still have
in the Farce. To show the viciousness of that posture, we need only urge the
indecency of it, and allege that the use of it ought not to be allowed, in
regard that all Dissimulation and Hypocrisy is a great sin in the sight of God
and men: Now the Mask is so hypocritical, that the very word it self is
commonly taken for Hypocrisy. Thence it comes that Seneca, defining the masked
or hypocritical person, gives him this Character, Cum prae se fert aliquis quod
non est, When any one would seem, or appear to be what he is not. Besides, if
Painting be forbidden, and be accounted a capricious humor so prejudicial to
decency and good manners, that there is no Maid nor Woman, but thinks it an
injury to be reproached with painting her self, what opinion ought we to
conceive of those who disguise themselves? For it is imagined done out of no
other end than to cloak their lewd actions, who make use of it; as we
frequently find in the informations for Murders and Felonies, that they are
committed by disguised persons, who thereby would prevent the discovery of
their crimes. Let therefore the use of the Mask be utterly discarded, as a
thing which is contrary to that uprightness of disposition, the signs whereof
are modesty and shamefastness, and by a prevention of blushing, ushers in
impudence, abusiveness, and a contempt and falsification of God's Image
imprinted on the face of man.

The Second said, That in times of War, the Horsemen, who are commanded out
against the Enemy, having close head-pieces over their faces, seem to be so
masked and disguised that they are not to be known; not so much to prevent
their being wounded in the face, as to elude their Enemies, so as that they may
not discover the Commanders and persons of quality, upon whose safety the
gaining or loss of a battle depends. And this Dissimulation has sometimes been
practiced with great advantage, when some private Soldier has put on the
armor, and rid the horse of the General of the Army, so to draw the Enemies
Forces from that side, while they unexpectedly charge him on the other. And
whereas he is commonly the Master of his desires, who can discover the counsels
of his Enemy, and those cannot be known otherwise than by Spies, who would
never be admitted either into Cities or the Enemy's Camp, if they did not in
their habit and demeanor imitate him; what Question is to be made, but that it
is lawful to put on disguises upon such a design, to get the more certain
intelligence? To divert from Military Affairs to Merchandise, it is the safest
way for him who would travel to dissemble his condition; and whereas Poverty is
that which is least of any exposed to dangers, unless a man will follow the
example of Ulysses, who counterfeited himself a Beggar or Pedlar, of which
profession all are not equally capable, it will not misbeseem a great Lord to
demean himself as an ordinary Gentleman, and sometimes to avoid surprises, to
act the part of his Servant, while the Servant acts that of a Prince. Let us
divert thence, and make our appearance before the Courts of Justice; and we
shall there find, that Attorneys and Lawyers, when they speak, are ever masked
and disguised in laying open the Causes of their Clients, who on their side are
also apt enough to dissemble and conceal whatever they think might prejudice
them. So that the Painters had much more reason to represent the Lawyers,
Attorneys, and their Clients, with a veil over their Eyes, then Justice; since
that among them, he has the reputation of the bravest man, who is the greatest
Orator, and has the best Lungs; and according to their saying, who have best
defined the Art of Oratory; It is the Art of persuading people to what they
please, by making great things little, and little things great, which, in other
Language, is for a man to disguise all things, and himself into the bargain,
inasmuch as he seems to believe the contrary to what he says and knows, and
that among the rules of Oratory, this is one, that the Orator is to personate
even to his voice and gesture, and accommodate himself to what he says, which
is properly to mask himself, and that not only the face, but also the feet, the
hands, the tongue, and all those parts of the body which are employed in
pronunciation, elocution, and the gestures suitable to the thing treated of.
Nor is it to be expected that Divines and Physicians are absolutely exempted
from these kinds of disguises, since that, the better to insinuate into the
affections of their Penitents and Patients, which is the way to gain their
hearts, and by that means to Convert and Cure them, they ought to be very
complaisant toward them, comply with their infirmities, and accommodate
themselves to their humors in all things indifferent, that they, on the other
side, may submit to their advice in those things which are necessary. And not
to descend to particular Instances which might be made in all other
Professions, this will be the result, that those who will find fault with Masks
and Disguises, must, with the same breath, cast an aspersion on all humane
society, which, as Augustus said at his departure out of this world, is nothing
but a Comedy, wherein every one acts his part under a disguise. The same thing
was said by one of the Satyrists, but much more pleasantly; for being, as we
say here, upon the Save-all, that is, ready to give up the last gasp, he cried
out to his friend, Draw up the Curtain, the Play is done. For the greatest part
of our Complements being only so many fictions and flatteries, Traffic and
negotiations being so many disguises, and humane life consisting in those
actions, the consequence is, that all the world is under a Mask, and that the
less dangerous, since there are some make it their Profession to be masked, as
do also Ambassadors and other persons of quality in some places of Italy when
they have a desire not to be known. And as to what has been said against
Painting, it seems to be a little too severe to blame that pardonable
curiosity, which the women are only guilty of, to preserve and heighten their
greatest Treasure, that is, their Beauty, upon the account whereof they are
principally recommendable to men; who, were it not for that, would be apt to
slight them much more than now they do. For what do the poor women do more in
that than is daily done in Medicine, whereof one part treats of Cosmeticks,
that is, of Painting, and is brought in for the reparation of the defects and
deformities of Nature.

The Third said, That the Mask or Vizzard, by the Latins called Persona,
either upon this consideration that it changes the condition of the person,
causing him to be taken for some other; or happily a per-sonando, by reason of
the new sound he gives the words pronounced through the Vizzard. This invention
of Vizzards, as also that of speaking Prologues before Plays, is by some
attributed to one Thespis, an Athenian Poet, of whom it is said, -- Et
plaustris vexisse poemita Thespis
Quae canerent agerentque peruncti foecibus ora.


By others, to Aeschylus the Tragidian, Post hunc personae pallaeque repertor
honestae
Aeschylus. --
At first they painted with diverse colors the faces of those Comedians, who
were carried about the streets in Chariots; but that humor not taking so well,
because the same Actor by that means found it very troublsome to act several
parts, they found out the convenience of Masks and Vizards, made as near as
they could like those whom they were to represent, till such time as the
Macedonians became formidable in Greece. For these meeting with some persons in
Vizards who resembled them, the Actors were somewhat at a loss how they should
handsomely come off: whereupon the business being taken into deliberation, it
was resolved, that those made thence forward should be for the representation
of extravagant or ridiculous persons, or such as might frighten the Spectators;
such as were those which the Greeks called Mormolycea, bug-bears, and
Oxyodontas, and the Latins, Larvas, (wherewith the Mothers threatened their
little Children) Gumias, Lamias, Sillos, etc. These last represented the
countenances of ridiculous and abominable women, -- Cum personae pallentis
hiatum
In gremio matris formidat rusticus infans.


She was also -- Magno manducus hiatu. They were at first made of the leaves of
the Fig Tree, then of a certain herb that had large leaves, and, from its being
used upon that occasion, called personata. Afterward the said Vizards were
made of the bark of Trees; whence came this expression, Oraque corticibus
sumunt horrenda cavatis.

And at last they came to be of wood, whence this other, Vt tragicus cantor,
ligno tegit ora cavato. Whence it may be inferred, that the design of using
Masks and Vizards upon the Stage, where it is most used, is in order to
imitation, and to heighten the confidence of the Actors, who by that means are
not known. And the convenience and decency of that custom is such, that one of
the greatest reproaches lying on the memory of Nero, is, that having brought
some persons nobly descended upon the Stage for to be Actors, he caused them to
put off their Vizards while they played on the Flute, and forbad the Comedians
to appear vizarded upon the Stage. To this may be added, that, according to the
Counsel of the Holy Fathers, women and young maids, when they walk abroad, nay,
when they go to Church, ought to be not only masked, but also veiled, to
prevent the temptations which the full sight of them might cause in men, and
the destraction of their own and the others devotion. Now the female sex making
up above one half of the world, we cannot, upon any rational grounds
universally find fault with that thing or custom, the use whereof is allowed to
the greater part.

CONFERENCE CCXIX. Of Fables and Fictions, and whether their conveniences or
inconviences be greater?
OF all the flowers of Rhetoric, lying is one of the worst, and withal so much
the more pernicious, the more full it is of artifice. For if the saying of
Aristotle be true, That the liar always deserves to be blamed, there is a
certain resemblance between him who simply tells a lie, and him who simply
takes away another man's life by poison; inasmuch as the latter infects the
Heart, and the former viciates and corrupts the source of our Ratiocination;
the end whereof is only to come to the knowledge of Truth. As therefore the
poisoning of a man is always a heinous and punishable crime; but that Steward
who should poison his Master, when he gave somewhat to eat or drink, when the
other pretended to be exteamly hungry or dry, would be the greatest villainy in
the world, and deserve a far greater punishment: So he who simply tells a lie
is not so much to be blamed, as he who covers and disguises his lie under the
appearance of some probable history, which is clearly received by our
understanding; and this thus drawn in by the liklyhood of the relation, grows
less distrustful of it, than of the other kinds of falsehood, which are
delivered without any artifice. So that lying, and consequently Fables, and all
the species thereof, have the same proportion to our Understanding, as Monsters
have to Nature; our Understanding cannot endure them, whereas Truth is its
sustenance. Thence it comes that those Fables which are destitute of the
ornament of Truth, which is probability, are not heard with any patience, such
as are old Wives Tales, and the like absurd relations, which are so ridiculous,
that only the ignorance of Children is capable of entertaining them with any
pleasure; but with so much the greater danger to themselves, in regard that
those tender Tables receiving the impression of some false persuasion, will not
afterward so easily part with it; nay on the contrary, it commonly continues
there to the end, at least some part of it, as if Time were not able so fully
to eat it out, but there may be seen some lines of the first draught. Whence it
comes that some eminent persons do account it a great oversight in the
education of Children, to entertain them with Tales and Stories: instead
whereof, those weak minds, wherein, as in soft wax, a man may easily imprint
what he pleases, should rather be acquainted with History, which, by reason of
its variety and truth, would be equally delightful, but much more advantageous.
And indeed those who make use of Fables, thinking by them to teach truth, take
a very preposterous way to do it. For all the advantage which may be derived
from Fables, is only to draw on men's minds with greater delight to the
knowledge of true things: and it is easily found to be a way as unlikely to
prevail, as if a man should make use of some place infamous and notorious for
lewdness, as a School wherein he should read Lectures of Chastity to young Men
and Maids; or lodge a Fuller or Whitener of Cloth with the Collier, one soyling
all that the other had cleans'd.

The second said, that Man's understanding h^ving its distasts and
humoursomness, as well as his body, and Content being equally requisite for the
sustenance of both, in regard that a coarser dish of meat taken with a good
stomach is preferred before better cheer forced down against Appetite; it is
but necessary, that the same remedies should be used to recreate our minds,
when they are wearied, and out of humor with an over-earnestness of study, as
are used to retrive and sharpen the languishing appetite. This latter is
recovered by feeding on some dish excellently well-ordered, such as by its
haut-gousts, and picquancy will rather excite, then satisfy the Appetite. Such
is the bitterness of the Olive, Vinegar in Sallets, and the like; which have
the same effect as the stepping back of such as leap, or the appearance of a
Fly on a face of an exquisitely fair complexion. These Fables are invented to
reduce the wandering and wearied Understanding to its former interrupted
pursuance of Truth. There are two kinds of them: One may be called a simple
Fiction, such as are old Wives Tales, which deserve not the name of fabulous
Relations, unless it be upon the account of their absurdity; and yet it ought
to be seasoned with something that is miraculous and delightful. The other is
Mythological, which may be divided into four kinds. First, the Poetical, in one
continued Relation, such as are the Metamorphoses of Ovid; or Drammatick, and
accommodated to Persons, such as as are Comedies and Tragedies. Secondly, the
Emblem, or Device, which is a real explication of some feigned thing, painted,
or otherwise represented. Thirdly, the Apologue, such as are the Fables of
Aesop; and these are divided into three sorts, the Moral, the Rational, and the
Mixed. The Moral, are those, wherein irrational things are introduced, such as
is the Fable of the two Pots, the earthen and the brazen; or that of the
distribution of the prey between the Lion, the Ass, and the Fox. The Rational
are only of Men, such as is that of the Satyr and his Entertainer, whom he
leaves, because he blew hot and cold out of the same mouth. Of the Mixed, we
have an example in the Fable of the Fowler, and the Stork, taken in the net
with the Cranes. The fourth kind is the Romance: The benefit and advantage of
all which kinds of Fable is notorious to all: For besides that they comprehend
that common recreation, which is opposite to the conflict of Mind, and serious
occupation produced by the reading of Histories, the Poetical kind of Fable, I
mean that of the continued Relation, where the Poet speaks alone, does make
extraordinary discoveries of the old Pagan Antiquities, whereof a man cannot be
ignorant without a great defect. The Dramatick, where Persons are introduced
speaking, when it is represented by good Actors, makes a prevalent impression
on the minds of the Spectators and Auditors, and has nothing comparable to the
other kinds of writing and expressing: so that it is the most efficacious
instrument to move and work upon the Passions. There may also be very great
advantages made of the other forementioned kinds of Fable, especially of the
Romance, which has the same effect on our minds, in order to their instruction
in goodness and virtue, as well-proportion'd Pictures have to teach us the art
of Drawing. For, as there are not to be seen now any Pictures comparable, in
point of body, to that of the so much celebrated Venus, which consisted of
whatever was handsome in any Woman or Maid, and borrowed the hair of one, the
complexion of another, the neck of a third, and the breast and other members of
others; so is it impossible that History should ever come up to the noble
height and delight of the Romance. For, History, though it be not absolutely
true, yet being obliged to represent things past with as much likeness as a
picture is taken according to the face of him who is to be drawn, the
consequence of that obligation is, that however it may embellish things and
actions, yet is it still engaged to expose them to the eye of the Reader as
they are, or at least as they are conceived to be. Now the number of unjust
things much exceeds that of the just, and consequently the bad and sad examples
will much shorten the Reader's delight. Whence it follows, that History wants
those two principal ends, for which it ought to be sought after, to wit,
content and advantage: whereas the Romance brings both along with it, as being
commonly full of the rewards obtained by virtue, whereof one is, that a sincere
and constant Love should at last be crowned with the greatest of worldly
enjoyments; and on the contrary, there are not wanting the punishments and
executions of lewd and vicious persons; whereto add the strange variety of the
accidents, represented therein, which being carried on with nobler and more
unexpected intrigues, extremely heighten the satisfaction of the Reader.

The Third said, That for any man to endeavor the discovery of Truth by its
contrary, to wit, Fables, is to look for light in the midst of darkness; and as
a certain Musician among the Ancients demanded a double reward, for teaching
those who had been instructed amiss in that Art, for this reason, as he said,
that there was a certain time requisite for the forgetting of what they already
knew, and as much for learning how to play well: so that Child, who shall have
heard of the universal Deluge by the Fable of Deucalion and Pyrrha, will find
more difficulty to disengage his mind of those stones, which, they having cast
behind them, became men and women, then he will have to imprint in it the
natural Story of Noah and his Ark. The same thing may be said of all the other
Fables, out of which there is any truth to be derived, to wit, that it is like
the ordering of Crabs, where there is much more to be picked away, then there
is to be eaten. Nay the Romans themselves, who seem to be more instructive, may
be reproached with this, that they have not represented to their Readers, the
State of life and civil Conversation, as it really is, but have entertained
them with a Platonical Commonwealth. And that discourages men very much, when
they find the course and customs of the World to be contrary to what they had
taken so much pains to read: Whereas the young man will be the less startled to
find himself hissed by his Auditors, when he speaks well; and slighted by
Fortune, when he does well; while the ignorant and the wicked are her greatest
Favorites, after he has read in History of many Persons of worth so treated;
than he would be, if he thrust himself into affairs, having never seen any
thing but examples of Vice punished, and Virtue rewarded.

CONFERENCE CCXX. Whether it be better to go to bed late, and rise betimes in
the Morning; or do the contrary.
THough it be a kind of recession from the common opinion, to prefer going to
bed and rising late, before the opposite; yet is it to be noted by the way,
that most Persons of great affairs, and the more judicious sort, observing that
course of life, are of that judgment; since that to approve a thing is to do
it. Now we see that all the great Lords and Ladies about the Court, the most
refined spirits, and such are best able to judge of all things, nay most men
who have any thing more than an ordinary burden of affairs, for the most part
go to bed late, and rise late; whereof several Reasons may be assigned. The
first and most ordinary, methinks, are the affairs themselves, which
insensibly steal away the time from us; and that the more unperceivably, the
more delightful that business is, about which we are employed; the time sliding
away faster from him, who takes a pleasure in the doing of a thing, then it
does from another who is in some trouble of mind or body. Whence it comes, that
a tedious Tale, and a bad Book, are ever thought too long. They therefore are
to be thought the happiest, who, if they had their own wills, would go to bed
latest; not only for that reason which made a certain King of this part of the
World say, That he would be King as long as he could, inasmuch as when he
slept, there was no difference between him and the meanest of his Subjects: but
also for this, that night surprising them before they had done all their
business, the Supper or Collation must be the later, and consequently the going
to bed. The second reason is deduced hence, that there ought to be a
correspondence between the tranquillity of the mind and that of the body. It
being therefore necessary, that he who would take a good sleep should not be
subject to any disturbance of mind, and that indisturbancy being procured only
by that order which every one has taken in his affairs, it is to be imagined,
that the later a man goes to bed, the more business he has dispatched, and
consequently there remains the less to be done. Upon this score is it, that
Merchant's Suppers are accounted the most quiet, for having spent the whole day
in trudging up and down about their Trade, they then enjoy themselves with
greater serenity. In the third place, a man should not go to bed, till
digestion be pretty well advanced; from the want or slowness whereof, hideous
Dreams, Crudities, Ventosities, nay sometimes Apoplexies, do proceed. Now this
digestion is so much the more advanced, the later a man goes to bed: which
difference will be best observed by those, who go just from the Table to their
beds, and lie down as soon as the meat is out of their mouths. Fourthly, that
Custom is ever the best, from which it is in a man's power most easily to wean
himself, and in the change whereof he will be subject to least inconvenience.
Now he who has contracted a habit of going to bed late, will find it a less
inconvenience to go to bed betimes, that so he may rise betimes, or upon some
other Motive, then he shall, who has accustomed himself to go to bed betimes,
for he will be sleepy, and unfit for the doing of any thing, as soon as his
bedtime is come. Fifthly, Hippocrates would not have a man enslave himself to
an over-strict course of life, grounding his advice on this, that such regular
persons find it the greater difficulty to support the miscarriages which
oftentimes cannot be avoided in the ordinary course of life; as those who walk
upon ropes are more apt to fall, at least find it a harder matter to keep on,
then those who walk on the plain ground. Now those who go to bed betimes are
commonly more regular in the hours of Supper, and all the other actions of the
day, upon the exact observance whereof that of their bedtime does depend. Now
it is obvious to any one, who shall consider the difference of professions,
that there are but few that leave a man at liberty to observe so exact a rule
as this is. So that being sometimes necessitated to make a breach of it, the
consequence will be, that those who have the more strictly engaged themselves
to the observance of the rule of going to bed betimes, must needs receive a far
greater inconvenience from the neglect of it, than they ordinarily do who go to
bed late. Sixthly, the same reason that obliges phlegmatic persons, and such
as are subject to Catarrhs, to content themselves with little sleep, which is
this; that their humidity, joined with that of sleep it self, augments their
distemper; besides, that Sleeping which moistens and cools, is not so well
procured in that part of the day which is most cold and moist, that is, from
nine at Night till three in the Morning, but rather toward the Morning, at
which time the Blood begins to be predominant, inasmuch as in so doing he
abates somewhat of its Heat, and being to dilate it self till ten in the
Morning, at which time Choler begins to be predominant, moderates its acrimony;
as all those will acknowledge, which Sex soever they be of, who are subject to
the Megrim, who find very great ease by that Morning sleep, which accordingly
is found to be the most delightful; and has this further advantage attributed
to it, that the Dreams thereof are prophetical, and will come to pass in a
short time; whereas the others are accounted superfluous by those who have been
Professors in that Art. Moreover, those who rise too early in Morning are
subject to the Headache in the Afternoon, and more easily transported with Anger
all the rest of the day; to effect which, the consideration of the Temperament
does very much conduce. For, as sleeping in the day time is born with in Old
Men and Children, and that in both, by reason of their weakness, and for the
recruit of their Spirits, and, particularly in Old Men, to take off somewhat of
the acrimony of that serous phlegm which is predominant in them; so, the
greater part of Men being subject to Choler, (whence happily proceeded the error
of some Physicians, who talk of nothing but refrigeration in all diseases) and
the coolness and moisture of the Night correcting that hot and dry distemper,
it is the more convenient, that Sleep should do as much in the Day time, by
taking off then somewhat of their Choler.

The Second said, That the retrival and restoration of the Spirits obliges the
Animal to sleep, which ought to continue at least for such a space of time as
amounts to the third part of that a man has been waking, and should never
exceed the one half of it. Far is it therefore from being imaginable, that
Nature should be able to endure what is affirmed of the seven Sleepers, or the
long nap of Epimenides, which lasted fifty years. Nor are we to give any more
credit to what is related to us concerning a Plant in the Low Countries, which
will keep people waking many nights and days together, without any
inconvenience; but the time when we should begin or end our sleep, being left
to our own discretion, it is requisite we should accommodate our selves to the
order prescribed by Nature, which has appointed the day to labor, and the
night to rest in: Nay, it is also the advice of Hippocrates, Galen, and all
Physicians, who think it not enough to direct rest in the night, and waking in
the day, but also conceive very great hopes of those, who, in the time of their
sickness, are so irregular therein. Add to this, that darkness, silence, and
the coldness of the night being fit to recruit the Spirits, and promote their
retirement within; whereas light, noise, and the heat of the day, are more
proper to occasion their egress for the exercise of actions; which granted, he
who observes not this rule charges Nature with an erroneous proceeding. And
that this is her way, is apparent hence, that those Animals which are guided
only by her motion, (which is as certain as our reason is ordinarily irregular)
go that way to work. Cocks and other Birds go to their rest, and awake with the
Sun; if any of our Domestic Creatures do otherwise, our irregularity is the
cause thereof and that perversion is of no less dangerous consequence than that
of the Seasons, which is ever attended by diseases. And who makes any doubt but
that the greatest perfection of the Heavens consists in their regular motion,
the principal cause of their duration? Which order since we are not able to
imitate, it is but requisite we should come as near it as we can in our
actions, among which sleeping and waking, being the hindges on which all the
others of our life do hang, if there be any irregularity in these, confusion
and disorder must needs be expected in all the rest, as may be seen in the
lives of Courtiers of both Sexes, who turn night to day, and day to night, a
course of life much different from that which is observed by the Superiors and
Members of regulated companies. Besides, it is the Morning that not only holds
a stricter correspondence with the Muses, but is also the fittest time for the
performance of all the functions of Body and Mind. Then is it that Physicians
prescribe exercises, in regard that the Body being cleared of the Excrements of
the first and second concoction, is wholly disposed for the distribution of
Aliment, and evacuation of the Excrements of the third. So that he who spends
that part of the day about his affairs, besides the expedition he meets with,
does by that means maintain the vigor of his Body and Mind, which is commonly
dulled by sleeping in the day time, which fills the Head with vapors, and when
exercise comes to succeed it in the warmest part of the day, the heat which is
then commonly greatest makes it less supportable. Therefore Nature, who is a
sure guide, inclines us to sleepiness in the Evening, there being not any thing
but the multiplicity and distraction of Civil Affairs, which, depriving us of
that Function, as it does of diverse others, makes the Life of Man so much the
less certain, the more he is involved in Affairs; whereas the duration of that
of Animals, and, next to them of Country People, and such as comply with the
conduct of Nature, is commonly of a greater length and more certain.

CONFERENCE CCXXI. Whether the Child derives more from the Father, or the
Mother.
IF our Forefathers may be conceived wise enough to have known the nature of
things, it is to be acknowledged, that the Child derives most from the Father,
since that they thought fit to bestow on him his name rather than that of the
Mother; and that the name is the mark and character of the thing. Besides, the
Male being more perfect, larger and stronger than the Female, which indeed is
an imperfection and default of Nature, whose constant design it is to make a
Male, and is not disappointed; but through want of heat, vigor, and
temperament; it is but rational, that what proceeded from these two, should
have the denomination from the more perfect of them. Thus a Regiment is known
by the name of the Colonel; a City, by that of its Founder; a Law and Ordinance
by that of the Lawgiver; and a Receipt, the Composition whereof consists of
two simple medicaments, has most of the nature of the stronger, and that which
is of greatest virtue. This is further confirmed by the common Comparison,
which is used to express the difference there is between the Father and the
Mother in the business of generation. For the Mother, and particularly, the
Matrix, is compared to a field, and the paternal seed to the grain which is
sown in that field, which serves well enough in order to its sprouting and
shooting forth, but supplies it only with matter, which is determinated by the
form of the grain, from which the Plant produced of it receives its being. So
that the present Question amounts to no more, than if a Man should ask, Whether
an ear of Wheat derived more from the ground, or from the seed that had been
sown in it? A further proof hereof may be deduced from the instruments of
generation, which being more apparent in the man than in the woman, are a
silent insinuation, that the former contribute more thereto than the latter.
And the greatest and most remarkable difference that there is between the
Children being that of the Sex, the experiment alleged by Physicians, that if
the right Testicle be bound, Males will be produced, as Females will if the
contrary, clearly shows that by the Father's part the Sex is determinated, and
consequently, it is from him that there do also proceed the least individual
differences and circumstances, wherein the likeness or unlikeness of Children
to their Fathers and Mothers, either in Mind or Body does consist. For if the
Males especially should retain more from the Mothers than they do from the
Fathers, that proverbial saying would prove false, which affirms, that Fortes
creantur fortibus -- in regard that most women are chargeable with a want of
Courage. And daily experience makes it apparent, that one of the greatest and
most common causes of Valor is deduced from the Fathers side: Upon which
principle is grounded the account we make of Nobility, which comes seldom but
from the Father's side, whereas the want of Nobility on the Mother's side, does
not make the Child less a Gentleman. Nay some have made it a Question, whether
the Mother did contribute any thing to the formation of the foetus, or only
found it nourishment. But those who have treated more nicely of this matter
unanimously agree, that the Woman's Seed is much weaker, and more watery than
that of the Man, serving only to qualify it, as Water does Wine, yet so as
that the Water is converted into the nature of the Wine, and is called Wine as
soon as it is mixed with it. As to those Children who chance to be more like
their Mothers than their Fathers, it is to be conceived one of Nature's
fagaries, who delighting in variety cannot produce many children, but there
must consequently be a great diversity of Lineaments in their faces, and
figures in their members; among which the idea of a Woman imprinted in the
imagination of the Father may be communicated to his Seed, which consequently
expresses that figure.

The second said, That there were three kinds of resemblances, to wit, that of
the Species, that of the Sex, and that of the Effigies, as to the Body, and
that of manners, as to the Soul. or The resemblance of the Species is, when a
Man begets a Man, a Woman proceeds from the material Principles of Generation
which the Mother contributes more plentifully then the Father: the proof
whereof may be seen in the copulation of Animals of different Species. For if a
Hee-goat couples with a Sheep, he shall beget a Sheep, which shall have nothing
of the Goat in it, save that the fleece will be a little rougher then it is
wont to be. And if a Ram couples with a She-goat, the production will be a
Goat, whose hair will be somewhat softer than otherwise. But as to what is
related of Aristo's, having had a Daughter by an Ass, who for that reason was
called Onoscele; of Fulvius Stellius's, having another by a Mare, who was
thence called Hippona; and of a Sheep, which brought forth a Lion* in the
pastures of Nicippus, to whom it presaged Tyranny; of Alcippa, who was
delivered of an Elephant, having been impregnated by an Elephant, are to be
looked on as monstrous, and possibly fabulous Productions.

The resemblance of the Sex depends on the temperature and predominancy of the
Seeds. For if the seed of both Male and Female be very hot, Males will be
engendered; if cold, Females; and both of them will be either vigorous or weak,
according to the predominancy of heat or cold. Whence it follows, that this
resemblance does not proceed more from the one then the other, of those who are
joined together: but the resemblance of Effigy, and the other accidents of the
Body, and of the manners is more hard to resolve, there being a secret virtue
in both the Seeds, which, as Aristotle affirms, is continued in it to the
fourth Generation, as may be confirmed by the story of Helida, who having lain
with a Negro, brought forth a white Child; but her Grandchild by that was
black. Plutarch affirms the same thing to have happened in the fourth
Generation of a Negro. And yet this resemblance proceeds rather from the
Mother's side than the Father's; for if the causes, which communicate most to
their effects, imprint most of their nature into them; by that greater
communication, those effects accordingly retain so much the more of their
Causes. Now the Mother communicates more to the Child then the Father does, for
she supplies him with Seed, those who have maintained the contrary being
persons not much skilled in Anatomy, and after she has contributed as much as
the Father to that Generation, she alone nourishes the foetus with her
menstrual blood, which then begins not to follow any longer the course of the
Moon, whereby it was regulated before. Besides, coming thus to furnish the said
foetus with nourishment, for the space of nine Months, it is no wonder she
should absolutely tranform it into her own nature, which is thence accounted
but one and the same, in respect of both Mother and Child. Now there is not any
thing liker, or can retain more of it then the thing it self; which cannot be
said of the Father, who is not only different from the Embryo, whom he has
begotten, but also has not any thing common with it, after that first action.
So that there are many Children posthumi, and born long after the death of
their Fathers, which thing never happens after the death of their Mothers; nay
it is seldom seen that a Child taken out of the body of a Mother ready to die,
ever thrives much afterward. Though we shall not stick to acknowledge, that
what is related of the first person of the race of the Caesar's, from whom that
Section was called the Caesarean, might possibly happen, according to the
Relation; yet is it done with this restriction, that most of the other Stories
told of it, are fabulous. But if the Mother comes afterward to suckle her
Child, as Nature and the Example of all other Animals teaches her, which is
happily the reason of their being more vigorous, and of a continuance of life
more regular than that of the man, that second nourishment added to the former,
being drawn from her milk, which derives the quality of the mass of blood, from
which it is extracted, makes him absolutely conformable to the Mother. For if
nourishment may, as we find it to be true, change the Temperament of Persons
well advanced in years, with much more reason may it work a remarkable
alteration in the Body and Mind of a Child newly come into the World, who is as
it were a smooth Table susceptible of any impression. Whence it is to be
concluded, that they proceed very rationally, who are so careful of the
welfare of their little ones, (when the Mothers, either by reason of
sickness, of upon some other account, are not able to bring them up) as to be
very inquisitive about the Nurses they put them to, and the quality of their
Milk. Nay, what is more; are not the changes caused by Nurses in the Body of
the Infant as considerable, as that which happens to the two seeds of Male and
Female mixed at the Generation, which recover their increase by the irroration
of the Maternal Blood which flows thereto; and, if it be impure, does
communicate its impurity to it; as, on the contrary, being pure, it is many
times able to purify the corrupted seed of the Male. Whence Physicians have
observed, that sound Children have descended from Fathers subject to the
Leprosy and such diseases. Add to this, that the safety on the Mothers side is
greater than on the Father's. Moreover, they are the Mothers, from whom
proceeds the Imagination, which acts upon their Embryo all the time they are
with Child; and thence it comes, that they are much more fond of their Children
than the Fathers; which fondness is a sign that there may be more of the
Mothers observed in the Children, than of the Fathers. For the love we have for
our selves is so great, that God would have it to be the measure of that which
we ought to bear unto our Neighbor; and that which we bear to God himself has
some reference to his affection toward us. Those therefore who would insinuate
themselves into the favor of any one, have no surer way to do it, than by
complying with his humor, and as much he can become conformable to him.

CONFERENCE CCXXII. Whether is harder, for a Virtuous Man to do that which is
Evil; or for a Vicious to do that which is Good.
BEfore we come to the Resolution of this Question, we are to consider two
things; the former, that Man consists of two parts, the Superior, which is the
Soul; and the Inferior, which is the Body; and whereas these two parts have
different objects, and such as which contradict one the other, there happens to
be a great Conflict; the body being strongly inclined to sensuality, and the
Soul endeavoring to raise her self up to spiritual things. But in regard the
Organs she makes use of are material, such as are also the Senses, which assist
her in her operations, it is not to be thought she can overcome without great
pains; inasmuch as the instruments which she stands in need of, for the
exercise of Virtue, hold a greater correspondence with the Body; and as they
derive their Being from matter, so they betray the Resolutions of the Soul,
reducing her under a Tyrannical Subjection. Whence it follows, that the wicked
or vicious person finds it the greater difficulty to do well; inasmuch as being
enslaved to vice and sin, he cannot shake off that yoke, as having a constant
inclination to evil.

The Second thing to be considered, is good and evil in it self; for, according
to Nature, there is no evil in Humane Actions, inasmuch as in appearance they
are all good; otherwise the Will, the object whereof is that which is Good and
pleasing, would not be inclined thereto, since good is that which all things
desire. There are therefore two sorts of good, and as many of evils, one
Natural, and the other Moral; the Soul is easily inclined to the Moral good,
and the Body to the Natural; and, consequently, it is much more easy for the
Vicious person to do a Moral good, than it is for the Virtuous Man to do a
Moral Evil.

The Second said, That it is harder for a good Man to do evil, in regard that
to the virtuous man Virtue seems so fair and taking, that he finds it the
greatest difficulty in the world to forsake her, and so to embrace Vice, which
he looks upon as a hideous Monster, inasmuch as Beings and Substances are more
amiable than Privations are odious; in regard that as Love respects the things
that are amiable, and aversion is not extended to that which is not; in like
manner, Vice is not so much shunned, as Virtue is beloved: Whence it follows,
that it is a greater trouble for the good man to do that which is evil, in
regard he knows the perfection of good, as much as the vicious person is
ignorant of it; and, from that ignorance, there must needs proceed a difficulty
and backwardness of embracing it.

The Third said, That the vicious person finds it a harder task to do well, in
regard that Nature is strongly bent toward that which is evil; and,
consequently, the virtuous person, when he does that which is evil, easily
falls down into the bottom; according to the descent of humane inclinations;
and the vicious person, when he does that which is good, climes up a high
Mountain full of Rocks and Precipices, and engages against Nature her self,
being in open hostility against the sensual Appetite, and, according to the
Scripture, We do not the good which we would do, but the evil we would not do,
that we do: To show that the difficulties men find in the pursuance of good are
so great, that Saint Paul himself complains of his having a Law within him
which rebelled against the Law of God. This Nature of ours being full of the
imperfections conceived in Original Sin, has so great a repugnance to good,
that there was a necessity of a Law of Grace to regenerate it, in order to the
pursuit of good, a compliance with the true sentiments of Religion, and the
knowledge of God; not to urge, that Pleasure has so great attractions and
charms, that it is almost impossible to over-master them. Thence it came that
Ulysses ordered himself to be bound to the mast of his Ship, and caused his
ears to be stopped, that he might not hear the harmonious voices of the Sirens;
otherwise his Reason would not have been so strong as to over-master his
sensual Appetites, which must be either destroyed, or so fettered, that the
Soul may not be drawn away by pernicious temptations.

The Fourth said, That Virtue was natural to Man before Adam's Transgression,
and, from the time of his rebellion against God, Vice has seated it self in
her place; so that when Innocence forsook our first Parent, all vices and
imperfections possessed themselves of his Mind, and are become so naturalized
there, that it begat a necessity of establishing Divine and Humane Laws:
whereof some were for the eradication of Vices; others, for the punishment of
Crimes; all which trouble might have been spared, if there had not been so much
difficulty in the doing of that which is good.

The Fifth said, That it being supposed, (as indeed it is true) that Humane
Nature is more inclined to Vice than to Virtue for the reasons before alleged,
yet is there a certain means to frustrate and destroy that Inclination, and
advance the Soul to a sovereignty over the Body, by abolishing and destroying
the Senses, and those intellectual powers whereby the Organs are governed. For
if the Body have the Mastership, the Soul will be forced to obey; but if the
Soul commands, she will bring the Body into subjection to all the virtuous
actions she pleases her self. And then the Virtues will be naturalized in man,
and the Question proposed will meet with a contrary Solution; for in that Case,
it will be much more hard for the virtuous man to do that which is evil, than
for the vicious to do well; inasmuch as the virtuous person by that
mortification of the Senses, will be in a manner reduced to the state of
original innocence, and restored to the glorious condition Man was in before
the Fall.

The Sixth said, That such a moral regeneration is a great Cabalistical Secret,
unknown to all the learned; that such a mortification and destruction of the
Senses as was proposed, is a work not yet well discovered to the Curious, as
transcending all common rules. For, if the Soul acts not without the assistance
of the Organs, and the interior and exterior Senses, the weakening or destroying
of these will contribute to the weakening of the Soul; and instead of making a
Prophet, the transformation will be into some Hypochondriack, or extravagant
Phanatick, as it happens to those who macerate their Bodies by an indiscreet
zeal; insomuch that having not the perfect knowledge of that Science, it were
more expedient that men had a recourse to the ordinary means of Morality, to
regulate the Passions of the Soul, and bring her to the pursuance of Virtue.
Now according to the rules of Morality, even those who are good, are much
inclined to evil, and find it no easy matter to oppose it.

The Seventh said, That it is as hard a matter for the vicious person to do
well, as it is for the virtuous to do ill, in regard that the inclination,
which the good man has to do good and eschew evil, is equal to that of the
wicked person, which is always bent to do evil, it being very difficult for him
to embrace Virtue by shunning Vice, by reason of the aversion which he has to
that which is good. And to make this the more clear, we commonly find some
persons so naturally addicted to the exercises of Virtues, that what they do
seems to be without any study. Whence it may be deduced, that the first seeds
of Virtue and Good proceed from those natural Dispositions, which are called
Inclinations, and, consequently, the difficulties in both are concluded to be
equal. And that may also be observed in Socrates, who himself acknowledged,
that his natural Inclinations were so bent to Vice, that if the dictates of
Philosophy had not wrought things in him beseeming the person, whom the Oracle
had declared wise, he would have been carried away with sensual Appetites,
according to his natural Inclinations; there being some Natures truly Heroic,
and ever doing well; and others brutish, and always inclined to evil. To this
we are to add the consideration of the persons, their qualities, and age;
inasmuch as there being somewhat particular in any of these circumstances, it
changes the resolution in the general proposition, which being universal, and
of a large extent, it were necessary, in order to the finding out of the Truth,
that we confined our selves to these circumstances, yet still following the
forementioned opinion. For as fire finds no difficulty to ascend, no more than
the water does to flow downwards and make toward its center; so every one
complying with his own Inclinations, stands in an equal bent toward good and
evil, without any trouble or difficulty; but to proceed contrary to that
motion, the virtuous person finds the trouble attending the doing of a evil
action, equal to that of the vicious in doing a bad one.

The Eighth said, That this bent of the Inclinations ceases in those who are
one while inclined to the doing of that which is good, another, to the doing of
that which is evil, as may be observed in Nero, who, during the first five
years of his Government, was the mildest of any of the Emperors, yet
afterward gave himself over to all manner of Cruelty. For what can be said of
this alteration, and if a man be naturally inclined to good, Why is not the
same inclination continued in him? Does this inconstancy proceed from the mind
or from the body? If it proceeds from the mind, since the powers thereof have a
certain knowledge of the Good, Why does it not embrace that which is good,
answerably to its knowledge of the same? If it proceeds from the body, since
this has a dependence on the mind, why does it not follow the impressions
which it derives from the other? The Professors of Astrology, who give so much
credit to their Influences; affirm, that these diversities proceed from those
Constellations, whereby that change is caused, and by which the Will is moved,
and receives a bent either to good or evil; but if Reason have the sovereignty,
it ought to be conformable, and produce such effects as are answerable thereto.
There is therefore a great probability, that the causes of good and bad actions
are to be referred to the regeneration of the Elect, and the reprobation of the
wicked, who are left to the pursuance of their sensuality; and thence it will
follow, that it shall be as hard for a truly-devout person to sin, as for a
reprobate to do well; and so the Question is to be referred to the decision of
Theology.

CONFERENCE CCXXIII. Whether a piece of Iron laid upon the Cask prevents
Thunder from marring Wine contained within it, and why?
SInce we are always to begin with that which is undeniable in matter of fact,
whereby we are assured, that a piece of Iron laid upon a vessel full of Wine,
prevents its being corrupted by Thunder, which, without that precaution, would
cause it some prejudice; which precaution has also the same effect in
preserving the Eggs which the Hen sits upon, and in keeping Milk from turning;
all the difficulty of this Question is only in the latter part of it, and that
is, to find out the reason thereof, which must either be referred to some
occult virtue in the Iron, or to some of its manifest qualities. If it be said
that this is wrought by the manifest qualities of that metal; it seems
requisite that the Iron should be within the vessel with the Wine, that so it
may oppose the poison of the Air whereby it is infected. But on the other side,
to allege those occult virtues, is an argument of humane ignorance, inasmuch
as they are to act by the interposition of some means: So that, all things
considered, it is more rationally affirmed, to be an effect proceeding from the
manifest qualities of the Iron, which prevent and hinder that bad impression of
the Air. But to give a more evident reason hereof, we are to consult Astrology.
That Science teaches us, that Mars, by which Planet Iron is designed, has its
House in Aries, which is the sign of the Ram; and the Naturalists observe, that
the Sun entering into that House, causes the sap and moisture of the Vine to
ascend, an evident sign that there is a correspondence between Wine and Iron,
and that the one preserves the other by the natural Sympathy there is between
them. And to make it appear that the Influences exercise their virtues even
upon things inanimate, yet derived from the root of what had been Vegetable or
Animal, we find that Wine, though it be carried ever so far, is subject to an
observable alteration, when the grapes of the same Vine are near their
maturity; that distance of Places and Climates not obstructing the Union and
Correspondence which there is between the whole and its part, which cannot be
joined together save only by means of the Celestial Influences.

The Second said, That the forementioned reason deduced from Astrology was not
evident, and that there is more subtilty in it than Truth, and, consequently,
that it is to be sought with greater probability to find it out of Natural
Philosophy, which treats of Meteors, where the greatest difficulty is to know
whether that effect is produced by the expulsive, or by the attractive and
retentive virtue. That we should affirm it proceeds from the expulsive virtue,
cannot with any probability be done, inasmuch as expulsion is to be wrought by
somewhat that is more powerful and more subtle. Now there is not any
likelihood, that Iron should be more powerful and more subtle than Air,
inasmuch as the Iron is of a more weighty matter, passive, earthy, and has
somewhat of the nature of that Passive Element. We may therefore rather affirm,
that this effect is wrought by the attractive and retentive virtue; which
opinion is proved, in regard there is but one humid matter, which the central
fire forces from the deepest part of the Earth; and of the more unctuous and
weighty part of this matter Metals are made; of the less weighty, Minerals and
Salts; from the subtiler part Vegetables and Animals derive their nourishment;
of the most subtle are produced the Winds, Thunder, and all the Meteors, which
participate of Heat and Drought, which make several combinations in the Air.
Now whereas it is from the most imperfect part of this unctuous matter that
Iron is made, of an earthy and impure Sulphur, it is deducible thence, that
there is a Sympathy between Iron, and the gross vapors of Thunder and
Lightning: To make which out a little more clearly, we find that the places
through which Thunder has passed, smell of Sulphur; nay, there is framed in
the Air that which is commonly called the Thunderbolt, which somewhat resembles
Steel, as it were to show the correspondence there is between Iron and Thunder.
So that the Air, being impregnate by those noisome terrestrial vapors, which
are of the same nature with Iron, meeting with some piece of it laid on a
vessel, is joined to the Iron by Sympathy, makes a sudden stop there, and puts
a period to its operation; and the Iron by its attractive virtue receives them,
as by its retentive it retains them, and by that means prevents their effect.

The Third said, That though that opinion were probable, yet does it require a
more ample discussion, and we are to examine how this attractive virtue
operates. Now there are four Natural Virtues which govern all the operations of
Nature and Art; the Attractive, which is now under consideration, acts by heat
and a temperate drought; the Retentive, by drought and cold; the Expulsive, by
moisture and heat; the Digestive, by heat and a temperate moisture. The Iron
then which is said to attract these vapors, has indeed those qualities of
heat and drought; yet can it not be easily conceived, that a little piece of
that metal can check the malice and infection of a great quantity of Air,
spread all over a spacious place; besides that it is also necessary, that the
Iron should send forth out of it self the effects of its qualities, that so the
attraction might be made, the marks whereof are neither seen on the Iron, nor
the effects of the qualities out of the Subject, inasmuch as metals being
quenched in cold Water, are not evaporated but by a violent fire. So that it
may as well be said, that the attraction is wrought by some occult virtue,
which draws; yet so as that neither the attraction nor the manner of it can be
observed.

The Fourth said, That the operations of Nature are not like those of Art; her
ways and contrivances are more obscure, and the causes of things are occult; as
for example, the Lodestone draws Iron, yet so as that there cannot be any
thing perceived of any body of air and smoke issuing out of the Loadstone. And
the magnetical Balsom, or Weapon-salve, cures a wounded person, though at a
great distance; having only some part of his Cloths, yet can there not any
thing be observed on the Subject which receives the Plaster; so secret and
silent is Nature in her Operations. On the contrary, the designs and
contrivances of Art may easily be discovered, as those of a Clock or Watch. But
the reason of this diversity of operations between Art and Nature, is, that Art
goes to work publicly and before the Senses, and Nature does her business
within doors and secretly; the latter works in the Center, the other in the
Circumference; one produces the seed of the combination of the Elements,
whereof she keeps an exact account of the weights and proportions; and the
other can neither make nor produce any thing, as being only in a capacity of
making use of the substance and materials of Nature, in order to their joining
together, after she had prepared and purified them. But on the other side, Art
has this advantage, that her works are much more perfect, inasmuch as she
makes use of purified essences, and the other of accidents and superfluities,
having not instruments fit for the purifying of her Materials. So that there
are some who doubt of the reality of the effect now under consideration. And
therefore, ere we proceed any further to the finding out of the causes and
reasons thereof, it were requisite a strict enquiry should be made, whether it
be certain that Iron prevents the effects of thunder, by preserving Wine and
Eggs under a Hen that sits, from receiving in any prejudice.

The Fifth said, That what was confirmed by general experience was not any
longer to be questioned, and that whoever stood upon the Negative betrayed his
own ignorance; that for us to think to find solutions for all the possibilities
of nature, were an attempt somewhat like that of exhausting the Sea; That there
are certain secrets in Nature of things dreadful to humane Reason, incredible,
according to the principles of Art and of our Knowledge. That Nature is the
great Circe, the grand Sorceress, That the Lodestone draws Iron to it; That
there is a certain Stone called Pantarbe which draws gold to it; That dead
Arse-smart being laid under a Stone, cures the wound on which it shall be
rubbed, sooner or later according as the Herb putrifies; That the hair or wool
of a mangy beast being thrust in, for a certain time, under the bark of an
Aspen-tree, cures the beast of vermin; That the Menstrua of Women trouble
Springs, spoil Looking-glasses and Powdering-tubs; And if there be some things
that corrupt them, it is not to be imagined that Nature is so cruel a
Stepmother, but that there may be others whereby they are preserved, and so
the Remedies may come from the same hand as caused the disease; That the
Hazel-tree discovers hidden Treasures and Mines; That Talismans are made
against Serpents and Insects, nay against some Diseases; That there is a mutual
friendship between the Olive Tree and the Myrtle, whereof it would be as hard a
matter to give any reason, as it would be to give any, of the enmity between
the Vine and the Laurel, and the inclination which the Male-palm has toward
the Female; That the crowing of the Cock frightens Lions, and that that Bird
should be so exact a Fore-teller of the Sun's approach; That the Fish called a
Remora, stops Ships under sail; That the eye of a Dog prepared after a certain
way keeps others from coming near the person that has it; That the powder of
Crab-shells prepared, draws out Arrows and Bullets shot into the Body; That
there is a certain Stone got out of the Snake, which cures such as are subject
to the Dropsy; That Serpents are not found within the shade of Ash-trees; That
the Marygold follows the motion of the Sun; That the precious Stone called a
Topaze put into seething water, immediately stays the seething of it; That the
Emerald, the Sapphire, the Turqueis Stone, and Coral, change their colors, upon
the happening of certain accidents to those who have them about them; That
there are certain Herbs which chase away spirits, as well as Music does; and
that the dispositions of a black and adust choler invite and entertain them.
Now from all these instances it may be deduced, that, as it is a great
presumption to think to give reasons of all things, so does it argue a certain
weakness of mind to doubt of all that has been alleged; so great are the
abysses and inexhaustible treasures of Nature, whose operations transcend
humane belief, in thousands of other things, as well as in the Question now
under dispute.

CONFERENCE CCXXIV. Of Stage Plays; and whether they be advantageous to a
State, or not?
HUmane Life is traversed by such a vicissitude of distractions and
disturbances, that not only the Civil, but also the Ecclesiastical Magistrates
have unanimously concluded it necessary, that men should have some
divertisements, whereby their minds and bodies, not able to undergo continual
labor, might receive some relaxation, for want whereof they would be crushed
under the burden of their affairs. Now among those relaxations, there is not
any brings greater delight with it, then what is performed on the Theater, that
is, Plays; which represent unto us things past, heightened with all the
circumstances they are capable of, which cannot be done by History, as being a
thing dead, and not animated by Voice, Gestures, and Habits. But if we add
thereto, that this innocent divertisement is attended by those advantages which
may be deduced from excellent Sentences and Instructions, we must conclude him
who finds fault with it, to be of a more than Timonian humor, and a professed
enemy to civil Society. The proof hereof is derived from the Use of it, the
true Touchstone, whereby good and profitable things are to be distinguished
from such as are hurtful and unprofitable. For there have been an infinite
number of things taught by Men, which have been smothered as soon as brought
forth; and there are others also, which the Inventors of them have outlived;
but when an Invention finds a kind entertainment through many Ages, it is the
best argument that may be of its goodness. And such is that of Comedy, which
(how weak or ridiculous soever it might be at the beginning, at which time
Thespis got himself drawn through the Streets in a Chariot, as he recited his
Poems) presently met with those who made it their business to cultivate and
heighten it to that pitch of perfection, whereto it is now come, which is such
that it is no wonder the greatest minds should yield to the charms of it. For
as those things that are sensible, are more apt to move and make impressions on
the spirits of men, then such as are purely intelligible; so Plays, exposing to
our eyes all things with a greater circumspection, decorum, and order, then is
observable in the actions of men commonly disturbed by unexpected emergencies,
and the unconstancy of their passions, accordingly raise in us a greater
aversion for crimes, and greater inclinations to virtue. Nay, these cause more
apprehensive emotions in our souls, than they are apt to receive from any other
representations whatsoever, not excepting even the precepts of Philosophy it
self, which are weak enough when they are destitute of their examples,
imprinting in us such Characters as can hardly be blotted out, in regard they
force their passage into our Minds through several of our senses; and as
History prevails more by its Examples than the reason of its Precepts, so
Plays have the advantage of History in this regard, that in the former, things
act upon us with greater efficacy. This Influences it has on us in captivating
our Senses and Understanding, is the more remarkable, in that the greatest
Wits are incapable of other reflections, while they behold what is represented
on the Stage. Besides, if the great business of the world be truly considered,
it is but a Stage Play, wherein every one acts a part; he who would avoid
Plays, and not see the vanity of humane actions, must find out some way to get
out of the world. Nor are all persons in a capacity to learn how they should
demean themselves by Books and Precepts, but all are susceptible of some
instruction by Plays; since that in these, there are such sensible Lessons,
that the most ignorant may find in them certain encouragements to Virtue, which
on the Stage appears to them in her luster, and attended by those honorable
rewards which the Poets bestow on Heroic Actions. And as Geographical Maps
cannot so well acquaint those who study them with the dispositions of people,
together with all the circumstances of places, as Travels and Relations may: In
like manner, Philosophy smites not the Senses, as those passages do which are
represented on the Theater, where such as are in Love (the ordinary subject
thereof) may observe their own Adventures personated, and take notice of their
vain pursuits, and the unhappy events of those which are carried on by unjust
ways. In fine, if immortality flatters ours labors with promises to transmit
our Memory to Ages; yet at a great distance from us, what greater satisfaction
can there be, than to hope that our noble actions shall be represented on
Theaters before Princes and Magistrates?

The Second said, That Humane Nature being more inclined to evil than to good,
those confused representations which are made on the Stage, of all sorts of
good and bad things, are more likely to make impressions of evil in the minds
of men, than to render them more inclinable to that which is good. Whence it is
to be inferred, that the danger and inconveniences of Plays will outweigh their
advantages. This consideration occasioned the banishing of them out of several
States. And whereas the Subjects of them are commonly taken from the Loves of
some extravagant persons, and the crimes attending them, the end thereof must
be answerable to the means, which are lewd Artifices, whereby it is compassed,
and wherewith men's minds are imbued, and so inclined to wicked actions, and
such as are most likely to promote the execution of their pernicious designs;
which would not happen, were they ignorant of them. Nay, to go to the original
of this kind of entertainments, the most ancient of them, acted in the time of
Romulus, was contrived for the surprizal and carrying away of the Sabine
Virgins; it being easily inferred, that what produced so bad an effect must of
necessity have been a bad cause.

The Third said, That Plays considered in themselves were indifferent, but
that according to the diversity of their Minds who frequent them, they have a
different operation; as Wine excessively taken besots and lays some asleep,
and enlivens others, according to the difference of their Temperaments. For if
they meet with weak Minds, they imprint in them the Passions of the things that
are represented, much more easily than Books usually do. But if they are
persons of a strong Constitution of Intellectuals, they consider what they see
as a pure Fiction, and a draught of Painting, in the intrigues whereof they
find a certain divertisement, much like that of excellent P^inters in their
Perspectives; they are pleased to see a mist cast before the eyes of the
vulgar, while they themselves are sufficiently satisfied, that what others
think represented to the life, is only performed by the interposition of
Scenes: So that, from this diversity of operations, this only can be inferred,
that Plays and Opera's are advantageous and innocent divertisements to such as
are well-vers'd in the affairs of the world, who, being over-press'd with a
continued earnestness in the prosecution of their more serious concerns, find a
certain relaxation therein; not in a melancholy sloth, such as is inconsistent
with the activity which is natural to them, but in those less serious
employments; as on the contrary, those persons who are already too much
inclined to idleness, vanity, and effeminacy, ought not to be admitted to
Plays, in regard they can have no other effect on them, than to make them more
effeminate.

The Fourth said, That as Women are justly forbidden the use of the Sciences,
so ought they also to be forbidden the sight of Plays; inasmuch as it is not
expedient, in order to frugal Housekeeping, that that Sex should be allowed an
acquaintance with those curiosities which might divert them from the care they
ought to have of their domestic affairs. For, besides the loss of time,
idleness is extremely prejudicial to that Sex, whose portion should be
assiduity in labor, frugality, and a constant keeping of the House, which is
not consistent with the frequenting of Shows and Play Houses, and seeing the
representations made there: Which, the more instructive they are, and the more
likely to fill Women's heads with new things, the more ought they to be
forbidden the sight of them; there being not any thing a Husband should fear so
much in his Wife, as an excess of Wit, upon the conceit whereof she assumes to
her self a certain authority over him, contrary to the Institution of
Matrimony, or at least thinks her self equal to him, which is not much less to
be feared, inasmuch as it is a great disturbance to the domestic tranquillity.
This may be the better apprehended by the example of two Men equally learned,
who disputing one against the other, seldom come to any agreement, as a knowing
and an ignorant person many times do; for if the latter chance to contradict
himself, he is easily convinced, and acquiesces. And though the Greeks
sometimes admitted Women in their Academies, to execute the functions of
Professors and Regents, yet are not those examples to be introduced into this
Age, whereof the corruption is such, as is able to change Virtues into Vices.
But, from this general Rule we are to except such Heroina's, as are the great
Exemplars of all Virtues, who surpassing the greatest part of Men in Wit and
Intellectuals, it were injurious to think them susceptible of those bad
impressions, which the Men are able to resist.

The Fifth said, That the example of the Romans who gave extraordinary salaries
to Comedians, as Cicero assures us they did to Roscius, sufficiently shows the
advantages of public representations. And indeed, if there be any thing to be
blamed in Plays, it is this, that they are too Pathetick, that is, too apt to
raise and express Humane Passions. For as an Oration measured in Verse, is more
elaborate than Prose; so Verses, disposed by a sound Judgment for the Stage,
are extremely beyond those of Exegematick Poems, wherein only the Poet speaks
himself. Moreover, the observance of Time, whereto all the Acts are confined,
and the other Laws of Dramatick Pieces, discover their excellency above all
others. So that to question, Whether they are advantageous, is to bring into
doubt, Whether the Masterpieces of Poets, Orators, and Historians, are
advantageous to a State.

CONFERENCE CCXXV. Whether that Temperament of the Body which conduces most to
Health, be also the most convenient for the Mind.
I Shall not here insist on the division of the Temperaments, as for instance,
into Simple, to wit, when one Quality is predominant over its opposite, the
other two remaining equal, as we affirm him to be of a hot Temperament, who
shall be more hot than cold, humidity and drought remaining in an aequilibrium;
and Compound, to wit, that which is the result of the same combination of
qualities, which makes the four Elements: into the Universal, to wit, of the
whole Body; and Particular, viz. that which is proper to each part: into that
which is of Weight, wherein all those qualities are as it were in a balance,
one not exceeding the other; and that of Justice, wherein those qualities bear
a certain proportion one to the other: Not insisting, I say, on these
Divisions, but presupposing them as common doctrines; I shall here think it
sufficient to examine, in the first place, Which of all these Temperaments is
most convenient, in order to health, and in the second, whether the same will
also be most convenient for the acquisition of a good mind, that is, for the
better exercise of the functions of the rational Soul; in a word, whether the
most healthy person shall always be the most wise? Galen has writ an express
Treatise, to prove that the Manners follow the Temperament of the body, and
therefore since those manners are the effects of the Will, the noblest of all
the faculties of the Soul, in regard it has a Sovereignty over all the others,
it should seem that the affirmative is to be maintained, especially if we lay
this for a ground, that those persons who are subject to Melancholy are the
most ingenious, forasmuch as they are the most healthy; cold and drought making
up a more solid and firm mass, then any other two qualities; and heat and
moisture being too variable, and too much subject to corruption. Upon which
consideration, Galen, in his first Book of the Temperaments, chap. 4. denies,
That the Spring is hot and moist; on the contrary, says he, it is the worst of
all the Temperaments of the Air whereby we are encompassed, and that is
commonly the constitution observable in sickly and contagious seasons. In his
eighth Book of the Method of curing Diseases, chap. 7. he adds, That a hot and
moist distemper makes our health incline to corruption. The hot and dry is also
too easily inclinable to be enflamed, as the cold and moist is too much subject
to defluxions; and withal to sharp Diseases, such as are putrid Fevers, for
the first; Burning Fevers, for the second; and Apoplexies, Palsies, and
Dropsies, for the last. On the other side, cold and drought are enemies to
corruption, and by those very qualities which are contrary thereto, they more
powerfully oppose external injuries, by reason of the solidity of the skin, and
the density of its parts; as the dispositions of melancholy persons are not
subject to the passionate disturbances of the Choleric, the inconstancy of the
Sanguine, the slothfulness of the Phlegmatic; and communicate the same
Stability which is in them to the Spirits, which act answerably thereto. Of
this Constitution were all those laborious and studious people, and all the
great Persons, whose assiduous employments have made them famous in their own
and subsequent Ages.

The Second said, That if we may believe the same Galen, in the sixth Book of
the preservation of Health, the hot and moist Temperament is the most healthy,
as being the most proper to man's nature; and he-further writes, That those who
are very moist, are long-lived, and when their bodies are come to their full
strength, they are more healthy then others, and are more robust and hardy then
other men of the same Age, and so continue till they grow old. And thence it
is, says he, That all the Physicians and Philosophers, who have diligently
examined the Elements of man's body have commended that Temperament. For, as
Aristotle affirms in his Book of a long and short life, Our life consists in
heat and moisture, as cold and drought dispose us toward death, and the sooner
the animal grows cold and dry, the sooner it grows old and dies. But these two
contrary sentiments of Galen may be reconciled well enough, by affirming his
meaning to be, that exrernal heat and moisture are enemies to health; whereas
on the contrary, the natural heat and radical moisture are friends to it;
inasmuch as these are never chargeable with excess, but always moderate, one
serving for aliment to the other; and they are so far from being capable of
receiving any distemper, that, what results from them, serves for a rule
whereto all the other Temperaments are referred; which the Vulgar improperly
calls by the name of the four Humors, that are predominant in them; but that
abuse being fortified by custom, we must follow it, though for no other reason
then that we may be the better understood. Whence it follows, that the Sanguine
Temperament is the most healthy, as being the most conformable to life. This
Temperament is also the likeliest to produce a good Wit, inasmuch as it
exercises better then any other the functions of the Rational Soul, which being
distributed between the natural, vital, and animal Faculties, and these being
better exercised when they most abound with clear and purified spirits, it is
certain, that the Sanguine Temperament, the only treasury of the Spirits,
supplies more plentifully, and with such as are more pure, those in whom it is
predominant, then it can be imagined to do others, in whom that blood is either
puffed up by an excessive froath of Choler, or drowned in the waterishness of
Phlegm, or buried in the mud of Melancholy. And this may be observed in the
gentileness, and the singular slight, nay the easiness, wherewith persons of a
sanguine Constitution demean themselves in all things they undertake, betraying
such a smiling cheerfulness in their eyes and countenance, as discovers their
interior joy and satisfaction; and is no less delightful to those that are
present, then the impetuous sallies of the Choleric give distate, the sluggish
delays of the Phlegmatic are tedious, and the profound reveries of the
Melancholy hateful and importunate. But as for the inconstancy, the only
Objection, which the other Temperaments make against the Sanguine, it is not to
be accounted vicious in them, but looked on as a divertisement, wherewith they
are pleased, and which they put themselves upon, only that their labors may,
by that ohange, be the more delightful to them. Which change is so much the
more excusable in them, that they court it not, to the end they should be idle,
but they may apply themselves to some other employment, which suits better with
their humor, such as the overlong contemplation thereof might not dry up that
noble blood which runs in their veins, and, by converting it into dregs, turn
the sanguine into a melancholic Constitution, to which the obstinacy,
wherewith it persists a long time in the prosecution of one and the same
design, is a greater discommendation, than the inconstancy imputed to the
sanguine is to that, inasmuch as the latter makes advantage of it, to wit that
of attempting, and many times executing several designs together, especially
when it undertakes such as it is sure to master, such as may be Dancing,
Music, Courtship, well-concontriv'd Stories, and such other pleasant things.
And indeed, it is impossible to exercise the functions of the mind well, when
the body is indisposed; as on the contrary, when the body is in perfect health,
the mind acts its part so much the better.

The Third said, That it were very unjust to deprive of the honor due to them,
the Heroes and Worthies of the World, whose temperament must needs have been
choleric, by attributing to any of the others the great and noble actions of
the mind, which belong to them. Now to demonstrate that the temperament of the
Heroes consisted of heat and drought, we need bring in no further evidence,
than the suddenness and expedition wherewith they undertake and execute all
their designs, as it were complying with the activity of Fire, which has the
supremacy among the Elements, as they have the pre-eminence amongst men. Nay it
may be urged, that great enterprises would never be executed without some
degree of choler, which serves as it were for salt to all humane actions. This
premised, as out of all dispute, we now come to consider whether the hot and
dry Temperament be the most consistent with health. I affirm then, that it is
more consistent with it, than the Phlegmatic, which abounds in excrements;
then the Sanguine, which easily admits of alterations; nay also then the
Melancholic, whose gross humors are more subject to obstruction, then Choler
is, the vivacity whereof is to be seen upon all occasions; those of the
Choleric Constitution having always their Vessels large, and, as such, much
more unlikely to be stopped up.

The Fourth said, that so far as the soul and body are different, so far are
also their qualities such. From which consideration Aristotle took occasion to
affirm, That robust bodies are designed to obey, as the weak are to command,
inasmuch as commonly they are the receptacles of a stronger soul. This raised a
persuasion in some, that the most imperfect bodies have commonly the most
perfect souls, alleging to that purpose, the example of the crooked and
ill-shap'd Tree, which supplies us with the best of Liquors, Wine; whereas the
strait and fair-spreading Oaks, bear nothing but acorns, for the feeding of
Swine. Besides, as the word spirit or mind is sometimes taken for the Invention
which principally consists in the Imagination; sometimes for the Judgment, or
Understanding; and might be also taken for the Memory, among which this last
requires a hot and moist temperament, as the first is pleased with a hot and
dry; and the second, to wit the judgment, consists in the dry and cold, which
makes men staid and settled: so is it accordingly requisite, that we should
distinguish, of which of these three faculties the question is to be
understood. But generally speaking, it is not easily imaginable, that there
should be a well-fram'd mind in a much-indispos'd body, inasmuch as there is
the same proportion between them, as there is between the mold and the figure
cast in it; a Palace, and him who dwells in it. The same thing may much more
rationally be said of the humors, from which the spirits being drawn bring
their quality along with them: so that the Temperament which is most convenient
in order to health, will also be the most convenient for the functions of the
Soul.

CONFERENCE CCXXVI. Whether it be more expedient for a Man to have only one
Friend or many.
SInce Man is no further to be called so, then as he is sociable, and that
there is no Society more delightful then that of Conversation, which cannot be
better maintained then by the relation and correspondence there is between such
as are of a like disposition, which presuppose a Friendship; it should seem,
that it is not grounded only on Reason, but also on Nature her self, which
subsists altogether by that Union, as she is absolutely destroyed by discord.
And this is principally made apparent in civil life, wherein Friendship is so
powerful, that, being religiously observed, there will be no need of Justice,
since every one would voluntarily render that to another which is due to him,
which is the proper Work of that Virtue: which being in like manner well
administered, that of Fortitude would also be unnecessary; and it would be
superfluous to use the rigor of the Laws, to oblige men to the doing of a
thing which they exercised without any compulsion. Hence it came that the
wisest Lawgivers, as Aristotle affirms in his Ethics, took more pains in
establishing the Laws of Friendship among their Citizens, then those of
Justice; inasmuch as these latter take place, only upon the non-observance of
the former, which are so much the more durable, in regard they are grounded
upon the pure freedom of the Will, without any other obligation, then that
which our own choice has imposed on it self, of its own accord, in a legal
friendship. Its nature also is as much concealed as its effects are manifest,
which are so convincing, that those, who have spoken most advantageously of
them, affirm that to take away Friendship were to deprive the World of the
light of the Sun; and that humane Society may as well be without it, as want
the use of Fire and Water. Nor is it their meaning to speak of that irregular
Passion, produced by the motion of the concupiscible Appetite, which is
inclined toward a delightful good, and which only flattering the Senses, those
who are carried away with it are called amorous Persons, and not Friends; but,
of that Queen of Virtues, which is enthroned in the rational Appetite, excited
by a virtuous Good, which being conceived as amiable, and proportioned to the
Will, she loves and strictly embraces it, causing such a perfect union between
him who loves, and him who is beloved, that they are but one heart and one
soul, which, for that reason is said to be rather where it loves then where it
lives. So that it being not to be imagined, that such an union can be among
many, neither can true friendship be among many, but only between two, whose
mutual correspondence being the greater, their Friendship is consequently more
firm and durable. And it is more complete between these two Relatives, then it
can be among many, whose correspondence being more difficult, for want of the
conditions requisite to Friendship, which are not so easily met with in a
greater number, it is possible they may have a certain kindness and good will
one toward another, but not a solid and sincere Friendship, which looks on a
friend, as a second Self, a relation that has place only between two, whom
Antiquity, for that reason, ordered always to go by Couples.

The Second said, That Friendship could not continue long only between two
friends, in regard that there being not any one but is chargeable with some
imperfection, it is impossible but that it should produce some coldness and
indifference, in his apprehensions who takes notice of it, and that in time
will come to an alienation, as it commonly happens in Friendship. And this is
yet the farther from being wel-setled, upon this account, that continual
familiarity coming to discover the weaknesses of one or the other, it can never
be long without some punctilio's and disputes, which are many times advanced to
such a height, that there is a necessity of a third person to compose their
differences. Now this must be done by one who is a common friend to both, and
consequently, to establish a permanent friendship, it is requisite there should
be three, a number the more highly to be esteemed, in that the Graces consist
of it; without which, Friendship will be but of a short continuance. Upon that
account it was that the Tyrant Dionysius wished that he might make up the
third, with those two intimate, friends Damon and Pythias. The Scythians also,
as Lucian affirms, to make up a perfect friendship, required that there should
be three persons, who drunk together out of a Vessel, into which they had spilt
some drops of their blood, wherewith they died the points of their swords.

The Third said, That Friendship, in respect of our Will, was as Science in
respect of our Understanding. For as this latter has a natural inclination to
Knowledge, so the Will is endu'd with such another to Love, inasmuch as in it
she finds her sovereign good. Thence it comes, that as there are some spirits
so sublime, that, not content with one only knowledge, they embrace several,
whereas there are others so circumscribed and confined, that only one Science
wholly takes them up so, as that they are not able to make any progress into
others; so are there some Souls so limited in their affection, that it can be
dilated but to one object, which checks, and makes them incapable of loving any
more, as those generous and heroic hearts do, which have so strong a bent to
do well and to love; that, not satifi'd with one object, they diffuse their
affections to all those whom they think worthy thereof. And so the decision of
the question should depend on the Capacities of those who love, since that,
considering the amiable objects, whether they be such, and, consequently, there
be cause for the loving of them, or are not really such, but only so conceived
by the apprehensive faculty, they are equally fit to move the Will to love
them, and to gain its affections; and they ought to be the more agreeable to
it, in that it finds in them its perfection and the accomplishment of its
desires. And so the plurality of Friends is so far from being any prejudice to
Friendship, that it sets a greater esteem upon it, as also on him who loves.

The Fourth said, That Friendship, taken generally, is a mutual Good Will
between those who are desirous to do one another some reciprocal kindness; but
taking it more precisely, it may be defined a Virtue, by means whereof virtuous
persons are so united in Affection and Will, that they become absolutely like
one another, through a hearty good Will, Concord, and good Turns mutually done
and received. The former resides particularly in the interior motions of the
mind; the second, in words and discourse; the third, in effects. These are the
three essential marks of a virtuous Friendship; which, not regarding its proper
interest, as those do, who love upon the account of pleasure or profit, courts
not the objects it loves, out of any other consideration than that of the
Virtue or Science which render it recommendable. Now these qualities being
seldom found among many, who ought to be equally furnished therewith, that the
Friendship may be reciprocal, it is very hard to meet with so many Subjects
capable of so sublime a Virtue as that; which, besides that combination of
Virtues, requiring much experience, and a great process of time that we might
not be deceived in the choice of Friends, (with each whereof a Man, according
to the common saying, should eat a bushel of Salt before he contracted a
Friendship) it will be found a much harder task to make such a strict
examination of the qualities and dispositions of many, than it will be to do it
of one alone; with whom, consequently, it is more safe to enter into
Friendship, than it can be with many.

The Fifth said, That Friendship being grounded on conversation, and there
being not any more divertive and delightful than that between those who eat and
drink together, the Case is the same with friends as it is with guests, which
ought not to be under the number of three, nor exceed that of nine; whence came
the ancient Proverb, that a well-ordered Feast should not be under the number
of the Graces, nor transcend that of the Muses. In a word, since conversation
is the groundwork of perfect Friendship, as the former cannot be pleasant
among less than three, and must be confused and wearisome among above nine; but
is most divertive, when five or six persons well-qualifi'd, and perfectly
understanding one the other, fall into mutual discourse; so Friendship cannot
be of long continuance between two, but there must be a third to encourage it;
yet with this further caution, that it is better maintained among a greater
number of persons equally virtuous, provided nevertheless it exceed not that of
nine, to prevent the confusion and inconvenices attending a greater.

The Sixth said, That though there be an absolute necessity of Friendship, in
all he transactions of humane life, in order to the more pleasant expense of
it, yet are there principally two certain times, wherein its necessity is more
apparent, to wit, those of Prosperity and Adversity. In the former, our friends
participate of our happiness, in the latter, of our misfortunes; and whereas
these last are commonly more frequent than good successes, the plurality of
Friends, who are our second-selves, making the burden the more supportable by
the part every one takes in our misfortunes; it is much more expedient that a
Man should have many, then content himself with a small number, which being not
able to bear the brunt of so violent an assault, he would be in danger of being
overcome thereby. Nay, though all things should happen according to our wishes,
yet were it convenient to have a considerable number of Friends, the more to
congratulate our good fortune, which will make the greater noise in the world,
the greater their number is who approve and applaud it.

The Seventh said, That the plurality of Friends was equally inconvenient, as
well in good as bad fortune. For, in the latter, it must needs trouble us very
much to give occasion of grief to a great number of Friends, who though they
bemoan us ever so much, yet are we still in the same period of misfortune; nay,
our unhappiness is the greater, in that it is contagiously communicated to so
many persons at the same time. In the former, there cannot be any thing more
troublesome then that great number of people who love, or pretend to love us in
our prosperity, it being then impossible for us equally to satisfy them all,
as we might easily do one single Friend, from whom we may also derive greater
comfort in Adversity, than from many addressing themselves to us at the same
time; to whose humors to accommodate our selves well, we must study an
unconstancy equal to that of Proteus, and put on as many Countenances as they
have different Inclinations.

The Eighth said, That since a good thing is so much the more excellent, the
more it is communicated and diffused several ways, Friendship ought to derive
its esteem from that communication, which the greater it shall be, the more
recommendable shall it make the Friendship, which, consequently, is the more
perfect among many, to whom it is always advantageous, since it comprehends the
three kinds of Goods, the profitable, the pleasant, and the virtuous. For, is
there not much to be gained in a society, which the more numerous it is, the
greater advantages and assistances may be derived from it? There is not any
thing so highly delightful as to love and to be beloved of many. But whereas
Friendship is the Livery of Virtue, whose inseparable attendant she is, Can
there be any thing more virtuous and commendable then after that manner to love
several others who love us, and by that reflux of mutual kindness give
assurances of our Virtue, answerable to the acknowledgements we had made of
their merit; the multitude of Friends not abating any thing of the esteem of
civil Friendship, no more than the great number of charitable persons does
prejudice Charity which is a consummate Love, and equally embraces all?

CONFERENCE CCXXVII. Of Oracles.
THere is not anything disquiets the Spirit of Man so much as the desire he
has to know things to come; and whereas he cannot of himself attain thereto,
by reason of the weakness of his knowledge, which he derives from, the Senses
and other corporeal powers; he will needs try what he can do out of himself,
and there is no place into which his curiosity has not found a way to discover
what he so much desired. But in fine, after he had to no purpose sought this
knowledge in the Elements and all Natural Bodies consisting of them,
superstitious Antiquity be thought it self of another way to gain it, which was
to address it self to those counterfeit Divinities, whom the Holy Scriptures
assures us have been no other than Devils, whom it elsewhere calls the Gods of
the Gentiles. For these, after they had, by sin, lost the gift of Grace, having
conserved that of a most perfect Science, and so general, that there is not any
thing in all Nature which they know not, and cannot foretell (excepting only
such effects as are purely free, which are known only to God) those ancient
Idolaters have oftentimes been informed by them of things to come, consulting
them to that purpose, when they were upon the undertaking of some Affair of
great importance, the success whereof was doubtful, resolving upon the
prosecution thereof, according to the Answers of those false Gods called
Oracles, in regard they were pronounced either by their mouths, or those of
their Ministers. The manner of declaring them was twofold; one, by Dreams, or
Nocturnal-Visions; the other, by an express Voice, which was distinctly heard
by those who came to consult them. The Oracles, which were delivered in Dreams,
though they were not so clear as those received by the Voice, were nevertheless
considerable proportionably to the esteem made of the persons who were the
Interpreters of them, and the places where they were delivered. That of
Amphiaraus was the most remarkable of any; in which, after the accustomed
expiations, those who came to consult him, laid themselves down on the ground
upon the skins of such Rams as had been sacrificed to the Gods, whose names
were written upon the Altar, and were in that posture instructed in what they
desired to know. The same Ceremonies were heretofore used among the Egyptians
and the Greeks, in the Temples of Serapis and Aesculapius, where those mute
Divinities returned their Answers only to such as were asleep, who consulted
them principally for the cure of their Diseases.

The second way, which was by express voice, was either performed by the
whispering-places of certain Grots; or by the mouths of such Statues as were
dedicated to the said Divinities; which Statues, for that reason, had their
mouths always open, and ready to speak;, or by the mouths of the Priests and
Sibylls, who being seized by a sacred fury pronounced the Oracles with a
certain impetuousness of voice, and violent contorsions of the countenance, not
unlike those of distracted people among us; or lastly, by the mouths even of
brute beasts, which the stupidity of those poor blinded people also made use of
to that end. Thus the Egyptians worshipped and consulted an Ox, under which
figure they represented their God Apis, whose Oracles were accounted
favorable, when he cheerfully received the fodder presented to him, but it
signified the contrary, when he refused to open his mouth to receive it; and
this was interpreted a presignification of the death of Germanicus. The
Tenedians observed the same Ceremonies toward a Cow, big with Calf; the
Nubians, a people of Aethiopia, the same toward a Dog, and the Persians
toward a Cock, the different accents of whose crowing distinguished their
Oracles. Among these, the Oracles which some went to hear in the vast deserts
beyond the Country of the Garamantes, at the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, though
they were the most venerable of any, as being the most ancient, were
nevertheless as ridiculous as any of the rest, being grounded only on a simple
motion of the body, a bowing of the head, a wink with the eye, which those that
were present imagined they had observed in the Statue of that Controller of the
Gods, adored in that desolate place, with the head and horns of a Hee-goat. He
was a little more familiar in the City of Dodona in Epirus, where he had also a
very magnificent Temple, taking the pains to pronounce his Oracles sometimes
with his own divine mouth, and sometimes using those of two Virgins, whereof
one, called Peristera, which signifies a Dove, gave occasion to the Fable,
wherein it was reported, that, in the Temple of Jupiter at Dodona, there were
Doves that spoke, as well as Oaks, which answered the questions that had been
put to them. The manner thus; those high Trees being shaken by the ordinary
Winds of those Countries made a great noise there, which was increased by that
of a great number of Brass-kettles fastened to the branches of them, amidst the
sound whereof those Oracles were delivered, that they might be received with
greater reverence. But whereas the Art of Divination was by a special
privilege reserved to Apollo among all those Gods, his Oracles were
accordingly looked upon as the most certain. Thence it also came, that he was
worshipped, upon that account, in several parts of the World, especially in the
Island of Delos, one of the Cyclades, the place of his Birth, where there was
an Altar built of horns taken from the right side of the heads of several
Animals, neatly laid one upon the other with incomparable dexterity; the horns
of the left side being not it seems so proper for Divination. He there returned
his Answers under a humane shape, as in Lycia he did it under that of a Wolf:
But in his Temple at Delphi, a place remarkable for its situation, as being in
the midst of the World, whence it was conceived to be as it were the navel of
it, he made his Answers sometimes through the throat of a Dragon, under which
form he was there honored, sometimes by the mouths of his Priestesses, who,
after they had been shaken for a certain time by a violent wind, which issued
out of a deep and obscure cave, whereby they felt themselves animated and
agitated into a more then natural motion, pronounced their Oracles, sometimes
in Prose, sometimes in Verse, according to the impressions of that Divinity
whereby they were inspired. But to render these yet more Majestic, those
Priestesses affected certain precise days, as for example those of the Calends
and Ides, and required certain particular dispositions, that they might the
more insolently impose upon the more credulous: And these consisted in certain
expiations and preparations, in order to their being more worthily susceptible
of that divine inspiration, which the Pythian Priestess pretended her self fit
to entertain, after she had drunk of the Water of the fountain of Delos; as
another, who served the same God at Colophon, imagined her self worthy of it,
when she had drunk of a neighboring Spring, the Water whereof put her into an
immediate fury. At Argos there was a necessity of drinking the blood of a Lamb,
and at Aegira, that of a Bull, ere the Oracles could be gotten out of them. But
what most discovers their vanity, is, that even those who consulted them (which
they did only to comply with the weakness of the people, and gain reputation
among the simple) if they found them not favorable, either went on
nevertheless in the prosecution of their designs, or forced them to pronounce
such as should be to their advantage. This course was taken by Alexander the
Great and Cleomenes; by the former, when he consulted the Pythian; by the
other, when he consulted the Delphick Oracle, both which they forced to say
what they pleased themselves. Thence it came, that most of the ancient
Philsophers exclaimed against them, and the Platonists, who made a greater
account of them then any of the other Sects, acknowledge, that they are no
other then the most despicable Devils, and those of the lowest rank, who engage
themselves in that employment, which they must needs practice in desert and
dreadful places, to the end there might be fewer witnesses of their weakness
and impostures. These are apparent in their very Answers, which, if not false,
were so ambiguous, or at least so obscure, that many times there needed another
Oracle to explain them. Nor were they in vogue, but during the darkness of
Paganism, which being dispelled by the light of the Gospel, those Oracles never
durst appear in that glorious day, which would have discovered their lying and
falsehood.

The Second said, That the Art of Divination being conjectural, and grounded on
experience, as well as several others of that nature, it is not to be admired,
that the Answers of those who heretofore made profession thereof were not
always true: and therefore it is as irrational a procedure to draw any
consequences thence to its prejudice, as to infer, that the Precepts of
Medicine are false, because the Physician does not always make his Prognostics
aright. The General of an Army may sometimes proceed upon wrong grounds; and
the expert Pilot may run upon those shelves and rocks which he most endeavors
to avoid. True it is that the subtilty of the Devil, and depravedness of
Mankind have foisted abundance of abuses into the business of Oracles,
especially in the erecting of those Statues to those fabulous Divinities, which
they commonly made of Olive Tree, Laurel, Vine, Cedar, or some such kind of
wood, full of unctuous moisture, which they said were the tears or sweat of
their false Gods; as also in the pompous Ceremonies, wherewith they amused the
credulous Vulgar. Such were those of Trophonius among the Thebans, who answered
only those who being clad in white descended through a hole of the cave into
his Temple, and there offered cakes to the Spirits which inhabited it; after
which they were conveyed out at another place of the cave, where they drunk the
Water of the Fountain of Memory, which caused them to remember whatever they
had heard; as they had drunk that of Lethe before they had entered into it,
which had caused them to forget all affairs of the World. But we are not hence
to conclude, that all Oracles were false, nor doubt of the validity of that
sublime Art, upon its being disparaged by those who have professed it, since it
has its grounds, not only in the inclination of men's minds, who having an
extraordinary earnestness to know things to come, there must needs be some
Science for the attaining of that Knowledge; otherwise Nature, who had
imprinted that desire in him, should, contrary to her custom, have done
something in vain; but also in the dispositions of that Temperament which is
subject to Melancholy, or black Choler. For, the former of these is the
Temperament of the more ingenious sort of people, according to the Philsopher
in his Problems; and the other, being more resplendent, is that of persons
inclined to Divination, occasioned by the clear representation of the Species
in that humor, which being bright and smooth as a Mirror, cannot so well be
discovered by those who are not of that Constitution; to which Plato in his
Memnon attributes the cause of Apollo's Priestesse's pronouncing the Oracles in
Hexameter Verse, though she had never learnt Poesy; and Pompanatius in his
Books of Enchantments, affirms, that it caused a Woman, who never was out of
Mantua, where she was born, to speak several strange Languages.

The Third said, That Divination being above the reach of our Understanding, as
much as this latter is below the Divinity, which has reserved to it self the
privilege of a distinct knowledge of things to come, it is to no purpose to
seek for the true causes of it in our selves, but we are to find them in the
Heavens, whence, if we may believe the Professors of Astrology, that quality of
Divination or Prediction is communicated to Men by the interposition of the
Intelligences, whereby those vast Bodies are moved, and that Science taught, by
making it appear how great a correspondence there is between the effects of the
sublunary Bodies, and the superior causes on which they depend, and wherein
they are potentially comprehended, even before they are actually existent.
Whereto if you add the concourse of the Universal Spirit, which equally
animates the whole world, and the parts whereof it consists, and which meeting
with convenient dispositions in the minds of men, and the several places where
Oracles have been given, inspired those extraordinary motions, which have
raised the Spirit of man, and opened its way into effects the most at a
distance from his knowledge: Admitting, I say, such a concourse, there may some
probable reason be given of these Predictions, not only of things, whose causes
being natural and necessary, their effects are infallible, such as are
Eclipses, the Rising, Setting, and Regular Motions of the Planets; or of those
whose causes are only probable, as it is reported that Pherecydes foretold a
dreadful Earthquake, by the boiling up of the water in his own Well; and
Thales foresaw the scarcity of Olives in the Territories of Athens: But also of
effects, which having only contingent or free causes, lie not so obvious to
discovery; and yet these being denoted by the general causes, such as are the
Heavens and the Universal Spirit, those persons who have clear-sighted and
illuminated Souls may perceive them therein, even before they happen.

The Fourth said, That there are three general causes of Oracles, one
Supernatural; another, Artificial; and the third, Natural; and that, not to
speak any thing of the Supernatural, whereof the Devils were the Authors, and
made use of it to continue still in their first Rebellion, when they attempted
to ascend into the Throne of God, and be like him; nor yet of their Artificial
Cause, which was certain persons devoted to their worship, who retiring into
Caves and Subterraneous places, were incited by those evil Spirits to that
sordid Ministry, that so by that means they might lay snares for the simple,
who were easily drawn away by these false Lights. The Natural Cause of those
Oracles, especially such as were pronounced out of the celebrated Caves and
Grots of Antiquity, was a subtle Exhalation raised out of those places, which,
fastening on the Spirits of the Prophet or Prophetess already disposed to
receive that impression, had the same Influence on them as the fumes of Wine
have on those who drink it to excess; whether that evaporation be caused by the
quality of the Earth or Waters, or proceed from the Metals, Minerals, and other
Fossile Bodies, contained within their entrails. For if it be acknowledged,
that the waters passing through them, derive certain particular qualities, Why
may not as well those vapors do the like, nay, happily in a greater measure,
and, consequently, work those extraordinary effects? Nay, upon consideration,
they will not be found more miraculous than what is related of an Exhalation
which issues out of a Cave near Hieropolis, which, as it is affirmed, is fatal
only to Men, and not to those who have not lost their Virginity; nor yet than
the water of a Fountain in Boeotia, which causes Mares to run mad, as that
which was in the Temple of Bacchus at Andros, had the taste of Wine; that of
Delphi lighted those Torches which were within a certain distance of it, and
extinguished those which were thrust into it. Now such qualities as these are,
depending on the properties of the places; it may be as easily conceived, that
those, where such Answers of the false Gods were given, had the like: and
thence it is to be imagined, that those having ceased by the ordinary
vicissitude of all things, the said Oracles accordingly received also their
period.

CONFERENCE CCXXVIII. Of the Tingling of the Ears.
AS the Ear is the Instrument of that Sense which is called the Sense of the
Disciple, and is more serviceable to us in order to Instruction, than all the
rest put together; so is it not to be wondered, the Ancients should be of
Opinion, that it contributed so highly thereto, that the most inconsiderable
motions of it advertise us of things which seem to be farthest from our
knowledge. Thence it came that they deduced certain conjectures of things to
come from the tingling of the Ears, which they held to signify good luck when
it was on the right side; and the contrary, when it happened on the left Ear:
which is to represent enemies, as the former does friends; yet with this
provision, that nothing contributed thereto from without, as for example, noise
might do, or some other agitation of the air, stirred by some external cause,
but the tingling must proceed from within; sonitu suopte tinniunt aures,
without which condition it signifies neither good nor bad luck, that is,
nothing at all. And what seems somewhat to confirm this observation, is, that
it has not been cast out among all the other rubbish of superstitious
Antiquity, but reigns even in the present Age, wherein not only many among the
Vulgar commonly say, that they are well or ill-spoken of, when their ears glow
or tingle, but also some of the better sort are also of the same persuasion.
They ground this belief on the Sympathy or Antipathy there is between Friends
and Enemies, which are such, that not being confined by the distance of places,
which yet according to their opinion ought not to be too great, they force the
species of voice and words toward the organs of Hearing, which are thereby
excited, through the communication of those Magnetic Virtues, and these are
not less sensible then those which the objects direct toward the same
instruments in ordinary sensation; though they be more delicate and subtle. As
the Lynx, the Eagle, and other sharp-sighted Animals see the species of visible
objects far beyond their reach who are shorter-sighted; and the Birds of prey
smell carcasses though they are very far from them.

The Second said, That it was a little too far fetched, to attribute those
Effects to Sympathy, which being as abstruse as what some pretend to deduce
from it, amounts to as much, as if one would prove one obscure thing by another
which is yet more obscure. As therefore there is no action done beyond the
limits appointed to every Agent, which comprehend the sphere of their activity,
so can there not be any such between the sonorous Species, and the Hearing of
him who feels this Tingling, unless it be within the reach of his ear; which
since it cannot be, when, for example, we are spoken of in our absence, it is
impossible the Hearing should receive the impression of the voice pronounced in
a place at too great a distance to be conveyed to it, inasmuch as it is
necessary in all sensation, that, besides the good disposition of the sensitive
Faculty and the Mean, there should be a proportionate distance between the
sensible object and the organ, ere it can judge well of it. So that those who
imagine they hear what is said of them afar off upon no other reason then that
their ears tingle, have not their Hearing more sensibly, but, on the contrary,
worse qualified then others, through the disturbance caused therein by gross
humors, which occasion the same disorder in the Ear as suffusions do in the
eye, when it sees the Objects in the same color and figure as the vapors or
humors, whereby it is clouded, though they be not effectually so. In like
manner, the sound or noise, heard by those whose ears tingle, though it makes
them conceive the species of such a sound proceeding from without, is only
illusory, and caused by the disorder of the ill-affected organ, but it
communicates its irregularity to the Imagination, when it frames to it self
favorable consequences from such a humming in the right Ear, and some
misfortune from the like in the left, there being not any reason, by which so
fantastic and chimerical an opinion can be maintained.

The Third said, That it is injuriously done to deny Man that advantage which
we find by experience, that some, not only brute Beasts, but also Plants have,
to wit that of having a previous feeling of the good or evil which are to
happen to them by a property bestowed on them by Nature for their conservation.
Thus we find Rats forsake the house which will soon after fall down; Lice take
leave of one that is dying; Birds of prey come from far distant places to their
food; the Swallow comes to give us a visit in the Spring, and spends that
delightful season with us; which once past, she goes to find out other Springs
in unknown Countries. The Ox gives us notice of an approaching shower, when,
having lifted up his head very high, and breathed withal, he immediately falls
a licking his thighs; The Cat makes the same Prognostication, when she combs
her self as it were, with her paws; The same thing is done by the Waterfowl
called the Ducker, and the ordinary, Drake, when they settle their feathers
with their beaks; The Frogs do the same by their importunate croaking; The
Ants, by the extraordinary earnestness they express in hoarding up their corn;
and the Earthworms, when they appear above ground; Nay, the poor Trefoyl will
close it self upon the approach of a Tempest, as do also most Plants in foul
weather; which being over, they spread abroad their leaves and flowers, and
seem newly blown, as it were to congratulate the return of the Sun, as is done,
among others, by the Marigold, which for that reason is called Heliotropium;
for the great correspondence there is between it and that all-enlivening Star.
Nay, that correspondence is also so remarkably obvious in the other Plants,
that those who have observed them most exactly, affirm, that there is not any
herb so despicable, but it has an interior character, answerable to that of
some Star, which communicates its virtues and qualities to it, and thence it
comes to be called a terrestrial Star. Why therefore should it come into
dispute, whether Man has such a Privilege, as that he may be sensible of what
is prejudicial or advantageous to him, by that tingling of the Ear, which may
well be the sign thereof though the cause be not absolutely manifest? For,
experience it self and the effects consequent to the observation do very much
confirm it, for those being commonly answerable to what had been conceived by
those to whom that kind of Divination by the Ears had happened, there is as
much ground to give it some credit, as there is to deduce any thing from some
other less considerable accidents, from which the like conjectures are made;
such as are, for example, among others, the twinkling of the Eyes, sneezing,
the meeting of something extraordinary, especially a Negro, an Eunuch, or some
other defective person; and the striking of ones feet against the threshold of
his own door, which proved fatal to C. Gracchus, who was murdered the very day
that such an accident had happened to him; as also to Crassus, the day he was
defeated by the Parthians. In all which signs there is much less likelihood of
declaring the accidents, which some would attribute thereto, than may be
imagined in the Tingling of the Ear, as being the seat of the Memory, which the
Ancients for that reason were wont to stir up, by plucking the tip of it; and
if it be true what Plato says, that all our Knowledge is but Reminiscence, and
that we only remember the Species of things, which had been before in our
Understanding, it will be no hard matter to find out some ground for this
praesension.

The Fourth said, That there was no other conjecture to be drawn from this
Tingling of the Ear, than that the Person subject thereto, has a weak and
ill-dispos'd Brain, which breeding abundance of ill humors, if they come to
make any stoppage in the passages of the Ear, its action is vitiated and
obstructed by that Tingling, which is a symptom of a depraved Hearing, and
causes the party to hear an importunate sound or noise, though there be not any
made without, and that there be not any application of the hollowness of the
hand to the Ear, in which case it hears some such noise. 'Twould therefore be
ridiculous to look after any other causes thereof than what may be in the
disposition of the Brain, and the excrements it produces, on the diversity
whereof as also on that of their Motion in the Ears, that Tingling depends; as
do also the Breathing, the Ringing, the Buzzing, and the Swimming of the Ear,
which are Symptoms of a depraved Hearing; the breathing or blowing being done
by a little blast which gets out gently; the Tingling by the interruption of
its motion; the ringing proceeds from a more gross vapor, and such as blows
more strongly; as the resounding does from an impulsion yet more vehement; and
lastly, the Swimming is caused by the agitation of these as well vaporous as
spirituous matters, which being different and differently moved, produce those
different sounds. And therefore it is absurd, to derive any other marks of what
should happen to us, then those laid down in Medicine, which teaches us, that
they who are subject to these frequent tinglings and ringings of the Ears are
in their way to Deafness, by reason of the danger there is, that these vaporous
humors should make so strong an obstruction in the organs of Hearing, that the
auditory air cannot get into it, to make sensation: and if this happen in a
burning Fever, together with dimness of the eyes, it is a certain presage of
the distraction or madness, which ordinarily follows that noise of the Ear.

CONFERENCE CCXXIX. Of Philtres, and whether there be any proper Remedies for
the procuring of Love.
THere is not any thing so pleasant and delightful as to be beloved; To procure
that, it is requisite there should be some perfection, which being conceived
such by the person whose favor is courted, it prevails so far upon his
Inclinations, that he cannot forbear being in Love with it. Thus is it that a
known Truth does so fully satisfy our Understanding, that it cannot deny its
consent thereto: Thus is the Will so strongly engaged upon the pursuance of a
Good which seems delightful to her, that it is hardly in her power to gainsay
it; nay, she is of her self inclined thereto, not needing any other Charms to
induce her thereto, than those she meets with in the goodness of the Object
which she loves. These are real Philtres which never fail to raise Love in
those that have them; there is no necessity of looking after other Remedies,
all which are used either to a bad end, or to none at all. Deianira, desirous
to make use of them, in order to her being better beloved by her Husband
Hercules, proved the occasion of his death, by the means of a garment, which
she sent him died with the Blood of the Centaur Nessus. Another Woman, as
Aristotle affirms in his greater work of Ethics, brought her Husband to the
same Fate, after she had made him take a Medicine of that kind. Lucilia
administering such a Philtre to the Poet Lucretius her Husband, put him into
such a distraction that he killed himself. The like was done by the Emperor
Lucilius, after he had taken such a one from the hands of Callisthenes; as also
by Caligula, after he had drunk off one of these potions into which there had
been put a piece of that flesh which is found on the foreheads of young Colts
as soon as they are cast, called in Latin Hippomanes, an ingredient
particularly recommended among these Medicaments. In which Receipts, we find
also the brains of Cows when they would go to Bull, and those of young Asses,
the bones of a green Frog, the little Fish called the Remora, the Matrix of the
Hyaena, and the little Bird called Motacilla, the Wagtail, from its continual
wagging of the tail, which it seems is so effectual a Remedy for the procuring
of Love, that Pindar, in his fourth Ode of the Nemaea, acknowledges that his
Heart was so strongly drawn away and charmed by the means thereof, that he
could not forbear Loving. But though it were granted, that these Remedies had
some particular Virtues to excite Love in those to whom they had been
administered, yet would it not follow thence, that they should make that Love
mutual, by obliging them to love those by whom they are beloved. For those to
whom they are given commonly not knowing, nay, many times having an aversion
for the others, it is impossible that these Philtres should be able to force
People's Wills and Inclinations, which are always free to love what they know
not; or if they know it, have a horror and aversion for it. Otherwise it would
amount to as much, as to give them a certain Sovereignty over a free power;
such as the Will is, which it cannot endure, as being above all Corporeal
Agents, such as these Medicaments are. Among which, as there are some have the
virtue of extinguishing the flames of Concupiscence and Carnal Love, by
correcting the heat of the Blood, diminishing the quantity of the Seed, and
dispersing the Spirits whereby it is raised; so on the contrary, there are
others, which as it were awake and excite that Passion, by the production they
make of abundance of good and spirituous seed, and, consequently, may indeed
invite those who use them, to that base and unbridled Love, but not to a mutual
Love, such as is particularly directed to him, who finding his affection
slighted, is forced to give these Remedies that he may be beloved by the
person whom he courts.

The Second said, That Love and the Graces, if we may credit those Authentic
Authors the Poets, always kept company with Venus, whereby they would signify
to us, that the most effectual means which any one can use to insinuate himself
into the Love of another, was, to become himself amiable and agreeable; and
that those who pretend to do it by other ways, do many times come short of
their intentions; or if they at last come to be loved, it is by such a
perversion of the party's imagination whom they court, that, instead of framing
a rational and well-regulated Passion, they raise therein that fury and rage,
which the Physicians call Erotomania. Thence it comes that to accomplish their
des^res, besides such means as are natural, they also make use of all the
diabolical Artifices and Inventions that Magic can furnish them withal, to
compass that piece of Witchcraft. To that purpose, they make use of Mandrakes,
wherewith the women prepare a certain Drink for the men, administering the
female to procure themselves to be loved by them; and the men cause them to
take the male, that they may beloved by the women They assign the same
properties to the Herb Calamint, affirming, that it gains the Heart, and raises
it into such a heat, that it is inclined to love him who gives it, and the same
thing is said of several other odoriferous Herbs, which seem to have a stricter
connection with the effect they promise themselves from them, than an infinite
number of other impious and absurd things, whereof they make an extraordinary
account. As for instance, among others the Menstrua of Women; the Navel-string
of a Child newly born, reduced to powder, and taken in a potion; as also the
skin of such a one wherewith they make their Virgin-parchment, on which they
write their Characters; Eggs dipped in the Blood of a Toad; a certain bone
taken out of the throat of a salt Bitch; the feathers of a Scrich-Owle; and
especially the parings of the Nails, together with the Hair of the Head, or of
any other part of the Body; and for want of those, some small thread of the
person's garment whom they would engage to love, which these impious Ministers
of Satan hide under her bolster; or if that cannot be done* under the
threshold of some door through which she is to pass, adding thereto, according
to their common practice, certain words and figures, forged by the old Spirit
of Lying. Nor are they content with all these palpable fooleries, but they must
add thereto some enormous sacriledges, by their abusing the most sacred
Mysteries of Christian Religion, profaning not only the Olive-Branches and
hallowed Palms, the holy Oils, the Habits and Ornaments of Priests, whereof
they make use of some parcels, as they do also of the scrapings of the hallowed
stones of our Altars, but also the sacred Host it self, on which they grave
certain Marks and Characters with Blood; and having reduced it to powder, put
it into the meats of such as they would bewitch with those Love-Sorceries.
There are also others who pretend to do the same things by Images of Wax, made
like the persons whose Love is desired, which they melt at a fire made of
Cypress, or some rotten pieces of wood taken out of Sepulchers, imagining that
by virtue of the words which they pronounce during that Ceremony, the Heart of
the person beloved will be softened and grow more tender, the hardness whereof
if they cannot overcome by simple melting, they prick the waxen figure with the
points of needles, presuming that the thing which it represents, will be
sensible of the like treatment. There are others yet who content themselves
with this Ceremony, that is, to burn the leaves of Laurel, or the stones of
Olives, used anciently, according to the testimony of the Prophet Baruch, by
Women, to reproach their gallants with their neglect toward them. But the
famous Sorceress Canidia, makes it her boast, in Horace, that she had wrought
this effect with the marrow of the Bones and the Liver of a young Child, which
she had taken out of his Belly, after she had starved him to death buried in
the ground up to the chin; promising her self, by means of this powerful
Philtre, so far to recover the affections of her Gallant Var^s, who had been
debauched from her, that she would inflame and make him burn more violently
than pitch set on fire. So certain is it, that there is not any crime, how
heinous soever, which this furious Passion will not inspire into those, who so
earnestly endeavor the satisfaction of it, which for that reason the Laws
punish with so much severity. Nor do they less condemn the superstitious
remedies which some others propose for the prevention of them, as being such as
are no less dangerous than the mischief they would hinder, of which kind are
these, to carry about one the privy parts of a Wolf, a Secret recommended by
Pliny and Pompanatius; to drink of the Urine of a Hee-goat; to cast on himself
the dust of the place where a Mule had wallowed; and such other unlawful and
suspicious means.

CONFERENCE CCXXX. Of Atoms.
IT is a Truth not questioned by any of the Philosophers, what Sect soever they
were of, that there must be certain Principles, whereof Natural Bodies consist.
Their Generation and Corruption confirm it; since that according to the former,
there being not any thing made of nothing; and according to the latter, it
being not imaginable that any thing can be reduced to nothing, there must be
some first Principles, from which, primarily, and of themselves natural things
do proceed, and whereto they are at last resolved. But it has not yet been
fully decided, to what this prerogative is to be granted. Heraclitus would
bestow it on Fire; Anaximenes on the Air; Pherecydes, to the Earth; Thales, on
the Water; Xenophanes, on the two latter, jointly; Hippon, on Fire and Water;
Parmenides on Fire and Earth; Empedocles, and most of the other Naturalists, on
those four Elements together; which yet, as some affirmed, could not execute
the function of Principles without the assistance of other Superiors, such as
Hesiod maintains to be Chaos and Love; Antiphanes, Silence and Voice; the
Chaldaeans, Light and Darkness; the Mathematicians, Numbers, and among others
the Tetrad, which the Pythagoreans affirm to be the source of all things; the
Peripateticks Matter, Form, and Privation; Anaxagoras, the Similar Parts; and
Democritus, his Atoms, so called by reason of their smalness, which renders
them invisible, and incapable of being distinguished and divided into other
lesser Particles, though they have quantity, and are of so great a bulk as to
be thereby distinguished from a Mathematical Point, which has not any; as
being defined to be what has not any part, and what is so imperceptible and
small, that it can hardly fall under our External Senses, but is only
perceivable by reason. The same thing may also be said of the other qualities
of these Atoms, which Epicurus, who received them from Democritus, as he had
the knowledge of them from Leucippus; and he again from one Moschus,
Phoenician, who lived before the Trojan War, made it not so much his business
to lay them down for the first Causes and general Principles of Natural Things,
as to take away the four common Elements, since he does not deny but that these
are constitutive parts of the world, and whatever is comprehended therein. But
his main work is to maintain, that they not the first seeds and immediate
Principles thereof, as consisting themselves of Atoms or little Bodies so
subtle and small, that they cannot be broken or made less, and being the most
simple and next pieces, whereof mixed bodies are made up, and whereto they are
afterward reducible by dissolution, there is some reason to give them the
denomination of the first material and sensible principles of natural bodies.

The Second said, That if these Atoms be allowed to be the principles of
natural bodies, these last will be absolutely unknown to us, as being made, up
of infinite principles, which being incapable of falling under our knowledge,
it will be impossible for us to come to that of the mixed bodies which are to
consist of them. Whence it will follow, that though the Atoms should be such as
the Philosophers would persuade us they are, yet would not our Understanding,
which cannot comprehend any thing but what is finite, be ever the more
satisfied, since it would not be able to conceive them, nor consequently the
things which should be produced of them. Nor is it to be imagined that those
things would differ among themselves, since that, according to their sentiment,
those little chimerical bodies are not any way distinguished, but all of the
like nature, and of the same substance.

The Third said, That though there be not any essential difference in the
Atoms, yet is it certain, That they make remarkable diversity in the production
of things, by the properties and different qualities that are in each of them,
whereof there are two kinds, Common and Proper. The proper are, Largeness of
Bulk, Figure, Motion, and Resistance; the common are, Concourse, Connection,
Situation, and Order, which are generally competible to all Atoms, as the four
others are proper and particular to them. Their bulk is not to be considered as
if they had any considerable quantity; there being no Atom, how great soever it
may be, but is infinitely less then the least body in the World, being for that
reason so imperceptible, that it is impossible for the sight to distinguish it.
Yet does not that hinder but that they are bodies, and consequently have
quantity, which is a property inseparable from bodies; as Mites, Hand-worms,
and such other little Animals, which by their extreme litleness elude our
sight, do nevertheless consist of diverse parts, miraculously discoverable by
Magnifying-glasses, nay to the observance of Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and such
like obscure parts, answerable to those which reason obliges us to admit,
though our senses cannot attain thereto. It being the property of figure to
follow quantity, which it determinates and qualifies, it is necessary, that if
the atoms are different as to bulk, they should be the same also as to figure:
which being observable when bodies are broken into great pieces, and those
appearing with superficies, angles, and points diversely figured, they must
still retain some figure even after they are pounded in a mortar into small
parcels and particles, though our senses by reason of their weakness, are not
able to comprehend it. To the same weakness it is to be attributed, that we are
not able to discern the diversity of figures in grains of corn and other seeds,
which seem to be in a manner alike, though they are not such, no more than the
leaves of Trees and Plants. Nay even in Drops of water and Eggs, though in
appearance there is a likeness so great, that it is come into a Proverb; yet is
there so remarkable a diversity, when it is strictly observed, that there were
heretofore in the Island of Delos certain people so expert, that, among several
Eggs, they would tell which had been laid by such or such a Hen. The hair of
our heads (a thing, to some would seem incredible) have particular figures
whereby they are distinguished one from another. The figures of Atoms are of
that rank, as are also those of the Moats which are seen playing and dancing up
and down in the beams of the Sun, when darted in at a narrow passage: for
though they seem to be all round, yet examined with that instrument which
magnifies the species of things, we find in them an infinite number of other
figures. In like manner is it requisite, that the Atoms should have the same
difference of figures, that they may the more fitly concur to the mixture and
generation of Bodies. To that end, the maintainers of this opinion affirm, that
some are round, some oval, some oblong, some pointed, some forked, some
concave, some unequal, some smooth and even, some rough and rugged, and of other
such like figures, as well regular as irregular, in order to the diversity of
their motions. Of these there are three kinds assigned; according to the first,
the Atom moves downwards by its own weight; according to the second, it moves
upwards; and according to the third, it moves indirectly and from one side to
another. These two last are violent motions, but the first is natural to the
Atom; to which Epicurus attributes a perpetual motion, which causing it to move
incessantly toward the lowest place, it still makes that way of its own
nature, till such time as in its progress it has met with other Atoms, which
coming to strike against it, if they are the stronger, they force it upwards,
or of one side, according to the part of it which had received the shock; and
so clinging one to another, they make several mixtures, as, when they come to
separate after their union, they are the causes of the corruption of mixed
bodies. And these bodies have so much the more Resistance, which is the last
property of these Atoms, the more dense and solid these last are; as on the
contrary, when they are less dense and solid, by reason of the vacuity there is
between their parts, the bodies consisting of them have so much the less vigor
and force to oppose external injuries.

The Fourth said, That there is not any better instance, whereby the nature of
Atoms can be explicated then those little Motes, which move up and down the air
of a Chamber, when the Sunbeams come into it at some little hole or cranny. For
from this very instance, which is so sensible, it may easily be concluded, not
only that they are bodies, which have a certain bulk and quantity, how little
and indivisible soever it may be, but also that they are in continual motion,
by means whereof, as those little corpuscula, or Motes, incessantly move and
strike one against another, and are confusedly intermixed one among another; so
the Atoms, by their perpetual agitation and concourse, cause the mixtures and
generations of all natural things. So that, all considered, it is as ridiculous
on the other side to affirm, that they are only imaginary principles, because
they are not seen, as to maintain, that those little Motes are not in the air,
because they are not perceived to be there in the absence of the Sunbeams,
which we must confess renders them visible, but with this assurance, that they
are nevertheless there, even when they are not discerned to be there.

The Fifth said, That it is certain, there are abundance of bodies in Nature,
which are in a manner imperceptible to our senses, and yet must be granted to
be real bodies, and consequently endowed with length, breadth, profundity,
solidity, and the other corporeal qualities. Such as these are, among others,
the sensible Species, which continually issue out of the Objects, and are not
perceived by the senses, but only so far as they are corporeal and material,
especially the Odours, exhaling from certain bodies, which after their
departure thence, in process of time, decay and wither. Of this we have
instance in Apples, and other Fruits, which grow wrinkled, proportionably to
their being drained of those vaporous Atoms, (whereof they were at first full)
which evaporate in a lesser or greater space of time, the more closely those
little bodies stick one to another, or the more weakly they are joined
together. Nay, the intentional Species, how sublimated soever they be, by the
defaecation made by the agent Intellect, are nevertheless bodies, as are also
the Animal Spirits, which are charged therewith, and the vital and natural,
whereby the former are cherished. In like manner, Light, the beams of the Sun
and of other Stars, their Influences, their Magnetic Virtues, and other such
Qualities, observable in an infinite number of things, between which there is a
mutual inclination and correspondence, or antipathy, cannot be imagined to act
otherwise then by the emission of certain little bodies; which being so small
and subtle that they are incapable of further division, may with good reason
be called the Elements and material Principles of all Bodies, since there is
not any one but consists of them.

The Sixth said, That the concourse of these Atoms being accidental, if we may
credit Epicurus, we cannot attribute thereto the causes of the generations
happening in this World; inasmuch as an accidental cause not being able to
produce a regular effect, such as is that of Nature in Generation, it is
ridiculous to attribute it rather to these Atoms, than to some other cause,
which is such per se, and always regular in its operations, such as is Nature
her self. But what further discovers the absurdity of that opinion is this,
that it thinks it not enough to refer the diversity of the other effects, which
are observed in all natural bodies, to that of the Atoms, whereof they consist;
but pretends also by their means, to give an account of that of our Spirits,
which those Philosophers would represent unto us made of those orbicular atoms,
and accordingly easily moved by reason of that round figure, and that those in
whom it is most exact, are the most ingenious and inventive persons, as others
are dull and blockish, because their Spirits have a lesser portion of those
circular Atoms. But this speculation may be ranked among pure chimaera's, since
that the functions of our Understanding, being absolutely spiritual and
immaterial, have no dependence on the different constitutions of those little
imaginary bodies; nay though there were any correspondence between them and the
actions of our minds, their round figure would not be so much the cause of our
vivacity, as might be the pointed or forked; as being more likely to penetrate
into, and comprehend the most difficult things than the circular, which would
only pass over them, without any fixed fastening on them.

CONFERENCE CCXXXI. Whether the King's Evil may be cured by the touching of a
Seventh Son, and why?
THough this noisome Disease sometime fastens on several parts of the body, yet
is there not any more sensible of its malice than the neck, which by reason of
its being full of glandules, is extremely troubled therewith, which happens as
well by reason of their thin and spongy constitution, as their nearness to the
brain, from which they receive the phlegmatic and excrementitious humors,
more conveniently, than any of the other parts can be imagined to do, which are
at a greater distance from it. And yet these last, notwithstanding that
distance, are extremely troubled therewith, nay sometimes to such excess, that,
if we may credit Johannes Langius in the first Book of his Medicinal Epistles,
a Woman at Florence had the Evil in one of her Thighs, which being got out
weighed sixty pound; and a Goldsmith of Amberg had another of the same bigness
in a manner, near his Knee. And what is much to be observed, is, that though
the Evil seems to be only external, yet is it commonly preceded by the like
swellings, which ly hid within, and whereof those without are only the marks:
which observation is confirmed by the dissections made of those who are
troubled with it, in whose bodies, after their death, there are abundance of
these Evils, whereof the Glandules of the Mesenterium and the Pancreas, which
is the most considerable of any about Man's Body, are full, and which are
commonly produced by Phlegm, the coldness and viscosity whereof do indeed
contribute to their rebellion; but it is very much augmented by the external
and common Causes, such as are Air, Aliment, and Waters infected with some
malignant qualities, which render it Endemious and peculiar to certain Nations;
as for instance, the Inhabitants of the Alps, and the Pyrenean Mountains,
especially the Spaniards, who are more infected with this foul disease than any
others, which is also communicated by succession, as most of the other
diseases, which become hereditary by means of the Spirits, employed by the
Formative Faculty in Generation, and carrying along with them the Character of
the parts and humors of him who engenders, and imprinting them on the foetus.
Hence it comes that for the curing of it, there is more required than to
administer the remedies commonly used in the cure of other tumors, which must
be dissolved or softened, that so they may be brought to suppuration, unless
they can be consumed and extirpated; but in this there must be some particular
means used. And, not to mention that which is generally known to all, to wit,
the touching of those who have this Evil by the King of France, and his Majesty
of Great Britain, whom they heal by a miraculous virtue, and a special
privilege granted those two great Monarchs by God himself; it is commonly
affirmed, that the seventh Male-child, without any interruption of Females,
has the same advantage of healing this disease, by a favor which Theology
calls gratia gratis data, and whereof many affirm, that they have seen the
effects. These are attributed to the virtue of the Number Seven, so highly
esteemed by the Platonists, as consisting of the first odd Number, and the
first even and square number, which are Three and Four, and are by them called
the Male and Female, whereof they make such account, that, according to the
Opinion of these Philosophers, the Soul of the world was made up of those two
Numbers; and it is by their means that whatever is comprehended in it subsists.
It is also for this Reason, that Children born in the seventh month, live as
those born in the ninth; whereas such as are born in the eighth die. To this
may be added, That the most considerable Changes of Man's Life happen in these
several Septenaries, which number does not only contribute to his Conception,
which is not perfect till the seventh day, after the Matter has received the
Virile Sperme, and to his Birth in the seventh month; but also to all the other
accidents which happen to him in all the several Septenaries. For the Child
begins to have some appearance of Teeth in the seventh month; at twice seven
months he makes a shift to stand alone; at three times seven his Tongue is so
far loosed, that he speaks with some Articulation; at four times seven he goes
steadily and confidently; at the age of seven years he acquires new forces, and
renews his Teeth; at twice seven he is of ripe age, and capable of engendring;
at three times seven he gives over growing, but becomes still more and more
vigorous, till he has attained to seven times seven, that is, to the forty and
ninth year of his age, by some called the little climacterical year, as being
the most complete of any, in regard it consists of a perfect number multiplied
by it self, and in which there always happens some accident proceeding hence,
that Nature being not able to forbear the doing of something, when she has
attained that sovereign degree of perfection, is forced to decline. It is
therefore to be attributed to this complete number, (which is called by the
Greeks by a term which signifies Venerable) that the seventh Son cures the
Evil, the cause whereof being malignant, and, indeed, having something in it
that is obscure, which Hippocrates calls Divine; it is not to be admired, that
the curing of it should depend on a Cause equally obscure, and at so great a
distance from our knowledge.

The Second said, That without having any recourse to so abstracted a Cause, as
that of the virtue of the number Seven, which, being a discrete quantity, is
incapable of action, which is reserved to such qualities only as are active;
Nor yet to the Stars, which are at a greater distance from us; Nor yet to the
force of the Imagination, which many think may produce that effect: Waving all
recourse to these, I am of Opinion, that it is rather to be referred to the
Formative Faculty, which producing a Male when the Seeds of the Parents are so
disposed, as that what is more vigorous and strong has a predominancy over the
other which is less such, that is, when it continues still in the getting of a
Male without any interruption to the seventh time, the reason of it is, that
these Seeds are still so strong and spirituous, that a Male is gotten instead
of a Female, which is the production of those Seeds that are weaker and colder
than the Masculine. Now the heat and spirits whereby Males are procreated, may
communicate to them some particular virtue, such as may be the Gift of healing
the Evil; which may be affirmed with as good ground, as that the spittle of a
Man fasting being well-tempered, kills Serpents; and that it is held, many have
heretofore had such a prerogative for the healing of certain diseases, by some
particular qualities, depending either on those of their Temperaments, or of
their whole substance. Thus Vespasian, as Tacitus affirms in the fourth Book of
his Histories, restored his sight to a blind Man. Adrian, as Aelius Spartianus
relates, healed a Man born blind only by touching him. And Pyrrhus, King of the
Epirotae, if we may believe Plutarch, in his Life, healed all that were
troubled with the Spleen in his time, by touching their Spleen with the great
Toe of his right Foot; of which Toe there was a far greater Opinion conceived
after his death, in that it was found entire, and not consumed by the fire, as
all the rest of his Body was. This virtue of healing thus after an
extraordinary manner, has been derived into some whole Families. There are to
this day many in France, who affirm themselves to be of the Family of Saint
Hubert, and have the gift of healing such as are bitten by mad Dogs. In Italy
there are others, who make it their boast that they are of the Families of
Saint Paul and Saint Catharine: whereof the former are not afraid of Serpents,
which, for that reason, they bear in their Coat; no more than these latter are
of burning coals, which they handle without burning themselves. In Spain also,
the Families of the Saludatores and the Ensalmadores, have the gift of healing
many incurable diseases only by the Touch. Nay, if we may rely on common
Tradition, we have this further to add, that it holds for certain, that those
Children who come into the world on Good Friday have the gift of healing
several sorts of diseases, especially Tertian and Quartan Agues.

The Third said, That if the gift of healing the Evil depended on the vigor of
the Principles of Generation, which meet in the seventh Male-child, it would
follow that the eighth or ninth coming into the world consecutively, should
more justly pretend to that privilege; inasmuch as the generative faculty
discovers a greater virtue and vigor in that production of a ninth Male-child
without interruption, then it might do in that of a seventh. Which being not
found true, it were absurd to look for the Causes of it in Nature, whose forces
are not able to attain an Effect so transcendent, and so much above her reach.
It must therefore be a supernatural gift, which God bestows on certain persons,
out of a pure gratuitous favor, and more for the ease and comfort of others,
than out of any advantage to those who receive it; as are also the gifts of
Prophecy and doing Miracles. For it is a demonstration of God's Omnipotence,
not to heal diseases only by ordinary means, the dispensation whereof he has
left to Physicians, who to that end make use of natural remedies, but to do the
same thing without any assistance of Nature by extraordinary and supernatural
means, in the application whereof, he sometimes uses the Ministry of Angels,
as in the curing of Tobit, and those sick people who came to the Pool at
Jerusalem, after the water had been stirred by the Angel; sometimes by the
Saints, of whom it is written, that the very shadow of their Bodies has many
times been effectual to that purpose, as was that of Saint Peter; and
oftentimes those of other persons, to whom he had communicated the gift for
reasons unknown to us; as he granted that of Divination to the Sibyls, though
they lived in Idolatry.

The Fourth said, That Man was, potentially, all things; and that consisting of
a Body exactly temperate, and of such a Soul as is the most perfect of forms,
he comprehended in an eminent degree within himself all the virtues of things
as well corporeal as animate. Whence comes it then, that he shall not have the
virtues and properties which are observable not only in stones, wherewith he
participates Being, but also in Plants which are capable of Vegetation as well
as he; Animals, with whom he has motion, sense, and life; and lastly, in the
separated Spirits, as having, answerably to them, certain powers that are
spiritual and removed from materiality? And so, since the Virtue of healing
Diseases is found in most Beings, which are of some nature with Man, it is but
reasonable he also should have the same one, such as is the gift of healing the
Evil, which happens principally in the Seventh Male-child, by reason of the
perfection of his nature, which performs all the most complete functions in
that number, which Hippocrates upon that occasion affirms to be the dispenser
of life. Nay if there have been some who have had the Virtue of communicating
several Diseases, by their sight and touching, as it is related of the Psylli,
Tribales, Illyrians, and other Nations, who bewitched those whom they touched;
and of him, whom Philostratus makes mention of in the life of Apollonius, who
killed with his very aspect, as the Basilisk does; far greater reason is there
that there should be some to communicate health. For though this latter,
requiring more preparations and conditions, is so much the more difficultly
transferred from one Subject to another then sickness is, yet the reason of
contraries will have it so, that if the one is, the other may be communicated,
and that with the greater justice, inasmuch as health, participating of the
nature of good, ought to be more communicative from one subject to another then
sickness.

CONFERENCE CCXXXII. Of Conjuration.
THere is as much fault to be found with the excessive curiosity of those, who
would know all things, as there is with the unsufferable stupidity of some
others, who are not any way touched with that natural desire of Knowledge: for
as these latter, by renouncing that accomplishment, deprive themselves of the
greatest satisfaction of life; so the others, being transported beyond the
limits prescribed to the mind of Man, wander they know not which way, and
precipitate themselves into the abysses of errors and impieties. That of the
Necromancers, who make it their boast, that they can command out of their Tombs
the Souls of the deceased, that they may be, by them, informed of what they
desire to know, is so much the more enormous, in that they have made an Art of
it, called by them the Black Art, or the Art of Conjuration, a name as
ridiculous as the precepts whereof it consists; which having no ground but what
they derive from the capriccio's and fantastic extravagances of those
Impostors, they sufficiently destroy themselves; so as there needs nothing else
to discover their palpable vanity; no more then there is to make appear the
error of those, who, to confirm that diabolical invention, maintain, that
there are abundance of effects above those of Nature, which are to be
attributed to those souls separated from their bodies, especially that of
foretelling things to come, and informing those thereof who consult them; it
being considered, that, besides the gift they have of Science, which is common
to them with all spirits disengaged from matter, they have a particular
inclination of doing good to men, by advertising them of those things which so
much concern them. But this is not only absurd in it self, but also impious,
and contrary to Christian Faith, which teaching us that there are but three
places, where these souls have their abode, to wit, Paradise, Hell, and
Purgatory, it is to be believed, that those which are confined to the last
never come out thence, but upon a special permission of God, which he sometimes
grants them, that they may solicit the suffrages of the Living; those of the
damned are further from being in a capacity to get out of that infernal prison,
to which Divine Justice has condemned them, to be there eternally tormented;
And the Blessed Spirits are yet more unlikely to quit their blissful State and
the joys of Paradise, wherewith they are inebriated, to satisfy the vain
curiosities of those who invocate them, and for the most part make use of them
rather to compass the mischievous Sorceries and such like Crimes whereof that
Black Art makes profession, then to procure good to any one; or if it happen
that at any time they do any, it is in order to the doing of some greater
mischief afterward, such as may be that of Superstition and Idolatry, whereto
these spirits inclining those who invocate them, and requiring of them such
Sacrifices and Adorations as are due only to the Deity, it is more then a
presumption, that they cannot be the souls of the Blessed, but downright
Devils, who, transformed into Angels of Light, impose upon those who are so
willing to be seduced.

The Second said, That as the employments of the Devils are different, so is
there also a remarkable difference in their natures, which depends principally
on the places of their abode, according to which, if we may believe Orpheus,
some of them are Celestial or Fiery, some Aerie, some Watery, and some
Terrestrial and Subterraneous; and among those the Aerial, to whom Plato
attributes the invention of Magic, are by the Students of that Art, accounted
to be the most ingenious to deceive men, by reason of their more easy putting
on of the grosser parts of the air, and their appearing under what forms they
please; and consequently, it will be no hard matter for them to assume that of
the bodies of deceased persons, and, by that counterfeit appearance, to deceive
the credulity of those, who are persuaded, that, by this art of Conjuration,
they may be obliged to make a particular discovery of themselves; and it is an
observation of Ananias, in the third Book of the Nature of Devils, when a dying
person presented his right Hand to some other, who thereupon joined Hands with
him. Nor is this any thing less superstitious than for the said two persons to
make a mutual promise one to the other, that he, who shall die first of the
two, shall appear to the survivor, to give him an account what condition he is
in; since that, in these Apparitions, it is always to be feared, that they are
the Evil Spirits, whose main design is to seduce them that assume their places,
and do appear instead of those whom we think we see.

The Third said, That he thought it not very strange that the Souls of the
deceased, having still a certain remembrance of those with whom they conversed
in this Life, and to whom they are still obliged by some tie of affection, such
as was that of the Rich man in Hell toward his living Brethren, should also
have an Inclination to assist them as much as they can. It may therefore be
inferred, that, with the permission of God, they do appear, when they are
earnestly entreated to do it. For, not to speak of Moses and Elias, who
appeared on Mount Thabor, the day of the Transfiguration; the Prophet Jeremy
and Onias appeared to Judas Macchabaeus, as the Soul of Samuel did to Saul; to
whom the Holy Scripture attributing the gift of Prophecy, that apparition was
not illusory, nor procured by the Devil assuming the shape of that Prophet, but
certain and real, in which that Holy Man presented himself, and, out of the
desire he had to bring that King, for whom he sometime had a great affection,
into the way of salvation, he remonstrated to him the judgments of God, which
would fall upon him, if he turned not from the evil of his ways.

The Fourth said, That though there be nothing but confusion among the Evil
Spirits, yet is there to be imagined a certain Order in their Nature, and such
a Subordination among them, that there are Superiors and inferiors, whereof
some have a sovereignty over others. Thence it comes, that among the Magicians,
who have unhappily engaged themselves in their service, those who have given up
their Names to a Devil of a superior Hierarchy, force the others to obey them,
and may exercise the same superiority over the Spirits of a lower Class, as
their Master can. It is to these Regent or principal Magicians, that some would
attribute the privilege of calling up the Souls of the dead, and, for want of
them, the Evil Spirits of an inferior Order, whom they show to those who
consult them; or when they cannot do that, they think it enough to procure an
appearance of Specter and Shades, by that cursed Art of Conjuration,
distinguished for that reason into Necromancy and Sciomancy, whereof the former
makes the dead appear, or rather Devils, with their very Bodies, and their
Clothes and other marks, which they had during their being here: The other
shows only Phantasmes, which have some resemblance of them, yet make a shift to
answer their Questions who come to enquire of them. And whereas the whole
mystery is full of impostures, they omit nothing that may cause terrors, that
so men's spirits being prepossessed, they might give the greater credit thereto.
It was the opinion of ancient Paganism, which first exercised this Art, that
the Souls of the dead might be evocated, by pouring on the ground Wine, Milk,
and Honey, and mixing it with the blood of certain Animals newly killed, the
entrails whereof, being still hot, were afterward carried three several times
about two Altars, garnished with three black or blew fillets, and a Cyprus. But
when they were persuaded that those Souls of the deceased, which they called
Manes, were incensed against them, they appeased them with black Victims,
casting their entrails dipped in Oil, into a fire laid on their Sepulchers
made of such Trees as bear no fruit, gave them Incense, cast Wine with the
hollow of the Hand, and exercised such Ceremonies for the most part ridiculous;
which also were commonly performed at midnight, and in Caves and subterraneous
places, there being not any thing they thought more contrary to those Spirits
of darkness, than the light of the day, and especially the rising of the Sun.
Thence it proceeded, that Homer sends his Ulysses into obscure places, there to
consult the Soul of Tiresias; and Virgil makes Aeneas descend under ground, to
learn of the Sibyl what he had to do. The Poets also have feigned that Orpheus
descended into Hell, to fetch thence his Wife Eurydice; and the History of
Pausanias tells us, that, to appease the Ghost of Cleonica, whom he had killed,
by mistake, and for which act he was continually tormented in the night time,
he offered some such sacrifices to it in an obscure place called Heraclea,
where having appeared to him, she told him, that he should be delivered out of
all his sufferings as soon as he were returned into Lacedaemonia; as
accordingly he was, having been there starved to death with hunger in the
Temple of Pallas, where he had taken Sanctuary, to avoid the fury of his
Fellow-citizens, by whom he was pursued.

CONFERENCE CCXXXIII. Of Natural Magic.
NAtural Magic has degenerated extremely in these last Ages, wherein it is
grown as execrable, even to the very name of it, as it was honorable at the
beginning, as those of Tyrant and Sophist were heretofore denominations
generally esteemed, but now they are abhorred. The ill use which some have made
thereof, is, the true Cause of this treatment of Natural Magic, which they
have filled with vanities and impostures, whereas it is in it self not only the
noblest, but also the most ancient of all the Sciences. For it is conceived to
have begun above four thousand years since in Egypt, under Zoroaster the
Grandson of Noah, whence it was spread among the Babylonians, the Chaldaeans,
and the Persians, among whom the Magi were in so great authority, that, with
the Mysteries of Religion, they were entrusted with the Civil Government and
the conduct and tuition of the Kings, who were never admitted to the Crown,
till they had been fully instructed in that Discipline. By this it was that
Orpheus and Amphion came to be so powerful, as to draw brute beasts and stones
after them; and hereby King Solomon came to be the wisest of all men; and,
lastly, by the study of this, Apollonius Tyanaeus, Pythagoras, Socrates, and
the other Sages of Antiquity acquired the esteem they were in. But what adds
much to the recommendation of it, is, that by its means the three Magi, or Wise
Men in the Gospel, who were Kings, came from the East, where this Science
flourished, having found out that the Star which they saw, being different from
all the others, yet no Meteor kindled by some Natural Cause, was an
extraordinary sign which God had been pleased to make appear unto them, to give
them notice of the Birth of his Son; there being no rational ground to imagine
they were downright Magicians, as Theophylact conceived in his Commentaries
upon Saint Matthew; at least this is certain, that, after the adoration of our
Savior, they absolutely renounced that Diabolical Magic, if it be supposed
they had any tincture of it before. For as to this latter, which is grounded
upon some compact with the Devil, who thereby obliges himself to do
transcendent things for him with whom he has contracted, being a kind of
Idolatry it is generally abhorred and condemned by all, since it makes use of
pernicious means to attain its end, which is ever bad. But such is not the
other, whose end, and the means it employes to compass it being good and
lawful, there is no doubt, but it may be lawfully used. Besides, as Psellus and
Proclus, two persons well skilled in these matters, have very well observed
this last kind, called Natural Magic, is only an exact and perfect knowledge
of the secrets of Nature, by means whereof, consequently to the Observations
which some eminently-curious persons make of the motions of the Heavens, and
the influences of the Stars, with the Sympathies and Antipathies which are
almost in all sublunary bodies, they apply things so justly one to another, and
with such an exact consideration of time, place, manner, and proportion, that
they work prodigious effects; which, the more credulous, and such as are
ignorant of the correspondence there is between these Effects and their Causes,
look upon as Miracles and Enchantments. Such as were those of the Magicians of
Pharaoh, who could turn their Rods into Serpents, make the Rivers of Egypt red
as blood, and fill the whole Country with Froggs, but were not able to go any
further, to imitate the other Miracles of Moses, which they were forced to
acknowledge wrought by the Finger of God. Nor are the Effects of Artificial
Magic less wonderful, not only in respect of its Predictions observable in
Judiciary Astrology, Agriculture, Medicine, the Art of Navigation, and others,
grounded upon very probable Conjectures, but also of its operations, as well
true as false, or illusory. The true ones are grounded on the Principles of the
Mathematics, especially on those of the Mechanics, which are the noblest and
most necessary part thereof, and on which do depend all the Water-Engines,
Machins moving of themselves, and other Inventions wherewith the Ancients
wrought such Effects as were accounted miraculous. Such were, that Man's Head
of brass made by Albertus Magnus, which framed an articulated Man's Voice, in
imitation of that of Memnon; the glazen Sphere of Archimedes, the motions
whereof naturally represented those of the Celestial Orbs; his
Burning-glasses, wherewith he burnt the Fleet of the Romans, who besieged the
City of Saragossa where he then was; the wooden Dove of Archytas, which flew up
and down with the other Doves; as did the little Birds of Boethius made of
Copper, which had this further advantage, that they could sing melodiously; as
could also those which the Emperor Leo caused to be made of Gold; Malleable
Glass, and such other admirable Effects of this Art, for that reason called by
Hero, Thaumaturgica. Those which it produces by illusion and juggling, depend on
some sleightness of hand, and cousening tricks, such as are used by the
Professors of Legerdemain, to delude our Senses, and make things appear
otherwise than they are. Such a performance was that mentioned by Josephus, in
the xviii. Book of his Antiquities, used by that false Messiah, Barchochabas,
who to gain himself the esteem of the true one, had the knack of vomiting
flames of Fire out of his Mouth as he spoke, by means of a lighted piece of
Towe, which he could order as occasion served; which trick, such another
Impostor showed more cleverly, by means of a nut-shell filled with Brimstone
and Fire. And it is a thing now generally known, that, by certain Artifices no
way diabolical, one may make a company of people sitting at the Table look as
if they were dead, or like so many Tawny-Moors; nay, if we believe Pliny, in
the xxviii. and xxxv. Books of his History, they may be made to look as if they
had the Heads of Asses or Horses.

The Second said, That, according to the Doctrine of Paganism, re-advanc'd
since the Light of Christianity by the Marcionites and the Manichees, as there
were two Gods, one called Oromazus, the Author of all good, who was the Sun;
the other, Arimanes, Author of all mischief; so there were two kinds of
Magic whereof one, consisting of an exact knowledge, and application of things
in order to a good end, is commendable, and known by the simple denomination of
Magic, which they affirm to be an invocation of those Genii, who are our
Guardians and Benefactors, in order to the procuring of some good either to our
selves or others: The other called Mangania, which they exercised by the
invocation of the bad Genii or Demons, was ever condemned as pernicious, as
having no other design then to do mischief by Sorceries and Witchcraft. And
though the grounds of that Doctrine are contrary to the Truth of Christian
Faith, yet since it assures us that there are good and bad Angels, which were
the Genii of Paganism; there is some probability, that as these last incline us
to Idolatry, Superstition, and other Impieties, to divert us from the worship
of the true God, by the study of the Black Art; so is it the main business of
the former, by a discovery of the Secrets of Nature, which is the White and
Natural Magic, to incline us to an acknowledgement of the Author of it. In
like manner, as we find, according to the Apostle, that, in the order which God
observes for the good of his Church and the furtherance of our Salvation, there
are diverse Gifts, such as are those of knowledge, healing, working of miracles,
prophesying, speaking of strange languages, and the like; all which do
notwithstanding depend on the same Spirit of God, who dispenses them according
to his good pleasure: So the Devil, who endeavors to imitate the Works of God,
does the like, in the distribution of those Talents, which he communicates to
his instruments, to employ them upon different occasions, the better to
accommodate himself to the diversity of their inclinations, whom he would
abuse, which is his principal design. He furnishes those whose restless
curiosity will needs know things to come, with Oracles and Predictions; he
entertains the vain with impostures and illusions; the envious with Charms and
Sorceries; the revengeful, and such as are inclined to such implacable
passions, are suggested with all the mischievous contrivances, which that
perverse Spirit is at all times ready to teach any who are desirous to be his
Disciples, to whom the practice of his instructions prove as fatal, as they are
intended, to be to those, against whom they are employed.

CONFERENCE CCXXXIV. Of the Moles and Marks appearing in the Face.
AS the Face is the highest part of the Body, as to situation, and the most
delicate, as being the mansion of the external Senses, which cannot act without
the assistance of the Spirits, whereby that delicacy is imprinted in it; so
does it accordingly lie more exposed to as well internal as external injuries,
then the other parts, which are not so much in sight, nor of so exquisite a
complexion. And as the least flaw in a Diamond, or a fair Looking-glass is soon
perceived by such as look attentively on them, so these Marks are so much the
more observable in the Face, then in any other part of the body, the more
susceptible it is thereof, by reason of its clearness and delicacy. I may add
to this a thing which would be very improbable, if we had not the assurance of
experience for it; to wit, that there is not any mark though ever so little, in
the face, but does denote some other, which though not apparent, it is
nevertheless easy for such as are expert to conjecture whereabout it is, by
the inspection of those that are manifest. Thus if there be a mark in the midst
of the Forehead, it shows that there is such another in the midst of the
breast; but it will be toward one side or other of this latter, inclining
toward one of the arms, if the mark in the Forehead be not exactly in the
middle of it, that is, incline any thing to the right or left side: as it must
be on the brisket or lower part of the breast, if it appear at the extremity of
the forehead toward the root of the nose, between which and the parts devoted
to generation, there is such a correspondence, that the simplest sort of people
draw consequences of their good or bad disposition, from the length or figure
of the nose. But the more intelligent, not contenting themselves with this
conjecture, affirm, that, according to the different scituations of those
marks, there are the like correspondent to them in those parts, as well of the
Man as of the Woman; for whether those on the former be in the middle, on the
right side or the left, those on the other parts are exactly answerable to
them. The several observations which have been made of these correspondences of
marks in the Women we shall leave to the examination of the Female
Physiognomists, so far as the parts beforementioned are under consideration,
and confine our selves to the Men. In these, the mark which is apparent on the
highest part of the nose toward the root, as we called it before, where the
space is between both eyes, always denotes another at the bottom of the Yard,
near the Testicles; between which and the Ey-lids there is so great a
correspondence, that those little specks or warts which are many times to be
seen on the latter, are the significators of the like in the former; even with
that observance of proportion, that if it be on the upper-lid, those marks will
be on that part of the Cods which is nearest the Yard; if it be on the lower,
they shall be on that part which is nearest the Fundament. Moreover, from the
appearance of one of these marks upon one of the Ey-brows, it is concluded,
that there is as much on the shoulder on the same side, which is at a greater
or lesser distance from the Backbone, the nearer to or further off the other
is from the space which is between both the eyes. There is the like
correspondence between the Cheeks and the Thighs, for if they have a mark just
in the middle, the thigh shall be marked just in the same part, and on the same
side; if they be near the nose, the thigh shall be marked near the groin; if
they incline toward the ears, the correspondent marks will be toward the
buttocks. The mark appearing between the Eye and the eminent part of the Cheek,
discovers one under the Arm-pit; that on the tip of the Ear, shows there should
be one on the upper part of the Arm. It is inferred also from the mark upon the
upper lip adjoining to the Nose, in that space which makes a separation been
the Nostrils, that there is another answerable thereto in the Peritonaeum,
betwixt the Fundament and the Cods; and from those on the Chin and the lower
Lip, that there are others about the bottom of the belly. But though these
rules are grounded on rational conjectures, yet are they not infallible, no
more then those of Phystognomy, whereof they are a part; as is also
Metoposcopy, which judges of the secret inclinations by the inspection of the
Face. The second said, That, as Man comprehends in himself an abbreviation of
all the rarities of the World; so does his Face comprehend all those of his
body, whereof it is an extract. So that as the greater world is known by Man's
body, which is the lesser, it is no hard matter to make a discovery of this
last by the face, which indeed is less as to volume, but so well composed and
proportioned, that it may well be looked upon as the most accomplished
Masterpiece of Nature, who in the structure thereof has imitated Geography,
which, not able to show us all the inhabitable Earth, presents us with an
epitom of it in a Map; or behaves her self like a Whole-sale-Merchant, who does
not expose all his commodities, but thinks it enough to show patterns thereof,
whereby a judgment may be made of their value. Thus it is that there may be a
discovery made of the most secret motions within, by the figure and composition
of the parts of the face, inasmuch as those of the other parts of the body
depending on them, there is a judgment made of the one by the other, and
consequently of the actions and inclinations, which are commonly answerable to
the constitution and temperament of the parts. But it is somewhat hard to make
this judgment by the simple marks of the Face, whether they proceed from
Nature, as those do which Children bring along with them into the World, and
depend on the imagination of the Mothers, which is an external cause; or from
some other Causes, as the heat of the entrails, the abundance of gross and
terrene humors, and the density of the pores of the skin, which, checking them
in their way, makes them appear in freckles, specks, and other kinds of spots
in the face? For, these causes never being constant, but subject to much
variety, according to the several occurrences which either augment or diminish
them, it is impossible to make a certain judgment of a thing, which is in a
continual change.

The Third said, That the said Art of guessing at the marks of the most secret
parts of the body by the inspection of those of the face, is so ancient, that
the Physician Melampus, cited in Homer, Odyss. lib. xv. delivered certain
precepts of it, above three thousand years since; and after him, Avenzoar,
Septalius, Taxilius, and several others have cultivated it, and endeavored to
show the probability of certain reasons, which they ground principally upon the
correspondence there is between the face and its parts, and all the other parts
of the whole body of Man. It consists in two heads, to wit, in the proportion
of greatness or measure, or in the resemblance of color, consistency, figure,
situation, number, or such other condition, which may be common between them.
The first correspondence between the face and the rest of the body, consisting
in greatness, which comprehends the three dimensions, length, breadth, and
profundity, is so sensible, that those who have exactly measured all the parts
of it, have found, that the face is the ninth part of the greatness of the
body, making the distributions of those spaces so just that no one exceed
another; provided that the body be well composed, and that there be no defect
in the conformation, nor any considerable disorder in the temperament of the
whole, or its parts. The first of these spaces comprehends the face it self;
the second is from the throat to the brisket, where the xiphoidal Gristle is;
the third reaches below the Navil; the fourth passes by the groin to the
beginning of the haunches; the fifth and sixth comprehend the whole extent of
the thigh; at the end whereof is the seventh, which with the eighth take up the
whole space from the knee to the heel, as the ninth does that of the whole
foot: wherein as there are three new regions called Tharse, Metatharse, and the
Toes, so are there as many in the Face. The first whereof, which is the mansion
of wisdom, is from the beginning of the hair to that of the nose, where there
is an interval between the Eyebrows. The second, which is that of beauty,
comprehends all from that interstitium, to the end of the nose; and the third,
where the seat of goodness is, reaches to the lower part of the chin. Now these
different intervals are in like manner observable in the other spaces, with so
exact a proportion, that the countenance is not only answerable to any one of
those spaces, which, with it, make up the whole greatness of man's body; but
there is also a correspondence between every part of it, and those of each of
the said spaces, as between the highest, the midst, and the lowest part, and
that which is in the same situation, as between right and right, and left and
left. So that as the face is not only the measure of the whole body, being
repeated nine times, but also the least parts of the face bearing the same
proportion to those of the rest of the body, it should seem, that rational
consequences may be drawn of the marks of those parts that are out of our
sight, by those of the Face which are apparent to us. For if it be considered,
that, besides the correspondence there is between them as to quantity, there is
yet another, which we said was that of resemblance, which makes a strict
affinity between them, and such as is particularly observable between the
Forehead and the Breast; the Ey-brows, and the Shoulders; the cavities of the
Ey-brows, and the Armpits; the Ears, and the Arms; the Chin, and the Groin;
the Cheeks, and the Thighs, and so of the rest; those who have this knowledge,
may easily ghess at the Warts, the Moles, and marks that are out of our sight,
by those which are apparent to us; it being probable, that as Nature has
marked the one with one sign, which is as it were the Seal she has set to her
work, it must needs be found after the same manner in that counter-part,
between which and the other, there is an alliance, not only by reason of its
substance and composition, but upon the account of several other Accidents,
which make them alike. Thus the Forehead by reason of its plain figure in the
middle, and circular toward the extremities, and by its solidity is a
sufficient representation of the Breast. The eminent situation of the
Eyebrows discovers the correspondence there is between them and the shoulders,
which are the most elevated parts of the Body; and the cavities of the Eyes
which is under the Eyebrows, have some alliance with those of the Armpits,
which are under the Shoulders. The Cheeks, by reason of their fleshy and
musculous composition, have a relation to the Thighs, and particularly, to the
Buttocks, which are situated in the midst of the Trunk, as the Cheek is in the
Face, between the Forehead and the Chin. The Mouth and the Chin have also a
great proportion with the Belly and the Groin, the former being situated in the
lower part of the Face, and the latter at the lower part of the Belly; as also
upon this account, that they are equally fleshy, and soft in their superior
parts, and, in their inferior parts, bony and hard. But this correspondence is
yet more sensible between the Mouth of the Woman and her secret parts, and
between the Lips of both those parts, which for that reason have the same name;
as there is the like between the Nose, the Eyebrows, and the Eyes, and the
Genitals of a Man, the Testicles and the Cods. Nor can there be any sign more
manifest, than such as appear in those places; whence there may be inferred the
marks of those which Nature has so much concealed; which though so far out of
sight, are nevertheless manifest to such persons as have the curiosity to study
this correspondence. But there is such an association between the Hand and the
Foot, as well in regard of their composition and structure, as for the
employments they are both put to; that the marks about the Hand and Fingers,
have others answerable to them on the same parts of the Foot, in a
correspondent order and disposition one to another.

The Fourth said, That to find out the reason of this Proportion and Sympathy,
we must not confine our selves to sublunary Causes, but attribute an Effect so
well ordered, and so regular to a Cause answerable thereto. For my part, I
cannot assign any but what is derived from the Heavens, whose motions and
influences being the general Causes of whatever happens here below, that is
constant and regular, it is to them that we ought to attribute an exactness,
which is so certain, that it very seldom miscarries. Thence it comes that the
Professors of Astrology, with some ground of reason, affirm, that as there is
no Plant so inconsiderable but has its signature imprinted on it by that Star,
which has a predominancy over it; so is there a far stronger reason, than Man
should have his signature, which, as they maintain, is set upon him as a seal,
by the Star on which he has a dependence; it being certain that the seven
Planets have an Empire over every part which they govern. Thus Ptolemy assigns
to Saturn the right Ear, the Spleen, the Bladder, and the Bones; to Jupiter,
the Hands, the Lungs, the Liver, the Blood, and the Seed; to Mars, the left
Ear, the Reins, and the Testicles; to the Sun, the Brain, the Eyes, and the
Nerves; to Venus, the Nose, the Mouth, and the Genitals; to Mercury, the
Tongue, the Understanding, and Ratiocination; to the Moon, the Mouth of the
Stomach, and the Stomach it self. But they attribute these marks of the Face to
the motion of the Stars of the eighth Sphere, which are as it were expressions
of the different Inclinations, which every one naturally has, and which are
bestowed on him at his Nativity; but with this Caution, that it is hard to
explicate them, unless a Man can decipher those Characters, and find out the
true signification thereof, which is the chiefest of all Sciences.

CONFERENCE CCXXXV. Of Auguries and Auspices.
THere never was any Opinion so erroneous, but it met with some Abettors; nor
any thing in point of practice so extravagant, but was in some measure
authorized. Of this quality is that of Auguries. For, though Cicero, when he
was Augur, said somewhat on the behalf of them, yet in his second Book of
Divination, he could not forbear discovering their absurdity, and charging them
with vanity and foolery. And yet this Opinion was in such veneration among the
Romans, who were otherwise the most prudent of any Nation in the world, that
they sent yearly six Children, Sons of the most eminent Senators, into Tuscany,
to learn of the Inhabitants thereof (who it seems were well skilled in it) the
Science of foretelling things to come by the flight, singing, or chirping of
Birds, since generally known by the name of Augury. Nay, this veneration is the
more remarkable in this respect, that they would not undertake any thing of
importance, till they had first consulted the College of Augurs, which was
first established by Romulus, who had also been instructed therein, having
ordered it to consist only of three persons, according to the number of the
Tribes. But that number was afterward increased to 24. who were consulted
about whatever concerned that great Empire, and they continued till the time
of the Elder Theodosius; when it was suppressed, having till then been so
considerable by the nobility and merit of those whereof it consisted, that they
were the Arbitrators of all Counsels and Deliberations, which were not taken,
till their judgments had been first had. Nay, they had this further advantage
above all other Magistrates, that they could not be put out of their places
upon any account whatsoever, but continued during their lives in that dignity,
as Fabius Maximus did, who was Augur sixty two years. Nor was it only requisite
that that they should be free from crimes, but also from all bodily
imperfection, the least defect of Body being accounted a lawful Cause, to
hinder an Augur from taking place among the rest; it being, as Plutarch affirms
in his Problems, an undecent thing for any one to present himself before the
Gods, and to treat of the Mysteries of Religion, with anything of uncleanness
or imperfection about him. Nay, they thought any thing of that kind so contrary
to the said Ceremony, that, to be the more successful in the performance
thereof, it was requisite that the Birds and other Creatures whereof they made
use in their Auguries, should be as free from any defect as the Augurs
themselves. In the mean time, they required so much respect from the people,
that, not thinking it enough to have the Lictors march before them with the
Fasces, as was done before the chiefest Magistrates, they had for a further
badge of their dignity, a stick crooked at one end, called Lituus, which was
that of Kings. And indeed, they assumed to themselves so great authority, that
they confirmed the Elections of Dictators, Consuls, and Roman Praetors, whom
they many times took occasion to depose, under pretense that they had been
elected contrary to the will of their Gods, whereof they pretended to be the
only Interpreters. They took upon them also the knowledge and discovery of
things to come, by carefully observing certain extraordinary accidents, which
surpised all others by their sudden and unexpected coming to pass, and which,
by a certain Science and long Observation, they affirmed to be the
significators of what was to come. And this they derived principally from the
Heavens, and the different Apparitions of the Air, especially from Thunder and
Winds; then from Prodigies and miraculous effects of Nature; and afterward
from four-footed Beasts, but especially from Birds, from which comes the name
to that kind of Divination, called Auspicium and Augurium, wherein those
Divinators foretold things concealed, and such as should come to pass by the
singing and flight of Birds. They also made the same Predictions by observing
how the young ones, being taken out of a cubb, where they had been kept, took
the food laid before them. For if these devoured it with a certain greediness,
so as that some fell to the ground, the Omen was fortunate, and signified all
happiness to the Consulter; whereas, on the contrary, it signified ill-luck, if
they would not meddle with it at all. And this Opinion was so strangely rooted
in the Minds of some superstitious people, that Titus Livius, and Valerius
Maximus attribute the Cause of two signal defeats of the Romans (one under the
Command of Publius Claudius, in the first Punick War; and the other under that
of Flaminius, in the second) to their contempt of these Auguries.

The Second said, That of all the several kinds of foretelling secret things,
he thought not any more rational than that which was done by the means of
Birds, called Ornithomantia; the Nature of which Creatures being very ancient,
and in a manner celestial, they seem to be more susceptible of the impressions
of the Heavens, whereof they are the Inhabitants, and which are the true Causes
of whatever happens here below, than any other Animals which have their abode
either in the Earth or Waters. Thence it comes, that the Eagle which soars up
higher than any other of the Volatile Commonwealth, has been the most
esteemed in the business of Auguries, by the Professors of this Art, who also
give him the pre-eminence, as to the constancy and vivacity of his Sight,
taking it for a signification of good luck, when he began his flight on the
right side; and that especially, if it were so violent, that the noise of his
wings might be heard. Thus Aristander, having seen an Eagle flying from the
Camp of Alexander the Great toward that of his Enemies, derived thence an
Augury of his Victory; as Tarquinius Priscus did the like of his coming (as he
afterward) did to the Crown from this accident, that an Eagle came and took
his Cap off his Head, and set it on again, after he had kept it a good while in
the Air. But Tarquinius Superbus had for an Augury of his exile and the loss of
his Kingdom, the violence done by some Vultures to some young Eagles, which
they cast down out of their Nest. Such another Augury had Dionysius the Tyrant,
when, in his presence, an Eagle, having snatched away with his beak a dart out
of the hands of one of his Guard, cast it into the Sea; soon after which
accident, he was shamefully unthron'd, and forced away. Yet does this Bird
always denote happiness, and goodluck, as do also the Vultures; to twelve
whereof, which were seen by Romulus, while he was laying the foundations of
Rome, it is conceived, that that Metropolis of the world ows it fortune and
continuance. Darius, having seen two of them torn to pieces by so many Hawks,
conceived a hope of enjoying, as he did, the Kingdom of Persia; but he lost it,
together with his Life, after his meeting with a great number of Swallows, as
he marched in the head of his army to engage against the Scythians. And it is
believed, that they had been also fatal to Pyrrhus King of the Epirotae, upon
whose Tent those troublesome Birds were seen; as they had also been on the Ship
wherein Mark Anthony was, before his dysaster. The greater kind of Owl has
always been accounted so unlucky, that one day, being got into the Capitol,
under the Consulship of S. Papellius Ister, and Lucius Pedonius, there was a
particular solemnity performed, for the expiation of the City, which the Augurs
affirmed to have been polluted by that unlucky Bird: which yet was not such to
Agrippa, of whom it is often related, that the said ill-look'd Bird having
appeared to him in prison, it proved an augury of his restoration to the
Kingdom of Judaea, whereof he had been dispossessed. The ordinary Owl is also
of ill presage; for having one day pearch'd on the top of Pyrrhus's Lance, in
his expedition against the Argians, it was his misfortune to lose the battle.
The Ravens are no less unlucky; for they were the forerunners of the bloody
civil War between Sylla and Marius; and their crokings foreshew'd death to
Alexander the Great, when he made his entrance into Babylon, and did the like
to Cicero, while he was avoiding the Ambushes of his inveterate enemy Antony.
The Madge-howlets, the Scritch-owls, the Cormorants, and other such mournful
and melancholy Birds, make a sufficient discovery of their fatal predictions,
by the death of those who hear them. The Pilots fear nothing so much as to see
the Cranes flying toward them, and returning back the same way again; that
return advertising them, that they are threatened with some extraordinary
tempest. The Stork has always been favorable to Auspices, and looked upon as
a Messenger of Concord, as the Hawk, and the Buzzard, especially where there
was any thing done in order to marriage, or about the acquisition of riches,
which the Falcon, whereof the latter is a Species, was conceived to presage
with so much certainty, that the Thuscans built the City of Capua only upon
their perceiving of one of them during the time of their Augury. The
Wood-pecker and the Hern have also made so happy presages, that every one
reassumed new courage in the heat of a battle, when they appeared in sight of
the Soldiers. The Nightingal, which having pearch'd on the lips of Stesichorus
whilst he was yet a Child in the Cradle, sung there, was a presignification of
that sweetness, which was afterward to flow from his delightful Poems; as the
Bees which made honey on those of Plato were a presage of his Eloquence. Though
it must be acknowledged concerning these last, that the Augurs were otherwise
conceited of them; for having observed great numbers of them in Brutus's Camp,
they obliged him to quit it, so to avoid the misfortune that threatened him, and
which happened to the Great Pompey, in whose Ships these Bees were seen in
excessive numbers before the Pharsalian defeat. But these observations are not
so constantly certain, but that there may be much diversity among them by whom
they have been made. Hence is it that Homer, among all the good Auguries, gives
the precedence to the Dove, which others will not have to be such, but only
when she is accompanied, otherwise being alone they hold that she boads some
ill luck; as the Swan does to all but Mariners. But among the rest, the
ordinary Hen, when ever she makes a noise somewhat like the crowing of the
Cock, foretells some signal misfortune, though that of the Cock himself be
numbered among those auguries that denote good success, as having foreshewn
victory to Themistocles, the night before he gained the battle against Xerxes,
and been reputed a Solar animal, from the correspondence there is between him
and the Sun, whose motions he declares by his crowing, which upon that account
is formidable even to Lions.

The Third said, That there are two kinds of Auguries, the Natural, and the
Artificial: The former depends on the connection there is between the Effects
and the Agents whereby they are produced; which connection being known, it is no
hard matter to give a conjecture of things to come, whereof such as are
clear-sighted observe the necessity of their coming to pass, by reason of the
strict connection there is between them, and the causes whereby they are
produced. This is confirmed by the infallible predictions which are made not
only at Sea by Pilots, who foresee Tempests and winds by such signs as seldom
fail; but also by simple Laborers and Husbandmen on the Land, who do the like
in the changes of weather. Now this kind of Augury is as rational as the other
is absurd, as being a frivolous invention, grounded on certain observations,
which are for the most part vain and impertinent. Such among the rest, is the
division it has made of the Heavens into its twelve Houses, which are the
Regions or Spaces whereto those Augurs confined the extent of their
predictions, which they made with their Augural staff, without which the
Auguries, according to their judgment, were of no validity, nor was there any
more account to be made of them, then of what might be derived from such
accidents as happen without or besides expectation, or rather present
themselves, whence they were commonly called Oblative Auguries. But those which
happened conformably to the circumstances of time and place, which those
Divinators had limited, and when they thought of them, were called Impetrative.
And this is one of the conditions observed in their discipline, wherein there
was no account made of what the Augur affirmed that he had not particularly
observed, no more then then there was of any, thing that passed beyond the
compass of the places designed to that function. For the better observance of
the ceremonies thereof, the Augural House was not covered but lay open to the
air, which, for the better carrying on of the work, should be clear and serene,
out of a fear that the rain or wind might hinder their making an exact
observation of the flight and different motions of the Birds; in the choice
whereof they were so hard to please, that they employed them not in their
presages, but only toward the Spring. After which, especially toward the
month of August, they made no account of them, in regard they were not then in
so much vigor, nor in so good case, yet did they appoint such a dependence
among them, that the Auguries taken from those that were inferior, gave place
to the others of a higher quality. So that if a Crow chanced to pass by, while
they were attentively divining by the flight of a Dove, this lanter auspice was
to no purpose, no more then would be that of other Birds upon the arrival of
the Eagle, which also would signify nothing upon the fall of a thunderbolt,
which disturbed all their mysteries, with much more reason then a Rat might do,
which had no sooner appeared in the Assembly, but the whole Ceremony was put
off to another more convenient time. True it is then, that some advantages may
be made of Birds, in order to the drawing of auguries and presages of natural
effects, such as are rain, thunder, tempests, winds, heat, drought, cold,
frost, snow, hail, and other changes of weather, produced by the impressions of
the Heavens, the Elements, and other Causes, as well general as particular; but
not to make any predictions thence of such events and accidents as depend on an
infinite number of circumstances of time, place, and persons, who being purely
free agents, their actions are wholly voluntary, and consequently impossible to
be predicted, what artifices soever may be used to do it. Whereto we may add
this Remark, that those artifices being full of abundance of vain and
pernicious observations, the sentence of condemnation past against them is
just, not only that of the Canon and Civil Laws, which severely punish such as
make use thereof, but also that pronounced by the mouth of God, who expressly
forbids his people in the twentieth chapter of Leviticus, to make their souls
abominable by beast or by fowl, threatening with death the Wizard, and him that
had a familiar Spirit.

CONFERENCE CCXXXVI. Whether those Children who are born with Cawls about their
whole or some parts of their Bodies are always fortunate, and why?
CHildren do ordinarily come naked out of their Mother's Wombs, when, after
their struggling with Nature, they begin their entrance into the World with
crying and tears, acknowledging their weakness, and the miseries they are
likely to be exposed to in the sequel of their lives. Yet there are some
Children excepted from this general Rule; and thence is it that some would have
them exempted from the misfortunes common to all the rest, upon this account,
that they are born with cawls about them, that is, are encompassed by a
membrane, which comes over their heads and their shoulders, called by the
Greeks Amnios, which is the innermost of the three membranes, wherein the
wombe-lodg'd infant is enwrapped, called by some Midwives the Coife, or Biggin
of the Child, by others the Child's shirt, and in some places known by the name
of the Silihow, by reason of its tender and delicate intertexture, which other
Children quit in their Mothers wombs, before they come out thence, with the
other Membrane called Chorion, of which together with that mass of flesh which
had served them for a cushion and support during the time of the praegnancy,
are framed the Secondines or After-burthen, so called, because it comes not out
till after the Child is born. And as these Children born thus cawl'd and coif'd
with this tunicle (which like a large Hood or Capouch covers their heads and
necks) seem not to participate of the nakedness of the others, who bring
nothing into the World; so is it to be imagined, that they are not so much
subject to the miseries and calamities inseparable from the common life of
other men, inasmuch as their beginning being different from that of others, who
come after the ordinary way into the World, upon the score of this special
privilege, of having their heads furred and covered, the consequence of it
ought in all probability to be extraordinary, and full of happiness, whereof if
this coif be not the cause, yet have some at least observed that it has always
been the sign, and that all those who have been born after that manner have
been very fortunate. The History of Antoninus, surnamed Diadumenus, related by
Aelius Lampridius, in his Life, confirms this observation: For being born with
such a coif, he afterward came to the sovereign dignity of the Empire, in the
management whereof all things succeeded according to his wishes. Nay, it has
been generally believed, that good fortune was so constant an attendant of this
Coif, that all those who were desirous to compass their affairs carried it
about them, especially Advocates, who made use thereof, to gain reputation in
their public pleadings, being to that end very careful to buy them of the
Midwives, who, knowing the excellency thereof, sold them at a very dear rate,
after they had surreptitiously got them away from the children, they had
received into the World. For those who have made it their business to enquire
more strictly into this observation, maintain, that he who brings this natural
coif with him into the world is to expect all manner of good fortune, even so
far as to be invulnerable, provided he be careful to have it always about him,
or, (what contributes more to that effect) to eat it, as is
over-superstitiously done by some. But the contrary will happen to the Child,
if he be robbed of that precious exuvium or coat, or it be secretly taken from
him, to be given to another, who, by that translation thereof, will receive the
whole benefit of it.

The Second said, That though the foresaid persuasion sufficiently destroyed it
self, there being no connection or correspondence between the accidents of
humane life and that shirt, which sometimes comes over the whole Body of the
Child, commonly falls not much below the Shoulders, and many times does only
cover the Face like a Mask; yet have many been of Opinion, that it contributed
much to happiness and the advantage of good fortune; insomuch that Saint John
Chrysostom, in several of his Homilies, speaks against those of his time, who
made use thereof to gain esteem; which a Clergyman named Praetus, being
desirous to acquire, by the means of such a Coif, bought of a Midwife, he was
very highly censured, as Balsamon affirms in his Commentaries upon the Canons
of the Apostles. And Paulus Jovius, an Author of great repute, observes, on the
Nativity of Ferdinand Daval, that the Coif he brought with him from his Mothers
Womb, contributed much to his being happy and beloved of all. From all which we
may make this inference, that there is nothing so extravagant, but may meet
with Favorers and Abettors. For I may lay it down for certain, that this
Opinion has no other ground than what it has found in the weak Brains of
those Midwives, who having nothing in them but the name, have insensibly
scattered these errors into the Minds of the vulgar, with whom the wisest
being obliged to comply in matter of Language, it comes to pass at last, that
what was before but a common saying, finds a degree of assent among the most
considerate. Nay, what is not any longer to be endured, they think it not
enough to maintain this groundless persuasion, but there are some so
ridiculous, as to derive a new kind of Divination from it, which they call
Amniomantia, whereby they promise to foretell whatever happiness or unhappiness
should befall a Child newly born, by the color of that Membrane, whereof they
affirm that the redness signifies good success, and that the blackness or
blewness of it denotes the contrary. To which they add another kind of
Divination, called Omphalomantia, which teaches them to judge by the knots of
the string, whereby the Child is fastened to the After-burthen, how many
Children more the Mother shall have; who, according to their judgment, will be
Males if those intersections be of a color inclining to black, and Females if
they be white; which Observations are not only impertinent, but also impious
and superstitious.

The Third said, That the common persuasion, of the happiness attending
Children born with these Coifs, is well-grounded, provided that it be taken in
the sense wherein the Physicians, who, in all probability, are more likely to
be the Authors of it, than those simple Women who received it from them, would
have it to be understood; to wit, that those who thus born covered with that
fortunate Membrane, (in regard they are not put to so much trouble, nor suffer
so great violence in the passage, by reason of its being open and easy) come
forth clothed out of their Mothers Wombs, without being obliged to leave
behind them the Membranes, wherein they had been enclosed in the Matrix;
whereas most other Children are forced to quit them at their coming into the
World, by reason of the Obstructions they meet with in their passage through
those narrow streights, which consequently, is so much the more painful and
laborious to them, than it is to such as are coifed, who are not to be imagined
ever the more happy, as to the remainder of their lives, whereof the good or
bad conduct are the true Causes of their happiness or unhappiness, and not that
Coif, which can neither produce nor signify them.

The Fourth said, That those Children, who are born thus coifed, are not only
more happy in their Birth, but they are also such in all the actions of their
lives, as being commonly more peaceable, and of a more quiet Constitution, than
such as leave that Membrane within their former lodgings; who are accordingly
more turbulent and restless, and, for that reason, have not those insinuations;
whereby the former are recommended. For in these, the moderation of their
manners and demeanor consequent to that of their humors, gaining the hearts
of all those with whom they converse, raises them into the general esteem of
all, and so facilitates their accession to Honors and Employments; it being
certain, that there may be some judgment made of the course of Life a Man is
likely to take, by the deportment of his Childhood; so is it no hard matter to
give a ghess at the same, by that of the Infant, when he makes his first sally
out of his Mothers Womb, which is one of the most remarkable transactions of
his Life. Whence it may be inferred, that that first coming abroad being free
from the trouble and agitation, whereof all others are sensible, and which
makes them forget their Vesture which is left behind by the way, they ought
accordingly to be dispensed from the misfortunes incident to others, and enjoy
a particular happiness.

The Fifth said, That the most restless and most turbulent persons, are
commonly the most happy in this world, whereas those who endeavor to walk
according to the strict rules of Modesty and Reservedness, do not carry on
their business so well, as the former do, who confidently attempt any thing,
and imagine themselves the favorites of Fortune. And thence it is that she, on
the other side, is so assistant to them, that though it be granted the Children
born clothed are more meek and moderate than those who come into the World
after the common rate, yet would the clean contrary to what is pretended follow
from it. For, instead of being cherished by Fortune, it is seldom that she
smiles on them, but is much more kind to those stirring and tumultuary Spirits,
who many times obtain greater favors of her than they durst hope for, had they
demeaned themselves toward her with less earnestness and importunity.

The Sixth said, That if every Man be the Artizan of his own Fortune, those who
are of the best Constitution and strongest Temper, ought to be more happy than
others, whose irregularity of humors does manifestly cause that of their
Actions and Fortunes. Now the Children born with Cawls and Coifs about them,
seem to be less vigorous, and of a weaker disposition than those who come into
the World without any; inasmuch as the latter, being more earnest and violent,
are no sooner sensible of the time of their Deliverance, but they courageously
break through the Chains whereby they are detained, the Membranes whereby they
are encompassed, which those others having neither the Strength nor Courage to
do, it gives a great presumption, that they will express but little upon other
more pressing occasions, and consequently, they will content themselves with
the mediocrity of their Conditions, and not aspire to any thing extraordinary.

CONFERENCE CCXXXVII. Of Antiperistasis.
SO great is the Indulgence of Nature, that she thought it not enough to bestow
Being and Existence on the things she has produced; but she has also
imprinted in them a strong Inclination to preserve it, by fortifying them
against the assaults of their Contraries, the presence whereof sets them on
such an edge, that they become so much the more active. And this is not only
confirmed in Animate Beings, such as are Plants and Animals, which vigorously
oppose whatever is hurtful to them, by so powerful a Virtue, that Men have
been forced to find out a particular name for it, to wit, Antipathy; but also
in other Inanimate Bodies, which generously stand upon the defensive, when they
are set upon by External Agents, whose contrary qualities coming to engage
against them, they redouble their Forces, and rally all together as it were
into a Body, the better to receive the Charge. This is that which the
Philosophers call Antiperistasis, which is a vigorous resistance of the
Subject, caused by the contrariety of an Agent, which encompasses it of all
sides, purposely to destroy or corrupt it. It will be to no purpose to enter
into any Dispute concerning the Existence of that which we call Antiperistasis;
but we shall lay it down for granted, though it be contested by Cardan and some
other Philosophers, who maintain, that Water, Air, and the other Subterraneous
Bodies, are not actually colder at one time than at another, but only seem to
be such to our Senses, which, though they should be destitute of all qualities,
are then endu'd therewith, so that the same Well-water which seems to be hot in
Winter, by reason of the coldness that is in the Touching, seems cold in
Summer, by reason of the heat of the same Organ, which judges of it
comparatively. For the contrary is seen, in that Well-water, in Summer, being
transported into a hot place, is there nevertheless cold; and the fumes and hot
vapors which exhale from Springs and Wells in Winter, do sufficiently
demonstrate, that, during the said season, the water is endu'd with a true and
real heat, too sensible to be accounted imaginary. But this Antiperistasis is
further more solidly confirmed by Experience, whereby we see that fire burns
more violently, and is more sparkling in great Frosts, or in the shade, than in
hot weather, or when it lies exposed to the beams of the Sun. In like manner, a
little Water cast upon a great Fire, makes it more violent than it was before;
and the Ventricles of our Bodies, according to the Opinion of Hippocrates, in
his Aphorisms, are hotter in Winter than in any other season of the year;
whence it comes that we are apt to feed more plentifully, and Digestion is then
better performed. Nay, if we but go down into our Cellars, we shall find that
the heat is more sensible there in Winter; but in Summer, when all things are
scorched and burnt up on the surface of the Earth, all Subterraneous Places are
so much the colder, the deeper they are, and the nearer they approach to the
Center; toward which, Cold, which is one of the natural qualities of the
Earth, gathers together, and reunites it self thereto, that so it may be
secured from the heat, whereby it is encompassed of all sides. And as it is to
this, that the generation of Metals in the entrails of the Earth is principally
attributed; so most of the Meteors which are framed in the two Regions of the
Air, owe theirs to this same Cold, which coming to encompass, and as it were to
enclose the hot and dry Exhalation which makes the Winds, Lightning, Thunder,
and Thunderbolts, as also that which makes the Comets in the Middle Region of
the Air; these unctuous and easily-enflam'd vapors, being encompassed of all
sides, by the extreme coldness of that Air which encloses them, they, in order
to their Conservation, reunite, and take fire, after the same manner as the
Rays of the Sun darted against some Opake Body, or reflected by
Burning-glasses, set on fire the most solid Bodies, on which they are
repercuss'd; as it is related of Archimedes, who by such an Artifice, consumed
the Ships of Marcellus, who besieged the City of Saragossa in Sicily. Which
instance serves as well to prove Antiperistasis, as the manner whereby it is
wrought, to wit, by the repercussion of the intentional Species of the Subject
caused by its contrary. Thus then it comes, that the Water of Springs and Wells
is cold in the Summer, in regard the Species of the cold, forced by the Water
toward the heated Air which is all about it, are darted back again by that
opposite heat to the place whence they came; whereupon being thrust closer
together, they there reinforce and augment the Cold; which happens not so in
Winter, when the Species of the coldness of the Water, meeting with no
Obstruction in the Air, endu'd with the like quality, insinuate themselves into
it without any resistance; and so not being reflected nor forced back toward
the Water, it is not then so cold as in Summer.

The Second said, That the intentional Species, being not designed to act, but
only to make a discovery of the beings from which they flow, as may be seen in
those of all sensible Objects, which these Species represent to the Organs that
are to judge of them, cannot contribute any thing to the vigor of the action
observable in the Antiperistasis; which he conceived should rather be
attributed to the simple form of the Subject, which having an absolute
sovereignty over the qualities employed thereby, in order to Action, renders
them more or less active, according to the need it stands in of them. And as
seething Water taken off the Fire becomes cold of it self, without any other
assistance than that of its proper substantial form, which has the property of
re-instating it self in that degree of Cold, which is naturally due unto it; so
ought it with greater reason to have an equal right of preserving that same
quality, when it is assaulted by its contrary, Heat; without having any
recourse to those Emissions of Species, which, though we should grant the
Tactile qualities (what is much in dispute) yet would not be able to cause an
Antiperistasis, inasmuch as being inseparable from them, if the intentional
Species of the coldness of Well-water were directed toward the warmed Air, it
should take along with it the coldness, and, consequently, it should be so far
from acquiring any new degree of coldness thereby, that it would lose much of
that which it had before. For since it is the Nature of these Intentional
Species to be otherwise incapable, by reason of their immateriality, of
producing any Corporeal and Material Effect, such as is the augmentation of the
degrees of any active quality, as Heat and Cold are, there being not any
contrariety between the Species thereof, no more than there is between those of
^ll other Bodies, whereof they are the Images, there is not any reason that
obliges the Intentional Species of the Cold to retreat and close together, when
they come to meet with those of Heat, or Heat it self* no more than there is
that the Species of this latter quality should make the other more vigorous by
their reflection.

The Third said, That it must be acknowledged, that the Species of Cold and
Heat, and the other first Qualities were not contrary among themselves, as
being in their own Nature inalterable and incorruptible, as the other
Intentional Species are, which come near the Condition of Spirits: Yet does it
not follow thence, that these Species cannot be reflected, inasmuch as the
Visible Species, Light and Voice, which also have no contraries, are not for
that the less re-percuss'd by Mirrours and other solid Bodies, or those hollow
places which make Echoes.

The Fourth said, That it is not sufficient, in order to the giving of a reason
of that effect, to attribute it to the substantial form of every Agent, but it
is to be referred to a superior cause, such as is the Soul of the world; whose
function it being to preserve every thing in its intireness, and to be
assistant thereto, when it comes into any danger, as it happens when it is
assaulted by its contrary, then bent upon its destruction, there lies a certain
engagement on this first cause, to relieve it in so great an extremity, by
supplying it with new forces to help it out of that oppression. Thence it comes
that our Cellars are warm in Winter, and cool in Summer, as are also all other
ground-rooms and low places; That Water shrinks up and frames it self into
little drops, when it is spilt on dry ground, whereas it spreads abroad and is
diffused in moist places; That Lime is set on fire by the casting of water upon
it; That the fire burns better in frosty than in hot weather; That Wine drinks
more cool out of a Glass that had been warmed; That the coldness of Snow causes
an extraordinary heat in their hands who handle it; and, That generally all
tactile qualities are rendered more active, by the opposition of their
contraries, by reason of the concourse, and the assistance they then receive
from that general Cause, which concerns it self in their preservation. Of this
we may give an instance in Politics, affirming, that the procedure of the
forementioned Cause is much like that of great Potentates, who, in a war
between some petty Princes or neighboring States, if they find one party ready
to be absolutely ruined, supply it with such forces as shall enable it to
recover it self, so to bring the several interests into an Aequilibrium,
whereof there is as great a necessity in Nature, which is kept up by that
proportion, wherein all things find their subsistence, as their destruction
proceeds only from their disproportion and inequality.

The Fifth said, That we are not to look for the reason of Antiperistasis any
otherwhere, than in the Subjects themselves, wherein we find the action, whose
intenseness and augmentation are to be referred, not to that of the degrees of
the active qualities, but to their compression and reinforcement, which renders
them more sensible, in regard they are more material, as may be seeen in a
red-hot iron, the heat whereof burns much more violently, then that of a fire
of Straw or Aqua-vitae.

The sixth said, That according to the principles which allow all things to
participate of a certain degree of sentiment, this condensation, or compression
of the degrees of heat or cold, ought to be the effects of a sensitive Agent,
which having a knowledge of what may be hurtful or beneficial to it, withdraws
within it self the qualities which preserve it entire, when it is pressed upon
by others that are more violent, and such as the meeting whereof might be
prejudicial thereto, which it forces from it, in order to Action. And herein it
is that the good of every thing consists; inasmuch as every thing has being
only so far as it has action, when it is assisted by friendly qualities, and
the like; and by this means it is that Cold and Heat act more vigorously, when
they are opposed one to the other; and that our cavities are hotter in Winter,
by reason of the compression of the Spirits and the natural Heat; which are the
more diffused in Summer, in regard this latter goes to meet with its like, as a
little fire is put out by a great one, and a weaker light obscured by a clearer.

CONFERENCE CCXXXVIII. Of the Sympathetical Powder.
THough this Powder be now as much out of esteem as it was in vogue, soon after
the first finding of it out, for the expeditious curing of wounds: yet will it
happily be a business of some advantage to examine their Motives, who first made,
and publicly sold it; as also those of such as have sometimes made use of it
with good success. And whereas novelty procures a certain esteem to Remedies as
well as to other things, so this Sympathetical Powder found so great belief at
its first coming abroad, among Persons addicted to a military life, who were
immediately flattered with a speedy and easy curing of their most mortal
wounds by the means thereof, without any trouble of making incisions or
dilatations, many times more painful then the hurt it self, that we have had
some persons these last Campagnes, though destitute of learning and experience,
who had the subtlety to raise such a mist before the eyes of the generality
with this Powder, that they concluded this remedy to be true balm, and the only
Panacea, or All-heal of all wounds. But time having discovered the vanity of
it, as also the impostures of those by whom it was so highly recommended, it
has been clearly found out, that there are few people in this age, but are
either deceived themselves, or make it their main business to deceive others.
For in fine, this Powder is as much cried down at present* as ever it was cried
up; and there is nothing left of it, but the insolent name of Sympathetical,
imposed upon it by the Authors thereof, in imitation of the Unguent of the same
name, wherewith Goclenius, and some other Physicians, endeavored to make good
the Magnetic cure of wounds, wherein they only dressed the arms or other
instruments, by which they were given, and applied the convenient remedies
thereto. But in regard they could not always come at the arms, which had done
the mischief, to keep up their practice, and to make the cure yet more easy,
these upstart Doctors be thought themselves some years since, of another
expedient to compass their designs, that is, found out a remedy, wherewith they
make it their boast, that they will cure all sorts of hurts, only by applying
this powder to some piece of Cloth, which had been used either to bind up, or
make clean the wounded part. And whereas there are two kinds of wounds, one
simple, which makes a solution of continuity in the soft and fleshy parts of
the body, such as are the veins, the arteries, the nerves, and the muscles; the
other, compound, which happens ih the solid parts, especially where bones are
broken; these Gentlemen have accordingly two different kinds of Sympathetical
Powder; to wit, a simple, and a compound. The former is made with Roman
Vitriol, which is our green and transparent Coppress, which they beat or pound
not over small, and disposing it upon papers, in such quantities as they think
fit, lay it in the Sun, when he makes his entrance into the first degree of the
Sign Leo, and leaving it there for the space of three hundred and sixty hours,
which make just fifteen days, answerably to the like number of degrees, which
that Planet travels over, in the space of a year in the Zodiac. During this
time it is calcined into an exquisite whiteness, and then they take it in, and
keep it carefully in some temperate place, that is not too moist, that is, such
as may not be likely to melt it, for fear it should by that means lose its
virtue; for which reason also it is taken in during its calcination, in the
cool of the evening, and in the nightime, and when the air is inclinable to
rain, or over-moist. But there must be a great care taken, that it be not
stirred with any instrument of iron, when this powder is either in the
preparation, or ready made up; these Authors affirming, that it takes away its
virtue, instead whereof they order, that the Artist should make use of a little
Willow-stick, which is of great efficacy in these magnetic cures. The compound
Sympathetical Powder is made of the same Vitriol, prepared after the same
manner, and the Gum called Tragacantha, exactly pulverized, mixed together in
equal quantities; instead whereof, others put Gum-Arabick, Sarcocolla, the
roots of the great Comfrey, and the five-leav'd Tormentile, or such other
vulnerary and astringent Plants. However these kinds of Sympathetical Powder
may differ, as to the composition of them, yet in the use of them, they observe
the same circumstances. For though the simple wound require the powder of the
same name, and the compound, where there is any fracture, requires the compound
powder, yet is the manner of employing them still the same. And to that end, as
well in wounds newly received, as those that are of some standing, and
degenerated into ulcers, they apply a clean cloth made of hemp or flax, to
receive the blood from them, or the matter, wherewith being imbibed, they cast
the powder upon it, then fold up the cloth, enclosing it in another; and being
thus wrapped one in the other, they are laid up in some temperate place, unless
it be when the wound is extremely enflamed, or very cold. If either of these
happen, they remove the cloths from the place where they were first laid,
disposing them into some cold place, such as may be a Cellar, or some other
cool room; if the part affected be excessively hot; and on the contrary, into
an Oven or Stove, if it be threatened with a Gangrene, or the extinguishing of
the natural heat; and they daily continue the dressing of these wounds after
the same manner, till they are perfectly cured; till which time they carefully
preserve all the clothes imbued with the blood or matter that came from them.
But what palpably discovers the vanity of this practice, is, that they affirm
the wound to be perfectly cured by this means, how great a distance soever
there may be between the wounded part, and the Sympathetical Powder, which,
they say, equally produces its effect afar off as near at hand. Which is
contrary to Reason, whereby we are instructed, that every agent being confined
to certain limits in its action, beyond which it can do nothing; it is
impossible that this powder should at so disproportionate a distance, produce
the effect which they would attribute thereto, nay though it were granted it
might, if it were immediately applied to the place affected.

The Second said, That if all Agents were obliged to follow that general Rule,
whereby they are restrained from acting otherwise then upon the Subjects they
touch, either by themselves, or by some virtue issuing from them, it would be a
very hard matter to give a reason of the action of that Sympathetical Powder
upon the wounds it cures, without making use of the assistance of common
Surgery, which are many times more insufferable then the hurts about which they
are employed. But since there is a great number of the like instances in
Nature, it will be no harder task to find satisfaction in the causes of this,
then in those of all the rest, which act at a distance, without any sensible
transmission from the Agent to the Patient; as for instance, of the Loadstone,
which draws iron to it; of the North-Star, which does the same with the
Loadstone; of the Moon's causing the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; of the
Sun's concocting Metals and Minerals in the bowels of the Earth; and of an
infinite number of others, which act upon subjects at a distance, by certain
occult qualities. Which qualities, in regard they are manifest and sensible in
the Loastone, are commonly called Magnetic; such as is also the cure
consequent to the application of this powder on the blood, or matter taken from
the wound, which is thus treated sympathetically, and whereof the action is
withal animated by that universal Spirit, whose general interposition and
concurrence being requisite to all Agents, in order to the prosecution and
advancement of their operations, it may be concluded, that he does express it
in this Powder, whose virtue he conveys to the wounded part, by means of the
blood, which issued from it, which though separated from the body, there is
however some conformity and correspondence between it and its whole.

The Third said, That he thought it a very strange humor, to attribute to
Roman Vitriol, and the Gum Tragacantha the virtue of curing that at a distance,
which they cannot do near at hand, and that, being applied to the wounds about
which they are employed. True it was that they were sometimes cured by that
kind of procedure; but that it was not to be looked on as a miracle wrought by
the Sympathetical Powder, but as a pure effect of Nature; on which the curing
of maladies principally depending, as Hippocrates affirms, there needs no more
for the effecting that of a wound, then to take away all heterogeneous bodies,
to reunite the gaping of the wound, and to keep it clean and at ease; for the
natural heat, with its balm, the radical moisture and the Spirits, will advance
the cure in that condition, more then all the suppurating, mundifying,
cathoeretick, and epuletick medicines, which Art commonly makes use of. Thence
it comes, that the Masters of this new doctrine give a great charge, to those
who would make use of their Sympathetical Powders, to keep the wounds very
close, after they have washed them with Urine, Sal-water, or Wine, and to take
away the splinters of the broken bones, as also the clotted and congealed
blood, and the other heterogeneous bodies which might hinder the reunion. And
this indeed is no hard matter for them to do in the simple fleshy wounds; but
they never could do it in those which are accompanied with fractures, openings
of great Vessels, hurts in some considerable part of the body, or such other
extraordinary accidents. Otherwise that effect being above the reach of the
remedy, which is incapable of producing that cure, if it happen by that means,
and after that manner, it cannot be wrought otherwise then by virtue of a
secret compact with the evil Spirit, who will be forward enough to promote the
welfare of the body, in those who should make use of this remedy, conditionally
that they may run the hazard of destroying their souls.

CONFERENCE CCXXXIX. Whether there be any such Creatures as the Ancients
conceived the Satyrs to be?
NOvelty and things extraordinary, if we may credit the Professors of
Artificial Memory, have so great a power and influence over our minds, that
they do not only force them to attention, when the objects are present, but do
also much more excite, and better conserve the species then ordinary things
can. This it was that obliged diverse Poets and Historians to speak of Hydra's,
Chimaera's Basilisks, Satyrs, Centaurs, and several other things invented out
of pleasure or wantonness, such as have no ground in truth, and are pure
poetical fictions. For those who have endeavored a more strict examination of
the power of Nature, have found the intermixture of these species a thing
impossible, not only in respect of the matter, which was to receive the Soul,
whereto she is determinated by a certain proportion, but also in respect of the
form which is indivisible, especially the Rational Soul. Whence it comes, that
the Poet Lucretius speaks very learnedly, and affirms, that there cannot be any
Centaurs, whereof the reason is the same with that of Satyrs; nay the
Generation of Satyrs, according to the reason alleged by him, is much more
impossible than that of Centaurs. Because, says he, if that intermixture of a
Man's and Horse's nature were admitted, and it be withal supposed that Horses
are come to their full strength in three years, at which period of time
Children are hardly taken from their Nurses breasts, how is it to be imagined,
that monstrous Animal should be in its beginning and vigor at the same time?
Besides, a Horse being accounted old, when Man enters into his youth, how
should the one come to dye, when the other were arriving to his greatest
vigor? Now Goats being shorter-liv'd then Horses, there is yet less likelihood
of feigning an Animal, consisting of a mixture of such a nature and Man's. For
which reason, Pliny, in Book 7. of his Natural History, affirms, that a
Hippocentaur being foal'd in Thessaly, died the very same day, and for the
continuation of the miracle, was kept in honey (which is acknowledged to be an
excellent Balm) and publicly exposed to the view of all. Virgil places them at
the entrance of hell, upon this reflection, that such things as are contrary to
Nature cannot subsist. And St. Hierom, in the Life of S. Paul the Hermit,
relating how a Centaur had appeared to S. Anthony, questions whether it were a
real Centaur, or the evil Spirit, under such a form, and in the prosecution of
his discourse, seems to conclude it a pure illusion of the Devils, since he
drove it away with the Sign of the Cross. So that we are not to attribute these
Satyrs to any thing, but the licentiousness which the Poets have always assumed
to themselves, as well as the Painters, to dare and undertake any thing,
without any regard to the rule given them by Horace, not to make an
intermixture and coincidence of strange and opposite nature; and that Satyrs,
that is, half-men, half-goats, were to be disposed among the Hydra's and
Chimera's, in as much as by them they would only represent men that were very
active, lascivious, clownish, and much inclined to railery: and thence also the
Satirical Poem came to have its denomination, as being a composition or farce
of a Kitchen, whence some would have it to descend. Which fiction is
sufficiently justified by the divine Nature which they attributed to those
Satirical Animals, and by the other fabulous stories of Pan, whom they affirm
to be the god of those Satyrs, as also of the Shepherds. We are therefore to
make no other account of this invention, then of all the other productions of
their Imagination, what root soever they may have taken in the minds of the
Ancients; in regard that being thoroughly examined it may be ranked among those
senseless Old-wives tales, wherewith they amuse little Children. Unless we
would rather refer these Satyrs to the illusion of Devils, who assume their
shapes, to abuse silly Women. And thence it is that they are, by some, called
Incubi.

The second said, that it was as dangerous for us to involve in impossibilities
whatever we have not seen, as to be over-credulous in believing all. But when
Reason and Authority, which bring experience with them, and assure us of a
thing, appear of any side, our credulity may well be excused. And this is the
case, in the question concerning Satyrs, inasmuch as the concurrence of the
seeds of those two species, whereof they consist, may as well produce them, as
the Mule is engendered of an Ass and a Mare. Whereto may be added this, as a
general acknowledgment, that Nature has not omitted any thing of that which
might complete her power, as having produced from Nothing, even to the most
excellent Beings, whatever was to come into the mean between both. Besides,
though the Imaginations of Mothers were not capable of all things, and cannot
imprint that figure and change of body on the Infant, nay to make what they
pleased of it, whereof there are daily instances, that sometimes they do; yet
the commonage of fields and forests, and such nourishment as the Children
might have taken from Goats, as well as Romulus and Remus did it from a
She-Wolf, might, in process of time, incline them to such or such a form.
Whereto it will signify little to oppose the reason of Lucretius, since it
seems erroneous, by what is commonly done in the ordering of Trees, which are
promiscuously engrafted in different kinds, as for example, an Apple Tree may
be in a Cabbadge-staulk. By which intermixture, the Apples growing on such a
Tree, shall not only have a little scent of the Cabbadge, but also, that which
is worse always prevailing over that which is better, whereas the Apple Tree
should last many years, and the Cabbadg is but of one, from these two
extremities there arises a mean, to wit, a Tree which lives longer then a
Cabbadge, and not so long as an Apple Tree should: Which thing is also to be
observed ingraffing upon different kinds of Tree. Thence it comes that S.
Hierom, in the life of St. Paul the Hermit, speaking of the Centaur that
appeared to S. Anthony (for it is true, that the subsistence of one of these
Monsters proves that of the other; as the one being destroyed, the other cannot
subsist) does not affirm it to be a pure illusion, but doubts whether it were a
real Centaur, such as those spoken of among the Ancients, or a Devil that had
assumed that form. But S. Anthony, took him for a Man, and not for a Devil whom
he knew to be a Liar, since he asked him where the Servant of God, whom he
sought for, lodged. Whereto the Centaur replied but in a savage voice, and such
as could not be understood, whereupon he drew near to S. Anthony, and with his
hand showed him the way he should go, which done he ran away. Whence Saint
Hierom concludes, that it is a hard matter to know, Whether the Devil had not
appeared under that Figure to frighten that holy person; or that the Desert,
fruitful in Monsters, had produced that Beast. And Plato, in the Banquet of the
Wisemen relates, that a certain Shepherd having presented Periander with a
Child, brought forth at his house by a Mare, having the Head, Neck, and Hands
like those of a Man, in all the other parts resembling a Horse, and having the
voice of a Child; Diocles proposed, that such Prodigies were the forerunners
of Seditions, and Distraction of men's minds. Whereto Thales replied, that it
was a natural thing, to prevent which for the future, he advised him to keep no
Grooms but such as were married. It Is also the advice of Pliny, who in the
seventh Book of his Natural History, affirms, that in the Country of the
Cartadulones, among the Mountains of the Indies, there are Satyrs, a sort of
very swift Animals, running sometimes on two feet, sometimes on all four,
having a humane shape, and such as by reason of their activity are never taken,
till they are old or sick. Plutarch also affirms, in the Life of Sylla, that in
his return from Italy, there was brought him a Satyr, like those described by
the Ancient Authors, half-man, and half-goat, which had been taken sleeping.
Being asked who he was, his Answer was in such a Dialect as favored nothing of
Man's Language, but in an articulate voice, between that of Goats, and the
neighing of Horses; and the result was, that Sylla taking compassion of him,
sent a Guard to conduct him to the place from whence he had been brought. The
same Author makes mention of the death of the God Pan, who was a Satyr. Saint
Hierom in the place before cited, affirms, that another Satyr spoke; and he
gives a description of him, saying, that he was of a middle stature, having a
crooked Nose, horns on his forehead, and feet like those of a Goat; and that
he brought Saint Paul the Hermit some Dates, not taken off the bough on which
they had grown: Which kindness obliges the Saint to ask him, Who he was?
Whereto he made Answer, that he was a mortal, and one of the Inhabitants of
that Hermitage, whom the abused Pagans adored for Fawnes, Satyrs, and Incubi. I
come to you, continued he, as a Deputy from the rest of our Company, entreating
you to pray for us to your God and ours, whom we acknowledge to be come into
the world for the common salvation of all. Having with those words concluded
his Embassy, the light-footed Animal ran away. And that this Relation may seem
the less strange, we have this further to add, that in the time of Constantine,
there was one of them brought alive to Alexandria, which was exposed before the
people at the public Shows, and afterward dying, his Body was salted, and
transported to the City of Antioch to be shown to the Emperor. Pausanias also
relates, that he had heard it of one Euphemius, who, he says, was a person
worthy of credit, that sailing into Spain, he was hurried by a Tempest to
certain Islands full of a savage kind of men, who had their bodies all over
hairy, long tails like those of Horses, and red hair, which they could not
force away from about them, otherwise then with blows; and that one of the
Women-savages having been left upon the shore by the Mariners, those Savages
abused her with all imaginable violences. So that, to doubt whether there be
any Satyrs, after so many Testimonies that there are, were to have too great a
compliance for our own Senses, and too little for the Testimonies of the
Ancients.

CONFERENCE CCXL. Whether it be better to bury or to burn the bodies of the
Dead?
ALL the World seems to be very much concerned in this business, inasmuch as
there being not any man but his coming into this world necessarily infers his
departure out of it; and that consequently, a separation of Body and Soul,
every man ought accordingly to consider, what will become, after death, of that
other part of himself, unless he has discarded all sentiments of humanity, and
has assumed the humor of the Cynick whom his friends having asked, where he
would be disposed after his death, he desired they would leave him in the place
where he died, without troubling themselves any further. Whereupon they
demanding of him whether he was not afraid his body might be devoured by Dogs,
he answered, that he should be no more sensible of their bitings then of the
gnawings of worms, if he were put into the earth; but however they would do
well to lay his staff by him, to frighten those Dogs that should come near his
body. There are whole Nations who have made choice of the bowels of these
Animals for their burial, especially the Hyrcanians, who kept Dogs purposely
that they might be devoured bp them after their departure. The like was done
heretofore by the Medes and Parthians, who thought it less honorable to be
interred, then to be devoured by Dogs and Birds of prey, especially Vultures,
to which the Inhabitants of Colchos and Iberia exposed the Carcases of those
who in their lifetime had done gallant actions, but always burnt those of the
cowardly. Nay, what is absolutely inhumane, (though Chrysippus, an ancient and
eminent Philosopher, approves it in a discourse upon that Subject) some were so
barbarous, as to eat the flesh of their Fathers, and Mothers, and best Friends,
out of a persuasion, that it was one of the greatest demonstrations of piety,
to give their nearest Relations a burial in their own bellies. The Persians
religiously preserved them in their Houses, after they had enclosed them in
wax, to prevent putrefaction: which was better done by the Egyptians, with
honey, salt, bitumen, rosin, cedar, aloes, myrrh, and such perfumes, which have
preserved their Mummyes to this time. The Scythians did the same with ice and
snow, wherewith they covered the bodies of the deceased, to secure them from
corruption. The Pythagoreans used, to the same purpose, the leaves of Poplar,
Myrrh, and Aloes, wherewith they covered their dead; after which manner M. Cato
desired to be buried, as Lycurgus was, in Olive-branches. The Aethiopians
enclosed theirs in Glass; the Thracians and Troglodites put theirs under heaps
of stones; the Hyperboreans and Icthyophagi buried them in the waves of the
Sea; the Poeonians, in Lakes; and the Inhabitants of Caria though no Sepulcher
more honorable for those who died for their Country, then that of their own
Arms, wherein they buried them; as they did Persons of Quality in the
Highways, that they might be the more conspicuous, and especially in Mountains
which were only for the burial of Kings; whence came the custom of erecting
Obelisks and Pyramids on their Tombs. But though there were a great diversity
in this kind of burying, yet it consisted principally in this, that some made
choice of the Earth, others of the Fire, for their sepulture. The former is not
only more natural and more rational, but also more advantageous than the
latter, since there is nothing more consonant to natural reason, then to return
to the earth those bodies; which having been framed thereof, cannot be better
consigned then to the bosom of that Mother; wherein being once enclosed, they
infect not our Air with corruption and malignant exhalations, as they may when
cast into the fire, the heat whereof forcing the fumes and infected vapors of
those Carcases to a great distance, they may corrupt the purity of the Air, and
prejudice their health who are present at those funeral Piles, which, for that
reason, the Law of the Twelve Tables expressly forbad to be set on fire within
the City of Rome, lest the corruption might be communicated to the neighboring
Houses, but provided it should be done without the walls.

The Second said, That though the general way of burying the dead now is to
enterre them, yet methinks that of burning them, and preserving their ashes, is
more noble and honorable, in regard the Fire excells the Earth in purity, as
far as it transcends it in its vicinity to Heaven, the qualities whereof it
communicates to the bodies it consumes, purifying and preserving them from all
putrefaction, and making them so clear and transparent, that, according to the
common opinion of Theology, in the general conflagration, the World and all
bodies comprehended within it, will be vitrify'd, by means of the fire. It is
therefore more honorable to have our bodies consumed by that Element, then to
have them devoured by Worms and Putrefaction; whereof fire being an enemy, and
the Emblem of Immortality, there can be no better expedient to secure our
deceased Friends from oblivion, then that of burning their bodies, whereof we
have either the bones or ashes left, which may be preserved whole Ages; there
being yet to be seen the Urns of the ancient Romans full of such precious
deposita, as those who put their Friends into the ground can never see. Add to
this, that it is a rational thing to make a distinction between Man Beast,
which they do not, who, burying both, treat them after the same manner; whereas
if Man's body were burnt, and that of the Beast left to rot in the ground, it
would serve for a certain acknowledgment of the disproportion there is between
them; and that as the latter is of a mean and despicable condition, it is
accordingly disposed into the Earth, which is under the other Elements, and as
it were the Common-shore of the World; whereas the former being designed for
Immortatality, Fire, which is the most sensible Hieroglyphick thereof is more
proper for it then the earth; (wherein if we were not carried away rather by
opinion than reason, and that Tyrant of three Letters in the Latin Tongue, as a
learned Author calls Custom, did not corrupt our judgment) it were more
rational to bury the bodies of Malefactors, then to burn them as is commonly
done.

The Third said, That if we may judge of the goodness of a thing by its
Antiquity, the way of interring the dead will carry it, as having been from the
beginning of the World. Holy Scripture tell us, that Abraham bought a Field for
the burial of himself and his; and that a dead body having been disposed into
the Sepulcher, where the bones of Elizeus were, was raised to Life. In other
Histories we find, that most Nations practiced it, especially the Romans, till
the time of Sylla, who was the first whose Body was burnt at Rome; which
disposal of himself he ordered, out of a fear he might be treated as Marius had
been, whose bones he caused to be taken out of the ground, and cast into the
River. From that time they began to burn the Bodies of the Dead, which
continued till the Reign of the Antoninus's, when the Custom of burying them
came in again, and has since been used by all Nations, whose universal consent
gives a great presumption, that this manner is to be preferred before any
other. Add to this, that our Savior would have his precious body so disposed,
and the Holy Church, which is divinely inspired, seems to mind us of the same
thing, when, upon Ash Wednesday, she tell us, that we are dust, and that into
dust we shall return.

The Fourth said, That there were five ways of disposing the dead. One is, to
put them into the ground; another, to cast them into the water; the third, to
leave them in the open air; the fourth, to burn them; and the last, to suffer
them to be devoured by Beasts. This last is too inhumane to find any Abettors,
but among Barbarians; Men are more careful to prevent the corruption of Water
and Air, without which they cannot live, then to suffer carrions and dead
carcasses, which would cause infections and insupportable stinks; so that the
contest is only between Fire and Earth. For my part, I give the precedence to
the former, whose action is more expeditious than that of the other Elements,
which require a long time to consume dead bodies; whereas Fire does it in an
instant. Whereto I may add this, that there cannot be any other more likely
expedient, whereby men may secure themselves from those contagious infections,
which many times occasion diseases, especially when they are attended by
Malignancy. Nay however, it is to be wished, whether dead bodies be buried or
burnt, that it should be done out of the City, and that the Law of the
Decemviri, to wit, Hominem mortuum in urbe ne sepelito, neve vrito, were still
punctually observed.

FINIS.

